Simulation and Sustainability 
Enhancing Event-Discrete-Simulation Software with Sustainability Criteria 
 
Andi H. Widok 
Department of Engineering II 
Industrial Environmental Informatics Unit 
University of Applied Sciences, HTW Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
a.widok@htw-berlin.de 
Volker Wohlgemuth 
Department of Engineering II 
Industrial Environmental Informatics Unit 
University of Applied Sciences, HTW Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
volker.wohlgemuth@htw-berlin.de 
 
 
Abstract — Nowadays global initiatives face numerous prob-
lems: non-transparent financial developments on the global 
markets, only a few years after the biggest economic crisis of 
our times, unsolved ecological problems that, given the ascent 
of emerging economies, are seemingly getting worse and the 
almost surreal speed at, which new technologies are changing 
our societies. The impacts these changes are having on compa-
nies worldwide are as numerous as their effects on the popula-
tion. Sustainability and Sustainable Development have become 
key words in the hope of addressing and managing the changes 
that lay ahead of human societal development. This paper 
attempts to highlight shortcomings in the concept of sustaina-
bility and ways to make the concept more workable by present-
ing the development of an Environmental Management Infor-
mation System (EMIS) as a combination of discrete event 
simulation and ecological material flow analysis for production 
processes. 
Keywords – Sustainability, Simulation, Event-Discrete-
Simulation, Sustainability Reporting. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent decades there has been a significant increase in 
the attention paid to the concept of sustainability. Despite 
this positive development, there is still only a small number 
of simulation systems that pay tribute to the complex inter-
dependencies of economic, ecological and social values. This 
chapter will address the problems of current developments 
and therefore describe the motivation for the development of 
the EMIS that will be presented in the following chapters. 
A. 
Ecological Perspective 
From an ecological point of view, the world is facing a 
wide variety of problems. Even though there is still and most 
likely will continue to be a debate about how much and to 
what extent the effects of climate change are anthropogenic, 
the results themselves have been empirically proven and will 
consequently change the socio-economic requirements on 
earth within coming decades [1][2][3]. Effects such as the 
extinction of species [4][5], deforestation [6], changes in ice 
distribution [7], droughts and increasing incidence of forest 
fires or other effects, such as the development of CO2 Emis-
sions [1] or as the overfishing of the seas [8] will have a 
huge impact on the quality of life in the coming century. 
In this respect, the figures presented by the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in the year 2007 [1] 
made it very clear how pressing the need for a community-
wide approach is for sustainable development in environ-
mental protection. Despite phases with little or no economic 
growth, there is no expectation that the ecosystem will expe-
rience periods of natural recovery in coming decades, quite 
the opposite in fact. If one looks at current metabolic rates in 
the world [9], one finds that they are still rising [9][10]. The 
World Resources Forum (WRF) estimates that global re-
source extraction will exceed 80 billion tons in 2020. This 
means that mankind will have doubled the annual rate of 
global resource extraction within only 40 years (1980–2020) 
[11]. It further states: 
―Globalizing the traditional model of economic growth is 
leading to rapidly increasing consumption of limited natural 
resources, followed by ecological disruption. (…) Rising 
global consumption of raw materials (…) is beginning to 
affect the life-sustaining services of the earth, which are not 
replaceable by technical means. (...) Today, the fundamental 
flaw in human activities is the enormous consumption of 
natural resources per unit output of value or service. (...) The 
environmental safety threshold has already been surpassed, 
as is evident‖ various ―developments (…). And yet, only 
some 20 per cent of humankind enjoy the full benefits of the 
mainstream economic model, while all people – in particular 
the poor – have begun to suffer the consequences of its 
flaws‖ [11]. 
This statement can be translated into a system-thinking 
realization, that the behavior and interaction of system-
elements are currently endangering the stability of the system 
itself. In this respect, one can consider various escalating 
curves, the result of catching-up processes involving emerg-
ing industries and countries such as China and India and the 
physical impossibility [10] of extending the present con-
sumption patterns of the industrialized countries to all parts 
of the world, which will ultimately lead to social problems. 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

B. 
Social Perspective 
Morally there is no argument as to why the developing 
countries and the poorest countries should not be ―allowed‖ 
to achieve the same state of production and wealth that the 
industrialized countries have achieved. The only argument at 
this point, with our current technology, is that it is physically 
impossible and, even if it wouldn‘t be, the level of produc-
tion, given a world with 7 billion citizens, would result in 
catastrophic ecological consequences, if processes would be 
rushed. 
When bearing in mind the ecological part of the problem, 
one can see that the system is out of balance due to excessive 
pressure on several fronts; the keyword in this sentence is 
balance since this is basically the common denominator for 
the social problem as well. What can be considered as unjust 
pressure on the ecological side would be translated as un-
equal distribution on the social side with results/effects such 
as hunger, lack of education or even terrorism. 
Given the growing metabolic rates of the emerging coun-
tries one must be realistic and see that of course people will 
try to reach a similar state of wealth and prosperity and 
therefore, due to the impossibility mentioned, the only way 
to preserve the current or a current-comparable standard of 
living throughout industrialized countries, emerging coun-
tries and others, would be to find ways to reduce resource 
usage to an extent that would allow the same high level of 
production using only a fraction of the raw resources. In 
order to sustain our economy without completely revising 
our standard of living, the only way to achieve justice in 
distribution is the dematerialization of our economies and 
greater resource efficiency. 
C. 
Economical Perspective 
This transformation of economies would make invest-
ment imperative. The financial sector, however, is currently 
experiencing problems of its own. The financial crisis of 
2007/08, the very recent developments surrounding the Euro 
(considering Greece and other European countries) and also 
surrounding the Dollar and the government/budget deficit in 
the United States ought to demonstrate how much mankind 
tends to worry about wealth and status and also how interde-
pendent the global market already is today. The conse-
quences of the crisis can be observed on the large scale al-
ready referred to, but also at the level of small and medium 
sized companies (SME), which are failing to obtain neces-
sary loans from banks. 
Basically it comes down to a similar problem of distribu-
tion as that, which applies to raw resources. If we consider a 
company as a minimal representation of an economy, we 
understand that with a purely economic orientation it will not 
lead to sustainable growth. A strong social commitment or 
intensive environmental management, however, will not 
have any positive effects if the company structure cannot 
bear the load they place on it either. Thus it is imperative that 
these three measures of sustainability are combined by 
means of balanced efforts leading to a synergistic increase in 
value [12][13][14]. 
This balance in efforts is what sustainability has been try-
ing to define from the very outset. Throughout sustainability 
theory, from Meadows (1972) [15], Lynam, Herdt (1989) 
[16] and Pezzey (1992) (who already listed 27 different 
definitions for sustainability) [17], Pretty (1995) [18] to (Bell 
and Morse, 2008) [19], there has been a broad understanding 
that shrinking processes can also be considered sustainable. 
They all addressed the question of the objective that had to 
be protected / balanced.  
For companies, the main priority and the most important 
commodity must naturally be the financial side; otherwise 
the company could neither exist nor produce. The communi-
ty on the other hand has other interests when it considers this 
company. On the one hand, it is imperative that the company 
creates goods for public consumption, which bring in money, 
so that some of the public will obtain their income from it, 
but it is also necessary that the production methods do not 
harm the people or their environment. Allowing for the inter-
ests of the people, laws were drafted to make sure that the 
interest of companies does not take precedence over the 
interest of the people (legal compliance). In this context, 
there has always been a huge debate between Europe and the 
United States about regulation and deregulation. When it 
comes to ecological impacts however, this discussion seems 
misplaced as the market does not guarantee to reflect 
people‘s interests when their perception is limited by manu-
factured prices or other artificial local regulations. 
II. 
SUSTAINABILITY AND SIMULATION 
In Section I.A we stated that sustainability addresses the 
problems of distribution, it therefore follows the ideals of 
intra- and intergenerational justice and is a conclusion of the 
realization that human actions have consequences, if not for 
themselves then for other people with a shift in space or 
time. Consequently, we understand sustainability as accep-
tance of this responsibility and therefore as a need to act 
without a shift in time. 
A. 
Normative understanding of Sustainability 
In view of the fact already explained, that it is not possi-
ble to have an equal distribution of goods, wealth, resources 
and products in the world within a short period of time 
(where short can be 50 years or more) and to preserve the 
ecosystem, it follows that the ideals of intra- and intergenera-
tional justice cannot be satisfied at this point in time. There-
fore the concept of sustainability must be regarded as the 
means to achieve intra- and intergenerational justice and is 
consequently normative.  
B. 
A Definition of Sustainability 
To ensure that there is a clear understanding of the fol-
lowing, we will define sustainability under a capital-based 
approach (similar to the one used by McElroy, Jorna, van 
Engelen [20]). 
We define sustainability mainly as the agglomeration of 
actions/campaigns/processes that have a positive effect on 
the regeneration of social, environmental and/or economical 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

capital on the one hand, and/or reduce the degradation of this 
capital on the other, bearing in mind that the protection of 
that capital is the normative goal. 
A third option being the allowance of the use of a differ-
ent source, or not having to use the capital in question at all 
any longer. An example of this would be the usage of new 
processes allowing the substitution of different materials 
insofar as the old material would no longer be needed for the 
process and the new material would be less of a drain on 
overall capital. 
The main problem with this definition lies in the specifi-
cation of what social/economic/environmental capital is. 
While no one will argue that it exists, one can argue about 
the concrete indicators and the attributed values behind them 
or, more specifically, about the value-correlations between 
them. This is also what makes it so difficult to define a sus-
tainable process. While a process may be very ecologically 
sustainable when measuring the amount of material used, it 
may also be very expensive and therefore drain economic 
capital or vice versa. 
The question is how the three aspects are correlated or ra-
ther, which indicators have been attributed to each of the 
aspects in the first place. For that matter we argue that envi-
ronmental and indicators related to Corporate Social Respon-
sibility (CSR-related) processes have been greatly underva-
lued in recent decades. While we do not believe that every 
single process in a company can or even should be broken 
down into a value, we believe it to be possible, to do this 
with many more processes than is the case at present and 
especially with more environmental and social processes. 
More than that, it is important to do so because most of the 
negative influences on environment and or people do in fact 
happen due to the lack of knowledge about correlations and 
impact scenarios. 
Last but not least, one must take into account that con-
sumption (a reducing effect on capital) may also be sustaina-
ble if natural or otherwise regenerating capital, which is of 
value in a certain quantity becomes a danger at a higher 
concentration. An escalating feedback-loop can therefore 
come from the capital at some tipping-point of its existence, 
which has to be managed. This would make an inversion of 
the signs imperative in order to achieve equilibrium between 
existence and effect of the capital. 
While we realize that the definition of sustainability indi-
cators is one of the most critical parts of sustainability as-
sessment, this definition in conjunction with intended usage 
in simulation experiments allows many different approaches 
to be tested when assessing the sustainability-enhancing 
potential of intended measures. Thus simulation is a way to 
assess the sustainability of new processes. 
C. 
Simulation as a way to get closer to the 
immeasurable (Sustainability) 
Simulation can be used to show the possible effects of al-
ternative conditions and courses of action. It is also used 
when the real system cannot be engaged, because it may not 
be accessible, or it may be dangerous or unacceptable to 
engage, or it is being designed but not yet built, or it may 
simply not exist [21]. In that regard simulations are perfect 
tools when it comes to experiment with uncertain outcomes, 
which may be harming or contra-productive. 
As stated in Section I, we see one of the main challenges 
of our time in the dematerialization of the economy and 
consequently much higher resource efficiency. Under those 
premises the simulation focus had been laid on usage in 
production. The rational use of goods, such as the produc-
tion, consumption and distribution is widely known as eco-
nomic activity. Its improvement is directly connected to the 
in- and output relations and consists of the attempt to get 
more returns while investing lesser resources [22]. This 
process is also called optimization and it is target-oriented 
(e.g., optimizing the costs, quality, efficiency or effective-
ness). Optimizations can also be achieved using an opera-
tions research approach [23]. The operations research ap-
proach and most analytic methods however become proble-
matic once one has to deal with many variables. That is pre-
cisely when simulations are more worthwhile. The simula-
tion of production addresses a variety of different indicators, 
the most common measures of system performance being the 
following [24]: 
 
Throughput under average and peak loads; 
 
System cycle time (how long it take to produce 
one part); 
 
Utilization of resource, labor, and machines; 
 
Bottlenecks and choke points; 
 
Queuing at work locations; 
 
Queuing and delays caused by material-
handling devices and systems; 
 
Work in progress (WIP) storage needs; 
 
Staffing requirements; 
 
Effectiveness of scheduling systems; 
These indicators can be considered as the standard value 
set of today‘s production optimization, they however do not 
incorporate environmental or social indicators and hence an 
optimization of the production using those key-indicators 
would go only in one direction, leading to a higher output. 
Even though a higher production can of course have other 
positive effects, they are far from guaranteed. In the coming 
chapter we‘ll illustrate the integration of the environmental 
perspective in the same model, which is used for simulation 
runs. In Section IV we‘ll then propose our current vision on 
how to even integrate the social perspective in the simulation 
model and thus acknowledging all three pillars of sustaina-
bility. 
III. 
THE ROAD SO FAR – DEVELOPMENT 
A. 
The earlier years 
The techniques of modeling and simulation have been es-
tablished as an important instrument for the analysis and 
planning of complex systems in many domains [25]. 
The deduction from investigations around year 2000 was 
the proposal to use simulation techniques for supporting the 
application of the Material Flow Network method [26] [27]. 
Following that proposal, simulation can be used to calcu-
late unknown environmental quantities. For example, it al-
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

lows determining the necessary load of connected input 
flows considering complex systems [28]. 
In a sense, the material flow perspective is more general 
than the discrete event perspective [29]. Information is rarely 
linked to objects like products or process steps. Material 
Flow Networks, which were also developed at the University 
of Hamburg [30], are based on the Petri-Net theory. 
During one of the latest research projects, the prototype 
modeling- and simulation software named MILAN was 
developed. On one hand, its discrete event simulation com-
ponents allow an accurate analysis of typically economic 
aspects and industry related aspects, presented under point 
II.C, and on the other hand, its material flow analysis com-
ponents did add for the first time an environmental perspec-
tive to the discrete event simulation model, i.e., a considera-
tion of relevant material flows and transformations such as: 
 
consumption of commodities, resources and ad-
ditives; 
 
energy demand; 
 
waste accumulation; 
 
Emission generation. 
Discrete event simulations are a powerful method to 
represent production processes close to reality and to follow 
time intervals of different sizes from few hours up to several 
business years for investigating aspects depicted in the intro-
duction. With the generation of pseudo-random numbers 
following given stochastic distributions natural variations 
such as varying inter-mediate arrival times of production 
jobs can be represented. 
In 2006, we presented the first application of the Material 
Flow Simulator Milan [29], since then we intensified our 
work on different levels of the architecture and extensions of 
the simulation engine as elucidated in the next chapter.  
B. 
Recent developments 
The first implementation of MILAN was realized using 
the Delphi version of DESMO-J, called DESMO-D, the 
framework and components in high level language Delphi. 
The component-based architecture was realized using COM-
Technology [28]. This realization however seemed outdated 
and was renewed since 2009 and MILAN was re-
implemented. 
The new development of the material flow simulator 
MILAN is based on the open-source plugin framework EM-
PINIA (http://www.empinia.org) (comparable to the Java 
framework Eclipse (http://www.eclipse.org)). EMPINIA, 
which was developed in the course of the EMPORER 
project, is designed for the development of complex domain-
specific applications especially in the field of environmental 
management information systems (EMIS) [31]. It is a com-
ponent-orientated extensible application framework based on 
Microsofts.NET (http://msdn.microsoft.com/de-de/netframe-
work/default.aspx) technology with the purpose to support 
and simplify the development of complex software systems. 
For MILAN it was necessary to provide libraries of simu-
lation components (e.g., for production systems: machines, 
transporters, system boundaries), which enable the modeler 
to represent and simulate his system adequately. These com-
ponents can be added to an application i.e., as building 
blocks via a plugin mechanism and thus can be used to build 
a user-specific model. 
This implementation may lead to an easy development of 
user-specific components with low dependencies and an 
attachment to a modeling tool box for a certain application 
field, which is not possible with other simulation tools [32] 
[25]. These components can either be generally applicable or 
might be used for very specialized purpose. Specialized 
entities are developed for a whole production sector (e.g., 
semi-conductor sector with coater, stepper and dispatcher) 
[33][27] or they represent a production component of a cer-
tain company with its specific parameters. In contrast general 
components are highly abstracted and are applicable for 
many production systems [34]. The goal of this project was 
the development and implementation of such general entities 
for MILAN. 
Another important gain resulting from the EMPORER 
research project was the implementation of very abstract 
simulation entities for the analysis of production systems. 
These entities enable users to model and simulate a broad set 
of production systems. Because of their modularity and the 
plugin mechanisms of EMPINIA it is very easy to add more 
specialized entities to the production system‘s domain and to 
use them for a material flow simulation. 
After that the production components were verified by 
performing a simulation study in a company that produces 
solar panels. The problems, results and experiences of this 
validation were used to improve and enhance the compo-
nents, the simulation infrastructure and MILAN as a simula-
tion tool, itself. 
Besides the components, which come with EMPINIA 
there are many plugins taken from a designed EMIS toolbox 
and were then combined with MILAN. The simulation capa-
bilities of the MILAN software consist of the simulation 
core, a bundle for discrete event simulation and simulation 
components. 
The simulation core consists of the central simulation 
service, interfaces and abstract base classes for models, expe-
riments and model entities. These are used in each kind of 
simulation. The simulation service provides models and 
experiments in a way that other software parts can use them. 
The simulation core gives models and their entities access to 
the functionality of a domain model service. A domain mod-
el defines the domain of an EMPINIA-based application, its 
elements and their relations as well as rules that apply to this 
domain. MILAN consists of the domain 'simulation' with 
elements like 'model' and 'entity'. Among other important 
functionalities the domain service provides possibilities to 
persist its elements. That is the reason why this service is 
used in MILAN to save and load formerly created models. 
A bundle for discrete event simulation extends the simu-
lation core with classes specific to the discrete event simula-
tion approach. These classes are using an EMPINIA exten-
sion that enables the development of logical graphs in order 
to combine entities of a model to a network diagram. The 
basic generic experiment component is extended with an 
event list and a scheduler, which are used to simulate time in 
discrete steps. 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The simulation components have access to many stochas-
tic distributions (e.g., Normal, Bernoulli). They are used to 
generate streams of random numbers, for example to sche-
dule an event, which follows a certain arrival probability. 
Additional to these existing distributions user-defined distri-
butions can also be added via plugins. 
In the following the common features of the MILAN 
software will be summarized. 
The graphical manipulation of building blocks leads to a 
faster development of a model. The graph editor can be used 
to manipulate and create models. The editor itself can work 
in different domains. Domain specific functionality and the 
graphical representation have to be defined by plugin devel-
opers enabling the editor to handle new domains and their 
components, which are also using plugin definitions. 
Manipulating model parameter for the simulation and 
material flow perspective is done by means of property edi-
tors enabling a simple and consistent way of setting values 
for all types of properties. For the production system domain 
there are standard editors implemented. These allow the 
change of component specific parameters like setting distri-
butions, accounting rules, queue lengths or capacities etc. 
No analysis can be done without results. These are shown 
in reports, which can be designed with the help of the report-
ing system. The data for the reports is aggregated during 
simulation runs by a system of observers that listen to 
changes in the material accounting and simulation entities. 
The development of new features and the testing of the 
full capacity of MILAN‘s functionality are ongoing. The 
Combination of economical and ecological indicators in one 
model has already been achieved. In the following chapter 
we‘ll outline visions on how MILAN might get even closer 
to a sustainability enhancing simulation system. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In an often cited interview the Nobel Prize Winner Mil-
ton Friedman said: ―So the question is, do corporate execu-
tives, provided they stay within the law, have responsibilities 
in their business activities other than to make as much mon-
ey for their stockholders as possible? And my answer to that 
is no, they do not‖ (February 1974) [35]. 
Even if one would tend to agree with Friedman, there are 
already examples of when and how this statement would be 
economically disadvantageous, considering Nike and their 
incident with child labor in their supply chain [35][36] or the 
case of Brent Spar and their sinking of an oil platform 
[35][37], which made obvious that the long term goal of 
profit maximization can only be achieved when parts of the 
social responsibility are also acknowledged [35][37][38][39]. 
In case of Nike, the sales figures dropped after the incident, 
resulting to a stock loss of 20 per cent [35][39][40][41]. The 
connection is already there. 
Also the range of management approaches that look at 
social sustainability is relatively vast, so that one faces an 
unmanageable diversity of what are referred to as ‗solutions‘. 
There are however not many software solutions that pick up 
on social aspects and where they do their usage is rather 
infrequent. This fact alone narrows down the search for uni-
versal applications, but also opens another perspective on the 
much more discussed ―opposition‖ between the achievement 
of economical and ecological objectives [42]. 
To make companies realize that they must aim not mere-
ly for financial stability, it is mandatory that corporate social 
responsibility (CSR) and environmental efforts become a 
financial attribute and thus have an economic value too. The 
lack of these values, or rather their unspecific nature in the 
past, has led to many of today's undesirable developments, as 
profit is often solely attributed with financial growth while 
social, human, environmental profit is only of relevance 
when it comes to legal compliance [42]. 
In that regard current research at the HTW Berlin also 
tries to incorporate social indicators for the assessment of 
sustainable growth in production. Through the EMPINIA 
extension mechanism it is possible to define new resources, 
in this regard, human resources. These resources are then 
getting attributes, such as, for example, workload/contract 
information and references to the workstations, these refer-
ences are basically the skills of the current employees. In 
order to pay tribute to the different abilities of the employees 
the workstations/building blocks themselves are more or less 
in dependence of human resources to function properly and 
the human resources have a variety of criteria that, for exam-
ple inhibits them to work 30 hour shifts. There is a whole 
framework of social criteria possible to be attributed to these 
new ―resources‖; however research is still on its very begin-
ning. The first focus of the introduction of social criteria will 
be health. Employees should not work longer then a certain 
amount of time; they should have the possibility to take all 
their vacation and should not get in contact with any harming 
emissions, noise, particular matter or other harming material. 
Even though that does not sound revolutionizing it is the first 
step in addressing more complex interactions, such as finan-
cial equilibrium, daycare for children or other criteria. 
We hope that in the future, after testing the introduction 
thoroughly, we can implement more criteria and define new 
functions of correlation and interdependencies. In this paper 
we tried to give further input to the ongoing discussion on 
how to assess sustainability and more precisely the sustaina-
bility of producing companies. We tried to show in the intro-
duction that no matter, which pillar of sustainability is consi-
dered the negative influence, the loose ends, are likely to be 
a result of a system-imbalance. They are the underlying 
conditions for most of the problems we face today. We also 
tried to show that the change of human economies will be-
come imperative and must be managed in a way that intends 
to address the issue of participation, which we consider to be 
one of the main problems of the sustainability dilemma. 
People and companies, as system-elements will not intensify 
their positive influence unless the instability of the system is 
made obvious to them. The combination of different perspec-
tives of sustainability in one model might contribute to this 
thesis and will therefore be our ongoing focus in the future. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 2007, IPCC 
Assessment Report 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[2] Rottke, N.B., 2009, Ökonomie versus Ökologie – Nachhaltigkeit in 
der Immobilienwirtschaft?, Köln 
[3] Benz, G., 2009, Naturkatastrophen sind Kulturkatasstrophen! 
Umwelthistorische 
Grundlagen 
von 
Riosikoanalysen 
für 
Naturgefahren, article published in: Beiträge zum Göttinger 
Umwelthistorischen Kolloquium, Göttingen 
[4] Butchart, S.H.M. et al., 2004, Measuring Global Trends in the Status 
of Biodiversity: Red List Indices for Birds, PLoS Biol 2(12): e383. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020383, 2004 
[5] Butchart, S.H.M. et al., 2007, Improvements to the Red List Index, 
PLoS ONE 2(1): e140. doi:10.1371/journal.pone. 0000140  
[6] Corbera, E. Estrada, M., and Brown, K., 2010, Reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing 
countries: revisiting the assumptions 
[7] Mallory, M.L., Gaston, A.J. Gilchrist, H.G. Robertson, G.J. Braune, 
B.M., 2010, Effects of Climate Change, Altered Sea-Ice Distribution 
and Seasonal Phenology on Marine Birds, from A Little Less Arctic: 
Top Predators in the World's Largest Northern Inland Sea 
[8] FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), 
2007, The State of world fisheries and aquaculture 2006, Rome 
[9] OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) 
2008, Measuring material flows and resource productivity, Synthesis 
Report, Paris 
[10] Hilty, L.M. and Ruddy, T.F., 2010, Sustainable Development and 
ICT interpreted in a natural science context, Information, 
Communication & Society, 13: p. 1, 7 — 22 
[11] WRF (World Resources Forum), Draft Declaration of the World 
Resources Forum, 16 October 2008, p. 1 
[12] Stahlmann, V., 2008, Lernziel: Ökonomie der Nachhaltigkeit, 
München 
[13] Schmidt-Bleek, F., 2008, Nutzen wir die Erde richtig?: Von der 
Notwendigkeit einer neuen industriellen Revolution, Frankfurt 
[14] von Pappenheim, J. R., 2009, Das Prinzip Verantwortung, Gabler, 
GWV Fachverlage GmbH, Wiesbaden 
[15] Meadows et. al., 1972, The Limits to Growth, Report, Club of Rome 
[16] Lynam, J. K. and Herdt, R. W., 1989, „Sense and sustainability: 
Sustainability as an objective in international agricultural research‖, 
Agricultural Economics, volume 3, n° 4, p. 381 – 398 
[17] Pezzey, J, 1992, ―Sustainability: An Interdisciplinary Guide.‖ 
Environmental Values 1, 1992, p. 321 - 362 
[18] Pretty, J., 1995, Participatory learning for sustainable agriculture 
World Development, Vol. 23 No.8, 1995, p.1247-1263, World 
Development, 8th edition 
[19] Bell, S. and Morse, S., 2008, Sustainability Indicators: Measuring the 
Immeasurable? Sterling, Second Edition 
[20] McElroy, M.W. Jorna, J.R., and van Engelen, J., 2007, Sustainability 
Quotients and the Social Footprint published in Corporate Social 
Responsibility and Environmental Management, John Wiley and Sons 
Ltd and The European Research Press Ltd 
[21] Sokolowski, J.A. and Banks, C.M., 2009, Principles of Modeling and 
Simulation. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-470-28943-3. 
[22] Wöhe, 
G. 
and 
Döring, 
U. 
2008, 
Einführung 
in 
die 
Betriebswirtschaftslehre. 23th edition. Vahlen, München. 
[23] Domschke, W. and Drexl, A. 2007, Einführung in Operations 
Research. 7th edition. Springer, Berlin. 
[24] Banks, J., Carson J., Nelson B.L., Nicol, D., 2005, Discrete-event 
system simulation (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-088702-3. 
[25] Page, B. and Kreutzer, W. 2005, The Java Simulation Handbook: 
Simulating Discrete Event System with UML and Java. Shaker 
Verlag, Aachen. 
[26] Wohlgemuth, V., Bruns, L., and Page, B., 2001, Simulation als 
Ansatz zur ökologischen und ökonomischen Planungsunterstützung 
im Kontext betrieblicher Umweltinformationssysteme (BUIS), in: 
Hilty, L.M., Gilgen, P.W. (Hrsg.): Sustainability in the Information 
Society. 15. Internationales Symposium "Informatik für den 
Umweltschutz" der Gesellschaft für Informatik (GI), Zürich 2001. 
Metropolis Verlag, Marburg, Band 2, p. 999-1008. 
[27] Wohlgemuth, V. 2005, Komponentenbasierte Unterstützung von 
Methoden der Modellbildung und Simulation im Einsatzkontext des 
betrieblichen Umweltschutzes. University of Hamburg: Thesis (PhD). 
Aachen, Shaker Verlag. 
[28] Joschko, P., Page, B., and Wohlgemuth, V., 2009, Combination of 
Job Oriented Simulation with Ecological Material Flow Analysis as 
integrated Analysis Tool for Business Production Processes, 
Proceedings of the 2009 Winter Simulation Conference 
[29] Wohlgemuth, V., Page, B., and Kreutzer, W., 2006, Combining 
discrete event simulation and material flow analysis in a component-
based approach to industrial environmental protection. Environmental 
Modelling & Software, p. 1607-1617. 
[30] Möller, A. 2000, Grundlagen stoffstrombasierter betrieblicher 
Umweltinformationssysteme. Projekt-Verlag, Bochum. 
[31] Wohlgemuth, V., Schnackenbeck, T., Panic, D., and Barling, R.-L. 
2008, Development of an Open Source Software Framework as a 
Basis for Implementing Plugin-Based Environmental Management 
Information Systems (EMIS). In: Möller, A.; Page, B.; Schreiber, M. 
(Eds.): EnviroInfo 2008. Proceedings of the 22nd International 
Conference 
Environmental 
Informatics 
- 
Informatics 
for 
Environmental Protection, Sustainable Development and Risk 
Management, 
September 
10-12, 
2008, 
Leuphana 
University 
Lüneburg. Shaker Verlag, Aachen, p. 584-592 
[32] Page, B., Lechler, T., and Claassen, S. 2000, Objektorientierte 
Simulation in Java mit dem Framework Desmo-J. Libri Books,  
[33] Wohlgemuth, V., Page, B., Mäusbacher, M., and Staudt-Fischbach, P. 
2004, Component-Based Integration of Discrete Event Simulation 
and Material Flow Analysis for Industrial Environmental Protection: 
A Case Study in Wafer Production, in: Proceedings of the 18th 
International Conference for Environmental Protection, October 21-
23, CERN, Geneva, p. 303-312 
[34] Jahr, P., Schiemann, L., and Wohlgemuth V. 2009, Development of 
simulation components for material flow simulation of production 
systems based on the plugin architecture framework EMPINIA. In: 
Wittmann, J.; Flechsig, M. (Eds.): Simulation in Umwelt- und 
Geowissenschaften. Shaker Verlag, Aachen, p. 57-69 
[35] Dubielzig, F., 2009, Sozio Controlling in Unternehmen, Das 
Management erfolgsrelevanter sozial-gesellschaftlicher Themen in 
der Praxis, Gabler Edition Wissenschaft, Dissertation Leuphana 
Universität Lüneburg, 2008, First edition 
[36] Insight Investment 2003, Labour Standards and Working Conditions 
in 
Supply 
Chains. 
Downloaded 
from 
www.insightinvest-
ment.com/documents/responsibility/ir_labour.pdf (28th Mai 2008) 
[37] Mantow, W. 1995, Die Ereignisse um Brent Spar in Deutschland: 
Darstellung und Dokumentation mit Daten und Fakten; Hintergründe 
und 
Einflussfaktoren; 
Kommentare 
und 
Medienresonanzen. 
Hamburg: Deutsche Shell AG. 
[38] Bakan, J. 2005, Das Ende der Konzerne. Die selbstzerstörerische 
Kraft der Unternehmen. Hamburg, Europa Verlag. 
[39] Mintzberg, H., 1983, The Case for Corporate Social Responsibility, 
The Journal of Business Strategy, 4 (2), p. 3-15. 
[40] Murray, S., 2002, The Supply Chain. Working Lives under Scrutiny. 
Downloaded 
under 
www.theglobalalliance.org/documents/ 
FinancialTimes1202article_000.pdf (20th Mars 2005) 
[41] Leitschuh-Fecht, H. and Bergius, S., 2007, Stakeholderdialoge 
können besser werden, UmweltWirtschaftsForum, 15 (1), p. 3-6. 
[42] Colantonio, A., 2009, Social Sustainability, ed. Oxford Institute for 
Sustainable Development Downloaded under: http://Fec.europa.eu/ 
research/sd/conference/2009/presentations/7/andrea_colantonio_-
_social_sustainability.ppt, (15th May 2011) 
 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

