A Generic Operational Simulation for Early Design
Civil Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
Benjamin Schumann, Jim Scanlan
School of Engineering Sciences
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
Benjamin.Schumann@soton.ac.uk
J.P.Scanlan@soton.ac.uk
Kenji Takeda
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK
kenjitak@microsoft.com
Abstract—Contemporary aerospace programmes often suffer
from large cost overruns, delivery delays and inferior product
quality. This is caused in part by poor predictive quality of the
early design phase processes with regards to the operational
environment of a product. This paper develops the idea of
a generic operational simulation that can help designers to
rigorously analyse and test their early product concepts. The
simulation focusses on civil Unmanned Air Vehicle products and
missions to keep the scope of work tractable. The research agenda
is introduced along with ideas, initial results and future work.
Designers specify details about their product, its environment and
anticipated operational procedures. The simulation returns infor-
mation that can help to estimate the value of the product using the
value-driven design approach. Information will include recurring
and non-recurring mission cost items. The research aim is to show
that an operational simulation can improve early design concepts,
thereby reducing delays and cost overruns. Moreover, a trade-
off between mission ﬁdelity and model generality is sought along
with a generic ontology of civil Unmanned Air Vehicle missions
and guidelines about capturing operational information.
Index Terms—Aerospace testing; Remotely operated vehicles;
Relational databases; Maintenance; Computational modeling;
Object oriented modeling; Computer simulation; Discrete time
systems; Unmanned aerial vehicles;
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper introduces and explores the concept of an
operational simulation for improving the early design process
of aerospace products. The work aims to sketch out a road map
to obtain a PhD. Section II establishes the current problems
in early design and deﬁnes important concepts. Section III
speciﬁes the four main research questions to be answered by
the project. Subsequently, initial results obtained so far are
presented in section IV. Lastly, section V represents the main
part of this paper, introducing the necessary steps towards
answering the research questions.
II. BACKGROUND
This section reviews the most important problems of the
early design phase of aerospace products. Subsequently, it
introduces the concept of Value-driven Design (VDD) and how
it can help to alleviate these problems. Lastly, the concept of
an operational simulation is introduced together with a more
narrow deﬁnition applicable for this research.
A. Early design phase problems
Aerospace products are designed according to customer
demand. Customers specify the required product and manufac-
turers focus their effort to meet expectations. During the early
design phase, precise information about the ﬁnal product and
its environment is unknown [1]. Much work is based on expert
opinion and subjective engineering judgement rather than rig-
orous, systematic and disciplined analysis [2]. However, wide-
ranging decisions taking into account performance, environ-
mental, legal, disposal and operational aspects must be agreed
in a very short period of time. Early design phase decisions are
generally acknowledged to determine the success of aerospace
products to a great extend [3]. Therefore, improvements to
the early design phase procedures can potentially improve
aerospace products.
The current design process is guided by ﬁxed, static spec-
iﬁcation documents that cannot account for the dynamic and
complex nature of the product environment. This leads to
unsatisfactory understanding of the product domain, which
can be a primary cause for product failure [4]. The current
processes do not account for the full life-cycle of a product,
fail to evaluate operational costs properly and do not focus
on the value a product generates [5]. Moreover, speciﬁcation
documents cannot capture all eventualities and details of the
operational environment of the product. Partly due to these
shortcomings, contemporary aerospace products regularly suf-
fer from huge cost overruns, delivery delays and quality
problems. It is becoming essential to found early design
decisions upon tangible, tractable and rigorous decisions to
create competitive products.
One important aspect currently skipped during early product
design decision making is the operational environment the
product will work in. As designers focus to meet customer ex-
pectations, they neglect to investigate how successful a product
design will be in speciﬁc operational environments. Simulating
the operational environment and the product interactions early
on can help improve the current situation.
Another major problem occurring in early product design
is the disregard for non-recurring costs in cost estimates [5].
However, non-recurring costs such as payload integration,
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

transportation to the operational environment, support person-
nel costs and the inﬂuence of the design usually form a large
part of total life-cycle costs. For example, about two thirds
of the total cost of contemporary scientiﬁc Unmanned Air
Vehicle (UAV) missions are non-recurring cost items [6]. An
operational simulation can help to estimate these costs and
improve the quality of cost estimates signiﬁcantly.
B. Value-driven design
VDD emerged as a new approach to designing aerospace
products that tries to reduce the problems of current design
processes [7]. It aims to ﬁnd the optimal design and not
just any design that satisﬁes customer speciﬁcations. This is
achieved by introducing a value function that incorporates life-
cycle performance, product and operational information. The
value function returns the product’s value and allows intuitive
comparison of different designs. The aim is to optimize a
product for the value it delivers, possibly violating customer
speciﬁcations for a better design and higher value [8]. The
value function returns transparent and consistent scores to in-
dividual designs. Thereby, it replaces the traditional customer
requirements like maximum weight or cost.
An optimized design can only be as good as the value
function in use. The quality of the value function depends
in part on the quality of the operational knowledge. In order
to improve the operational knowledge during the early design
process, an operational simulation can be helpful. By simu-
lating operations, performance and environmental processes,
novel insights can be gained into the product concept. More-
over, product performance can now be compared not only
to different product designs but also to various operational
scenarios.
C. Operational simulation
Operational simulations started to become widespread dur-
ing the early 1990ies following growing animation capabilities
and improved computing facilities. In the traditional sense, an
operational simulation is used to support short-term planning
and decisions within manufacturing scenarios. The models
are highly detailed and realistic, feeding on real-time data to
allow “live” decision making for operators [9]. The simula-
tions can also be used to predict the near future to discern
alternative decision scenarios. Today, operational simulations
are predominantly used within transportation management
and manufacturing: Railway timetabling is now conducted
using operational simulations to verify scenarios and ensure
operational stability [10]; operational simulations supported
the development of hybrid cars by assessing the costs and
beneﬁts of batteries for various types of drivers [11].
In the context of this research, an operational simulation
is deﬁned as a non-analytical model recreating anticipated
operations of a product during its service life. The model
does not recreate existing missions. Instead, the aim is to
embed the product into its future operational environment.
Therefore, real-time data management and decision making
are not aspects of the operational simulation presented here.
Fig. 1.
The DECODE-UAV
This new approach to operational simulations is explained in
more detail below.
III. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
The aim of this research is to enable designers to create
better products by improving the early design process. Prod-
ucts are tested within an operational simulation to observe how
useful they are, how much value they produce and if important
operational constraints exist. The research will investigate
several key issues:
1) Can an operational simulation improve a product early
on?
2) Is it possible to create a generic operational model
to simulate different aerospace scenarios for various
aerospace products? Where is the trade-off between ad-
equate mission ﬁdelity and sufﬁcient model generality?
What is adequate ﬁdelity?
3) How can operational information be captured during the
early design process?
4) What ontology can be used to unify various aerospace
scenarios?
IV. RESULTS SO FAR
Some of these questions have been answered already while
others remain open. This section presents the results obtained
so far.
As a ﬁrst step towards answering the research questions, a
speciﬁc operational simulation has been created to support the
design of a Search-and-Rescue (SAR) UAV for the DECODE-
project (DEcision Environment for COmplex DEsigns) at the
University of Southampton [12]. This UAV has been build
based (among others) upon the results of the simulation and
can be seen in Figure 1. The software of choice was AnyLogic
[13], a Java-based simulation tool, which is able to combine
Agent-based modelling with a discrete-event paradigm and
visual algorithms.
The operational simulation is implemented into an itera-
tive value-driven design work ﬂow. Computer-aided Design
(CAD), Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and structural
analysis tools supply product information such as weight,
cruise speed and speciﬁc fuel consumption. Subsequently, 10
years of operations are simulated and operational parameters
such as the total fuel used, the number of maintenance opera-
tions or the attrition of airframes are returned. This information
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 2.
The simulation animation
is used to calculate a value for the product design in order to
optimize it.
The simulation helped to improve the product by supporting
the early design phase in two ways: (i) It was used “actively”
by designers as an optimization tool within the operational
environment and (ii) it was used “reactively” to inform about
extensive product attributes such as maximum permissible
cost. It was shown that it is possible to capture, understand
and simulate operational information during the early design
phase (research question 1). This was done through interviews,
data acquisition and careful model building (see Figure 2).
However, the simulation turned out to be highly speciﬁc,
restricting its use for SAR operations within a pre-deﬁned
area only. Moreover, the simulation ﬁdelity was very high and
subsequent simpliﬁcation did not alter characteristic results.
The knowledge and experience gained will be used to create
a ﬂexible and generic operational simulation incorporating an
optimum level of ﬁdelity (research questions 3 and 4).
V. FUTURE WORK
This section details the steps necessary to answer the re-
search questions. First, the scope of the simulation is speciﬁed
followed by details on how to unify various mission scenarios.
Subsequently, the model building phase is described followed
by how the results will be obtained and help to answer the
research questions.
A. Model scope
A ﬁrst step towards a generic operational simulation is to
deﬁne the scope of the model. A focus on civil UAV operations
is imposed in order to keep the task manageable. This choice
is based on practical considerations: The civil UAV sector
is starting to grow as it has the potential to support and
replace many “dull, dirty and dangerous missions” [5]. It is
easy to validate simulation results against reality because civil
UAV operations are small in scale compared to commercial
or military operations. However, it is desirable to keep the
simulation open for use in other domains such as commercial
airliners. Despite regulatory and liability issues waiting to be
resolved, the market forecasts for civil UAVs promise rapid
expansion [14]. NASA [5] has identiﬁed a number of key
operational areas suitable for viable and cost-effective use of
UAVs. Figure 3 presents a selection of missions planned to be
included into this research. The portfolio covers the majority
of possible civil mission applications.
Fig. 3.
Classiﬁcation of civil UAV missions (adapted from [5])
B. Unify mission speciﬁcations
The next step will be to investigate mission characteristics
and unify mission stages, requirements and deﬁnitions into a
coherent ontology that can map any one mission into any other.
This will enable designers to test-run products in pre-deﬁned
scenarios and also enable comparison of different missions.
Thereby, a unique way to improve the early product design is
found because one of the major barriers to successful market
introduction is the capability to ﬂy multiple types of missions
[5].
One example of ontological uniﬁcation are the various
mission goals: Each one can be reduced into one of the
following categories:
• to ﬁnd something (casualties, animals, pollution)
• to cover a certain area (agriculture, patrolling)
• to stay at a ﬁxed point (trafﬁc, broadcasting)
• to follow a track (pipelines, borders)
Simpliﬁcations like this will be sought for other mission
properties such as frequency, length, ﬂight proﬁles (vertical
and horizontal), typical weather, visibility and the number of
UAVs involved.
The UAVs will be speciﬁed by parameters such as spe-
ciﬁc fuel consumption, range, endurance and fuel capacity.
The on-board equipment characteristics will include the type
of equipment (camera, sensor or radios), over-the-horizon
communication requirements (what SatCom bandwidth, time
of usage, amount of data) and on-board analysis equipment
(image analysers, etc.), which reduce bandwidth. As with
mission parameters, UAV parameters will be uniﬁed into one
ontology.
All speciﬁcations will be accompanied by reliability es-
timates in order to increase trustworthiness into simulation
results. Useful reliability ﬁgures will help users to estimate
insurance costs as well. Moreover, all speciﬁcations can be
entered using conﬁdence intervals in order to reﬂect informa-
tion uncertainty.
The operational simulation output will enable better cost
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

estimation by including traceable and comprehensible opera-
tional information about UAV consumables, transit operations,
maintenance, staff requirements, payload installation and Sat-
Com requirements. However, some aspects will still require
traditional cost estimates such as payload development, data
analysis, documentation or mission planning.
C. Model building
Subsequently, the generic operational simulation will be
constructed based on the developed ontology. Separating data
and simulation logic is good modelling practice to support un-
derstanding of users and developers. As a ﬁrst step, an external
database will capture the ontology details. This ensures that
more mission scenarios can be added to the simulation later
on. User input will be possible through the external database,
the ontology tool or directly in the runtime environment of
the Java-application. Users can select a pre-deﬁned typical
mission as deﬁned in the database. Alternatively, they vary
speciﬁc mission characteristics to suit individual requirements.
Subsequently, users enter UAV parameters and equipment
details. Based on user requirements, the simulation will then
run for one mission only, several missions, or simulate the
whole product life-cycle. Output will be in simple text format
for ﬂexible data analysis.
Throughout model building, the mission scenarios will be
validated and tested by real users such as the DECODE-team
for SAR-missions.
D. Results
Once the model is built and validated, the research questions
can be answered.
The work conducted so far already indicates that an opera-
tional simulation can improve a product early on in the design
process [12]. This will be veriﬁed further using the advanced
simulation model. A baseline case for an existing real UAV
will be compared to a UAV optimized by the simulation for a
range of mission scenarios.
The second research question will be answered while build-
ing and testing the model. It will be shown to what extend
it is possible to create a generic operational model spanning
a number of missions and a range of UAV-characteristics.
The trade-off between model ﬁdelity and generality will be
discussed.
The extent of capturing operational information during the
early design process will be deﬁned by the input speciﬁca-
tions required by the user. It will be discussed how much
information is required by the user and how little information
is sufﬁcient to still produce useful results.
The ontology unifying various civil UAV missions will be
explained.
VI. CONCLUSION
The lack of rigorous engineering analysis during the
early design process leads to major problems with complex
aerospace programmes. This research aims to improve the
situation by introducing the concept of a generic operational
simulation. This enables designers to test their product ideas
and concepts in various operational scenarios in order to
support cost and value analysis based on the environment
the product will work in. Ongoing work has already shown
the validity of this approach by optimizing the design of a
civil Search-and-Rescue UAV developed at the University of
Southampton. This work used a unique operational simulation
speciﬁcally developed for Search-and-Rescue missions. The
planned generic simulation will include the majority of pos-
sible civil UAV missions in order to give designers ﬂexibility
and the ability to compare designs and scenarios. It will
be shown that an operational simulation can help ﬁnding
the best initial concept based on rigorous analysis instead
of engineering judgement and intuition. A trade-off between
model ﬁdelity and generality will be sought. A useful ontology
for civil UAV missions will be developed along with best
practices to capture operational information early in the design
process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the EPSRC Doctoral Training
Centre grant no. EP/G03690X/1.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Gries, “Methods for evaluating and covering the design space during
early design development,” Integration, the VLSI journal, vol. 38, pp.
131–183, 2004.
[2] H. Raharjo, A. C. Brombacher, and M. Xie, “Dealing with subjectivity
in early product design phase: a systematic approach to exploit quality
function deployment potentials,” Computer & Industrial Engineering,
vol. 55, pp. 253–278, 2008.
[3] M. Ivashkov, “Accel: a tool for supporting concept generation in
the early design phase,” Ph.D. dissertation, Eindhoven University of
Technology, 2004.
[4] E. S. K. Yu, “Towards modelling and reasoning support for early-phase
requirements engineering,” Requirements Engineering, p. 226, 1997.
[5] T. H. Cox, C. J. Nagy, M. A. Skoog, I. A. Somers, and R. Warner, “Civil
UAV Capability Assessment,” NASA, Tech. Rep., December 2004.
[6] B. Papadales, “Cost and business model analysis for civilian uav
missions,” Moir´e Incorporated, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[7] P. D. Collopy and P. Hollingsworth, “Value-driven design,” in 9th AIAA
Aviation Technology, Integration and Operations Conference (ATIO),
no. 2009-7099, AIAA.
Hilton Head, South Carolina: AIAA, 21-23
September 2009.
[8] J. Cheung, J. Scanlan, J. Wong, J. Forrester, H. Eres, P. Collopy,
P. Hollingsworth, S. Wiseall, and S. Briceno, “Application of value-
driven design to commercial aero-engine systems,” in 10th AIAA Avi-
ation Technology, Integration and Operations Conference, no. AIAA
2010-9058.
Fort Worth, Texas: AIAA, 13-15 September 2010.
[9] M. Andersson and G. Olsson, “A simulation based decision support
approach for operational capacity planning in a customer order driven
assembly line,” in Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Confer-
ence, D. J. Medeiros, E. F. Watson, J. S. Carson, and M. S. Manivannan,
Eds., 1998, pp. 935–941.
[10] J. Demitz, C. H¨ubschen, and C. Albrecht, Timetable planning and
information quality.
WIT Press, 2010, vol. 1, ch. A, pp. 11–25.
[11] V. J. Winstead, “Method and apparatus for determining the operational
energy cost of a hybrid vehicle,” US Patent 6 335 610, January 1, 2002.
[12] B. Schumann, J. Scanlan, and K. Takeda, “Evaluating design decisions in
real-time using operations modelling,” in Air Transport and Operations
Symposium 2011 (ATOS), R. Curran and S. C. Santema, Eds.
Delft
University of Technology, March 2011.
[13] AnyLogic,
XJ
Technologies
Software,
1992.
[Online].
Available:
www.xjtek.com
[14] K. Herrick, “Development of the unmanned aerial vehicle market:
Forecasts and trends,” Air & Space Europe, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 25–27,
2000.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

