Urban Consolidation Centers – an Analysis of Internal Processes Using Discrete 
Event Process Simulation 
 
Max Wuennenberg1, Chen Yang1, Johannes Fottner1 
1Chair of Materials Handling, Material Flow, Logistics 
Technical University of Munich 
Garching bei Muenchen, Germany 
e-mail: {max.wuennenberg, c.yang, j.fottner}@tum.de 
 
 
Abstract— This study addresses the spatial constraints posed 
by urbanization and population growth in cities. It evaluates 
different types of urban consolidation centers to improve 
urban logistics. Design parameters are identified through 
literature review, and an evaluation methodology is developed. 
Simulation models are created for each center type, integrating 
the evaluation approach. The approach is validated in a case 
study in Munich, using real-life data. Simulation results 
analyze 
key 
performance 
indicators 
and 
provide 
recommendations for optimizing logistics and economic aspects 
in urban consolidation center planning. Efficient options 
include roll containers, electric pallet trucks, Last In – First 
Out storage, and gloves with integrated identification devices. 
Keywords – Cargo bikes; City logistics; Discrete-event 
simulation; Identification technologies; Urban consolidation 
centers. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The volume of Courier, Express, and Parcel (CEP) 
shipments grew by 11.2 % to 4.51 billion shipments from 
2011 to 2021. Annual growth of 4.7 % is expected up to 
2026 [1]. Apart from extraordinary events, such as the 
COVID-19 pandemic, this is mainly due to changing 
consumer behavior, increasing urbanization, and growing 
demand for e-commerce products [2]. Online retail poses 
new challenges for urban delivery traffic, as more and more 
small shipments are to be delivered to customers more 
quickly [3]. To that end, city logistics is confronted with 
challenges similar to those industrial material flow systems 
are confronted with [4]. In addition to that, special services, 
such as same-day or same-hour delivery are gaining in 
importance [5]. Environmental protection measures and 
efficiency improvements are urgently needed. The concept 
of Urban Consolidation Centers (UCCs), which are located 
close to delivery areas, enables the distribution of goods 
flows and route-optimized delivery [3]. UCCs serve as 
transshipment points for environmentally friendly vehicles 
and as interfaces for alternative delivery concepts [6]. 
Simulation techniques help plan and optimize UCCs in 
neighborhoods with a relevant usage potential [7]. This 
article presents a simulation-based approach for the analysis 
of UCCs and the identification of feasible design premises.  
The work is structured as follows: In Section II, the state 
of the art regarding design and operations of UCCs is 
presented and subsequently, research objectives are derived. 
In Section III, an approach for setting up simulation-based 
UCC analyses is presented and implemented with a case 
study example. Section IV concludes the work by 
summarizing the results and identifying limitations and 
potential future research work. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART AND RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
A. Urban consolidation centers for parcel distribution 
UCCs serve as transshipment hubs for high-volume 
shipments in densely populated areas, facilitating the flow of 
goods between shippers or recipients and regional 
distribution centers. Generally, transportation is provided by 
trucks in classes ranging from 3.5 to 12 tons. 
Shipments are pre-sorted at regional distribution centers 
and typically consist of low-weight, low-volume goods 
delivered in high-density areas (see Figure 1). UCCs are 
supplied from CEP service providers' regional centers in the 
morning, using roll containers or pre-sorted boxes. UCCs 
can be either stationary or mobile, using pre-existing real 
estate or swap bodies/trailers to create temporary hubs. 
Mobile UCCs are transported to and from the established 
location by truck [8]. 
 
NIGHT
Parking of cargo bikes
in the UCC
8 AM TO 10 AM
Supply UCC from
depot / branch office per 
service provider
Loading cargo 
bikes
10 AM TO 5 PM
Delivery within a radius
of approx. 2 km per service 
provider
Unloading of 
undelivered packages
4 TO 6 PM
Collection of undelivered 
packages per service 
provider
Each SP one 
vehicle up to 7.5 t
Packages on roll containers or 
pre-sorted in interchangeable 
boxes
Multiple tours 
possible per vehicle
Each SP one vehicle 
up to 7.5 t
Batteries are charged
 
Figure 1. Operating scenario for a multi-user UCC, based on [8]. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

B. Quantitative methods: discrete-event process 
simulation and methods-time measurement 
Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) examines event-driven 
process chains using multiple scenarios [9]. Transferring 
gained knowledge to the real-world system requires minimal 
differences between the initial system and the model [10]. 
System variants are compared and evaluated based on 
different criteria. This paper maps and models the material 
flow system in UCCs using DES, following five essential 
steps: Task analysis, model design, implementation, 
verification, validation, and application [11]. Methods-Time 
Measurement (MTM) determines standardized process times 
by breaking down human motion into steps [12]. It quantifies 
manual processes in UCCs, assisting in DES model 
parameterization by adding relevant partial times of basic 
movements to determine total activity time [13]. 
C. Storage equipment: handling systems and identication 
technologies 
Two types of load carriers in UCCs are considered in this 
work: Roll containers and Euro pallets. Roll containers are 
self-driven with wheels, requiring no handling equipment. 
Euro pallets are handled using manually operated or electric 
pallet trucks [14]. Different identification technologies in 
warehouse logistics simplify package sorting and recognize 
package information [15]. They can be condensed to four 
representative main types of identification technologies, 
which are the following: Smartphone, glove with built-in 
scanning device (ID glove), stationary camera and RFID 
scanner. Cameras and RFID scanners require special 
workstations, while smartphones and ID gloves provide 
mobile solutions carried by workers during sorting, 
eliminating the necessity for separate workstations [16]. 
D. Parcel sorting and storage operations 
Efficient storage systems prioritize fast access, short 
transport and walking distances and organized structures 
[17][18]. For UCCs, a row storage is the most common 
variant. It allows fast access and moderate investment costs. 
Thus, in the following, a row storage scheme is used for all 
configurations. Storage strategies aim to minimize distances, 
maximize capacity utilization, and prevent obsolescence. 
Besides First-In – First Out (FIFO) and Last In – First Out 
(LIFO), other strategies, such as optimizing service routes 
and combining orders, can be applied [16][19]. 
E. Research objective 
The impact of UCCs on urban logistics has been studied 
in Barcelona (Spain) and Belo Horizonte (Brazil), 
considering economic and ecological factors [20][21]. 
Various methods have been developed to determine locations 
and identify factors affecting depot operations for enhanced 
collaboration 
among 
stakeholders 
[22][23][24][25]. 
Moreover, UCCs were evaluated for business opportunities 
and collaboration using Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
and DES models in a case study in Greece [26]. Also, the 
effectiveness of traditional delivery trucks and cargo bikes 
for parcel delivery was compared and assessed using the 
DES approach and agent- based simulation [27]. 
The previous research is strongly focused on the handling 
and delivery process and the general cooperative use of 
UCCs, examined from the macro perspective. The 
simulation-based investigation and evaluation of material 
flow and storage strategies, as well as their influence in 
combination with further configuration parameters within 
different UCC types is not considered accordingly. This 
results in two research objectives that this work addresses: 
1) How can different UCC types be evaluated under 
variation of relevant layout parameters, as well as material 
flow and storage strategies by means of DES? 
2) Which recommendations can be derived for the 
planning and dimensioning of UCCs, the processes to be 
carried out and the selection of identification technologies? 
III. 
MODELING 
In the following subsections it is explained how UCC 
operations are modeled using a DES approach, including the 
selection and implementation of different parameters.  
A. Concept of an evaluation approach 
The evaluation of UCCs requires defining relevant design 
parameters and assessment metrics that reflect realistic 
processes and can be integrated into simulation models for 
deriving meaningful conclusions. Prior to developing the 
DES model, all relevant parameters must be determined. 
They are the inputs and generate the system diversity by 
being set to different values in several combinations. MTM 
helps to quantify the them. The outputs are performance 
metrics, such as lead time and throughput, as well as 
monetary aspects, such as investments or personnel costs. 
Table I summarizes all relevant design parameters based 
on the literature analysis. The UCC types studied include 
various container sizes, swap bodies (non-stackable freight 
containers specifically designed for road and rail transport), 
and storage rooms of different sizes (the small storage room 
having an area of 50 m² and the large one 100 m²). The 
parameters include four different combinations of parcel 
volume and weight (A, B, C, and D), subsequently referred 
to as parcel flow. Each one represents a distribution of parcel 
weight and volume. Flows with larger or heavier parcels 
yield a lower number of parcels in total. Standardized parcel 
formats are used. Volume and weight are calculated using 
average values. Roll containers and Euro pallets are used as 
load carriers, and respective volume utilization rates are 
determined. 
Also, 
various 
handling 
equipment 
for 
transporting the load carriers is considered. Identification 
technologies, such as barcode scanners and radio-frequency 
identification (RFID), and different storage strategies, such 
as FIFO, LIFO, and chaotic are used to capture parcel 
information and optimize the sorting and picking efficiency. 
B. Implementation with discrete-event process simulation 
In this subsection, the method for determining the 
number of required load carriers and calculating the 
capacities of UCCs for a certain application scenario is 
introduced. It is also explained how floor space utilization in 
warehouse management is determined. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE I. MORPHOLOGICAL BOX CONTAINING THE IDENTIFIED DESIGN 
PARAMETERS AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS. 
Design 
Parameters 
Characteristics of Design Parameters 
Parcel flow 
A 
B 
C 
D 
Load carrier 
Roll container 
Euro pallet 
Handling 
equipment 
Manual operated pallet 
truck 
Electric pallet truck 
Identification 
technology 
Smartphone 
ID glove 
Camera 
RFID 
Storage 
strategy 
FIFO 
LIFO 
Chaotic 
UCC type 
10 ft 
container 
20 ft 
container 
Swap 
body 
Small 
storage 
room 
Large 
storage 
room 
To start, the number of required load carriers is 
determined based on the calculation of the load capacity of a 
single load carrier in terms of parcels. The load capacity 
depends on the assumed parcel volume in the respective use 
case, the internal volume of the respective load carrier, and 
the volume utilization rate the CEP provider is aiming for. 
The internal volume V of a load carrier is determined 
using geometric dimensions from technical data for roll 
containers and Euro pallets. The load capacity C of a load 
carrier is calculated by multiplying V with the volume 
utilization rate ρ divided through the volume v of an 
individual parcel as 
 
C = V ρ v-1. 
(1) 
Hence, the number of load carriers can be computed as 
the number of parcels overall divided through the number of 
parcels a single load carrier can carry. 
After that, suitable UCC types can be selected based on 
their storage capacities (see Figure 2 for an exemplary 
application with a 20 ft container, comparing the layout 
drawing and the simulation model). UCC types with storage 
capacities equal to or greater than the calculated number of 
load carriers are considered as potential solutions. 
Figure 2 shows the simulation model with transport 
module (center), workstation module (upper left corner), and 
storage module (upper and lower part). The transport module 
consists of footpaths and workstations. The workstations 
define where the employee should stand during transfer or 
handling. The workstation module is composed of only two 
single stations. These are intended to simulate the process of 
placing the package on the table and the identification 
process by scanning it with a camera or RFID. Each cell of 
the warehouse module consists of a warehouse and two 
individual stations, and one cell is provided for each storage 
location. The warehouse allows to keep a single load carrier 
on it. Left and right single stations are used for depositing the 
load carrier during a temporary stopover and for transferring 
the parcels to the waiting load carrier in the UCC. 
The floor space utilization rate is an important metric in 
warehouse management, representing the ratio of the space 
effectively utilized for operational purposes compared to the 
total warehouse area. A higher floor space utilization rate is 
generally desirable, but limits exist since warehouse 
operators and their equipment still need to move around. 
Floor space utilization rate is calculated using the ratio of 
used warehouse area and gross warehouse area. 
Regarding the time analysis of the storage and retrieval, 
different time intervals are defined based on the sorting 
methods used. The total lead time is the sum of the time for 
storage executed by the truck driver and the time for retrieval 
(i.e., picking times) executed by the cargo bike rider. The 
process of retrieval begins with the cargo bike arriving at the 
UCC and ends when the last parcel assigned to the respective 
tour has been loaded into the bike. For all simulation runs, a 
medium-sized cargo bike with the loading capacity of 
1.25 m3 and a loading weight of 150 kg has been assumed. 
In order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the 
system behavior of a UCC, sufficient simulation results must 
be generated and collected. This can be accomplished by 
running multiple simulations. The execution of those 
simulation runs can be optimized using experimental design 
and thereby reducing the number of final runs and avoiding 
duplication. The simulation model, adapted to different UCC 
types, is created using suitable simulation software. It 
features an intuitive and modular user interface for easy 
implementation and parameter adaptability. Recorded 
simulation results are documented for subsequent data 
processing. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY: APPLICATION IN MUNICH SCHWABING-
WEST 
This subsection presents an assessment approach for 
UCCs, discussing results and findings. A case study in 
Munich is used to compare different UCC types based on 
planning data. With the district of Schwabing-West as an 
example, the number of UCCs and parcel distribution are 
determined based on population size and delivery rates. 
Storage capacity and the number of carriers are taken into 
account to calculate the minimum number of UCCs required. 
Layout – 20 ft container
Simulation model – 20 ft container
 
Figure 2. Comparison of the layout drawing with the simulation model of 
the 20 ft container. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

In the example of Schwabing-West with 68204 
inhabitants and an average delivery rate of 0.2 parcels per 
inhabitant and day, this results in a total volume of 13641 
parcels per day [28][29]. There are five CEP service 
providers, each of which therefore has to process about 2730 
parcels per day. Based on a UCC delivery radius of one 
kilometer, two UCC locations with a diameter of two 
kilometers are selected for sufficient coverage [30]. 
The estimated number of parcels per UCC that need to be 
processed on a daily basis is approximately 1,365. However, 
it should be noted that seasonal deviations of capacity 
demand can cause the necessity for a UCC to offer more 
storage capacities. The results presented in the following 
have been generated using an average over the four different 
parcel flow scenarios A to D and the respective simulation 
results. The number of UCCs in the district is kept as low as 
possible for as long as the capacity requirements are met. 
With the assumption that only one type of UCC with the 
same parcel volumes exists in the planning area, a simulation 
model was developed to evaluate the processes within a 
UCC. The simulation model was generated with Tecnomatix 
Plant Simulation [31].  
To vary the parameters in Table I, four test groups have 
been created. Test Group 1 (192 simulation runs) considered 
parcel flows and load carriers. In Group 2, handling devices 
were compared over 16 simulation runs. Group 3 was meant 
to compare identification technologies and storage strategies 
(320 runs). The scope of Group 4 with 18 simulation runs 
was the comparison of UCC layouts. This yields a total sum 
of 546 executed simulation runs. 
The results were evaluated from a logistical and 
monetary point of view, considering setup and operational 
costs. In the following paragraphs, the results of this case 
study are presented. They are also shown in Figure 3. 
At first, the choice of different load carriers is considered 
– see sub-figure 3(a). Throughput for storage and retrieval of 
roll containers and Euro pallets varies by the UCC type 
considered. Storage time per parcel tends to increase with a 
larger number of load carriers, as larger UCCs require longer 
transport and transit times. The cost comparison between roll 
containers and Euro pallets shows that Euro pallets have the 
lowest investment costs in most UCC type scenarios (since 
they are the less costly type of load carrier). 
On the other hand, roll containers have lower average 
variable costs. Due to reduced operating times, the use of roll 
containers can reduce the total storage time significantly. 
The result is that the throughput for storage operations varies 
between roughly 2800 parcels per hour (p/h) for 10 ft 
containers and more than 9100 p/h in a large storage room 
when roll containers are used. The throughput that can be 
reached when using pallets varies between 2500 and 8400 
p/h for the two respective UCC types. When it comes to 
retrieval, roll containers enable throughputs of 680 p/h for 
10 ft containers and 370 p/h for large storage rooms, in 
contrast to 670 and 260 p/h for the pallets. 
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
10 ft
container
20 ft
container
Swap
body
Small storage
room
Large storage
room
Throughput [Parcel/h]
Storage (Roll container)
Retrieval (Roll container)
Storage (Euro pallet)
Retrieval (Euro pallet)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
10 ft
container
20 ft
container
Small storage
room
Large storage
room
Time [min]
Storage (Manual)
Retrieval (Manual)
Storage (Electric)
Retrieval (Electric)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
10 ft
container
20 ft
container
Swap
body
Small
storage
room
Large
storage
room
Time [min]
Retrieval (RFID)
Storage (RFID)
Retrieval (Camera)
Storage (Camera)
Retrieval (ID Glove)
Storage (ID Glove)
Retrieval (Smartphone)
Storage (Smartphone)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
Storage
Retrieval
Throughput [Parcel/h]
FIFO
LIFO
Chaotic
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
 
Figure 3. results of the case study simulation: (a) Throughput by storage and retrieval regarding load carriers (b) Storage and the retrieval time regarding 
handling devices (c) Storage and the retrieval time regarding identification technologies (d) Throughput regarding storage strategies for all UCCs. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Regarding floor space utilization, roll containers show a 
better utilization rate than pallets. Among the different layout 
types for UCCs, roll containers reach up to nine percentage 
points more in that metric. The reason for this can be found 
in the compact design. In a 20 ft container, the floor space 
utilization rate reaches the highest value of 38 %, whereas in 
the large storage room, only 12 % can be reached. This low 
floor space utilization is due to the layout structure of this 
large room which requires additional picking aisles, thereby 
reducing the amount of space available for storage purposes. 
The next part of the case study is the examination of 
different handling devices – see sub-figure 3(b). Electric 
pallet trucks show a shorter storage time due to their better 
maneuverability and speed. This means that, when summing 
up the required lead time per parcel for storage and retrieval, 
electric pallet trucks can save less than one minute when a 
10 ft container layout is used. However, with a large storage 
room, a lead time reduction of roughly 2.5 min can be 
observed. In relative figures, electric pallet trucks enable a 
lead time reduction between 0.7 % and 1.8 %. The retrieval 
time accounts for the largest share of the total lead time. 
Hand pallet trucks, on the other hand, are more 
economical due to their lower purchase price. Depending on 
the type of UCC layout used (which means a different 
number of UCCs and therefore also a different number of 
handling devices are needed), the fixed costs can vary by a 
factor of 10. However, electric pallet trucks always cause 
about 260 % of the fixed costs of hand pallet trucks. 
The next aspect covered by the case study are the 
different identification technologies for the parcel sorting – 
see sub-figure 3(c). The results show that the sorting speed 
of the different technologies is in descending order as 
follows: ID glove, smartphone, camera, and RFID scanner. 
The retrieval time accounts for a larger share of the total lead 
time compared to the storage time. The results show that the 
ID glove has the shortest total lead time for all UCC layout 
types, while stationary RFID scanning causes the longest 
lead time. The use of a smartphone as an identification 
device in parcel sorting is the most cost effective. The ID 
glove can reduce variable costs even more in most cases, but 
it is not always the most cost-effective solution overall due to 
its high purchase price. The use of cameras and RFID results 
in higher capital costs and lower storage performance. 
The final subject considered in the case study is the 
influence of different storage strategies – see sub-figure 3(d). 
Regarding storage time based on the average value of all the 
UCCs, the chaotic storage principle achieves the largest 
storage time and thus the lowest efficiency due to the 
additional documentation the operator needs to deal with. 
The FIFO and LIFO principles, on the other hand, have a 
lower storage time and therefore a higher throughput (both 
reaching 17 % higher values than chaotic storage). For 
retrieval, the storage strategies perform similarly to each 
other, and the achieved throughputs vary by less than 1 %. 
As a result, the chaotic storage can be observed to have the 
highest personnel costs among the three storage strategies. 
Overall, the results show that the use of roll containers, 
electric pallet trucks, ID glove and the LIFO storage 
principle are the most efficient design options. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Research findings 
In this paper, UCCs as important parts of inner-city 
distribution logistics were evaluated using DES and varying 
different design parameters. As a starting point, the relevant 
design parameters and different types of UCCs were 
determined. These parameters were then summarized 
according to study objectives, used for an evaluation 
approach, and implemented in simulation models. Those 
DES models were adapted for all UCC types considered. 
In the planning example for Munich Schwabing-West, 
several scenarios for parcel quantities, sizes, and weights 
were assigned to various UCC types. The optimal number of 
UCCs to deal with these parcel volumes was then 
determined. Subsequently, the different UCC types were 
evaluated and compared using the evaluation approach and 
the constructed simulation model. To evaluate the different 
UCCs, logistical and monetary aspects were considered. The 
cost analysis focused only on acquisition and personnel costs 
but could be extended in the future to include insurance and 
ancillary costs, such as electricity and water. 
Through the sensible use of identification and 
communication technologies and electric devices, logistical 
performance in the UCC could be significantly increased, 
while personnel costs could be lowered through the 
reduction of working time. This reduction could be reached 
by the increased identification efficiency in parcel sorting 
related to the use of reliability-enhancing identification 
technologies. However, due to the high purchase price, 
introducing technological equipment is not necessarily an 
absolute ideal solution for all UCC scenarios. Furthermore, it 
should be noted that the choice of the appropriate load carrier 
depends on the specific requirements of the UCC and the 
nature of the storage and delivery processes. 
In the last part of this work, the recommendations for the 
design parameters of UCCs were derived regarding the 
simulation results and the applied evaluation criteria. The 
evaluation approach developed for this purpose and the 
designed and built simulation model were thus verified and 
validated on the basis of the quantitative simulation results 
from the practical case study in Munich Schwabing-West. 
B. Limitations and future work 
However, the simulation runs executed for the evaluation 
were reduced to only that amount which was necessary for 
the most relevant study objectives in order to save 
computational time and modeling effort. It could lead to the 
risk that resulting simulation results are not taking into 
account potential hidden interactions between certain design 
parameters in combination with the UCC types.  
The time window per day for the employee was 
consequently set to eight hours. However, this working time 
might not be optimal for all potential use cases. Also, the 
warehouse process was only simulated for one UCC within 
one day. In the future, the simulation model could be 
extended to several UCCs with a longer time interval, e.g., 
one week, in order to provide more accurate results about the 
cooperation between the UCC and CEP service providers. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The investigation of the UCC system can be further 
optimized in subsequent research through test trials in real 
laboratories in order to gain a comprehensive overview of 
UCCs in various application scenarios and to ensure the most 
precise and comprehensive evaluation possible. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
With the use and expansion of environmentally friendly 
delivery transport, such as electric cargo bikes, and the high 
handling capacity performed in inner-city areas, UCCs 
become an increasingly important and conceivable solution 
to make the last mile delivery of CEP service more efficient. 
By using UCCs and working closely with cities and 
municipalities, logistics and traffic, problems can be 
mitigated to help reduce congestion and emissions in inner-
city residential areas. The consideration of costs involved 
depending on the choice of configuration parameters helps to 
select an appropriately designed UCC. To this end, the use of 
roll containers, or (alternatively) electric pallet trucks 
combined with ID gloves helps in finding a balance between 
costs and achieved logistics performance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] BIEK, CEP Study 2022: A market analysis in Germany, 2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.biek.de/publikationen/ 
studien.html (retrieved: October 2023) 
[2] IHK, Micro depots in connected cities: a study on Krefeld, 
Mönchengladbach and Neuss, 2019. 
[3] K. Havers, Guidelines for the sustainable design of urban 
delivery 
traffic 
systems, 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://digital.zlb.de/viewer/metadata/34654392/0/ (retrieved: 
October 2023) 
[4] M. Wuennenberg, P. Vollmuth, J. Xu, J. Fottner, and B. 
Vogel-Heuser, “Transformability in Material Flow Systems: 
Towards an Improved Product Development Process,” in 
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, Managing and 
Implementing the Digital Transformation, 2022, pp. 3–14. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-14317-5_1 
[5] P. H. Voß, Logistics - an underestimated industry of the 
future: Strategies and solutions along Supply Chain 4.0, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/ 
10.1007/978-3-658-27317-0.pdf (retrieved: October 2023) 
[6] E. Taniguchi and R. van der Heijden, “An evaluation 
methodology for city logistics. in: Transport logistics,” 
Classics in Transport Analysis, no. 5, 2002, pp. 65–90. 
[7] W. Hofmann, T. Assmann, P. Neghabadi, V. Cung, and J. 
Tolujevs, Eds., A simulation tool to assess the integration of 
cargo bikes into an urban distribution system, 2017. 
[8] IHK, Micro depots in connected cities: a study on Krefeld, 
Mönchengladbach and Neuss, 2021. 
[9] Simulation of logistics, material flow, and production 
systems, 3633, Verein Deutscher Ingenieure. 
[10] K. Gutenschwager, M. Rabe, S. Spieckermann, and S. 
Wenzel, Simulation in production and logistics. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Vieweg, 2017. 
[11] J. Banks, D. Gerstein, and S. Searles, Modeling processes, 
validation, and verification of complex simulations: A survey. 
Methodology and validation, 1988. 
[12] H.-J. Bullinger, Guidelines for a personnel-oriented design of 
competitive work stations: Springer-Verlag, 2013. 
[13] M. Wuennenberg, B. Wegerich, and J. Fottner, “Optimization 
of Internal Logistics using a combined BPMN and Simulation 
Approach,” in Proceedings of the 36th ECMS International 
Conference on Modelling and Simulation ECMS 2022, 
Ålesund, Norway, 2022, pp. 13–19. 
[14] H. Martin, Transportation and storage logistics: Springer-
Verlag, 2016. 
[15] M. Kärkkäinen and J. Holmström, “Wireless product 
identification: enabler for handling efficiency, customisation 
and information sharing,” Supply chain management: an 
International journal, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 242–252, 2002. 
[16] H. Martin, Storage logistics, transportation planning, and 
controlling of intralogistics systems: Springer Vieweg 
Wiesbaden, 2014. 
[17] D. Arnold, H. Isermann, A. Kuhn, H. Tempelmeier, and K. 
Furmans, Handbook for logistics: Springer, 2008. 
[18] T. Schmidt, Ed., Internal logistics. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Vieweg, 2019. 
[19] H. Gleißner and J. Femerling, “Fundamentals in logistics,” in 
Logistik: Gabler, 2008, pp. 3–20. [Online]. Available: 
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-8349-9547-
6_2 (retrieved: October 2023) 
[20] M. Roca-Riu and M. Estrada, “An evaluation of urban 
consolidation centers through logistics systems analysis in 
circumstances where companies have equal market shares,” 
Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 39, pp. 796–
806, 2012. 
[21] V. Correia, L. Oliveira, and A. Guerra, “Economical and 
environmental analysis of an urban consolidation center for 
Belo 
Horizonte 
City 
(Brazil),” 
Procedia-Social 
and 
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 39, pp. 770–782, 2012. 
[22] G. Battaia, L. Faure, G. Marqués, R. Guillaume, and J. R. 
Montoya-Torres, Eds., A methodology to anticipate the 
activity level of collaborative networks: The case of urban 
consolidation: Taylor & Francis, 2014. 
[23] A. Anderluh, v. Hemmelmayr, and D. Rüdiger, “Analytic 
hierarchy process for city hub location selection-The 
Viennese case,” Transportation Research Procedia, vol. 46, 
pp. 77–84, 2020. 
[24] R. Dupas, J. Deschamps, E. Taniguchi, A. Qureshi, and T. 
Hsu, 
“Optimizing 
the 
location 
selection 
of 
urban 
consolidation centers with sustainability considerations in the 
city of Bordeaux,” Research in Transportation Business & 
Management, p. 100943, 2023. 
[25] M. Savall-Manyó and I. Ribas, “Location of micro-urban 
consolidation centres for the superblocks in Barcelona,” 
IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 145–150, 2022. 
[26] M. Rabe, A. Klueter, and A. Wuttke, Eds., Evaluating the 
consolidation of distribution flows using a discrete event 
supply chain simulation tool: Application to a case study in 
Greece: IEEE, 2018. 
[27] A. Ballano, A. Al-Rahamneh, A. Serrano-Hernandez, and J. 
Faulin, “Agent-based modelling and simulation for hub and 
electric last mile distribution in Vienna,” Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 220, pp. 718–723, 2023. 
[28] BIEK – A study on parcel occurence in German cities. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.biek.de/presse/meldung/die-
meisten-pakete-pro-einwohner-gibts-in-m%C3%BCnchen-
stuttgart-und-d%C3%BCsseldorf.html 
(retrieved: 
October 
2023). 
[29] Statista, Inhabitants of the Munich districts in 2022. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/ 
1106611/umfrage/einwohnerzahl-der-stadtbezirke-von-
muenchen/ (retrieved: October 2023). 
[30] BIEK, “Micro Depots - An advantage for cities,” 2019. 
[31] Tecnomatix Plant Simulation Software. [Online]. Available: 
https://plm.sw.siemens.com/de-DE/tecnomatix/products/ 
plant-simulation-software/ (retrieved: October 2023). 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

