A Framework to Specify Agent-Based Models
Using ODD* Protocol
C´edric Grueau
Department of Systems and Informatics
EST Set´ubal, Polytechnic Institute of Set´ubal
Set´ubal, Portugal
0000-0003-3445-4070
Thyago Romagna Bendo
Department of Systems and Informatics
EST Set´ubal, Polytechnic Institute of Set´ubal
Set´ubal, Portugal
0000-0003-2164-4270
Alan Gavioli
Paran´a Federal University Of Technology
Medianeira, Brazil
0000-0002-5325-0754
Jo˜ao Junior Ara´ujo
Department of Computer Sciences
NOVA School of Science and Technology
Caparica, Portugal
0000-0001-5914-1631
Abstract—The use of Agent-Based Models (ABM) is a popular
approach to develop simulations in ﬁelds such as social sciences,
geography and natural sciences. However, due to the complexity
of the models, the sharing of models’ speciﬁcation becomes an
arduous process, which makes it difﬁcult to validate and replicate
this type of model. To assist in this process, experts from the
domain have developed the ODD (Overview, Design concepts,
Details) protocol to help systematize ABM descriptions. However,
because it is a protocol, the latitude allowed in the description of
the models and the format in which these descriptions are made
only address part of the problem. On the one hand, it may remain
difﬁcult to understand the description, and on the other hand, the
access and processing of the ODD descriptions are still a manual
task. To solve the problem, a framework, based on an ontology,
was developed to allow traceability of ABM described with ODD.
Concepts from other metadata initiatives, such as Dublin Core
and Codemeta, were included to add important data to the ODD
protocol. An application was developed to facilitate the access to
the models, which allows the analysis of the data source of the
model and the extraction of the protocol components. An API
was also developed that gives access to ABM descriptions and
promotes the processing of ABM descriptions. The application is
ready for a series of tests to validate our approach, the usability
of the application and the utility of the framework.
Index Terms—ODD Protocol; ODD+D; ODD+2D; Linked
Data; Agent-Based modelling.
I. INTRODUCTION
For the last two decades, individuals are in the center
of research social and geographical systems research [1].
Networks and interactions of individual entities, called agents,
contribute for the emergence of the system’s behavior. Agent-
based models (ABM) have become an efﬁcient technique to
simulate complex systems. The popularity of the ﬁeld began
to increase, leading to an increasing number of applications
of ABM for Geographical Systems (see [2] or [3] for some
examples).
After two decades of development and the creation of an
enlarged user community, many challenges still need to be
addressed in developing and advancing ABM applicable to
geographical systems. Some of these challenges were ﬁrst
presented a decade ago in a publication by [4] and were
recently revisited [5]. One of these challenges is Replication
and Experiment. Replication of agent-based models is difﬁcult
to achieve due to multiple parameters, methods and contexts
that pertain to a certain situation [5].
Another challenge is related with the vocabulary used by
modellers and programmers to describe the concepts used
in their model. The lack of standardization may lead to
misunderstanding of the exchange of software metadata. [6]
suggested a minimum standard of model description for good
modelling practice, namely the provision of source code and
an accessible natural language description, and argue for the
development of a common standard.
However, as noted by [7], code is often only understandable
by other modellers and even this can be problematic if it is
badly written and poorly documented. It is only through such
activities that we can replicate and experiment with agent-
based models. Similar efforts with respect to reproducibility
of results are also being called on in the geocomputation.
The ODD protocol [8] (Overview, Design concepts, and
Details) was created to deﬁne a series of information that
should accompany the description of each ABM. However,
the ﬁrst version of the protocol is limited by its ability to
describe only one version of the model and does not have a
direct relationship with the code for the model. These aspects
were improved with the new versions of the protocol, ODD+D
(ODD + Decision), with the latest version ODD + 2D (ODD
+ Decision + Data) having a considerably greater descriptive
capacity [9]. In this paper, we will refer to OOD protocol and
its different extensions by ODD*. Using ODD*, modellers
should fulﬁll a series of ﬁelds to describe models’ structure
and data, simulations components and agents’ rationale. Some
questions to answer are provided by the protocol’s authors in
order to help modellers inform ABM descriptions. Modellers
must organize this information into a document that will be
used by other experts of the ﬁeld to understand and replicate
the model.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Despite the improvement brought by the odd* protocol, it
still remains challenging for modelers to compare two ABM or
to process quickly and safely an ABM description in order to
reuse it. Ones will still need to manually collect descriptions,
interpret them, compare them and adapt the code.
In section 2, we will see how researcher have been working
on ODD* to improve models speciﬁcation. Section 3 will
describe our proposal and section 4 will present ﬁrst results.
II. RELATED WORK
Different approaches have been followed to reduce the gap
between modellers and the community of users interested in
replicating, understanding and validating ABM. Early adopters
of the ODD protocol have advocated that the more infor-
mation about an ABM is given to the community, the more
transparent the model is. This approach has evolved towards
the development of repositories such as CoMSES [10], which
is a network with the common goal of improving the way
experts develop, share, and use computational modeling in
the social and ecological sciences. However, suggestions of
researchers [6] have headed towards a minimum standard of
model description, namely the provision of source code and
an accessible description. Yet, ABM speciﬁcations can be
found in repositories of models and scientiﬁc articles, these
speciﬁcation only remain accessible by manual searches.
In [7], authors proposed an extension to the ODD protocol to
build, document, and compare AMB for Coupled human and
natural systems (CHANS). They included two new sections a
“Model Veriﬁcation and Validation” section and a “CHANS
Characteristic Features” section. Authors also propose a tech-
nical development that facilitates CHANS- related agent-based
modeling, including the online pseudo-code and preliminary
library of reusable modules in Netlogo [11], a multi-agent
programmable modeling environment. Authors presented a
cross-site comparison in relation to CHANS models include
reinforcing the need for standardized modules for CHANS
ABMs. Yet, authors do not provide any suggestion on how to
store and provide automatic comparisons of cross-sites ABM.
Models stored in separate repositories are still hard to search
for and compare.
The latest addition to ODD* is ODD+2D with a greater
description of data used for the simulations. This new version
implied a reorganization of the protocol’s ﬁelds related to
data, which highlighted a crucial aspect of ODD* protocol:
the information to provide for the model description vary
according to the version of ODD* the author is using to
document his model. This point usually implies ﬁeld removal
or adaptation, damaging the development of a pattern on MBA
documentation.
Despite efforts promoted to normalize ABMs’ description
Modelers still need better support for ABMs’ speciﬁcation,
comparison and discovery. The development of a common
standard remains thus limited to natural language. On the other
hand, the analysis and comparison between models stored in
such repositories remains a task that can only be performed by
users. Different software repositories, software languages and
scientiﬁc domains denote this information in different ways,
which makes it difﬁcult or impossible for tools to work across
these different sources without losing valuable information
along the way.
III. PROPOSAL
As stated before, the ODD* protocol is the most consistent
proposition to describe ABM. It organizes information of an
speciﬁc instance of an ABM in a document, according to a
speciﬁc ODD version. As a document, the ABM description
using ODDª should also be described with other metadata.
Data about authors, date and keywords are essential for the
management of models’ speciﬁcations. On the other hand,
computer code has been identiﬁed as a key element for the
ABM replication and validation, we thus advocate that meta-
data about code should also be included in ODD* descriptions.
We propose in these work to include these two components,
document and code metadata, into models speciﬁcations de-
scribed with ODD*. For the last decade different initiatives
have led to the development of metadata sets that can describe
both document and code. Dublin core [12] for documents
and the CodeMeta Project [13], for computer code, are two
initiative that are widely used to describe such data. For this
work, we will take advantage of both. A subset of Dublin
Core will be used to add data to identify and link ODD*
speciﬁcations to authors and scientiﬁc papers. On the other
hand, codeMeta metadata will allow to describe code versions
and dependencies to facilitate software replication and code
analysis.
To address some of the limitations and to enable better use
and greater adoption of the ODD* protocol, we developed a
framework to enhance the capacity of describing ABM prove-
nance and provide a more ﬂexible analysis and comparison
of models. To prevent patterns on MBA documentation we
propose a model for the ODD* based on an ontology. This
will enable the analysis and reasoning on models components
in order to compare models instances. The framework allows
ABM users to better manage the version of the ODD* protocol
associated with each model. It also allow to describe models
authoring and computer code related to the implementation
of simulations. Through the platform, MBA descriptions are
stored as linked data that can easily be accessed and processed.
The extended description is supported by an ontology called
ODD* that can be extended according to new versions of
the protocol that may be proposed. Figure 1 presents the
architecture of the framework that will be detailed in Section
III-B.
A. Domain Model
To develop an ABM documentation model, it is important
to provide support for all concepts existing in ODD*. At the
present time there are four versions of protocols considered
between ODD and ODD+2D. The differences between each
versions consist in changes of ﬁelds’ name, relocation of ﬁelds,
and expansion of ﬁelds.
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

ABM Modeler
Developer
Web App
API
Authentication
RDF Lib
Files
uses
uses
uses
Insert model
Serach model
View models
Fetch models
Fig. 1. Architecture of the framework
To provide a support for all the versions of ODD*, it was
necessary to map all the concepts and constructs between
versions. We used the descriptions of each versions presented
in [8], [9], [14], [15]. The mapping process resulted in a feature
model partially presented in Figure 2.
The feature model only describes concepts present in the
ODD* protocol. Considering that the description of an ABM
using the ODD protocol is a document, it is also relevant
to provide metadata to describe this resource and provide
provenance data. We chose to include a subset of the Dublin
Metadata Element Set to achieve that. We added the following
attributes from the Dublin Core schema for our domain model:
Title; Creator; Contributor; Date; Subject; Language; Source;
Rights; Publisher; Bibliographic Resource; and Identiﬁer.
Another important concept included in the ODD* ontology
is the the information regarding computer code. We incor-
porated the following ﬁelds from the CodeMeta schema to
our model: URL; Maintainer; Version; Reference Publication;
Programming Language; File Format; File Size; License; and
Read Me.
The ontology which aggregates ODD* concepts, including
selected ﬁelds from Dublin Core and CodeMeta, is presented
in Figure 3.
It deﬁnes a structure of components that can be used and
combined to build a description of an ABM, according to a
certain version of the ODD protocol.
B. ODD* as linked data
Linked Data is structured data linked to other data in
order to create a larger set of data that can be used through
semantic queries. It uses Web standards such as URIs, HTTP
and RDF format to identify a resource object in the internet.
The possibility to structure ODD* components as linked data
offers the opportunity to deﬁne resources that can be accessed,
analyzed and manipulated by both human and machines. For
these reasons, we decided to represent and store ABMs as
Linked Data.
C. Framework
The framework is composed by a Web application that
can be used by users to insert, search and visualize ABMs.
A REST API manages the access to models repository that
are store in a SQL Database after being transformed to RDF
Format using the RDFLib Library. In the actual version of the
application, some of the models’ data are stored as ﬁles. This
is the case for tabular data and images. Other application can
also access models stored in the framework taking advantage
of the API included in the framework.
The Web application provides access for users without any
special requirement on the software use. This Web client
encapsulate a didactic approach to explain to users how the
model are organized and combined, according to ODD ver-
sions. It uses colors to explain the transition between protocol
versions and facilitate models creation and visualization. The
emphasis have been directed towards performance reading
ease, allowing different screen sizes and navigation using
keyboard keys.
To provide machine access, developers access the API,
allowing access to models components according to the onto-
logical model.
IV. FIRST RESULTS
After the implementation of all components, we chose to
test the usability of the Web application before any other aspect
of the platform. We want to ensure that users are able to create
and search for models using the Web application. The objective
of the test are to verify how easy it is to create a new model,
without errors, and store it using the Web application. We also
want to understand if users could search, read and analyze a
model stored in the platform. To evaluate the usability, a group
of students from Computer Science and Software Engineer
courses from bachelor and master degrees will be invited to use
the application and execute two different tasks. A ﬁrst group
will be assigned the task to insert an ABM description and the
second group will be assigned the task to retrieve information
from a model already existing in the database. For the test,
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 2. Partial view of the feature model for ODD* protocol.
ODD*
ODD*
Details
has-details
ODD,ODD+D,ODD+2D
CodeDescription
DocumentDescription
Code Meta
Dublin Core 
has-code
has-documentdescription
Overview
DesignConcepts
has-designconcepts
has-overview
Fig. 3. Main concepts of ODD* Ontology.
we will use the ODD description of an ABM about Urgent
Diffusion in Social Media, published by [16]. For both tests,
the objectives of the experience will be clearly explained and
some basic concepts about ABM will be introduced before
start.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a project that aims at improving
the documentation of ABM using the ODD* protocol. We
introduced a framework, based on an ontology, to create
and store ABM speciﬁcations available as Linked Data. This
framework will contribute to enhance models provenance
and manipulation to perform more complex tasks on those
speciﬁcations. In addition, we presented a Web application
that enables the creation, storage and retrieval of ABMs. The
platform will be tasted to verify if the Web application can
be used efﬁciently to analyze and understand ABMs based
on their ODD descriptions. Future work will focus on testing
the Web Application with experts from the domain in order
to evaluate the utility of our approach. Tests will also be
performed on the API in order to evaluate its usability by
programmers.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Batty, The New Science of Cities. The MIT Press, 2013.
[2] A. J. Heppenstall, A. T. Crooks, L. M. See, and M. Batty, Agent-based
models of geographical systems. 2012.
[3] J. Rocha, Multi-agent Systems. InTech, sep 2017.
[4] A. Crooks, C. Castle, and M. Batty, “Key challenges in agent-based
modelling for geo-spatial simulation,” Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems, vol. 32, pp. 417–430, nov 2008.
[5] A. J. J. Heppenstall, A. Crooks, N. Malleson, E. Manley, J. Ge, and
M. Batty, “Agent-based Models for Geographical Systems: A Review.”
2019.
[6] B. M¨uller et al., “Standardised and transparent model descriptions
for agent-based models: Current status and prospects,” Environmental
Modelling & Software, vol. 55, pp. 156–163, may 2014.
[7] L. An, A. Zvoleff, J. Liu, and W. Axinn, “Agent-Based Modeling in
Coupled Human and Natural Systems (CHANS): Lessons from a Com-
parative Analysis,” Annals of the Association of American Geographers,
vol. 104, pp. 723–745, jul 2014.
[8] V. Grimm et al., “A standard protocol for describing individual-based
and agent-based models,” Ecological Modelling, vol. 198, pp. 115–126,
sep 2006.
[9] A. Laatabi, N. Marilleau, T. Nguyen-Huu, H. Hbid, and M. A. Babram,
“ODD+2D: An ODD based protocol for mapping data to empirical
ABMs,” JASSS, vol. 21, no. 2, 2018.
[10] “Comses network - abm.” https://www.comses.net/, 2021.
Accessed:
2021-01-29.
[11] “Netlogo.” https://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/, 2021. Accessed: 2021-
01-29.
[12] D. Hillmann, “Using Dublin Core,” 2008.
[13] “codemeta.” https://codemeta.github.io/, 2021. Accessed: 2021-01-29.
[14] V. Grimm, U. Berger, D. L. DeAngelis, J. G. Polhill, J. Giske, and S. F.
Railsback, “The ODD protocol: A review and ﬁrst update,” Ecological
Modelling, vol. 221, pp. 2760–2768, nov 2010.
[15] B. M¨uller et al., “Describing human decisions in agent-based models –
odd + d, an extension of the odd protocol,” Environmental Modelling &
Software, vol. 48, pp. 37 – 48, 2013.
[16] W. Rand, J. Herrmann, B. Schein, and N. Vodopivec, “An agent-based
model of urgent diffusion in social media,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies
and Social Simulation, vol. 18, no. 2, p. 1, 2015.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

