A New Approach to Modelling Fiber-Reinforced Plastics for Hydrocode Analysis  
Experimental Model Validation of Composite Materials Under Ballistic Impact 
 
Arash Ramezani and Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
University of the Federal Armed Forces  
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract—In the security sector, the partly insufficient safety of 
people and equipment due to failure of industrial components 
is an ongoing problem that cause great concern. Since 
computers and software have spread into all fields of industry, 
extensive efforts are currently made in order to improve the 
safety by applying certain numerical solutions. A fiber-
reinforced composite is a promising material for ballistic 
protection due to its high strength, stiffness and low density. 
The use of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMW-
PE) composite as part of the primary armour system in 
vehicles has the potential to provide significant weight savings 
or improved protection levels over traditional metallic 
materials. Although already used in vehicle armours, both as 
spall liners and within complex multi-element/multi-material 
packages, there is a limited understanding of the mechanisms 
driving ballistic performance. Existing analysis tools do not 
allow for a good approximation of performance, while existing 
numerical models are either incapable of accurately capturing 
the response of thick UHMW-PE composite to ballistic impact 
or are unsuited to model thick targets. In response, this paper 
aims to identify the key penetration and failure mechanisms of 
thick UHMW-PE composite under ballistic impact and develop 
analytical 
and 
numerical 
models 
that 
capture 
these 
mechanisms and allow accurate prediction of ballistic 
performance to optimize modern armor structures. An 
analysis methodology is proposed to model the behaviour of 
thick UHMW-PE composite panels under ballistic impact 
using inhomogeneities on the macroscale. A sub-laminate 
approach for discretisation of the target is proposed to 
overcome the problems of premature through-thickness failure 
in the material model. The methodology was extensively 
validated against existing experimental ballistic impact data 
and results for UHMW-PE targets. Finally, a numerical 
modelling methodology was developed for the analysis of thick 
UHMW-PE composite under ballistic impact. 
Keywords-solver 
technologies; 
simulation 
models; 
hydrocodes; fiber-reinforced plastics; optimization; armor 
systems; ballistic trials. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
This work will focus on fiber-reinforced plastics, more 
precisely composite armor structures consisting of several 
layers 
of 
ultra-high 
molecular 
weight 
polyethylene 
(UHMW-PE), a promising ballistic armor material due to its 
high specific strength and stiffness.  
 
Figure 1.  Polyethylene. 
UHMW-PE is a thermoplastic polymer made from very 
long molecular chains of polyethylene. Figure 1 shows the 
chemical structure of polyethylene, where in UHMW-PE 
the number of repeated chains (n) is in the order of 105, 
giving rise to molecular weights in the order of 106 [1]. As a 
non-polar molecule, interaction between polyethylene 
molecules is by very weak Van der Waals forces.  
However, due to the ultra-long polymer chain, 
significant strength can be derived through a gel spinning 
process that produces highly oriented and crystalline 
molecular structures aligned in the spinning direction. The 
gel spinning process firstly involves dissolving UHMW-PE 
in a solvent at high temperature. The solution is then pushed 
through a spinneret to form liquid filament that is then 
quenched in water to form gel-fibers. These fibers are then 
drawn in hot air at high strain rates of the order of 1 s-1 
forming 
fibers 
with 
smooth 
circular 
cross-sections 
approximately 17 mm in diameter [2] with a molecular 
orientation greater than 95% and a crystallinity of up to 85% 
[1], see Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Increase in molecular orientation and crystallinity through gel 
spinning of UHMW-PE [3]. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

These fibers are composed of smaller macro-fibrils 
approximately 0.5 mm to 2 mm in diameter, which in turn 
are made of micro-fibrils, 20 nm in diameter (Berger et al., 
2003). Commercial UHMW-PE fiber is manufactured by, 
amongst others, Dutch State Mines (DSM) and Honeywell 
under 
the 
trade 
names 
Dyneema® 
and 
Spectra®, 
respectively. The fibers are used in a variety of applications 
requiring high specific strength and low weight. This 
includes high strength ropes and nets, cut-resistant gloves, 
as well as blast and ballistic protection. 
For ballistic protection applications, the fibers can be 
woven into fabrics to provide a soft and flexible material or 
coated in a matrix and aligned to form uni-directional plies, 
which are then stacked and pressed under temperature and 
pressure to form rigid laminates. 
UHMW-PE composites and fabrics have been shown to 
be extremely effective against ballistic threats, particularly 
in weight-critical applications, e.g., personal protection 
vests and helmets for protection against small calibre threats 
[4]. The goal is to evaluate the ballistic efficiency of 
UHMW-PE 
composite 
with 
numerical 
simulations, 
promoting an effective development process.  
Due to the fact that all engineering simulation is based 
on geometry to represent the design, the target and all its 
components are simulated as computer-aided design (CAD) 
models. The work will also provide a brief overview of 
ballistic tests to offer some basic knowledge of the subject, 
serving as a basis for the comparison of the simulation 
results. Details of ballistic trials on composite armor 
systems are presented. Instead of running expensive trials, 
numerical simulations should identify vulnerabilities of 
structures. Contrary to the experimental result, numerical 
methods allow easy and comprehensive studying of all 
mechanical parameters. Modeling will also help to 
understand how the transparent armor schemes behave 
during impact and how the failure processes can be 
controlled to our advantage. By progressively changing the 
composition of several layers and the material thickness, the 
composite armor will be optimized.  
There is every reason to expect possible weight savings 
and a significant increase in protection, through the use of 
numerical techniques combined with a small number of 
physical experiments. 
This work deals with numerical simulations of impact 
problems on fiber-based composite armor using the 
commercial 
finite-element-code 
ANSYS 
AUTODYN. 
Having presented some basic knowledge on the theory of 
numerical 
simulation 
in 
AUTODYN, 
two 
recently 
published approaches for modeling impact on the selected 
composite (Dyneema® HB26) are explained. While both of 
them make use of a nonlinear-orthotropic material model 
implemented in the AUTODYN-code, they differ in the way 
how the highly inhomogeneous microstructure of HB26 is 
represented 
geometrically. 
Lässig 
chooses 
a 
fully 
homogeneous description, whereas Nguyen discretizes the 
composite into sublaminates, which are kinematically joined 
at the surfaces and breakable when a certain contact-stress is 
reached. In order to validate the two approaches, the 
response of HB26-samples impacted by handgun-projectiles 
was determined experimentally and compared to the 
corresponding numerical results. Unfortunately, a poor 
agreement between experimental and numerical results was 
found, which gave rise to the development of an alternative 
modeling approach. In doing so, the composite was 
subdivided into alternating layers of two different types. 
While the first type of layers was modeled with open-
literature properties of UHMW-PE-fibers, polymer-matrix-
behavior was assigned to the second type. Having adjusted 
some of the parameters, good agreement between 
experiment and simulation was found with respect to 
residual velocity and depth of penetration for the considered 
impact situations.  
After a brief introduction and description of the 
principles of simulation in Section II, state-of-the-art models 
of fiber-reinforced plastics are discussed in Section III. 
There is a short section on ballistic trials where the 
experimental set-up is depicted, followed by Section V 
describing the model validation. Section VI presents the 
analysis with numerical simulations and the results of this 
work. The paper ends with a concluding paragraph in 
Section VII and an outlook in Section VIII. 
II. 
PRINCIPLES OF SIMULATION 
To deal with problems involving the release of a large 
amount of energy over a very short period of time, e.g., 
explosions and impacts, there are three approaches: as the 
problems are highly non-linear and require information 
regarding material behavior at ultra-high loading rates 
which is generally not available, most of the work is 
experimental and thus may cause tremendous expenses. 
Analytical approaches are possible if the geometries 
involved are relatively simple and if the loading can be 
described through boundary conditions, initial conditions or 
a combination of the two. Numerical solutions are far more 
general in scope and remove any difficulties associated with 
geometry [5]. They apply an explicit method and use very 
small time steps for stable results. 
For problems of dynamic fluid-structure interaction and 
impact, there typically is no single best numerical method 
which is applicable to all parts of a problem. Techniques to 
couple types of numerical solvers in a single simulation can 
allow the use of the most appropriate solver for each domain 
of the problem.  
The goal of this paper is to evaluate a hydrocode, a 
computational tool for modeling the behavior of continuous 
media. In its purest sense, a hydrocode is a computer code 
for modeling fluid flow at all speeds [6]. For that reason, a 
structure will be split into a number of small elements. The 
elements are connected through their nodes (see Figure 3). 
The behavior (deflection) of the simple elements is well-
known and may be calculated and analyzed using simple 
equations called shape functions [7].  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 3.  Example grid. 
By applying coupling conditions between the elements 
at their nodes, the overall stiffness of the structure may be 
built up and the deflection/distortion of any node – and 
subsequently of the whole structure – can be calculated 
approximately [8].  
III. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART 
The numerical modeling of composite materials under 
impact can be performed at a constituent level (i.e., explicit 
modeling of fiber and matrix elements, e.g. [9]), a meso-
mechanical level (i.e., consolidated plies or fiber bundles, 
e.g. [10]), or macromechanically in which the composite 
laminate is represented as a continuum.  
In [11–14] a non-linear orthotropic continuum material 
model was developed and implemented in a commercial 
hydrocode (i.e., ANSYS® AUTODYN®) for application 
with 
aramid 
and 
carbon 
fiber 
composites 
under 
hypervelocity impact. The non-linear orthotropic material 
model includes orthotropic coupling of the material 
volumetric and deviatoric responses, a non-linear equation 
of state (EoS), orthotropic hardening, combined stress 
failure criteria and orthotropic energy-based softening. For 
more detail refer to [15]. Lässig et al. [16] conducted 
extensive experimental characterization of Dyneema® HB26 
UHMW-PE composite for application in the continuum 
non-linear orthotropic material model, and validated the 
derived material parameters through simulation of spherical 
projectile impacts at hypervelocity.  
A number of researchers have applied the non-linear 
orthotropic model for UHMW-PE composites with varying 
levels of success (Hayhurst et al. [17], Herlaar et al. [18], 
Ong et al. [19], Heisserer and Van der Werff [20] and 
Lässig et al. [16]). Ong et al. [19] assumed material 
properties of UHMW-PE composite based on those of 
Kevlar® with some data from literature, which resulted in 
poor predictions of the penetration behaviour. Hayhurst et 
al. [17], Herlaar et al. [18] and Heisserer and Van der Werff 
[20] used material input parameters derived from a range of 
experiments, and reported better prediction, although the 
results cannot be independently verified because the 
material parameters are not provided. 
Nguyen et al. [21] evaluated and refined the modeling 
approach and material model parameter set developed in 
[16] for the simulation of impact events from 400 m/s to 
6600 m/s. Across this velocity range the sensitivity of the 
numerical output is driven by different aspects of the 
material model, e.g., the strength model in the ballistic 
regime and the equation of state (EoS) in the hypervelocity 
regime. 
This paper will present an optimal solution of this 
problem with an enhanced model for ultra-high molecular 
weight polyethylene under impact loading. For the first 
time, composite armor structures consisting of several layers 
of fiber-reinforced plastics are simulated for all the current 
military threats. 
IV. 
BALLISTIC TRIALS 
Ballistics is an essential component for the evaluation of 
our results. Here, terminal ballistics is the most important 
sub-field. It describes the interaction of a projectile with its 
target. Terminal ballistics is relevant for both small and 
large caliber projectiles. The task is to analyze and evaluate 
the impact and its various modes of action. This will 
provide information on the effect of the projectile and the 
extinction risk.  
Historically, impact events are classified according to 
the impact velocity. One such approach was proposed by 
Zukas et al. [22] who categorised impact problems based on 
impact velocity, where the material response and established 
strain rate characterised the impact problem. Figure 4 
depicts the strain rate, the impact velocity required to 
achieve the strain rate and the material effects as proposed 
by Zukas et al. [22]. 
Under this classical approach, the ballistic regime could 
be considered to be within the strain rate range of 102 s-1 to 
104 s-1 which corresponds to an impact velocity of between 
50 m/s to 3000 m/s.  
According to Zukas et al. [22], within this region the 
material strength is important in resisting penetration, and 
there is an onset of hydrodynamic effects. This approach to 
define the impact regime using the strain rate is insufficient 
when considering the impact behaviour for a diverse range 
of materials with different properties. For example, very low 
velocity impact of a hard object into a fluid can be described 
entirely using hydrodynamic theory, which under Figure 4 
would be classified as both a low strain rate (low velocity) 
and high strain rate (hydrodynamic effects) problem.  
 
Figure 4.  Impact response of high strength materials [22]. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Wilbeck (in [23]) proposed classification by the ratio of 
the impact pressure (P) to the material strength (S).  
P/Sp and P/St 

where subscripts p is the projectile and t is the target. The 
pressure, P, according to hydrodynamic theory is given by:  
P  V2

where  is material density and V is the impact velocity. 
From this, impact events can be classified in nine different 
regimes, depicted in matrix form in Figure 5. 
The ballistic regime is considered to reside in regime 2, 
4, 5, 6 and 8 according to Figure 5 where the impact pressure 
is close to the material strength of the target, projectile or 
both. For this paper, regime 5, 6 and 8 are of interest because 
at impact velocities typical of FSPs, the impact pressures are 
considered to be on the order of, or greater than the strength 
of UHMW-PE composite. 
Given that a projectile strikes a target, compressive 
waves propagate into both the projectile and the target. 
Relief waves propagate inward from the lateral free surfaces 
of the penetrator, cross at the centerline, and generate a high 
tensile stress. If the impact was normal, we would have a 
two-dimensional stress state. If the impact was oblique, 
bending stresses will be generated in the penetrator. When 
the compressive wave reached the free surface of the target, 
it would rebound as a tensile wave. The target may fracture 
at this point. The projectile may change direction if it 
perforates (usually towards the normal of the target surface).    
Because of the differences in target behavior based on the 
proximity of the distal surface, we must categorize targets 
into four broad groups. A semi-infinite target is one where 
there is no influence of distal boundary on penetration. A 
thick target is one in which the boundary influences 
penetration after the projectile is some distance into the 
target. An intermediate thickness target is a target where the 
boundaries exert influence throughout the impact. Finally, a 
thin target is one in which stress or deformation gradients are 
negligible throughout the thickness. 
 
Figure 5.  Matrix of impact regime [23]. The ballistic regimes are shaded. 
There are several methods by which a target will fail 
when subjected to an impact. The major variables are the 
target and penetrator material properties, the impact velocity, 
the projectile shape (especially the ogive), the geometry of 
the target supporting structure, and the dimensions of the 
projectile and target. 
In order to develop a numerical model, a ballistic test 
program is necessary. The ballistic trials are thoroughly 
documented and analyzed – even fragments must be 
collected. They provide information about the used armor 
and the projectile behavior after fire, which must be 
consistent with the simulation results. 
In order to create a data set for the numerical simulations, 
several experiments have to be performed. Ballistic tests are 
recorded with high-speed videos and analyzed afterwards. 
Testing was undertaken at an indoor ballistic testing facility. 
The target stand provides support behind the target on all 
four sides. Every ballistic test program includes several trials 
with different composites. The set-up has to remain 
unchanged.  
 The camera system is a PHANTOM v1611 that enables 
fast image rates up to 646,000 frames per second (fps) at full 
resolution of 1280 x 800 pixels. The use of a polarizer and a 
neutral density filter is advisable, so that waves of some 
polarizations can be blocked while the light of a specific 
polarization can be passed. 
Several targets of different laminate configurations were 
tested to assess the ballistic limit (V50). The ballistic limit is 
considered the velocity required for a particular projectile to 
reliably (at least 50% of the time) penetrate a particular piece 
of material [24]. After the impact, the projectile is examined 
regarding any kind of change it might have undergone.  
V. 
MODEL VALIDATION 
Experimental 
characterisation 
of 
the 
ballistic 
performance of UHMW-PE composite can be prohibitively 
expensive, 
so 
it 
is 
highly 
desirable 
to 
establish 
computationally efficient numerical models that accurately 
predict the ballistic response of the material. First, existing 
models should be validated. 
A. Resources 
In [16], numerical simulations of 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 panels impacted by 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres 
between 2052 m/s to 6591 m/s were shown to provide very 
good agreement with experimental measurements of the 
panel ballistic limit and residual velocities, see Figure 6. The 
modeling approach and material parameter set from [16] 
were applied to simulate impact experiments at velocities in 
the ballistic regime (here considered as < 1000 m/s). 
Lambert-Jonas parameters (a, p, Vbl) are provided in the 
legend.  
In Figure 6, the results of modeling impact of 20 mm 
fragment simulating projectiles (FSPs) against 10 mm thick 
Dyneema® HB26 are shown. The model shows a significant 
under prediction of the ballistic limit, 236 m/s compared to 
394 m/s. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
Figure 6.  Experimental and numerical impact residual velocity results for 
impact of 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres against 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 at normal incidence (left) and impact of 20 mm FSP against 10 mm 
thick HB26 at normal incidence (right). 
B. Method 
The FSP material was modelled as Steel S-7 from the 
AUTODYN® library described using a linear EoS and the 
Johnson-Cook strength model [25]. The aluminum sphere 
was modelled using AL1100-O from the AUTODYN® 
library that uses a shock EoS and the Steinburg Guinan 
strength model [26]. The master-slave contact algorithm was 
used to detect contact between the target and projectile. 
The sub-laminate model with shock EoS was applied to 
the aluminum sphere hypervelocity impact series and 20 mm 
FSP ballistic impact series presented in Figure 6, the results 
of which are shown in Figure 7.  
The sub-laminate model is shown to provide a significant 
improvement in predicting the experimental V50 of 394 m/s 
for the FSP ballistic impacts (377 m/s) compared to the 
monolithic model (236 m/s).  
The ballistic limit and residual velocity predicted with the 
sub-laminate model for the hypervelocity impact case are 
shown to be comparable with the original monolithic model. 
For conditions closer to the ballistic limit, the sub-laminate 
model is shown to predict increased target resistance (i.e., 
lower residual velocity). For higher overmatch conditions, 
there is some small variance between the two approaches. 
Now, regarding common handgun projectiles, the results 
look sobering. As the most widespread weapon in the world, 
the Kalashnikov rifle (AK-47) is a good example to compare 
ballistic trials and simulation results.  A 7.62x39 mm full 
metal jacket (FMJ) projectile with a velocity of 700 m/s is 
used and the model is shown in Figure 3.  
In Figure 8, a qualitative assessment of the bulge 
formation is made for the 11 mm panel. Prediction of bulge 
development is important as it is characteristic of the 
material wave speed and is also a key measure in defence 
applications, particularly in personnel protection (i.e., vests 
and helmets). In the ballistic experiments, the 11 mm target 
panel resists the 7.62x39 mm FMJ projectile. But in both 
models, material fails and the projectile penetrates the plate. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Comparison of the experimental results with the two numerical 
models for impact of 20 mm FSP against 10 mm thick Dyneema HB26® at 
normal incidence (left) , and impact of 6 mm diameter aluminium spheres 
against 15 kg/m2 HB26 at normal incidence (right).  
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 8.  Bulge of a 11 mm target impact by a 7.62x39 mm FMJ 
projectile at 689 m/s (experiment) and the simulation results using both 
“state-of-the-art” models of Lässig and Nguyen700 m/s. 
There is no accurate reproduction of the bulge. The 
problem is a neglect of micro-structures. Fraction and 
fragmentation between the laminate layers cannot be 
described by homogeneous continuum models. These 
disadvantages are addressed in a very new and more 
representative model. 
VI. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
As mentioned before, the ballistic tests are followed by 
computational modeling of the experimental set-up. Then, 
the experiment is reproduced using numerical simulations. 
Figure 3 shows a cross-section of the projectile and a CAD 
model. The geometry and observed response of the laminate 
to ballistic impact is approximately symmetric to the axis 
through the bullet impact point.   
Numerical simulation of modern armor structures 
requires the selection of appropriate material models for the 
constituent materials and the derivation of suitable material 
model input data. The laminate system studied here is an 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene composite. Lead 
and copper are also required for the projectiles.  
The projectile was divided into different parts - the jacket 
and the base - which have different properties and even 
different meshes. These elements have quadratic shape 
functions and nodes between the element edges. In this way, 
the computational accuracy, as well as the quality of curved 
model shapes increases. Using the same mesh density, the 
application of parabolic elements leads to a higher accuracy 
compared to linear elements (1st order elements). 
Modelling of fiber-reinforced composites under impact 
is challenging because of the complexity of the material 
composition and the many failure modes it exhibits at 
different scales (fibrillation, intra- and inter-laminar failure, 
etc.) and impact regimes. For this reason, numerical 
simulation of impact using hydrocodes was exclusively 
performed for isotropic materials up until the late 1990’s. 
Since then, there have been many advances in modelling 
composites brought about by the introduction of more 
accurate constitutive models and modelling techniques. In 
general fiber-reinforced composites can be modelled at three 
different scales, as shown in Figure 9:  
• 
Micro-scale, where the individual fiber, matrix and 
(in some cases) the fiber-matrix interface is explicitly 
modelled; 
• 
Meso-scale, where the properties of the individual 
plies that are homogenised in the principal directions are 
modelled and stacked together to produce a laminate; and 
• 
Macro-scale, where the laminate is modelled as a 
continuum and the properties of the laminate are 
homogenised in the principal directions. 
 
Figure 9.  Micro, meso and macro mechanical model of fiber reinforced 
composites [27]. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Modelling of fiber-reinforced composites at the micro-
scale has several important advantages. This includes 
increased model fidelity, relatively simpler constitutive 
equations to describe the fiber, matrix and the interface, and 
characterisation tests that are relatively easy to perform. 
However, models at this scale require explicit modelling of 
every single fiber, matrix and the contact interface, which is 
extremely computationally expensive and not practical 
currently for typical engineering problems (see Figure 10). 
While 
the 
meso-scale 
approach 
is 
far 
more 
computationally tractable compared to the micro-scale, 
models at this scale are still not practical for thick targets. 
A. Modelling 
Because of the discrepancies discussed in Section V, a 
new model was developed – a concept for the numerical 
simulation of fiber-reinforced plastics under impact loading. 
Here, the homogeneous continuum model is replaced. 
Alternating layers of fibers and matrix are used for the 
geometry. The layers are bonded and have different material 
models (see Figure 11).  
The fiber layers apply anisotropic elasticity, no plasticity 
and anisotropic material failure (stress-dependent). The 
matrix layers use isotropic elasticity, von Mises plasticity 
and isotropic material failure (stress-dependent). To simulate 
the effect of delamination, principal stress failure is applied. 
3D numerical simulations were performed of the full 
target and projectile, where both were meshed using 8-node 
hexahedral elements. The projectile was meshed with 9 
elements across the diameter. The target is composed of sub-
laminates that are one element thick, separated by a small 
gap to satisfy the master-slave contact algorithm (external 
gap in AUTODYN®) and bonded together as previously 
discussed. The mesh size of the target is approximately equal 
to the projectile at the impact site. The mesh was then graded 
towards the edge, increasing in coarseness to reduce the 
computational load of the model. Since UHMWPE 
composite has a very low coefficient of friction, force fit 
clamping provides little restraint. High speed video of 
ballistic impact tests typical showed clamp slippage upon 
impact. As such no boundary conditions were imposed on 
the target. 
 
Figure 10.  Cross section of a Dyneema® HB26 panel. 
 
Figure 11.  Geometry of a target plate: alternating layers of fibers and 
matrix are used in the computer model. 
B. Simulation Results 
The model developed in [16] was adjusted and the 
concept has been extended to different calibers and projectile 
velocities. Composite armor plates between 5.5 and 16.2 mm 
were tested in several ballistic trials and high-speed videos 
were used to analyze the characteristics of the projectile – 
before and after the impact. The simulation results with the 
modified model are shown in Figures 12 and 13.  
The deformation of the projectile is in good agreement 
with the experimental observation. Both delamination and 
fragmentation can be seen in the numerical simulation. 
Compared to the homogeneous continuum model, fractures 
can be detected easily. Subsequently, the results of 
experiment and simulation in the case of perforation were 
compared with reference to the projectile residual velocity. 
Here, only minor differences were observed. The results are 
summarized in Table I.  
 
Figure 12.  Effect of a 5.5 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm bullet at 686 
m/s, 47 µs and 88 µs after the initial impact. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 13.  Effect of a 16.2 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm bullet at 
679 m/s. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
Target 
Thickness 
5.5 mm 
Residual 
Velocity  
11.0 mm 
Residual 
Thickness 
16.2 mm 
Residual 
Thickness 
Experiment 
604 m/s 
6 mm 
11 mm 
Simulation 
587 m/s 
4 mm 
10 mm 
 
The next step is to test the influence of meshing, based 
on Ramezani and Rothe [28]. The accuracy that can be 
obtained from any FEA model is directly related to the finite 
element mesh that is used. The finite element mesh is used to 
subdivide the CAD model into smaller domains called 
elements, over which a set of equations are solved. These 
equations approximately represent the governing equation of 
interest via a set of polynomial functions defined over each 
element. As these elements are made smaller and smaller, as 
the mesh is refined, the computed solution will approach the 
true solution. This process of mesh refinement is a key step 
in validating any finite element model and gaining 
confidence in the software, the model, and the results. 
Early in the analysis process, it makes sense to start with 
a mesh that is as coarse as possible – a mesh with very large 
elements. A coarse mesh will require less computational 
resources to solve and, while it may give a very inaccurate 
solution, it can still be used as a rough verification and as a 
check on the applied loads and constraints. 
After computing the solution on the coarse mesh, the 
process of mesh refinement begins. In its simplest form, 
mesh refinement is the process of resolving the model with 
successively finer and finer meshes, comparing the results 
between these different meshes. This comparison can be 
done by analyzing the fields at one or more points in the 
model or by evaluating the integral of a field over some 
domains or boundaries. Table II summarizes the four 
different mesh sizes. A Hewlett-Packard (HP) ProLiant 
DL380p G8 Server is used for all calculations.  
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF THE CALCULATION TIME 
Mesh Size 
Number of Elements 
over Edge Lenght 
Calculation Time [h] 
Coarse 
25 
0.5 
Medium 
50 
4 
Fine 
75 
25 
Very Fine 
100 
268 
 
By comparing these scalar quantities, it is possible to 
judge the convergence of the solution with respect to mesh 
refinement. The results are shown in Figure 14.  
It should be noted that an explicit modeling of the 
individual fibers is not an option, since the computational 
effort would go beyond the scope of modern server systems. 
To expand the scope of the model, the validation should be 
extended to other ballistic load cases.  
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
The material model developed in [16] has some 
shortcomings 
regarding 
the 
simulation 
of 
handgun 
projectiles (e.g. 7.62×39 mm). Although previously found to 
provide accurate results for hypervelocity impact of 
aluminum spheres, the existing model and dataset was 
found 
to 
significantly 
underestimate 
the 
composite 
performance under impact conditions driven by through-
thickness shear performance (ballistic impact of fragment 
simulating projectiles). The model was found to exhibit 
premature through thickness shear failure as a result of 
directional coupling in the modified Hashin-Tsai failure 
criterion and the large discrepancy between through-
thickness tensile and shear strength of UHME-PE 
composite. As a result, premature damage and failure was 
initiated in the through-thickness shear direction leading to 
decreased ballistic performance. By de-coupling through-
thickness tensile failure from the failure criteria and 
discretizing the laminate into a nominal number of 
kinematically joined sub-laminates through the thickness, 
progresses in modeling the ballistic response of the panels 
was improved. 
 
Figure 14.  Convergence analysis: comparison of the projectile velocity 
(7.62×39 mm bullet) at different mesh sizes. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

A major difficulty in the numerical simulation of fiber 
composites under impact is the detection of failure 
processes between fiber and matrix elements as well as 
between the individual laminate layers (delamination). One 
promising 
approach 
is 
the 
use 
of 
"artificial" 
inhomogeneities on the macroscale.  
This paper is based on Ramezani and Rothe [29]. New 
approaches make it possible to increase the accuracy of the 
simulation results. The previous concept was not valid for 
all projectiles/calibers. An alternative model has been 
developed to overcome these difficulties. Using sub-
laminates and inhomogeneities on the macroscale, the 
model does not match the real microstructure, but allow a 
more realistic description of the failure processes mentioned 
above. The numerical model proposed a sub-laminate 
discretisation of the laminate in order to better model 
delamination failure. For this to occur, the sub-laminates are 
joined together using bonded contacts where failure is 
initiated based on a combined normal and shear stress 
criterion. Such approach is known to be mesh-dependent 
and has been replaced by fracture energy based failure 
(mode I, II and III) [30]. Most finite element models of 
fibre-reinforced composite today capture interlaminar 
failure through zero thickness cohesive elements which 
accounts for both damage and fracture mechanics (using 
tractionseparation laws), though this is not available in the 
hydrocode used in this work. 
This work also demonstrated how a small number of 
well-defined experiments can be used to develop, calibrate, 
and validate solver technologies used for simulating the 
impact of projectiles on complex armor systems and 
composite laminate structures. Ballistic trials can be used as 
the basis of an iterative optimization process. Numerical 
simulations are a valuable adjunct to the study of the 
behavior of metals subjected to high-velocity impact or 
intense 
impulsive 
loading. 
The 
combined 
use 
of 
computations, experiments and high-strain-rate material 
characterization has, in many cases, supplemented the data 
achievable by experiments alone at considerable savings in 
both cost and engineering man-hours.  
VIII. FUTURE WORK 
Generally, the field of ballistic and penetration 
mechanics is extensive due to the unlimited combination of 
targets and threats. The response of targets is different 
depending on the projectile size, geometry, material and 
impact velocity. The scope of this work was restricted to the 
most common threats (where FSPs are used as a 
representative surrogate), however understanding the 
penetration and failure mechanisms of the material impacted 
by different projectiles (spherical and ogive) can also be 
valuable. This work also only considered normal impacts 
(the worst case scenario), however attacks experienced on 
the front line are almost always at an oblique angle (large or 
small). Understanding how UHMW-PE composite responds 
to obliquity is important and deserves attention. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Van Dingenen, “Gel-spun high-performance polyethylene 
fibres,” in High Performance Fibres, pp. 62–92, 2001. 
[2] B. Russell, K. Karthikeyan, V. Deshpande, and N. Fleck, 
“The high strain rate response of ultra-high molecular-weight 
polyethylene: From fibre to laminate,” in International Journal 
of Impact Engineering (60), pp. 1–9, 2013. 
[3] L. H. Nguyen, The Ballistic Performance of Thick Ultra High 
Molecular 
Weight 
Polyethylene 
Composite. 
RMIT 
University, 2015. 
[4] P. M. Cunniff, “Dimensionless parameters for optimization of 
textile based body armor systems,” in 18th International 
Symposium on Ballistics, pp. 1303–1310, 1999. 
[5] J. Zukas, Introduction to hydrocodes. Elsevier Science, 2004. 
[6] G.-S. 
Collins, 
An 
Introduction 
to 
Hydrocode 
Modeling. Applied Modelling and Computation Group, 
Imperial College London, 2002. 
[7] P. Fröhlich, “FEM Application Basics,” Vieweg Verlag, 
September 2005. 
[8] H.-B. Woyand, FEM with CATIA V5. J. Schlembach 
Fachverlag, 2007. 
[9] 
D. B. Segala and P. V. Cavallaro, “Numerical investigation of 
energy absorption mechanisms in unidirectional composites 
subjected to dynamic loading events,” in Computational 
Materials Science 81, pp. 303–312, 2014. 
[10] S. Chocron et al., “Modeling unidirectional composites by 
bundling fibers into strips with experimental determination of 
shear and compression properties at high pressures,” in 
Composites Science and Technology 101, pp. 32–40, 2014. 
[11] C. J. Hayhurst, S. J. Hiermaier, R. A. Clegg, W. Riedel, and 
M. Lambert, “Development of material models for nextel and 
kevlar-expoxy for high pressures and strain rates,” in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 23, pp. 365–376, 
1999. 
[12] R. A. Clegg, D. M. White, W. Riedel, and W. Harwick, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
I—material model and characterisation,” in International 
Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 190–200, 2006. 
[13] W. Riedel, H. Nahme, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
II—experimental 
investigations 
and 
simulations,” 
in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 670–80, 
2006. 
[14] M. Wicklein, S. Ryan, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact on CFRP: Testing, material modelling, 
and numerical simulation,” in International Journal of Impact 
Engineering 35, pp.1861–1869, 2008. 
[15] ANSYS. AUTODYN Composite Modelling Release 15.0. 
[Online]. Available from: http://ansys.com/ [retrieved: May, 
2017]. 
[16] T. Lässig et al., “A non-linear orthotropic hydrocode model 
for ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene in impact 
simulations,” in International Journal of Impact Engineering 
75, pp. 110–122, 2015. 
[17] C. J. Hayhurst, J. Leahy, J., M. van der Jagt-Deutekom, and P. 
Kelly, “Development of Material Models for Numerical 
Simulation of Ballistic Impact onto Polyethylene Fibrous 
Armour,” in Personal Armour Systems Symposium, pp. 5–8, 
2000. 
[18] K. Herlaar, M. van der Jagt-Deutekom, and M. Jacobs, “Finite 
element simulations and experiments of ballistic impacts on 
high performance PE composite material,” in 22nd 
International Symposium on Ballistics, pp. 1040–1047, 2005. 
[19] C. Ong, C. Boey, R. S. Hixson, and J. O. Sinibaldi, 
“Advanced layered personnel armor,” in International Journal 
of Impact Engineering 38(5), pp. 369–383, 2011. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[20] U. Heisserer and H. Van der Werff, “The relation between 
Dyneema fiber properties and ballistic protection performance 
of its fiber composites,” in 15th International Conference on 
Deformation, Yield and Fracture of Polymers 3, pp. 242–246, 
2012. 
[21] L. H. Nguyen et al., “Numerical Modelling of Ultra-High 
Molecular Weight Polyethylene Composite Under Impact 
Loading,” in Procedia Engineering 103, pp. 436–443, 2015. 
[22] J. Zukas, T. Nicholas, H .Swift, L. Greszczuk, and D. Curran, 
Impact dynamics. John Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
[23] C. E. Anderson, J. S. Wilbeck, J. D. Walker, K. A. 
Dannemann, S. A Mullin, and S. Chocron, “Short Course on 
Penetration Mechanics - Lecture Notes,” presented at the 
Southwest Reseach Institute, San Antonio, USA, 2013. 
[24] D. E. Carlucci and S. S. Jacobson, Ballistics: Theory and 
Design of guns and ammunition. CRC Press, 2008. 
[25] G. Johnson and W. Cook, “A constitutive model and data for 
metals subjected to large strains, high strain rates and high 
temperatures,” in 7th International Symposium on Ballistics, 
pp. 541–547, 1983. 
[26] D. Steinberg, Equation of state and strength properties of 
selected materials. California, 1996. 
[27] L. Meyer and M. Mayer, “New Strain Rate Dependent 
Material Model for Fiber Reinforced Composites,” in Society 
of Experimental Mechanics 3, pp. 149–158, 2010. 
[28] A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “Influences of Meshing and High-
Performance Computing towards Advancing the Numerical 
Analysis of High-Velocity Impacts,” in International Journal 
on Advances in Systems and Measurements, Volume 9, 
Numbers 3 & 4, 2016, ISSN 1942-261x , S.142-153. 
[29] A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “Numerical Simulation and 
Experimental Model-Validation for Fiber-Reinforced Plastics 
Under Impact Loading - Using the Example of Ultra-High 
Molecular Weight Polyethylene,” The Eighth International 
Conference on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 
2016) IARIA, Aug. 2016, pp. 17-25, ISBN 978-1-61208-442-
8. 
[30] Y. Mi, M. Crisfield, G. Davies, and H. Hellweg., “Progressive 
delamination using interface elements,” in Journal of 
Composite Materials, 32(14), pp. 1246–1272, 1998. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

