Designing a Model for Flu Propagation in Emergency Departments 
 
1Morteza Ansari Dogaheh, 
1Emilio Luque, 2Manel Taboada  
1Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department 
University Autonoma of Barcelona 
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: morteza.ansaridogaheh@e-campus.uab.cat, 
emilio.luque@uab.es 
2Escuelas Universitarias Gimbernat: Computer Science School 
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona (UAB) 
Barcelona, Spain  
e-mail: manel.taboada@eug.es 
 
 
 
Francisco Epelde 
Medical Department 
Hospital Universitari Parc Tauli 
Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: fepelde@tauli.cat 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Influenza is an acute viral infection that primarily 
attacks the upper respiratory tract. The disease occurs 
worldwide and spreads very quickly in populations, especially 
in crowded circumstances like Emergency Departments (ED). 
Influenza can be spread in three main ways, all of which are very 
feasible in ED environments: by the airborne route, by 
contaminated surfaces or from direct personal contact such as a 
handshake. Our research uses Agent Based Modeling and 
Simulation techniques to build the model and the simulation of 
the transmission of flu virus contact in ED. The simulator allows 
us to build virtual scenarios with the aim of understanding the 
phenomenon of flu transmission and the potential impact of the 
implementation of different policies in propagation rates. This 
work is an expansion of the previous one carried on by other 
members of our research group, with the aim of developing a 
more flexible and reasonable healthcare system simulation and 
modeling. 
Keywords- Emergency department Simulator; Agent based 
modeling and simulation; Influenza propagation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Influenza, known as the flu, is a respiratory infection 
caused by a virus. According to the Centers for Disease 
Control (CDC), the burden of Influenza during the 2017–2018 
season was the highest since the 2009 pandemic, resulting in 
more 
than 
22.7 
million 
medical 
visits, 
959,000 
hospitalizations, and 79,400 deaths in the United States [1]. 
The flu virus usually spreads from person to person through 
coughing or sneezing. The flu can be contacted by touching a 
surface that includes the flu virus on it and then touching the 
nose or eyes [2]. Infection with the influenza virus can cause 
significant morbidity and mortality. This is specifically true in 
vulnerable populations with an underlying disease in an 
indoor situation like Emergency Department areas. 
Emergency Departments are one of the most complex and 
dynamic healthcare systems, receiving an increasing demand, 
and usually being overcrowded. ED has a continuous activity, 
operating 24 hours a day every day of the year. The existence 
of a communicable disease within the emergency services, 
especially a seasonal contagious disease [3], can have a 
negative influence on the service offered, and increases the 
risk of both, the infection of health personnel and of 
worsening of the underlying disease of the patients attended 
in the ED. The resource planning of ED is complex because 
its activity is not linear, and it varies depending on time, day 
of the week, and season. Simulation becomes an important 
tool for modeling complex systems that include many 
elements, a large number of interdependencies among such 
elements, and/or considerable variability [4]. Discrete Event 
Simulation (DES), System Dynamics (SD), and Agent-Based 
Modeling and Simulation (ABMS) are the main three 
approaches used in the simulation of healthcare systems. 
However, the ability of ABMS to represent both human 
intention and interaction, makes it a better-suited approach 
than DES and SD for modeling systems like healthcare one, 
that are based on human behavior and interaction [5][6].  
A solid example of an Agent-Based Model for Hospital 
Emergency Departments is presented in [7], which has been 
designed following a system analysis performed at different 
hospitals, under the advice of healthcare professionals with 
many years of experience. Agents are modeled using Moore 
state machines that interact inside a specified environment, 
enabling the study of the dynamics of complex systems 
without having challenges in getting exhaustive system 
definitions that are required by other modeling approaches. 
The validity of the model and the simulator for representing 
the real system have been checked applying the verification 
and validation process recommended by [8]. High 
Performance Computing (HPC) has been used due to the 
specific features of the model (a great number and variety of 
agents), the amount of data to be computed and finally the 
number of executions of the Simulator needed in the 
experiment.  
In [9], the authors use such Emergency Department 
ABMS as the core component of a decision support system 
that aids healthcare managers to make the best-informed 
decisions possible, and causing better use of resources, 
achieving a more efficient and improved patient care system. 
A Length of Stay (LoS) index is used to evaluate the 
efficiency of ED. Among others, the experiment let to 
conclude that the estimated patient LoS can be reduced using 
a larger number of ED Staff, and/or more experienced ED 
staff, and/or the modularity in the ED different sections.  
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The aim of our work is to develop a model and a simulator 
that, used as Decision Support System, aids the administrators 
and heads of the ED to get additional knowledge about how 
the flu virus propagates, how it can influence over the patients 
ongoing treatment and the effects over sanitary staff, with the 
purpose of identifying strategies of improvement.  
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. 
Section 2 presents the Emergency Department Simulation. 
The Flu Propagation Model is detailed in Section 3. Finally, 
Section 4 closes this paper with conclusions and future work. 
II. 
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SIMULATION 
The Emergency Department is a healthcare unit that offers 
immediate care to patients, also called the emergency room, 
emergency ward, accident & emergency department, or 
casualty department [10]. ED is one of the most complex and 
dynamic areas in a hospital. Its activity is not linear and 
depends on several factors, including human behavior. 
Simulation becomes an important tool for modeling 
complex systems that include many elements, a large number 
of 
interdependencies 
among 
such 
elements, 
and/or 
considerable variability [4]. It is impossible to model all the 
functionalities of such a complex system because there are lots 
of factors that can influence the different components and 
worth noting. Actually, it is useful to make a very abstract 
perception in mind from the considered real world. Moreover, 
we have to choose a proper methodology to find a better 
answer to our problems.  
Discrete Event Simulation, System Dynamics, and Agent-
Based Modeling and Simulation are the main three 
approaches used in the simulation of healthcare systems. DES 
simulates just the significant events of a system. It frequently 
is characterized by a series of tokens that hold up in turn for a 
service provider that forms them some time they proceed on 
to another portion of the system [7]. SD, which is used to 
simulate large systems, began to be used as a simulation 
method in healthcare operational supervision later than DES. 
An SD simulation is based on continuous space and does not 
model individuals, it simulates the whole system along time. 
Healthcare systems are based on human interactions, and 
the ability of ABMS to represent both, human intention and 
interaction, makes it an appealing approach, while DES and 
SD are not well-suited approaches to model them [5][6]. A 
clear illustration of the potential use of ABMS in ED modeling 
is shown in [11].  
Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation is considered as a 
systemic approach with a bottom-up architecture that can be 
used as a productive method to get the macro-level point of 
view from the micro-level evolution of agent interactions [12], 
[13]. The main components of an agent-based model are 
environment, agents, and interactions [14]. 
We based our model on a previous Emergency 
Department model (ED-Simulator) that has been developed as 
part of previous research work [7][9][13] by our research 
group, 
High 
Performance 
Computing 
for 
Efficient 
Applications and Simulation (HPC4EAS), of the Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB). Such model has been 
designed with the participation of ED staff from the Hospital 
of Mataro (Hospital of medium size that gives care service to 
an influence area of 250,000 people attending 110,000 
patients/year in the ED), and the Hospital of Sabadell (one of 
large size that gives care service to an influence area of 
500,000 people attending 160,000 patients/year in the ED). It 
is a pure Agent-Based Model, formed entirely of the rules 
governing the behavior of the individual agents which 
populate an ED. 
Two kinds of agents have been identified, active, and 
passive. Active agents represent people, who act upon their 
own initiative: 1) patients; 2) admission staff (who receive 
patients just when they arrive at the ED); 3) sanitarian 
technicians (who help certain patients to move from one place 
to another of the ED); 4) triage and emergency nurses (the 
former receive patients after their admission for establishing 
their priority level and the latter are involved in the diagnosis 
and treatment phase); 5) and doctors. Passive agents represent 
systems that are solely reactive, such as the loudspeaker 
system (that is used by ED staff to communicate with patients 
that are in the waiting rooms), patient information system, 
pneumatic pipes (that are used to send the trials from the 
diagnostic zone to labs), and central diagnostic services 
(radiology service and laboratories).  
As it is shown in Figure 1, ED is divided into different 
zones in which different types of agents may act, maintaining 
interactions that also may be different. Such interactions are 
carried out through communication. For this reason, the model 
includes both an environment and a communication model.  
The input of our model are the patients who arrive to get 
emergency services. According to the Spanish Triage System 
[15], very similar to the Canadian Triage System, after the 
patient arrival, and the registration by the admission staff has 
been completed, based on the severity of their situation in 
triage, patients are categorized taking into account their 
priority level. There are 5 different values, level 1 is for the 
most critical situation and it is named resuscitation, and level 
5 is for the least critical one (non-urgent).  
 
 
Figure 1. Different areas in Emergency Department. 
 
There are different areas in EDs Spanish standard (Figure 
1): Admissions Area, Triage Area, Diagnosis-Treatment 
Zone, Waiting Rooms, and etc. After triage, patients with 
diagnosed acuity level 1, 2, and 3 are treated separately and 
allocated in Area A, and patients 4 and 5 are treated in a 
separate area identified as Area B. The admissions and triage 
sections apply the same healthcare staff, but doctors and 
nurses are different for Area A and B [13]. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

III. 
FLU PROPAGATION MODEL 
In order to create a contact propagation model of flu by 
ABMS method, we will define all actors involved in the ED 
process and their specific function and behavior such as: 
doctors, nurses, admission staff, laboratory technicians, 
auxiliary personnel, cleaning staff, patients and companions. 
Also, the following terms and items will be defined: 
”Transmission vector” as any agent capable of transmitting 
the flu virus, ”Susceptible” as any agent that has a risk to 
acquire the influenza infection, and ”Prevention policies” as 
behaviors performed by members of the sanitary staff in order 
to attempt to control the rate of propagation of flu and other 
contagion infections. 
We propose four types of contact transmission in which a 
transmission vector is required: 
a) Direct transmission: flu virus is transmitted from a 
transmission vector to another susceptible agent. 
b) Semi-direct transmission: a transmission vector 
spreads the virus to an immune person and then s/he 
spreads that to a susceptible person. 
c) Semi-indirect transmission: once a passive agent is 
infected by flu virus, then another passive agent 
touches it, and after a chain of contagion, an active 
agent is in contact with that. 
d) Indirect transmission: when a transmission vector 
touches medical equipment or objects in the ED 
environment, and flu virus is transmitted to the 
object, later, a susceptible agent (patient or 
healthcare staff) has contact with the same object and 
acquires the microorganism.  
 
 
Figure 2. Flu severity and propagation possibilities evolution in ED. 
 
As stated before, the aim of this research is to understand 
how the influenza is influencing and changing the acuity level 
of the patient, how it is affecting sanitary staff, and 
consequently, how this is changing the behavior of the ED. If 
we apply for a screening at the entry point of incoming 
individuals, we may find different types of individuals. People 
with a negative test result will be categorized as 'not infected'. 
Obviously, they are susceptible to get infected. Then, based 
on the results, we can categorize positive people with 'no 
symptom', 'mild symptom', and 'severe symptom' [16]. Figure 
2 shows the different states of flu virus infection, in its 
lifecycle in a host patient.  
In [17] the authors show the probability of MRSA 
infection in ED, and how many people are involved with 
MRSA contamination. However, in our research, the idea is 
not only how the propagation of the flu virus in ED is, but also 
how this propagation is affecting people. Affecting people or 
patients means that the acuity level of them could improve 
gradually if there was not any flu infection. If patients are 
exposed to a flu virus contamination, they will require more 
attention and more use of ED resources like health care staff, 
facilities, care boxes, etc. As a result, the LoS will be higher 
and ED will become closer to saturation. In some cases, this 
leads to overcrowd, and overcrowd means more risk of 
epidemic and propagation in the area. In this situation, the 
relative position of the body influences human thermal plume 
(e.g., a seated inclination of the body), which is considered to 
affect the air velocity of convective flows around a human 
being, and hence the ability to carry small droplets [18]. As an 
indoor area, every section of ED has a strong potential of 
getting infected by flu, and being beneath high risk of flu 
propagation. Places, where patients type 1, 2 and 3 have been 
held, have almost no risk, because they have no contact with 
others, and in addition they have not been waiting in any 
queue before admission. Contrary to that, patients with acuity 
level 4 or 5 spend long time in the waiting rooms and ED 
wards. So, probably they have a highest possibility to get 
infected. Figure 3 shows the different probabilities of risk 
infection for each section of the treatment process in ED. 
The risk of propagation of the different areas in the ED 
also depends on the number of individuals that stay in. It is 
high in zones like waiting rooms, ED wards and admission 
zone, and low in triages room, examination room or care 
boxes. Flu propagation is being facilitated in limited (indoor) 
areas, so, quantifying the probabilities of the virus 
transmission in some specific areas like waiting rooms, wards, 
etc, is expected in this research, and this can also be 
considered as a framework because of its independent 
behavior [19]. Consequently, calculation leads to be more 
complicated. The key point that arises here is to find the 
relationship between the size of an indoor area and the 
propagation of infection there, and how many people should 
be there in max to minimize or reduce the rate of contagious. 
Therefore, some new variables like fragility and the ratio of 
area size per capita have to be added to our previous model. 
Fragility is an index that indicates how fragile anybody is: as 
more fragile anybody is, the more severe will be the flu 
infection. There are some indicators for each individual to 
show the amount of being at risk for getting an infection in a 
contagious situation.  
A combination of patient age (ag), acuity level (al), 
underlying diseases (ud), etc. play a role to generate the 
fragility index of each person: Fr(p)=f(ag,al,ud) 
 
  
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 3. Flu severity and propagation possibilities evolution in ED. 
As Figure 3 shows, there are different possibilities of 
getting the flu virus based on the flu contact rate of each area 
inside the ED:  
P(getFlu): { Pt(fc), Pec(fc), Pd(fc), Pwd(fc), Pw(fc), Px(fc)}  
 
Moreover, Flu Contact rate P(fc), Flu Infection rate is also 
calculated. P(fc) holds the probability of flu transmission in 
triage. We use Pt(fc) to represent the probability of flu contact 
rate in the process of treatment. Pec(fc) shows the possibility 
of transmission in express care room, Pd(fc) represents the 
probability of propagation in the examination room, Pwd(fc) 
is the propagation probability in wards, Pw(fc) shows the 
probability in the waiting room and Px(fc) is for x-ray and 
labs. There is another variable named ‘status’ for each agent 
(active/passive) 
with 
the 
following 
possible 
values: 
Susceptible or non-carrier, Carrier, Infected, and Recovered. 
We can categorize patients into two parts. The first part 
includes patients who do not have a clear possibility of being 
carriers or infected with the flu virus. In this case, the 
healthcare staff assumes that this patient is non-carrier; and 
the second part is those patients who are known or can be 
assumed to be carriers or infected with the flu. 
The authors in [17] conclude that some preventive 
facilities like isolation of patients can avoid the transmission 
of MRSA bacteria between patients. However, in flu not only 
physical contact between patients should be banned, but also 
they have to use some facial masks or facial shields because 
the flu virus is also airborne. Actually, as a result, we aim to 
limit the probability for propagation of flu in the ED, and, by 
taking some preventive actions in EDs, the number of patients 
who contact the flu can be reduced. On the other hand, the 
single best way to prevent seasonal flu is to be vaccinated each 
year, but good health habits, like covering one's cough and 
washing hands, often can help stop the spread of germs and 
prevent respiratory illnesses like the flu.  
 
P(AgainstFlu)=f(Vaccinate,Handwashing,SanitizeHand, 
IsolatedMaterial,MedicalMask,MedicalShield,SocialDistanc
ing, AreaSizeCapita)  
 
There are passive indicators that are assumed to affect the 
propagation rate in an indoor area. We hypothesize that the flu 
transmission rate in Emergency Departments may be 
influenced by area temperature (T), humidity (H), air pressure 
(P), air condition speed (AS), air condition direction (AD), air 
pollution in ED (AP), UV radiation (UV), airborne particles 
in ED (AbP), etc. So, we can assume a strong correlation 
among these indicators:  
C (FluTransmissionRate)= f (T, H, P, AS, AD, AP, UV, 
AbP) 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we opened a new idea on our group's 
previous work in the area of modeling and simulating the 
emergency department. Although we have experience in 
simulating MRSA in our ED-simulator, in this research we are 
initiating, to model and simulate how influenza propagates in 
different areas of an ED, how it influences patients underlying 
diseases, and furthermore, what are its effects on healthcare 
staff.  
Our journey started with initiation and investigation on the 
topic area, and it continues with data gathering and problem 
articulation. Then, we initiate a conceptual model for our idea, 
and it will continue with model design and implementation, 
the model calibration, validation and verification. Finally, we 
will be able to analyze the results. The resemblance of this 
virus's lifecycle and its effects on ED with some other diseases 
like Covid19, Chickenpox, Mycoplasma pneumonia is also 
hypothesized. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by the Agencia Estatal 
de Investigacion (AEI), Spain and the Fondo Europeo de 
Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) UE, under contract TIN2017-
84875-P and partially funded by a research collaboration 
agreement with the Fundacion Escuelas Universitarias 
Gimbernat (EUG). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Center for Disease Control and Prevention: Archived Estimated 
Influenza Illnesses, Medical visits, Hospitalizations, and 
Deaths in the United States- 2017-2018 influenza season. 
Available from:  
        https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/2017-2018/archive.htm 
[2] D. Chumachenko, V. Dobriak, M. Mazorchuk, I. Meniailov, 
and K. Bazilevych, “On agent-based approach to influenza and 
acute respiratory virus infection simulation” in 14th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Trends 
in 
Radioelecrtronics, 
Telecommunications 
and 
Computer 
Engineering (TCSET), Feb. 2018, pp. 192-195. 
[3] E. Davoli and World Health Organization, “A practical tool 
for the preparation of a hospital crisis preparedness plan, with 
special focus on pandemic influenza” (No. EUR/06/5064207). 
Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2006. 
[4] P. Babin and A. Greenwood, “Discretely Evaluating Complex 
Systems” in Industrial Engineer Magazine 43(2): pp. 34-38, 
2011. 
[5] E. 
Bonabeau, 
“Agent-based 
modeling: 
Methods 
and 
techniques forsimulating human systems” in Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, vol. 99, no. Suppl 3, pp.7280–7287, 2002. 
[6] P. Escudero-Marin and M. Pidd, “Using ABMS to simulate 
emergency departments” in Proceedings of the 2011 Winter 
Simulation Conference, IEEE. pp. 1,239-1,250. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[7] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. 
Luque, “An agent-based decision support system for hospitals 
emergency departments” in Procedia Computer Science, 4, pp. 
1870-1879, 2011. 
[8]  R.G. Sargent, “Verification and validation of simulation 
models” in Proceedings of the 2010 Winter Simulation 
Conference, Ed. B. Johansson, S. Jain, J. Montoya-Torres, J. 
Hugan, and E. Yücesan, pp. 166-183. 
[9] E. Cabrera, E. Luque, M. Taboada, F. Epelde, and M. L. 
Iglesias, “ABMS optimization for emergency departments” in 
Proceedings of the 2012 Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE. 
pp. 1-12. 
[10] World Health Organization: Emergency medical services 
systems in the European Union: report of an assessment 
project co-ordinated by the World Health Organization-Data 
book (No. EUR/08/5086087). Copenhagen: WHO Regional 
Office for Europe, 2008). 
[11] A. K. Kanagarajah, P.A. Lindsay, A.M. Miller, and D.W. 
Parker, “An exploration into the uses of agent-based modeling 
to improve quality of health care” in Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Complex Systems, edited by A. 
Minai, D. Braha and Y. BarYam, pp. 471-478, 2010. 
[12] D. M. Nguyen, “A Risk Analysis Framework for Nosocomial 
Influenza Infection Using Agent-Based Simulation”, Doctoral 
Thesis, Tokyo Tech Research Repository. 2014, July 28th, 
Available from: 
 
http://t2r2.star.titech.ac.jp/rrws/file/CTT100693389/ATD1000
00413/thesis_11D35078.pdf 
[13] Z. Liu, D. Rexachs, E. Luque, F. Epelde, and E. Cabrera,  
“Simulating 
the 
micro-level 
behavior 
of 
emergency 
department for macro-level features prediction” in Proceedings 
of the 2015 Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE. pp. 171-182.  
[14] L. Perez and S. Dragicevic, “An agent-based approach for 
modeling dynamics of contagious disease spread” Int J Health 
Geogr. 2009; 8:50. Published 2009 Aug 5. doi:10.1186/1476-
072X-8-50. 
[15] R. Sánchez et al., “El triaje en urgencias en los hospitales 
espanyoles”, Emergencias: Revista de la Sociedad Española de 
Medicina de Urgencias y Emergencias, Vol. 25, Nº. 1, 2013, 
pp. 66-70, ISSN 1137-6821. 
[16] S. Moghadas and M. Laskowski, “Review of Terms Used in 
Modelling Influenza Infection”, National Collaborating Centre 
for Infectious Diseases, September 2014, ISBN 978-1-927-
988-18-3. 
[17] C. Jaramillo, M. Taboada, F. Epelde, D. Rexachs, and E. 
Luque, “Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA 
Transmission in Emergency Departments” in Proceedings of 
the 2015 International Conference of Computational Systems, 
pp. 443-452. 
[18] N. Zhang et al., “Close contact behavior in indoor environment 
and transmission of respiratory infection” Indoor Air, 2020 30: 
pp. 645-661, Available from: 
        https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12673  
[19] M. A. Dogaheh, “Introducing a framework for security 
measurements”, in 2010 IEEE International Conference on 
Information Theory and Information Security, IEEE. pp. 638-
641. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

