Simulation of an Order Picking System in a Pharmaceutical 
Warehouse 
João Pedro Jorge1, Zafeiris Kokkinogenis3,4, Rosaldo J. F. Rossetti2,3, Manuel A. P. Marques1 
1 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Portugal 
2 Department of Informatics Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Portugal 
3 Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science Laboratory (LIACC), Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Portugal  
4 Institute of Mechanical Engineering (IDMEC), Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Portugal 
{deg11008, pro08017, rossetti, pmarques}@fe.up.pt 
 
 
Abstract - The paper presents an agent-based simulation model 
of an order picking system. A pharmaceutical warehouse is 
used as case study with the purpose of improving the 
implemented picking processes. Warehousing activities affect 
the total logistic costs of a company or supply chain. The 
optimization of the required picking operations is one of the 
most important objectives when attempting to reduce the 
operative costs. This study intends to provide a proof-of-
concept agent-based model for scheduling the number of 
human resources required for picking activities. The 
improvement in the service and the planning of the manpower 
used in the warehouse, thus achieved, leads to operation-cost 
reductions. The goal is accomplished by using the NetLogo 
agent-based simulation framework. The simulation outcomes 
suggest that dimensioning human resources is a means to 
satisfy the desirable level of customer’s service.  
Keywords - Warehouse Simulation; Order Picking system; 
Agent-Based model; NetLogo. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Recent trends in the warehouse planning have resulted in 
order picking design and management being more important 
and complex. Order picking operation is one of the logistic 
warehouse’s processes. It comports the retrieval and 
collection of articles from a storage location in a specified 
quantity into a box to satisfy a customer’s order. 
Customers tend to order more frequently, in smaller 
quantities, and they require customized service. On the other 
hand, companies tend to accept late-arrival orders while they 
need to provide rapid and timely delivery within tight time 
windows [1]. In general, lead times are under pressure. This 
is particularly true for pharmaceutical distribution centres.  
In this business, pharmacies can order at the click of a 
button and expect inexpensive, rapid and accurate delivery. 
Obviously, managing order picking operations effectively 
and efficiently is a challenging process for the warehouse 
function. A key objective is to shorten throughput times for 
order picking, and to guarantee the meeting of due times for 
shipment departures. In order to offer high customer service 
level and to achieve economies of scale in transportation to 
support the related costs, these small size, late-arrival orders 
need to meet the tight shipment time fence. Hence the time 
available for picking orders at warehouses becomes shorter, 
which imposes higher requirements on order processing time 
at warehouses [2].   
Order picking operations often consume a large part of 
the total labour activities in the warehouse ([3], even claims 
up to 60%), and for a typical warehouse, order picking may 
account for 55% of all operating costs [4]. Most of the 
warehouses employ humans for order picking. 
According to the movement of human and products, 
order picking is organized into picker-to-parts and parts-to-
picker systems. In a picker-to-parts system the picker (the 
person that performs the order picking operation) walks 
along the aisles to pick items. In this system is used the pick 
by order. During a pick cycle, pick information is 
communicated by a handheld terminal or a voice picking 
system. No paper pick lists are needed.  The parts-to-picker 
systems are usually implemented by the usage of 
“Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems” (AS/RS). 
In the present case study we use a pharmaceutical 
warehouse that has four different storage areas depending on 
the type of product stored: products with low rotation rate, 
products with high rotation rate, big and fragile products and 
special products (inflammable). The maximum number of  
pickers is 15. 
To simulate the order picking operations, an agent-based 
model of the warehouse is used. The agent-based model 
represents the real order picking entities and simulates the 
customer service indicators. For this work, we used the 
NetLogo modelling framework [5] to rapidly prototype 
simple, yet realistic, “what-if” order picking scenarios and 
analyse the system performance under different real set-ups. 
NetLogo is a free open-source programmable modelling and 
simulation platform, appropriate for modelling complex 
systems. One of its main advantages is the ease of 
programming. The language is very intuitive and specifically 
designed for agent-based modelling, thus the user needs only 
to program agent behaviour, not the agents themselves. 
Moreover, the researcher community extensively supports 
the modelling platform and regularly develop a number of 
tools useful to the modeller. 
This paper has the following research objectives: (i) to 
assign the correct number of pickers for a certain average of 
served orders; (ii) to provide a tool based on a simulation 
model to analyse the performance of the order picking 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

process; (iii) to calculate the demand of each type of product 
based on real data; (iv) to calculate the orders rate that enter 
in the warehouse; (v) to create a framework with the capacity 
of generating orders randomly.  
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II the 
existing literature is reviewed, the real system is presented in 
Section III. A modelling framework, the NetLogo 
implementation and the validation experiments are shown in 
Sections IV, V and VI. Conclusion and future work follow in 
Section VII. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The two major types of order picking systems can be 
distinguished 
into 
parts-to-picker 
and 
picker-to-parts 
systems. De Koster et al. [1] have provided an extensive 
literature review of the order picking operations and their 
implementations. One of their conclusions was the lack of 
attention from the researcher community for the pickers-to-
parts order picking systems despite them being the dominant 
implemented approach.  
Picker-to-parts systems occur in two types: pick by order 
and pick by article (batch picking). It is also possible to 
distinguish picker-to-parts systems by the order arrival and 
release. This can be either deterministic or planned [6] or 
stochastic [7].  
A polling model can describe the order arrivals and 
processing; a system of multiple queues accessed in a 
speciﬁed sequence by a multiple servers [8]. Hwang et al. [9] 
use clustering-based heuristic algorithms for the batching of 
orders for order picking in a single-aisle automated storage 
and retrieval system. Daniels et al. [10] consider the 
warehouse in which goods are stored at multiple locations 
and the pick location of a product can be selected 
dynamically. 
There are also relevant applications in operation 
management. For instance, Koenigsberg and Mamer [11] 
consider an operator who serves a number of storage 
locations on a rotating carousel conveyor.  Bozer and Park 
[12] presented a single-device polling-based material 
handling systems. Although these systems have been widely 
researched, they have not yet received systematic treatment 
and application in the picking process organized in a picker- 
to-parts system. The same situation occurs with the agent-
based models. The literature mainly presents agent-based 
approaches to solve order picking problems where goods are 
stored at multiple locations or warehouse control solutions 
[13], [14]. The study described in this paper is applied to a 
real case, which the picking is organized in a picker-to-
product system. 
This work contributes to the literature by exploring the 
agent-based metaphor to simulate an order picking system in 
a realistic scenario using real data of a pharmaceutical 
warehouse. 
 
III. 
REAL SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
Figure 1 shows the layout of the order picking 
workstation under study. This system can be classified as a 
picker-to-product system. Pickers work to fulfil orders. The 
number of order lines in an order is referred to as order size. 
Order sizes may vary significantly.  
The pharmaceutical distribution center has four different 
storage areas depending on the type of product stored: 
products with low rotation rate, products with high rotation 
rate, big and fragile products and special products 
(inflammable) and a maximum number of 15 pickers.  
 The storage areas are arranged in a pre-defined layout 
and there is a common conveyor to transports the order 
boxes between them. A customer order may require products 
from one or more storage areas and the time to collect the 
products is different for each case. 
At the order picking workstation, orders arrive 
sequentially using boxes on the conveyors. Once the picker 
and the required order product box are available, the picker 
moves to the product rack, then picks a number of required 
items and place it on the conveyor to be transported to the 
position where the order product box waits. The Figure 1 
shows a scheme of this process. The picker works on one 
order at a time until all lines of the order have been picked 
and the order is said to be finished. When an order is 
finished, the system moves the finished order box to the 
dispatch area. 
 
 
Figure 1. A scheme of order picking process 
 
In this type of system, the picker can only pick items 
from the product racks that belong to the order currently 
being processed.  
If for any reason the product is not available, the picking 
time is above a limit or some error occurs the order is 
deviated and need a special procedure is used to finish it. 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION MODEL DESCRIPTION 
In the following section we discuss the concepts of a 
pharmaceutical order picking system focusing on the picker-
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

to-parts system. We describe the processes taking place 
during the operation of the warehouse as well as the data 
used to model the system.  
The workstation is modelled using an agent-based 
approach. Several pickers, products stored in racks, boxes 
with the products to complete the orders and a server-based 
management information system, compose such a system. 
The user can adjust this model changing the number of 
pickers. The orders arrive randomly at the workstation with a 
rate of 7, 8 orders per minute and they have random lines of 
products based on the real data. This value is obtained by the 
analysis of the data of one entire month (65 000 records). 
The result is depicted in Figure 2 in a Poisson distribution. 
Orders are created based in this real rate. 
 
 
Figure 2. Poisson distribution of the real data 
 
In this model, customer orders can require one or more 
product lines from one or more storage areas. To describe 
this situation it was assumed four types of final product: 
- 
if an order requires one or more products lines 
from one area, we call it a PROD1ZONE; 
- 
if an order requires one or more products lines 
from two areas, we call it a PROD2ZONE; 
- 
if an order requires one or more products lines 
from three areas, we call it a PROD3ZONE; 
- 
if an order requires one or more products lines 
from four areas, we call it a PROD4ZONE. 
The frequency and the average preparation time per each 
type of order are calculated using the real data from entire 
days. And the result is depicted in Table I. 
 
 
Table I. Demand production and time preparation 
Type of order 
Frequency per 
Type of order (%) 
Average Preparation 
Time (min) 
PROD1ZONE 
30.46% 
5' 
PROD2ZONE 
27.89% 
15' 
PROD3ZONE 
22.91% 
25' 
PROD4ZONE 
18.74% 
43' 
 
This means that in 10 orders the amount of each type of 
final product is: 
- 
PROD1ZONE: 3.1 orders 
- 
PROD2ZONE: 2.7 orders 
- 
PROD3ZONE: 2.3 orders 
- 
PROD4ZONE: 1.9 orders 
For this model it was assumed that products are always 
available in the warehouse, the pickers are equally skilled 
(homogeneous agents) for the order picking operations, the 
workspace is considered an open space and the time to pick a 
product from the shelf is standard and do not vary with the 
product. 
The orders can have many different statuses: “arriving”, 
“queuing”, 
“placing”, 
“preparation”, 
“finishing” 
and 
“leaving” as it can be seen in Figure 3.  The process time 
used in this paper represents an aggregation of all 
components that contribute to the processing time at the 
order picking workstation, the Effective Process Time (EPT). 
Initially orders move towards the warehouse entrance and 
stand in a sequential order until a place is chosen. If a free 
place exists, then the order must navigate to that place. Once 
the order has reached the place the status is changed to 
“waiting” and a counter is started. After the pre-defined 
finishing time has passed, the order changes its status to 
“leaving”. 
 
 
Figure 3. Orders status 
 
Jacobs et al. [15] presented an algorithm to compute the 
EPT realizations directly from arrival and departure events. 
An order picking workstation is characterized by several 
process time components (see Figure 3). At the core of the 
process is the time required for picking items (preparing and 
finish time), that is the raw pick time. Next to the raw pick 
time, pickers may require some setup between processing of 
orders. Conveyor systems may break down, causing 
unavoidable delays. Picker availability is also an issue since 
it is likely that a picker is sometimes not present at the 
0	  
0.02	  
0.04	  
0.06	  
0.08	  
0.1	  
0.12	  
0.14	  
0.16	  
0	   1	   2	   3	   4	   5	   6	   7	   8	   9	  10	  11	  12	  13	  14	  15	  16	  
Probability	  
Number	  of	  orders	  
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

workstation. These components are aggregated into a single 
EPT. The idea is then to reconstruct the EPT directly from 
order arrival and departure times registered at the operating 
order picking workstation under consideration with the 
obvious advantage that it´s not need to quantify each 
component that contribute to the process time. 
Figure 3 shows an example of arrivals and departures of 
four orders at an order picking workstation. An arrival Ai 
occurs at the moment an order i is prepared at the order 
picking workstation. A departure Di occur when the picking 
has been finished and the respective order i is finished. 
EPT realizations are calculated using the following 
equation: 
 
EPTi = Di − Ai   (1) 
 
where Di denotes the time of ith departing order and Ai 
denotes the arrival of the corresponding ith order. The bottom 
part of Figure 3 illustrates how EPT realizations are obtained 
using Equation (1). 
The picker agent has various statuses: “selecting the 
product”, “getting products from the rack”, “going to the 
workspace”, “preparing the product” and “sending the 
product”. 
V. 
NETLOGO IMPLEMENTATION 
In this paper, we describe the use of NetLogo as a rapid 
prototyping tool for an agent-based simulation framework to 
evaluate the setup of a pharmaceutical warehouse order 
picking system.  
We present how our problem was modelled and which 
abstractions were used to achieve the outlined objectives. 
Furthermore, complexities and constraints inherent to this 
problem were identified. From that, a simplified model of 
an abstraction of the application domain was created 
without losing key aspects. Our purpose is to simulate the 
activities and operation taking place in an order picking 
system in way (i) to assign the correct number of pickers for 
a certain average of served orders; (ii) to simulate the orders 
behaviour: served and diverted; (iii) to calculate the orders 
rate that enter in the warehouse. 
 
There are several concepts and agents involved in this 
model: 
 
1. The Orders:   
Orders are randomly generated to “arrive” in the warehouse 
following a probability distribution according to the 
historical data distribution. A preparation place is assigned 
(“placing”) to each order. Here, the order assumes the state 
“waiting” until the order picking operations are finished 
(“finishing”). Upon conclusion, the order assumes the state 
“leaving” and is forwarded to the dispatching area. The 
demand for each type of product is based on data from a 
pharmaceutical company.  
If the waiting time is too long, (for any reason: product not 
found, place not available) the order is diverted.  
2. The picker:   
The user before setup can define the number of pickers 
and their initial location is randomly generated in the 
workspace. Simple reactive agents based on simple “if-
Then” rules implement the pickers. The picker collects all 
the products to finish the order. There are four types of final 
products: PROD1ZONE, PROD2ZONE, PROD3ZONE and 
PROD4ZONE. Each final product has different picking time 
to be prepared (defined in the source code). Once the 
products have been collected, the picker moves to the 
sending area and places it on the conveyor. The picker 
restarts the cycle. In the proposed model, pickers are 
represented by agents. 
 
3. The server:  
The server is an agent responsible for the managing and 
dispatching of the orders.  
If all positions for preparing the orders are full, the server 
does not allow orders to enter into the system to do the order 
picking operation; this causes a sequential order (“queuing” 
of orders). 
The only interface variable that the user must set before 
the model runs is the number of pickers. All the other 
variables can be changed, allowing a dynamic observation. 
The user can change also the following variables:  
- 
The demand for each type of final product; 
- 
The chance that orders are generated; 
- 
The speed of the conveyor. 
 
Various monitors and plots allow the user to display the 
result of these dynamics:   
- 
The total number of orders;  
- 
The number of free places;   
- 
The number of instances of each type of 
product; 
- 
A chart plotting the number of orders served 
every 100 ticks (NetLogo unit of time); 
- 
A chart plotting the number of diverted orders 
every 100 ticks;   
- 
An average number of orders served; 
- 
An average number of diverted orders; 
 
The user can experiment to change the values and seeing 
the result through the monitors and charts. It is possible to 
observe the visual phenomena that are developed such as 
bottlenecks, queues and the spatial distribution of diverted 
orders. 
There are important aspects in this model: 
- 
Queuing at the warehouse entrance;  
- 
Bottlenecks at the exit; 
- 
Congestion on the conveyor; 
- 
The stochastic aspects are inherent in the model; 
- 
Agents don't always move in exactly the same 
way; 
- 
Demand of different final products may vary 
naturally. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

     
 
Although NetLogo is a simple simulation framework, it 
proves to be a very useful tool for creating this type of 
agent-based model of real scenario. With respect to other 
simulation paradigms, the agent-based approach offers the 
users the possibility to observe not only the dynamic of the 
system but also the interaction of the situated entities in the 
system. One key point is also the agent movement. 
Specifically creating a realistic system where agents (e.g., 
pickers) can move having specific goals and destinations. 
The limitation in allowing agents to move dynamically in 
the NetLogo environment is that they are constrained 
moving discretely on a grid-based space patch-by-patch 
rather having smooth trajectories.   
 
VI. 
VALIDATION EXPERIMENT 
In this section the simulation experiments are discussed 
to validate the proposed model. First, a simulation scenario 
has been created to use as a test case representing the “real 
life” operating order picking workstation. Then, the model 
has been simulated at a real utilization level (using different 
number of picker-agents, the real demand and the real order 
picking times) to generate order arrival and departure 
events. Subsequently, these events are used as variables for 
the global model. Next, the model was simulated at various 
utilization levels (varying the number of pickers and 
conveyor belt speed) to measure the number of orders 
served versus the number of diverted orders. 
 
 
Figure 4. Orders behaviour in real system 
 
For 
the 
aforementioned 
experimental 
set-up, 
a 
comparison has been made over the average number of 
served and diverted orders of this simulation model with 
those of the real system.  In this way, it´s possible to assess 
the accuracy of the predictions of the average number of 
served orders. The real system’s data are depicted in Figure 
4 (in green the average number of served orders) while the 
simulation obtained results are depicted in Figure 5. The 
word “tick” in the graph of Figure 5 is a measure for the 
time that is used by NetLogo. 
 
 
Figure 5. Order behaviour in simulated system 
 
Analysing the order plot over a complete working day’s 
operations, we get a good idea of the order average of 
served orders and diverted orders. By looking at the 
historical company’s data, we can see that the diverted 
orders are in line with the current observations. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This 
paper 
presented 
an 
order 
picking 
model 
implemented in the NetLogo agent-based platform. 
Although the model may appear to be simplistic, its 
conceptualisation encompasses many aspects of the 
observed system in the real world. The model manages to 
predict the average number of served orders using a certain 
amount of human resources by means of an agent-based 
simulation model with real data from a pharmaceutical 
distribution center. Arrival and departure time data are the 
only input required to calculate the time to complete the 
orders. The validation of the simulation study demonstrated 
that the data used are adequate to the required results. It was 
found that the proposed model accurately predicts the 
defined goal in a satisfactory degree. 
In practice, the actual pick rate does not deviate from the 
expected rate. With this regard, the EPT represents the 
actual pick time of an order picking workstation. This will 
allow the identification of possible improvements for order 
picking activities. 
The proposed model has practical use because collecting 
arrival and departure data of orders is relatively simple in 
warehouses and the output is easily perceived.  
In future work, the model’s layout will be improved and 
demonstrate how the presented approach in this paper can 
be applied to a more detailed order picking workstation (i.e., 
heterogeneous agents to represent differently skilled pickers, 
automation mechanism in the warehouse, etc.). 
Besides that, the current advancements in order picking 
technology have allowed multiple orders to be processed 
simultaneously by a picker, which is often the case in large-
scale warehouses. Thus, orders routings in large-scale 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

warehouses would not be processed in a FIFO sequence at 
the workstation. Performance analysis, in such a context, of 
order picking workstation will be also subject to future 
work. Therefore, it is important to improve and enhance the 
attributes of the agent-based model to tackle these issues. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This project has been supported by the FEUP project 
“Support system for availability and location of products for 
picking” and FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia), 
the Portuguese Agency for R&D, under the grant, 
SFRH/BD/67202/2009 
 
REFERENCES 
1. 
R. de Koster, T. Le-Duc, and K. J. Roodbergen, “Design 
and control of warehouse order picking: A literature 
review,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 
182, issue 2, pp.68–73, October 2007. 
2. 
M. Yu, “Enhancing warehouse performance by efficient 
order picking,” Netherlands Research School for 
Transport, Infrastructure and Logistics, Doctoral Thesis, 
October 2008. 
3. 
J. Drury, “Towards more efficient order picking,” IMM 
Monograph No. 1. Report, The Institute of Materials 
Management Cranfield, U.K, 1988. 
4. 
J. A. Tompkins, J. A. White, Y. A. Bozer, and J. M. A. 
Tanchoco, ”Facilities planning,” New York, John Wiley 
and Sons, 2003. 
5. 
U. Wilensky, “NetLogo,” Center for Connected Learning 
and 
Computer-Based 
Modeling, 
Northwestern 
University, 
Evanston, 
IL, 
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/, 
(accessed 
September 2012). 
6. 
N. Gademann and S. Van de Velde, “Order batching to 
minimize total travel time in a parallel-aisle warehouse,” 
IIE Transactions vol. 37, issue 1, pp. 63-75, 2005. 
7. 
T. Le-Duc, “Design and control of efficient order picking 
process,” Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus 
University 
Rotterdam, 
the 
Netherlands, 
Ph.D. 
dissertation, 2005. 
8. 
M. M. Srinivasan, “Nondeterministic polling systems,” 
Management Science, vol. 37 no. 6, pp. 667–681, June 
1991. 
9. 
H. Hwang, W. Baek, and M. Lee, “Clustering algorithms 
for order picking in an automated storage and retrieval 
system,” International Journal of Production Research, 
vol. 26, issue 2, pp. 189–201, 1988. 
10. R. L. Daniels, J. Rummel, and R. Schantz,  “A model for 
warehouse 
order 
picking,” 
European 
Journal 
of 
Operational Research, vol. 105, pp. 1–17, February 
1998. 
11. E. Koenigsberg and J. Mamer, "The analysis of 
production systems,'' International Journal of Production 
Research, vol. 20, issue 1,  pp. 1-16, 1982 
12. Y.A. Bozer and J.H. Park, “Expected move request 
waiting times in single-device, polling-based material 
handling systems,” IIE Trans vol. 33, issue 1, pp. 55–63, 
2001. 
13. B. Kim, J. G. Robert, and S. H. Sunderesh, “Intelligent 
agent modeling of an industrial warehousing problem,” 
IIE Transactions, vol. 34, issue 7, pp. 601-612, 2002. 
14. B. Kim, S. H. Sunderesh, J. G. Robert, and A. St. Onge, 
“Intelligent agent based framework for warehouse 
control,” Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, January 2004. 
15. J. H. Jacobs, L. F. P. Etman, E. J. J. van Campen, and J. 
E. Rooda, “Characterization of operational time 
variability using effective processing times,” IEEE 
Transactions  on Semiconductor Manufacturing, vol. 16, 
no. 3, pp. 511–520, 2003. 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

