Sensitivity Analysis of Simulation Study Results  
on Safety Stock Relaxation in Material Requirement Planning 
Sonja Strasser, Klaus Altendorfer, Andreas Peirleitner 
Production and Operations Management 
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria 
Steyr, Austria 
e-mail: {sonja.strasser, klaus.altendorfer, andreas.peirleitner}@fh-steyr.at 
 
 
Abstract—In Material Requirement Planning, the lack of 
capacity constraints can lead to production plans, which 
cannot be fulfilled on time. One countermeasure for coping 
with capacity problems is a temporary relaxation of safety 
stock, which can be implemented in different ways. In this 
paper, three variants for relaxing safety stock are presented 
and compared in 
a simulation study for 
a simple 
manufacturing structure. All three methods reveal a significant 
potential of improvement in comparison to MRP. In a 
sensitivity analysis, the influence of two MRP planning 
parameters, i.e., safety stock and production lot size, on the 
overall costs and the relationship between these two 
parameters are examined.  
Keywords-Discrete Event Simulation; Sensitivity Analysis; 
Material Requirements Planning; Safety Stock Relaxation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In production planning, Material Requirement Planning 
(MRP) [1] is widely applied due to its well comprehensible 
algorithm for scheduling production orders to satisfy 
material requirements by external demand. However, there 
are some weak points of MRP like the assumption of infinite 
machine capacity and constant production lead times [2] [3]. 
Neglecting capacity constraints leads to the generation of 
usually infeasible production plans by MRP, which require 
additional planning effort at the production control level [4] - 
[6]. 
In the last decades, several approaches have been 
developed to deal with the drawbacks of MRP. Especially 
for the integration of capacity constraints, there exist a set of 
different solution approaches [7]. One possibility is to react 
on capacity problems after the MRP run [4] [5] [8], although 
it is hard to solve these problems, which are generated at the 
higher MRP level. Some authors start before the MRP run 
and try to avoid capacity violations already at the Master 
Production Schedule (MPS) level  [9] [10]. Another 
approach is the formulation of an optimization problem with 
capacity constraints instead of the MRP run [11] [12]. In 
addition to the high computational effort for solving real 
world planning problems, the theoretical formulations limit 
the practical application of these approaches. The integration 
of a solution heuristic into the well-known MRP algorithm 
for tackling the capacity constraints is another possibility, 
which is more likely to be accepted for practical 
implementations. Different approaches can be found in [7], 
[13]- [16]. 
In [16], capacity planning is integrated into MRP by 
providing simple algorithmic measures, like the temporary 
relaxation of safety stock, load dependent dynamic planned 
lead times and lot size adaption heuristics. The basic 
concepts of Material and Capacity Requirements Planning 
(MCRP) are provided, but details on the implementations 
are missing. First insights on the performance of the MCRP 
algorithm are presented in [17] with a simulation study of a 
simplified production system structure, with eight final 
products and three Bill Of Material (BOM) levels.  
In this paper, two variations of the safety stock 
relaxation for capacity load balancing, introduced in [16], 
are defined (Section II) and their performance is compared 
to the initial implementation and traditional MRP in a 
simulation study (Section III). To derive a better 
understanding of the proposed methods for safety stock 
relaxation, a sensitivity analysis of two MRP planning 
parameters on the performance of the production system is 
conducted and the interrelationship of these parameters is 
investigated in Section IV in detail. In Section V, 
concluding remarks summarize the main results and outline 
future research.   
II. 
SAFETY STOCK RELAXATION 
A. Production System 
The modeled production system structure applied in this 
paper is motivated by different automotive suppliers’ 
production systems and similar to the production system 
presented in [18]. However, it is a very streamlined version 
(low number of products, simple BOM structure, only one 
machine per low level code) to not disturb the simulation 
experiment results unnecessarily, which are generated later 
on. Figure 1 shows the resources, bill of material and work 
schedule applied.  
The studied production system is a pure Make-to-Order 
(MTO) system. Eight final products (low level code, i.e., 
LLC, 0) are delivered to a set of different customers stating 
their orders with a random customer required lead time in 
advance of the respective due date. These final products 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

consist of 1 piece of a semi-processed material on LLC 1 
and 2, whereby the raw materials on LLC 3 are assumed to 
be always available. One machine is available for each 
processing step and the transformation from one low-level 
code to the next always includes one processing step. The 
lot sizing policy is Fixed Order Periods (FOP) for all 
materials (see [19] for details). The different scenario 
parameterizations concerning processing times, setup times, 
demand behavior and customer required lead time are 
introduced in Section III. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Production System. 
B. Safety Stock Relaxation Method 1 
A safety stock within MRP is applied to reduce the 
negative effects of uncertainties in customer demand and 
production processes. From a planning perspective the safety 
stock is never undershot in the original MRP algorithm (see 
netting in MRP algorithm, [19] and [1]) and is only used for 
unplanned occurrences. In the approach introduced in [16], 
safety stock is already applied in the planning algorithm for 
capacity load balancing, i.e., available safety stocks are used 
to temporary reduce the capacity needed. This leads to a shift 
in capacity consumption since this safety stock has to be 
refilled in later periods, which leads to a higher capacity 
consumption there. The basic idea behind that measure is 
that capacity shortages are only temporary and, therefore, 
some idle capacity is available further in the future, i.e., 
capacity load is balanced. 
The integration into MRP looks as follows: The MRP 
algorithm starts with the steps netting and lot sizing for all 
materials at the respective LLC. After these two steps for all 
machines at the respective LLC the cumulated capacity 
needed is calculated. If the cumulated capacity is higher than 
the available capacity within one planning period, a safety 
stock relaxation is performed. These three steps (netting, lot 
sizing and capacitating) are conducted identically for all 
safety stock relaxation methods evaluated.  
In safety stock relaxation method 1, the safety stock for a 
specific material can only be reduced if there is a planned 
order receipt in the period of the capacity problem. (Note, 
that the applied lot sizing rule FOP summarizes net 
requirements of multiple periods, so there isn’t a planned 
order receipt for each material in every period.)  The safety 
stock is only reduced to the level needed, that the capacity 
problem in the period of the capacity problem is solved 
(cumulated capacity needed is equal or smaller than the 
available capacity). The safety stock is reduced to the end of 
the coverage of the current FOP lot size. Additionally, a 
minimum safety stock level can be considered as lower 
bound. For the application of the safety stock relaxation 
method, the materials are ordered according to their capacity 
consumption per piece at the respective machine. The 
method starts with the material, which has the highest 
capacity consumption per piece and is performed for further 
materials until the capacity problem is solved.  
The following steps are again performed for all safety 
stock relaxation methods in the same way. The MRP steps 
netting and lot sizing are recalculated including the relaxed 
safety stocks. The MRP algorithm ends with the steps 
backward scheduling and BOM explosion for all materials at 
the respective LLC. 
C. Safety Stock Relaxation Method 2 
Safety stock relaxation method 2 starts similar as 
method 1 with the MRP steps netting and lot sizing and the 
calculation of the cumulated capacity needed until a capacity 
problem is detected. In method 1 the safety stock relaxation 
can only be performed, if there is a planned order receipt in 
the period of the capacity problem. In method 2, this 
restriction is removed. A safety stock relaxation can also be 
performed, if there is a planned order receipt that covers net 
requirements (due to lot sizing policy FPO) in the period of 
the capacity problem. This allows that the safety stock for 
planned order receipts with end dates before the period of the 
capacity problem can be relaxed. The consequence is that the 
amount of materials, for which a safety stock relaxation can 
be performed, is extended. Safety stock relaxation method 2 
ends with recalculation of netting, lot sizing, backward 
scheduling and BOM explosion. 
D. Safety Stock Relaxation Method 3 
Safety stock relaxation method 3 is an extension to 
method 2 and uses the same logic for the safety stock 
relaxation. In comparison to method 2, the relaxed safety 
stock numbers are stored for the next MRP run, usually for 
the next day. The next MRP run is calculated with the 
predefined relaxed safety stocks.  
Method 3 has the effect that when a safety stock 
relaxation for a planned order receipt is made, it is never 
revised. The only exception is that the safety stock can be 
further relaxed to the minimum safety stock, if there is a new 
capacity problem. The safety stock is then refilled with 
future planned order receipts. 
III. 
SIMULATION STUDY 
In this section, we outline the design of the simulation 
study and evaluate the performance of the three different 
methods for safety stock relaxation, presented in Section II, 
in comparison to MRP. For the simulation study, the generic 
simulation framework SimGen based on AnyLogic©, also 
used in [18], is applied. 
A. Scenario Definition 
To evaluate the performance of the safety stock 
relaxation method in comparison to MRP, a production 
system with high work load is selected. If there is a low work 
load in comparison to the available capacity, methods for 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

capacity balancing would be pointless. Starting with 
customer 
demands (log-normally distributed with a 
coefficient of variation of 1), which result in a shop load of 
100% without setup, a scenario with 95% is generated by 
multiplying the monthly demand with a utilization factor of 
95% minus a predefined percentage of setup activities (5% 
and 10%). A higher percentage setup leads to more time, 
which is spent for setup. The resulting demand for, e.g., 
final product 10 with initial demand of 1,059 pcs/month, a 
utilization factor of 95% and percentage setup of 5%, is 953 
pcs/month.  
Applicable Customer Required Lead (CRL) time values 
are estimated in a preliminary simulation study. Summing 
up the average production lead times for each processing 
stage delivers a basic lead time value. The average CRL for 
our simulation study is determined by multiplying this basic 
lead time value with a CRL factor of 3. To model stochastic 
effects in CRL a log-normal distribution with a coefficient 
of variation of 0.5 is applied. In our simulation model, all 
customer orders are accepted. Due to an average utilization 
of 95% in the considered production system, short term 
overloads can be balanced in future periods or by covering 
customer orders with safety stocks. 
Overall costs, consisting of holding and tardiness costs 
are selected as performance measure. The holding costs per 
piece and day are 1 CU for final products, 0.5 CU for semi-
processed materials and the tardiness costs for final products 
are 19 CU per piece and day. In the simulation study, 5 
years are simulated, where the first year is considered as the 
warm-up period and therefore excluded from the analysis. 
Due to the stochastic effects in demand and customer 
required lead time, each iteration is evaluated with 10 
replications.  
B. Planning Parameters 
Applied lot sizing rules, safety stock levels and planned 
lead times are important planning parameters for MRP [19]. 
In our simulation study, we choose Fixed Order Period 
(FOP) as lot sizing policy and the number of periods, for 
which the demand is accumulated into one production lot, as 
a planning parameter. To examine the influence of different 
safety stock levels, a safety stock factor is introduced as 
planning parameter. The actual safety stock is the initial 
value of safety stock multiplied with the safety stock factor. 
The fixed planned lead time of MRP is introduced as a 
factor, which is multiplied by the basic lead time values. 
These values are generated in the preliminary study, which 
is already used for setting customer required lead time 
values (see Section A. Scenario Definition). The initial 
value for safety stock of a product type is its average 
demand per day, i.e., a safety stock factor of 4 means that 
the average demand of 4 days is kept on safety stock. 
For the safety stock relaxation methods, defined in 
Section II, a lower bound for the safety stock is introduced 
as an additional planning parameter. This minimum safety 
stock is again implemented as a factor that is multiplied 
with the applied safety stock. In order to get reasonable 
planning parameters for the safety stock relaxation methods, 
as well as for MRP, a grid search procedure is applied. 
Table I shows the specified values for all planning 
parameters. 
TABLE I.  
PARAMETER SETTINGS 
Parameter 
Values 
FOP periods 
{4,5,6,8,10,12,14,16} 
Safety stock factor 
{0,1,2,4,6,8,16} 
Planned lead time factor 
{0,0.5,1,1.5,2,2.7} 
Minimum safety stock factor 
{0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75} 
C. Results of Safety Stock Relaxation and MRP 
Due to different percentages of setup (5%, 10%), two 
different production scenarios are investigated. For each 
method of safety stock relaxation and MRP, the parameter 
combination that leads to minimal overall costs is selected. 
Table II shows the results for 5% setup. All methods for 
safety stock relaxation reduce the overall costs significantly, 
whereby method 3 delivers the best result. The number of 
FOP periods and the planned lead time factor are similar for 
all methods, only the safety stock factor is higher for method 
2 and 3. In the cost minimum solution, the introduced 
minimum safety stock factor is only applied for method 3. 
TABLE II.  
OPTIMAL SETTINGS (5% SETUP) 
 
MRP 
Method 1 
Method 2 
Method 3 
Minimum overall 
costs 
10426.6 
8319.2 
8112.1 
7595.7 
Relative 
Improvement 
- 
-18.1% 
-20.2% 
-25.3% 
FOP periods 
6 
5 
5 
5 
Safety stock 
factor 
4 
4 
16 
8 
Planned lead time 
factor 
1.5 
2 
1.5 
1.5 
Minimum safety 
stock factor 
- 
0 
0 
0.25 
TABLE III.  
OPTIMAL SETTINGS (10% SETUP) 
 
MRP 
Method 1 
Method 2 
Method 3 
Minimum overall 
costs 
10163.6 
8498.1 
9528.0 
9760.7 
Relative 
Improvement 
- 
-16.4% 
-6.3% 
-4.0% 
FOP periods 
6 
8 
6 
6 
Safety stock 
factor 
6 
4 
8 
8 
Planned lead time 
factor 
1 
1.5 
1 
1 
Minimum safety 
stock factor 
- 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
 
In the scenario with 10% setup (see Table III), safety 
stock relaxation is also advantageous in comparison to 
MRP, whereby in this system with higher setup times, 
method 1 leads to the best result. The selected parameters 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

show that method 2 and 3 demand for a higher safety stock 
and a minimum amount of this safety stock, which must not 
be used for relaxation. Again, FOP periods and planned lead 
time factors don’t reveal major differences for the applied 
methods. An interesting result concerning the comparison of 
safety stock relaxation methods is that method 1, i.e., having 
less safety stock relaxation occurrences but recalculating 
these each MRP run, leads to similar cost reduction 
potentials independently of the setup times. However, 
methods 2 and 3, i.e., allowing the safety stock to be 
reduced more often, do not perform that well if setup times 
are high. This might be related to the fact that safety stock 
reduction sometimes implies a new production lot to refill 
the safety stock after finishing a lot with reduced safety 
stocks. The negative impact of this unintended behavior is 
higher if setup times are higher. 
IV. 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
In this section, the influence of the two MRP parameters 
FOP periods and safety stock factor is investigated in a 
sensitivity analysis to create a comprehensive understanding 
of how the three introduced methods behave, also in 
comparison to MRP. The influence on the performance, as 
well as the interrelationship of these parameters, is 
analyzed. 
A. The Influence of FOP Periods on Performance 
The application of four different methods and two 
different percentages of setup lead to eight different cases, 
which are examined separately. For each specified value of 
the number of FOP periods (see Table I), we select the 
combination of the other planning parameters, which results 
in minimal overall costs. Additionally we also show the 
amount of inventory and tardiness costs in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Influence of FOP periods on costs. 
All cases show a more or less convex function for overall 
costs with respect to FOP periods with just a few outliers. As 
already mentioned in Section III, the optimal value for FOP 
periods are almost the same for all four methods. A low 
number of FOP periods leads to significant higher overall 
costs in the 10% setup scenario, whereas a higher number 
leads to a moderate increase in costs. For all numbers of FOP 
periods optimal inventory costs exceed optimal tardiness 
costs considerably. Apart from some outliers for small 
number of FOP periods, the inventory costs show a convex 
behavior with respect to the FOP periods. These results are 
in line with analytical production system findings without 
capacity balancing [20]. 
B. The Influence of Safety Stock Factor on Performance 
For the safety stock factor, the same analysis as for the 
FOP periods is performed and the results can be found in 
Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Influence of safety stock factor on costs. 
The curves for overall costs show a clear convex shape 
with respect to safety stock factor, again with significant 
higher cost values for low safety stock values. For practical 
applications, this means that it is preferable to choose a 
higher safety stock when using safety stock relaxation, 
instead of selecting a safety stock that is too low. Small 
safety stock factors lead to high tardiness costs in 
comparison to inventory costs because the ability to balance 
capacity demands is limited. When safety stock is increased, 
also inventory costs increase and exceed the tardiness costs. 
The results show that method 1, with a lower number of 
safety stock relaxation occurrences, is much more sensitive 
on defining the right safety stock, similar to MRP. On the 
contrary, methods 2 and 3, i.e., more safety stock relaxation 
occurrences without/with memorizing this decision, can also 
benefit from higher safety stocks. Looking at the inventory 
costs shows that methods 2 and 3 also have lower inventory 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

costs at higher safety stocks in comparison to method 1 and 
MRP. This implies that in methods 2 and 3 the average 
safety stock is lower which is intuitively clear since more 
safety stock relaxation occurrences are expected with these 
methods. 
 
C. The Influence of FOP Periods on Safety Stock Factor 
To explore the relationship between the parameters FOP 
periods and safety stock factor, for each value of FOP 
periods, the optimal safety stock factor is displayed in Figure 
4. This means, that for a fixed number of FOP periods, all 
other parameters are varied in the predefined grid (see Table 
I) and the safety stock factor which leads to the minimal 
overall costs is selected. Again, we show all combinations of 
setup scenarios and methods. The optimal parameter settings 
presented in Table II and III are marked by a star. 
In general, a lower number of FOP periods, i.e., higher 
overall shop load due to setup times, leads to a higher 
optimal safety stock factor (apart from one outlier for 
method 2 at 5% setup). This shows that specifically for high 
shop congestion, the safety stock relaxation methods demand 
for more safety stock in order to balance capacity better. The 
result for method 3 in the 10% setup scenario is interesting 
and shows a further increase in safety stock for a high 
number of FOP periods. Note that in this scenario method 3 
performs significantly worse than method 1 (see also Figure 
2). This implies that memorizing the safety stock reduction 
decision might in situations with high setup efforts and high 
lot covering ranges lead to system instabilities, which entail 
high safety stocks. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Influence of FOP periods on safety stock factor. 
D. The Influence of Safety Stock Factor on FOP Periods 
In this section we fix the safety stock factor and 
determine the number of FOP periods, which result in 
minimal overall costs. The results for all methods and 
scenarios are displayed in Figure 5. In six of the eight cases, 
the number of FOP periods show a concave shape with 
respect to the safety stock factor. Only for method 2 and 3 in 
the 10% scenarios there seems to be no influence of the 
safety stock on the optimal value of FOP periods. This is an 
interesting result since these are exactly the two scenarios 
where safety stock relaxation only leads to a rather small cost 
reduction potential (see Table III). 
 
 
Figure 5.  Influence of safety stock factor on FOP periods. 
Low safety stock values lead to the situation that 
flexibility related to the customer demand can only be gained 
by lower production lot sizes. These situations still lead to 
high costs because no capacity load balancing is possible 
(see Figure 3). For medium safety stock levels, a slight 
increase in lot size leads to a lower overall shop load (and 
capacity balancing by safety stock relaxation is already 
possible). This lower overall utilization combined with the 
capacity balancing leads for most cases also to the lowest 
overall costs. For very high safety stock factors, high 
inventory costs and low tardiness costs result, i.e., customer 
orders can always be fulfilled from the safety stock. 
Therefore, lower lot sizes (lower lot covering ranges) 
provide a possibility to slightly decrease the inventory costs. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this article, three methods for temporary relaxing 
safety stock as an extension to traditional MRP are 
investigated. In addition to the safety stock relaxation 
introduced in [16] two variations are presented and 
implemented in a simulation model. Since MRP neglects 
capacity constraints, heuristics for balancing capacity 
demand can improve the performance of the production 
system. The results of the simulation study show that all 
methods for safety stock relaxation lead to significant 
improvement in overall costs in comparison to MRP. The 
relative improvement ranges from 4% to 25%. 
In a sensitivity analysis, the influence of the planning 
parameters safety stock factor and FOP periods on the 
performance of the production system is investigated. The 
overall costs in dependence of the planning parameters 
behave similar for method 2 and 3, because they have more 
common features in their functionality in contrast to method 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

1. One finding with practical relevance is that a higher safety 
stock is advantageous when relaxing safety stock, because 
there is only a small increase in overall costs while 
increasing safety stock. Opposite to this, a safety stock, 
which is too low, leads to considerably higher overall costs. 
When exploring the interrelationship of the two planning 
parameters, the results show that especially for high shop 
loads, due to low number of FOP periods and high 
percentage of setup, more safety stock is needed for 
balancing capacity requests. In most of the cases, plotting the 
optimal number of FOP periods with respect to safety stock 
shows a concave behavior, whereby medium levels of safety 
stocks lead to the best solutions for overall costs. Comparing 
the results of method 1 to the results of methods 2 and 3 
shows that method 1 is more sensitive to the safety stock 
factor whereas methods 2 and 3 perform significantly worse 
if setup times are high. 
Limitations of this study are the selected ranges for the 
planning parameters for the grid search, which cannot 
guarantee an optimal solution. Furthermore, the simulation 
study is applied to a simple manufacturing structure. In 
further research, the safety stock relaxation methods have to 
be tested in more complex production structures or real 
production systems to get better estimates for the 
improvement potential in real world manufacturing systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was partially funded by FFG Grant 858642 and 
the FH OÖ grant MCRP. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Orlicky, Material requirements planning: "The new 
way of life in production and inventory management", 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1975. 
[2] 
T. Rossi and M. Pero, "A simulation-based finite 
capacity MRP procedure not depending on lead time 
estimation", International Journal of Operational 
Research, vol. 11, no. 3, 2011, pp. 237-261. 
[3] 
L. Sun, S. S. Heragu, L. Chen, and M.L. Spearman, 
"Comparing dynamic risk-based scheduling methods 
with MRP via simulation", International Journal of 
Production Research, vol. 50, no. 4, 2012, pp. 921–
937. 
[4] 
M. Taal and J. C. Wortmann, "Integrating MRP and 
finite capacity planning", Production Planning & 
Control, vol. 8, no. 3, 1997, pp. 245–254. 
[5] 
P. C. Pandey, P. Yenradee, and S. Archariyapruek, "A 
finite capacity material requirements planning system", 
Production Planning & Control, vol. 11, no. 2, 2000, 
pp. 113–121. 
[6] 
N. A. Bakke and R. Hellberg, "The challenges of 
capacity planning", International Journal of Production 
Economics vol. 30-31, 1993, pp. 243–264. 
[7] 
T. Rossi, R. Pozzi, M. Pero, and R. Cigolini, 
"Improving 
production 
planning 
through 
finite-
capacity MRP", International Journal of Production 
Research vol. 55, no. 2, 2016, pp. 377–391. 
[8] 
T. Wuttipornpun and P. Yenradee, "Development of 
finite capacity material requirement planning system 
for assembly operations", Production Planning & 
Control, vol. 15, no. 5, 2004, pp. 534–549. 
[9] 
A. M. Ornek and O. Cengiz, "Capacitated lot sizing 
with alternative routings and overtime decisions", 
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 44, 
no. 24, 2006, pp. 5363–5389. 
[10] A. R. Clark, "Optimization approximations for capacity 
constrained 
material 
requirements 
planning", 
International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 84, 
no. 2, 2003, pp. 115–131. 
[11] J. Maes and L. N. van Wassenhove, "Capacitated 
dynamic lotsizing heuristics for serial systems", 
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 29, 
no. 6, 1991, pp. 1235-1249. 
[12] L. Özdamar and T. Yazgac, "Capacity driven due date 
settings 
in 
make-to-order 
production 
systems", 
International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 49, 
no. 1, 1997, pp. 29–44. 
[13] P. J. Billington, J. O. McClain, and L. J. Thomas, 
"Heuristics 
for 
Multilevel 
Lot-Sizing 
with 
a 
Bottleneck", Management Science, vol. 32, no. 8, 
1986, pp. 989–1006. 
[14] D. L. Woodruff and S. Voß, "A Model for Multi-Stage 
Production Planning with Load Dependent Lead 
Times", 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, 2004, pp. 88–96. 
[15] J. J. Kanet and M. Stößlein, "Integrating production 
planning and control: Towards a simple model for 
Capacitated ERP", Production Planning & Control 21 
(3) (2010), pp. 286–300. 
[16] H. Jodlbauer and S. Reitner, "Material and capacity 
requirements planning with dynamic lead times", 
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 50, 
no. 16, 2012, pp. 4477–4492. 
[17] S. Strasser, A. Peirleitner, K. Altendorfer, C. Jenewein, 
and H. Jodlbauer, "The effect of safety stock relaxation 
and dynamic planned lead time within the MCRP 
algorithm in a simple manufacturing structure", 
unpublished. 
[18] T. Felberbauer and K. Altendorfer, "Comparing the 
performance of two different customer order behaviors 
within the hierarchical production planning", in: 
Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference 
2014, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Inc., Piscataway, New Jersey, 2014, pp. 2227–2238. 
[19] W. J. Hopp and M. L. Spearman, "Factory Physics", 
3rd ed., Mc Graw Hill / Irwin, Boston, 2008. 
[20] K. Altendorfer, "Influence of lot size and planned lead 
time on service level and inventory for a single-stage 
production system with advance demand information 
and random required lead times", International Journal 
of Production Economics, vol. 170, 2015, pp. 478–488. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

