Approach to a Holistic Modelling
of Cycling Dynamics
Yannick Rauch
Institute of Energy Efficient Mobility
Karlsruhe University of Applied Science
Karlsruhe, Germany
email: yannick.rauch@h-ka.de
Julia Rall
Mechanical Engineering and Mechatronics
Karlsruhe University of Applied Science
Karlsruhe, Germany
email: julia.rall@outlook.de
Maximilian Ruhe
Mechanical Engineering and Mechatronics
Karlsruhe University of Applied Science
Karlsruhe, Germany
email: maximilian.ruhe@outlook.de
Reiner Kriesten
Institute of Energy Efficient Mobility
Karlsruhe University of Applied Science
Karlsruhe, Germany
email: reiner.kriesten@h-ka.de
Abstract—Model-based approaches for the development of
complex systems are an established method for component or
function development. With an increased interest in cycling due to
the political promotion of cycling and the spread of technological
innovations, such as e-bikes, model-based approaches can support
the corresponding research and development activities, e.g., for
a simulation-based assessment of cycling infrastructure. For
this purpose, a holistic modelling of bicycle riding should be
used, which is able to represent the physical aspects of cycling
including a representation of the cyclist, bicycle as well as
the environment and dynamics independently. Crucial for such
a modelling approach is a comprehensive description of the
vehicle’s longitudinal, lateral and vertical dynamics as well as its
dynamic limitations, which is presented in this paper. Based on a
propulsion force given by the overall model, the trajectory and all
relevant environmental properties, the resulting model calculates
the dynamics relevant for the process of cycling and the cyclist.
The necessary parameters are derived from the characteristics
of the cyclist and the bicycle as well as the characteristics of the
route to be travelled.
Keywords—Cycling; Simulation; Bicycles; Bicycle Dynamics.
I. INTRODUCTION
The consideration and technologisation of cycling and bi-
cycles is an emerging field of interest in research and devel-
opment applications. On the one hand, an understanding of
bicycle usage as well as improvements of the corresponding
infrastructure is required to further improve cycling, which is
promoted by governments as part of new mobility strategies,
e.g., Germany’s national cycling plan [1]. On the other hand,
new technologies emerge that make the use of bicycles more
accessible and convenient, which gets particularly visible in
the rapid spread of e-bikes over the last few years [2][3].
To address current research challenges, model-based meth-
ods to simulate the whole process of cycling may provide in-
teresting approaches. The utilisation of model-based methods
is well established throughout the entire development process
of complex systems and software [4], especially in the field
of automotive engineering [5]. This makes it possible to test
functions or components in the context of an entire vehicle
and its environment at early stages of development. For a
realistic representation, simulations include a model of the
vehicle environment and the driving dynamics according to
the physical relationships. Furthermore, there are model-based
approaches using a physical-technical description for calcula-
tions, e.g., a prediction of electrical energy consumption [6].
However, this extensive use of model-based methods is still
fairly uncommon for bicycles.
Possible applications of a physical overall cycling simula-
tion could be the development of functions and components or
an energy demand prediction for e-bikes [7][8]. In addition,
a holistic modelling of cycling can be used to consider the
quality of cycling infrastructure based on variables such as a
cyclist’s power-/energy expenditure or travel time [9]. In this
way, objective aspects of cycling, which can be expressed in
physical terms, are made observable from a rider’s perspective.
For this, a stand-alone simulation must model the rider,
the bicycle as well as the environment and the dynamics.
The cycling dynamics result from the route and environmental
influences as well as the propulsion generated by the cyclist
as pedalling torque and bicycle model as propulsion force on
the rear wheel, which itself results in relation to the cycling
dynamics. Accordingly, this paper presents an approach of
a model to simulate the dynamics relevant to the process of
cycling and to the cyclist.
Section II provides an overview of the state of the art of
cycling model approaches. In Section III, the model of cycling
dynamics is derived by physical description and equations.
Section IV presents the implementation of the model regarding
the resulting model and the required parameters for simulation.
Thus, in Section V, the model can be simulated and the corre-
sponding results verified. To conclude, Section VI summarises
this paper and provides a preview to future work.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

II. STATE OF THE ART
The description of the dynamics of cycling primarily needs
to consider that a bicycle is a single-track vehicle. Thus, cor-
responding models exist for the resulting stability problem, as
well as associated concepts for the stability control of a bicycle
[10], e.g., on the basis of a given steering angle. Furthermore,
there are models for describing the resulting vertical dynamics
according to the surface profile, for example to represent the
comfort of cycling on different road surfaces [11][12]. These
modelling approaches can be used, for example, in human-in-
the-loop bicycle simulators [13]. This involves generating the
feedback of the cycling dynamics according to the human han-
dling and realising it with corresponding actuators. However,
modelling approaches that depict a holistic description and
representation of a vehicle’s longitudinal, lateral and vertical
dynamics as well as dynamic limitations are, to the best of
our knowledge, not available. Thus, this work proposes an
approach for a holistic model of cycling dynamics to be
used in a stand-alone model, e.g., to achieve a simulation-
based assessment of cycling infrastructure [9]. To realise
this, the corresponding physical descriptions found in the
literature of bicycle or motorbike technology are used [14][15].
Nevertheless, the corresponding relationships and equations
must first be applied to our specific model concept. In addition,
the parameters required for the description of the cycling
dynamics must be derived from the characteristics of the
cyclist and the bicycle.
III. MODELLING CYCLING DYNAMICS
To achieve a holistic description for simulating the dynam-
ics of cycling, the model environment provides a simulated
propulsion force. The trajectory of the cycled path is given
as a-priori knowledge that is derived by the course of the
route. Furthermore, the frame of the bicycle is considered
inflexible and the cyclists position on the bicycle does not
change over the course of a journey. In addition, all further
relevant information, e.g., slope, weather/wind, underground,
for calculating the dynamics is specified as data given over
distance of the route.
Based on these information, the given trajectory and the
propulsion force, the resulting model must describe the move-
ment of a cyclist and the bicycle as well as specifying the
dynamic limitations of cycling. Accordingly, the necessary
description of longitudinal, lateral and vertical dynamics are
derived.
A. Longitudinal Dynamics
To simulate the process of cycling the description of longitu-
dinal dynamics is a crucial aspect to describe the locomotion of
a bicycle and a cyclist. For this the resistance forces of cycling
are considered. Thus, the acceleration is calculated on basis
of given propulsion Fprop. and braking forces Fbrake on the
wheels as well as the resistance forces (1), while the velocity
of the bicycle results from the integration of acceleration (2).
m a = Fprop. − Fbrake − Froll − Fslope − Fdrag
(1)
v (t) =
Z
a (t) dt
(2)
Accordingly, Figure 1 shows the forces acting on the bicycle
and the cyclist as well as the direction of speed and wind.
1) Slope Resistance: For cycling uphill a positive slope
value generates the slope resistance force Fslope. This refers
to the component of gravity FG depending on the weight
of bicycle and cyclist m that occurs in the direction of
movement (3). In contrast, this force acts as propulsion when
cycling downhill, caused by a negative slope angle α.
Fslope = FG sin(α) = m g sin(α)
(3)
2) Drag Resistance: The drag force Fdrag (4) considers the
resistance from the air displacement caused by the movement
of bicycle and rider. The front area A depends on the type
of the bicycle and the corresponding resulting seating position
of cyclists. This also applies to the drag coefficient cW . In
addition, the density of the air ρair varies according to the
altitude, temperature and humidity. Furthermore, the wind can
exert a significant force in dependence of the actual wind
speed vwind. Thus, the drag force can support or hinder the
propulsion depending on the intensity and direction of the
wind.
Fdrag = 1
2 ρair cW A (vbike − vwind)2
(4)
3) Rolling Resistance: Rolling resistance occurs at both
wheels of a bicycle and results from flexing, roll off and road
resistance. The flexing resistance results from the deformation
of the tyres, specifically a flattening around the contact point.
The intensity of the deformation and resistance depends on the
type of tyre used, in particular its width and profile, as well
as the actual tyre pressure. Depending on these properties, the
flexing resistance is represented by a factor iF . Furthermore,
the deformation of the tyre causes the contact point of the
tyre and the tyre axis to be displaced in relation to each
other, so that the normal force FN generates a torque. This
roll off resistance is also represented by a factor cR, which
is calculated according to the distance between the axle and
the contact point e (Figure 1) and the wheel radius rwhl. The
road resistance, which depicts the rolling over the unevenness
of a road surface as well as any sinking into the subsoil,
is also mapped via a factor iR. Accordingly, the rolling
resistance force Froll (5) is calculated on the basis of the
above-mentioned factors as a function of the normal force.
Figure 1. Representation of the dynamics and resistance forces for cycling.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

For this purpose, the product of the individual factors can be
combined to form the rolling resistance coefficient fR.
Froll = FN iF iR cR = FN fR
(5)
The normal force equals the gravity force in the vertical
direction and is thus dependent on the slope angle (6).
FN = FG cos(α) = m g cos(α)
(6)
4) Transient Resistance: The transient resistance is the
force required to overcome the inertia of a vehicle in a
direction of motion and of the rotating parts of the power train.
Since newtonian mechanics are used to derive the dynamics
along the longitudinal axis (1), the mass inertia of the vehicle
is already taken into account. In addition, the inertia of the
rotating parts of the power train ΘP T , the inertia of front
ΘF W and rear wheel ΘRW must be taken into account (7).
Fa,rot = ΘP T a
r2
whl
+ ΘRW a
r2
whl
+ ΘF W a
r2
whl
(7)
This rotatory acceleration resistance can be added with the
translatory resistance (Fa,tran = m abike) to a total accelera-
tion resistance (8).
Fa,total = a (m + ΘP T
r2
whl
+ ΘRW
r2
whl
+ ΘF W
r2
whl
)
(8)
In order to represent the rotational inertia in the given lon-
gitudinal dynamic equation (1), a factor λ (9) is used for
representation.
λ =
m + ΘP T
r2
whl + ΘRW
r2
whl + ΘF W
r2
whl
m
(9)
This results in the following equation for the description of
the longitudinal dynamics:
λ m a = Fprop. − Fbrake − Froll − Fslope − Fdrag
(10)
B. Lateral Dynamics
Since the proposed cycling model does not deal with the
balance or stability control of cycling, the consideration of
lateral dynamics emphasis to the resulting movement that
occurs in curve situations. In particular, the tilt angle and the
steering angle are to be depicted.
1) Bicycle Balance: For the calculation of the tilt angle
according to the representation in Figure 2 an ideal curve
is assumed. The tilt to a side of the bicycle is caused by a
deflection of the centre of gravity in relation to the point of
contact. The tilting angle γ of the bicycle is determined by
the ratio between the centrifugal force FC (11) corresponding
to the actual curve radius rc and the normal force FN.
FC = m v2
rc
(11)
These act at a bicycle’s centre of gravity and generate a torque
around the point of contact corresponding to its height hc
and angular deflection. For stable cornering, these generated
torques must be equal (12), so that the tilt angle results (13).
FG hc sin(γ) = m v2
rc
hc cos(γ)
(12)
Figure 2. Representation of an idealised stationary cycling trough a curve.
tan(γ) = v2
g rc
(13)
2) Bicycle Steering: In addition to the tilt angle, the han-
dlebars must be turned in for cornering. This steering angle
results from the geometry of the vehicle’s track model shown
in Figure 3. The calculation is based on the yaw angle β (14)
around the centre of gravity, the wheelbase L and the distance
between the centre of gravity and the rear axle D.
sin(β) = D
rc
(14)
However, this only represents the angle of the front wheel
turning from its neutral position ψ (15).
tan(ψ) = L
D tan(β)
(15)
Based on this, the rotation of the handlebar θ is calculated
(16) assuming a small head tube angle δ (Figure 1).
tan(θ) =
ψ
sin(δ)
(16)
C. Braking Dynamics
For cycling, dynamic limitations occur primarily during the
braking process. This is due to the propulsion force that does
not usually cause the static friction to be exhausted and thus
the wheels to spin. However, when braking intensively, the
friction limit is quickly exceeded, so that the corresponding
wheel locks up and slips. To enable the cyclist to prevent
this, the maximum braking force FBmax that can be applied
is calculated using the static friction force FS (17) using the
static friction coefficient µS as a function of the normal force.
FBmax = FS = µS FN = µS m g cos(α)
(17)
Figure 3. Representation of a bicycle’s geometry model for curve cycling.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

1) Normal Force Distribution: Furthermore, it must be
taken into account that especially during braking there is
a nodding movement, which is caused by the mass iner-
tia/acceleration. This leads to an increase in the front wheel
load and a reduction in the rear wheel load. The wheel loads
at the front/rear wheel (19)/(18) can be calculated from the
moment equilibria corresponding to the normal forces (6) and
the inertia force resulting from the acceleration.
FNfront = FN D − m a hS
L
(18)
FNrear = FN (L − D) + m a hS
L
(19)
Applied to (17), this results in different maximum braking
forces for the front and rear wheel.
2) Braking in Curve Situations: Braking during cornering
is subjected to further limitations, so that the maximum
possible braking force is decreased accordingly. This is due to
the existing static friction force being used for lateral traction
(20). As lateral guidance force, the centrifugal force must be
applied.
FBmax =
q
F 2
S − F 2
C
(20)
To calculate the maximum braking force on the front/rear
wheel, the centrifugal forces must be calculated based on the
weight distribution, the speed and the corresponding curve
radius. The curve radius of the front and rear wheel result from
the geometry of the bicycle (Figure 3). The equivalent masses
for front and rear wheel result according to the position of the
centre of gravity on the longitudinal axis. With the resulting
centrifugal/lateral guidance forces (21)/(22), the maximum
braking force for front/rear wheel can be calculated (20).
FCfront =
m D v2
L
p
r2c − D2 + L2
(21)
FCrear = m (L − D) v2
L
p
r2c − D2
(22)
D. Vertical Dynamics
The vertical dynamics represent the effects of the road
surface on the cyclist. For this purpose, the tyre and the
suspension fork are modelled as a serially connected spring-
damper unit for the front axle, while only the tyre is modelled
for the rear axle. According to a given profile of the under-
ground, the deflection passed on to the respective wheel can
thus be calculated.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
The physical equations given from literature and the de-
scription of the dynamics of cycling derived from those
are modelled in MATLAB/Simulink and simulated with the
numerical methods offered there. This results in our definition
of an overall structure of the dynamics model. In addition,
the parameters used for the modelling must be provided and
determined.
A. Resulting Model
The resulting model is presented in Figure 4 and consists
of five subsystems. According to the formulated description
of the driving dynamics, all quantities are handled as scalars
and apply in the direction defined in the corresponding figures
(Figure 1, 2, 3). The longitudinal dynamics system calculates
the acceleration and velocity of the bicycle according to the
slope angle αslope, the roll resistance factor fR, the resulting
wind speed vwind, the density of the air ρair and a given
propulsion force Fpropulsion. The gravity subsystem calculates
the normal forces for front and rear wheel FNfront/FNrear by
considering the slope angle and the acceleration of the bicycle.
The curve dynamics use the bicycles velocity and the curve
radius rcurve (measured to the centre of gravity) and include
the calculation of steering angles ϕ, θ, the tilt angle γ as well as
the centrifugal forces at front and rear wheel FCfront/FCrear.
In combination with the normal forces these are considered
by the braking subsystem to calculate the maximum braking
forces for each wheel FBmax,front/FBmax,rear. The vertical
dynamics use the calculated normal forces to determine the
translation/deflection passed on to the front and rear wheel
yfront/yrear which can be given by a road surface profile.
B. Modelling Parameters
The required parameters are calculated from the charac-
teristics of the rider, bicycle and the route. A distinction is
made between parameters that are variable over the course
of the route and those that are constant for a ride. Both
the constant parameters and the parameters depicted over
the route are calculated by appropriate pre-processing before
the simulation is executed. In order to retrieve the distance-
dependent parameters, the distance travelled so far on the
given route is required. For this purpose, the model of the
longitudinal dynamics is extended by the integration of the
velocity over the simulation time.
1) Ride Constant Parameter: To calculate the ride constant
parameters, it is assumed that the characteristics of the rider
and bicycle are sufficiently known. Among other things, the
total weight of rider and bicycle must be calculated. The
parameters for the aerodynamic description, cW -value and
frontal area A, are determined depending on the type of
bicycle used, e.g., mountain bike (MTB) or road bike and the
physique of the rider. In the same way, the centre of gravity
Figure 4. Resulting approach of a holistic dynamic model of cycling.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

position hS, D can be derived, while the head tube angle δ and
wheelbase L are only determined on the basis of the bicycle
used. The parameters describing the spring-damper unit should
also be derived according to the bicycle type, while the vertical
dynamic properties of the tyres are calculated depending on the
type, e.g., MTB or road bike tyres, as well as the tyre pressure.
For a general consideration, the derivation of the parameter
values is based on defined rules, whereas for a concrete bicycle
these data can be specified individually.
2) Distance Dependent Parameter: For synthetic routes, the
user must define the required properties, whereas for routes
based on real infrastructure, tools and methods for route data
generation can be used. In our case, a self-developed route
data generation algorithm and environment is used that has
been applied to the application for bicycles [16].
This tool enables the calculation of the curve radius rcurve
and the altitude profile of the route, from which the slope
angle αslope can be calculated. The air pressure ρair is
calculated depending on the altitude profile and the generated
air pressure, humidity and temperature. The resulting wind
speed vwind is calculated according to the general wind speed
and direction as well as the trajectory. The rolling resistance
fR and the static friction coefficient µS depend on the surface,
but also on the type of tyre and its pressure.
C. Determination of Parameters
For the modelling of the cycling dynamics of a bicycle it
should be possible to depict specific bicycles as well as generic
bicycle types.
1) Parameters for Specific Bicycles: The geometric data as
well as the weight can be taken from the technical data for a
known bicycle or measured directly. The required characteris-
tics for modelling the specific spring-damper unit, are usually
not publicly available. However, the specific values are only
required if the vertical dynamics are to be considered in detail.
Furthermore, experiments can be realised to determine
parameters of longitudinal dynamics, for example a coasting
test to determine the drag coefficients (cW A) and the rolling
resistance coefficient (fR). For this purpose, the coasting
process on a flat road, in which only the air and rolling
resistance act, is simulated using (1) and (2) with a given
initial speed. The searched parameters are iterated and the
mean square error between simulated and measured speed
is calculated. Based on the parameter combination with the
smallest error, the drag and the rolling resistance coefficient
for the given surface are obtained, as shown in Figure 5.
2) Parameters for Generic Bicycles: The required database
for deriving the dynamic parameters on the basis of the bicycle
or tyre type is derived from literature and the results of ex-
periments. Assumptions are also made according to qualitative
data from literature, which in turn must be evaluated through
experimental tests. To determine the geometric information,
data sheets can be used from which average values can be ob-
tained. For the description of the spring-damper unit, standard
values are used, which result from components specific to the
type of vehicle.
Figure 5.
Coasting experiment to determine parameters of longitudinal
dynamics (fR= 0.006, cW A = 0.6 m²).
V. SIMULATION AND RESULTS
To verify whether the developed dynamics model is cor-
rectly formulated, it is integrated into the model environment
in Simulink. This simulates the propulsion force applied to the
rear wheel and provides the required route data, such as the
parameters for calculating the longitudinal dynamics. Figure 6
shows the corresponding results for driving on a forest road.
The first part of the route is uphill, which is reflected in the
gradient resistance and plausibly results in a lower speed. As
soon as the uphill and overall resistance decreases, the speed
increases as expected. Furthermore, it shows correctly that
the increased velocity neutralises the tailwind that acts on the
cyclist in the course of the ride. To demonstrate the dynamics
of cycling curves Figure 7 illustrates this process. Therefore a
curve radius between 10 to 30 meters is given and the resulting
tilt and steering angles are displayed. It can therefore be shown
that, as expected, narrower curves or smaller curve radii result
in increased steering and tilt angles.
Figure 8 shows forces involved in the breaking process on
front and rear wheel. For this purpose, the brakes are applied
from a speed of 24 km/h while driving through a curve with
a radius of 100 metres and, for illustration purposes, a high
static friction value of 0.98 is selected. It can be seen that
plausibly an increased load is applied to the front wheel due
to the deceleration and thus an increased maximum braking
force occurs.
Figure 6. Results of the subsystem for calculating the longitudinal dynamics
of cycling on a forest road.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 7.
Results of the subsystem for calculating the dynamics of curve
cycling.
As expected, an opposite effect appears at the rear wheel.
Furthermore, the model correctly represents that the decreasing
centrifugal force caused by the reduced speed on both wheels
leads to an increase of the maximum braking force.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents an approach towards a holistic model of
cycling dynamics to be used for simulating the whole process
of cycling, e.g., to be used for the assessment of cycling
infrastructure. Therefore the proposed model calculates the
longitudinal, lateral and vertical dynamics as well as dynamic
limitations as a function of a given propulsion force and
trajectory. Furthermore, all relevant parameter describing the
route, the cyclist or the bicycle are available as a-priori
knowledge. Accordingly, physical descriptions of the cycling
process provided by literature are applied to achieve a suitable
model for given use-cases, e.g., a model-based assessment of
cycling infrastructure. Additionally a brief overview of the
determination of these parameters for specific and generic
bicycles is provided. The resulting model is implemented as a
Simulink model while the required parameters are calculated
by pre-processing functions. Thus, a verification shows that
the developed model is capable of plausibly representing the
required representation of cycling dynamics.
Further development of the model will mainly focus on the
qualitative evaluation of the model. Literature research and
experiments will be used to develop functions for determining
Figure 8. Results of the forces involved in braking dynamics.
the required parameters. Once the parameters have been de-
termined precisely, an extended evaluation of the dynamics
model can be carried out especially in comparison to real
cycling situations. Furthermore, optimisations of individual
subsystems are possible as well as a continuous development
of the model according to given requirements from the model
environment or given use-cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was carried out as part of MODELO-Rad project
[9], sponsored by the Ministry of Digitalisation and Traffic of
the Federal Republic of Germany.
REFERENCES
[1] Federal Ministry for Digital and Transport, “National Cycling Plan 3.0,”
2021.
[2] Zweirad-Industrie-Verband e.V., “Market data bicycles and e-bikes 2022
- Marktdaten Fahrräder und E-Bikes 2022,” 2023.
[3] Royal RAI Association, “Mobility in Figures Two-Wheelers,” 2023,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.raivereniging.nl/file/upload/
doc/clickable-pdf-mic-mobiliteit-in-cijfers-tweewielers-2022-1.pdf
2023.08.04.
[4] M. Glöckler, “Simulation als Teil moderner Entwicklungsprozesse,” in
Simulation mechatronischer Systeme, ser. Lehrbuch, M. Glöckler, Ed.
Springer Vieweg, 2018, pp. 251–261.
[5] J. Schäuffele and T. Zurawka, Automotive Software Engineering. Wies-
baden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2013.
[6] K. Kruppok, C. Gutenkunst, R. Kriesten, and E. Sax, “Prediction of
energy consumption for an automatic ancillary unit regulation,” in 17.
Internationales Stuttgarter Symposium, ser. Proceedings, M. Bargende,
H.-C. Reuss, and J. Wiedemann, Eds. Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden,
2017, pp. 41–56.
[7] E. Burani, G. Cabri, and M. Leoncini, “An Algorithm to Predict E-Bike
Power Consumption Based on Planned Routes,” Electronics, vol. 11,
no. 7, p. 1105, 2022.
[8] Y. Rauch and F. May, “Online Energy and Range Prediction for E-
Bikes,” in Reports on Energy Efficient Mobility – Volume 3, D. Feßler,
M. Kettner, R. Kriesten, P. Nenninger, and P. Offermann, Eds. Zenodo,
2023, pp. 100–110.
[9] J. Eckart, R. Kriesten, and Y. Rauch. (2022) Modelo-Rad. [Online].
Available
from:
https://www.mobilitaetsforum.bund.de/DE/Themen/
Wissenspool/Projekte/Projektbeispiele/Projekte/MODELO_Rad.html
2023.08.04.
[10] A. L. Schwab and J. P. Meijaard, “A review on bicycle dynamics and
rider control,” Vehicle System Dynamics, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 1059–1090,
2013.
[11] W. Du, D. Zhang, and X. Zhao, “Dynamic modelling and simulation
of electric bicycle ride comfort,” in 2009 International Conference on
Mechatronics and Automation.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 4339–4343.
[12] C.-P. Chou et al., “Simulation of Bicycle-Riding Smoothness by Bicycle
Motion Analysis Model,” Journal of Transportation Engineering, vol.
141, no. 12, p. 04015031, 2015.
[13] D.-S. Kwon et al., “KAIST interactive bicycle racing simulator: the 2nd
version with advanced features,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and System.
IEEE, 2002, pp. 2961–2966.
[14] M. Gressmann, Bicycle Physics and Biomechanics - Fahrradphysik
und Biomechanik: Technik - Formeln - Gesetze, 12th ed., ser. Tour.
Bielefeld: Delius Klasing Verlag, 2017.
[15] J. Stoffregen, Motorradtechnik.
Wiesbaden: Vieweg+Teubner Verlag,
2012.
[16] T. Nguyen and Y. Rauch, “Real Route Generation for Simulation Based
Developement,” in Reports on Energy Efficient Mobility – Volume 2,
D. Feßler, M. Kettner, R. Kriesten, P. Nenninger, and P. Offermann,
Eds.
Zenodo, 2022, pp. 58–64.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

