Using Simulation Modeling to Create Transdisciplinary Process Models and to 
Build Basic PLM Tools to Support the Systems Engineering Lifecycle 
 
Germano de Souza Kienbaum 
Laboratory for Applied Mathematics and Computing 
National Space Research Institute (INPE) 
São José dos Campos, Brasil 
e-mail: kienbaum@lac.inpe.br 
Álvaro Augusto Neto 
Science Computer Division 
Aeronautics Institute of Technology  
São José dos Campos, Brasil 
e-mail:alvaro@ita.br 
Renato Fernandez 
Federal Institute for Education, Science and 
Technology (IFSP) 
São Paulo, Brasil 
e-mail: renato@ifsp.edu.br 
Elaino Kelson Teixeira Silva 
BPMExpert Engenharia de Sistemas LTDA 
São José Campos, Brasil 
e-mail: kelson@jetsoft.com.br
 
 
Abstract - This work describes the use of simulation modeling 
methodology to create transdisciplinary reference process 
models, which can then be transformed into specialised models, 
making use of the methodologies originated from traditional 
autonomous disciplines that deal with complex discrete event 
process problems, namely: Systems (Concurrent) Engineering, 
Project Management, Business Process Management and 
Simulation Modeling. In particular, the transformation of the 
enterprise´s systems (concurrent) engineering process lifecycle 
(an aggregate of product engineering and organization´s 
management processes) into specialised models and their 
implementation, making use of the appropriate inherent 
methodology and tools originated from these traditional 
autonomous study areas, result in integrated applications that 
can be used as tools to support basic Product Lifecycle 
Management. These tools can be used to support the execution 
of essential procedures in the Small and Medium Enterprise´s 
systems (concurrent) engineering process, as an alternative to 
complete and/or tailored Product Lifecycle Management and 
Business Process Management support systems, which are 
usually costly, complex, difficult to customize and to integrate 
with other legacy software applications, and therefore not 
suitable for use by Small and Medium Enterprises. 
Keywords - Systems Engineering; Project Management; 
Business 
Process 
Management; 
Simulation 
Modeling; 
Transdisciplinary Process Science and Technology 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Transdisciplinary Process Science and Technology (T-
ProST) is a term used in this work to designate a holistic view, 
which consists of the integration of various disciplines that 
deal with complex discrete event process models: Systems 
(Concurrent) 
Engineering 
(SE) 
[3][9][13], 
Project 
Management (PM) [18], Business Process Management 
(BPM) [10][14] and Simulation Modeling (SIM) [15]. T-
ProST strives towards improving the modeling and seeking 
better and integrated engineering and management solutions 
for complex discrete event problems.  
The general goal of the research endeavors on T-ProST 
has a wide scope and very ambitious nature: to develop a 
mature 
and 
comprehensive 
transdisciplinary 
process 
modeling methodology (T-ProST Framework) and to design 
and implement its integrated supporting environment for 
application to a large category of complex discrete event 
process problems. The problem domain covered by T-ProST 
is essentially the same one covered by discrete event process 
modeling and simulation procedures based on modeling 
representations, such as Activity Cycle Diagrams (ACD) [15], 
Role Activity Diagrams (RAD) [11] and Workflow Diagrams 
(Workflows) [19]. 
The main difference and original contribution between the 
use of the T-ProST Framework and that of the traditional use 
of its component disciplines is the creation of a 
transdisciplinary process model and its use as a common basis 
for the development of their individual specialised process 
models. This is done by conducting a systematic modeling 
procedure designated as Conceptual or Reference Modeling 
and making use of a graphical notation denominated Unified 
Lifecycle Modeling Diagrams (ULMD), an innovative 
diagramming technique originated from a fusion of the 
aforementioned graphical representations [7][8][12]. 
This work presents the T-ProST approach as a totally 
integrated application of their component individual 
autonomous disciplines and their supporting tools to the 
design phase of the SE lifecycle. The case study performed 
and explained here is original and it targets the application of 
the T-ProST Framework to the Small and Medium 
Enterprise´s (SME) SE lifecycle and SME´s BPM lifecycle. 
These denominations refer to the complete systems 
engineering lifecycle and the SME´s business process 
management lifecycle, respectively, which include, but is not 
limited to, its product engineering and production 
management processes. 
The limitation of the scope to the design phase of the SE 
lifecycle in order to explain the T-ProST approach was made 
for demonstration purpose only. In fact, it can be applied to 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

any category of complex discrete event process that can be 
dealt with the ULMD notation and it is intended to be scalable 
and capable of being used in a wider context, covering the 
whole organization´s business process management, be it a 
SME or normal enterprise. 
The reason why one targets SME rather than a broader 
spectrum is that this segment could benefit the most from the 
methodology and tools proposed in the T-ProST approach. 
These enterprises can make use of the software environment 
created with the T-ProST Framework as an alternative to 
complete and/or tailored Product Lifecycle Model (PLM) and 
BPM support systems, which are costly, complex, difficult to 
customize and to integrate with other legacy software 
applications, and therefore not suitable for use by SME to 
support their SE lifecycle. 
The rest of this work is structured according to the 
following. Section II defines some fundamentals concepts of 
the methodology. Section III describes the T-ProST approach. 
Section IV identifies the problem and sets the overall scope of 
the research. Section V presents the conceptual modeling 
phase and the resulting reference model. Section VI describes 
the specialised model building and analysis phases, for each 
of the four disciplines comprised by T-ProST (SE, PM, BPM 
and SIM). Section VII performs a global assessment on the 
integrated results obtained from the application of the 
individual disciplines and their supporting tools. Some issues 
considered are T-ProST´s domain of applicability and the 
benefits and limitations of the methodology. Finally, in 
Section VIII, the Holistic Revision and Conclusions presents 
a summary of the experience gained (the “lessons learned”) 
with the development of the T-ProST approach and the 
application of the T-ProST Framework in some case studies 
already conducted with the methodology. 
II. 
FUNDAMENTALS OF THE METHODOLOGY 
The most fundamental and distinctive concepts in T-
ProST are those of the transdisciplinary reference process 
model and its specific notation, denominated Unified 
Lifecycle Modeling Diagrams (ULMD), as created by the first 
author [7][8][12]. The reference process model in ULMD 
describes the system´s lifecycle process in its essential 
structural and dynamical features, with the special purpose of 
serving as a common basis for the development of the 
additional 
specialised 
unidisciplinary 
models 
to 
be 
implemented in each of the autonomous component 
disciplines of T-ProST. 
The actual ULMD designation and its notation format is 
an evolution of former versions of the diagrams named 
Unified Simulation Modeling Diagrams (USMD) or Unified 
Conceptual Modeling Diagrams (UCMD). USMD/UCMD on 
their turn were originally created from a mix of both ACDs 
[15] and RAD networks [11] and they can be used for 
modeling complex discrete event process problems from the 
domain classes of any of the study areas mentioned before [7].  
Table I shows the ULMD symbols used in this work and 
their respective meaning, both in its former USMD/UCMD 
version and in its actual format. The actual format of the 
modeling notation resembles very much that of the basic set 
of Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) [16] icons 
with a few extensions and one could question the need for “yet 
another type of process modeling notation or graphical 
diagrams”. In fact, BPMN is widely used and supported by 
large communities, becoming the “de facto” notation for 
creating models to be converted into specific proprietary 
notations and implemented in a variety of proprietary tools 
offered by different systems´ manufacturers. The use of the 
ULMD notation, however, is just a first step (the conceptual 
modeling phase) of a gradual modeling process and one can 
state that some semantic characteristics of ULMD are non-
existent in any of the traditional graphical or textual process 
model representations, such as ACD, RAD, Workflows or 
even BPMN. These characteristics turn out to be essential for 
the type of logic and knowledge represented in the reference 
model. 
TABLE I.  
ULMD: THE CONCEPTUAL MODELING NOTATION 
 
 
The ULMD distinctive features start with its high level of 
abstraction and minimalism, comprising only a dozen of 
different symbols for expressing the complete structural and 
dynamics of the agents´ lifecycles as concurrent processes. 
The diagram logic expresses all-in-one: the hierarchical 
process decomposition, the variety of agents and messages 
and their process control flows, the agents lifecycles or roles 
and the interactions among them. The diagrams are created in 
the form of encapsulated modules, which can be displaced in 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

frames or swimming lanes and pools, describing from a very 
simple process (task) to a very complex one (macroprocess). 
Underlying all these characteristics, some of which could 
still be stated in regard to BPMN, there is an unequalled 
feature that differentiates ULMD from all other types of 
existing process modeling diagrams. They are not about pure 
logical operations and control flows (flowcharts), they are 
essentially about real time consuming transformation 
activities performed by real entities and messages (artifacts) 
exchanged between them. The links correspond to real entities 
flowing along their lifecycle (solid lines) or artifacts (dotted 
lines) exchanged between the activities, both used as inputs to 
other activities. Each class of entity has its specific process 
lifecycle, and they interact to perform their time consuming 
common activities, which get into a halt until all required 
inputs (entities and/or artifacts) are available and the 
additional internal initial conditions for their execution are 
satisfied. One special type of condition is external and it is 
depicted graphically, named triggering mechanism. The 
control flows are always associated with some type of entity, 
resource, artifact or triggering mechanism, and they reactivate 
the processes in a hold at a particular point in time and 
location, making it progress through its complete lifecycle. 
III. 
THE T-PROST APPROACH 
A T-ProST study is performed making use of a framework 
(T-ProST Framework), consisting of three elements, which 
constitute the pillars of the methodology: Knowledge 
Structure, made by the transdisciplinary hierarchical process 
model 
created 
(conceptual 
or 
reference 
model); 
Implementation Method, for their evolution along their 
respective lifecycles; and Supporting Tools, used to 
implement their integrated applications [7]. 
The Knowledge Structure consists of the hierarchical 
decomposition of the System´s Lifecycle (SL) process model 
in layers and is represented by the unified reference model. 
Each phase or macroprocess of T-ProST can be further 
decomposed into their component activities and single tasks, 
evidencing the gradual transformation of the System´s 
Lifecycle and, in particular, the simultaneous use of the 
diverse disciplines to build the multifaceted model on which 
the complete T-ProST study is carried out. 
Table II presents the T-ProST approach described as 
macroprocesses and their respective component activities. 
The first column shows the Implementation Method or 
Unified Lifecycle Modeling procedure used to create the 
specialised models and evolve them along their lifecycles. 
The macroprocesses or phases in Table II are designated: 
 
Phase Zero (Mission Definition/ Strategic Planning);  
 
Conceptual Modeling Phase (Analysis, comprising 
Elicitation/ IDEF0 Model/ Reference Model);  
 
Model Development Phase (Specialised Model 
Building/ Specialised Model Implementation); 
 
Model Execution Phase (Design of Experiments/ 
Experimentation); 
 
Finishing Phase (Specialised Assessment) 
 
Global Assessment (Integrated Joint Assessment); 
 
Holistic Revision 
The Phase Zero consists in the system or problem 
definition and the identification of the study´s objectives, 
which is performed in one activity divided into two tasks, 
denominated Mission Definition and Strategic Planning, for 
generality purposes. 
The second phase is the Conceptual Modeling Phase, to 
build the hierarchical process model in ULMD format, 
describing the operational processes, corresponding to the real 
transformations occurring in the system. This makes it easier 
for the different kinds of users and modelers to understand the 
system´s behavior, and later on to translate this model logic 
into their specific type of notations, in order to accomplish the 
specialised model building and construction phases. 
TABLE II.  
T-PROST´S METHODOLOGY AND ITS USE IN SE 
 
 
The remaining phases are those shown in Table II with 
their respective denomination and more detailed definition 
given by the decomposition of its respective macroprocess 
into its components, consisting of composed or single 
activities, the last ones named tasks. The four types of Tasks 
B, C, D, E and F are those related with the four component 
disciplines of T-ProST (SE, PM, BPM and SIM). They are 
treated separately during the phases of Model Development, 
Execution and Finishing (specialised modeling, execution and 
evaluation), and their results are integrated in the Global 
Assessment Phase, to yield a thorough assessment of the 
multifaceted 
model 
created 
making 
use 
of 
the 
transdisciplinary reference model. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The Implementation Method or Unified Modeling of the 
System´s Lifecycle Process is created by the aggregation of 
the diferent worldviews used by the individual disciplines that 
are part of T-ProST. These disciplines are jointly applied 
making use of a reference model as a common basis for the 
uniformization of the system´s description, representative of 
its essential structural and dynamical features. The 
implementation method comprehends the transformation of 
the reference model into the specialised models, their 
implementation, execution, analysis and assessement, initially 
as units, and later on as aggregate, yielding a complete 
multidimensional analysis of the system, based on a holistic 
view that encompasses all individual disciplines applied. 
The models are created gradually in the form of layers, the 
most internal one depicting the transformations associated 
with the systems engineering process (SE model), followed by 
the PM model that encompasses and extends these operational 
processes with those necessary for project management. 
The BPM model is built on the top of the PM model and 
extends it with additional processes, whenever necessary, as 
for example with the management processes related with the 
coordination of a portfolio of projects. This gradual modeling 
and implementation procedure is performed until the 
outermost layer is built, consisting of all processes associated 
with the core product development processes, the project 
management processes and the complementary business 
management processes by the organization, encompassing its 
complete product lifecycle. Any of the intermediary single 
layers can be treated separately and used for analysis 
purposes, in the traditional way their studies are performed. 
Simulation as a tool can also be used in association with any 
of the individual layers across the whole modeling procedure. 
The denomination of SIM model, however, is reserved for the 
outermost layer describing the complete SL, which comprises 
the BPM model, with its internal PM and SE layers, and any 
the additional features necessary to conduct a complete 
simulation study of the System of Interest (SoI), be it the 
Product Lifecycle (PL) or the Enterprise Lifecycle (EL), 
according to the objectives of the study. 
IV. 
PROBLEM DEFINITION 
To conduct the actual case study on the application of the 
T-ProST approach in the SE´s design phase process in this 
work, one decided to use a modified version of the System 
Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK) [3] reference 
model of the domain of interest, that is, the design phase of 
the SE Project. Before going into details about the Product 
Lifecycle Modeling (PLM) model, though, it is useful to 
establish the broad scope of the BPM model making use of the 
APQC´s Process Classification Framework (PCF) [1] to 
illustrate the complete organization EL reference model. 
Figure 1 illustrates the scopes in which the concepts 
System Lifecycle (Enterprise Lifecycle or Product Lifecycle) 
and their respective Reference Models are used in this work. 
The EL reference model is based on a top-down view of the 
organization, describing it according to a holistic process 
view, encompassing all EL phases, from strategic vision 
through product development, deployment, operation and the 
client management, until final product disposal. In this 
context, PL and PLM are considered a part of the EL and 
BPM, as indicated by part 2.0 of APQC´s PCF [1], which 
shows the macro Develop and Manage Products and Services, 
comprising the product´s engineering and management 
processes.  
Part 2.0 of APQC´s PCF [1] presents no detailed 
description about how these generic processes should look 
like, apparently because they are left to be defined by each 
specialised type of industry.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Scopes of APQC´s PCF and SEBoK SE´s design phase 
reference models 
In the case study presented here this part of the modeling 
was based on the reference model presented and described in 
detail in part 3 of the SEBoK [3] and illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  SEBoK [5] SE´s design phase process modified by 
authorsConceptual Modeling 
Any enterprise that has SE as the main driver of its 
production processes may well make use of the PL and PLM 
concepts definitions in SEBoK [3] to describe their product´s 
design phase according the reference model mentioned above. 
The T-PROST approach is demonstrated in the following 
in a stepwise way, by applying it to the problem described 
above, according to implementation method shown in column 
one of Table II. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

V. 
CONCEPTUAL MODELING 
The Conceptual Modeling Phase is carried out through an 
activity denominated Analysis, which consists of three tasks, 
the first and second ones concerned with the description of the 
process hierarchical structure (descriptive model), and the 
third one concerned with its dynamical description (process 
model). 
The descriptive model makes use of techniques typical of 
the SE worldview: the Elicitation of Information on the 
process; and the creation of the Integrated DEFinition for 
function modeling diagrams (IDEF0) [6] to create the IDEF0 
model, for process decomposition and documentation. The 
descriptive model consists in the detailed hierarchical 
description of the PL in the IDEF0 format. The IDEF0 model 
comprises all available information on the processes (inputs, 
outputs, control and resources), except for the workflow of 
process execution. Figure 3 shows the internal decomposition 
of the macroprocesses Concepts Definition and Systems 
Definition in the IDEF0 notation. 
The third task of the Conceptual Modeling Phase is typical 
of the SIM worldview: the Creation of the Reference Model, 
a process model based on the descriptive model and the 
addition of the sequence of execution or workflow of 
processes. The workflow for process execution is added at this 
stage of the unified model development lifecycle, making use 
of the ULMD notation. Despite resorting to mechanisms 
typical of the SE and SIM worldviews for its elaboration, the 
reference model created describes the process logic in a very 
abstract way, which is independent of the specific 
representations existing in the individual disciplines that are 
part of T-ProST. 
The ULMD reference model of the systems engineering 
design phase is shown in Figure 4. Two types of loops are used 
to describe the iterations, which need to be executed in case it 
is necessary to perform revisions of the work previously 
accomplished, denominated FB1 and FB2, according to the 
following definitions: 
 
FB1 – Iteration: loop for minor revision, between two 
consecutive processes, belonging to the same 
macroprocess or phase of a Project. 
 
FB2 – Feedback: loop between two non consecutive 
processes, which might belong to a single 
macroprocess or different ones, for reworking an 
outcome that should have already been produced in 
previous stages of the entitie´s lifecycle, but which 
needs to be redefined or to suffer a major revision. 
 
Figure 3.  SE´s design phase – concepts definition and systems definition – in IDEF0
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 4.  SE design phase – concepts definition and system definition – in ULMD 
The macroprocesses Concept Definition and System 
Definition might undergo successive iterations, during the 
execution of the systems engineering lifecycle design phase, 
and the processes might be executed by just one class type of 
entity or by different types, each class type responsible for a 
specific process, for example, mission analysts and system 
modelers. The agents responsible for the execution will act 
sequentially or in parallel, according to the execution flow 
previously defined or that established at runtime by means of 
the scripts used in the activities for routing the control flow 
during model execution. This is assured by drawing the 
diagrams as sequential processes only if this is mandatory, 
otherwise they are displayed as parallel and their execution 
might occur simultaneously, if there are enough resources 
available, or they might be executed sequentially, if the 
conditions and internal limitations make it necessary. A loop 
encompassing the processes whose sequential or parallel 
execution is not determined beforehand enforces that all of 
them are correctly performed before the control flow is passed 
ahead to the next process in the entity´s lifecycle.  
VI. 
SPECIALISED MODEL BUILDING AND ANALYSIS 
The Model Development phase is performed according to 
each of specialised modeling and analysis techniques 
originated from the autonomous disciplines component of T-
ProST. 
The transformation of the Reference Model into the 
specialised models with their supporting applications can be 
used as a basic PLM environment, if the software tools used 
possess 
all 
the 
management 
features 
required 
for 
documenting, 
monitoring 
and 
controlling 
product´s 
configuration and its evolution along the entire product´s 
development lifecycle, from conception to disposal. The first 
steps performed by the SE Modeling tasks B1 and C1 in Table 
II are just the start for the creation of a more complete and 
integrated environment. This complete environment will be 
formed by the addition of the tools created through tasks B2 
and C2 in the PM Modeling activity, those created through 
tasks B3 and C3 in the BPM Modeling activity, as well as 
those created through the tasks B4 and C4, in the Simulation 
Modeling activity. All these tools have a complementary 
nature, resulting from the fact that they all make use of the 
same reference model and adopt a systematic approach for 
their implementation, as described below, in the following 
steps of the application of the T-ProST Framework. 
A. SE Modeling 
The Systems Engineering Modeling consists in the 
transformation of the Reference Model into the specialised SE 
model. This corresponds to thoroughly documenting the 
model, starting with the known knowledge content about the 
Reference Model, that is, a merge of the information shown in 
Figure 3 and Figure 4. The SE modeling might be supported 
by databases applications and also by some kind of 
configuration and control management system, ideally one 
that can display, both graphically and as linked data, the 
complete information on the model, including the process 
model hierarchical decomposition and execution sequence, 
for monitoring purposes. 
The documentation of the case study presented in this 
work required keeping track of all data related to the product 
design phases (Concepts Definition and Systems Definition), 
as well as the addition of more model documentation, such as 
the descriptions of the artifacts created by the SE processes. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

B. PM Modeling 
The objective of the PM study area is to plan and 
coordinate the activities necessary to provide a satisfactory 
product, service or enterprise´s endeavour, within the 
boundaries set by the chronogram, the budget, resources, 
infrastructure and human resources and technology available. 
The traditional way to describe a project is by representing 
it as a sequenced network of activities, by means of diagrams 
known as Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) 
[18], a renowned and well documented technique, used for 
management of engineering projects, be it of a service or 
industrial nature, aiming at their planning and execution 
control. This would result at a macroprocess level in the 
diagram depicted in Figure 5. 
.
 
Figure 5.  Concepts definition process – PERT model
PM modeling is seen as the application of PM techniques 
making use of a process oriented worldview supported by 
software tools to extend the SE model with the necessary 
activities related with the management of product 
development along the entire product lifecycle. The PM 
model extends the SE process model with additional PM 
processes and explains all relations between these two types 
of models [7]. 
By using the T-ProST approach, one can get great gains 
by addressing PM not just for the management of a single 
project, but for the management of multi-projects, through 
process modeling and the integration of the concepts and 
methodologies used in PM, BPM and SIM. Traditionally, the 
PM, BPM and SIM methodologies and their supporting tools 
have remained conceptually very divergent and self-contained 
in their respective knowledge and application domains, 
showing little communication between them, due to this 
“single enterprise” way of handling projects in the PM study 
area. 
On the one hand, project management concepts, such as 
critical paths and completion time for a segment of the 
process, typical of PM, can be applied in simulation studies to 
yield greater productivity and a thorougher analysis of 
possible strategies for system operation. On the other hand, 
simulation modeling concepts, such as idle times of entities 
staying in queues in front of activities and dynamical 
resources allocation, can be applied to reduce segments or 
overall process completion times and costs in PM applications 
in the SE lifecycle. 
C. BPM Modeling 
BPM is a structured and systematic approach for 
conducting modeling, analysis, automatic execution and 
control, management and continuous improvement of 
processes used in the product engineering and production 
management of complex product and services [10][14]. 
Figure 6 shows the design phase of the systems 
engineering lifecycle in the BPMN notation [16]. This is just 
the first step of the modeling process, the model representation 
using the Bizagi´s Process Modeler [2]. The complete 
modeling procedure needs a second modeling step, making 
use of the Bizagi suite, an environment where this initial 
graphical model can be extended with many additional 
features and transformed into running applications, which 
may be used for automating some features of the system´s 
operational process. The complete set of software tools to 
support the BPM methodology is known as Business Process 
Management Systems (BPMS) [10]. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 6.  SE´s design phase – concepts definition and systems definition – BPMN model 
The BPMS tools work throughout the complete model life 
cycle 
of 
business 
processes 
studies: 
modeling, 
implementation, execution, automation, monitoring, analysis 
and continuous improvement of the system. They provide an 
environment for the complete development and deployment 
of an application that will act as part of the mechanisms used 
in the operation of the real system, playing a major role in 
aspects regarding its execution, its monitoring and control, 
and contributing for its continuous improvement. 
The organizations, however, still face a complex scenario 
for customizing and improving their business processes due to 
the diversity, incompatibility and/or incompleteness of 
methods, as well as the high costs of deployment of its 
supporting tools. The T-ProST general systematic approach 
could help to integrate and unify concepts and tools used in 
support of SE, PLM, PM and BPM and to help discard some 
overhead results that might turn out to be inconsistent, 
duplicate or superfluous regarding these existing individual 
study areas. The use of BPMS systems can provide the means 
for implementation of automated procedures to conduct the 
operation of the real system. Other main applications to 
compose the T-ProST supporting environment might be 
chosen among existing tools as well, and additional interfaces 
might be built for their integration 
D. Simulation Modeling 
The use of SIM in T-ProST follows the traditional 
definition of simulation with the remark that one is addressing 
the aggregate of the processes representative of the systems 
engineering and of the organization management lifecycles 
[7]. 
The complete simulation application requires the creation 
of the facilities needed for the experimentation (design of 
experiments) and of any other additional features for analysis 
and presentation of results. 
Model assessment in simulation studies can be made by a 
combination of the normal procedures used in simulation for 
this purpose with the techniques derived from project 
management of a multi-project nature, with the aim of 
enhancing the understanding of the experimental factors and 
strategies which significantly affect system's productivity. 
The integrated use of standard model assessment and 
project management techniques in simulation studies reveals 
that they have a complementary nature, the first group of 
procedures allowing for the analysis of the dynamics of the 
process, including optimization of resources allocation, and 
the second one allowing for a better evaluation of activities 
completion time of partial or complete production cycles, as 
well as their cost assessment.  
The only special feature is the use of the SL reference 
model, represented in the ULMD notation, to base model 
development in the proprietary simulation system offered by 
the different manufacturers. The reference model is 
transformed into the specific model notation and implemented 
according to the manufacturers of the proprietary systems, as 
shown in the example of Figure 7, created with the 
SIMPROCESS simulation system [5]. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 7.  SE´S design phase - concepts definition macroprocess – simprocess model
The 
application 
of 
the 
existing 
software 
tools 
interchangeably in each of these study areas can already 
improve the simulation model assessment and the multi-
projects management tasks. The combination of these two 
techniques is therefore very promising, but its advantages 
cannot be entirely exploited through the separate use of the 
actual existing software tools of the individual types in studies 
of the other area, because they have been designed with 
different purposes, which do not take into account their 
complementary nature. 
VII. GLOBAL ASSESSMENT 
T-ProST presents an interesting alternative way to 
improve the solution of problems involving complex business 
processes, that is, instead of making use of the existing 
knowledge base to create new techniques and tools, and/or to 
improve the already existing ones, one would focus on the 
(re)structuring, integrating and unifying the knowledge base 
underlying them. 
This holistic approach could consolidate all the scattered 
knowledge on complex process under a single umbrella, 
capable of covering the entire problem domain and covering 
the complete process model life cycle. This innovative holistic 
view addresses both the restructuring of the knowledge 
content (descriptive view) and the creation of a general 
systematic modeling procedure (unified process view), 
making use of reference models to base the individual or 
combined use of the diverse modeling techniques to create 
multifaceted models. 
The objective is to progress towards the integration and 
the unification of the concepts, methods and tools from these 
diverse techniques, seeking to apply them simultaneously in 
an easy and consistent way, thereby achieving the same 
complementary benefits from their individual use and, at the 
same time, avoiding any overheads, inconsistencies and 
duplications related with their joint application. 
The proposed methodology can be applied to a large 
problem class, with special interest focused on applications in 
serial processes and in multi-projects of an identical single 
project nature, whose execution share common resources and 
occur in parallel. 
The full development and application of the methodology 
will require the use of existing tools to perform several case 
studies, as well as the creation of a new hybrid environment, 
which on its turn will require quite a lot of software 
application and development time. For the moment, one has 
already performed studies making use of the following 
support tools: ProjectLibre [17], to support project 
management applications; Bizagi [2] and Bonita [4], to 
support the application of BPM techniques; and Simprocess 
[5], to build simulation models and conduct their analysis of 
results. The main reason for choosing these tools was their 
availability in the form of open source or low cost academic 
licenses. They can be easily substituted by similar systems, 
since the great majority of them can cope with the 
implementation of the specialised models described in the SE, 
PM, BPM and SIM categories presented in this work. 
There is an expected overhead in this attempt to apply a 
transdisciplinary approach based on existing autonomous 
tools, represented by the expensive procedure in regard to 
maintaining model consistency and compatibility across the 
whole model development life cycle. This overhead resulting 
from the application of a unified approach right from the start 
of the modeling process is seen rather as an anticipation of 
future problems, which might remain unsolved if the 
traditional way, based on independent application of the 
techniques and the gathering and interpretation of their results 
to build a global solution thereafter, is applied. This drawback 
can be reduced in future studies of this kind by the use of 
formal verification procedures and of software mechanisms to 
improve process model consistency and compatibility. 
The authors advocate further that a more encompassing 
and definitive solution for this problem can be achieved 
through the evolution of the T-ProST Framework and the 
improvement of its supporting tools, aiming at its 
transformation into a mature methodology. The foundations 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

and guidelines for implementation of this methodology have 
been presented in this work and they will be pursued and 
extended in future research. 
VIII. HOLISTIC REVIEW AND CONCLUSIONS 
The application domain of the T-ProST approach 
comprises not only the Product´s Lifecycle (PL) processes 
with its development and management processes (known as 
PLM in the literature), but also the Enterprise´s Lifecycle (EL) 
process, with its business process management procedures 
(known as BPM in the literature). The complete holistic view 
on processes advocated by the T-ProST approach considers 
PLM as a part of BPM, and refers to product´s and enterprise´s 
lifecycles simply as System´s Lifecycle (SL), with the 
meaning of the system concept made clear by the context in 
which it appears. 
The USMD/UCMD former versions of the notation have 
been used to describe and conduct some case studies on a 
variety of discrete event problems, such as a steelworks 
problem used as a class project, which is an example of a serial 
production process, typical of the SIM study area. Another 
example of application was on a house construction process, 
typical of the PM study area, which has been modeled and 
studied as a hybrid PM and SIM problem, showing the 
diversity of systems that can be represented using the notation. 
The present work improves the experience obtained in 
those previous case studies and presents T-ProST as an 
aggregate of the application of the individual techniques. The 
multifaceted modeling makes use of a reference model of the 
design phase processes of the systems engineering lifecycle as 
a common basis, aiming at the integration and the exploitation 
of their complimentary advantages. As a result, the T-ProST 
framework has been revised, which will lead to the 
development of a mature methodology and its supporting 
tools for application in additional case studies in the future, for 
continuous improvement of the methodology and its 
supporting environment. 
The full benefits of a unified methodology shall only be 
achieved if one undertakes the design and the construction of 
a hybrid environment to deal simultaneously with all the 
issues involved in the individual study areas. A hybrid 
environment based on an integrated approach will allow the 
modeling and analysis of a production process as the 
application of basic SE, PM, BPM and SIM tools, in 
substitution of complex PLM systems, which are costly and 
difficult to customize, and therefore not adequate for SME. 
With such tools it will be possible to increase productivity, 
reducing segment or full process completion time, subjected 
to resources and costs constraints, by shifting and analysing 
the start of successive production cycles, for example. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors acknowledge the MSc and PhD research 
students who participated in the courses CSE-326 and CSE-
331 year 2015 of the Post-Graduation Program ETE/INPE, 
who participated in the development and implementation of 
the system engineering design phase models, as class projects. 
REFERENCES 
[1] American Productivity and Quality Center. Process classification 
framework. [Online]. Available from: https://www.apqc.org/pcf 
2015.10.15 
[2] Bizagi. 
BPM 
suite 
overview. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.bizagi.com/en/bpm-suite 2015.10.15 
[3] Bkcase Editorial Board. The guide to the systems engineering body of 
knowledge (SEBoK), v. 1.4. R. D. Adcock (EIC). Hoboken, NJ: The 
Trustees of the Stevens Institute of Technology, June 2015. [Online]. 
Available from: http://sebokwiki.org/wiki/Download_SEBoK_PDF 
2015.10.15 
[4] Bonita BPM 7.1.2. Community Edition. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.bonitasoft.com/products-v2#versions-
community/2015.10.23. 
[5] Caci Inc. Federal. Simprocess - Product overview and user´s manual. 
Release 5.2. [Online]. Available from: http://simprocess.com/about-
simprocess/simprocess-documentation/ 2015.10.15 
[6] Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS). 
Integration Definition for Function Modeling (IDEF0). [Online]. 
Avaiable from: http://www.idef.com/pdf/idef0.pdf 2015.10.10 
[7] G. S. Kienbaum, A framework for process science and technology and 
its application to systems concurrent engineering. São José dos 
Campos: INPE, Technical Report.  [Online]. Available from: 
<http://urlib.net/8JMKD3MGP3W34P/3KG6NB5> 2015-10-29. 
[8] G. S. Kienbaum, “A framework for process science and technology 
applied to concurrent engineering”, In: ISPE Internacional Conference 
on Concurrent Engineering, 19., 2012, Trier, Germany. Proceedings... 
London: Springer-Verlag, 2012. v. 2, p. 1033-1044. ISBN 
9781447144250. [Online]. Available from: 
http://plutao.sid.inpe.br/col/dpi.inpe.br/plutao/2012/11.28.14.40.58/do
c/CE2012.pdf 
[9] International Council On Systems Engineering. Systems engineering 
handbook: a guide for system lifecicle processes and activities. 4th 
Edition. Hoboken, NJ, John Wiley &Sons, 2015. 
[10] J. Jeston and J. Nelis, Business process management: practical 
guidelines to successful implementations, Oxford: Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2008. 
[11] J. Murdoch and J. McDermid, “Modelling engineering design 
processes with role activity diagrams”, In: Transactions of the SDPS, 
Vol. 4, No. 2, June 2000, pp.45-65. 
[12] L. A. Silva, G.S. Kienbaum, G. Loureiro and M. M. Tanik, “A design 
and process science study applied to the Laboratory for Integration and 
Testing of the National Space Research Institute (LIT/INPE),” In: 
SDPS 2011. 2011, Jeju Island South Korea. Proceedings... [Online]. 
Available from: http://plutao.sid.inpe.br/col/dpi.inpe.br/plutao/2011/ 
06.11.14.52/doc/SDPS2011.pdf. 
[13] NASA. Systems engineering handbook. 2007. [Online]. Available 
from: http://ntrs.nasa.gov/ 2015.10.10 
[14] N. Melão and M. Pidd, “A conceptual framework for understanding 
business processes and business process modelling”, In: Information 
Systems Journal, 2000, pp. 105–129. 
[15] M. Pidd, Computer simulation in management science, 3rd Edition. 
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK, 1992. 
[16] Object Management Group. Business process modeling notation – V. 
2.0. OMG Document Number: formal/2011-01-03. [Online]. Avaiable 
from: http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/ 2015.10.10 
[17] ProjectLibre User Guide - Version 0.3.3. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.projectlibre.org/2015.10.23. 
[18] Project Management Institute. A guide to the project management body 
of knowledge, 5th ed. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management 
Institute, 2013. 
[19] W. Van der Aalst, M. Weske and G. Wirtz, “Advanced Topics in 
Workflow Management: Issues, Requirements and Solutions”, In: 
Transactions of the SDPS, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2003, pp. 49-77 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

