Requirements for Highly Integrated Management Systems
Simulation Expands Past-oriented Documentation to Future-oriented Optimization
Carlo Simon, Stefan Haag and Lara Zakfeld
Hochschule Worms
Erenburgerstr. 19, 67549 Worms, Germany
Email: {simon,haag,zakfeld}@hs-worms.de
Abstract—Despite their advantages, Integrated Management
Systems mirror the past. Simulation experts, however, can po-
tentially make use of the processes stored therein to predict the
future. Based on personal experiences, the authors assume that
many practitioners in Business Process Management are unfa-
miliar with this possibility. To gain insight into this assumption,
they examined the relevance of simulation in Business Process
Management literature and education, especially in German
degree courses on Business Information Systems. Presented in
this paper is a summary which serves as the basis to formulate
requirements for a new class of Integrated Management Systems
called Highly Integrated Management Systems by combining
past-oriented documentation and future-oriented forecasts within
one system. From the authors perspective, an implementation of
a Highly Integrated Management Systems could make use of
high-level Petri nets for the realization of the process part since
they are well-proven concerning the modeling and simulation of
complex processes in administration and production, but can also
be used for visualizations needed in a documentation.
Keywords—Highly Integrated Management System; Process
Management; Simulation; Petri nets.
I. INTRODUCTION
Integrative or Integrated Management Systems (IMS) serve
two purposes: 1) They facilitate management by process
documentation, thus leading to a better comprehension, op-
timization and implementation of these processes. 2) They
provide means that base on these documented processes for
establishing systematic management techniques in different
ﬁelds such as quality, occupational health and safety, environ-
mental protection, or energy utilization, which can be certiﬁed
after implementation.
However, as the described processes are inherently past-
oriented, this is also the case for IMS. Simulation experts,
though, can use processes - especially well-documented ones
- to examine change along with its possible effects. This makes
different courses of action and their consequences manageable
and opens room for optimization.
During their work with and visits to several companies
of different size, the authors experience a lack of simula-
tion usage. However, nearly all companies implement some
form of management system. This begs the question as to
whether those practitioners in the ﬁeld of Business Process
Management (BPM) who work with IMS are oblivious to
the possibilities of using their documented processes future-
oriented.
The authors assume two possible causes for such a non-use:
Either, there simply is a knowledge gap, or there is a lack of
suitable tools - or both, which seems to be the case. This paper
aims at providing support for these assumptions and a solution
for practitioners to beneﬁt from simulation possibilities.
Section II outlines the methodology used. Section III pro-
vides information about IMS as they are used nowadays while
Section IV examines software for IMS. Afterwards, Section V
describes the ﬁndings of the literature review. Since no related
work to extend IMS by simulation could be found, a new class
of IMS is introduced in Section VI along with requirements
for supporting software. Section VII deals with the necessity
of an expanded simulation education. The paper closes with a
conclusion and future work in Section VIII.
II. METHODOLOGY
There are two research questions worked on for this con-
tribution: 1) What is the current scope of simulation use
regarding processes documented in IMS? 2) What capabilities
are missing in today’s IMS supporting software - if so - to
assist practitioners in conducting such simulations?
The results of this paper base on desk research. They are
derived from speciﬁcations of IMS, IMS supporting software,
and foundational process management literature as processes
are the core models of IMS. Also, degree courses in BIS and
similar courses at German universities of applied sciences were
examined with regards to process management and simulation.
The literature reviewed is listed in Sections III, IV, and V.
This work detected remarkable deﬁcits concerning the sim-
ulation education in literature and courses. But also for current
software for IMS and process management deﬁcits could be
observed as these systems are either past- or future-oriented.
In a second step and in a normative manner, requirements
for a new class of IMS are derived that combine past and
future in one system.
III. INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
AND PROCESS MANAGEMENT
According to ISO 9000, management comprises coordinated
activities to guide and direct organizations. Hence, a manage-
ment system is a set of interrelated functions and elements to
conduct these tasks but also to determine a company’s policies
and objectives and the objectives of its processes [1].
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The standardization of management systems by the Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization (ISO) provides compa-
nies with a framework to establish such structures. However,
this comes along with an extensive documentation obligation
if companies seek for a certiﬁcation. Suitable software can
mitigate this effort and the third section gives an overview of
corresponding systems. The core of all such documentations
is a comprehensive description of the company’s processes.
An IMS holistically considers and processes the different
elements, functions and perspectives of the organizational
structure of a company according to Figure 1 [1][2].
Cross Section Functions
Business Functions
Financing & Investment
Research & Development
Marketing
Procurement
Human Ressources
Production
Maintenance
Sales
ISO 9001 Quality
ISO 14001 Environmental
ISO 27001 Information Security
ISO 31000 Risk
ISO 37301 Compliance
ISO 45001 Occupational Health and Safety
ISO 50001 Energy
Figure 1. View of companies as network of functions
by Integrated Management Systems (based on [2]).
The following overview is intended to show the most
important management systems:
ISO 9001:2015: Introduced in 1987, this standard for quality
management systems today also serves as the basis for
the other standards listed in this section, as well as
further (quality management) standards like ISO 13485
for medical devices, ISO 29001 for petrochemicals, or
ISO 90003 for software engineering.
ISO 14001:2015: An
environmental
management
system
supports a continuous improvement of environmental
performance based on material ﬂow analyses.
ISO 27001:2013: Information security management systems
are used to assess and address such risks.
ISO 31000:2018: Despite the variability of potential risks,
ISO attempts to standardize operational risk management.
ISO 37301:2021: Compliance management systems aim to
identify, prevent, or respond to non-compliant behavior.
ISO 45001:2018: This standard for occupational health and
safety management systems integrates two formerly in-
dependent standards in one.
ISO 50001:2018: Energy management systems facilitate an
environmentally friendly use of energy sources.
IV. STATE OF THE ART OF SOFTWARE FOR
INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
This section summarizes the presumably most important
characteristics of software for IMS as database-driven systems
to collect and link the process documentations for the various
management systems.
Table I shows a set of criteria that have been used in [3] to
compare the nine modeling software systems for IMS listed in
Table II. This catalog extends a former one discussed in [4] by
criteria used in students’ projects and by criteria considered in
evaluation portals. Naturally, the description of processes con-
stitutes an important part. However, it also contains previously
unexamined criteria, such as that for executability.
TABLE I. COMPARISON CRITERIA FOR SOFTWARE
FOR INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS (BASED ON [3])
Group
Criterion
Example characteristics
Modeling languages
BPMN/EPC/Petri nets/...
Process saving
Process description
Model integrated/...
Process indicators
Simulation
Animation
Search
Keywording/Full text
Swimlanes
Subprocesses
Process adaptability
Modelint guidelines
Comments
Model integrated/...
Process
modeling
Versioning
Process map
Overviews
Organigram
Multi language
English/German/French/...
Individual views
Everyone/Admin only
Usability
Individual start page
Everyone/Admin only
User groups
Own/Predeﬁned
Permission release
Role
management
Task management
News/Reminders
Documentation
Online/Ofﬂine/Exportable
ISO-Certiﬁcation
ISO 9001/14001/27001/...
Audit-Organisation
Planing/Feedback
Maturity assessment
Quality
management
Process qualiﬁcation
Operating systems
Windows/Mac/Linux/...
Availability
On-premise/SaaS
Maintenance/Updates
On-premise/Remote
Interfaces
Graphs/XML/...
Implementation
Mobile
iOS/Android/Web-App
Hotline
Phone/Chat/Email
Training
Seminar/Webinar
Ofﬂine manual
Online manual/Videos
User support
Help Assistant
Auto complete/Suggestions
Fees
Pricing
Licensing
Sector speciﬁc
Automotive/Financial/...
Application
Department
Purchasing/Logistics/...
Indicator evaluation
Yes/No/...
Evaluation in maps
Release workﬂow
Approvals/Tasks
Third-party extensions
Release online
Real life
execution
Process analysis
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The selected groups, criteria and possible characteristics
cover a broad range from various process modeling ap-
proaches, integrated quality management, role management,
but also usage aspects. Group real life execution considers
different possibilities to link stored documentations to real
world phenomenons.
The tools listed in Table II have been selected for personal
reasons or due to being mentioned in other tool comparisons.
Their evaluation concerning the mentioned criteria was con-
ducted by evaluating information supplied by the manufac-
turers’ websites and through subsequent interviews with the
providers, to which all but two were willing to respond.
TABLE II. SOFTWARE SELECTION FOR TOOL COMPARISON
(BASED ON [3])
Tool
Publisher
IMS
Aeneis
Intellior AG
Yes
ARIS
Software AG
Yes
Bﬂow* Toolbox
Prof. Dr. R. Laue & Team
No
BIC Cloud
GBTEC Software + Consulting AG
Yes
Business Transformation
iGrafx LLC
Yes
Camunda BPM
Camunda Services GmbH
No
Process Manager
Signavio GmbH
Yes
Prozessdesigner
JobRouter AG
No
Smart Process
CWA GmbH
Yes
The following results are to be highlighted in summary:
• Seven tools offer evaluation of process indicators.
• Four products fully implement release workﬂows.
• Six manufacturers claim possibilities for process simula-
tion, although in some cases only the actual process ﬂow
is represented and a connection with real data is impos-
sible although this would be important for execution.
• Those tools that cannot be classiﬁed as software for IMS
support according to Table II lack options for linking
the models in a process map, the possibility of storing
the models in a central database, or the representation of
responsibilities with the aid of organizational charts.
Only two of these products support all of these features,
namely Process Manager by Signavio and Smart Process by
CWA. Most simulation solutions only provide means to check
the basic feasibility of the processes. In some cases, however,
simulations of throughput times, costs or bottlenecks are
included. Since real world data such as current stock levels or
customers’ orders cannot be factored in, the simulation results
remain on a primitive level.
(Pro-)active opportunity and risk management and the sup-
port of a culture of continuous improvement are two subtasks
of IMS [5]–[7]. Still, they are not sufﬁciently implemented by
the systems’ past-orientation thus far. At the same time, they
testify to the need for a stronger future-orientation.
This aspect is also evident in the High Level Structure
(HLS), a meta standard according to which ISO has organized
the structure of its management system standards since 2012.
The common requirements for management systems - or their
standards - can be summarized in a basic management system
and extended by sector-speciﬁc properties [5].
The HLS is described in a document called Annex SL,
consisting of ten chapters according to which a management
system should be implemented and documented [8]. Annex
SL establishes uniform terms and deﬁnitions, an overarching
architecture for all new ISO management system standards and
revisions, and guaranteed identical text modules in the clauses
of all standards [9]. Using the same outline for different
management systems simpliﬁes their integration.
V. PROCESS MANAGEMENT FROM A
BUSINESS INFORMATION SYSTEMS PERSPECTIVE
As this article is partially derived from German education
in BIS, several German sources are quoted in this section.
However, also comparable literature in English is referred
to where applicable. For an introduction to BIS the authors
recommend [10] and for one to BPM [11]. According to [10],
A business information system is a group of interre-
lated components that work collectively to carry out
input, processing, output, storage and control actions
in order to convert data into information products that
can be used to support forecasting, planning, control,
coordination, decision making and operational activ-
ities in an organisation.
This deﬁnition clariﬁes the future-oriented character of the
subject. The role of BPM in this task is shown by the
structure of [12], which starts with this topic in advance of
an introduction to enterprise resource planning systems or in-
formation systems for speciﬁc industries. Also, considerations
concerning a digital transformation of organizations begin with
a process perspective [13].
A similar view is found in the relevant literature to BPM
itself. [14] points out that the hierarchical order of an organiza-
tion should follow its processes. [15] and [16] also emphasize
the formative role of BPM, with the latter also clarifying
the relation to IMS. The envisioned complex applications of
BPM developed by these authors cannot be imagined without
suitable software to support this management approach.
BPM is also of central importance for process enactment
in Workﬂow Management Systems (WfMS) [17]. This is
further accentuated [18]–[20], who consider the inﬂuence of
digitalization on process optimization. The considerations of
[21], who see processes as the key to digital transformation, go
even further and are an important contribution to BIS research.
The German Informatics Society’s framework recommenda-
tions for teaching BIS also see the design-oriented construction
of information systems as a key objective [22]. Again, process
management sits at the core with topics as strategic process
management, enterprise and process modeling, process min-
ing, analysis, mining and optimization, and domain-speciﬁc
reference models. IMS, though, only play a marginal role.
This view can also be conﬁrmed after an analysis of
a selection of process management modules in courses of
study in BIS or in computer science with a corresponding
specialization.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

For this purpose, the authors examined 46 study programs
at 34 German universities of applied sciences and classiﬁed
the characteristics of the modules. A total of 96 modules were
identiﬁed in the context of process management, 35 of which
were included in the evaluation because at least 5 topics of
BPM were clearly named. Table III shows an overview of the
examined module descriptions. The modules’ titles have been
translated to English equivalents; for reference, the original
German titles can be found as an appendix.
TABLE III. SAMPLE OF PROCESS MANAGEMENT MODULES IN
GERMAN BUSINESS INFORMATION SYSTEMS DEGREE PROGRAMS
University
Level
Module
Bachelor
Business Information Systems
Bachelor
Business Process Management
ERP Systems
FH Aachen
Bachelor
Implementation and Extension
Bachelor
Business Process Modeling
HS Augsburg
Master
Business Process Modeling
Business Processes and
Bachelor
Operational Applications
Applications in
HTW Berlin
Master
Business Administration 2
Bachelor
Fundamentals of Process Modeling
Master
Process Modeling and Analysis
TH Brandenburg
Master
Process Implementation
HTW Dresden
Bachelor
Business Process Modeling
HS Flensburg
Bachelor
Business Process Management
HS Furtwangen
Bachelor
Business Process Design
Operational Business
HS Kaiserslautern
Bachelor
Process Modeling
Bachelor
Modeling IT Systems
Bachelor
IT Systems Planing
Process Integration and
Master
Organizational Development
HS Karlsruhe
Master
Processes Design & Implementation
HS Mainz
Bachelor
Business Process Management
Advanced Business
HS Mannheim
Bachelor
Process Management
TH Mittelhessen
Bachelor
Digital Business Processes
HS Niederrhein
Bachelor
Business Process Management
Business Process and
Bachelor
Project Management
HS Pforzheim
Master
Enterprise Information Systems
OTH Regensburg
Bachelor
Business Process Analysis and Design
Bachelor
Business Process Management
HS RheinMain
Bachelor
Process Digitalization
HS Stralsund
Bachelor
Business Processes
Strategic Enterprise
Bachelor
Process Management
HS Trier
Master
Business Process Management
Bachelor
System Modeling
FH Wedel
Bachelor
Process Model Implementation
TH Wildau
Bachelor
Business Process Management
Bachelor
Business Process Management
HS Worms
Master
Process Management
The content shown in Table IV was derived from the
subject-speciﬁc module descriptions. Due to varying degrees
of detail in the module manuals, this overview is still incom-
plete but reﬂects the relevant tendencies.
TABLE IV. PROCESS MANAGEMENT TOPIC AREAS
OF THE MODULES EXAMINED
Topic
Occurrences
Requirement analysis
7
Automation / RPA
BPMS & WfMS: 13
RPA: 1
Other: 7
Documentation
4
Implementierung
SAP: 2
Other: 11
Integration
5
Process indicators / Controlling
8
Lifecycle
5
Mathematical basics
Graph theory: 2
Other: 1
Modeling
25
Modeling languages
BPMN: 23
EPC: 12
BPEL: 3
Petri nets: 2
Other: 17
Modeling tools
ARIS: 5
Camunda: 4
Signavio: 1
Other: 10
Process Mining
5
Process analysis & tools
17
Reengineering / Optimization
17
SCOR
2
Views
ARIS house: 6
Other: 3
Simulation
3
Strategic tools
Process maps: 7
Culture: 1
Strategy development: 1
Others
Cost Accounting: 5
Other: 9
In 17 modules, the analysis of process models is addressed,
the same applies to reengineering and optimization. 13 mod-
ules cite implementation in connection with business process
or workﬂow management systems.
Focusing on more rarely mentioned topics, strategic aspects
are stated nine times, key indicators or process controlling are
only included eight times, and process documentation (beyond
the actual modeling) is mentioned only four times.
Of major importance to the SIMUL conference series is
the observation that simulation is only considered three times.
This is possibly related to the low use of Petri nets, which are
taught seldom and - if at all - only with regard to their basic
concepts. The exciting possibilities for innovating software for
IMS with high-level Petri nets are almost not considered.
Standards and certiﬁcations that are of major importance for
many industries and for operational practice are not included
in any of the module descriptions.
VI. REQUIREMENTS FOR SOFTWARE FOR
HIGHLY INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
While the previous part of this article was descriptive, it is
continued with a normative deﬁnition of a new kind of IMS,
which combines the contrary contributions discussed so far.
Simulation, being the core theme of the SIMUL conferences,
is also the key concept for this entirely new approach:
A Highly Integrated Management System combines
a holistic documentation with multi-perspective
simulations across different management systems.
While management and control are comprehensively re-
ﬂected in IMS and their supporting software, other topics like
planning, change and transformation are still underrepresented.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Past
Present
Future
{
}
Deviation between
Documentation and Reality
Uncertainty of Forecasts
Model Requirements
Planning Scenario Complexity
Additional Real-Data-Driven Simulation
Digital Twin for Ad Hoc Planning
Additional Data-Driven Simulation
Integrative Planning
Additional Instance Simulations
Simple Key Indicator Analysis
Static Documentation
Visualization of Alternatives
Fundamental Technologies
Integrated Data Model
of the Model Views
Secured Access
to Real Data
Process Mining for Model
Generation and Monitoring
Release Workﬂow
to Ensure Model Quality
Figure 2. Characteristics of a Highly Integrated Management System (own illustration).
The disadvantage of this deﬁcit can be illustrated by a
problem many companies may face in the near future:
Due to regulatory requirements, a company strives to decar-
bonize its production and, for this purpose, stores the expected
costs for emission certiﬁcates in the environmental manage-
ment system. At the same time, customers inquire about the
carbon footprint of products, which leads to corresponding
entries in the quality management system. An emergent sim-
ulative planning could show the interactions between these
two systems, but also provide information of the effects on
other connected systems such as energy management or even
production itself. To this end, it would be necessary to link this
simulation extensively with current production data.
A comparable scenario can neither be described by means
of current IMS nor are these systems suitable to support
the transformation processes to develop a company in the
described manner. One major reason for this is that in current
IMS software processes are described with BPMN, ﬂow chart
diagrams or EPCs that have their strengths in rapid process
visualization but their weaknesses concerning simulation. At
best, instance simulations can provide information regarding
the correct executability of processes [23][24]. However, since
no formal mathematical semantics are deﬁned for the men-
tioned modeling languages even these instance simulations
may vary depending on the tool used [23][25][26].
For the described problem, however, it rather would be
necessary to consider the different views in a holistic, multi-
perspective simulation. Against this background, a return to
Petri nets seems to be helpful for two reasons:
1. As theoretical underpinning of process mining, Petri nets
can be used to automatically generate process models
from transaction data of operational information systems,
which simpliﬁes the modeling task signiﬁcantly and en-
sures a better match between reality and model [27].
2. With high-level Petri nets, in which places can be inter-
preted as tables in a database, complex production pro-
cesses can be modeled and the consequences of strategic
changes such as one from push to pull production can be
estimated in advance [28][29].
In both application areas of Petri nets, powerful modeling,
analysis and simulation tools are needed. Such tools are avail-
able and they have contemporary user interfaces. However, a
fusion with the requirements for software to support IMS is
still pending.
Figure 2 visualizes these requirements for an HIMS and
for software to support it. The goal is an optimal supply of
information in the present by mapping the current situation and
at the same time enabling forecasts into the future. The further
back in time the model representing the current situation
was created, the greater the deviation between reality and
documentation becomes. Likewise, the occurrence probability
of forecasts decreases the further they are projected into the
future. This is accompanied by the desire for new functional-
ities that go beyond the possibilities of current IMS software.
These functionalities are shown in the middle part of the
ﬁgure. The demands on the models and their analysis and ex-
ecution increase with the complexity of the planning scenarios
that can be expressed with them. A simulation environment
that is able to simulate processes parallel to reality on the
basis of fed-in real data, may be regarded as a digital twin.
In addition, there are requirements regarding the fundamen-
tal technologies that make model integration and operational
use possible in the ﬁrst place. These range from data storage
and secure access to release workﬂows that ensure the neces-
sary model quality.
There are probably two options for the development of cor-
responding systems: Either the simulation features of software
for the support of IMS are extended, for example following
the capabilities of higher Petri nets, or simulation tools are
extended by functionalities such as a management of shared
documents, monitoring of key performance indicators and
release workﬂows.
VII. SIMULATION EDUCATION
Supplying companies with simulation capabilities by means
of HIMS is one part of the challenge. The other one is
providing them with competent workforce as modeling and
domain expertise often only exist separately (cf. [30]).
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Opportunities, methods, limitations, and applications of
simulation should play a more integral part in the education
of BPM, of BIS, and also of IMS. The simulation community
should engage intensively in this ﬁeld.
The ﬁrst ﬁeld of possible engagement is the development
of appropriate tools. Domain experts need HIMS that make
modeling easy and simulation experts have to learn how
to adopt speciﬁc domain knowledge and especially, how
to produce visualizations of the simulation results that are
understood by the domain experts, i.e. an HIMS also must
provide visualization components.
This, however, requires personnel who are able to work in an
interdisciplinary manner. Therefore, university education must
provide students with factual and interdisciplinary knowledge
but also - and probably more important - with the skills to
gain cross-disciplinary insights themselves.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper provides support for two assumptions regarding
the use of simulation in the context of IMS: The ﬁrst one
is a lack of IMS software suited for process simulation
and, therefore, optimization. However, the examined tools
supposedly are but a fraction of available software. The second
assumption is the missing simulation competencies many
practitioners show in the authors’ anecdotal experience. This
is supported by literature both for practice and education. Both
points, though, base on German sources, possibly illustrating
a country-speciﬁc phenomenon. Thus, international inquiries
seem beneﬁcial - if only to improve the situation in Germany.
The authors see two paths for research to follow from
here on. The ﬁrst is the creation of an HIMS suitable for
practical use. Since this idea is completely new and contradicts
existing assumptions on how an IMS should work and look
like, a fast commercial implementation cannot be expected. An
experimental research environment at a university or research
department seems to be better suited for this task. Further,
since conferences like SIMUL show that the development of
novel simulation techniques often takes place in a research
context, adding IMS capabilities to an existing process simu-
lation environment would be reasonable. As a Petri net-based
modeling and simulation tool is in active development by the
authors, it seems obvious to use this as a starting point to
proof the concept.
The second path refers to simulation education: How differ
other countries’ degree courses in BIS from the ones examined
so far? What are the implications of such differences on
HIMS? What can be learned from simulation in other ﬁelds of
study, for example physics, social science, but also business
management games?
We cordially invite the interested community to reach out
for an exchange on different - or missing - points of view,
established handling, best practices or planned changes -
both in education and in implementing suitable software for
(Highly) Integrated Management Systems.
APPENDIX
TABLE V. ORIGINAL GERMAN MODULE TITLES OF TABLE III
University
Level
Module
Bachelor
Business Information Systems
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozessmanagement
ERP Systeme implementieren
FH Aachen
Bachelor
und erweitern
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozess-Modellierung
HS Augsburg
Master
Gesch¨aftsprozess-Modellierung
Gesch¨aftsprozesse und
Bachelor
betriebliche Anwendungen
Betriebswirtschaftliche
HTW Berlin
Master
Anwendungen 2
Bachelor
Grundlagen der Prozessmodellierung
Modellierung und Analyse
Master
von Prozessen
TH Brandenburg
Master
Implementierung von Prozessen
HTW Dresden
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozessmodellierung
HS Flensburg
Bachelor
Business Process Management
HS Furtwangen
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozessdesign
Modellierung Betrieblicher
HS Kaiserslautern
Bachelor
Leistungsprozesse
Bachelor
Modellierung von IT-Systemen
Bachelor
Planung von Informationssystemen
Process Integration
Master
and Organizational Development
HS Karlsruhe
Master
Processes Design & Implementation
HS Mainz
Bachelor
Business Process Management
Advanced Business Process
HS Mannheim
Bachelor
Management
TH Mittelhessen
Bachelor
Digitale Gesch¨aftsprozesse
HS Niederrhein
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozess-Management
Gesch¨aftsprozess- und
Bachelor
Projektmanagement
HS Pforzheim
Master
Unternehmensinformationssysteme
OTH Regensburg
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozessanalyse und -design
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozessmanagement
HS RheinMain
Bachelor
Digitalisierung von Prozessen
HS Stralsund
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozesse
Strategisches
Bachelor
Unternehmensprozessmanagement
HS Trier
Master
Gesch¨aftsprozessmanagement
Bachelor
Systemmodellierung
FH Wedel
Bachelor
Prozessmodellimplementation
TH Wildau
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozessmanagement
Bachelor
Gesch¨aftsprozessmanagement
HS Worms
Master
Prozessmanagement
REFERENCES
[1] ISO 9000:2015: Quality management systems — Fundamentals and
vocabulary, Geneva, 2015.
[2] A. Neumann, Integrative Managementsysteme, 3rd ed. Berlin: Springer
Gabler, 2017, German, transl. Integrative Management Systems.
[3] J. Foos, “Markt¨uberblick f¨ur Software zum Prozessmanagement,” Mas-
ter’s thesis, Hochschule Worms, 2020, German, transl. Market Overview
for Process Management Software.
[4] D. Adam, N. Riegel, T. Jeswein, M. Koch, and S. Imal, “Studie BPM
Suites,” Fraunhofer IESE, Kaiserslautern, Tech. Rep., 2013, German,
transl. BPM Suites Study.
[5] A. Badreddine, T. B. Romdhane, and N. B. Amor, “A multi-objective
risk management approach to implement an integrated management sys-
tem: Quality, security, environment,” in IEEE International Conference
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

on Systems, Man and Cybernetics.
San Antonio, TX, USA: IEEE,
2009, pp. 4728–4733.
[6] S. Salah, J. A. Carretero, and A. Rahim, “The integration of quality man-
agement and continuous improvement methodologies with management
systems,” IJPQM, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 269–288, 2010.
[7] S. Vulanovi´c, M. Deli´c, B. Kamberovi´c, I. Beker, and B. Lali´c, “In-
tegrated management systems based on risk assessment: Methodology
development and case studies,” APEM, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 93–106, 2020.
[8] High-Level Structure: Management System Standards - Annex SL,
https://www.iso.org/management-system-standards.html (last accessed
25.08.2021), Geneva, 2012.
[9] R. Tricker, Quality Management Systems - A Practival Guide to Stan-
dards Implementation.
Abingdon-on-Thames: Taylor & Francis, 2019,
ch. What is Annex SL all about?, pp. 114–131.
[10] P. Bocij, A. Greasley, and S. Hickie, Business Information Systems.
London, UK: Pearson, 2008.
[11] J. Jeston, Business Process Management. Abingdon-on-Thames: Taylor
& Francis, 2018.
[12] H. R. Hansen, J. Mendling, and G. Neumann, Wirtschaftsinformatik,
12th ed.
Berlin: De Gruyter - Oldenbourg, 2019, German, transl.
Business Information Systems.
[13] A. Fleischmann, S. Oppl, W. Schmidt, and C. Stary, Contextual Process
Digitalization.
Cham: Springer Nature, 2020.
[14] M. Gaitanides, “Strategic Planning and Structuring of Organization,”
in European Approaches to International Management, K. M. und
W. H. Staehle, Ed.
Berlin: de Gruyter, 1986.
[15] G. Fischermanns, Praxishandbuch Prozessmanagement, 11th ed., ser.
ibo-Schriftenreihe.
Gießen: Verlag Dr. G¨otz Schmidt, 2013, vol. 9,
German, transl. Handbook Project Management.
[16] H. J. Schmelzer and W. Sesselmann, Gesch¨aftsprozessmanagement in
der Praxis, 8th ed.
M¨unchen: Hanser, 2013, German, transl. Business
Processs Management in Practice.
[17] W. M. P. van der Aalst, A. H. M. ter Hofstede, and M. Weske, “Business
process management: a survey,” in Proceedings of the 2003 International
Conference on Business Process Management.
Springer, Berlin, 2003,
pp. 1–12.
[18] T. H. Davenport, Process Innovation: Reengineering Work through
Information Technology.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business institution
Press, 1993.
[19] M. Hammer and J. Champy, Reengineering the Cooperation.
New
York: Harper Business, 1993.
[20] M. Hofmann, Prozessoptimierung als ganzheitlicher Ansatz.
Wies-
baden: Springer Gabler, 2020, German, transl. Process Optimisation as
a Holistic Approach.
[21] G. Bontinck, ¨O. Isik, J. van den Bergh, and S. Viaene, “Unlocking the
Potential of the Process Perspective in Business Transformation,” in Int.
Conf.on BPM.
Springer, 2016, pp. 161–176.
[22] Gesellschaft f¨ur Informatik, “Rahmenempfehlungen f¨ur die Ausbildung
in Wirtschaftsinformatik an Hochschulen,” GI, Bonn, Tech. Rep., 2017,
German, transl. Recommendation Framework for the Education in Busi-
ness Information Systems at Universities.
[23] K. Rosenthal, B. Ternes, and S. Strecker, “Business Process Simu-
lation: A Systematic Literature Review,” in ECIS 2018 Proceedings.
Portsmouth, UK: AIS, 2018, pp. 199–216.
[24] G. Wagner, O. Nicolae, and J. Werner, “Extending Discrete Event
Simulation by Adding an Activity Concept for Business Process Mod-
eling and Simulation,” in Proceedings of the 2009 Winter Simulation
Conference, 2009, pp. 2951 – 2962.
[25] P. Bocciarelli, A. D’Ambrogio, A. Giglio, and E. Paglia, “Empowering
Business Process Simulation Through Automated Model Transforma-
tions,” in Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Modeling and
Simulation.
Tampa, FL, USA: SpringSim, 2014, paper 39, pp. 1–9.
[26] T. Berger and W. Gleissner, “Integrated management systems: linking
risk management and management control systems,” IJRAM, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 215–231, 2018.
[27] W. M. P. van der Aalst, Process Mining, 2nd ed.
Berlin: Springer,
2016.
[28] C. Simon and S. Haag, “Simulatable Reference Models To Transform
Enterprises For The Digital Age – A Case Study,” in ECMS 2020:
34th International ECMS Conference on Modelling and Simulation,
M. Steglich, C. M¨uller, G. Neumann, and M. Walther, Eds., 2020, pp.
294 – 300.
[29] C. Simon, S. Haag, and L. Zakfeld, “Showing the Advantages of Pull
over Push Production with the Aid of Petri Nets,” EMISA Forum:
Proceedings of the SIG Enterprise Modelling and Information Systems
Architectures of the German Informatics Society, vol. 41, pp. 9–10, 2021.
[30] ——, “Research-Agenda for Process Simulation Dashboards,” in ECMS
2021: 35th International ECMS Conference on Modelling and Simula-
tion, 2021, pp. 243–249.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

