A Supply Chain Disruption Framework for Discrete Event Simulation 
Andrew Greasley 
Dept. of Engineering Systems & Supply Chain Management 
Aston University 
Birmingham, UK 
e-mail: a.greasley@aston.ac.uk 
Daniel Chicksand 
Dept. of Management 
University of Birmingham 
Birmingham, UK 
e-mail: d.chicksand@bham.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—This article presents a supply chain disruption 
framework for discrete event simulation based on the analysis 
of the prior literature. The aim is to develop a better 
understanding of the elements that are required to meet the 
challenge of using discrete event simulation in this application. 
The framework identifies the main elements in terms of the 
disruption event, supply chain configuration, supply chain 
resilience and supply chain performance metrics. The review 
also identifies challenges for the use of discrete-event 
simulation in this way including the representation of rare 
disruption events and time-series interpretation of disruption 
events.  
Keywords-supply chain disruption, discrete event simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Discrete Event Simulation (DES) is usually considered a 
stand-alone software tool that is used to assess the steady-
state performance of manufacturing and service processes. 
However recently it has been used to undertake the analysis 
of the effect of transient disruptive events in a variety of 
supply chain settings such as food retail [1], LED panel 
light manufacturing [2], medicine supply [3] and forestry 
log export [4]. In this context the lack of empirical data that 
could be used to understand these events is to some extent 
overcome by the use of structured experimentation using 
computer simulation experiments [5].  
The purpose of this article is to review existing work on 
the use of DES to analyse disruptive events in a supply 
chain context. From this review a framework has been 
developed that identifies the key attributes of the 
combination of disruptive events, the supply chain 
configuration and supply chain resilience factors that lead to 
supply chain performance. By identifying key attributes 
associated with supply chain disruptions, this framework 
will provide a basis on which to develop a DES model of 
disruption events and measure their effect on supply chain 
performance. 
II. 
REVIEW OF THE USE OF DES TO ANALYSE DISRUPTIVE 
EVENTS IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN 
The review examines supply chain disruption in terms of 
the nature of the disruption event itself, the supply chain 
configuration, the supply chain features and relationships 
that lead to a level of supply chain resilience and supply 
chain performance metrics used to assess the response to 
disruption events. 
A. Disruption Event 
A disruption can be defined as an unplanned and 
unanticipated event that disrupts the normal flow of goods 
and materials in the supply chain [6]. An event that has the 
potential to occur, but has not yet done so, can be referred to 
in terms of ‘risk’ [7]. As well as the direct impact of a 
disruption on the supply chain we may need to consider the 
ripple effect defined as a disruption in a supply chain node 
that can spread to neighbouring nodes or links [8]. The 
ripple effect is associated with low-frequency, high-impact 
disturbance risks [8]. 
In the context of a supply chain for the source of risk 
(that leads to a disruption event) [9] define two main 
categories of internal risk and supply chain risk.  
• 
Internal risks can be categorised as the internal risk of 
the process (value-adding processes) and the internal 
risk of control (systems which govern how a firm 
controls the processes).  
• 
Supply Chain risks can be categorised as external to the 
firm but internal to the supply chain network (either 
downstream demand or upstream supply risks) or 
external to the supply chain network (events in the 
environment such as natural disasters or socio-political 
events).  
Manners-Bell [10] states that although supply chain risks 
are the most relevance in the supply chain context, internal 
risks of process and control can also impact the wider 
supply chain.  
In terms of DES models of the source of risks leading to 
disruption events, [11] models a combination of the 
following: 
• 
internal firm risks such as machine breakdowns and 
internal quality problems 
• 
internal supply chain risks such as delays in contracting 
with suppliers and raw material shortage 
• 
external supply chain risks such as earthquakes and 
computer Denial of Service events  
Borgos and Ivanov [1] model disruption events related 
to the external supply chain risk of the COVID-19 pandemic 
in terms of internal supply chain risks leading to shutdowns 
at supplier’s factories, bottlenecks in transportation and 
panic buying by customers.  
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

In terms characterising a disruption event, [5] provide 
the following generic attributes: 
• 
length (number of time periods over which the shock 
manifests itself),  
• 
magnitude (the size of the initial negative impact, and 
the extent to which the shock subsequently reduces 
supply chain performance over time,  
• 
shape (the way in which the disruption manifests itself 
– a step function, a ramp etc.)  
• 
number (number and frequency of disruption that occur 
during a given event).  
 
B. Supply Chain Configuration 
In terms of the supply chain configuration, this can be 
described by the use of a supply chain map such as in [2]. 
Christopher [12] emphasises the importance of managing 
the critical nodes and links in the supply chain. MacCarthy 
et al. [13] define the minimum information for a supply 
chain map as nodes, the participants of the supply chain and 
links, how the participants are connected. Primary 
participants contribute direct to value-adding activities in 
the supply chain process, but we may also need to 
incorporate secondary participants such as third-party 
logistics providers in our analysis. The primary flows 
modelled by DES in the review are material flows, such as 
in [14] but information and financial flows could also be 
modelled. 
C. Supply Chain Resilience Factors 
In terms of factors that impact the resilience of the 
supply chain to disruption events, [15] distinguishes 
between the physical features of a supply chain such as its 
design matched to demand, shape, stocks, capacity, 
agility/flexibility and supply chain relationships such as 
collaboration and visibility. In addition [5] model the 
connectivity relationship between supply chain actors.  
In terms of supply chain physical features examples 
cover the use of higher stocks and spare capacity, such as 
Garrido Rios [11] who provides an analysis of on-hand 
inventory and short-term manufacturing capacity. Ivanov 
[14] studies the use of a policy of backup capacity - using 
capacity in owned plants in the region and using the 
capacity of owned plants in neighbouring countries. In terms 
of supply chain relationships, [16] study the use of the 
policy of alternative suppliers and [2] study the use of 
backup suppliers.  
 
D. Supply Chain Performance 
In terms of measuring supply chain performance when 
submitted to disruption events, [17] define performance 
measures of speed of recovery, financial cost and customer 
impact. Borgos and Ivanov [1] define performance measures 
of profit, revenue, costs, delivery time, inventory levels, 
order backlog (orders lacking products) and late orders.  
As well as direct supply chain design and operations 
measures most studies aim to provide a measure of supply 
chain resilience which is defined by [18] as requiring two 
capacities of resistance (ability to delay a disruption and 
reduce the impact once the disruption occurs) and recovery 
(ability to recover from a disruption). Garrido Rios [11] 
defines (static) resilience as a function of fill rate which is 
defined as the number of backorders and lost orders as a 
proportion of total orders. Borgos and Ivanov [1] use the 
service level ratio of on-time orders to overall number of 
outgoing orders as an indicator of disruption and recovery. 
Moosavi et al. [2] use the resilience metric from [19] and [5] 
provides an overall measure of resilience (defined as the 
relative percentage of functionality over time) derived from 
the three measures of the number of time periods in which a 
negative change in inventory is observed, the total negative 
change in inventory over the course of these time periods 
and the average negative change in inventory over this same 
interval. 
 
III. 
DEPLOYING THE FRAMEWORK FOR DES 
Based on the review a framework is presented which can 
be used when using DES to analyse disruptive events that 
impact on the supply chain (Fig. 1). Disruption events act on 
the configuration of supply chain design and combine with 
supply chain resilience factors to produce a level of supply 
chain performance. The supply chain resilience factors will 
be aspects of the current supply chain design that have an 
effect on supply chain performance. They can also be part of 
the simulation experimental design to analyse the effect of 
disruption events on future supply chain configurations.  
We 
can 
now 
proceed 
to 
investigate 
how 
to 
operationalise the elements in the framework to enable its 
representation as a DES model.  
Macdonald et al., [5] model the characteristic of a 
generic disruption event directly. If we wish to model a 
disruption event that has been derived from a source of risk, 
we will need to operationalise this event by characteristics 
of its length, magnitude, shape and number. For example, 
Garrido Rios [11] operationalises disruption events deriving 
from risks such as machine breakdown, using probability 
distributions for the number of occurrences and length of 
disruption. Uniform distributions are used to represent the 
time between disruption events based on the assumption that 
the likelihood of the event remains constant over the 
simulated time period.  
 
 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 1. Supply Chain Disruption Framework for Discrete Event Simulation 
 
In terms of supply chain configuration, the conceptual 
modelling stage of the DES study will require us to develop 
a diagrammatic representation, usually in the form of a 
process map, of the explanatory model [20]. MacCarthy et 
al. [13] argue that the degree of mapping the supply chain 
depends on the purpose and so introduce a classification of 
supply chain maps based on a hierarchy of supply systems. 
This may require high level supply chain and supply 
network maps to be decomposed to the process map level 
(as presented in a hierarchy for supply systems mapping, 
[13]) to enable modelling of material flows by the DES. To 
define the supply chain configuration in a DES, [21] 
organise the process map around the Supply Chain 
Operations Reference (SCOR) model categories of Source, 
Make and Deliver.  
In terms of supply chain resilience factors, the current 
resilience of the supply chain can be assessed for a range of 
disruption events. In addition, the use of simulation 
scenarios incorporating either physical or relationship 
design changes can be employed. For example, connectivity 
is operationalised for a DES study by [5] by expressing 
connectivity between supply chain partners as a value 
between 0 (no connectivity) to 1 (full connectivity). Full 
connectivity means that the full effect of the disruption 
event would be passed between supply chain partners. 
Finally supply chain performance can be expressed 
using traditional DES measures such as financial and 
customer-oriented metrics. These can be reported by 
simulating over multiple replications to provide confidence 
intervals around average performance across these metrics 
[20]. In terms of the concept of resilience this metric will 
require operationalising, for example as inventory fill rate 
[11]. Resilience may also require a time-based analysis to 
identify the nature of the recovery from the disruption event 
in terms of its magnitude and length. Melnyk et al. [16] 
outline a procedure for dealing with time series data that 
uses a differencing technique combined with an outlier 
detection approach [22]. The outcome is the quantification 
of system performance in terms of measures that define 
resistance and recovery. 
IV. 
SUMMARY 
The framework identifies the elements that need to be 
incorporated into the DES model and provides a roadmap 
for determining suitable methods for operationalising these 
elements in the DES. However, further work is needed to 
meet the challenge of modelling supply chain disruption 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

using DES. For example, the representation of rare 
disruption events, the impact of the ripple effect, supply 
chain mapping decomposition at the conceptual modelling 
stage and time-series interpretation of disruption events at 
the experimentation stage.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Borgos and D. Ivanov, “Food retail supply chain resilience 
and the COVID-19 pandemic: A digital twin-based impact 
analysis 
and 
improvement 
directions”, 
Transportation 
Research Part E, vol. 152, 102412, 2021. 
[2] J. Moosavi and S. Hosseini, “Simulation-based assessment of 
supply chain resilience with consideration of recovery 
strategies in the COVID-19 pandemic context”, Computers 
and Industrial Engineering, vol. 160, 107593, 2021. 
[3] J. Viana, K. van Oorschot and C. Ardal, “Assessing resilience 
of medicine supply chain networks to disruptions: a proposed 
hybrid simulation modelling framework”, Proceedings of the 
2021 Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE, 2021. 
[4] P. Childerhouse, M. Al Aqqad, Q. Zhou, and C. 
Bezuidenhout, “Network resilience modelling: a New Zealand 
forestry supply chain case”, The International Journal of 
Logistics Management, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 291-311, 2020. 
[5] J.R. Macdonald, C.W. Zobel, S.A. Melynk and S.E. Griffis, 
“Supply chain risk and resilience: theory building through 
structured experiments and simulation”, International Journal 
of Production Research, vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 4337-4355, 2018. 
[6] C.W. Craighead, J. Blackhurst, M.J. Rungtusanatham and 
R.B. Handfield, “The Severity of Supply Chain Disruptions: 
Design Characteristics and Mitigation Capabilities”, Decision 
Sciences, vol. 38 no. 1, pp. 131-156, 2007. 
[7] I. Manuj, J.T. Mentzer and M.R. Bowers, “Global Supply 
Chain Risk Management”, Journal of Business Logistics, vol. 
29, no. 1, 133-155, 2008 
[8] A. Llaguno, J. Mula and F. Campuzano-Bolarin, “State of the 
art, conceptual framework and simulation analysis of the 
ripple effect on supply chains”, International Journal of 
Production Research, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 2044-2066, 2022. 
[9] R. Mason-Jones and D. Towill, “Shrinking the supply chain 
uncertainty cycle”, Control, September, pp. 17-22, 1998. 
[10] J. Manners-Bell, “Supply Chain Risk Management: How to 
design and manage resilient supply chains”, 3rd Edition, 
Kogan Page: London, 2020. 
[11] D.A. Garrido Rios, “A Mixed-Method Study on the 
Effectiveness of a Buffering Strategy in the Relationship 
between 
Risks 
and 
Resilience”, 
PhD 
Thesis. 
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/106605, 2017. 
[12] M. Christopher, “Logistics and Supply Chain Management”, 
Fifth Edition, FT Publishing: Harlow, 2016. 
[13] B.L. MacCarthy, W.A.A. Ahmed and G. Demirel, “Mapping 
the supply chain: Why, what and how?”, International Journal 
of Production Economics, vol. 250, 108688, 2022. 
[14] D. Ivanov, “Disruption tails and revival policies: A simulation 
analysis of supply chain design and production-ordering 
systems in the recovery and post-disruption periods”, 
Computers and Industrial Engineering, vol. 127, pp. 558-570, 
2019. 
[15] D. Waters, “Supply Chain Risk Management: Vulnerability 
and Resilience in Logistics”, 2nd Edition, Kogan Page: 
London, 2011. 
[16] S.A. Melnyk, C.W. Zobel, J.R. MacDonald and S.E. Griffis,  
“Making sense of transient responses in simulation studies”, 
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 52, no. 3, 
pp. 617-632, 2014. 
[17] J.R. Macdonald and T.M. Corsi, “Supply Chain Disruption 
Management: Severe Events, Recovery, and Performance”, 
Journal of Business Logistics, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 270-288, 
2013. 
[18] S.A. Melnyk, D.J. Closs, S.E. Griffis, C.W. Zobel and J.R. 
MacDonald, “Understanding supply chain resilience”, Supply 
Chain Management Review, January/February, 2014. 
[19] S.A. Torabi, M. Baghersad and S.A. Mansouri, “Resilient 
supplier selection and order allocation under operational and 
disruption risks”, Transportation Research Part E, vol. 79, pp. 
22-48, 2015.  
[20] A. Greasley, “Simulation Modelling: Concepts, Tools and 
Practical Business Applications”, Routledge:Abingdon, 2023.  
[21] H. Carvalho, A.P. Barroso, V.H. Machedo, S. Azevedo and 
V. Cruz-Machado, “Supply chain redesign for resilience using 
simulation”, Computers and Industrial Engineering, Vol. 62, 
pp. 329-341, 2012.  
[22] L.M. Liu, “Time Series Analysis and Forecasting”, Second 
Edition, Scientific Computing Associates Corp: Chicago, 
2009. 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

