Simulation as a Sensor of Emergency Departments: 
 Providing Data for Knowledge Discovery 
Work-in-Progress Paper 
 
Eva Bruballa, Manel Taboada 
Tomàs Cerdà Computer Science School 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) 
Barcelona, Spain 
eva.bruballa@eug.es, manel.taboada@eug.es 
Eduardo Cabrera, Dolores Rexachs, Emilio Luque 
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) 
Barcelona, Spain 
ecabrera@caos.uab.cat, dolores.rexachs@uab.es, 
emilio.luque@uab.es
 
 
Abstract— Simulation of unusual or extreme situations of 
Hospital Emergency Departments (ED) makes it possible to get 
extra knowledge about the behavior of the system which could 
not be obtained in other way. There is no real data available of 
such situations, but simulation allows us to obtain this 
information. In this paper, we show how the data obtained by 
simulation of scenarios representing special real situations 
expand the real available data. That provides further 
information, which will allow us to reach more reliable models 
of real system behavior, avoiding extrapolation methods, which 
imply important errors, especially in nonlinear systems as ED. 
The objective pursued in this ongoing research is to extract the 
information contained in all this data to observe patterns and 
translate them into relationships and behavior models about 
variables which may influence the Hospital Emergency 
Department’s performance 
and 
quality of service. A 
methodology to obtain new knowledge from intensive data, 
based on the use of the simulator as a sensor of the real system, 
and so as the main source of data, is proposed. As immediate 
future work, we intend to prove this methodology in a case of 
study which aim is to gain knowledge from a specific set of 
data, obtained through the simulation of a reduced set of 
scenarios of the real system. 
Keywords—Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation (ABMS); 
Data-Intensive;Data Mining (DM); Decision Support Systems 
(DSS); Emergency Department (ED); Knowledge Discovery. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A. Simulation as a Decision Support System (DSS) 
Hospital Emergency Departments (ED) are a primary 
care unit in healthcare systems and the main way of patient’s 
admission to hospital. It is one of the most important 
components of the whole healthcare system and one of the 
most complex areas of a hospital. 
The complexity of the ED service is due to its operation 
mode, which results from human actions and interactions 
between the different elements of which it is composed, and 
simulation based on an Agent-Based Model of the System 
(ABMS) becomes a powerful tool for its description. 
Simulation provides a better understanding of the system 
working way and of the activity of its elements, and it 
facilitates decision-making to establish strategies for its 
optimal operation [1][2]. Definitely, it is a way to achieve 
additional knowledge of the system, by developing inference 
processes on the variables of interest of the system in order 
to make predictions about the behavior of these variables 
under different conditions, based on information obtained 
from the generated data [3]. 
B. Simulation as a sensor of the real system 
This work in progress aims to obtain knowledge of the 
system, which could not be obtained without the use of 
simulation. In fact, the starting idea of this research is to 
understand the simulation as a “sensor” of the real system 
[4]. Such idea suggests the hypothesis of the ability to gain 
knowledge about the ED service behavior from the data 
provided by the simulation of any possible scenario. Then 
simulation allows us to obtain data from exceptional, ideal or 
extreme situations of the ED, such as extraordinary or 
unusual number of patients or abnormal number of staff 
(doctors or nurses). This information is very difficult to have 
in other way because it is impossible to prove these kinds of 
scenarios in the real system. Data obtained directly from the 
real system will be complemented with data generated by the 
simulator. This will allow us to obtain much more refined 
behavior models of the system, an extra knowledge which 
would not be possible to obtain without the simulation. 
C. An Agent-Based Model of the Emergency Deparment 
Previous work carried out by our research group, High 
Performance Computing for Efficient Applications and 
Simulation (HPC4EAS), of the Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona (UAB), in collaboration with the ED Staff Team 
of the Hospital de Sabadell (one of the most important 
hospitals in Spain, which provides care service to an 
influence area of 500,000 people, and attends 160,000 
patients per year in the ED), has led to the design and 
development of an agent-based-model of the ED. The model 
describes the ED's behavior from the actions and interactions 
between agents, and between them and the ED physical 
environment. The result is a simplified version of the ED 
which simulates patients with less acuity level (4 and 5 in the 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

scale of priority and urgency that applies in Spanish 
hospitals), those causing saturation of the service most of the 
time. The implementation of the simulator has been done 
with NetLogo, an Agent-Based Simulation environment well 
suited for modeling complex systems, and it has been 
validated and verified, in this its first version  [5][6]. 
The input parameters that characterize each different 
scenario in the simulation of the real system are the 
healthcare staff configuration, the number of incoming 
patients, the derivation percentage of patients and the period 
of time simulated. In addition, each simulation provides data 
of the Length of Stay (LoS) of all patients in all ED locations 
and the number of patients per hour and location [5][6]. 
D. High Performance Computing (HPC) 
There are a great number and variety of simulated agents, 
and different possible values for the input parameters in the 
simulator. This results in a large number of different possible 
scenarios to be simulated. There is no other limitation in the 
amount of data that can be generated than the computational 
time needed for the executions of the simulation. Using High 
Performance Computing (HPC) we can run the simulation 
for any possible scenario in reasonable computation time. 
Each execution will generate the corresponding data based 
on the designed model. Thus, the potential of HPC makes it 
possible to generate a very large number of data, store this 
data, process and analyze it to be transformed into 
information. The effective processing and analysis of this 
intensive data cannot be done with traditional statistical 
techniques, and the use of data mining techniques is required 
to discovering these yet unknown patterns in the data and 
complete the knowledge discovery cycle. The new 
knowledge of the system can be manifested through patterns, 
rules, associations, groups, constraints, trends, etc. 
There are previous works in which data mining is applied 
in different processes within the Hospital Emergency 
Departments to obtain knowledge about them. But in all 
cases, the analyzed data comes directly from the real system. 
These other works can guide us, taking as a reference their 
objective of study and the algorithms that they have applied 
in each case. The prediction of the demand for health 
workers, the influence of different variables on the workload, 
the expected saturation of the service, the formation of 
bottle-necks in the connection with the hospital and the 
creation of a clinical recommender system, or diagnostic 
support, are the objectives of these referred works 
[7][8][9][10][11]. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the 
objectives and features of the research, and the proposed 
methodology; Section III describes a case study which is a 
reduced example of the proposed working method. Finally, 
section IV closes the paper with discussion and future work. 
II. 
OBJECTIVES AND PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 
The main purpose of this research is to obtain knowledge 
from the intensive data generated via simulation of the real 
system. 
The specific objectives to be achieved are: 
 
To gain knowledge about the system behavior for 
any possible situation (e.g., epidemics, mass 
accidents, unexpected increase in the demand for 
service, etc.). 
 
To anticipate solutions for unusual situations: 
Provide prediction models of staff demand and other 
resources in the service, as a reference for making 
decisions in exceptional cases. 
Our proposal of methodology is represented in Figure 1, 
which shows the process we will follow in our search from 
data to knowledge. From bottom to top, the data will be 
generated by the simulator, processed, transformed and 
integrated in a data warehouse, and finally analyzed and 
interpreted using data mining techniques to observe patterns 
and reach unknown models of system behavior. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Phases of the proposed methodology 
The phases of the proposed work system are described 
below in more detail. 
A. The simulator: Source of Data 
Our ED simulator, already verified and validated, allows 
the generation of data concerning different possible 
situations, called scenarios, by assigning different values to 
the input parameters, either representing the more common 
conditions or other extreme or less likely situations, which 
are difficult to test in reality. This approach offers the 
possibility to obtain data for any possible scenario of service. 
Figure 2.  Screenshot with features of the simulator interface. 
The present version of the simulator includes six primary 
areas: admission area, triage boxes, waiting rooms, diagnosis 
and treatment boxes, and x-ray area; and five different types 
of active agents: patients, admission staff, nurses, doctors 
and x-ray technicians (Figure 2). All incoming patients are 
triaged, but once they have been triaged, only patients 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

identified at triage phase with acuity level 4 and 5 are served 
at the stage of diagnosis-treatment phase [12]. 
The input parameters that define each scenario are the 
staff configuration, the number of incoming patients 
(workload), the percentage of patient’s derivation to other 
services, and the simulation period. Each possible 
configuration of the healthcare staff includes: admission 
personnel, triage nurses, doctors, emergency nurses and X-
ray technicians. There is a minimum and maximum number 
of each type of staff, and two different levels of experience, 
low and high, labeled as junior and senior, respectively. 
Furthermore, different values assigned to the random 
number generation seed, will affect the way incoming 
patients arrive into service. The distribution of patients' 
arrival changes, in each simulated hour, for a specific staff 
configuration, a given workload and a determined value for 
patients’ derivation. This results in different iterations for the 
same scenario. 
For each of the executions carried out, the simulator 
provides data concerning healthcare staff configuration, the 
time required by each of them in each location of the service, 
the cost of the configuration, and the Length of Stay (LoS) of 
each patient from their entry into the service until they leave 
the system, and specifically for each of the areas or places 
through which it passes. The number of patients per hour, per 
location, is also registered. Therefore, it is the assigned value 
for the rest of parameters defining the simulated scenario: the 
workload, the percentage of derivation for each type of 
patient, the simulation period and the random seed. 
The data obtained directly from the real system is the first 
approach to obtain information. But, we can generate a much 
larger number of data using the simulator as a sensor of this 
real system, and thus, as data source, so that the reliability of 
the results will be much higher. 
B. Transforming Data: The Data Warehouse 
After capturing the data, we can try to upgrade its quality, 
decoding, reformatting and merging it. Extract, Transform 
and Load (ETL) tools must help us to extract, scrub, 
transform and integrate all data in a proper way to be stored 
in a database, data mart or a data warehouse, to make its 
further analysis possible. Data partitioning, data combining 
or data summarization is the way to transform data and 
convert them from operational system format to data 
warehouse format. 
C. Observing Patterns: Data Mining 
Stored data contains information that should be treated. 
We must deal with the analysis of large amounts of data, 
reason why statistical techniques and traditional methods are 
inadequate and difficult to apply. 
Data mining techniques will be used to analyze such a 
large amount of data and try to extract the information 
behind them. Classification, association and clustering 
methods and algorithms, among others, are some of them. 
We have to choose which will be the best algorithm to find 
patterns or trends that will allow us, in turn, make inferences 
and prediction models through regressions between the 
observed variables. 
D. Acces to knowledge 
Finally, this data analysis should lead us to knowledge 
discovery in terms of behavioral or prediction models. That 
might be helpful for decision-making in the operational 
management of the ED by the persons responsible for it. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
In this context and according to the agreed methodology, 
we will try to obtain knowledge from a set of data already 
available, obtained from the simulator execution for a 
reduced set of scenarios, carried out in a previous work 
within our research group [12]. 
In this case study, we deal with a set of scenarios 
characterized by the healthcare staff configuration and the 
number of incoming patients (workload). Any other input 
parameter is fixed for all the scenarios. The period of 
activivy simulated is the equivalent to one day (24 hours), 
the value for patient derivation percentage is zero, and the 
random seed is also fixed. 
In the referred work [12], the total number of different 
staff configurations is 28,350. In addition, four different 
workload scenarios of total incoming patients, during the 24 
hours of ED activity, are considered: up to 96, 216, 312, and 
408 patients average per day. 
In [12], it is described how exhaustive search among all 
configurations for a given workload was used to find out the 
optimal ED staff configuration that led to the minimum 
patient Length of Stay in the ED under a cost configuration 
constraint (the cost of staff configuration must be less or 
equal to €3,500) and the amount of human resources (ED 
Staff) available. 
Moreover, in [12], it was implemented an alternative 
approach to reduce the computation time in simulation 
executions. This approach consisted of a combination of the 
Montecarlo method and K-means. After a random 
configuration execution by the Montecarlo method, the 
results of the K-means clustering method were that the 
scenarios were aggregated in some specific regions through 
the average LoS. Within the region containing the optimal 
solution, again an exhaustive search was carried out. 
Now, we wonder about the possible relation between the 
set of staff configurations that are aggregated in the same 
cluster, as a result of this clustering method, applied to all the 
simulated scenarios. Do the points (configuration) of a 
specific region follow a specific law? Do they have 
something in common? Why have these regions and no 
others appeared? The goal is to observe patterns, similarities, 
any common feature among the staff configuration of all the 
scenarios of a same region. Then try to establish relations, 
and so, new knowledge of the system. 
Around 25,000 configurations of the total 28,350 satisfy 
the considered cost restriction. These are the configurations 
that were executed for each workload. That is, about 100,000 
scenarios were executed. These are the total of scenarios we 
will deal with for the verification of the proposed 
methodology, trying to find this possible relation between 
the aggregated configurations. 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The first step in our methodology process has been done, 
i.e., the data have been generated by the simulator. The 
second phase will be to transform and integrate these data 
into a data warehouse format. 
This is the point we have reached in this work in 
progress. We know there is something hidden in the data 
from these 100,000 scenarios, and we think we have the right 
methodology to find it. Now, we have to choose the right 
algorithms and tools to attain this knowledge. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This ongoing research claims the benefits of simulation 
as source of data targeting a better understanding of the 
behavior of ED. Furthermore, the simulator, once tuned with 
the real system, is able to go beyond purely to replicate 
reality. 
Epidemics, disasters and seasonal fluctuations on the 
demand of the healthcare service are real examples that 
could happen any time in the real system, and cause collapse, 
almost certainly, of the ED. Simulation is a way to obtain 
knowledge of these kinds of situations that can occur in 
reality, but cannot be tested in the real system before they 
happen. 
The methodology proposed is supported by the use of 
high performance computing. HPC allows us to use the 
simulator as a sensor of the real system, to execute a large 
number of simulations, each one of them concerning an 
almost unlimited number of different scenarios, in order to 
obtain a large amount of data, which in many cases would 
not be available without the simulation. 
Applying data mining techniques on such data will allow 
us to extract interesting patterns unknown before, thus, 
information about the real system, and finally knowledge 
about the behavior of the ED in such situations, which is 
useful for the decision making process. 
As future work, a phase of experimentation with the 
simulator in its current version will be performed: Execute 
the simulation in all possible scenarios for different kinds of 
situations, to obtain intensive data to analyze and prove the 
proposed methodology to obtain some results. 
We have to specify the tools and techniques for the 
storage and the processing of the data and find the suitable 
data mining algorithms to analyze it. 
Simultaneously, in the same research line, we are 
working on the model of a new version of the simulator 
which includes patients with more urgent acuity level, that is, 
level 1, 2 and 3 in the mentioned scale of priority. Part of the 
future work is the implementation of this extended version of 
the simulator, which implies an enhancement that will 
greatly increase the number of possible scenarios to take into 
account 
in 
our 
future 
experimentation. 
The 
next 
experimental phase of the research will consist of executing 
new simulations with this extended version of the simulator, 
and again, trying to gain knowledge of the real system from 
the massive data generated by the improved sensor. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by the MINECO 
(MICINN) Spain under contract TIN2011-24384. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. M. Mancilla, "Simulation: A tool for the study of real 
systems", Ingeniería y Desarrollo, Universidad del Norte, vol. 
6, 1999, pp.104–112. Available from: 
http://rcientificas.uninorte.edu.co/index.php/ingenieria/article/
view/2226/1443 [Retrieved: July, 2014]  
[2] J. Pavón, M. Arroyo, S. Hassan, and C. Sansores, “Simulation 
of social systems with software agents”, CMPI-2006, Actas 
del Campus Multidisciplinar en Percepcion e Inteligencia, 
vol. 
1, 
2006, 
pp. 
389-400. 
Available 
from: 
http://samer.hassan.name/files/CMPI.pdf 
[Retrieved: 
July, 
2014] 
[3] L. R. Izquierdo, J.M. Galán, J.I. Santos, and R. Del Olmo, 
“Modeling complex systems using agent-based simulation 
and system dynamics”, “Modelado de sistemas complejos 
mediante simulación basada en agentes y mediante dinámica 
de sistemas”, Empiria: Revista de metodología de ciencias 
sociales, vol. 16, 2008, pp. 85–112. 
[4] A. Choudhary, Northwestern University, USA, Keynote 
Speaker: “Big Data, exascale systems and knowledge 
discovery – The next frontier for HPC, Euro-Par Conference, 
August 
2013. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.europar2013.org/upload/Dokumente/Euro-Par-
2013-Keynote-Choudhary.pdf [Retrieved: July, 2014] 
[5] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera, and E. Luque, “Modeling, 
simulation and optimization of resources management in 
hospital emergency departments using the agent-based 
approach”, Advances in Computational Modeling Research, 
2013, pp.1–31. 
[6] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera,  F. Epelde, M. L. Iglesias, and E. 
Luque, “Using an agent-based simulation for predicting the 
effects of patients derivation policies in emergency 
departments”, Procedia Computer Science, vol. 18, ICCS 
2013, pp. 641–650. 
[7] C. C. Yang, W. T. Lin, H. M. Chen, and Y.H. Shi, 
“Improving scheduling of emergency physicians using data 
mining analysis”, Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, 
no. 2, 2009, pp.3378–3387. 
[8] A. Ceglowski, L. Churilov,  and J. Wassertheil, “Knowledge 
discovery through mining emergency department data”, 
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, IEEE, 2005, pp. 142c–142c. 
[9] A. Ceglowski, L. Churilov, and J. Wassertheil, “Combining 
data mining and discrete event simulation for a value-added 
view of a hospital emergency department”, Journal of the 
Operational Research Society, 2006, pp. 246–255. 
[10] L. Grigull and W. M. Lechner, “Supporting diagnostic 
decisions using hybrid and complementary data mining 
applications: a pilot study in the pediatric emergency 
department”, Pediatric research, vol.71, no. 6,  2012, pp. 725–
31.  
[11] W. T. Lin, Y. C. Wu, J. S. Zheng, and M. Y. Chen, “Analysis 
by data mining in the emergency medicine triage database at a 
Taiwanese 
regional 
hospital”, 
Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications, vol. 38, no. 9, 2011, pp. 11078–11084. 
[12] E. Cabrera, M. Taboada, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. 
Luque, “Simulation optimization for healthcare emergency 
departments”, Procedia Computer Science, vol. 9, ICCS 2012, 
pp. 1464–1473. 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

