Increase of Robustness on Pre-optimized Production Plans Through Simulation-
based Analysis and Evaluation 
Christoph Laroque 
Heinz Nixdorf Institute 
University of Paderborn 
Paderborn, Germany 
 
laro@hni.uni-paderborn.de 
Robin Delius 
Heinz Nixdorf Institute 
University of Paderborn 
Paderborn, Germany  
 
robin.delius@hni.upb.de 
Jan-Hendrik Fischer 
University of Paderborn 
Paderborn, Germany  
 
 
jhfischer@gmail.com 
Dennis Horstkämper 
University of Paderborn 
Paderborn, Germany  
 
 
dhorstkemper@gmail.com  
 
Abstract—We propose the use of the material flow simulation 
to evaluate the robustness of a production plan, which was 
created and optimized with no respect to unforeseen 
derivations. Since the necessary probabilities for machine 
failures and similar operational events on the floor can easily 
be integrated in the simulation model, in order to analyze, how 
initial plan performs in these situations. The influence of 
unforeseen events in daily production cannot be modeled 
within mathematical optimization without consuming large 
amounts of computation time. We show a possible way to use 
simulation to evaluate and enhance a production plan. We 
illustrate the developed process using a real-world use-case of 
medium complexity and can show, that simulation is able to 
evaluate the robustness of a given pro-optimizes production 
plan. 
Keywords: material flow simulation; robustness; production 
planning; mathematical optimization 
I. 
MOTIVATION 
Even after overcoming the global economic crisis 
tremendous requirements exist within the daily operation of 
a production facility and its supply chain. Fluctuating 
demands are leading to less adaequate forecast data and the 
need to lower capital commitment is leading to the 
necessarily of designing robust production planning models 
[1],[5],[6]. It is always the intention to be able to serve all 
demands in due time while causing minimal costs. 
Several uncertainties exist within the production 
planning process. On the one hand, many unforeseen events 
can take place: machine failures, missing materials, changed 
sales demands or ill employees are only a small subset of 
possible examples. On the other hand, it is simply 
impossible to include all factors that might occur into the 
planning process in the first place. Therefore, planning 
methods are always based on different models of a 
production structure, which are an abstraction of reality 
themselves.  It is the responsibility of the production planner 
to decide which factors he wants to take into the account 
when creating his models. He always has to find a 
compromise between the detail level of the model (and 
therefore its significance) and the solvability of the 
optimization problem which is created on its basis. The lot 
sizing and scheduling problems that are used within 
production planning are usually already np-complete even in 
their simplest form [15]. Therefore, one cannot guarantee to 
be able to find acceptable solutions in a timely manner 
while using modern operation research techniques. Thus, we 
have to find a solution to include the aforementioned 
uncertainties within the production planning process without 
limiting its solvability significantly. We connect a 
mathematical optimization model with a down streamed 
material flow simulation for this purpose. While we always 
assume optimal conditions within the mathematical 
optimization model, we are including the uncertainties in the 
simulation process. This allows us to analyze whether a 
production plan is able to perform well creating an 
acceptable 
monetary 
solution 
under 
these 
changed 
conditions or not. We create a sensible scheduling using 
rule-based machine controls within the simulation. In 
addition, we are able to create automatic or manual 
modifications of the plan and can evaluate these as well 
using additional simulations. It is easily possible to develop 
a more robust production plan with these tools. 
Simulations usually are used to verify the solutions of an 
optimization problem. However, the aim of our research is to 
replace parts of the optimization process with simulation 
methods to receive solutions with an acceptable quality on a 
timely matter. First, we solve a mathematical optimization 
problem with standard solver software like IBM ILOG 
CPLEX [17]. Figure 1 shows the general optimization and 
simulation process.  
After regarding the necessary State-of-the-Art in Section 
II, we describe the production model and the corresponding 
optimization models in Section III. It is possible to include 
uncertainties in the planning phase within the mathematical 
optimization process. We briefly discuss these methods in 
Section IV. To generate a more robust production plan 
based upon a given near optimal plan we propose a 
procedure which generates and evaluates a number of 
scenarios with the help of off-line simulations to create a 
new plan. We explain the transfer of the optimization 
solutions into the simulation process in Section V. To cover 
a broad spectrum of stochastically possible scenarios; 
several replications of the stochastic simulation based upon 
the production structure are performed. This way we are 
able to cover a wide field of possible scenarios for machine 
failures and other events. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

CPLEX
MST-File
Converter
Production 
Plan
d³FACT
Production 
Plan including 
uncertainties 
Evaluation
DB
Evaluated Production 
Plans
Postprocessing
 
Figure 1: General Structure of presented concept 
 
The production schedules are logged and afterwards 
evaluated on the base of costs and robustness. A rule-based 
machine control is used, to try to reduce possible production 
losses when intermediate products were not assembled in 
due time. An additional post-processing can be used to 
maintain further robustness increasing actions. The effect of 
these actions can be evaluated using further simulations. We 
present these processes in Section VI. We finally evaluate 
the outcome of our work using a case study. Additionally, 
we give a conclusion (Section VII) and an outlook towards 
further possibilities and improvements for this approach.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
An ideal environment, free from external influences as 
used in most scheduling approaches is normally not given 
when processing a production plan. Production settings are 
subject to influences from human and machine failures. 
Additional resources and materials might not be available in 
due time and new demands often have to be taken into 
account on a short-term notice. A comprehensive overview 
about the execution of production plans under uncertainties 
is given by Aytug et al. [2]. They develop a taxonomy to 
classify uncertainties, to be able to classify numerous facets 
of disturbances within operational procedures. These are 
characterized by four dimensions: 
• 
Cause (e.g., machine failure) 
• 
Context (e.g., materials have not been delivered) 
• 
Effect (postponed starting times) 
• 
Inclusion (reaction upon interruptions, either  
predictive or reactive) [2] 
These aspects illustrate 
uncertainties 
within the 
production planning process. The effect of disturbances and 
interruptions depends upon the robustness of the scheduling. 
Schneeweiß [15] gives a basic definition of a robust plan: A 
plan is robust, when it is insensitive against random 
environmental influences. Based on this expression one 
cannot find any quantitative measurements however. Scholl 
[16] expanded upon this definition. We mainly consider two 
of the criteria he developed: If a plan is always valid, no 
matter what environmental influences may effect it, it is 
called “total validity robust”. One cannot assume to reach 
this level in practical applications though. Therefore, one is 
able to analyze the validity robustness in greater detail 
instead of using a binary value.  One could analyze the 
amount of broken model restrictions or also weight them 
after their importance. Within production planning, it is 
especially important to stay within the machine capacities 
and to adhere to given deadlines. We can consider the 
objective function of the planning models as the result of a 
production planning process. Therefore, one can define the 
criteria of result robustness: A plan is result robust, when its 
result only differs in a minimal way from the original plan 
when random environmental influences occur. However, a 
good result for one scenario may often lead towards a bad 
result for another scenario. Additionally result and validity 
robustness conflict with each other: a higher validity often 
causes higher costs. 
Simulations can fulfill two roles within robust 
production planning: on the one hand, one can use a 
simulation to simply assess and evaluate the robustness of a 
plan to confirm the validity of other approaches to create 
robust production plans. On the other hand they can be used 
to create robust production plans to include uncertainties. 
Aytug et. al [2] identified three main approaches in prior 
literature to create robust production plans: completely 
reactive procedures, robust scheduling and predictive-
reactive scheduling. Completely reactive procedures only 
take action when disturbances in the production process 
already occurred. They sort and filter all jobs given to the 
current machine and continue with the job that appears to be 
the best based on this evaluation. 
Robust scheduling approaches instead are creating plans, 
which minimize the effects of disturbances within the 
production procedure. Therefore, a plan for a worst-case 
scenario is created. Such a plan aims to be able to be 
processed in many different scenarios without greater 
difficulties. Both of these approaches share the issue, that 
available capacities will not be used to their full extend. 
A large amount of research happens within the area of 
predictive-reactive scheduling. First, a plan for the whole 
planning horizon is created. This plan will be adapted later 
on. This can happen in a periodic fashion, on the occurrence 
of new events or in combination of both methods. In 
practice, these hybrid approaches are mostly used [12], [7]. 
Simulations are a standard tool to evaluate the 
robustness of production plans. This can be done based 
upon different target measures. Honkomp et al. [10] 
compare a basic deterministic simulation with multiple 
stochastic replications. To measure the robustness they use 
metrics that either compute the relation between the average 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

objctive function of the stochastic simulations and the 
deterministic objective function or calculate the standard 
deviation of the stochastic simulations towards the best 
deterministic objective function. Apart from cost analysis, 
Pfeiffer et al. [13] also consider the plan efficiency and 
stability. This is also done in the overview about 
rescheduling approaches. Usually one obtains simple 
efficiency measurements (e.g., delays, backlogging amounts 
and production times). One can also evaluate these values 
visually [8]. Plan changes caused by stochastic events are 
processed to optimize the efficiency values. However, 
effects of changes within the scheduling are not taken into 
account within these approaches. Instead of optimizing the 
efficiency values one might also aim to create plans that 
only differ minimal from the original plan. A framework to 
evaluate different techniques to generate robust production 
plans has been developed by Rasconi et al. [14]. 
III. 
PRODUCTION MODEL 
To receive meaningful results we base our work on a 
close to reality production model with a corresponding 
complexity. Leaned upon a company in the supply industry 
of average size the model contains 21 machines with a 
general production structure, meaning that converging, 
diverging and linear substructures appear. Some of the 44 
products can be produced on several machines in a parallel 
matter. This may possibly lead to different production and 
setup times as well as costs. 11 products with external 
consumer demands exist in total. Based on this assumption, 
a high degree of freedom exists, when a concrete production 
plan shall be created. Figure 2 shows the overall machine 
plan and material flow of the production model. 
Typically, two different optimization models are used to 
create a production plan. Initially we calculate the lot sizes 
using 
a 
Multilevel 
Capacitated 
Lotsizing 
Problems 
(MLCLSP) based upon macro periods. Subsequently one 
creates a plan based upon micro periods using a Discrete 
Lotsizing and Scheduling Problem (DLSP) to determine 
exact production timings. As a result, the order in which the 
machines process their corresponding lots is decided.  
A. Lotsizing  
To determine the production amounts for each given 
period we use a MLCLSP in this paper. The basic version of 
the MLCLSP, as described by Tempelmeier and Helber [9] 
develops a cost optimal multiperiod production plan based 
on given demands, production costs, setup costs, inventory 
costs and machine capacities. For this purpose the 
optimization problem tries to take advantage of possible 
synergy effects that occur when production lots for several 
demands are combined, creating less need for setup 
processes. In contrast, this might create capital commitment 
and inventory costs when products are created in an earlier 
period. Therefore, a compromise between these factors has 
to be found. The model considers machine capacities in 
particular. Each machine can only be operated for a limited 
amount of time per period, for example for one or several 
working shifts. This does force an inventory increase. 
The MLCLSP is a model based on macro periods. 
Therefor it only determines which amounts of which 
products are produced on which machine in every given 
period. The model explicitly does not determine a lot 
scheduling. To reproduce dependencies between different 
products lead times are used. If a product needs another 
product from an earlier production level as an input, it has to 
be produced in an earlier period. A production of 
intermediate products is triggered whenever a final product 
is created. A bill of materials is used to determine the 
needed amounts.  
The 
MLCLSP 
we 
are 
using 
contains 
several 
enhancements over the basic models used in most literature. 
Several additional constraints are used to comply with the 
complexity of real production planning. Additionally to the 
standard model, we allow backlogging for products that 
have a direct external demand. Products can be 
manufactured on several machines in a parallel matter. We 
include transport lots and the machine capacities are 
determined upon a flexible work shift model. The 
mathematical formulation of the used model is as follows: 
Model MLCLSP: 
 
Minimize O = ∑
∑
∑
                  
 
   
 
   
 
   
                                
 
Under the Constraints: 
                ∑
         
    
              
            
    ,   
  
(4.1.1) 
 ∑
                      
        
      
    ,     
(4.1.2) 
               
    ,   
  
(4.1.3) 
                
    ,    
  
(4.1.4) 
             
     
(4.1.5) 
               
    ,    
 ,      
(4.1.6) 
        
     
     
       
    ,    
 ,      
(4.1.7) 
                
    ,    
 ,      
(4.1.8) 
             
    ,    
  
(4.1.9) 
    = 0 +    
          
      
    
       
    ,     
(4.1.10) 
   
      
      
    
    ,     
(4.1.11) 
In the objective function the sum of setup-, stock-, 
production-, backlog and personal costs are minimized. The 
following constraints enforce the creation of a valid 
production plan which fulfills external demands in due time 
whenever possible. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
Figure 2: Machine Plan 
 
Constraint 4.1.1. creates a balance between external 
demands on one side and production- stock and backlog 
amounts as well as secondary demands on the other side. To 
be sure that intermediate products are assembled before the 
final product is created, products must be created a day 
before the secondary demand takes place. Machine 
capacities are taken into account in constraint 4.1.2. It is 
only possible to perform a limited amount of production and 
setup activities within a single period. Using constraint 
4.1.3. ensures that one can only produce a product on a 
machine when a machine is was set up for that product. 
Additionally constraint 4.1.6. ensures that machines can 
only produce products that they can be set up for. Constraint 
4.1.8 expresses that production lots always have to be a 
multiple of transport lots. Within constraint 4.1.9, maximum 
backlog amounts for each product are defined. This way we 
can ensure that demands for intermediate products cannot be 
backlogged. The constraint 4.1.10 and 4.1.11 determine the 
amount of working shifts used for a machine in a certain 
period. The other constraints are used to design meaningful 
bounds to the variables, for example, stock amounts always 
have to have a positive value. 
 
Variables and constants meanings: 
    
Direct demand coefficient of products k and i 
    
Available capacity of resource j in period t 
    
Primary demand for product k in period t 
     
Personal costs for resource j in period t 
   
Stock expense ratio for product k 
   
Penalty costs for backlogging of product k 
J 
Amount of Resources (j= 1,2,…,J) 
   
Index set of operations performed by resource j 
M 
Big number 
   
Index set of followers of product k 
    
production costs of product k in period t 
     
Production amount of product k on resource j in 
period t 
     
Amount of containers of product k processed by 
resource j in period t  
      
Container size/Transport lot size for product k 
    
Setup costs for product k on resource j 
T 
Length of planning horizon measured in periods 
(t=1,2,…,T) 
     
Production time for product k on resource j 
     
Setup time for product k on resource j 
    
Stock for product k at the end of period t 
     
Binary setup variable for product k on resource j in 
period t 
     
Backlog variable for product k in period t 
       
Maximal backlog amount for product k (always 0 for 
intermediate products) 
   
     
     
  
Binary variables used to calculate the amount of used 
working shifts 
B. 
Scheduling 
Using a DLSP one can assess a plan based upon micro 
periods to determine exact production timings. The 
solutions of the MLCLSP can be used as parameters for the 
DLSP. This way one can create a complete machine 
scheduling plan. A basic version of the DLSP can be found 
at Fleischmann [11]. The production amounts within a 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

period that have been determined using the MLCLSP can be 
used as external demands for the DLSP. Periods within the 
DLSP are chosen as the smallest meaningful unit, for 
example the smallest common denominator of setup- and 
production times. The MLCLSP includes lead times; 
therefore, it is not needed to take dependencies between 
production levels into account. Hence, we can solve the 
DLSP for each machine individually. This means that the 
solution times are rather short. The problem complexity is 
appropriately low. We do however not include a DLSP 
within our work, as we use a rule-based machine control to 
create a scheduling plan within the simulation in an even 
shorter amount of time.   
IV. 
FUZZY PARAMETERS IN THE MODEL CREATION 
Fuzzy parameters and uncertain information can be 
reproduced using stochastic methods inside the model 
classes we described earlier. Ideally, we already know exact 
probabilities for possible events in advance. Where 
applicable we can use appropriate prognosis methods to 
estimate this probabilities. Otherwise, we can only use a 
normal or similar distribution. 
The stochastic optimization tries to find a solution that is 
the best for all possible combinations of parameters. Finding 
a solution for these models already is an np-hard problem 
for sharp levels of information. Finding a solution for a 
stochastic problem is an extremely time consuming task. 
Fuzzy parameters might even lead to a state explosion, 
meaning that an exponentially rising amounts of possible 
parameter combinations exist. The overwhelming amount of 
combinations cannot be used to create a valid solution. This 
situation gets even more complicated, as we use a 
multiperiod, multilevel production structure. A problem in 
early periods or on a low level can lead to even more 
problems in later periods or levels. In many situations, one 
cannot find a solution that is applicable for all possible 
situations. Therefore, one cannot assume that that it is 
practical to include uncertainties in the planning process 
using stochastic optimization methods. Even when such a 
solution exists, it is unlikely that it can be found within a 
reasonable amount of time.  
Most stochastic optimization approaches are based on 
three different methods. Multilevel stochastic models with 
compensation are based upon Dantzig [6]. Decisions on one 
level are made at an early point of time and fixed for all 
following levels. We consider a huge amount of possible 
events; therefore, we would have to model a corresponding 
amount of model levels. Stochastic programs with 
probabilistic constraints date back to Charles and Cooper 
[4]. Within these models, the breach of constraints is 
permitted for certain parameter combinations. One can only 
find proper solutions for this type of models when it is 
possible to transform the models into an equal deterministic 
model. Additionally, the expressive value of the model can 
be reduced due to the loosened constraints. Bellman [3] 
introduced stochastic dynamic programming. Based upon a 
decision tree a backward chaining is used to conclude the 
ideal choice at the decision situation. All this approaches 
share the issue that they can only be solved efficiently, if the 
amount of possible scenarios can be reduced to a certain 
amount. However, when looking at a real production 
problem many decisions are possible. Therefor we have to 
find different methods to include uncertainties within the 
production planning process.   
V. 
INTERFACES TO THE OPTIMIZATION SOFTWARE 
To be able to simulate the results of an optimization, the 
solution data has to be preprocessed in order to prepare the 
data for the simulation model. CPLEX can export a XML-
based file-format, which contains the mathematical 
programming solution for all variables of the problem. The 
Converter module reads the file line by line, whereas each 
line represents a variable. We mainly need two decision 
variables to be able to simulate the plan: The production 
variable      determines the products that are produced on a 
certain machine in a given time period. Additional data like 
production- and setup times as well as costs can be read 
from the database based on this production lots. Because a 
work shift model has been included in the mathematical 
optimization, every machine can have a different capacity in 
each period. Therefore, we also have to take the variable 
    into account, which describes these capacities. As we 
included lead times within the MLCLSP, all needed 
intermediate products should be available at the beginning 
of a new period. This means that there are no special 
requirements for the machine scheduling. We are able to 
schedule the lots in the same order as they appear within the 
exported XML file. The real scheduling and date 
safeguarding will be done within the simulation process. 
Based upon the given data we are able to calculate all 
needed information in a deterministic fashion. For example, 
we are able to calculate the stock or backlog amounts via a 
difference of production amounts, demands and secondary 
demands. Thus, we have all information needed to control 
the simulation procedure. These calculations are also needed 
to evaluate the simulation results. Therefore, it is a sensible 
approach to calculate these values for the original plan 
instead 
of 
importing 
every 
information 
from 
the 
mathematical model. 
C. 
Simulation 
The simulation model is implemented using the discrete 
event simulator d³FACT developed by our workgroup, 
Business Computing, esp. CIM. The extensible Java API 
provides a high-performance, petri-net-based material flow 
component [1]. 
The production plan information is first transferred 
towards the simulation logic. During the initialization of the 
simulation model, all machines are loading their fixed 
schedules for the complete planning period. It holds for each 
machine, which products in what amount have to be 
produced in each period. Furthermore, it holds the planned 
durations for the maintenance, production and setup 
processes. The lot release order is fixed and stays so, even in 
the case of blocked lots due, to late secondary demands. All 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

released lots are stored in a FIFO-Queue, to be processed in 
their incoming order. At the beginning of each new period, 
all planned lots are enqueued and the production cycle 
starts. Prior to nearly any lot, a setup is intended for rigging 
the machine. If planned, a routine maintenance of the unit is 
performed after a given amount of work pieces. 
If multiple products or machines demand the same 
intermediate product, a Fork is needed to control the 
material flow. It stores and routes the tokens as needed 
towards the point of consumption. The built-in buffer stores 
the tokens until a machine starts a job and signals its 
demand. The fork uses a FIFO-Queue to handle the 
incoming requests and to minimize the mean waiting time 
for supply. The machine uses a strict FIFO-Queue for lots to 
dispatch. In this naïve version, even a blocked lot with 
unfulfilled secondary demands waits until its demands are 
met. If all lots for a period are finished, the shift ends and 
the next jobs are dispatched in the next period. 
Under certain circumstances, it is possible that in case of 
unmet secondary demands and fully loaded periods, lots are 
pushed into the following period. In this case, the moved 
lots are scheduled prior to the regular lots to dispatch the 
longer waiting jobs first. Because the planning methods 
calculates with one day lead-time it is easily possible that 
delayed lots are blocking further following demands. 
D. 
Uncertainties in the production planning process 
The production schedule execution is typically affected 
by unforeseen interruptions und disturbances. In the 
simulation model, maintenance, cycle, and setup times are 
considered stochastically influenced, due to their high 
influence on the overall flow shop production process and 
their deterministic usage in the production-planning model. 
Material 
shortages, 
which 
arise 
from 
supplier 
unreliableness, are not taken in account and all materials are 
assumed of as supplied in time. 
The maintenance, cycle and setup times that are 
incorporated in the formulation of the production-planning 
problem, are forming the lower bound for the process 
execution and are modeled in the simulation. 
The stochastic influences are modeled with two 
parameters. On the one, hand the likeliness of an increased 
process time and on the other hand the amount of the 
deviation.  The probability that the planned process time 
varies, is modeled with a uniform distribution, whereas for 
the duration a normal distribution is used. Ideally, one is 
able to use historical data to determine the probabilities for 
each machine individually; however, this is not possible in a 
hypothetical model. 
E. 
Rule-based machine control 
To be able to improve the production plan within the 
simulation we are using a rule-based machine control. We 
are allowing a machine to change its own scheduling plan. 
As a day of lead-time is included in our planning process, 
this should not have a negative effect on later production 
levels.  One possible rule that we also implemented appears, 
when a machine is unable to produce a lot because the 
secondary demands cannot be met. In this case, the machine 
logic tries to find other lots for this period, which do not 
need the missing intermediate products. When such a lot 
exists, it is processed first while the original planned lot will 
be processed later. This way, we are able to ensure an even 
utilization of the given machine capacities. Additionally we 
reduce the danger of possible backlog amounts. This way 
we increase the validity robustness of the production plan. 
Another possible decision rule concerns setup carryovers. If 
production lots of the same product exist in successive 
periods, it is sensible to change the scheduling in a way, 
which allows this product to be produced in the end of the 
first period and in the beginning of the second period. 
Therefore, the need to setup the machines for both 
production lots is not applicable anymore. If one introduces 
a setup, carryover into the mathematical optimization highly 
increased solution times may occur. The discussed rule-
based mechanisms however only lead towards a small 
increase in processing time within the simulation process. 
Additional rules can always be applied in a model specific 
fashion. 
F. 
Evaluation 
The evaluation calculates performance figures for the 
validity and result robustness. For measuring the validity 
robustness, we compare the objective value of the simulated 
plans with the objective value of the original plan from the 
mathematical optimization. A comparison of single cost 
values is also possible, like evaluating the influence of 
capital commitment costs. A plan is considered validity 
robust, when it does not violate any of the optimization 
models restrictions. The model we use does allow 
backlogging however. Backlogging always incurs penalty 
costs, which also influence the result robustness. However, 
one cannot assess the influence of delivery dates that could 
not be met, as it might lead to the loss of a customer in the 
extreme cases. Therefore, it is sensible to protocol every 
appearance of backlog amounts. 
Important information considers the machine load 
factors. It can happen that the planned or even the maximum 
capacity of a machine is not sufficient to produce all lots 
allocated to it. These events are protocolled and evaluated 
separately as well. This allows for the search of admissible 
alternatives.  
G. 
Post-Processing 
Within the post-processing component, we are able to 
use additional simulation external methods to generate an 
improved production plan with an increased robustness 
based upon the simulated production plan. An increase of 
validity however usually creates increased costs. Therefore, 
we cannot assume that increased validity robustness also 
correlates with high result robustness. 
The simplest way to increase the robustness of a plan is 
to extend the given capacities where possible. Our model is 
based on a possible three-shift production. Generally, one 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

tries to avoid using all three shifts to avoid high personal 
costs during nighttime. By courtesy of the simulation we 
can however estimate the increase of robustness when 
considering the introduction of additional shifts. This allows 
the production planner to decide whether the additional 
costs are justified or not. One possible way to do this 
automatically is to calculate the average of the production 
timings after a higher number of simulations. Afterwards we 
can determine the average machine load factor and decide 
upon the amount of needed work shifts.  
Another possible way to increase the robustness of the 
production plan is to move several lots into an earlier 
period, when this period contains larger capacity reserves. 
This process is considerably more complicated, as 
secondary demands also have to be fulfilled in due time.  
Therefor one cannot simply review available capacities for 
the final product. One also has to check whether available 
capacities for the production of all needed intermediate 
products exist, which often is not the case when the overall 
machine load factor is constantly high. Additionally an 
earlier production causes further inventory and capital 
commitment costs. Thus, this way often is not an opportune 
choice. In general, it lies in the responsibility of the 
production planner to decide which amounts of cost 
increases he accepts to increase the validity robustness of 
his production plans. All production plans that are created 
within the post-processing can be simulated and evaluated 
again. The production planer consequently can access all 
information he needs to come to a corresponding decision. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
We executed several simulation runs based upon the 
production plan created by the mathematical optimization, 
using a planning horizon of 56 periods with a dynamic 
demand structure. We assumed a failure rate of 10% for 
each machine. The corresponding processes were prolonged 
by a standard deviation of 15% and 30%. Table 1 shows 
several performance indicators in a comparison of 
simulations with a naïve and rule-based machine control, in 
particular focusing delays for final products... We calculated 
the average values of 100 simulation runs. The rule-based 
machine controls objective function costs are considerably 
lower than the costs caused by the naïve machine control. It 
is noticeable that less final parts get delayed when using the 
rule-based machine control. Therefore, the ability to supply 
is increased and lower delay penalty costs occur. These also 
explain the lower objective cost values. 
 
TABLE 1: COMPARISON BETWEEN DETERMINISTIC (D), RULE-BASED 
(RB) AND NAIVE (N)MACHINE CONTROL 
 
 
However, a deterministic simulation of the production 
plan without stochastic influences shows that no penalty 
costs occur. The deterministic objective function value is 
correspondingly low. The rule-based machine control causes 
an improvement in result robustness as well as validity 
robustness. Table 2 shows the corresponding evaluation 
metrics by Honkomp et al. [10].  
TABLE 2: METRICS BY HONKOMP 
Standard 
Deviation Sim-Type 
          
  
̅̅̅̅      
15% 
Rule-Based 
40,00% 
1,42 
Naive 
40,09% 
1,52 
30% 
Rule-Based 
42,90% 
1,57 
Naive 
44,40% 
1,69 
 
The first column represents the relations between the 
standard deviation of all objective function values of all 
stochastic simulation runs and the objective function value 
of the deterministic simulation. A lower value indicates that 
disturbances and environmental influences have less impact 
on the ability to supply. The second column represents the 
relations between the objective function values of stochastic 
and deterministic simulations. The value shows the cost 
increase caused by the disturbances and directly shows the 
result robustness. Normally, a higher robustness is gained 
by increased costs. However, the inclusion of penalty costs 
into the objective function value causes lower cost for the 
more robust plan.  
Another reason for increased costs are the personal 
costs. The simulation showed that more working shifts have 
to be introduced to be able to satisfy customer demands. The 
original plan was using working shift per day. The resulting 
plans when using either simulation method mostly used two 
or three shifts. The rule-based machine control delays 13% 
less products beyond the planned capacity restrictions, 
therefore needing less working shifts and causing less 
personal costs as well. When analyzing the problems within 
the production process one needs to find out where a 
possible bottleneck occurs. During the simulation we 
protocol all occurrences of backlog amounts and the 
connected machines, products and periods. For further 
analysis we can determine which products are delayed most 
as shown in figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3: Delayed Final Parts according to products 
Standard 
Deviation
Sim-
Type
Objective 
Function
Delayed Final 
Products 
(Absolute)
Delayed Final 
Products 
(Relative)
Delay Penalty 
Costs
Stock Costs
D
2.769.282,95 € 2.769.282,95 € 2.769.282,95 € 2.769.282,95 € 2.769.282,95 €
RB
3.944.976,12 € 3.944.976,12 € 3.944.976,12 € 3.944.976,12 € 3.944.976,12 €
N
4.211.949,84 € 4.211.949,84 € 4.211.949,84 € 4.211.949,84 € 4.211.949,84 €
RB
4.355.206,90 € 4.355.206,90 € 4.355.206,90 € 4.355.206,90 € 4.355.206,90 €
N
4.670.432,31 € 4.670.432,31 € 4.670.432,31 € 4.670.432,31 € 4.670.432,31 €
15%
30%
1,66% 
98,34% 
Product 10
Product 11
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Surprisingly, most delays are caused by one final part. 
This is an obvious sign that the production capacity for this 
part might not be sufficient. Alternatively, production 
capacities for needed intermediate products might be 
insufficient. This can be found out by analyzing internal 
delays for the intermediate products. Table 3 shows the 
absolute and relative internal delays for both simulation 
types averaged over 100 simulations. We define internal 
delays as the amount of intermediate products that couldn’t 
be produced in the planned period. 
The usage of the rule-based machine control also shows 
an improvement when considering the internal demands. 
Despite not leading to direct revenue losses due to unmet 
demands, internal delays can cause costs when changes in 
the production plan have to be made. These costs aren’t 
implicitly included into our production model, but it is in 
the interest of the production planner to reduce these costs 
as well. When considering the internal delays per product 
we are able to find out that product 10 and product 11 are 
based on the same intermediate product. This product 
possesses several internal delays, which influence the 
production of the final products. We were able to find the 
bottleneck in our production model and can take action to 
reduce the impact of this issue. 
 
TABLE 3: ANALYSIS: ACCUMULATION OF INTERNAL DELAYS 
Standard 
Deviatio
n 
Sim-Type 
Internal 
Delays 
(Absolute) 
Internal 
Delays 
(Relative) 
15% 
Rule-Based 
10194,38 
1,81% 
Naive 
11172,92 
1,99% 
30% 
Rule-Based 
16172,68 
2,88% 
Naive 
17266,10 
3,07% 
VII. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have shown in this paper that a material flow 
simulation can be used to analyze a production plan created 
in a mathematical optimization and to evaluate its 
robustness. It is easily possible to read the results of an 
optimization process, to transfer this data into our 
simulation framework. We are able to simulate the plan 
including probabilities for unforeseen events and fuzzy 
information. The results of the simulations can be used to 
find possible weak spots in the given plan. In several cases, 
we might be able to fix these weak spots through automatic 
post-processing or with manual changes. The effect of these 
changes can also be evaluated using additional simulation 
runs. Therefore, a production planner can decide whether he 
wants to implement these changes or not. Performing a large 
number of simulations is substantially faster than running 
another instance of the optimization problem. In the end, we 
recommend this approach for practical and economic usage. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Almeder, C.; Preusser, M.; Hartl, Richard F.: Simulation and 
optimization of supply chains: alternative or complementary 
approaches? In OR Spectrum 31, S.95–119, Springer Verlag, 2009 
[2] Aufenanger, M., Dangelmaier, W., Laroque, C., Rügener, N.: 
“Knowledge-based Event Control For Flow-Shops Using Simulation 
and Rules”. In Proceedings of the 2008 Winter Simulation 
Conference, Edited by S. J. Mason, R. R. Hill, O. Rose,  T. Jefferson, 
J. W. Fowler, p 1952-1958, 2008 
[3] Aytug, H., Lawley,M.A., McKay, K., Mohan, S. Uzsoy, R.: 
“Executing production schedules in the face of uncertainties: A 
review and some future directions.” European Journal of Operational 
Research 161: p68-110, 2005. 
[4] Bellman R.: “Dynamic Programming”, Princeton University 
Press,Princeton, New Jersey, 1957 
[5] Bihlmaier, R.; Koberstein, A.; · Obst, R.: Modeling and optimizing of 
strategic and tactical production planning in the automotive industry 
under uncertainty In OR Spectrum 31, S. 311-336, Springer Verlag, 
2009 
[6] Biswas S, Narahari Y (2004) Object oriented modeling and decision 
support for supply chains. Eur J Oper, Res 153:704–726 
[7] Charnes, A.; Cooper, W.W.: Chance-constrained programming: 
Management Science 5:73-79, 1959. 
[8] Chong, C. S., Sivakumar, A. I., Gay, R.: “Simulation-based 
scheduling for dynamic discrete manufacturing.” In Proceedings of 
the 2003 Winter Simulation Conference, Edited by S. Chick, P.J. 
Sánchez, D. Ferrin, and D. J. Morrice, 2003 
[9] Dantzig, 
G.B.: 
“Linear 
Programming 
under 
uncertainty”, 
Management Science 1:197-206, 1955. 
[10] Frantzén, M., Ng, A. H. C. , Moore, P.: “Asimulation-based 
scheduling system for real-time optimization and decision making 
support”. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 2011 
[11] Ghezail, F., Pierreval, F., Hajri-Gabouj, S.: “Analysis of robustness in 
proactive scheduling: A graphical approach”. In Computers & 
Industrial Engineering 58 (2010) 193-198, 2009 
[12] Helber, S., Tempelmeier, H.: “A heuristic for dynamic multi-item 
multi-level capacitated lotsizing for general product structures” in 
European Journal of Operational Research 75, 296-311, North-
Holland,1994 
[13] Honkomp, S., Mockus, J.L., Reklaitis, G.V.: „A framework for 
schedule evaluation with processing uncertainty“. Computers and 
Chemical Engineering 23:595-609., 1999 
[14] Fleischmann, B.: “The discrete lot-sizing and scheduling problem” in 
European Journal of Operational Research 44, 337-348, North-
Holland, 1990 
[15] Maes, J.; Van Wassenhove, L.: Multi-Item Single-Level Capacitated 
Dynamic Lot-Sizing Heuristics-A General Review: The Journal of the 
Operational Research Society, Vol. 39, No. 11 (1988), S.991-1004 
[16] Peiffer, A., Kádár,., Monostori,L., Karnok, D.: „Simulation as one of 
the core technologies for digital enterprises: assessment of hybrid 
rescheduling methods”, International Journal of Computer Integrated 
Manufacturing, 21:2, 206 – 214, 2007 
[17] Peiffer, A., Kádár,., Monostori,L.: „Stability-oriented evaluation of 
rescheduling strategies, by using simulation.“ In Computers in 
Industrie 58 (2007). 630-643, 2007 
[18] Rasconi, R., Cesta, A., Policella, N..: “Validating scheduling 
approaches against executional uncertainty”. In Journal of Intelligent 
Manufacturing (2010). 49-64, 2008 
[19] Schneeweiß. 
C.: 
“Planung 
2: 
Konzepte 
der 
Prozeß- 
und 
Modellgestaltung“, Springer, 1992 
[20] Scholl, A.,:„Robuste Planung und Optimierung“, Physica-Verlags, 
2004 
[21] ILOG CPLEX :High-Performance Software for Mathematical 
Programming and Optimization: http://www.ilog.com/products/cplex
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

