A Case Study Concept for Supply Chain Resilience Analysis 
Frank Schätter, Florian Haas, Frank Morelli 
Pforzheim University 
Business School 
Tiefenbronner Str. 65, 75175 Pforzheim, Germany 
frank.schaetter@hs-pforzheim.de, florian.haas@hs-pforzheim.de, frank.morelli@hs-pforzheim.de 
 
 
Abstract — In times of crisis, the strong characteristic of a 
supply chain to be resilient is an important success factor. 
However, logistics structures are complex, and it is difficult for 
companies to assess where the vulnerable and, thus, critical 
parts of the supply chain are located. To provide an applicable 
and easy-to-use method, a two-step approach of resilience 
analysis was developed. This paper introduces a case study 
illustrating the different steps of this approach and gives an 
outlook with a focus on process mining. 
Keywords - supply chain resilience; supply chain data 
modelling and simulation; key resilience areas; process mining. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Supply chain resilience analysis is one of the most 
important success factors and trends of supply chain 
management in today's world, e.g., see [1]. Recent events, not 
least the Ukraine war, have shown like a burning glass how 
vulnerable supply chains are when hit by external crisis 
events. But the challenges for companies in dealing with such 
events are complex. Many companies felt the negative 
impacts in the form of disruptions to material flows 
throughout the supply chain. In many cases, the situation was 
even further exacerbated by an unexpected growth in the 
company's own business - as it was the case in the construction 
industry during the coronavirus pandemic.  
One challenge that has arisen repeatedly in recent years is 
that logistics managers often know little about the state of 
resilience of their own supply chain. In this context, resilience 
can be defined by the so-called triangle, which highlights the 
ability of structures to cope with the maximum negative 
impact of a disruption and the duration of the disruption [2]. 
The triangle that emerges between these two dimensions 
characterizes the extent of the current state of resilience. 
Companies need to define measures to reduce the net negative 
impact of a disruption with respect to these two dimensions. 
This is exactly where our research comes in. Due to the 
limited knowledge of logistics managers regarding the state 
of resilience, we propose an easy-to-use procedure to 
preventively increase the transparency in the network and to 
simulate possible management decisions to improve the state 
of resilience. We aim at positive impacts on the dimensions 
of the resilience triangle by limiting either the maximum loss 
or the time of disruption, e.g., by storing critical materials in 
warehouses or by applying a multi-sourcing strategy. In our 
earlier research, see [3,4], we concentrated on the process that 
a supply chain resilience analysis should go through. In this 
paper, we present a case study to illustrate our earlier 
thinking.  
The methodology used to operationalize our approach is 
case study research for qualitative data collection. The 
objective of case study research is to adequately represent 
reality. Case studies are based on empirical investigations 
that analyze a currently relevant issue in a practical context. 
Holism, empiricism, interpretation, and empathy can be 
named as the central parameters for this method [5]. Their use 
proves to be particularly suitable when the boundary between 
observation and context is not clearly evident. Therefore, the 
framework conditions of the phenomenon to be observed 
must also be included. Related studies analyze relationships 
and processes and join different methods and data sources 
[6]. Moreover, the use of a well-defined theoretical basis is 
particularly important to ensure generalizability of results [7]. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the 
next section, we briefly summarize our two-stage approach 
for supply chain resilience analysis, then we present a case 
study and show how the two stages can be translated into 
reality. This paper also provides insights into initial analytical 
results; the next step is to further detail, apply, and discuss 
the case study with practitioners and to move forward with a 
process mining application. Concrete initiatives in this regard 
are summarized in the concluding section. 
II. TWO-STAGE APPROACH OF SUPPLY CHAIN RESILIENCE 
ANALYSIS 
Supply chain resilience analysis should be data-driven by 
applying the data that is directly available to companies: 
transactional data, which represents the physical flows in the 
chain and can be easily captured by Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) systems, and event logs, which can be used 
to understand the actual management processes. Based on 
these two data sets, we have developed an approach that 
provides a guideline for logistics managers to easily assess 
both the current state of strategic resilience of the supply 
chain and the potentials within the actual processes that led 
to this state [4].  
The first stage of our approach relates to the data-based 
modeling of material flows in the supply chain. In this way, a 
company’s network becomes transparent in terms of its 
incoming and outgoing material flows from internal and 
external suppliers to internal and external customers. It must 
be mentioned that a supply chain is actually a very complex 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

structure when considering the entire value creation process. 
Inbound involves suppliers up to the provision of raw 
materials (tier 1-n); outbound involves customers’ customers 
establishing their own relationships and forming large, 
interconnected networks. Rather than claiming to be able to 
model this entire network (which is a challenging, if not 
impossible, undertaking), we focus explicitly on the direct 
links in the supply chain from a company’s perspective that 
can be influenced by its own decisions and collaboration 
initiatives. We have defined the relevant data sets (e.g., 
columns) to be included in a model sufficient to assess the 
strategic state of resilience in the enterprise [4]. These data 
roughly refer to delivery items highlighting the sender and 
receiver locations (e.g., cities, IDs) of a single material flow, 
the date and time of delivery, the quantity of material, and 
relevant metrics such as weight, volume, and landed cost. 
We also introduced a set of eight so-called "Key 
Resilience Areas" (KRAs) that can be focused on to assess 
the current state of supply chain resilience, which can be 
derived from the data-based supply chain model [4]. These 
KRAs provide insights into critical parts of the supply chain. 
First, there are vulnerable entities due to the geographic 
distribution of included companies (KRA1), suppliers 
sourced from with a risky single-sourcing strategy (KRA2), 
the consolidation of different materials within shipments 
(KRA6), and factories and warehouses that could be critical 
for valuable materials due to high volumes (KRA8). Second, 
vulnerable transport relations can be revealed in terms of 
frequent transportation delays of certain relations between 
senders and receivers (KRA5) or relationships at risk due to 
long distances (KRA7). A third category of analyses refers to 
vulnerable materials in the sense of an analysis of materials 
that are currently (not) stored in warehouses (KRA3). In 
addition, the average storage duration of critical materials 
(KRA4) shows the total quantity of a stored material in 
relation to demand. 
The use of KRAs can be understood as a strategic 
assessment of the current structure in terms of its 
vulnerability, which is an important first step in 
understanding the state of resilience. Although such 
transparency of vulnerability is indeed important when 
implementing long-term strategies to assess the benefits of 
resilience and efficiency in the supply chain, a deep 
understanding of the decisions and processes behind this state 
is essential. Therefore, we propose a second analytical stage 
that focuses on the actual management decisions related to 
the processes within the supply chain. Process mining has 
become an important approach in this regard. 
One of the biggest challenges in using process mining is 
the overwhelming amount of event log data available in 
companies. This is exactly where our approach comes in. To 
ensure that the highly relevant event log data can be used to 
uncover real opportunities to improve the state of resilience of 
a supply chain, the first stage of strategic resilience analysis is 
used as a filter: the collected event log data should be analyzed 
with a particular focus on the identified vulnerable entities, 
transportation relations, and materials. The reason for this is 
that these parts within the supply chain are responsible for 
potentially weak resilience and should therefore be assessed 
and possibly changed. 
III. CONCEPTION OF A CASE STUDY 
In this section, we present the concept and initial 
analytical results of a case study to illustrate the application 
of the two stages of our approach. We focus on a 
manufacturing company whose production warehouse is in 
Hamburg, Germany. The resilience analysis should focus on 
the inbound material flows from the tier 1 suppliers. It is 
assumed that all incoming materials are brought to the 
production warehouse in Hamburg before being shipped to 
the actual production sites. The company follows a European 
strategy, which means that all suppliers are located in the 
European Economic Area, including the United Kingdom. 
A. 
Stage 1: Strategic resilience analysis by using a 
data-based supply chain model 
Stage 1 proposes to develop a data-based model of the 
supply chain to analyze and simulate vulnerabilities in the 
network. For the case study, this model represents all inbound 
material flows from suppliers to the warehouse. In the 
following, the relevant aspects in the creation of the model and 
the application of KRAs for strategic resilience analysis are 
presented and discussed. 
Data-based supply chain model 
Logistics managers are provided with a complete list of 
transaction datasets required for the inbound material flow 
modeling, see [4]. The case study therefore considers delivery 
items from the last 12 months obtained from the company's 
ERP system. Here, a delivery item is defined as a single 
material-specific flow from a supplier to the production 
warehouse in Hamburg. The data-based supply chain model, 
thus, comprises the following data sets: 
• 
A sender ID as a unique identifier of the supplier; the 
ID is assigned in the ERP system, a total of 3,783 
suppliers are considered in the case study (E1 to 
E3783). 
• 
The receiver ID as a unique identifier of the recipient. 
In the case study, the production warehouse is defined 
by the receiver ID ‘WH1’. 
• 
The country and city where the supply chain entities 
are located. If they are not included in the transaction 
data, other location master data should be used. In 
total, the 3,783 suppliers are in 3,755 cities and 21 
countries; WH1 is located in Hamburg, Germany. 
• 
Sending date and receiving date as timestamps which 
shows the lead time of the delivery item directly; in 
the case study, we focus on historic shipments from 
2021. In total, the data includes 256 dates of shipment 
and receipt. Furthermore, the defined to-be lead times 
are available within the data. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

• 
A unique material number that defines the actual 
shipment; in the case study, we look at 5,865 material 
numbers (M1 to M5865). 
• 
The quantity of material in the shipment; in the case 
study, all quantities are expressed as the number of 
individual parts (not packages). 
• 
The corresponding total weight of the delivery item in 
the unit kg. If this is not included in the transaction 
data, it can be calculated simply by multiplying the 
weight of an individual part specified in the material 
master data by the quantity. 
• 
Geographic information about the sender and the 
receiver such as latitude and longitude of all locations. 
If this information is not available in the company's 
location master data, it must be calculated; there are 
various open access tools for this purpose available. 
We have used the “Log-hub supply chain apps” for 
this purpose. 
The data includes a total of 62,461 delivery items with a 
total weight of 8,550 tons delivered within 12 months. This 
corresponds to an average weight per delivery item of 136 kg. 
Fig. 1 illustrates the inbound supply chain, with each line 
referring to a specific transport link in the supply network. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Illustration of inbound material flows in the supply chain 
We propose a series of KRAs to analyze the current state 
of strategic supply chain resilience. In the case study, we focus 
on inbound tier 1 material flows and, thus, on the strengths 
and weaknesses of the current sourcing structure chosen by 
the company. To gain a better understanding in this regard, the 
following KRAs are considered relevant to the case study: the 
geographic distribution of locations (KRA1), materials 
sourcing strategies (KRA2), lead time deviations (KRA5), and 
the transport distances and durations (KRA7). 
State of resilience: KRA1 & KRA2 
With respect to KRA2, 64.7% of the supplied weight [kg] 
and 75.6% of the material numbers [#] refer to a single-
sourcing approach - or at least to a strategy where the 
incoming material flows were mainly ordered from only one 
supplier within the last 12 months. Table I provides an 
overview of the top 10 single-sourcing material IDs by total 
weight. We see that the corresponding suppliers (out of 2,195 
suppliers) account for 21.6% of the total single-sourcing 
material flow. This is an important aspect of resilience 
because if one of these suppliers was to fail, there would be 
significant disruption to the company's production facilities. 
TABLE I.  
TOP 10 SINGLE-SOURCING SUPPLIERS BY WEIGHT [KG] 
Material 
ID 
Sender 
ID 
Sender City & 
Country 
Weight 
[kg] 
Avg. del. 
weight [kg] 
Weight 
share [%] 
M2537 
E1646 
Kojetin, CZ 
381.016 
809 
6,89% 
M2868 
E2434 
Opava, CZ 
183.688 
633 
3,32% 
M441 
E3184 
Steinfurt, DE 
93.462 
1.507 
1,69% 
M2250 
E3429 
Vaterstetten, DE 86.219 
713 
1,56% 
M4723 
E2273 
Neratovice, CZ 79.114 
977 
1,43% 
M3417 
E878 
Duchcov, CZ 
66.762 
514 
1,21% 
M985 
E1002 
Ettlingen, DE 
62.622 
963 
1,13% 
M930 
E2666 
Radebeul, DE 
62.554 
2.406 
1,13% 
M5097 
E2677 
Rakovnik, CZ 
61.434 
407 
1,11% 
M444 
E1509 
Idstein, DE 
59.701 
1.456 
1,08% 
M2126 
E3184 
Steinfurt, DE 
58.996 
1.054 
1,07% 
 
Based on the bills of materials of the company under 
consideration, an indicator was added to the material master 
to indicate whether a material ID should be considered as 
critical or not (e.g., referring to the ABC/XYZ classification 
per material ID). The inbound data shows that 822 single-
sourcing suppliers (from 2,195) refer to a material ID that can 
be classified as critical. Table II provides an overview of the 
geographic clusters of these suppliers in relation to the top 5 
countries, the number of critical suppliers in each country, and 
the weight.  
TABLE II.  
CRITICAL SUPPLIERS PER COUNTRY (TOP 5) 
Country 
Suppliers [#] 
Weight [kg] 
Weight [%] 
DE 
281 
132,903 
23.47% 
CZ 
271 
397,199 
70.15% 
SK 
116 
1,430 
0.25% 
FR 
68 
10,717 
1.89% 
IT 
41 
6,933 
1.22% 
 
It becomes clear that Germany and the Czech Republic 
represent a geographical cluster of single-sourcing suppliers 
for critical materials (KRA1). In particular, the Czech 
Republic appears to be a very important region, as 70.15% of 
incoming material flows by weight [kg] are shipped from 
there. Hence, although most of these suppliers are in Germany 
(282), the functioning of shipments from the Czech Republic 
is of great importance for a functioning supply chain. In 
addition, a comparison of the top ten individual suppliers of 
critical materials and the top ten individual suppliers overall 
(see Table I) shows an overlap of six suppliers (E1646, E2434, 
E3184, E2273, E878, E2666, E3184). Thereby, five of these 
suppliers are in the Czech Republic, which underlines the 
criticality of the region. Fig. 2 summarizes the findings from 
the KRA1 analysis in terms of the top 30 suppliers of critical 
materials by shipping weight [kg]. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 2.  The top 30 single-sourcing suppliers of critical materials 
State of resilience: KRA5 & KRA7  
A deeper understanding of the resilience state of inbound 
material flows can be gained by examining the lead times 
experienced by suppliers in the past (here: 12 months). 
Second, the geographic locations of the suppliers provide 
direct insight into the actual transportation time and distance 
to the recipient - the longer this time and distance, the more 
susceptible the relation is to disruption (KRA7).  
In the model, we can see target lead times of 7 days 
(Germany) and 20 days (e.g., Finland) defined by the 
companies. In addition, the actual lead time can be calculated 
based on the available sending and receiving time stamps. 
Since there are usually multiple shipments available per 
supplier within the considered time frame, we analyze the 
average lead time per supplier by comparing this time with the 
defined target lead time. The results show that in 2021, 371 
suppliers (9.9%) had an average lead time deviation of more 
than 7 days. The corresponding shipping weight of these 
suppliers was relatively low (0.97%) and only 673 delivery 
items were affected. 
While this suggests a relatively robust structure and, thus, 
resilience of the current network, there is still a risk that those 
suppliers could cause significant supply chain disruptions. 
This is particularly true for 151 suppliers that are in addition 
single-sourcing suppliers, and even more specifically for 20 
of these single-sourcing suppliers who are delivering critical 
materials. It is imperative that decision makers should 
continue to monitor these suppliers, develop strategies to 
improve their delivery times, and avoid supply chain 
disruptions. 
Finally, KRA7 refers to those suppliers characterized by 
long transport distances and/or times. In particular, single-
sourcing suppliers identified in KRA5 that also supply critical 
materials face an increased risk of disruption if they are 
located at a great distance. The KRA analysis shows that 8 of 
these 20 suppliers are long-distance suppliers. Fig. 3 
summarizes the results with respect to the 20 single-sourcing 
suppliers of critical materials; the 8 long-distance suppliers - 
which by definition are more than 1,200 km away from the 
warehouse - are highlighted in white. 
 
Figure 3.  Critical single-sourcing suppliers regarding KRA5 & KRA7 
B. 
Stage 2: Process mining of procurement strategy  
In stage 2 of our approach, we suggest using process 
mining to precisely examine delivery items which are 
classified as critical in stage 1 in a more detailed analysis 
regarding root causes. Process mining offers the advantage of 
identifying the as-is process with its variants as it actually runs 
in the company. In this way, all foreseen and especially non-
foreseen deviations become transparent.  
Introduction to event-log based process mining 
The process mining approach subsumes methods for 
analyzing business processes based on digital traces that 
instances leave in the system during their execution [8]. 
Process mining is based on various data sources that are 
collected based on events in an event log. On the one hand, 
the preparation of event logs must focus on the relevant data 
in the sense of simplicity according to Occam's razor; on the 
other hand, the loss of information must be minimized so that 
the event log is valid [9]. To conduct process mining, it is 
necessary to store additional data elements (e.g., attributes of 
resources) to leverage information about resources and 
organizational perspective. Process steps that were not 
previously recorded in terms of data can be considered as part 
of process mining. However, they must be added to the event 
log so that they can be considered within the current model. 
Since such manual processing usually proves to be time-
consuming and uneconomical in operational practice, 
corresponding data has rarely been generated or used to date 
[10]. However, the event log must contain the relevant data 
for the considered process. 
Process mining with focus on the procurement process 
In the case study, we focus on the procurement process of 
the company under consideration. The application of process 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

mining requires the execution of three steps. Step 1 is the 
collection of all events in an event log that include all relevant 
actions taken by the planner. The order line item should be 
used to uniquely identify the events. In step 2, the to-be 
process model is generated. All actions to reveal the standard 
procurement process are being plotted. Fig. 4 illustrates the 
process model regarding the procurement process as the result 
of step 2; the flashes show where the process can be 
interrupted. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Generation of the process model using the example of a 
procurement process (step 2) 
Step 3 finally focuses on the process analysis and 
improvements: the process starts with the creation of a 
purchase order requisition. If the first visible event is the 
created purchase order, it becomes transparent that an 
approval in the form of a purchase requisition is possibly 
missing. The next event that should be logged is that the 
purchase order has been sent to the supplier and confirmed. If 
the setting provides that orders should be allocated between 
more than one supplier, e.g., the setup follows a dual or even 
multiple procurement strategy, but the event log shows that 
purchase order confirmations are only received by one 
supplier. This immediately points to a possible shortfall in the 
process with an immediate negative impact on a company’s 
state of resilience for this material. Also, if the event log shows 
that no purchase order confirmation has been received 
(although the supplier is maybe delivering), we can assume a 
lack in the process that negatively impacts the company’s 
ability to act well in advance before a shortage becomes 
apparent because the material is actually missing.  
Moreover, by the event goods receipt, a deviation in lead 
time from what has been agreed with the supplier can be 
detected. A permanently increased lead-time exposes the 
company to additional risks. Often forgotten is payment as the 
last step in the procurement process. The acceptance of an 
invoice for material that might not even been received is a 
financial risk. This - from a supply chain perspective more 
critical step - occurs if the invoice is properly cleared. Missing 
on-time payment can not only lead to a discontinued supply 
but also harm the company’s reputation amongst its suppliers 
which negatively impacts the company’s state in terms of 
preferred delivery in a bottleneck situation.  
The provided examples underline the power of process 
mining. In fact, the purchasing process generally being 
followed becomes transparent as well as - even more 
important - unforeseen and unknown deviations from the 
standard. Now we are using the findings from stage 1 to focus 
our analysis in a targeted manner on precisely those materials 
and suppliers that were previously classified as critical. In this 
way, our approach allows us to reduce the extent of the order 
lines to be analyzed in a way that makes it manageable in 
practice. Immediate measures directly addressing the 
weaknesses identified by the event logs can be simulated and 
followed through. 
Further advantages of the suggested two-step approach of 
a supply chain resilience analysis providing insights on the 
eight KRAs followed by implementation of measures derived 
from process mining in a very cost-effective way can be 
further illustrated using the procurement process. Decisions 
taken in the Source-to-Contract phase that expose the 
company to an increased supply risks can be identified by a 
combination of KRA2 (sourcing strategy of materials), KRA5 
(transport delays), and KRA7 (transport distance). This allows 
to increase the resilience of a company’s supply chain also 
from a strategic perspective, e.g., by increasing the number of 
suppliers, located at least domestically or even globally. 
Strategic decisions in terms of sourcing amongst others could 
also be to move supply from direct to indirect sources, to use 
bigger suppliers and to invest in long-term relationships.  
Given the strategy has been adjusted to address 
weaknesses in the eight KRAs the second step assures that the 
strategy is also followed through the whole organization. 
Process mining relentlessly logs every operational decision as 
an event and, thus, every deviation becomes transparent and 
can be addressed by managerial action. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
Our research is based on real-world experience of past 
global crises which have shown that, first, a resilient supply 
chain design can be a success factor and, second, the current 
state of resilience is often not transparently available to 
logistics managers. Therefore, we developed a two-stage 
approach that sequentially uses data analytics and process 
mining to capture and improve the state of resilience within 
the supply chain. In this paper, we presented the concept of a 
case study focusing on the inbound material flows of a 
company whose warehouse is in Hamburg, Germany. 
According to the first stage of our approach, we developed 
a data-based supply chain model that summarizes the 
shipments of materials from suppliers to warehouses. Using 
this model, we identified and analyzed elements in the supply 
chain that could be at risk, such as vulnerable locations or 
materials, via so-called KRAs. In the second stage of the 
approach, we showed how process mining of current 
procurement event logs can provide further insight into the 
decisions made by the company in the past and highlight 
measures to improve the current state of resilience. Thus, 
possible future configurations of the supply chain can be 
simulated and, thus, provide strategic decision support for 
logistics managers. It must be mentioned that this second stage 
is a work in progress concept which has not yet been verified 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

with real data in the form of event logs. However, the case 
study illustrated the applicability of transaction data in terms 
of assessing the strategic state of resilience of a supply chain.  
Hence, the next step required for the continuation of the 
approach presented is to choose a business case to gather the 
data elements. The following guiding principles, based on the 
"Process Mining Manifesto" are of particular importance here 
[11]. First, significant events need to be identified and 
evaluated. By looking at an example of a procurement process 
that follows a fixed procedure also for compliance reasons, we 
assume that the quality criteria as defined by Peters et al. can 
be met [10]. The next principle that needs to be considered for 
the continued research is the amount and condition of data that 
is being used. It proves to be purposeful to adjust the quantity 
and the quality of the data to one's own requirements. The 
level of detail or granularity of the selected attributes plays an 
important role for the event log data. Looking at a 
procurement process, it makes sense to be able to trace the 
document flow for individual purchase order items or lines 
(and not just purchase orders). For this, attributes such as the 
ID (identification number) of the purchase order items, the 
purchase order number or the material number are required 
[10]. Also, the question must be clarified which data should 
be analyzed to avoid "noise" in the sense of taking irrelevant 
data into account [11]. From our view, the presented case 
study results already show at this point that the two-step 
approach to supply chain resilience analysis with the KRAs 
concept is suitable for this purpose. 
A limitation of contemporary process mining techniques 
can be seen in the fact that they tend to focus on distinct 
process instances and not on the multi-case setting of business 
process simulation. An event log with a unique and consistent 
case ID is available for this purpose. To utilize a multi-case 
context in supply chain resilience management, approaches, 
such as the multi-event-log and the execution management 
system from Celonis or the object-centered process mining of 
van der Aalst et al. can be applied [13,14,15]. Their goal is to 
provide multiple event logs that allow process correlations to 
be analyzed without having an overarching case ID. For the 
above-mentioned reasons, we intend to continue our research 
on the example of the procurement process. The KRA 
developed in stage 1 refer, however, also still to a whole set of 
other supply chain related processes of a company’s 
operational performance. As things stand today, these must be 
analyzed individually by means of process mining, analogous 
to the procedure described for the example of the procurement 
process in stage 2. Here, a still more extensive linkage and 
recognition of the continuity would be desirable. We see the 
chance to even create an overarching case ID, for example, by 
linking the purchase order item with the transport order in the 
future. In the complex field of supply chain resilience 
management, this fact proves to be of central importance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The supply chain visualizations in Fig. 1-3 were created 
using the Log-hub supply chain apps. Log-hub provided us 
with a free license for research purposes, for which we would 
like to express our sincere thanks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Forbes, “2022 Global Supply Chains: Four trends that will 
shape 
the 
future,” 
[Online], 
available 
from: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2022/01/19/2022-global-
supply-chains-four-trends-that-will-shape-the-
future/?sh=23abf83d3ef4 
[2] H. Carvalho, S.G. Azevedo, and V. Cruz-Machado, “Supply 
chain management resilience: a theory building approach,” 
International Journal of Supply Chain and Operations 
Resilience, 1(1), pp. 3-27, 2014. 
[3] F. Schätter and F. Morelli, “Business Process Simulation 
Focusing Supply Chain Risk Management Aspects,” Special 
Track: Simulation and Modelling in Supply Chains, along with 
SIMUL 2021, pp. 38-43, 2021. 
[4] F. Schätter, F. Morelli, and F. Haas, “Supply Chain Resilience 
Management Using Process Mining,” European Council for 
Modelling and Simulation (Ed.), Communications of the 
ECMS Volume 36, Issue 1, June 2022, pp. 121-127, ECMS 
Digital Library, 2022. 
[5] G. Gemmel, “Strategisches Informationsmanagement in 
Großprojekten der Industrie,” [in English: „Information 
management in large-scale industrial projects“], Wiesbaden: 
Springer Verlag, 2014. 
[6] G. Thomas, “How to do your case study,” Los Angeles: SAGE 
Publications Limited, 2021. 
[7] R.K. Yin, “Case study research and applications: Design and 
methods,” Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc., 2018. 
[8] R. 
Buck-Emden 
and 
F. 
Dahmann, 
“Analyse 
von 
Studienverläufen mit Process-Mining-Techniken,” [in English: 
„Analysis of study progress with process mining techniques“],  
HMD Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik (55:4), pp. 846-865, 
doi: 10.1365/s40702-018-0410-1, 2018. 
[9] S. Suriadi, R. Andrews, A.H.M. ter Hofstede, and M.T. Wynn, 
“Event log imperfection patterns for process mining: Towards 
a systematic approach to cleaning event logs,” Information 
Systems (64), pp. 132–150 doi: 10.1016/j.is.2016.07.011, 
2017. 
[10] R. Peters and M. Nauroth, “Process-Mining,” Wiesbaden: 
Springer-Gabler, 2019. 
[11] W. van der Aalst, A. Adriansyah, A.K.A. de Medeiros, F. 
Arcieri, T. Baier, and T. Blickle, “Process Mining Manifesto,” 
Business Process Management Workshops. BPM 2011 
International Workshops, Clermont-Ferrand, France, August 
29, 2011, F. Daniel, K. Barkaoui, S. Dustdar (Eds.), Springer, 
Berlin, pp. 169–194, 2012. 
[12] N. Martin, B. Depaire, and A. Caris, “The Use of Process 
Mining in a Business Process Simulation Context: Overview 
and Challenges,” IEEE Symposium on Computational 
Intelligence and Data Mining (CIDM), Orlando, FL (USA), pp. 
1-8, 2014,  ISBN: 978-1-4799-4518-4, 2014. 
[13] W. van der Aalst and A. Berti, "Discovering Object-Centric 
Petri 
Nets,” 
[Online], 
available 
from: 
http://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.02047v1, 2020. 
[14] A.F. Ghahfarokhi, G. Park, A. Berti, and W. van der Aalst, 
“OCEL: A Standard for Object-Centric Event Logs,” L. 
Bellatreche, M. Dumas, P. Karras, R. Matulevicius, A. Awad, 
M. 
Weidlich, 
M. 
Ivanoic, 
and 
O. 
Hartig 
(eds.), 
Communications in Computer and Information Science 1450, 
New Trends in Database and Information Systems, Springer-
Verlag, pp. 169-175, 2021. 
[15] W. van der Aalst, “Object-Centric Process Mining: Dealing 
with Divergence and Convergence in Event Data,” P.C. 
Olveczky, G. Salaün (eds.), Software Engineering and Formal 
Methods, 17th International Conference, SEFM, Oslo, 
Norway, September 18-20, pp. 3-25, 2019. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

