Combining Finite Element and Multibody Modeling Techniques for Time-Efﬁcient
Simulation of Nonlinear Gear Dynamics
Jakub Korta∗, Antonio Palermo†∗‡, Domenico Mundo∗ and Shadi Shweiki∗†
∗University of Calabria, Department of Mechanical, Energy and Management Engineering,
Ponte Pietro Bucci, Cubo 46C, 87036 Rende, Italy
†Siemens Industry Software NV, Interleuvenlaan 68, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
‡KU Leuven, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Celestijnenlaan 300 B, B-3001, Heverlee, Belgium
Email: jakub.korta@unical.it, antonio.palermo@student.kuleuven.be,
domenico.mundo@unical.it, shadi.shweiki@unical.it
Abstract—Dynamics and vibroacoustics of mechanical transmis-
sions are perceived as one of the major concerns in the contem-
porary geared driveline design. These characteristics inﬂuence
durability and efﬁciency of the system, as well as its quality.
However, due to strong local effects and system nonlinearities,
computer analyses of gears can be extremely time consuming,
and hence, in the industrial practice, are carried out only to some
limited extent. This paper describes a time-efﬁcient multibody
approach to this problem, which allows for fast analyses of
high ﬁdelity, complex numerical gearbox models. The approach
presented in the paper consists of two phases: ﬁrstly, static
transmission error curves, describing the gear meshing stiffness,
are derived by analyzing high ﬁdelity Finite Element models of
the gears; subsequently, time-efﬁcient multibody simulations of
gear dynamics under different operating conditions are achieved
by using a speciﬁcally deﬁned user force element that allows to
take the meshing stiffness variability into account thanks to the
previously calculated static transmission curves.
Keywords–Gears; Mechanical Transmissions; Transmission Er-
ror; Dynamics; Nonlinear Statics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The design of a drivetrain based on a gearbox requires
understanding of a number of different mechanical engineering
ﬁelds, among which material strength, fatigue, noise and vi-
bration (NV) or manufacturing issues are particularly relevant.
The contemporary methods used to support mechanical design
process take advantage from numerical tools, which allow to
prepare and test a number of alternatives in relatively short
time and without the need of preparing expensive physical
prototypes. However, in the case of the mechanical transmis-
sions, to obtain reliable and accurate results, it is required to
use high ﬁdelity, very detailed computational models. This
drives a need for accurate experimental campaigns, which
could be used for model validation purposes. A description
of a modern gear test rig and a technique for measuring the
transmission error between two meshing gears can be found in
Ref. [1]. The difﬁculty in gear numerical modelling is driven
by the fact that the phenomena observed on the surface of
gear teeth are often local (e.g., Hertzian stress) and nonlinear
(e.g., contact force moving along the tooth proﬁle). The former
problem is caused by high forces acting on a very small, curved
contact surface of the teeth. High, Hertzian stress develops
locally and causes local material deformation, which inﬂuences
the teeth contact mechanics. The nonlinearities instead, can
have various sources, among which the most signiﬁcant are
connected with the number of teeth staying in contact during
gear rotation (expressed by the so-called contact ratio number
- see Figure 1) and by nonlinear deﬂection of a tooth, which
is caused by contact force traveling along its proﬁle, which
normally has uneven thickness from the bottom, to the top.
In particular, three-dimensional dynamic analyses aimed at
assessing drivetrain NV characteristics are often very time
consuming and require signiﬁcant computational power. To
overcome this problem, it is common to describe the analyzed
gears by simpliﬁed, one-dimensional or planar models [2]
[3] [4], which can cover the general behavior of the system,
representing roughly its deﬂection caused by loading forces.
In the same time, however, they neglect important phenomena
inﬂuencing its performance: misalignments, shuttling or teeth
microgeometry modiﬁcations. These factors contribute consid-
erably to dynamic loading of the gears, causing gear excitation
and, as a consequence, system vibrations.
The term of misalignment refers to inaccuracies in gear
relative positioning, which result in unsymmetrical load dis-
tribution on teeth surfaces. These positional errors can be
caused by lack of parallelism between the shaft rotation axes,
deﬂection of the mechanism components or manufacturing
errors (e.g., gear or shaft eccentricity). Shuttling, which is
a ﬂuctuation in the axial position of the resultant contact
force (i.e., along the rotation axis), leads to oscillations on
bearing forces and dynamic moments in the plane of action
(i.e., the plane spread over the contact force vectors, along the
axial direction). Shuttling happens intrinsically for gears with
inclined teeth (i.e., helical gears), due to the traveling contact
areas, from one corner of the tooth surface to the opposite,
when the gears spin. Other reason can be due to shifts in
contact stress distribution caused by gear misalignment [5].
Microgeometry modiﬁcations (e.g., tip relief, crowning) are
applied often to the gears in order to improve the interaction
between the teeth and to decrease local stress concentration
on the teeth edges [6]. In Ref. [7], the authors analyzed the
dynamic characteristics of a gear pair, which was subjected to
excitation caused by external forces and geometry inaccuracy.
This paper provides a wide theoretical insight into the gear
dynamics problem, proposing an analytical approach which
can be used to solve it. The authors described also numerical
calculations, which were aimed at understanding the inﬂuence
of forcing parameters on the analyzed system. However, the
proposed method does not rely on MB modelling technique,
severely limiting its applicability in the industrial practice.
Other factors which should not be neglected when gears
are under NV analysis are the variable meshing stiffness and
the Transmission Error (TE). The former describes ﬂuctuation
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

of gear pair stiffness and is caused by uneven load distribution
among the teeth during the gear rotational movement (see
Figure 1). It is governed by the gear contact ratio and is
load dependent. Nonlinear stiffness encountered in mechanical
transmissions was studied by using a piecewise representation
in Ref. [8], which describes the analytical and numerical
approaches towards the solution for such problems. The TE
is deﬁned as a deviation from a perfect motion of gears,
which can be caused by different reasons: misalignments,
teeth deﬂection under load, manufacturing inaccuracies and
others. All these factors constitute for mechanical transmission
complex dynamic behavior and should be taken into account
during the design phase. One approach to solve this problem
is based on the Finite Element Method (FEM), which is
capable of solving accurately even the most complicated design
cases. However, its major drawback, i.e., the simulation time,
precludes its application to demanding problems analyzed in
the time domain. In Ref. [9], the authors took the endeavor
to simulate gear interaction by using comprehensive FEM
approach and to tune specially prepared one degree-of-freedom
(DoF) models, to be able to represent its complex nonlinear
behavior. As they reported in the paper, they were able to
obtain either good correlation with the results in frequency
domain or satisfying meshing stiffness representation, but not
both simultaneously. Similar studies were described in Ref.
[10], in which the authors took the efforts aimed at correlating
the results from FEM-based and analytical, one DoF dynamic
models with the experiments.
Figure 1. Analysis of gear rotation angle, for which one (A) and two (B)
pairs of teeth stay in contact. Figures C and D show the teeth deﬂection
pattern, while local Hertzian stress is presented in ﬁgures E and F.
In this paper we present a numerical study on the dynamics
of a spur gear pair, which was carried out on a multibody
(MB) model by implementation of a methodology reported
in Ref. [11] and [12]. The utilized approach is capable of
analyzing complicated geared drivelines under variable loads
and operating conditions within computational time, which is
orders of magnitude shorter than in the case of the adequate
FEM-based runs.
The subsequent paragraphs describe the two phases of the
proposed simulation approach: ﬁrstly, static transmission error
(STE) curves, describing the gear meshing stiffness, are de-
rived by analyzing high ﬁdelity ﬁnite element (FE) models of
the gears; subsequently, time-efﬁcient MB simulations of gear
dynamics under different operating conditions are achieved by
using a speciﬁcally deﬁned user force element that allows to
take the meshing stiffness variability into account thanks to the
previously calculated static transmission curves. It is shown
that the utilized MB technique can be successfully used for
dynamic simulation of gear meshing and is able to capture
its nonlinear, load-dependent behavior. The described analyses
were carried out in velocity run-up conditions, for the models
loaded by torque of variable values. Because of the required
computational time, the same results would not be attainable
using the FEM approach.
Figure 2. Flowchart of the proposed methodology for gear dynamic
simulation.
The paper is structured in the following manner: Section
II summarizes the proposed approach, describing in short each
activity which must be taken to carry out time-efﬁcient gearbox
simulations. Section III provides a detailed description of the
prepared FE model and provides a description of the mesh con-
vergence analysis. Section IV presents and compares different
methods of calculating the TE curves, allowing for choosing
the most efﬁcient approach for STE estimation. Section V
describes the implementation of the described methodology
in order to understand the dynamic behavior of a spur gear
pair in run-up conditions.
II.
GEAR DYNAMIC SIMULATION METHODOLOGY
Based on the considerations presented in Section I, we can
now describe the methodology for gear dynamic simulations,
which is proposed in this paper. For the sake of clarity, the
ﬂowchart of the simulation procedure is presented in Figure
2. As mentioned above, the elaborated procedure is based on
derivation of a STE curve, which is computed using FEM
simulations. As shown in the subsequent paragraphs, nonlinear
static analyses are sufﬁcient to describe the desired behavior
of the analyzed system. This operation is executed iteratively,
for a set of discrete gear angular positions. Following, the
STE curve is derived by approximation of the results obtained
in the preceding phase. This constitutes an input for the MB
simulations, which are carried out on a MB model, prepared
using the contact formulation described in Ref. [11] and [12].
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

MB model prepared in this manner can be used for fast and
accurate dynamic simulations of complex gear trains, requiring
relatively short computation time.
III.
FE MODELING AND ANALYSIS OF THE SIMULATED
SYSTEM
The analyses described in this paper were carried out on
a pair of meshing, high-precision, identical spur gears, with
involute tooth proﬁle, for which Table 1 summarizes the main
geometrical data and design speciﬁcations.
TABLE I. GEAR DATA AND DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS.
Parameter
Value
Number of teeth
57
Normal module
2.60mm
Normal pressure angle
20deg
Tip diameter
154.50mm
Root diameter
141.70mm
Facewidth
23mm
Normal circular tooth thickness at theoretical pitch circle
3.78mm
Contact Ratio
1.45
Figure 3. Three-dimensional FE model of a spur gear pair used in the
described analyses.
The FEM models of a gear pair, which are depicted
in Figure 3, were built using the ﬁrst-order, eight-noded
hexagonal elements. The deformation of this type of ﬁnite
element is described by three translational DoF in each corner
node, resulting in 24 DoFs per element. The shape functions
describing the stress ﬁeld in the elements were linear. In order
to prevent from hourglass deformations (numerical, erroneous
element deformations), the element stress was retrieved by full
integration scheme. The model preparation and simulations
were performed in Altair HyperWorks software. Two types
of analyses were carried out: implicit statics with geometrical
nonlinearities with Altair OptiStruct and explicit dynamic
simulations with Altair Radioss. Depending on the simulation
type, two distinct modeling strategies were used [13].
In the case of the explicit dynamic analyses, the contact
between the interacting elements was modeled by using the
interface type 24, with node to surface deﬁnition and Coulomb
friction (µ = 0.3). The kinematic constraints applied to the
gear centers allowed only for rotational displacement. The
loading torque was generated by a viscous damper connected
to the center of rotation (CoR) of the driven gear. A proper
rotational velocity of the driving gear CoR was set through the
deﬁned boundary conditions.
In the case of the static analyses, geometrical nonlinearities
were taken into account. This assured high accuracy of the
results. In the case of these computations, the contact between
the teeth surfaces was modeled by means of the interface type
7. The loading torque of an appropriate value was applied to
the CoR of the driving gear, while the rotation center of the
driven gear was ﬁxed in all DoFs.
A. FE mesh convergence analysis
In order to reproduce the local phenomena of the simulated
system (i.e., deﬂection and Hertzian stress) while keeping the
computational time as low as possible, the model was divided
into two areas of coarse and ﬁne mesh. The former was used
in the region where there was no interaction between the
gear teeth and, hence, no local stress and contact pressure
concentrations were present. In this region, the mesh size
was set up to 8 mm. In the area in which the two gears
interacted with each another, the FE mesh size was decreased.
In order to understand the signiﬁcance of the FE element size,
a convergence analysis was carried out, showing the sensitivity
of the STE values towards this parameter. Figure 4 depicts the
chosen results of these trials: based on these ﬁndings it was
decided to set the smallest element edge length to 0.09 mm. As
depicted in Figure 4, the STE curve obtained for this element
size was qualitatively and quantitatively equal to the equivalent
calculated using the model described by a ﬁner mesh (element
edge length of 0.035mm along a tooth proﬁle).
Figure 4. The results of the convergence analysis showing the STE curves
obtained for different FE mesh size (torque T=350Nm).
For the NV assessment, the most important outcome of
the convergence analysis is the peak-to-peak value of the STE
curves and the contact ratio, which is the average number of
meshing tooth pairs and can be derived based on the STE
curve shape. These two parameters constitute for the internal
excitation force of a gearbox, in its operational conditions. As
shown in Figure 4, both of these characteristics were covered
accurately by the tested models.
The TE curves were calculated by subtracting the angle of
rotation (AoR) of the driven gear from the AoR of the driving
gear, according to (1):
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TE = (θP + θG)rB
(1)
where θP and θG are the AoR for the driving and of the driven
gear respectively, and rB denotes the radius of the base circle
of the gears.
IV.
METHODS TO COMPUTE STE CURVES
In order to use the MB approach described in the Intro-
duction section, an STE curve needs to be provided by the
user as an input. The generation of this curve can be done
by FE approach. In order to understand if the time efﬁcient
nonlinear static approach can result in an accurate estimation
of the STE curve, it was compared with the detailed explicit
dynamic simulation outcomes. The signiﬁcant drawback of the
latter is the computational time, which depends on the FE
mesh size and therefore in the case of the described type of
simulations it can be very long.
Figure 5. STE for 350Nm torque - comparison between static and dynamic
approach.
Figure 6. STE for 150Nm torque - comparison between static and dynamic
approach.
In the case of the dynamic simulations, the STE curves
were obtained by simulating gear rotation with a velocity run-
up from zero to a very low, constant rotational speed value
(10 rpm), which allowed neglecting inertia contribution to the
results. The procedure involving nonlinear static simulations
was based on a number of FEM implicit analyses carried out
for a discrete rotation angles of the gear pair. The angle step
of the driving gear rotation was set to 0.21 deg, which resulted
in 30 points per one meshing cycle. This number guaranteed a
smooth representation of the STE curve, requiring a relatively
low number of simulations, in the same time.
Figure 7. Diagram of a MB model of the simulated gear pair, showing the
viscoelastic contact element between the gear teeth (based on [11] and [12]).
The comparison between the statically and the dynamically
generated STE curves is shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6.
Two different loading torque values equal to 150Nm and
350Nm were used in the simulations. It can be seen from
the ﬁgures that both FEM methods resulted in quantitatively
and qualitatively correlated results. The signiﬁcant difference,
however, lied in the computational time needed for the analysis
to converge, which was equal to ca. 150 minutes and 3330
minutes for nonlinear static and dynamic analysis, respectively.
The obtained results allowed to choose the most suitable
method for the generation of the STE curves, which were
needed for the subsequent MB analyses, carried out with the
approach proposed in Ref. [11] and [12]. Since the approach
based on nonlinear static FEM calculations was signiﬁcantly
more time efﬁcient, it was selected to generate the input data
for the MB simulation.
V.
MULTIBODY GEAR ANALYSIS
The implementation of the multibody technique requires
that the gear geometrical description (i.e., number of teeth,
diameter, pressure angle) is provided simultaneously with the
data describing STE, spatial misalignments, torque variability
and microgeometry modiﬁcations. All of this information inﬂu-
ences the dynamic response of the system, allowing computing
the dynamic transmission error (DTE). The presented in Figure
7 and Figure 8 MB model was built in the Siemens LMS
Virtual.Lab 13.1 environment [14], in a manner which was
consistent with the FEM representation of the gear pair de-
scribed above. The constraints used in the MB model allowed
rotations of the gear centers of rotation. The loading torque
was applied to the driven gear, while the rotational velocity
was imposed for the driving gear. Moreover, as shown in
Figure 7, the implemented MB gear contact element assumed
viscoelastic behavior of interacting teeth.
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The DTE curves presented in Figure 9 and Figure 10 were
obtained under rotational speed linear run-up conditions, from
0 rpm to 3500 rpm and for two values of the loading torque:
150Nm and 350Nm. The simulated operating time was set to
70 seconds. Since the two gears had a number of teeth equal
to 57, the type of excitation due to meshing stiffness variation
along one meshing cycle could be considered as a multi-
harmonic frequency sweep. With the maximum rotational
velocity, it generated an excitation fundamental frequency of
3325 Hz.
Figure 8. Gears model in multibody dynaminics simulation environment.
By looking at the envelopes of the obtained DTE curves,
some local amplitude ampliﬁcations can be seen. These cor-
responded with the gear pair resonance, excited by the TE,
due to gear meshing stiffness variability. In the case of the
system loaded by the 150Nm torque (Figure 9), the most
signiﬁcant DTE ampliﬁcations were found at 116Hz, 438Hz,
597Hz, 907Hz and 1804Hz, while for the same mechanical
transmission loaded by the 350Nm torque (Figure 10), the
DTE ampliﬁcations were found at 122Hz, 479Hz, 650Hz,
980Hz and 1958Hz. The differences between these values are
summarized in Table II.
Indeed, in the utilized modeling method, the gear meshing
stiffness variation is derived from the STE curve supported
by the user and shows a stiffening behavior which is typical
of contact problems [15]. Based on its periodic, time-varying
characteristics it was possible to cover the nonlinearities
present in the described system. In the discussed analyses, the
STE curves depicted in Figure 5 and Figure 6 were used.
Figure 9. DTE calculated in run-up conditions, for spur gears pair loaded by
150Nm torque.
The obtained results prove the capabilities of the used
three-dimensional MB modeling methodology, based on the
FE gear contact formulation described in Section III. The
depicted in Figure 9 and Figure 10 gear pair behavior could
not be captured by consideration of a standard one-dimensional
or planar, linear representation of interacting teeth, described
in the introductory paragraph - Section I. This is because
TABLE II. THE DTE AMPLIFICATIONS IDENTIFIED FOR THE ANALYSED
SPUR GEAR PAIR IN RUN-UP CONDITIONS.
DTE
Loading torque
Difference
ampliﬁcation id
150Nm
350Nm
∆
∆[%]
1
116
122
6
5.17
2
438
479
41
9.36
3
597
650
54
9.05
4
907
980
72
7.94
5
1804
1958
153
8.48
Figure 10. DTE calculated in run-up conditions, for spur gears pair loaded
by 350Nm torque.
these simpliﬁed models neglect the contact stiffness variability
along the tooth proﬁle. On the other hand, if applied, more
comprehensive FEM analyses could have resulted in the same
results, as it was shown in Ref. [2]. However, in the presented
case, the computational time was signiﬁcantly lower compared
with a possible dynamic FEM calculations (e.g., shown in
Section III), and was equal to ca. 36 minutes on a standard
desktop computer: i7@3.2GHz CPU, 32GB RAM.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
It was shown in the paper that it is possible to analyze the
nonlinear behavior of a meshing gear pair, using a simpliﬁed,
yet efﬁcient MB analysis technique. By application of this
method, the time needed for a comprehensive analysis of a
driveline system is orders of magnitude lower, when compared
with the equivalent dynamic FEM calculations. This allows
to support the industrial design process with an accurate
and time-efﬁcient simulation tool, which would make feasible
the assessment of different gear design variants during the
virtual prototyping phase. Moreover, the proposed method-
ology for the DTE estimation can be effectively employed
for the purposes of driveline structural optimization, which
requires a number of iteratively carried out simulations and
hence, can be very time consuming. Because of the numerical
complexity, this would not be possible using the classical
FEM-based approach. The activity scheduled as the nearest
future step of the research work presented in this paper is
aimed at improving gearbox noise and vibration characteristics,
by application of teeth proﬁle microgeometry modiﬁcations.
By implementation of the described methodology and because
of its time-efﬁciency, the optimization approach can be more
comprehensive, including different load cases and operational
conditions. This will ease convergence to a global optimum of
the imposed problem.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research activities described in this paper were funded
within the People Programme (Marie Curie Actions) of the
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

7th Framework Programme of the European Union FP7/2007-
2013, under the contract with the Research Executive Agency
(REA) n. 324336 and the related research project DEMETRA
Design of Mechanical Transmissions: Efﬁciency, Noise and
Durability Optimization (www.fp7demetra.eu).
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Shweiki, A. Palermo, A. Toso, D. Mundo, and W. Desmet, “Effects
of center distance and microgeometry on the dynamic behaviour of
a spur gear pair,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
Engineering Vibration (ICOEV 2015) September 7–10, 2015, Ljubljana,
Slovenia, 2015, pp. 119–130.
[2]
F. L. Litvin and F. A., Eds., Gear geometry and applied theory.
Cambridge University Press, 2004, ISBN: 0-521-81517-7.
[3]
H. N. ¨Ozg¨uven and D. R. Houser, “Dynamic analysis of high speed
gears by using loaded static transmission error,” Journal of Sound and
Vibration, vol. 125.1, 1988, pp. 71–83, ISSN: 0022-460X.
[4]
G. Liu and R. G. Parker, “Dynamic modeling and analysis of tooth pro-
ﬁle modiﬁcation for multimesh gear vibration,” Journal of Mechanical
Design, vol. 130, no. 12, 2008, p. 121402.
[5]
D. R. Houser, J. Harianto, and Y. Ueda, “Determining the source of
gear whine noise,” Gear Solutions, vol. 1623, 2004, pp. 17 – 22.
[6]
J. D. Smith, Gear noise and vibration.
CRC Press, 2003.
[7]
S. Theodossiades and S. Natsiavas, “Non-linear dynamics of gear-pair
systems with periodic stiffness and backlash,” Journal of Sound and
vibration, vol. 229, no. 2, 2000, pp. 287–310.
[8]
Q. Ma and A. Kahraman, “Period-one motions of a mechanical os-
cillator with periodically time-varying, piecewise-nonlinear stiffness,”
Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 284, 2005, pp. 893–914.
[9]
R. G. Parker, S. M. Vijayakar, and T. Imajo, “Non-linear dynamic
response of a spur gear pair: modelling and experimental comparisons,”
Journal of sound and vibration, vol. 237, no. 3, 2000, pp. 435–455.
[10]
V. K. Tamminana, A. Kahraman, and S. Vijayakar, “A study of the
relationship between the dynamic factors and the dynamic transmission
error of spur gear pairs,” Journal of Mechanical Design, vol. 129, 2007,
pp. 75–84.
[11]
A. Palermo, D. Mundo, R. Hadjit, and W. Desmet, “Multibody element
for spur and helical gear meshing based on detailed three-dimensional
contact calculations,” Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 62, 2013,
pp. 13–30.
[12]
A. Palermo, D. Mundo, R. Hadjit, and Desmet, “Effects of variable
loads and misalignments on gear noise and vibration through multibody
simulation based on transmission error,” in Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Noise and Vibration Engineering (ISMA2012)
and 4th International Conference on Uncertainty in Structural Dynamics
(USD2012) September 17–19, 2012, Leuven, Belgium, 2012, pp. 3995–
4006.
[13]
R. Version, “5.1, radioss theory manual, altair engineering,” Inc., Troy,
MI, 2008.
[14]
Siemens
PLM
Software,
LMS
Virtual.Lab
13.2,
http://www.siemens.com/plm/lms, 2015.
[15]
K. L. Johnson and K. L. Johnson, Contact mechanics.
Cambridge
university press, 1987.
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

