Hybrid Modeling Approach to Investigate the Impact of Boarding Patients on Unit 
Performance   
Leila Keshtkar, Wael Rashwan, Waleed Abo-Hamad, Amr Arisha 
3S Group, College of Business 
Dublin Institute of Technology (DIT) 
Dublin, Ireland 
 
email: leila.keshtkar@mydit.ie, wael.rashwan@dit.ie, wabohamad@dit.ie, amr.arisha@dit.ie   
 
 
Abstract— Overcrowding of Emergency Departments (EDs) is 
an issue that adversely affects patient safety, quality of care, 
and patient experience. In attempt to mitigate this risk, the 
National Acute Medicine Program (AMP) in Ireland has 
introduced a fast track medical unit, namely Acute Medical 
Units (AMU), designed to accommodate medical patients 
presenting to the ED with certain severity levels. Surprisingly, 
less than 50% of ED medical patients can get access to this 
unit.  In partnership with a leading Irish hospital in Dublin, a 
hybrid simulation model has developed to investigate the 
underlying factors that limit patients’ access to AMU. Discrete 
event simulation is used to model the process while cross-
boundary interactions with other neighbor units such as ED 
and inpatient wards are explained using a system dynamics 
approach. Integrating the two simulation approaches show 
that boarder patients (i.e., patients waiting to progress) slow 
performance 
significantly. 
Decisions 
regarding 
capacity 
expansion are not the answer to this problem! Staffing and 
adequate resource leveling seem to have a better impact on 
patient flow.   
Keywords - Hybrid simulation; Boarding patients; AMAU; 
Healthcare management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Healthcare organizations worldwide are challenged to 
meet growing demands on Emergency Departments (EDs). 
Extra pressures are due to reduce costs, improve outcomes, 
and be more patient-centered while controlling the cost. 
ED overcrowding is a serious issue that adversely affects 
patient safety, quality of care, and patient satisfaction[1]. 
One of the main identified factors to ED overcrowding is 
boarding, in which admitted patients from the  ED spend 
long periods awaiting the availability of inpatient beds [2]. 
Consequently, less  ED resources are available for new 
emergency patients [3]. The bottleneck of inpatient boarding 
naturally will increase Patient Experience Time (PET) for 
both admitted and discharged patients [3]. As a result, the 
quality of care, patient safety and satisfaction goals are 
affected 
by 
ED 
boarding 
and 
crowding. 
Hospital 
management is ultimately looking for ways to reduce ED 
overcrowding and boarding patients [4], however due to 
system complexity, they worry about the impact of any 
interventions on patient flows and equally budget.   
Discrete Event Simulation (DES) modeling approach has 
a proven track record of success when it comes to system 
variability understanding. The boarding problem is multi-
dimensional and has macro and micro impactful decisions.  
DES models are effective to simulate the process in details 
while incorporating the patient-resource relationships [5]. 
Nevertheless, this problem requires higher-level modeling 
capabilities. Hybrid Simulations (HS) seem to provide better 
insights into complex systems because they offer a more 
holistic approach to system analysis [6]. This means less 
assumptions and better accuracy to outcomes [7]. Therefore, 
this paper is presenting an integration of two simulation  
approaches in a unified framework to support decision-
makers in the partner hospital [8]. Literature has indicated 
that HS can contribute to significant improvement of patient 
scheduling in outpatient clinic setting [9], redesigning and 
implementing new healthcare facilities [10], and model the 
complexities of emergency department [11]. Simulation 
models have been used to study patients boarding problems 
and their implications on patient experience. The trade off 
between increasing physical capacity of the ED and 
reducing admitted patient boarding times was examined in 
[12], while impact of inpatient boarding on the ED 
efficiency was explored in [13]. Reports from literature have 
revealed that not many studies have considered the hybrid 
approach between System Dynamic (SD) and DES in 
healthcare applications.   
This paper presents a hybrid simulation model (i.e., DES-
SD) to investigate the impact of patients boarding problem 
on the ability of patients to access other units in the hospital 
such as the Acute Medical Assessment Unit (AMAU). The 
proposed hybrid model considers the horizontal integration 
to the up/downstream departments (i.e., intra-departmental 
and inter-departmental interactions). DES model offers a 
better representation of the process complexity in details 
including patients flow, AMAU operations, and underlying 
relationships with other supporting units in the hospital. On 
the other hand, SD model is responsible for the cross-
boundary interactions outside the AMAU, which allows a 
holistic view to represent the interaction among system 
components. 
The remaining sections of this paper is organized as 
follows. A background about the project is given in the next 
section. A detailed description of developing the hybrid 
model 
then 
follows. 
Data 
collection, 
analysis 
and 
experimentation are presented. Finally, section VI concludes 
the paper. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

II. 
PROJECT BACKGROUND  
The Hospital under study is a public, adult teaching 
hospital that holds more than 520 beds. The hospital has a 
24-hour “on-call” Emergency Department (ED) that serves 
over 45,000 adult patients annually. The department has 
officially, 23 monitored trolley space. Recently, the hospital 
has opened two more new units to offer possible alternative 
treatment routes for patients: An Acute Medical Assessment 
Unit (AMAU) and a Short Stay Unit (SSU). The capacities 
of the AMAU and SSU are 11 trolleys and 24 beds 
respectively. The AMAU works as a 12-hour unit; it opens 
from 9:00 – 21:00, but only accepts patients till 18:00 to 
allow beds to be available for the next day. The SSU works 
as a short stay ward, on a 24/7 basis, for acute medical 
patients who need to be admitted to the hospital, and whose 
length of stay is estimated to be less than five days.  
AMAUs are resourced by physicians and a dedicated 
multidisciplinary medical and support teams and the only 
access to the AMAU is through the ED [14]. After patients 
are triaged and assigned a triage category according to the 
Manchester Triage System (MTS) that uses a five-level 
scale for classifying patients per their care requirements 
[15]. The triage nurse usually contacts the AMAU 
consultant or registrar so that they can accept or reject the 
case. Patients routed to the AMAU are those medical 
patients triaged as category 2 or 3 (i.e., very urgent and 
urgent 
patients 
respectively) 
who 
do 
not 
require 
resuscitation or isolation facilities. These patients only 
transferred to the AMAU if a trolley is available. Patients 
presented in these units will get to see a senior medical 
doctor, who should be able to treat and/or discharge 
patients, within almost one hour of admission. The two units 
along with the emergency department share resources 
among them, and share some resources with the hospital. 
When the AMAUs were first introduced, an improvement 
was witnessed in the increase of the proportion of patients 
discharged within 24 hours and also by decreasing length of 
stay and overall medical bed day usage [14]. However, 
AMAU unit under this study is facing two types of boarding 
problems: ED boarding and internal boarding. In ED 
boarding case, patients had occupied between one to six 
AMAU trolleys for maximum 12 hours. On the other hand, 
internal boarding occurs when patients in AMAU require a 
hospital bed in another downstream unit (e.g., medical 
words or SSU) for further treatment. AMAU unit opens 
from 9am to 6pm. Over a 6-month period, the number of 
medical patients presented to the ED with triage category 2 
and 3 is 3753, however only 40% of these patients got 
access to the AMAU with an average patient experience 
time (i.e., The total time from patient entrance to AMAU 
until s/he exit the unit) of 4.45 hours. Therefore, a 
collaborative study was conducted with the hospital and the 
national acute medical program to investigate the underlying 
factors that restrict patients’ access to AMAU specially 
patients boarding issues.   
III. 
HYBRID MODEL CONCEPTUALIZATION 
Analysing the patient boarding problem in AMAU 
necessitate integrating with downstream and upstream 
facilities that show high interdependency, in particular, ED 
and in-patient wards. A better understanding of the problem 
and its implications could be accomplished when system 
integration is to considered. Therefore, a hybrid simulation 
model between SD and DES is developed to address the 
consequences of patient boarding problem in the AMAU. 
The upstream component is the ED, which is the demand 
source of the AMAU while the downstream components 
model the patient disposition. In fact, patient disposition 
refers to two cases in AMAU: First, the patients who are 
waiting for beds in other units to release AMAU trolleys. 
Second, patients have been transferred to the AMAU 
overnight in order to free-up ED’s blocked trolleys. 
Patient’s flow in the AMAU is modeled using a DES in 
order to simulate the the unit activities and processes in 
details, taking into account the resources interaction. 
Downstream and upstream hospital operations are explained 
in  SD model, which enables manager to envisgae the 
impact of changes using feedback loops between the 
different activities. The two simulation models are running 
simultaneously (Figure 1), and the information is exchanged 
from both models in the run time with a parallel interaction. 
 
SD (Holistic view)
DES
Patient Flow AMAU
ED
In-patient 
Ward
SSU Unit
Admission From
 ED to AMAU
Sending ED 
Boarded patients
Ward Admission
SSU Admission
Discharge
Events to change
 SD
Events to change 
DES
 Downstream activities
 Upstream activities
 
Figure 1. The interaction between the DES and SD models. 
A. AMAU patient flow(DES) 
Upon arrival at the ED and registration, walk-in patients 
(self-referral or GP referral) remain in the waiting area to be 
triaged. When a patient’s name is called, depending on triage 
staff availability, the patient is assessed by a triage nurse. 
Based on patient condition and triage assessment by MTS 
criteria, each patient is assigned a clinical priority (triage 
category). Then, based on their severity level, medical 
patients can be directed to either the ED or the AMAU. A 
medical patient is eligible for the AMAU path if s/he arrives 
between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. (i.e., the unit's admission 
hours) and if the patient is triaged either a category two or 
three. Once these requirements are met, the triage nurse calls 
the AMAU's consultant to check the availability of a trolley 
for the patient. The patient goes back to the ED path if a 
trolley is unavailable. The majority of patients in the AMAU 
are medical patients, accounting 96% of patients presented to 
the unit. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Following the triage process, a patient who is directed to 
AMAU will be registered in the AMAU's system, 
interviewed by a nurse where his blood pressure and vitals 
are measured then s/he would wait for a doctor to assess the 
patient. Next, the AMAU doctor will discuss the case with 
the unit's consultant who would then either ask for more 
tests, request an opinion, or decide whether the patient needs 
to be admitted or discharged. AMAU's consultant from a 
medical/surgical speciality doctor can confirm whether a 
patient should be admitted or not. Alternatively, the 
consultant may wish to refer the patient to a colleague for a 
second opinion based on the medical condition. These are 
the primary care stages, which are relevant for all AMAU's 
patients, whether they are discharged from or admitted to 
hospital. Secondary patient stages are steps involved in the 
care of some, but not all patients such as diagnostics (e.g. 
MRIs and CTs). In the flowchart of AMAU steps (Figure 2) 
is shown. 
 
 
Figure 2. Patient’s flow in AMAU 
B. SD model 
The casual loop – developed by Vensim software (Figure 
3) – can be conceptualized regarding two main areas: the 
community area and the hospital area (ED, AMAU, and 
inpatient wards). Regarding the community, patients are 
presented to the ED from the surrounding catchment area 
and then discharged back to the community. The rate of 
patient arrivals depends on a variety of factors and 
characteristics of the surrounding catchment area. The rate 
of discharge back to the community depends on the bed 
occupancy, which is a function of the patient’s length of 
stay (LOS) in the hospital. The factors affecting both arrival 
rate and the average LOS are not considered in this model, 
and they are represented as aggregate parameters. To reduce 
the pressure on the ED, medical patients can be dispatched 
to the AMAU pathway subject to the AMAU’s trolley 
availability. The majority of the patients (75%) presented to 
the ED are discharged back to the community after 
receiving their treatment. If further inpatient care is 
required, patients wait in the ED for an inpatient bed. The 
rate of admission depends on the bed management and 
hospital bed occupancy. Due to the high bed occupancy of 
inpatients beds, patients that need inpatient care are boarded 
(delayed) in the ED while blocking ED trolleys.  
 
 
 Figure 3. A Simplified causal loop diagram 
 
A similar situation occurs in the AMAU when patients 
require further stay in the hospital and needed to move to 
other downstream units such as the SSU or inpatient beds. 
To free-up ED’s blocked trolleys, the ED management 
transfers some patients to the AMAU overnight. This 
management practice moves the ED bed blocking partially 
from ED to the AMAU. Consequently, the AMAU has an 
average of 3.2 blocked trolleys due the transferred ED 
boarded patients. The situation becomes worse when it 
combined with the AMAU boarded patients. In turn, these 
limit access to the AMAU and subsequently increase the 
pressure on the ED. 
    
IV. 
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
A. Data sources 
The data collected for this project utilized both 
quantitative and qualitative data types. The quantitative data 
are collected from the historical data of ED logs, electronic 
patient records (EPRs) from the ED’s IT system, and direct 
observation. The direct and indirect time per activity and 
staff Rota are not stored in the IT system and were collected 
from interviews and observations. The qualitative data such 
as patient pathways, conceptual modeling have been 
gathered through observation, interviews, and focus groups.  
B. Data analysis 
Data are collected retrospectively for six months for 
patients who are presented to ED and AMAU between 
January 1st, 2014 and June 30th, 2014. A total of 20,493 
anonymous patient records from ED and 1,520 anonymous 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

patient records from AMAU have been collected through the 
hospital’s information system, which is used by the staff 
(e.g., administrators, doctors, and nurses) to record data 
about each patient through the stages of their care. 23% of 
the patients arrived by ambulance, and 77% are walk-in 
patients. Of the total patients, 90% of patients are new 
patients, and 10% are unscheduled return. Referral from GP 
with a letter represents 70% of patients while 23% are self-
referred.  
 Patients differ according to the medical complaints and 
severity of their care needs, so it is essential to understand 
their different arrival patterns to reflect the characteristics 
and needs of various groups of patients. In this study, the 
patients are clustered based on the triage category to be able 
to differentiate those patients who will be directed to the 
AMAU path. As mentioned previously, the AMAU in this 
study facing two kinds of boarding: ED boarding and 
internal boarding. In ED boarding, patients occupy between 
one to six AMAU trolleys (Figure 4) for maximum 12 hours.  
 
 
Figure 4. Distribution of ED boarded patients in the AMAU. 
 
In internal boarding case, patients in AMAU are waiting 
to get inpatient ward beds or SSU beds in order to release 
AMAU trolleys. 
C. Verification and validation 
Conceptual models for both patient flow and causal loop 
diagrams have been documented and validated by hospital’s 
senior clinicians and senior nursing staff. The validated 
conceptual models along with the analysis of empirical data 
were used to develop the hybrid simulation model using 
AnyLogic software platform. Once the models are 
completed, the verification and validation were carried out 
all the way through the development phases of the model. 
Visual tracking was used to verify the model logic to ensure 
that patients follow the correct care path as expected. The 
following Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) were used for 
the AMAU: the average of total patient experience time 
(PET), the average of total waiting time (TWT) and patient 
access (i.e., the total number of patients enter the AMAU). 
The main reason for choosing patient access as one of main 
KPIs is that increasing patients access to the AMAU can 
mitigate overcrowding in ED [14]. The simulation model is 
validated (Table. I) using face validation and comparison 
testing. This is to ensure that the actual PET within the 
AMAU is reflected by the model when it runs for twenty-
four weeks period. 
 
TABLE I.  MODEL VALIDATION 
KPIS 
Base Scenario 
Real Data 
Difference% 
Avg. PET(Min) 
276.79 
267.6 
3.4 
Avg. Patient access 
1710 
1520 
11.1 
V. 
SCENARIO ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
The simulation results of the baseline model show that on 
average 1710 patients could access to AMAU unit at any six 
months. In fact, in the current situation, AMAU works on 9 
hours/ 5 days; from 9:00 am to 6:00 pm. According to the 
baseline only 40% of medical patients of ED could access to 
AMAU. However, the target of ED managers is to increase 
the flow percentage in order to absorb most if not all 
medical patients who attend to the ED during its opening 
hours. The average PET of the baseline – presented in Table 
II – is currently 276.8 minutes and patients normally wait 
98.2 minutes in AMAU.  
TABLE II.  SIMULATION RESULTS FOR BASE SCENARIO 
KPIS 
Baseline Scenario 
Avg. PET(Min) 
276.79 
Avg. TWT (Min) 
98.24 
Avg. Patient access 
1709.80 
 
A. Scenario Design 
The simulation scenarios are designed (Table. III) to 
identify the factors that contribute to PET and patient access 
to AMAU and consequently ED overcrowding. Three 
factors are considered: ED boarded patients, internal 
boarded; and the number of trolleys in the AMAU. 
TABLE III.  
SIMULATION VARIABLES FOR BASE SCENARIO,  
Control Variables 
 
ED  
Boarders 
Internal 
Boarders 
Number of 
trolleys 
Base Scenario 
Yes 
Yes 
11 
Scenario 1 
Yes 
Yes 
17 
Scenario 2 
No 
Yes 
11 
Scenario 3  
Yes 
No 
11 
Scenario 4  
No 
No 
11 
 
For the first two factors, a value of ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ means 
the existence or the absence of the corresponding factor 
respectively. For example, Scenario 1 is similar to the 
baseline with both ED boarding and internal boarded 
patients considered, however, AMAU trolleys are increased 
from 11 to 17. This is to investigate the effect of increasing 
the physical capacity of AMAU only. On the other hand,  
Scenario 2 is designed to examine the effect of having no 
ED boarders while keeping other variables the same as the 
baseline (i.e., same number of trolleys with internal 
boarders). 
B. Result Analysis 
Increasing the AMAU physical capacity (Scenario 1) 
results in 30% increase in patient access with an insignificant 
effect on PET (increased by 0.7%) and TWT (increase by 
7%). Despite adding extra trolleys (Table. IV) improve the 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

patient access, it has insignificant effect on PET and TWT. 
On the other hand, unlocking ED boarders (i.e., Scenario 2 is 
assuming constant inpatient beds availability for ED 
patients) has resulted in a significant increase patient access 
to the AMAU by 25.9% (i.e., 1710 to 2152 patients). Such 
increase is attributed to an increase of availability of AMAU 
trolleys as patients do not have to wait in the unit. However, 
there is no significant change in PET for AMAU patients 
(1.9% decrease).  
TABLE IV.  SIMULATION RESULTS FOR SCENARIO 1 AND SCENARIO 2. 
KPIS 
Base 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
 
 
O/Pa 
+/- 
(%) 
O/Pa 
+/-
(%) 
Avg. PET(Min) 
276.8 
278.85 
0.7 
271.5 
-1.9 
Avg.TWT(Min) 
98.2 
105.08 
7.0 
96.8 
-1.4 
Avg. Patient access 
1710 
2224.0 
30.1 
2152 
25.9 
a. O/P: simulation output; +/-  : percentage of increase/decrease relative to the base scenario. 
 
Scenario 3 seems more effective in comparison to 
Scenario 2 (Table. V), in which patient access increase from 
1710 patients to 2337 patients and TWT decrease from 98.2 
minutes to 51.8 minutes as well as 9.2% reduction in PET. 
TABLE V.  SIMULATION RESULTS FOR SCENARIO 3 AND SCENARIO 4. 
KPIS 
Base 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 4 
 
 
O/Pa 
+/- 
(%) 
O/Pa 
+/-
(%) 
Avg. PET(Min) 
276.8 
251.4 
-9.2 
285.8 
3.2 
Avg.TWT(Min) 
98.2 
51.8 
-47.2 
87.5 
-10.9 
Avg. Patient access 
1710 
2337 
36.7 
3052 
78.5 
a.O/P: simulation output; +/-  : percentage of increase/decrease relative to the base scenario. 
 
Scenario 4 is the ideal situation in the system with no ED 
boarding and no internal boarding. In this scenario, there is a 
noticeable increase by 78.5% in patient access and 10.9% 
decrease in TWT. However, PET has increased by 9 
minutes, which is mainly because the number of patients 
entered into the unit is doubled. All the internal queues in the 
AMAU were analyzed in order to gain insights regarding the 
increase in PET. Three main bottlenecks were discovered 
due to the increased number of patients who can access the 
AMAU: access to the SSU; the number of AMAU 
consultants; and finally, the number of required porters. As a 
result, different combinations of the four basic scenarios 
(Table. VI) were designed  
TABLE VI.  SIMULATION SETTINGS FOR SCENARIOS 5 – 11. 
Scenarios 
Control Variables 
 
ED 
Boarders 
Internal 
Boarders 
SSU 
beds 
NPb 
NCc 
NTd 
Base  
Yes 
Yes 
24 
1 
1 
11 
Scenario 5   
No 
Yes 
36 
1 
1 
11 
Scenario 6  
No 
Yes 
48 
1 
1 
11 
Scenario 7   
No 
Yes 
24 
2 
1 
11 
Scenario 8   
Yes 
No 
24 
2 
1 
11 
Scenario 9   
Yes 
No 
24 
3 
1 
11 
Scenario 10 
No 
No 
24 
2 
1 
11 
Scenario 11  
No 
No 
24 
1 
2 
11 
Scenario 12 
No 
No 
24 
2 
2 
11 
(b.NP: number of Porters, c.NC: Number of Consultants, d.NT: Number of Trolleys) 
 
       In Scenario 5 and 6 there are no ED boarders, and the 
number of SSU beds has been changed from 24 to 36 (50% 
increase) and 48 (100% increase) respectively. By 
increasing 50% of SSU beds, patient access from the ED to 
the AMAU has increased from 1710 patients to 2667 
patients (Figure 5) with a slight increase in PET and TWT 
(Figure 6) compared to the baseline model. In Scenario 7, 
there are no ED boarders, but another porter added to the 
AMAU which resulted in a 30.9% increase in patient’s 
access and 20.7% reduction in TWT.  Therefore, increasing 
SSU beds is not as effective as increasing one porter to the 
AMAU. Scenario 8, is also designed to increase one porter 
with no internal boarder. The results of this scenario show 
that patients access increased by 51.2% along with a 
noticeable decrease in TWT by 74% (from 98.2 minutes to 
25.5 minutes). Adding more porters (Scenario 9) does not 
have further improvement on the performance.  
      In Scenario 10, a full relaxation scenario (i.e., no ED 
boarders and no internal boarders) by adding another porter 
has resulted in a considerable decrease in TWT by 61.2%. 
In contrast, adding one more consultant to the AMAU with 
full relaxation (with only one porter) resulted in only 21.3% 
decrease in average TWT. In last relaxation scenario (i.e., 
Scenario 12) the combination of adding one porter and one 
consultant resulted in increasing the number of patients 
entered to the AMAU from 1710 patients to 3615 patients 
with an 81.5% decrease in TWT and 20.6% decrease in 
PET. To conclude, Scenario 12 seems to have the best 
impact on KPIs.   
 
 
Figure 5. Comparing patient access in scenario 5 to scenario 12 
 
Figure 6. Comparing PET and TWT in scenario 5 to scenario 12 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Overcrowding is one of the key problems in Emergency 
Department (ED) of hospitals. It often has a negative effect 
on 
patients 
and 
unit 
performance. 
Acute 
Medical 
Assessment Units (AMAUs) is a new unit that is designed 
to reduce pressures on EDs by serving particular categories 
of ED patients.  However, with time passing, this unit 
suffers from boarding issues – patients who are waiting for 
decisions.  
A hybrid simulation model (DES-SD) has developed to 
examine the impact of boarding on AMAUs overall 
performance. The DES has used to model the patient flow in 
details incorporating AMAU and its relationships with other 
supporting units in the hospital such as ED, Wards and SSU. 
On the other hand, SD has looked at cross-boundary 
interactions outside the AMAU. Results show that 
improving the flow between up and downstream enhance 
patient access and resource utilization. Nevertheless, the 
original approach to this issue was to increase unit physical 
capacity. Adding AMAU’s bed capacity will not have a 
significant impact on performance variables in comparison 
to adding extra staff. Particular resources (e.g., consultants 
and porters) seem to be impactful especially if less or no 
boarding problem exists.  
Finally, the hybrid modeling approach has enabled the 
hospital managers to gain insights to the dynamism 
embedded in the system and also identify bottlenecks that 
hinder the performance. Future work intends to consider 
interaction between variables. In addition, Design of 
Experiment (DOE) module in order to examine factor 
sensitivity will be included.  
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Abo-Hamad and A. Arisha, “Simulation-based framework 
to improve patient experience in an emergency department,” 
Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 224, pp. 154–166, Jan. 2013. 
[2] J. M. Pines, R. J. Batt, J. A. Hilton, and C. Terwiesch, “The 
financial consequences of lost demand and reducing boarding 
in hospital emergency departments,” Ann. Emerg. Med., vol. 
58, pp. 331–340, 2011. 
[3] B. A. White et al., “Boarding inpatients in the emergency 
department increases discharged patient length of stay,” J. 
Emerg. Med., vol. 44, pp. 230–235, 2013. 
[4] E. S. Powell et al., “The relationship between inpatient 
discharge timing and emergency department boarding,” J. 
Emerg. Med., vol. 42, pp.186–196, 2012. 
[5] J. Zulkepli and T. Eldabi, “Developing Integrated Patient 
Pathways Using Hybrid Simulation,” AIP Conf. Proc. 
vol.1782, 2016, pp.040022, doi: 10.1063/1.4966089. 
[6] E. Tillal, B. Mariusz, and S. brailsford, “Hybrid Simulation: 
Historical Lessons, Present Challenges and Futures,” 
Proceedings of the 2016 Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE 
Press, 2016, pp. 1388–1403. 
[7] K. Chahal and T. Eldabi, “A Generic Framework for Hybrid 
Simulation in Healthcare,” Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Syst. Dyn. 
Soc., 2010, pp. 1-16. 
[8]  S. K. L. Brailsford, Sally C., L. Churilov, “Treating ailing 
emergency departments with simulation: An integrated 
perspective,”Health science simulation., pp. 25–30, 2003. 
[9] R. E. Giachetti, E. A. Centeno, M. A. Centeno, and R. 
Sundaram, “Assesing the Viability of an Open Access Policy 
in an Outpatient Clinic: A Discrete Event and Continuous 
Simulation Modeling Approach ,” in Proceedings of the 2005 
Winter Simulation Conference, 2005, IEEE Press, pp. 2246–
2255. 
[10] T. R. Rohleder, D. P. Bischak, and L. B. Baskin, “Modeling 
patient service centers with simulation and system dynamics,” 
Health Care Manag. Sci., vol. 10, pp. 1–12, Nov. 2006. 
[11] N. Ahmad, N. A. Ghani, A. A. Kamil, and R. M. Tahar, 
“Modelling the complexity of emergency department 
operations using hybrid simulation,” Int. J. Simul. Process 
Model., vol. 10, pp. 360–371, 2015. 
[12] R. K. Khare, E. S. Powell, G. Reinhardt, and M. Lucenti, 
“Adding More Beds to the Emergency Department or 
Reducing Admitted Patient Boarding Times: Which Has a 
More Significant Influence on Emergency Department 
Congestion?,” Ann. Emerg. Med., vol. 53, pp. 575–585.e2, 
2009. 
[13] A. E. Bair, W. T. Song, Y. C. Chen, and B. A. Morris, “The 
impact of inpatient boarding on ED efficiency: A discrete-
event simulation study,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 34, pp. 919–929, 
2010. 
[14] W. Rashwan, H. Heba, and A. Arisha, “An Integrated 
Approach of Multi-objective Optimization Modeling for 
Evaluating New Supporting Program in Irish Hospital,” 
Proceedings of the 2016 Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE 
Press, 2016, pp. 1904-1915. 
[15] J. G. Cronin, “The introduction of the Manchester triage scale 
to an emergency department in the Republic of Ireland,” 
Accid. Emerg. Nurs., vol. 11, pp. 121–125, 2003. 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

