A Generalized Agent-Based Model to Simulate
Emergency Departments
Zhengchun Liu, Eduardo Cabrera, Dolores Rexachs and Emilio Luque
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department
Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain
Email: {lzhengchun, ecabrera}@caos.uab.es, {dolores.rexachs, Emilio.Luque}@uab.es
Abstract—Computer simulation based methods have enjoyed
widespread use in healthcare system investigation and improve-
ment in recent years. Healthcare systems are based on human
interactions and Emergency Departments (ED) are one of the key
components of the healthcare system. The efﬁciency and quality
of service in ED have a great inﬂuence on the whole healthcare
system. The ﬁrst step to intensively study the emergency depart-
ment, to ﬁnd its underlying problem or to provide the best service
with limited budget, should be to create a realistic computational
model of the ED. Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation (ABMS)
is an excellent tool to deal with complex system like ED. This
research introduces a generalized ABMS-based computational
model of ED. The model has been implemented and veriﬁed in
a Netlogo modeling environment and can be used to simulate
different EDs through a tuning process.
Keywords–Emergency Department; Healthcare; Agent-Based Mod-
eling and Simulating; Complex system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Emergency Department (ED), a medical treatment
facility specializing in acute care of patients who arrive without
prior appointment, needs to operate 24 hours per day, 365 days
per year. Hundreds of people attend ED per day looking for
healthcare services. It is an important entry point to access
the healthcare service system. Patients frequently arrive with
unstable conditions. Some of them arrive unconscious, and
their information such as their medical history, allergies, and
blood type may be unavailable. Thus, they should be treated
quickly.
In order to set which patient should be visited ﬁrst, it is
mandatory to classify them. Triage is the process of determin-
ing the priority of patients’ treatments based on the severity of
their condition. This can efﬁciently improve patients’ treatment
process when resources are insufﬁcient for everyone to be
treated immediately [1]. The Spanish scale of triage is very
similar to the worldwide Canadian one; it consists of 5 levels,
with 1 being the most critical (resuscitation), and 5 being the
least critical (non-urgent). The triage process also determines
the order and priority with which the patient must be attended
and the treatment area where they will be treated. This research
has been performed with the participation of the ED Staff of
the Hospital of Sabadell (a University tertiary level hospital
in Barcelona, Spain that provides care service to a catchment
area of 500,000 people, and attends 160,000 patients per year
in the ED). The model and the simulator will be veriﬁed and
validated with the data taken from this Hospital.
In general, there are two separate treatment areas (labeled
as A and B in this study) in some big EDs to provide
diagnosis and treatment service after the triage process. Area
A is for those patients with acuity levels 1, 2 and 3 whereas
area B is for patients with acuity levels 4 and 5. Area A
is occupied by the most urgent patients and is made up of
careboxes. A carebox is a small room which contains essential
medical equipment and supplies that could be used for patients’
treatment in ED. Patients attended in area A will stay in their
own carebox during all the diagnosis and treatment process.
Area B is for patients with an acuity level of 4 and 5, which
for the Hospital of Sabadell represents 60% of the patients
attended in the ED. In area B, there are 3 or 4 attention boxes
in which doctors and nurses interact with patients, and a large
waiting room in which all patients will remain while not having
interaction with the ED Staff. Area A occupies more space than
area B.
As for the category of the research object, although the
term complexity may have different deﬁnitions, according to
the deﬁnition by Tan et al. [2], a complex system consists
of interconnected components that work together, interchange
resources and information with the environment in order to
meet an objective. This kind of system exhibits several major
characteristics: a large number of interactive parts; interactive
complexity and self-organization. Thus, there is no doubt that
the Emergency Department is a speciﬁc case of a complex
system. There are no standard models to describe such systems,
and analytical models cannot easily represent the complex sys-
tem caused by random events. With the development of high
performance computing techniques, computer based simulation
could be one of the best solution to study this kind of system.
The purpose of this work is to develop a general model
and simulator that could be used to simulate any emergency
department by using an Agent-Based Modeling and Simula-
tion (ABMS) approach. The ﬁnal objective is to develop a
simulator that, used as a decision support system, aids the
managers of the EDs, to analyze risks, facilitate coordination
implementation, allocate the resources and identify weaknesses
in service of resource. In addition, it could be used for studying
other related problems in the healthcare service system and
as a sensor of ED to generate data concerning different
simulation scenarios for ﬁnding some unusual knowledge of
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the healthcare service by using big-data and data mining
techniques. These are three ongoing research lines of the High
Performance Computing for Efﬁcient Application and Sim-
ulation (HPC4EAS) research group at Universitat Aut`onoma
de Barcelona research group based on the ED simulator. Our
previous studies have created the simulator of area B for
patients with acuity level 4 and 5 [3][4]. This research is
continuing with the previous work to create the model of area
A in the ED.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
gives the literature review, a brief introduction to our previous
work and the main improvements of this study. Section III
is the main part of this article, which has four parts: Section
III.A describes the modeling approach for this kind of complex
system; Section III.B gives the structure of the model, the
deﬁnition of the agents and agent behaviors; Section III.C
explains the way to model the interactions between agents, and
section III.D presents the mathematical-computational model
of the diagnosis and treatment phase in detail. Finally, Section
IV closes the article with conclusion and future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Rising et al. [5] are among one of the earliest publications
on using computer modeling and simulation for improving
healthcare service. The authors use the Monte Carlo simulation
model for analyzing the effects of alternative decision rules
for scheduling appointment periods during the day to increase
patient throughput and physician utilization. Hancock et al.
[6] developed a computer-based simulator of the hospital
systems, which is used for predicting the size of nursing staff
conﬁgurations under different scenarios.
Concerning the development of the computational model of
ED, Paulussen et al. [7] describe a multi-agent based approach
for patient scheduling in hospitals. In such a system, patients
and hospital resources are implemented as autonomous agents
in which the resource agents view the patients as entities to
be treated, and the patient agents view the medical actions as
tasks that need to be performed. The coordination of patients
is achieved through a market mechanism. Patient agents ne-
gotiate with each other over scarce hospital resources, using
state health dependent cost functions to compute bid and ask
prices for time slots. Within this concept, stochastic processing
times and variable pathways are considered. Unfortunately, the
system does not take into consideration patient variety or the
different kinds of healthcare staff. But in fact, the variety of
patients and staff has great inﬂuence on the performance of
ED.
As the use of simulation approach for studying EDs, Badri
and Hollingsworth [8] developed an Emergency Room (ER)
simulation model incorporating the major activities. The model
allows the evaluation of “what if?” questions through changing
the values of the variables and simulating the results. The
ER simulation model determines the effects of changes in
the scheduling practices, allocation of scarce resources, patient
demand patterns, and priority rules for serving patients. In the
study of Gove and Hewett [9], they examined the problem of
capacity in hospitals and proved that: due to the complexity of
the hospital and its departments, simulation was an ideal choice
to study. Moreover, Diefenbach et al. [10] found that varying
the number of beds, physical layouts, access to radiology and
pathology services etc. in the ED has an exponential effect
on expression of the system. The simulation results under the
change of the conﬁgurations can provide valuable reference
for management decision making. Kuljis et al. [11] compared
the healthcare system with business and manufacturing, and
provided the feasibility of using modeling and simulation
methods to improve the Quality of Service (QoS) in healthcare
system.
For the use of ABMS approach for simulating EDs, Macal
et al. [12] gave a tutorial to create an agent-based model for the
complex system, and they suggested that ABMS promises to
have far-reaching effects in the future on how to use computers
to support decision making. As for the reason for chosing
ABMS approach for simulating ED, Escudero-Marin et al. [13]
gave the reason that ABMS is better for modeling the EDs than
others. The authors also provided a general description of the
possible potential use of ABMS in healthcare application.
The previous studies in our HPC4EAS research group
mainly included creating the simulator of area B in ED [3],
balancing between the budget and QoS, ﬁnding the optimal
and sub-optimal resource conﬁgurations of ED to achieve
better QoS with limited budget by using K-means methods
and pipeline scheme [4][14].
Unlike area B, area A is the area dedicated to the critical
patient. It is more complex and quite different with area B
mainly because the patients in this area usually cannot move by
themselves; consequently, the doctor and other auxiliary staff
need attend these patients in their carebox. These cases lead
to a greater amount of restrictions and interactions between
the agents in ED. Compared with our previous model, the
main improvements and contribution of this article include:
considering some more agents, modifying the behavior of some
exist agents, introducing a new way to deﬁne and simulate the
interactions between agents and state transition of the agents,
and providing an easy-tuning model to simulate the diagnosis
and treatment phase.
The model created in this study is a generalized model. A
tuning process is necessary before simulation. In this study, the
tuning process is a process to adapt the generalized model to
the real ED to be simulated. It is done by using the historical
data of the given ED. The difference between the simulation
results and the real data will correct the value of the model’s
internal parameters. After a series of feedback and iterations,
when the difference reaches to an acceptable value, the model
is adapted to the real ED.
III.
SIMULATION MODEL
Conducting a valid simulation is both an art and a sci-
ence. One of the main challenges when developing a general
simulation model is to keep a model as simple as possible
whilst including all the key system information to achieve the
objectives of the simulation. One feasible way to do this is
through the following three steps: (1) survey multitude real
models; (2) analyze the concept structures of these real models;
and (3) abstract and generalize from these real models to
develop a reusable generic pattern model. This section detailed
the general model of EDs.
A. Modeling approach
When faced this kind of complex system, it is almost
impossible to model all its functionality directly because there
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

are large numbers of factors that can affect the result and
need to consider. A good way to model is by using a bottom-
up-modeling approach. Starting from the bottom subsystem
(agents, agents’ behavior and interactions between agents),
the execution of the simulator will cause a large amount of
interactions between these agents, and then these interactions
will emerge the functionality of the emergency department
indirectly.
Agents
Queues
Length of Stay in 
ED
Quality of Service
Functionality of the Emergency 
Department
Execute Simulator
Model
Being Reflected
Work
Figure 1. Bottom up modeling approach.
As shown in Figure 1, it works by modeling the agents,
their behaviors and interactions between them. Then, when
executing the simulator, the state of agents will be changed
by their interactions, and the queue for the interactions and
their Length of Waiting Time (LoWT) will emerge, by such
analogy, the functionality of the ED will emerge indirectly
through the execution of the simulator. Furthermore, the QoS
can be evaluated through the results of different simulation
scenarios.
Discrete Event Simulation (DES), System Dynamics (SD)
and ABMS are the three main approaches used when sim-
ulating this kind of complex system. There is a large body
of literature describing the use of DES models in ED studies,
whilst there is considerably less literature on the use of ABMS
for this purpose. As healthcare systems are based on human
actions and interactions, combined with our experience and
requirement, it can be more properly to model with ABMS
[13]. ABMS models can offer ways to provide a deep insight
view and to generate hypotheses about system behavior by
representing this as a result of the interaction between the
agents.
B. Agents and Agent Behaviors
In agent-based terms, a system is modeled as a set of
heterogeneous agents that will create the overall behavior of
the system through their interactions in the execution process
of model. When developing ABMS, it is crucial to represent
the two main parts of an agent-based model: agents and agent
behaviors.
The deﬁnition of agents should include their capabilities,
the actions they can perform and the characteristics of the
environment that surrounds them. In this article, each kind of
agents is deﬁned as:
A = {V ∪ B}
(1)
where V is a set of state variable to represent the agents’
characteristics:
V = {V1, V2, . . . , Vm}
(2)
The states of the agents are indicated by the values of the
state variables. And set B contains all the behaviors of the
agents in this category:
B = {B1, B2, . . . , Bn}
(3)
Each kind of agent has its own deﬁnition of state variable
V and each state variable has a set of possible values in its
range:
Vi = {Y1, Y2, Y3, . . . , YKi}(0 ≤ i ≤ m)
(4)
After some survey of several EDs with the participation of
sanitary staff from hospital of Sabadell. The agents considered
in ED and their behaviors are shown in Table I.
TABLE I. AGENTS AND AGENTS’ BEHAVIOR
Agent
Behavior
Patient
Waiting for service.
Accepting service.
Waiting for treatment takes effect.
Admission Staff
Provide admission service for patient.
Waiting for next patient.
Triage Nurse
Provide triage service for patient.
Waiting for next patient.
Doctor
Look over test result.
Provide diagnostic service.
Arrange test for patient.
Arrange treatment plan.
Waiting for task.
Auxiliary Staff
Moving patient to the speciﬁc place.
Waiting for task.
Nurse
Take and send samples for laboratory test.
Provide treatment service.
Waiting for task.
Laboratory Test
Accept sample from nurse.
Analyze samples of patient.
Send analyzing result to the corresponding doctor.
Waiting for samples.
Internal Test
Provide test service.
Send analyzing result to the corresponding doctor.
Waiting for next patient.
External Test
Provide test service.
Send analyzing result to the corresponding doctor.
Ambulance
Providing service to patients.
Waiting for task.
Carebox
Providing treatment place to patient.
Waiting for next patient.
In Table I, each kind of agent has its own behavior. The
behaviors are generalized that do not represent one speciﬁc
action, instead, the combination of the value of their state
variables and the generalized behavior will represent the real
action. For example, if the value of state variables indicates
that the patient stays in the waiting room, waiting for service
after admission, which means that they are waiting for triage
service instead of other services.
As to the diagnosis service, there are different kinds of
tests, for example blood test, x-ray, B ultrasonic, and so on.
In reality, most of the time spent on diagnosis was on waiting,
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

waiting for the service and waiting for the result. The LoWT
depends on the length of the waiting queue which emerged as
a result of the agents’ interactions. The length of the waiting
queue depends on the number of patients, their acuity level
distribution and the amount of available resources in ED.
That is the reason why the LoWT emerged by executing the
simulation instead of being modeled directly. From this point
of view, it is better to take the test service as agents. In this
manner, the patients need to interact with these agents to know
their body condition, because of the limited number of these
agents, the patient usually needs to wait for the interaction,
as shown in Figure 1, the queues will emerge in this way.
Therefore, in Table I, all these tests were classiﬁed into three
types according to their interactive mode:
Laboratory test: It is a kind of test performed in a carebox
and laboratory, when the doctor ordered this kind of test, the
nurse will go to the carebox to take some samples and then
send them to the laboratory (or analysis by nurse directly), after
a period of time, the doctor will get the result. Due to the test
being an agent, the LoWT could emerge from simulation. The
main characteristic of this kind of test is that the patients do not
need to move, hence there is no interaction with the auxiliary
staff, but instead, the nurse will have some interactions to
perform with the patient and laboratory.
Internal test: The internal test means the diagnostic equip-
ment is owned and used only by ED, thus the length of the
waiting queue for the service is under-control and can emerge
through simulation. Unlike a laboratory test, in order to do this
kind of test, the patients need to move, so they need to interact
with the auxiliary staff, which may cause longer LoWT if the
conﬁguration of auxiliary staff is inadequate.
External test: In ED, there are some types of diagnostic
equipment shared with the hospital wards or even shared
with other EDs, therefore the length of the waiting queue
cannot emerge because part of the agents outside ED who
need to interact with these test agents but do not appear in
the simulator. One way to simulate is by using a period of
time delay (based on statistical data and following probability
distribution obtained from tuning process) to model this kind
of test. As with an Internal test, in order to do this kind of
test, the patients need to interact with auxiliary staff to move
them to the corresponding test room.
In addition to this, the ambulance and hospital wards were
also considered because the behavior of these two agents also
have obvious effects on the functionality of ED:
Ambulance: Some patients come by ambulance, especially
the patients in area A. Part of them will do admission and
triage in the ambulance, when the patient is critical enough,
and on arrival they will go to a carebox directly or stay in the
ambulance until a free carebox is available. At the same time,
some patients may need to go home by ambulance. But usually
the ambulance has arrival delay. Under this circumstance, they
will keep using the carebox. Hence, the quality of ambulance
service is one of the factors that may cause overcrowding in
ED.
Hospital ward: A hospital ward is a main exit way for the
patients in area A. It is common that the hospital ward does
not have enough free beds, thus the patient will keep using the
carebox even though this is not necessary, so the throughput
of hospital wards also has direct inﬂuence on the performance
of ED. For simulating the hospital ward, it is similar to the
external test agent. The number of free beds and available time
will be simulated through the probability distribution and the
parameters of the distributions are obtained from analyzing the
real data in the tuning process.
C. Model of the Interactions
The functional behavior of any system can be speciﬁed by
a state machine (also called an object) [15] . In this research,
to model the interactions between the agents and their states,
the Finite State Machine (FSM) was used.
According to the deﬁnition of agents through (1)-(4), the
state of agents are presented by the value of their state variables
and each state variable has a set of possible values. Based on
the actual situation, the transition of agents’ state is caused
by interaction with other agents or in some cases with time
elapse. Thus, the value of the state variables are changed by
one of their behaviors or time elapsing, as in (5):
YKi = f(Bj, T)(0 ≤ i ≤ m, 0 ≤ j ≤ n)
(5)
where Bj represents the corresponding behavior with other
agents, it is an element of the behavior set B. T represents the
elapsing of the time because sometimes the state of the agents,
e.g., patients’ body condition after medicating, can change with
time goes on without any interactions.
As shown in Figure 2, the state machine accepts commands
and produces outputs, which means that when the agents
interact with other agents and/or with the time elapsing (accept
input), the value of one or several variables will be changed
(because of the outputs produced). Any one of the variables’
value changing will represent the state transition.
Agent(Patient):
Variables:
    acuity level
    age
    body condition
    location
    …
   
State transition when interact with other 
agents or with time elapsing
Interacting
State variables 
changed
State 
transition
I/O
I/O
I/O
Figure 2. A typical patient’s conceptual state transfer model.
Therefore, the set of one kind of agents’ states is the
cartesian produce of each state variable’s possible value set(see
(6)). The state set of a speciﬁc agent in this type is a subset
of S, which is determined by the speciﬁc conﬁguration of the
agent.
S = {S0, S1, S2, . . . , St} = {V1 × V2 × V3 × . . . × Vn}
(0 ≤ t ≤
n
Y
i=1
Ki) (6)
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE II. A PART OF A PATIENT’S STATE TRANSITION.
State index
Source State
Destination state
Input
.. .
...
. . .
. . .
St
Waiting for service (free carebox).
Waiting for service (Doctor’s diagnosis).
Notice from IS with a free care box.
St+1
Waiting for service (doctor’s diagnosis)
Accepting Service(meet with doctor)
Doctor arrive at patient’s carebox.
St+2
Accepting Service(meet with doctor)
Waiting for service (X-Ray test service)
Doctor order X-Ray test for patient.
St+3
Waiting for service (X-Ray test service)
Accepting Service(X-Ray test service)
X-Ray service available.
St+4
Accepting Service(X-Ray test service)
Waiting for service (Doctor’s review of the test result)
X-Ray service ﬁnished.
.. .
...
. . .
. . .
By combining with Table I about the generalized behavior
of agents, (1) - (6) for the deﬁnition of agents and Figure 2
about the conceptual state transfer, it is feasible to list all the
agents’ evolution during the stay in ED, Table II gives a part
of one patients’ state transition. In Table II, although some of
the state is the same as Waiting for service, the value of its
state variables will determine the speciﬁc service the patient
waiting for.
Above all, by means of deﬁning the agents through state
variables, it will be feasible to deal with the huge amount
of states of the agents. At the same time, it will be easy
to add/remove states simply by adding/removing elements in
the set of possible values of the state variables and their
corresponding behavior. For the study of other ED related
problems, for example, the virus propagation in ED, some new
state variables and their possible values will become easy to be
added to indicate some more states. With the same approach,
by the execution of the model, some new functionality of the
research object will emerge from these new states.
D. Diagnosis and Treatment Phase
Before the diagnosis and treatment phase, for the patients,
they need to do admission and triage, actually these two
phases take very little time in reality. Figure 3 indicates
the common process in the emergency department. For the
patients, especially the patients with acuity levels 1, 2 and
3, most of their Length of Stay (LoS) in the emergency
department is spent in the carebox for having various kinds of
tests, receiving treatment and waiting for the treatment to take
effect. This is the most important part of the model because
most of the state transitions take place during this phase.
For the patients in area A (with acuity levels 1, 2 and 3),
they always stay in their own carebox during the diagnosis
and treatment phase. The general process in the carebox is
that the patient takes some tests (x-ray, ultrasound, blood
test and so on), then the doctor reviews the test result and
provides one treatment plan or asks to do further tests. After
that, the nurse will carry out the treatment plan or take some
test samples if a laboratory test is ordered. After a period of
time, some state variables of the patient will be changed or
the patient unfortunately die. With the change of the patients’
body condition, the doctor will decide what the patient need
to do next: to go the hospital ward, go home or continue with
diagnosis and treatment. In order to generalize the process of
all the patients, the next state will be decided by probability
distribution during simulating. The distribution model of the
probability was based on the statistical data from the real EDs.
Figure 3 indicates the general process-transfer strategy during
the patients’ stay in EDs.
In Figure 3, P1(%), P2(%), P3(%) and P4(%) represent
the probability of the next state transition separately. P ′
1(%)
and P ′
2(%) represent the decision of the doctor after reviewing
the test results and body condition of the patients in probability.
All of the probabilities follow some probability distributions.
The probability density function of the distribution is decided
by several key parameters based on the statistical analysis
of doctors’ decision and patients’ behavior, the value of
these parameters are estimated by a tuning process from real
historical data of the speciﬁed ED. The uniform forms of the
density functions are:
Pi = f(LoS, age, level)
(7)
4
X
i=1
Pi =
100%
(8)
P ′ = f ′(ToT, age, level)
(9)
2
X
i=1
P ′
i =
100%
(10)
where LoS is the patient’s length of stay in the carebox.
age is the age of the patient, which also has big inﬂuence to
the probability of state transition. level is the acuity level of
the patient. And ToT is the type of test service or diagnosis
by doctor.
The function f and f ′ are the probability density function.
These functions will be implemented by analyzing real his-
torical data in tuning process. This work can only be done
in the tuning process because different EDs have different
characteristics, it is a part of the simulator instead of the
general model. Therefore, combined with (1) - (10), every
patient will show different behavior during the execution of
the model because of the probability distribution and their own
differences in body condition. But the statistical property of
agents will reﬂect their common behavior.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Simulation methods have long been used to model elements
of healthcare systems with a view to analyzing new system
designs, retroﬁtting to existing systems and proposing changes
to operating rules. The Emergency Department (ED) is a typ-
ical complex system. To perform intensively study, a realistic
computational model is compulsory. An approach to modeling
this kind of system is by using agent-based modeling and
simulation, which is a kind of bottom-up modeling approach.
This paper presents a generalized agent-based model of the
emergency departments. It was designed based on the survey
of different EDs and with the participation of sanitary staff
in ED. This model has been implemented and veriﬁed in a
Netlogo modeling environment. It is not dedicated with one
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Test and(or) Diagnose
Hospital wards
Home
Dead
P2(%)
P4(%)
Admission
Triage
Waiting for service
Treatment
P'1(%)
P'2(%)
Figure 3. Main process in Emergency Departments.
speciﬁc ED, which can be used to simulate different EDs
through tuning process.
This research is a progress of our previous work. To model
the critical part of the ED (here, we call it area A), we deﬁned
some new agents also added some new state variables to extend
the behavior of the previous agents. A new way to simulate
the interaction between the agents and the state transition of
the agent was provided, an easy tuning model was created for
diagnosis and treatment phase in area A. In reality, most of the
emergency department works like area A. For those big EDs,
they have both area A and B, hence with both the model of A
and B, we have the model of the whole EDs.
Creating the computational model of the object is the ﬁrst
step of simulation. Model veriﬁcation is the task to ensure
that the model behaves as intended, some basic experiments
has been done to verify the functionality of the model. But,
in order to validate the simulator, tuning for some real EDs
is mandatory. Therefore, the ﬁrst step of future work should
be validation. Some real historical data of EDs will be asked
to perform the tuning process. Moreover, during the tuning
process, due to the great number of parameters for the model,
and the large number of agents and interactions between
them. To increase the number of studied scenarios and reduce
execution time as well, the use of high performance computing
will be mandatory.
In addition, the ED is the main entrance to the healthcare
service; some problems of the healthcare service system are
caused by the performance of ED. However, the ED is not
independent, all the departments of healthcare system inﬂuence
each another. Thus, our future work also include creating
the simulator of other healthcare departments, for example
the hospital wards to close the simulation loop of the whole
healthcare service system. After that, the simulators of these
departments will work as the sensor of the healthcare service
system. The data generated from these sensors will be analyzed
through data-mining and big-data techniques to ﬁnd some
unusual knowledge of the system to provide smarter service
to patients.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has been supported by the MINECO
(MICINN) Spain under contract TIN2011-24384 and partially
supported by China Scholarship Council (CSC) under refer-
ence number: 201306290023.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. S. Bermejo, C. C. Fadrique, B. R. Fraile, E. F. Centeno, S. P. Cueva,
and E. De las Heras Castro, “El triaje en urgencias en los hospitales
espa˜noles,” Emergencias: Revista de la Sociedad Espa˜nola de Medicina
de Urgencias y Emergencias, vol. 25, no. 1, 2013, pp. 66–70.
[2]
J. Tan, H. J. Wen, and N. Awad, “Health care and services delivery
systems as complex adaptive systems,” Communications of the ACM,
vol. 48, no. 5, 2005, pp. 36–44.
[3]
M. Taboada, E. Cabrera, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. Luque,
“An agent-based decision support system for hospitals emergency
departments,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 4, 2011, pp. 1870–1879.
[4]
M. Taboada, E. Cabrera, F. Epelde, M. L. Iglesias, and E. Luque,
“Using an agent-based simulation for predicting the effects of patients
derivation policies in emergency departments,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 18, 2013, pp. 641–650.
[5]
E. J. Rising, R. Baron, and B. Averill, “A systems analysis of
a university-health-service outpatient clinic,” Operations Research,
vol. 21, no. 5, 1973, pp. 1030–1047.
[6]
W. M. Hancock and P. F. Walter, “The use of computer simulation to
develop hospital systems,” ACM SIGSIM Simulation Digest, vol. 10,
no. 4, 1979, pp. 28–32.
[7]
T. O. Paulussen, A. Z¨oller, A. Heinzl, L. Braubach, A. Pokahr, and
W. Lamersdorf, “Patient scheduling under uncertainty,” in Proceedings
of the 2004 ACM symposium on Applied computing.
ACM, 2004,
pp. 309–310.
[8]
M. A. Badri and J. Hollingsworth, “A simulation model for scheduling
in the emergency room,” International Journal of Operations & Produc-
tion Management, vol. 13, no. 3, 1993, pp. 13–24.
[9]
D. Gove and D. Hewett, “A hospital capacity planning model,” OR
Insight, vol. 8, no. 2, 1995, pp. 12–15.
[10]
M. Diefenbach and E. Kozan, “Hospital emergency department sim-
ulation for resource analysis,” Industrial Engineering & Management
Systems, vol. 7, no. 2, 2008, pp. 133–142.
[11]
J. Kuljis, R. J. Paul, and L. K. Stergioulas, “Can health care beneﬁt
from modeling and simulation methods in the same way as business and
manufacturing has?” in Proceedings of the 39th conference on Winter
simulation: 40 years! The best is yet to come.
IEEE Press, 2007, pp.
1449–1453.
[12]
C. M. Macal and M. J. North, “Tutorial on agent-based modeling
and simulation,” in Proceedings of the 37th conference on Winter
simulation.
Winter Simulation Conference, 2005, pp. 2–15.
[13]
P. Escudero-Marin and M. Pidd, “Using abms to simulate emergency
departments,” in Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference.
Winter Simulation Conference, 2011, pp. 1239–1250.
[14]
E. Cabrera, M. Taboada, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. Luque, “Sim-
ulation optimization for healthcare emergency departments,” Procedia
Computer Science, vol. 9, 2012, pp. 1464–1473.
[15]
L. Lamport, “Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed
system,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 21, no. 7, 1978, pp. 558–
565.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

