Detailed Input data Source for Construction Process Simulation  
Approach to connect different data source for discrete-event simulation  
Jürgen Melzner, Sebastian Hollermann, Hans-Joachim Bargstädt 
Bauhaus-University Weimar, Germany 
e-mails: {juergen.melzner, sebastian.hollermann, hans-joachim.bargstaedt}@uni-weimar.de 
 
 
Abstract - Process simulation is an established tool to support 
planning process. In construction business, process simulation 
is not gained acceptance for work planning. The reason 
therefore is the complex development of simulation models 
because of the lag of comprehensive input data in a suitable 
form. For meaningful results of process simulation a reliable 
input data is very important. In construction business 
scheduling and cost calculation depends in different planning 
phases on different data source. Developments in object-
orientated construction design software offering possibilities to 
take this information about the object and combine these with 
process data delivered by dynamic construction data source. 
This paper presents an approach to integrate the dynamic 
construction data for input data in a very high level-of-detail. 
The presented approach is implemented in a discrete-event 
simulation framework. The objective is a tool for decision 
support in scheduling and calculation in construction 
management.       
Keywords-simulation; level-of-detail; process modeling; 
input data; construction management; scheduling.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Modeling and simulation of construction process 
supports construction planning and can help in reducing the 
risks concerning budget, time and quality on a construction 
project [1] [2]. Construction projects are complex because of 
the need considering different aspects in the planning phase 
[3]. The client creates a technical specification to define its 
expectations to the object. These product descriptions define 
the quality of the product, which has to be built. However, 
for a detailed job planning it is necessary to know the 
execution processes in detail. Detailed process chain 
analyses in construction management are not as well 
widespread as in stationary industry. Therefore process 
analysis and description have to done before. In complex 
process chains with different influences and boundary 
conditions process simulation is a well established [4].  
Process simulation is rarely used for construction process 
planning because of different aspects. Experts name for the 
most important impediment for the lacking use of simulation 
the missing automatically generated input-data [5]. 
The most important aspect in the development of the 
methodology is to capture the major requirements that 
describe the real construction process [6]. This paper 
presents, how construction processes can be described to 
deliver valuable entry criteria and input conditions for a 
simulation model. 
This short paper is structured as following: A short 
summary about the related work in 4D-animation in 
construction and scheduling with simulation support 
reproduced in Section II. Following by an explanation about 
the different planning phases in construction management 
with different level-of- detail. Section  IV explains the two 
data sources: product data and dynamic construction data. 
The generated input data will implemented in a discrete-
event simulation framework (Section V). Finally we 
complete with a summary and an outlook for further 
investigations.        
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A lot of investigations have been done in the area of 4D 
animation and process simulation. The generation of the 
input data is crucial according to the many researchers. 
Huhnt et al. [7] present an approach for data management 
for animation of construction processes. There modeling 
approach starts with a decomposition of a building into 
components. The manufacturing process is described in 
process-templates and sub-processes. By assigning the 
building components with the processes a 4D-animation 
will generate.    
  In construction projects it is common that drawing, 
scheduling and estimation are separated planning tasks. 
Several research projects are initiated to face these 
challenges. For instance, Kim et al. [8] propose a 
methodology of developing a 5D system. They link the 
schedule and costs, which develop in “EVMS” (Earned 
Value Management System) with the 3D model of a bridge.  
Chahrour and Tulke [9] link the 3D model with the time 
schedule to a 4D Modell. With help of their IFC tool they are 
able to integrate the process, of time scheduling in a project 
network. Furthermore they improve a 4D editor and 
implement their concept to software.  
Wu et al. [10] presented a pattern-based approach for 
facilitating schedule generation and cost analysis in bridge 
construction 
projects. 
Their 
approach 
shows 
a 
computational method to help project planner to generate 
the time schedules for bridge automatically. The method has 
been 
implemented 
in 
a 
discreet-event 
simulation 
environment. They developed a software tool called 
“Preparator”, which assists the scheduler to assign process 
patterns to individual elements of a 3D building model. The 
pattern represents a certain construction method including a 
number of work packages that the user has to decide to 
apply. 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The presented research projects describe approaches for 
data management in special fields. On the one hand, the data 
is used for the visualization and the other for the simulation. 
The research approach at Bauhaus-University Weimar focus 
on a data base for input data for simulation. The simulation 
result can visualized as well. In construction business, 
process planning is not a static process. Process planning 
and construction planning will developed dynamically and 
parallel in different project development phases.    
 
III. 
LEVEL-OF-DETAIL IN DIFFERENT PLANNING PHASES 
Tendering and scheduling in construction management is 
a progress, which is developed over a large period of time 
and in different level-of detail [11]. 
A. 
Primilinary planing 
The first phase in the development of a construction 
project is called “primilinary planning”. At the beginning of 
a project there is only an idea to build an object. There are 
less information about sizes and quantities. For project 
managers it is important in this early planning phase on a 
low level of detail to calculate the costs and construction 
time in an appropriate way. The figures in this phase are 
based on experience. For construction projects, they are 
called construction cost index (Baukostenindex-BKI). For 
different types of buildings the costs per unit are listed.    
B. 
Tendering 
The “tendering” phase, the construction company 
calculates the price for the object. The calculation is based 
on a bill of quantity with a description of the building 
performance. 
The 
bill 
of 
quantities 
defines 
detail 
construction quality for all objects. However, there is no 
virtual connection between processes and objects.  
C. 
Work planning  
The highest level-of-detail is necessary in the “work 
planning phase”. For robust work planning it is important to 
know much information about the object and processes as 
well. The project profit depends a lot on knowledge of the 
managers and the available tools for decision support.  
Our research objective is tool for decision support in 
construction management. The tool allows what-if-scenarios 
and a forecast of resource requirements. 
The bases for profound decisions are information. All 
decisions have influences to costs and time. But in the work 
planning phase the design of the building is almost 
completed. Therefore it is necessary to get and use more 
information for decision making in the early planning stage 
(Fig. 1). 
IV. 
INPUT DATA 
Construction business is typically for the one-of-a-kind 
business. Every building is build at once. Distinguishing 
features of the unique processes in the construction industry 
are according to [12]: 
 
uniqueness of design and construction  
 
different materials  
 
resources availability 
 
 
          
 
Figure 1.  Quantity of information in relation to planning phases; tratitional (left), new apporach (right) 
 
 
many disturbances and parameters with stochastic 
properties 
 
many different participants 
 
variety of mandatory and useful dependencies in the 
processes 
 
 
Therefore for simulation the construction processes the 
model, including the input data, has to be created from 
beginning on. For minimizing the effort for model generation 
standardized input data is necessary. For Construction 
simulation there are two main data sources needed. 
Information about the building including all objects and 
quantities will import via a Building Information Model 
(BIM). The construction data with the information about to 
time, cost, materials and labor recourses will delivered by a 
specific dynamic data base.  
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

A. 
Product data  
In construction business, 2-dimensional drawings are still 
usually. New developments in construction software support 
object-orientated Building Information Models (BIM). 
Commercial software programs developed an object 
orientated modelling environment. The base is different 
intelligent objects of building types such as walls and 
windows. These intelligent objects are elements of the 
product model and can be linked to each other for example 
that the height of a wall depends on the level of the next 
ceiling (level). Planning of construction projects in an object 
orientated 
environment 
is 
helpful 
for 
construction 
management as well as for technical purposes such as clash 
detection. The objects like walls, columns or decks in an 
object orientated environment have more information like 
traditional 3D-Modells. The information is geometrical 
parameters such as lengths, height, orientation and global 
coordination. Furthermore, we added information about 
construction methods on each object. Such as, for 
constructing a concrete wall you can do this in different 
ways. The first decision is to build it on site or with 
prefabricated 
elements. 
Such 
construction 
relevant 
information is connected to all objects. 
Our research does not replace other researches in the 
growing field of Building Information Modeling (BIM). It 
can be considered as a special contribution to additional 
performances of BIM. 
B. 
Dynamic construction data 
For more than 40 years a specific data base for 
construction work planning establish in Germany. The 
former 
standardized 
book 
of 
bill 
of 
quantities 
(Standardleistungsbuch-Bau STLB Bau) offering a vast 
amount of data about construction materials, construction 
regulations and construction practices [13]. The objective of 
this approach is the integration of these big data source for 
discrete-event simulation (Fig. 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Integration approach 
The dynamic construction data base offering a vast 
amount of structured information of construction processes. 
The data base structures all construction cost relevant trades. 
For the simulation studies the process time and costs are 
required. First each building object has connected with one 
process from the dynamic data base. The reunite of object 
and process are implemented in some commercial software 
as well. But, the process sequences have to create manual. 
Our approach aims to a definition of constraints in different 
level-of-detail. 
The crucial point for an automatically generated process 
sequence is correct setting of constraints. This is main 
development for the simulation framework described in 
Chapter V. Different planning phases requires different 
Level-of-Constraints. Therefore we take the existing 
decomposition of planning phases and define for each level 
appropriate constraint (Fig. 3). 
 
 
      
 
Figure 3.  Different level of constraints 
V. 
SIMULATION FRAMEWORK 
In this approach, a constraint-based model is used, which 
has been developed by König et. al. [14] to analyze 
construction processes. Thereby, the construction tasks and 
their constraints for production such as technological 
dependencies, availability and capacity can be specified and 
valid execution schedules can be generated. The concept has 
been implemented using discrete-event simulation. That 
means, only one point of time, at which event occur, are 
inspected. Within the cooperation SIMoFIT (Simulation of 
Outfitting Processes in Shipbuilding and Civil Engineering) 
a constraint-based simulation approach is developed (e.g. 
[15]). The SIMoFIT cooperation was established between 
Bauhaus-University Weimar and Flensburger Shipyard, 
because 
construction 
processes 
in 
shipbuilding 
are 
comparable to building industry [16].  
The constraint-based simulation approach is implemented 
by existing Simulation Toolkit Shipbuilding (STS) and uses 
the simulation program Plant Simulation provided by 
SIEMENS PLM. The Flensburger Shipyard and their 
partners are developing the STS since 2000.  
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The researcher group of Bauhaus-University Weimar 
developed and used the STS components for special aspects 
in construction management. They developed simulation 
models to investigate the impact of different influencing 
parameters on the performance of construction activities. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUTION AND OUTLOOK 
The described approach shows how an existing huge data 
source can deliver important data for construction 
simulation. The data source is the base of high level 
simulation solutions. The level-of-detail these approach 
depends on the planning phase, which is to consider. Both 
the building objects as well as the constraints in early 
planning phase are on a low level-of-detail. The specification 
during the project development delivers further information. 
Thus simulation solution develops from rough to detail as 
well.  For that reasons the solutions can help project manager 
by decision making.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The described approach is mainly developed in the 
research project MEFISTO, a lead project of the German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMWF). We 
express our thanks for the possibility to develop this 
approach. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Song, S. Wang, and S. Abourizk, “A virtual shop modeling 
system 
for 
industrial 
fabrication 
shops”, 
Simulation 
Modelling Practice and Theory, Vol. 14, 2006, pp. 649-662. 
[2] S. Abourizk, D. W. Halpin, and J. D. Lutz, “State of the art in 
construction simulation”, Proceedings of the 1992 Winter 
Simulation Conference, Arlington, VA, 1992, pp. 1271-1277. 
[3] F. O. Faniran, P. E. D. Love, and H. Li, “Optimal allocation 
of construction planning resources”, Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management, Vol. 125, 5, 1999, pp. 311–
319. 
[4] C. M. Tam, T. K. L. Tong, and H. Zhang, “Decision making 
and 
operations 
research 
techniques 
for 
construction 
management, City University of Hong Kong Press, Hong 
Kong, 2007. 
[5] W. A. Günthner and A. Borrmann, „Digitale Baustelle-
innovativer Planen, effizienter Ausführen: Werkzeuge und 
Methoden für das Bauen im 21. Jahrhundert“, Springer, 
Dordrecht, New York, 2011. 
[6] D. W. Halpin and L. S. Riggs, “Planning and analysis of 
construction operations”, Wiley, New York, 1992. 
[7] W. Huhnt, S. Richter, and S. Wallner, T. Habashi, T. Krämer, 
„Data management for animation of construction processes”, 
Advanced Engineering Informatics, Vol. 24, 2010, pp.404-
416. 
[8] H. Kim, C. Benghi, N. Dawood, D. Jung, J. Kim, and Y. 
Baek, “Developing 5D system connecting cost, schedule and 
3D model”, CONVR 2010: Proc. of the 10th International 
Conference on Construction Applications of Virtual Reality, 
2010, pp. 123-129. 
[9] R. Chahrour and J. Tulke, “Anbindung der Simulation an eine 
BIM-Umgebung, Chancen und Anforderungen im Vergleich 
zur 
Terminplanung”, 
Proc. 
of 
Simulation 
von 
Unikatprozessen: Neue Anwendungen aus Forschung und 
Praxis (Ed.: Istitut für Bauwirtschaft an der Universität 
Kassel), 2011, pp. 63-80. 
[10] I.-C. Wu, A. Borrmann, E. Rank, U. Beißert, and M. König, 
“A Pattern-Based Approach for Facilitating Schedule 
Generation and Cost Analysis in Bridge Construction 
Projects”, Proc. of the 26th International Conference on IT in 
Construction & 1st International Conference on Managing 
Construction for Tomorrow, 1-3 October 2009, Istanbul 
[11] S. Hollermann, J. Melzner, and H.-J. Bargstädt, “Flexible 
Scheduling based on Construction Process Modeling“ Proc. 
11th International Conference on Construction Application of 
Virtual Reality (CONVR 2011). unpublished. 
[12] V. Franz, “Unikatprozesse und ASIM-Aktivitäten – Bericht 
von der Arbeitsgruppe – Unikatprozesse“ Proc. Modellierung 
von 
Prozessen 
zur 
Fertigung 
von 
Unikaten 
Forschungsworkshop zur Simulation von Bauprozessen, 
25.03.2010, Weimar, 2010, pp. 5-16. 
[13] StLB-Bau, 
StLB-Bau-Dynamische 
Baudaten, 
2011, 
www.stlb-bau-online.de, Retrieved: 25.07.2011 
[14] M. König, U. Beißert, and H.-J. Bargstädt, “Ereignis-diskrete 
Simulation 
von 
Trockenbauarbeiten 
- 
Konzept, 
Implementierung und Anwendung”, Proc. Simulation in der 
Bauwirtschaft: 13. September 2007 an der Universität Kassel 
(Ed.: V. Franz), Kassel Univ. Press. Kassel, 2007, p. 15 
[15] M. König, U. Beißert, D. Steinhauer, and H.-J. Bargstädt, 
“Constraint-Based Simulation of Outfitting Processes in 
Shipbuilding and Civil Engineering”, Proc. 6th EUROSIM 
Congress on Modelling ans Simulation, 2007. 
[16] SIMoFIT (Simulation of Outfitting Processes in Shipbuilding 
and 
Civil 
Engineering, 
http://www.simofit.com/,       
Retrieved: 25.07.2011. 
 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

