A Standardized Simulation Model with Strategic Approach for Distribution 
Networks 
A Case Study in Mexico 
 
Homero H. Contreras, José Pablo Nuño 
Interdisciplinary Graduate Programs and Research Center 
UPAEP University 
Puebla, Mexico 
homerohector.contreras@upaep.edu.mx; 
pablo.nuno@upaep.mx 
Eric Porras, Eduardo Zelaya 
EGADE Business School 
ITESM – Campus Santa Fe 
Mexico City, Mexico 
eric.porras@itesm.mx; ezelaya@itesm.mx
 
 
Abstract— Considering that analytic tools are not completely 
suitable to analyze supply chain and distribution networks, 
simulation is considered a better alternative. Some theories 
about discrete simulation have been suggested, especially those 
related to the use of standardized models and the use of 
strategic planning process in simulation. This paper presents a 
standardized simulation model based on a simulation 
programming language rather than a graphical simulator, to 
be used as a decision-making tool for the top management due 
to its strategic approach. The model is validated in a real 
business case, where tangible results were achieved. 
Keywords-Simulation; 
standardized 
model, 
distribution 
network, strategy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Considering the opportunities that distribution network 
presents to create value and profits to any organization, 
specific tools to analyze and improve distribution must be 
used in today’s business environment. Most tools might be 
classified as analytical tools (those using a closed-form 
solution based on a mathematical algorithm) or simulation 
tools [1] 
Simulation is considered as a suitable tool because the 
integration of dynamic and stochastic issues of real life 
processes is a critical task. Standardized simulation models 
are those which can be applied to a broad range of systems 
and, at the same time, they can be adjusted to different 
scenarios and performance criteria, becoming specific when 
data for a particular system is loaded [2].  Therefore, a model 
is suggested, based on a common logic used to evaluate the 
configuration of a distribution network. This evaluation is 
focused on a strategic planning approach, using a general 
purpose simulation programming language.  
Any model must be evaluated through specific key 
performance indicators, which should be similar to the 
intended use case.  
This paper is organized as follows: a literature review 
about simulation, strategy and supply chain is presented, 
supporting the proposed idea; then, the methodology used to 
define a standardized model, including the objectives, logic 
and specific considerations of the code is described. The 
validation through a real business case in Mexico is included, 
and finally, some conclusions and future research are 
presented. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Any organization can been considered as a series of 
related operations where its assets must be adapted to the 
actual and future demand, in several levels of aggregation 
and time horizons [3]; therefore, the supply chain 
management becomes an integral part of the strategy of the 
organizations. In particular, the distribution network plays a 
vital role because successful firms have been supported by 
competitive advantages related to the optimization between 
demand and delivery [2]. Reaching flexibility in distribution 
and evaluating the potential scenarios that can be faced in 
delivery [4] are also relevant issues in the supply chain. 
Another important issue in supply chain deals with the 
integration of suppliers, producers, warehouses and point of 
sales. This integration also deals with the manufacturing and 
distribution of goods or services on time, on the exact 
amount and in the precise place, considering a minimum cost 
and a suitable service level [5]. Inventories are also a critical 
issue affecting the supply chain, and become an even more 
relevant factor in retail industries [6]. 
Any supply chain is a stochastic, dynamic and complex 
system facing a high variability and uncertainty, as well as a 
disperse configuration [7]. Therefore, it is mandatory to 
consider strategic decisions and specialized tools to support 
decision making process [3], focusing in either costs or 
differentiation [8]. 
The integration of all the activities within a distribution 
network provides opportunities in creating value, reducing 
costs, raising productivity and maximizing profits; however, 
this integration cannot be evaluated using analytic models 
[10]. Some analytic models can be used with a limited 
confidence and within specific constraints in the integration 
of variability [9], but are not very useful. 
Gongtao and Gavirneni [11] have suggested a model to 
evaluate distribution policies based on Erlang distribution; an 
analytic model based on a recursive approach to analyze 
demand, inventories and deliveries, but limited to normal 
distribution, is presented in Kim et al. [12].  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Considering that analytic models cannot accurately 
represent the real and complex behavior of the supply chain, 
simulation is considered as a suitable technique to analyze 
and evaluate it. Simulation provides a deep understanding of 
the system, as well as experimental ways to support a 
decision which considers variability [3]. It is important to 
notice that simulation does not provide an optimum result, 
but it provides the evaluation of several scenarios and how 
they affect some specific Key Performance Indicators (KPI), 
as stated by Fleisch and Tellkamp [13]. Also, the definition 
of specific and relevant KPI’s is also a vital issue. 
Some authors have suggested that simulation models 
based on Systems Dynamics (SD) theory can be used to 
evaluate strategies related to supply chain [4]. However, 
these models are focused on continuous behavior, with a 
high level of details and complex relations, making them 
more difficult to design, analyze and improve. In Labarthe et 
al. [9], the use of SD and agent-modeling has been 
suggested, but under an operational approach.  Considering 
that most of the typical operations in a supply chain occur at 
specific points of time, the discrete simulation provides a 
better option to analyze it. 
Siebert and Zubanov [14] have used discrete simulation 
to integrate fluctuations in demand throughout days, weeks 
and months, but using correlations, hence limiting the 
stochastic behavior of the model. 
Zhang and Zhang [5], have proposed a base model, but 
restricted to three echelons due to the complexity of the 
integration of more echelons. Almeder and Preusser [15] 
have presented a simple simulation model, where a lineal-
deterministic algorithm is optimized to prepare input data 
which is returned to the simulation model; however, this is 
not a simulation tool per-se, but a hybrid model. 
Hafeez et al. [16] propose the decomposition of the 
supply chain in two echelons, mainly to simplify the model, 
but they do not provide any arguments to support this idea; 
they also suggested an inventory approach totalizing the 
inventory levels across the network, similar to multiechelon 
theory, without any deep analysis on this issue. 
Some authors have proposed the use of standardized 
simulation models. These models, when used in distribution 
networks, must be flexible, based on parameters, efficient in 
computing requirements and repetitive so they can change 
the position within the network, as suggested by Longo and 
Mirabelli [17]. Standardized models are based on the idea 
that there are always some common processes within the 
distribution network that can be reused [7], and they must be 
focused on the specific elements of the supply chain that will 
be considered in the analysis [4]. However, they should 
consider the complete environment of the system, not 
restricted to a very limited approach [13]. 
Standardized simulation models present a challenge 
because most of the actual software available is highly 
graphics 
dependent 
and 
based 
on 
objects. 
These 
characteristics make software easy to use and learn, but 
implementing some logical processes (e.g., loops or complex 
conditionals) 
might 
be 
difficult; 
therefore, 
external 
applications or programming-languages must be used to 
fulfill a standardized model [18]. Simulation programming 
languages provide an easy way to create a detailed logic; 
Yang [19] even asseverates that actual software is based on 
the languages developed in the 60’s and 70’s and sometimes 
these old languages are even used to process the logic. As a 
matter of fact, SLAM [20], GPSS [21] and SIMAN [22] are 
examples of software that are used today and provide useful 
results. They are robust and they have been taught in 
universities, but their market-share is very low today, 
compared to newest software [19]. 
Considering that standardized models can be easily 
applied through the use of simulation programming 
languages, this paper proposes the design of a simulation 
model applied to a distribution network through the 
simulation language SIMNET [23]. This model is tested in a 
business case focused on health industry because this sector 
provides opportunities in inventories and continuous 
improvement [6] and it represents an important component 
of the gross domestic product [24]. It is also a relevant 
industry in developing countries [25]. 
III. 
PROPOSED MODEL 
A standardized simulation model, codified in SIMNET II 
and under a strategic approach, is proposed in this section. 
The model is based on a standard logic between a two-
echelon structure of the distribution network, providing a 
base code. This code should be general enough to become 
specific with real data, and it must be used in a recursive way 
to develop the structure of the complete distribution network.  
The methodology used in the design of this standard 
model is based on the analysis of the system and the 
definition of objectives and indicators; then, the standard 
logic must be outlined, and the specific characteristics of the 
model should be included in the structure of the 
programming code. Then, a process to verify and validate the 
code should be used, followed by the design of experiments 
to improve the systems. Finally, conclusions about the results 
obtained must be discussed. 
The characteristics of the suggested model are presented 
in the following sections. 
A. Objective of the Model and Indicators 
The focus of the model is based on the cost strategy, as 
stated by Porter [8]. 
Considering the wide spectrum of decisions facing in 
SCM, a selection of specific KPI related to cost strategy, 
must be defined before starting the analysis. Two KPI are 
proposed: 
 
The inventory levels and, 
 
The transportation cost. 
The integration of both the inventory levels and 
transportation costs will be made through a total cost 
indicator. This indicator will be the sum of the cost of 
holding inventory, the financial cost and the transportation 
cost. Some inputs for the model must be processed by 
analytical means in external tools, and the conjunction of 
simulation and analytical methods might provide the basis 
for a future hybrid model, as stated by Shanthikumar and 
Gargent [26]. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

B. Standard logic 
Considering the ideas of Pundoor and Hermann [7], the 
model encompasses some common processes found on most 
of the inventory and replenishment systems in all major 
SCM systems. These processes constitute the main logic that 
is considered in a two-echelon situation, where one supplier 
and ―n‖ clients are found. The main logic is the following: 
a) 
At the start of each week, the clients, accordingly to 
their desired maximum inventory level and the on-hand 
inventory of the last week, place an order to the supplier. 
b) 
The supplier, also accordingly to its desired 
maximum inventory level, places an order in to his system, 
and receives his order from the previous week. 
c) 
When the supplier receives his order, his initial 
inventory position is calculated, adding to the actual 
inventory level the received order. 
d) 
The clients receive their orders from the supplier, 
according to one of the following conditions: 
 
If the supplier’s initial inventory level is greater than the 
sum of all orders received, the clients receive the total 
amount of pieces requested. 
 
Otherwise, the clients receive a proportional amount of 
their order, based on the per cent that each order 
represent of the sum of all orders requested to the 
supplier. 
g) 
Orders are transferred from the supplier to the 
clients, and stock base at the supplier is updated. 
h) 
The initial inventory of the week is updated for each 
client. 
i) 
A demand is generated for each client, and the final 
inventory of the week is calculated. 
j) 
The average inventory level of the week is 
calculated for each client. 
k) 
The units sold for each client are calculated, and if 
needed, emergency orders are placed to the suppliers to 
fulfill the complete demand. These emergency orders are 
supplied from the stock base in the supplier, and if the stock 
base is not enough to fulfill all emergency orders, they are 
prorated based on a percentage basis (in this last case, the 
stock base ends at zero). 
l) 
The average inventory level at the supplier is 
updated. 
This two-echelon logic can be replicated into a series of 
suppliers-clients structure, where a supplier becomes a client 
of another supplier, as seen in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Two-echelon standard logic 
 
However, in order to recreate the structure of a 
distribution network, the replication should also be used in a 
parallel framework. For example, a network structure might 
be based on a Master Distribution Centre (MDC) which 
serves some Regional Distribution Centres (RDC), and these 
RDC might serve Regions or Clients. Therefore, the model 
should start at the end of the network, considering the 
aggregated demand of the regions, and then move backwards 
to the MDC in a series of phases, as stated in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Replication of the standard logic 
 
C. Model characteristics 
Some of the opportunities identified in the literature for 
the usage of simulation in supply chain are included in the 
model. In particular, the idea to reuse a generic model based 
on a common logic, as stated by Fordyce et al. [3] and the 
strategic approach cited by Chang and Makatsoris [27] and 
by Pundoor and Hermann [7]. The simplification approach to 
improve the computational performance is also include, as 
suggested by Longo and Mirabelli [17]. Other characteristics 
of the model are cited below. 
1) Aggregation and strategic approach  
Considering the design of a distribution network as a 
strategic issue, some assumptions must be made. In 
particular, some operational issues and issues that affect the 
long term results must be included. For example, all the 
pieces and products to be demanded must be added into a 
single aggregated demand, without distinguishing between 
individual items. This approach allows to be focused in the 
total items hold in inventory throughout the whole system, 
and also in the performance of the inventory levels of the 
complete network. 
2) Unitary transportation cost 
Distribution network might use different types of 
vehicles and routes. Therefore a unitary transportation cost 
for each RDC should be defined. 
3) Discrete operation 
Because most operations considered in any supply chain 
occur at specific points of the time, a discrete approach is 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

used. According to this, all variables are considered as 
observation based ones, even those typically considered as 
time based variables (computational rules have been defined 
to provide this conversion).  
Strategic issues also provides a justification to this 
conversion because the detailed behavior of the inventory 
level is not required, due to the aggregate approach of the 
analysis. 
The model is based on a single control entity that flows 
through the code and executes each of the logic steps 
previously defined. 
All the previous characteristics also supports the 
foundation of a simulation model that is completely 
integrated and do not require connection to external data. 
Another benefit of this model is the fast execution because 
memory allocation of observation based variables is 
considerable lower than time based ones. 
4) Time framework 
Considering that the focus of the analysis is the entire 
cycle of operations based on a discrete time scope, the model 
uses a non-temporal time framework. Therefore, the case to 
be analyzed might be based on a week, a month or a day, 
depending on the desired simulation analysis. 
5) Simulation software 
The standard logic must deal with several conditionals, 
mathematical operations and loops between some relations 
supplier-clients. Therefore a straightforward way to carry out 
the model is required, in both serial and parallel operations. 
Most 
graphical 
simulators 
available 
(e.g., 
Arena, 
ProcessModel, Simio) provide an easy-of-use environment, 
but cannot deal with loops and conditionals in a simple way.  
A simulation programming language is not as friendly as 
a graphical simulator, but it provides several important 
advantages: 
 
Additional flexibility, 
 
Allows a self-contained code,  
 
All logic, operations, calculations and data 
exchange can work in an integrated way within 
the model,  
 
Easy debugging and, 
 
The model can run faster. 
The proposed model is developed using SIMNET II, a 
simulation programming language owed to Dr. Hamdy Taha. 
SIMNET II is based on the use of four special nodes linked 
by branches. The nodes used in SIMNET II are: 
 
A source where entities arriving into the model 
are created, 
 
A queue which serves to house waiting entities, 
 
A facility, where service is performed and, 
 
An auxiliary, which is a special node with 
infinite capacity providing additional flexibility 
to the simulation. 
Branches connect the nodes and control the flow of 
entities. During the running of the model, branches can 
perform logic and several operations, including special 
routing of entities, evaluation of conditionals, execution of 
loops (for—next and do-while), evaluation and assignments 
of control variables, collection of statistical variables or 
exporting/importing data.  
A specific characteristic of SIMNET II is the use of the 
so-called PROCEDURES. These structures deal with the 
modeling of repetitive segments in a compact and efficient 
way, and can be considered as the foundations of a standard 
model, considering a logic that can be automatically 
replicated both in series or parallel, thus adding flexibility in 
reusing code. Through the use of procedures, the complete 
distribution network can be analyzed in small parts or in the 
whole, starting at the downstream of the supply chain and 
continuing upstream, just defining the appropriate input data. 
IV. 
VALIDATION OF THE MODEL 
In order to test the standardized model, a business case is 
used involving a Mexican company which runs a network of 
about 2000 drugstores in the whole country (about 25% own 
and 75% franchisees), and under the specific conditions of 
this firm.  
The distribution network is based on one MDC serving 
nine RDC, each one serving specific geographical areas of 
the country (mainly complete States). Each State, and its 
complete number of drugstores included, is considered a 
―region‖. 
This firm has its own-laboratory which produces most of 
the drugs and products to be sold. This laboratory is located 
next to the MDC, the only facility to which it serves, and 
there is no distribution cost to the MDC. The rest of the 
drugs and products are supplied by independent and external 
laboratories, which directly deliver to each of the RDC. The 
transportation cost of these products is carried out by the 
suppliers and included in the unitary cost to be paid by the 
company. 
Each RDC directly serves and deliver products to own-
stores, local warehouses and big franchisees. Due to the 
reduced amount of purchases, small and medium size 
franchisees are treated as final customers. 
A graphical representation of the distribution network of 
this company is presented in Fig. 3: 
 
 
Figure 3. Distribution framework for validation 
 
A special case is presented by small and medium size 
franchisees. As long as they are treated as customers, they 
must pick-up merchandise at specific drugstores or 
warehouses. Therefore they do not affect the distribution cost 
of the total network. 
The distribution is made through an external delivery 
company, serving the whole network by trucks, and some 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

areas by ferry. The routes are defined by each RDC and the 
process of putting orders and delivering products is made 
only once per week, with delivery time being less than three 
days (with average of two days in the complete network). A 
specific methodology to define a unitary transportation cost 
for each RDC is defined, regardless of the vehicle and route. 
A periodic review system is used for the inventory 
control, based on a period of one week. The order-up-to-
level approach is also employed, and the maximum level of 
inventory desired is based on a heuristically philosophy of 30 
days of sales. Of course, this system produces a high level of 
inventory, but also provides a fill rate of 99.9% 
The model is run to resemble the actual distribution 
network, under a steady state analysis with a 95% of 
confidence interval. 
Considering the two KPI defined in section 2, the results 
of the model versus the historical data are within the 5% 
error-tolerance. Because numerical data of the company are 
confidential, comparisons are made using percentages, where 
100% represents the historical data.  
The inventory levels of each RDC and the complete 
network can be seen in Fig. 4, where an overall difference of 
about 2.7% can be found. 
 
 
Figure 4. Comparison of total inventory level simulated versus historical 
data for each RDC and total network 
 
There is one significant difference for RDC number eight 
in the previous figure. This is caused because this specific 
RDC was recently open and no enough data are available.  
The distribution cost comparison is presented in Fig. 5, 
where the overall difference is about 3.2%. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Comparison of total distribution cost simulated versus historical 
data for each RDC and total network 
 
The analysis has demonstrated that the simulation model 
is valid and it resembles the actual behavior of the real 
system within the desired tolerances. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Considering that the maximum error found on the total 
inventory level is 2.7% versus the historical data, and 
deviation in the total transportation cost is only 3.2%, the 
standardized simulation model works properly and presents a 
reasonable precision on the assumed confidence interval. 
The computational power needed to compile this model 
is minimum, due to the use of a simulation language versus a 
graphical simulator.  
It has been demonstrated that the standard logic defined 
in this paper can be used as a base case for distribution 
network under similar conditions, and might be adjusted with 
minimum changes to other scenarios. Furthermore, the 
flexibility provided by the simulation language SIMNET II 
and its procedures have provided the fundamental bases for a 
standardized model. 
A future research or application of the model might be its 
use as a decision tool to support the reconfiguration of the 
actual distribution network. Strategic issues, like evaluation 
of effects due to open, close and/or merge RDC, or 
reassignment of regions to each RDC, can be easily carried 
out in the simulation model, and multiple scenarios could 
provide a framework to define a new network. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
CONACYT has granted a Ph.D. scholarship to one of the 
authors. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Law and D. Kelton, Simulation Modeling and Analysis, 
Boston, USA: McGraw Hill, 2000. 
[2] D. Cope, M. Sam-Fayez, M. Mollaghasemi, and A. Kaylani,  
Supply chain simulation modeling made easy: An innovative 
approach, Proceedings of the 2007 Winter Simulation 
Conference, Dec. 2007, pp. 1887-1896. 
[3] K. Fordyce, A. Degbotse, J. Milne, R. Orzell, and C. Wang,  
The ongoing challenge - An accurate assessment of supply 
linked to demand to create an enterprise-wide end to end 
detailed central supply chain plan, Proceedings of the 2008 
Winter Simulation Conference, Dec. 2008, pp. 2267-2270. 
[4] Q. Wang and N. Ingham, A discrete event modelling 
approach for supply chain simulation. International Journal of 
Simulation Modeling, vol. 7, Sep. 2008, pp. 124-134. 
[5] C. Zhang and C. Zhang, Design and simulation of demand 
information sharing in a supply chain, Simulation Modelling 
Practice and Theory, vol. 15, Jan. 2007, pp. 32-46.  
[6] M. Villette, P. Khadgi, R. Moraga, E. Asoudegi, and O. 
Ghrayeb, Simulation in retail: A case study for process 
improvement in the receiving area, Proceedings of the 2009 
Winter Simulation Conference, Dec. 2009, pp. 2920-2930. 
[7] G. Pundoor and J.W. Herrmann, A hierarchical approach to 
supply chain simulation modeling using the supply chain 
operations 
reference 
model, 
International 
Journal 
of 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Simulation and Process Modelling, vol. 2, Jul. 2006, pp. 124-
132. 
[8] M. Porter, What is strategy?, Harvard Business Review, vol. 
74, June 1996, pp. 61-78. 
[9] O. Labarthe, B. Espinasse, A. Ferrarini, and B. Montreuil,  
Toward a methodological framework for agent-based 
modelling and simulation of supply chains in a mass 
customization context, Simulation Modelling Practice and 
Theory, vol. 15, Feb. 2007, pp. 113-136. 
[10] F.T.S Chan. and H.K. Chan,  The future trend on system-wide 
modelling in supply chain studies, International Journal of 
Advanced manufacturing Technology, vol. 25, Feb. 2005, pp. 
820-832. 
[11] L. Gongtao and S. Gavirneni, Using scheduled ordering to 
improve the performance of distribution supply chains, 
Management Science, vol. 56, Sep. 2010, pp. 1615-1632. 
[12] G. Kim, D. Chatfield, T. Harrison, and J. Hayya,  Quantifying 
the bullwhip effect in a supply chain with stochastic lead 
time, European Jornal of Operational Research, vol. 173, Sep. 
2006, pp. 617-636. 
[13] E. Fleisch and C. Tellkamp,  Inventory inaccuracy and supply 
chain performance: A simulation study of a retail supply 
chain, International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 95, 
Mar. 2005, 373-385. 
[14] W. Siebert and N. Zubanov, (2010). Management economics 
in a large retail company. Management Science, vol. 56, Aug. 
2010, pp. 1398-1414. 
[15] C. Almeder and M. Preusser, A toolbox for simulation-based 
optimization of supply chains, Proceedings of the 2007 
Winter Simulation Conference, Dec. 2007, pp.1932-1939. 
[16] K. Hafeez, M. Griffiths, J. Griffiths, and M. M. Naim,  
Systems design of a two-echelon steel industry supply chain, 
International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 45, Aug. 
1996, pp. 121-130. 
[17] F. Longo and G. Mirabelli, An advanced supply chain 
management tool based on modeling and simulation, 
Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 54, Apr. 2008, pp. 
570-588. 
[18] C. Jenkins and S. Rice,  Resource modeling in discrete-event 
simulation 
environments: 
A 
fifty-year 
perspective, 
Proceedings of the 2009 Winter Simulation Conference, Dec. 
2009, pp.755-766. 
[19] M. Yang, Using data driven simulation to build inventory 
model, Proceedings of the 2008 Winter Simulation 
Conference, Dec. 2008, pp. 2595-2599. 
[20] A. Pritsker, Introduction to Simulation and SLAM II, New 
Jersey, USA: John Wiley & Sons, 1995. 
[21] T. Schriber, Simulation using GPSS, New Jersey, USA: John 
Wiley & Sons, 1974. 
[22] D. Pegden, R. Sadowski and R. Shannon, Introduction to 
Simulation using SIMAN, Boston, USA: McGraw Hill, 1995. 
[23] H. Taha, Simulation with SIMNET II, SimTech, Inc., USA. 
1992. 
[24] J. Swain, Software survey: Simulation - back to the future, 
ORSM-Today. Vol. 15, May 2011, pp.56-69. 
[25] C.K. Prahalad, Serving the world’s poor, profitably, Harvard 
Business Review, vol. 80, Sep. 2002, pp. 48-57. 
[26] J. Shanthikumar and R. Gargent, A unifying view of hybrid 
simulation/analitic 
models 
and 
modeling, 
Operations 
Research, vol. 31, Jun. 1983, pp. 1030-1052 
[27] Y. Chang and H. Makatsoris, Supply chain modelling using 
simulation, International Journal of Simulation Systems, 
Science and Technology, vol. 2, Jan. 2001, pp. 24-30. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

