Application of Lean Thinking Using Simulation Modeling in A Private Hospital 
 
Ayman Tobail(*), Patricia Egan(^), Waleed Abo-Hamad(*), Amr Arisha(*) 
(*)3S Group, College of Business, Dublin Institute of Technology, Dublin, Ireland. 
(^) UPMC Beacon Hospital, Sandyford, Dublin 18, Dublin, Ireland. 
Email: ayman.tobail@dit.ie, Patricia.Egan@BeaconHospital.ie, waleed.abohamad@dit.ie, amr.arisha@dit.ie 
 
 
Abstract—Timely access, prompt responses to patient needs, 
and availability of resources to deliver quality service are the 
key priorities of healthcare systems, in particular hospitals. To 
cope with these constraints, healthcare managers have turned 
into lean thinking and approaches in their attempts to reduce 
non-value added activities and save costs by reducing wastes. 
This paper presents a case study of a private hospital in Dublin 
that used integrated approach of value stream mapping and 
simulation modeling to assess lean implementation in 
admission and discharge processes. Simulation enabled the 
strategic management to examine the outcomes of three 
possible improvement scenarios on hospital performance 
before 
implementing 
lean 
strategies. 
The 
proposed 
methodology helped to identify bottlenecks and non-value 
added 
procedures. 
Results 
analysis 
showed 
potential 
improvement in patients’ admission and discharge cycle times, 
and offered the hospital the cost saving opportunity of 
reducing the numbers of bed required. 
Keywords-Lean; Modeling and Simulation; Healthcare. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Healthcare resources, like those in any other industry, are 
in high demand, and the current economic climate challenges 
both public and private hospitals to contain costs whilst 
optimizing their use. [1] outlines the challenges that face 
healthcare: slow economic recovery, rising costs and reduced 
rates of reimbursement by insurance companies, to name a 
few. Whilst their focus is on the US healthcare economy 
(which is primarily private) the issues faced are applicable 
worldwide. In Ireland, the last twenty years or so (pre 
recession) has seen an increase in people‟s earning and 
subsequent purchasing power, with a consequent rise in the 
percentage of the population with private health insurance, to 
around 46 per cent of the population [2], which equates to 
2.25 million private healthcare policy holders. However, this 
has led to a dichotomy: far from reducing the pressure on 
public services, the upsurge in private health insurance and 
the aging population profile have brought new demands for 
services in both public and private sectors. So, the number of 
private providers responding to this need has also increased 
over the last decade or so. Whilst healthcare is seen as 
relatively recession proof, the prolonged economic recession 
has impacted on all healthcare providers, increasing 
expectations on health service providers to raise service 
efficiency from external entities such as the government, the 
public/patients and, of course, insurers. Whilst such 
efficiencies have always been the focus of the private sector, 
in recent years the requirement has been expressed with 
renewed vigor. When dealing with challenges such as 
reducing costs, a hospital must take a strategic medium- to 
long-term view on how to proceed to how best to serve all its 
stakeholders fairly. Such strategic decisions determine how 
the organization will align itself with its environment [3].  
To ensure the best possibility of survival, organizations 
must scan the horizon for opportunities and capitalize on 
those that exploit their core competences. In the private 
sector, companies it must scan the horizon for opportunities, 
and capitalize on those that best exploit their core 
competences to give them the greatest chance of survival. 
These opportunities may include using frameworks and tools 
from other industries - and such tools can be adapted and 
developed to help healthcare organizations address their 
challenges. Lean thinking and simulation modeling offer two 
distinct frameworks which organizations can use to 
streamline their processes. 
In the rest of the paper, Section 2 reviews related work. 
Section 3 introduces project background. The proposed 
methodology is presented in Section 4, followed by 
experimentation and analysis in Section 5. Section 6 presents 
limitations and future work, while Section 7 concludes the 
paper. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Lean healthcare is the philosophy of improving flows of 
patients, information or goods by eliminating waste from the 
process [4] through „understanding current processes, 
identifying the areas for improvement, and implementing 
necessary 
change‟ 
[5]. 
The 
Lean 
approach 
seeks 
improvements within the organization's existing processes 
but without the substantial reorganization that would require 
costly investments. Waste erodes quality and results in 
„inefficiencies, higher operating costs, increased potential for 
errors and worker frustration‟ [6] – so, the logic behind lean 
thinking is to pursue the optimization of value streams (from 
the consumption point of view) by eliminating waste and 
non-value added activities. To identify the sources of such 
waste and non-value added activities, as well as 
opportunities of improvement, value added activities must be 
mapped using systematic tools and techniques [7]. A value 
stream can be defined as the collection of activities that are 
operated to deliver a product or service or a combination of 
both to a customer [8]. The Value Stream Map (VSM) 
technique demonstrates material and information flow, maps 
out value-added and non-value-added activities and provides 
time-based information about performance. This VSM 
technique is based on generating a current state map that 
shows the current performance and conditions of the studied 
systems, and a future state map which serves as a target for 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

improvement actions. Its simplicity and effectiveness have 
led to VSM being effectively integrated into several 
applications, appropriate to both manufacturing and non-
manufacturing situations. Although the lean concept 
originated in the automobile industry, the increased 
application of lean practices in healthcare has seen growth in 
the popularity of modeling tools such as VSM [9]. VSM  has 
been successfully utilized as a lean implementation tool in 
many different healthcare systems, from small physician‟s 
clinics [10] to larger and more complex systems such as 
Emergency Departments.  
Although VSM is very effective in presenting system 
parameters such as operation cycle times and resource 
capacities and availabilities, it does not have the ability to 
analyze the impact of system settings on performance. 
Various authors agree that the potential for lean healthcare 
exists, but evaluating its successful implementation remains 
a challenge [11]. Others argue that lean healthcare has too 
often been adopted unquestioningly and may actually result 
in more harm than good: [12] argue that the redesign of 
healthcare‟s 
complex 
processes 
„leads 
to 
continued 
fragmentation of healthcare work, loss of autonomy for the 
health professions, and a potential increase in hospital 
misadventure‟. This is due to the fact that VSM lacks 
prediction capabilities, so, it is also difficult to know if the 
desired level of system performance is the best that can be 
achieved. Moreover, value stream maps cannot take account 
of system variations and uncertainty [13], so, VSM must be 
integrated with another technique that can handle system 
variation, show dynamics between system components and 
validate the future state before any improvement steps can 
actually be implemented. Modeling and simulation can fulfill 
this need. Modeling and Simulation tools have the 
capabilities to fulfill this need. 
Simulation can be used to master new business concepts 
such as agile and lean management [14]. Unlike VSM, 
simulation offers more thorough analysis of a system‟s data, 
including examining its variability, determining whether the 
data is homogenous, and estimating the probability 
distribution that fits the patterns of the data. This kind of in-
depth analysis of data enables simulation to be used to 
support continuous improvement [15] and to model systems‟ 
future state maps, so, showing the ideal state of the system 
that can be pursued over time. The advantage of using the 
simulation approach in a lean context is not limited to the 
phase of developing a future state map, but extends to 
selecting the best alternative to the current system status. 
III. 
PROJECT BACKGROUND 
The tertiary partner hospital in this study is a private 
hospital in Dublin which provides a full range of services, 
including 
(among 
others) 
an 
Orthopedic 
centre, 
Oncology/radiotherapy care, eight operating theatres, and an 
Emergency Department (ED) that operates 12 hours a day, 
six days a week. There are two particular drivers for this 
project: 
- Patient perceptions of Quality. Quality can have many 
definitions - a product‟s quality can refer to whether it works 
or not, looks good or not, adds value or not. In the case of 
service, quality is much more subtle - it depends on both the 
provider and the recipient - here, the patient– it is all about 
their perception of the experience. Delays in any process 
result in patients literally sitting or lying around. For a fully 
conscious patient this can be frustrating, as there is no 
perceived value in waiting, unless it is recovering after 
illness or surgery. However, many patients also attend the 
hospital as in-patients for diagnosis, so, there are plenty of 
opportunities and potential causes for delays.  
- The continuous improvement ethos of the hospital. The 
hospital has been through the Joint Commission International 
Accreditation (JCI) process twice, which requires that all 
aspects of managing the hospital - from leadership to 
infection control to the patient journey - are clearly stated for 
all staff to see. This is to be achieved through written 
policies, procedures and guidelines, and the whole process of 
setting everything down in writing is a good way of spotting 
gaps in the service offered. The JCI process sees continuous 
quality improvement as a cornerstone to accreditation, and 
requires quality improvement be embedded in the 
organization's culture. The hospital has Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) and performance benchmarks. It constantly 
strives to improve its processes, and runs quality 
improvement initiatives, both large and small, both within 
departments and hospital wide. 
The hospital‟s Quality Improvement Committee meets 
monthly to discuss policies, procedures and quality 
initiatives in the hospital. Amongst the quarterly statistics 
and KPIs it considers is the average Length of Stay (LOS) of 
patients. LOS figures are averaged over the whole hospital 
population, although in reality lengths vary according to 
patient diagnosis, and many factors contribute to LOS 
variations, both qualitative (individual doctor practice style, 
individual patient diagnosis) and quantitative (discharge 
policy implementation, bed supply, method of payment) 
[16]. Delays in patient discharge are due to various factors: 
inconsistent discharge rounds (doctors attending when they 
can), delays in waiting for tests and in discharge 
prescriptions and late referrals to allied health professionals. 
The delayed discharges have a negative impact on 
availability of acute beds, admissions of elective and 
emergency admissions and overall patient experience. 
Currently the discharge process in the partner hospital 
depends on when consultants conduct their ward rounds. If it 
is decided to discharge a patient it is recorded in the patient‟s 
chart. A junior doctor then organizes any medications and 
last minute tests, and the patient‟s discharge summary, and 
the nurse notes when the patient leaves in their electronic 
record on the Hospital Information System (HIS). Discharge 
data on the HIS shows discharges primarily occur after 
midday, which has a negative impact on the availability of 
beds for both elective and ED admissions. The admissions 
process for both elective and ED patients can be quite 
lengthy. The main problem is the assignment of a bed for the 
incoming patient, which can be affected in leaving patients 
are discharged late, which may not only lead to patients 
experiencing significant delays, but to them being assigned 
to an inappropriate ward if there is no bed available on the 
appropriate ward. This means consultants have to make 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

rounds to other wards as well as those they are primarily 
assigned to, and necessitates further ward transfers when an 
appropriate bed does become available. If the bed manager 
had better information regarding bed availability s/he would 
be able to make more efficient admission decisions. At the 
beginning of this study, there was too much waste in the 
system but where exactly it arises needs to be clarified. 
Operations meetings have also highlighted the need for the 
hospital to have strategies for coping with unexpected 
influxes of admissions, when bed availability becomes 
critical. This paper describes a collaborative project between 
the bed management team and the research team. The main 
objective is to analyze the situations which cause discharge 
delays and propose valid solutions.  
IV. 
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 
As identified earlier, lean thinking helps remove or limit 
the impact of non-value adding steps in a process. However, 
lean management requires a team of people; it is an 
expensive method of process redesign. Implementing an 
unsuitable or ineffective change creates further waste, as 
well as frustration. Simulation modeling offers the 
opportunity to test process alternatives in a safe environment. 
The issue outlined (i.e., the admission-discharge process) is a 
day-to-day problem which has implications for strategic 
planning. As the work involves processes at the patient level 
Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) is suitable. The objective 
is to aid the bed administrator to allocate beds more 
efficiently, which will impact positively on the LOS of both 
the elective and ED admissions (both of which currently 
suffer delays due to the ad hoc discharge process) increasing 
patient satisfaction. An important added benefit is that this 
will help the hospital prepare better for any „bed crises‟. 
Using lean principles as the foundations, the framework 
devised for examining these issues involves 1) identification 
of the process; 2) identification of the value to the patients; 
3) develop VSM for the process(es); 4) develop the 
simulation model; and 5) experimentation and analysis. 
A. Identification of the Process 
There are many distinct processes in a hospital, but they 
are all inter-connected. Fig. 1 presents the overall patient 
journey, whether they enter the process as an elective 
candidate or via the Emergency Department, where they will 
have been diagnosed as requiring further treatment as an in-
patient. The Bed Manager then allocates the patient a bed, 
and they are given in-patient treatment until they are 
discharged home, or for further treatment elsewhere, or (in 
the worst case) to the mortuary. 
 
Figure 1.  Overall admission-discharge process 
B. Identifying the Value to the Patient 
Literature shows a link between discharge and admission 
rates: both the elective and ED admission processes were 
reviewed separately with respect to the affect delayed 
discharge had on bed allocation. The time the patient spends 
in the admission process can be viewed as part of their 
overall LOS. Delays in either admission or discharge are 
non-value added „activities‟ which directly affect the 
patient‟s 
perception 
of 
the 
quality 
of 
their 
diagnosis/treatment; delays for the patient are frustrating at 
best and life-threatening at worst. Other „customers‟ who are 
indirectly affected by delays in the process include referring 
doctors (who want their patients to be treated effectively and 
efficiently) and insurance providers. 
C. Develop Value Stream Maps for the process(es) 
Value stream mapping (VSM) gives a pictorial 
representation of the flow of materials, people and process 
information from the start to the end of a process. It includes 
all activities involved in the process, whether they can be 
categorized as value-added (e.g., blood tests); non-value 
added necessary (e.g., the patient completing their insurance 
details); and non-value added unnecessary. This can 
highlight problems and can help identify their causes, 
assisting managers in prioritizing process improvements. The 
overall pictorial representation VSM gives can also enable 
other stakeholders (doctors, senior management and 
accreditation inspectors) to appreciate the process more 
easily and more fully.  One the process to be mapped has 
been selected, VSM involves 1) talking to frontline staff 
involved in the process (here, bed manager, ED manager, 
admission clerks, etc.) to map each stage of the process on 
paper 2) collecting data to produce a current state map; and 
3) conducting a critique of the current state to identify 
wasteful areas of the process which offer the best chance of 
being changed. 
1) Elective Admission VSM 
Fig. 2 shows the VSM of the admission of elective 
patients, with relevant information attached to each step of 
the process: 1) capacity (i.e., number of people available to 
perform that step); 2) type (i.e., personnel required to 
perform that activity); and 3) P/T: process time is the time 
required to complete the activity. The averaged time taken at 
each step of the process is recorded in a time line at the 
bottom of each image - for example, the time taken for the 
Bed Manager to assign a bed for an elective admission can 
take between 10 and 15 minutes, so, is averaged to 12 
minutes. The timeline is presented from the patient‟s 
perspective, and includes process time and wait time. Process 
time represents value added activities, usually involving the 
patient (e.g., transfer to the patient room, attending radiology 
for a scan) while wait time is the time spent in an activity the 
patient is not involved (e.g., waiting for a bed to be 
assigned). 
2) ED Admission VSM 
The developed VSM constitutes of two parts – the main 
process (Fig. 3) and a sub-process (Fig. 4), which shows the 
patient having a scan in radiology. The associated time lines 
are shown at the bottom of each figure where these figures 
are the most likely value for the corresponding step (i.e. 
triangular distribution). The map was created to illustrate the 
impact delays in the diagnostic process can have on an ED 
patient's admission experience. Mapping the sub-process 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

adds complexity to the model, making it a truer 
representation of the real system and increasing the quality 
of the simulation model. 
 
 
Figure 2.  VSM Elective admission process 
 
Figure 3.  VSM ED admission process 
 
Figure 4.  VSM ED admission sub- process 
The times assigned to each step in the ED admission 
process was collected through observations carried by 
medical and administration teams. These times were 
summed according to type to determine where the overall 
process suffers most in terms of non-value added activities: 
the ED sub-process was evaluated separately as it contains 
both waiting and processing times. Table I shows the results.  
TABLE I.  
VSM WAIT, PROCESS AND TOTAL TIMES 
 
 
The total time taken for the elective admission is 78 
minutes, which may seem surprising given that these patients 
are scheduled appointments. The total time taken for ED 
admissions (including the sub-process) is 239 minutes, 
nearly half of which this is non-value added elements 
composed of the waiting involved between steps. The two 
longest wait periods occurs when 1) diagnostic tests are 
required – these may involve long scan times (MRI) or 
preparation (patients drinking contrast medium before a CT 
scan). These activities can be seen as non-value-added but 
necessary in order to have the scan; and 2) Awaiting for a 
bed to be assigned and to become available, which are non-
value added elements. 
D. Developing the Simulation Model 
The analysis of empirical data is essential in developing a 
robust simulation model that considers the time features of 
the examined system in terms of the volume and patterns of 
demands. Historical records were gathered from the hospital 
information system over a 6 months period, as provided by 
hospital managers. The data included occupancy rates, 
elective, ED and overall admission numbers. The average 
percentage of late discharges (after noon) was determined as 
83 per cent (see Fig. 5).  
 
 
Figure 5.  Late discharges as percentage of overall discharges 
As the discharge process affects bed availability, average 
bed occupancy levels was determined to be 91% due to the 
high rate of late discharge (Fig. 6). Average bed occupancy 
levels were determined to be 91% (Fig. 6). We argue that the 
discharge process - and specifically, late discharges - is a 
significant factor in this figure, which we argue is too low. 
The simulation model was designed to reflect this relation 
between the late discharging rate and the bed management 
performance issues. The data collected was also analyzed to 
extract the arrival rates of patients after categorizing them to 
ED patients and out patients after they had been categorized 
into those needing admission, and those need out-patient care 
(Fig. 7). 
Based on this analysis of empirical data and the VSM 
results, a comprehensive simulation model was developed 
for the admission-discharge cycle(s) in the hospital. 
Simulation model modules were connected to resemble the 
VSM processes, where blocks are connected to create 
conceptual flow chart, which simplifies the construction of 
the simulation model. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 6.  Bed occupancy levels over a 6-month period 
Thus, the top level of the simulation model defines the 
overall model structure, with the sub-level blocks containing 
additional modules with more details. The simulation model 
was developed using ExtendSim package and object-oriented 
programming was used to customize pre-defined blocks. A 
database was used to save the measured KPIs (i.e., avg. 
occupancy levels, avg. LOS, and avg. waiting time for ED 
admission) after each simulation run, after which the 
simulation output was exported in tabular form for future 
analysis and validation. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Number of admissions for ED and elective patients 
E. Verification and Validation 
Developing the simulation model depends on the right 
process being modeled and it being modeled (or built) 
correctly. As disconnects can exist between real world 
problems and models of those problems, the verification and 
validation processes are crucial. The model used six months 
data gathered from the HIS to predict average occupancy 
within four per cent of actual values. Literature states 10 per 
cent statistical accuracy as being an acceptable level 
(Connelly and Bair, 2004). Fig. 8 shows the correlation 
between predicted and actual occupancy rates. 
Real (blue line) refers to the original data set, but these 
included bed in the observation ward, which opened on day 
136. Their inclusion increased the number of total beds 
available, thus, skewing the data, so, it was decided to 
remove the observation beds from the analysis. This „new‟ 
data is represented by the „Real after modification‟ (green 
line). The „Simulated‟ (red) line represents the values 
predicted by the model - as the figure shows, these two track 
each other. 
 
Verification 
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
1
6
11
16
21
26
31
36
41
46
51
56
61
66
71
76
81
86
91
96
101
106
111
116
121
126
131
136
141
146
151
156
161
166
171
176
181
Day No.
Occupancy Rate (%)
Real
simulation
real after modification
 
Figure 8.  Correlation between predicted and actual values 
V. 
EXPERIMENTATION AND ANALYSIS 
A. Scenario Design and analysis 
Bed availability becomes a significant problem if there is 
an increased demand due to ED admission rates or the effect 
of late discharges. Increasing the number of beds in the 
hospital and improving the discharge planning for patients 
were the main two solution options the management team 
wanted the model to examine and analyse. Two variables 
were introduced to examine these strategies: number of beds 
available and late discharge rate, and three main scenarios 
were then introduced, as shown in Table II.  
TABLE II.  
SIMULATION VARIABLES FOR BASE SCENARIO AND 
SCENARIOS 1, 2, AND 3 
 
Number of beds 
Late discharge rate 
Baseline Scenario 
145 
83% 
Scenario 1 
110 to 170 with a step 
of 5 
83% 
Scenario 2 
145 
0 to 1 with a step of 
0.1 
Scenario 3 
110 to 140 with a step 
of 5 
0 to 1 with a step of 
0.1 
 
It could be expected that increasing the number of beds 
above the current level (i.e., 145 beds) would lower bed 
occupancy levels and decrease ED waiting times, while 
decreasing available bed numbers (without changing any 
other variables) would lead to significantly increased delays 
for patients waiting to be admitted (Table III). However, 
changing available bed numbers caused no significant 
change in penitents‟ average LOS in the hospital, because the 
discharge process still unchanged (i.e., the late discharge rate 
remained constant at 83%). 
On the other hand the simulation shows that reducing the 
late discharge rate (i.e., scenario 2) would have a significant 
impact on the average LOS (see Table IV).  
As the Table IV shows, continuously decreasing the 
proportion of late discharges constantly decreases bed 
occupancy levels, allowing the hospital the opportunity to 
decrease its number of available beds instead, with the 
attendant cost savings. To examine this possibility in more 
detail, the model examined (as scenario 3) a combination of 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

different discharge rates and the potential associated 
reductions in bed numbers. 
TABLE III.  
SIMULATION RESULTS OF SCENARIO 1 
Number 
of Beds 
Bed 
Occupancy 
ED Waiting 
Beds (hrs) 
Avg 
LOS 
(days) 
110 
95 
13.8 
4.5 
115 
95 
12.1 
4.5 
120 
94 
9.6 
4.5 
125 
93 
3.2 
3.9 
130 
93 
5.1 
4.3 
135 
92 
3.5 
4.4 
140 
92 
3.3 
4.4 
145 
91 
2.4 
4.4 
150 
83 
0.7 
4.2 
155 
81 
0.4 
4.3 
160 
78 
0.2 
4.3 
165 
74 
0.1 
4.3 
170 
71 
0.1 
4.3 
 
TABLE IV.  
SIMULATION RESULTS OF SCENARIO 2 
Late 
Discharge 
Rate 
Bed 
Occupancy 
ED Waiting 
Beds (hrs) 
Avg LOS 
(days) 
0 
51 
0.0 
2.1 
10 
56 
0.0 
2.4 
20 
61 
0.0 
2.7 
30 
64 
0.0 
2.8 
40 
70 
0.0 
3.2 
50 
73 
0.0 
3.4 
60 
79 
0.2 
3.7 
70 
85 
0.9 
4.1 
80 
91 
2.4 
4.4 
90 
93 
6.7 
5.0 
100 
98 
13.7 
5.8 
 
Interestingly, as the rate of late discharges decreases, the 
possibility of reducing the number of beds increases, while 
the quality of care for patients in terms of waiting times for 
beds and LOS in hospital also improves (see Fig. 9). These 
results of the simulation scenarios suggest that increasing 
bed numbers can be considered a knee-jerk reaction and will 
only solve the problem temporarily; as once more beds 
become available the referral rate for elective procedures will 
also increase. From an operations perspective, new beds are 
very expensive because they have to be staffed appropriately 
and there may often be limited physical space available to 
respond to higher occupancy: so, this is not a realistic option.  
It is clearly more efficient and cost-effective to review 
the discharge process to identify effective actions to decrease 
delayed discharges. This goal can be accomplished by early 
medical assessments (ward rounds), faster laboratory or 
diagnostic imaging results; fulfilling prescriptions in the 
pharmacy in a timely manner; and discharging patients to 
alternative care settings. The majority of patients' discharges 
are delayed because a nursing home bed, homecare 
packages, other community supports, rehabilitation facilities 
or other types of alternative care are not available. In an 
analysis of the reasons for the delay in discharging it was 
found that 75% of those patients were seeking nursing home 
care. Therefore providing short- and long-term beds has a 
substantial effect in reducing waiting times in many other 
stages of healthcare system. As acute hospitals become more 
technologically advanced in diagnostic and interventionist 
care, perhaps they are no longer appropriate settings for 
convalescing. Hospitals may want to consider „step down 
units‟ as an option for the future, which would dove-tail well 
with the increasing current use „hub and spoke‟ model. Hubs 
are based in large conurbations not served by tertiary care 
hospitals, and specialist clinics in these towns refer patients 
to the underlined studied Hospital for specific sub-specialty 
care such as orthopedic surgery, vascular surgery. 
VI. 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
While the information gathered for the VSM came 
directly from people involved, the quality of the data was not 
actually audited, so, assumptions and estimates had to be 
used for some steps. The documentation methods used to 
record some steps of the processes – hand-written notes in 
the patient‟s physical chart and entries on the patient‟s 
electronic record - can make capturing data about those steps 
difficult. And while simulation modeling can present 
possible solutions and the impact changes can have on a 
process, it does not take account of all the varied and often 
challenging professional bureaucracy environments. 
VII. CONCLUSION  
Further investigation is also required to substantiate 
preliminary findings, as certain assumptions were made, 
primarily about the discharge process (as noted previously). 
So, future work should incorporate a small team of people 
directly involved in the processes to gain results data of 
richer quality. Use DES modeling in conjunction with 
system dynamics model to work with, rather than against, 
each other. Hospital processes are interdependent and their 
efficiencies (or wastes) affect others, so, a system-wide 
(aggregate) view should be modeled. The person most 
affected by the whole system is the patient. The DES can 
inform the SD model to identify potential synergies between 
processes. This work discusses the practicalities, challenges 
and limitations of applying lean healthcare modeling to a 
hospital process – so, it represents a risk assessment for 
process change. It incorporates the principles of lean 
management (focusing on the patient journey through a 
process and seeking to identify, and so reduce, unnecessary 
waiting and non-value-added activities) and simulation 
modeling (testing solutions to balance capacity and demand) 
to improve the delivery of healthcare to patients. The 
problem in question is the impact late discharge has on bed 
availability and admission processes. 
Lean principles were applied to the problem, and the 
processes involved were mapped to achieve greater 
understanding and so inform the simulation model. Scenarios 
were run, focusing on the late discharge rate and its effect on 
numbers of bed required and patients‟ wait times overall 
LOS, allowing a future state map to be built. Simulation does 
not consider the environment or culture around a process - 
resistance to change may have to be addressed and 
countermeasures proposed - while a hospital may have a 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

change culture, this does not mean the consultants are parties 
to it. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Simulation results of scenario 3 
To achieve change, manager may have to seek 
opportunities for greater collaboration with consultants and 
include them in hospital change strategies. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. B. Davis and P. J. Robinson, “Journal of Health Care 
Finance,” vol. 37, no. 2, 2010, pp. 59–64. 
[2] HIA, “The Private Health Insurance Market in Ireland,” 2010. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.hia.ie/publication/consumer-
surveys.htm. [retrieved: May, 2011]. 
[3] D. Martin and P. Singer, “A strategy to improve priority 
setting in health care institutions.,” Health care analysis : 
HCA : journal of health philosophy and policy, vol. 11, no. 1, 
Mar. 2003, pp. 59–68. 
[4] J. A. Bahensky, J. Roe, and R. Bolton, “Lean sigma--will it 
work for healthcare?,” Journal of healthcare information 
management : JHIM, vol. 19, no. 1, Jan. 2005, pp. 39–44. 
[5] M. J. Johnston, P. Samaranayake, A. Dadich, and J. A. 
Fitzgerald, “Modelling radiology department operation using 
discrete event simulation,” in 18th World IMACS / 
MODSIM Congress, July. 2009, pp. 678–684. 
[6] C. Jimmerson, D. Weber, and D. K. Sobek, “Reducing waste 
and errors: piloting lean principles at Intermountain 
Healthcare.,” Joint Commission journal on quality and 
patient safety / Joint Commission Resources, vol. 31, no. 5, 
May 2005, pp. 249–57. 
[7] M. Rother and J. Shook, Learning to see value stream 
mapping to create value and eliminate muda. The Lean 
Enterprise Inst., Brookline, Mass., 1998. 
[8] R. K. Singh, S. Kumar, A. K. Choudhury, and M. K. Tiwari, 
“Lean tool selection in a die casting unit: a fuzzy-based 
decision 
support 
heuristic,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Production Research, vol. 44, no. 7, Apr. 2006, pp. 1399–
1429. 
[9] C. S. Kim, D. A. Spahlinger, J. M. Kin, and J. E. Billi, “Lean 
health care: what can hospitals learn from a world-class 
automaker?,” Journal of hospital medicine : an official 
publication of the Society of Hospital Medicine, vol. 1, no. 3, 
May. 2006, pp. 191–9. 
[10] R. R. Lummus, R. J. Vokurka, and B. Rodeghiero, 
“Improving Quality through Value Stream Mapping : A Case 
Study of a Physician ‟ s Clinic,” Total Quality Management, 
vol. 17, no. 8, 2006, pp. 1063–1075. 
[11] J. J. Waring and S. Bishop, “Lean healthcare: rhetoric, ritual 
and resistance.,” Social science & medicine (1982), vol. 71, 
no. 7, Oct. 2010, pp. 1332–40. 
[12] S. Winch and A. J. Henderson, “Making cars and making 
health care: a critical review.,” The Medical journal of 
Australia, vol. 191, no. 1, Jul. 2009, pp. 28–9. 
[13] C. R. Standridge and J. H. Marvel, “Why lean needs 
simulation” in Proceedings of the 2006 Winter Simulation 
Conference L. F. Perrone, F. P. Wieland, J. Liu, B. G. 
Lawson, D. M. Nicol, and R. M. Fujimoto, eds., 2006, pp. 
1907–1913. 
[14] D. M. Ferrin, M. J. Miller, and D. Muthler, “Lean sigma and 
simulation, so what‟s the correlation? V2,” in Proceedings of 
the 2005 Winter Simulation Conference M. E. Kuhl, N. M. 
Steiger, F. B. Armstrong, and J. A. Joines, eds., 2005, pp. 
2011–2015. 
[15] M. Adams, P. Componation, H. Czarnecki, and B. J. Schroer, 
“Simulation as a tool for continuous process improvement,” 
in Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference P. 
A. Farrington, H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, and G. W. 
Evans, eds, 1999, no. Grief 1991, pp. 766–773. 
[16] A. Clarke, “Why are we trying to reduce length of stay? 
Evaluation of the costs and benefits of reducing time in 
hospital must start from the objectives that govern the 
change,” Quality in Health Care, vol. 5, 1996, pp. 172–179.  
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

