Developing a Simulation Model for a Level of Usage  
 
Andrew Greasley 
Aston Business School 
Aston University 
Birmingham, UK 
e-mail: a.greasley@aston.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— This paper provides a framework categorising the 
level of usage of a simulation model and relating this to three 
key activities in the simulation process of model development, 
model interaction, and model integration. The aim of the 
framework is to clarify how the level of usage will decide both 
the nature of the information derived from the simulation 
study and the development activities that are required of the 
model builder. Further work is required in order to determine 
if in practice the level of usage is determined by the level of 
information required or other factors, such as a lack of user 
skills is preventing a higher level of usage of the technique in 
the organisation. 
Keywords-simulation; methodology; development 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There are many texts available on the topic of discrete-event 
simulation modeling.  Some texts focus on technical and 
statistical aspects [1,2], other texts focus on the application 
of simulation for process analysis [3,4], other texts provide 
tutorials on particular simulation software platforms, such as 
ARENA [5,6,7], and other texts take the reader through the 
steps 
involved 
in 
undertaking 
a 
simulation 
study 
[8,9,10,11,12,13]. 
However, 
all 
of 
these 
different 
approaches generally provide little guidance on the form of 
the simulation that is appropriate to the needs of the study. 
This should be considered in terms of viewing simulation as 
a tool which provides information to assist in decision 
making. It follows that in order to assist the decision-
making process it is not always necessary to undertake all 
the stages of a simulation study. For instance, the 
development of the process map may be used to help 
understanding of a problem and consequently, no further 
model development is necessary.  
The paper will provide an overview of proposed forms 
of simulation development. Four forms are identified and 
labeled on a continuum of levels of usage of the simulation 
technique. The forms are defined by three variables related 
to key aspects of the simulation project effort of 
development, interaction, and integration. There is then a 
discussion of these forms and an indication of further 
research required in order to validate these forms. 
 
 
II. 
DETERMINING THE LEVEL OF USAGE OF THE 
SIMULATION MODEL 
 
An important aspect in the process of building a simulation 
model is to recognize that there are many possible ways of 
modelling a system. Choices have to be made regarding the 
level of detail to use in modelling processes and even 
whether a particular process should be modelled at all. The 
way to make these choices is to recognize that before the 
model is built, the objectives of the study must be defined 
clearly. It may even be preferable to build different versions 
of the model to answer different questions about the system, 
rather than build a single ‘flexible’ model that attempts to 
provide multiple perspectives on a problem [14]. This is 
because two relatively simple models will be easier to 
validate and thus, there will be a higher level of confidence 
in their results than a single complex model. 
The objective of the simulation technique is to aid 
decision making by providing a forum for problem 
definition and providing information on which decisions can 
be made. Thus, a simulation project does not necessarily 
require a completed simulation model to be a success. At an 
early stage in the project proposal process the analyst and 
other interested parties must decide the role of the model 
building process within the decision-making process itself. 
Thus, in certain circumstances as stated earlier the building 
of a simulation model may not be necessary. However, for 
many complex interacting systems (i.e., most business 
systems), the model will be able to provide useful 
information (not only in the form of performance measures, 
but indications of cause and effect linkages between 
variables), which will aid the decision making process. 
Table 1 provides a framework which links four categories of 
usage of the simulation model, namely ‘problem definition’, 
‘demonstration’, 
‘scenarios’ 
and 
‘on-going 
decision 
support’ with three key aspects of the simulation process. 
These three key aspects are the level of development of the 
model, the level of interaction between the model and user, 
and the level of integration of the model with its data set 
that would be implied by the level of usage. 
 
 
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.        LEVELS OF USAGE OF A SIMULATION MODEL
 
 
Level of Usage 
Problem 
Definition 
Demonstration  
Scenarios 
On-going Decision 
Support  
Level of 
Development 
Process Map 
Animation 
Experimentation 
Decision Support 
System 
Level of 
Interaction 
None 
None 
Simple Menu 
Menu 
Extended Menu 
Level of 
Integration 
None 
Stand-alone 
Stand-alone 
Database 
Stand-alone Database 
Real-Time Data 
 
 
The levels of usage categories are defined as follows: 
A. Problem Definition 
One of the reasons for using the simulation method is that 
its approach provides a detailed and systematic way of 
analysing a problem in order to provide information on 
which a decision can be made. It is often the case that 
ambiguities and inconsistencies are apparent in the 
understanding of a problem during the project proposal 
formulation stage. It may be that the process of defining the 
problem may provide the decision makers with sufficient 
information on which a decision can be made. In this case, 
model building and quantitative analysis of output from the 
simulation model are not required. In terms of development, 
the outcome from this approach will be a process map of the 
system. As no model is constructed the level of model 
interaction and model integration categories are not 
relevant.  
 
B. Demonstration 
Although the decision makers may have an understanding of 
system behaviour, it may be that they wish to demonstrate 
that behaviour to other interested parties. This could be to 
internal personnel for training purposes or to external 
personnel to demonstrate capability to perform to an agreed 
specification. The development of an animated model 
provides a powerful tool in communicating the behaviour of 
a complex system over time. Here, the model should be 
developed to such as level as to enable the presentation of a 
realistic animation of the process. This will reveal the 
mechanics of process behaviour over time but will not 
provide a numerical indication of performances which are 
provided by the experimentation analysis undertaken in 
higher levels of usage. In terms of interaction, a simple 
menu system may be useful in providing a convenient 
method of altering parameters for the animation.  
 
 
 
However, there is unlikely to be a need for integration 
with external data sets, due to the lack of scenario analysis 
when used in the demonstration mode.  
 
C. Scenarios  
This category of usage can be related to the ‘classic’ or 
‘textbook’ use of the simulation method. Here, the model is 
developed, validated and scenario analysis conducted. 
Results are presented of performance measures of interest 
usually in the form of confidence intervals. In the scenario 
category, the model is used to solve a number of pre-defined 
problems but is not intended for future use. For this reason, 
in terms of the level of interaction, a menu system allowing 
change of key variables may be appropriate. In terms of 
integration, the simulation may use internal data files or 
ideally be linked to external databases. 
  
D. On-going Decision Support 
The most fully developed simulation model must be capable 
of providing decision support for a number of problems 
over time. This requires that the model be adapted to 
provide assistance to new scenarios as they arise. The menu 
system will need to provide the ability to change a wider 
range of variables for on-going use. The level of data 
integration may require links to company databases to 
ensure the model is using the latest version of data over 
time. Links may also be required to real-time data systems 
to provide on-going information on process performance. If 
it is envisaged that the client will perform modifications to 
the simulation model after delivery, then, the issue of model 
re-use should be addressed. Re-use issues include ensuring 
detailed model code documentation is supplied and detailed 
operating procedures are provided. Training may also be 
required in model development and statistical methods.  
 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

III. 
DISCUSSION 
 
A simulation modelling project can use extensive resources, 
both in terms of time and money. Although the use of 
simulation in the analysis of a one-off decision, such as a 
major investment appraisal, can make these costs low in 
terms of making the correct decision, there is a need to 
ensure the correct level of usage is chosen in alignment with 
the information required for the decision. Indeed, it has been 
noted that it is not a requirement of a simulation modelling 
exercise that a model is actually built, but qualitative 
outcomes from the process mapping stage, for example, 
could generate useful knowledge. This elicitation of 
knowledge through the process of conducting a simulation 
study rather than simply an observation of model results is 
termed ‘simulation for facilitation’ by Robinson [15]. On 
the other hand, the advantages of a higher level of usage 
may be considerable in terms of a greater amount of 
information gained as the level of usage is increased and 
there is also evidence that developing a model with on-
going 
decision-support 
capabilities 
increases 
model 
confidence and acceptance particularly among non-
simulation experts [16]. However, the consequences of 
developing a model with a high level of usage in terms of 
model development, interaction and integration should be 
considered. The use of simulation for on-going support is 
particularly challenging and it is thus important that during 
the project proposal stage that elements are incorporated 
into the model and into the implementation plan that assist 
in enabling the model to provide on-going decision support. 
Aspects include ensuring that simulation users are aware at 
the project proposal stage that the simulation is to be used 
for on-going decision support and will not be put to one side 
once the immediate objectives are met. Also, ensuring 
technical skills are transferred from simulation analysts to 
simulation users will enable understanding of how the 
simulation arrives at results and its potential for further use 
in related applications.  
To assist in the identification of the form of simulation 
that users adopt, a framework containing four levels of 
usage of simulation has been presented. It is proposed that a 
survey be conducted to establish the validity of these forms 
and the proportion of use of each of the four levels of usage. 
The aim will be to establish if there is a match between the 
level of usage and the information needs of the decision 
being taken or if there are other factors, such as lack of 
skills, impacting on the choice of level of usage. 
 
 
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
 
This paper aims to highlight an important aspect of 
conducting a simulation study, namely, the level of usage of 
the simulation model. This issue is important because it will 
decide both the nature of the information derived from the 
study and the development activities that are required by the 
model builder. Further work is required in order to validate 
the level of usage by practitioners and their implications for 
the simulation process. An important question is to 
determine why the different forms are utilised. For instance, 
is the level of usage determined by the level of information 
required or is it that the lack of user skills is preventing a 
higher level of usage of the technique in the organisation?  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A.M. Law and W.D. Kelton, Simulation Modeling and 
Analysis, Third Edition, Singapore: McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
[2] L.M. 
Leemis 
and 
Stephen 
K. 
Park, 
Discrete-Event 
Simulation: A First Course, Pearson Education, 2006. 
[3] H.J. Harrington and K. Tumay, Simulation Modelling 
Methods: To reduce risks and increase performance, 
McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
[4] M. Laguna and J. Markland, Business Process Modeling, 
Simulation and Design, Pearson Education, 2005. 
[5] M.D. Rossetti, Simulation Modeling and Arena, Wiley, 2010. 
[6] T. Altiok and B. Melamed, Simulation Modeling and 
Analysis with Arena, Academic Press, 2007. 
[7] W.D. Kelton, R.P. Sadowski, and D.T. Sturrock, Simulation 
with Arena, Fourth Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
[8] S.Robinson, Successful Simulation: A Practical Approach to 
Simulation Projects, McGraw-Hill, 1994. 
[9] R. McHaney, Computer Simulation: A Practical Perspective, 
Academic Press 1991. 
[10] M. Pidd, Computer Simulation in Management Science, Fifth 
Edition, Wiley, 2004. 
[11] S. Robinson, Simulation: The Practice of Model Development 
and Use, Wiley, 2004. 
[12] A.F. Seila, V. Ceric, and P. Tadikamalla, Applied Simulation 
Modelling, Thomson, 2003.  
[13] A. Greasley, Simulation Modelling for Business, Hants: 
Ashgate Publishing Ltd., 2004. 
[14] M. Pidd, Tools for Thinking: Modelling in Management 
Science, Third Edition, Wiley, 2009. 
[15] S. Robinson, “Modes of simulation practice: approaches to 
business and military simulation”, Simulation Modelling 
Practice and Theory, no. 10, 2002, pp. 513-523. 
[16] D.J. Muller, “Simulation: What to do with the Model 
afterward”, Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation 
Conference, Society for Computer Simulation, 1996, pp. 729-
733. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

