Optimal Usage of Marketing and Sales to Push Residential Refurbishment 
An emperically grounded Agent-Based Simulation on How to Push Refurbishment Decisions 
 
Mart Verhoog 
Marketing and Communication Department 
IU International University of Applied Sciences 
Bad Honnef, Germany 
e-mail: mart.verhoog@iu.org 
 
 
 
Abstract—Agent-based models can be used to assess the impact 
of different mixes of marketing and sales measures on home-
owner’s energetic refurbishment decision-making. During the 
last two decades, governments have been using especially mar-
keting-like measures (e.g., mass media campaigns) to push 
residential refurbishment – for a large part, unsuccessfully. 
Only recently, more sales-like activities (e.g., visits of energy 
consultants) have been offered for that purpose. The question 
now rises, whether this will be a more successful approach. 
This idea contribution addresses the research question asking 
what mix of marketing and sales measures is optimal to sup-
port homeowners during their refurbishment decision-making. 
Keywords— Agent-Based Modeling (ABM); refurbishment 
Decision-Making (DM); marketing and sales; empirically 
grounded. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Much research has been published about the importance 
of residential refurbishment for sustainability. Germany’s 
building stock has been erected for the largest part before the 
existence of any energetic building standards. Furthermore, 
German homeowners tend to energetically refurbish their 
property slowly and doubtingly. Consequently, heating resi-
dential buildings consumes too much energy and is accom-
panied by a huge ecological footprint [1]. 
More recently, the dependence of many European coun-
tries on Russian gas for heating buildings and the war Russia 
has been fighting against Ukraine has recharged the debate 
that energy efficiency in housing should be improved and 
refurbishment should be speeded up to lessen the dependen-
cy on Russian gas. 
This idea contribution deals with the question asking how 
governments can optimally push homeowners in the direc-
tion of a positive refurbishing decision with the help of mar-
keting and sales measures. In the past, governments used 
mass media campaigns to do this. More recently, local gov-
ernments have been offering visits of energy consultants at a 
reduced (or even at no) charge to convince homeowners to 
refurbish. The question is whether there are optimal (e.g., 
cost efficient) mixes of marketing and sales measures that 
help homeowners make this decision positively. An empiri-
cally grounded Agent-Based Model (ABM) for refurbish-
ment could be developed and the impact of different mixes 
of marketing and sales on refurbishment Decision-Making 
(DM) could be simulated. 
Science has applied ABM in the context of the current 
energy transition numerous times before. Du et al. [2] con-
clude in their review that ABM have been developed to 
model socio-demographic factors, housing factors, social 
influences, and environmental attitudes as drivers of DM in a 
context of energy transition. Most ABM, however, have fo-
cused on solar energy diffusion and less research was done to 
study refurbishment. Furthermore, Du et al. [2] conclude 
“Future studies can also evaluate the effectiveness of market-
based policies […]” (p. 8). 
Jager already stated in 2007 that the effectiveness of 
marketing could benefit from social simulations like ABM 
[3]. He proposes different formalizations of the 4 P’s com-
monly used in marketing to be implemented in ABM (Prod-
uct, Price, Place and Promotion). Delre et al. [4] focus espe-
cially on promotional activities, which is the category where 
mass and personal communication can be classified. Until 
today, however, ABM applied in consumer behavior DM 
studies do not differentiate between marketing and sales. 
For both the literature concerning DM in an energy tran-
sition context, and ABM literature in the field of marketing, 
modeling an optimal usage of marketing and sales to push 
residential refurbishment is an interesting contribution. 
This short description of the idea contribution is struc-
tured as follows. In Section II, this work briefly explains the 
key concepts used for this idea. Here, the Hierarchy Of Ef-
fects (HOE) model is explained, as this concept uses it to 
assess the impact of communication on DM. Furthermore, 
this section discusses the ABM modeling approach that is 
very suitable to answer the research question. The last con-
cept explained is the Sinus lifestyle segmentation approach. 
The Sinus lifestyle typology differentiates the German socie-
ty in ten groups. This typology can be used to simulate the 
refurbishment DM of 17 mi. homeowners in Germany, em-
pirically grounded, in a differentiated way. Section III docu-
ments some thoughts concerning the development of such an 
ABM for refurbishment. It describes how the DM process 
concerning refurbishment for different agents and touch-
points can be modeled. Finally, Section IV summarizes this 
idea contribution and briefly gives an outlook concerning 
future work and the implementation of the ABM for refur-
bishment.  
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

II. 
KEY CONCEPTS USED IN THIS IDEA 
The objective of commercial communication (or “touch-
points”) is to have an impact on consumers and to support 
consumers in buying DM. A large body of research exists to 
assess this impact. HOE models represent a family of models 
that examine this impact of touchpoints on different steps in 
the buying behavior. In this logic, HOE models assume 
forthcoming steps in the DM process can only be reached 
when previous ones have been effectively completed. Con-
sequently, the number of people who reach a next step in the 
process is usually reduced, compared to the previous step. 
This transfer from a previous step onto the next is called 
conversion. HOE models enable the calculation of transfer 
rates under the influence of communication – and as well 
under the influence of different kinds of communication: 
mass and personal communication.  
As mentioned in Section I, ABM have not distinguished 
between marketing and sales until today. HOE models can 
do exactly this: The first stages in the model are primarily 
impacted by marketing (mass communication touchpoints), 
and the last stages primarily by sales (personal communica-
tion touchpoints). This is the main rationale behind applying 
the HOE logic within the ABM for refurbishment. 
In previous research, the author developed a HOE model 
for energetic refurbishment of residential buildings [5]. The 
resulting model is based on Lewis [6], Lavidge and Steiner 
[7] and is shown in Figure 1. This model assesses the impact 
of touchpoints on DM for energetic refurbishment. 
This idea contribution proposes to develop an ABM. This 
modeling approach simulates decisions and/or behavior of 
different individual agents. These agents can interact with 
their environment, as well as with each other. Within an 
ABM, usually different agents behave according to their 
individual preferences, their characteristics, their interac-
tions, as well as their environment. Software for ABM al-
lows for the setup and description of different agents, their 
preferences, interactions, as well as their environment. In this 
way, the aggregated system with its dynamics (that emerges 
from many different individual behaviors) can be simulated.  
Agent-based models are especially interesting when 
problems of emergence are studied [8]. The idea is to use this 
approach to study refurbishment intention (after interactions 
with marketing and sales) at a lifestyle and system level. 
The last concept described is the Sinus Lifestyle typolo-
gy. The typology is used in marketing & sales, both in prac-
tice and in academics. The Sinus Institute has been monitor-
ing sociocultural developments and trends in the German 
society since the 1980ies and small adaptations to the life-
style typology are carried out regularly. The lifestyles are 
positioned in a two-dimensional space. The x-axis describes 
their orientation: Traditional towards progressive lifestyles. 
The y-axis describes social status: Lower class towards upper 
class. 
 
 
Figure 1.  HOE model for energetic refurbishment [5] 
Ten lifestyles are located within this two-dimensional 
space. Previous research by the author [5] showed that de-
pending on the Sinus lifestyle, German homeowners have 
very diverse attitudes and behaviors concerning energetic 
refurbishment of residential housing. This idea contribution 
uses the Sinus lifestyle approach as it forms an efficient 
segmentation approach to create differentiated, empirically 
grounded, agents within the ABM. 
After this description of the key concepts of the idea, 
Section III will document some thoughts about the ABM that 
could be developed to simulate the impact of marketing and 
sales on homeowners’ refurbishment DM. 
III. 
ABM FOR REFURBISHMENT 
The ABM for refurbishment can be based on empirical 
data, taken from [5], as displayed in Table I. The representa-
tive sample (n = 4471) describes the status quo of the deci-
sion concerning energetic refurbishment of 17 mi. home-
owners in Germany. The ABM will focus on the interaction 
of agents with various (mass and personal communication) 
touchpoints. This idea contribution does not take other driv-
ers of DM (e.g., social influences) into account. 
It comprises Sinus lifestyle data and their status quo con-
cerning the DM process in the format of the developed HOE 
model, as described in Section II. 
With the help of this data, conversion rates can be calcu-
lated, e.g., 65% of the social ecological lifestyle is converted 
from knowledge (80.0%) to attitude (52.3%). Within the 
ABM for refurbishment, 17 mi. agents (homeowners) can be 
set up according to the distribution of the status quo in their 
refurbishment DM (as displayed in Table I). 
The ABM can simulate the impact of touchpoints on 
each individual agent with the support of a threshold varia-
ble. As a result of the interaction with a touchpoint during a 
period, the value of the threshold variable is increased. It is 
assumed that an agent needs to reach a threshold variable 
with a value of 4 prior to being transferred to the next step in 
the HOE model. Hence, as soon as an agent’s threshold vari-
able reaches the value of 4, the agent is transferred towards 
the next step. Once an agent has been transferred, the thresh-
old variable is set to 0. During the initialization of the model, 
the threshold variable can be set randomly between 0 and 3 
to incorporate variability into the model. 
TABLE I.  
EMPIRICAL DATA FROM [5] 
German’s 
Sinus lifestyle 
Status quo in DM 
Aware
-ness 
[%] 
Know-
ledge 
[%] 
Atti-
tude 
[%] 
Con-
viction 
[%] 
Inten-
tion 
[%] 
1. Established conservat. 
99.0 
80.1 
51.0 
33.7 
14.9 
2. Liberal-intellectual 
99.7 
82.9 
57.9 
40.6 
13.3 
3. High achiever 
98.9 
79.5 
48.4 
32.9 
18.4 
4. Movers and shakers 
98.4 
76.9 
52.3 
34.6 
16.6 
5. Adaptive pragmatics 
99.5 
69.0 
53.9 
42.4 
22.4 
6. Social‐ecological 
99.7 
80,0 
52.3 
36.2 
17.0 
7. New middle class 
98.5 
76.9 
44.1 
32.6 
11.8 
8. Traditional 
99.0 
78.8 
44.5 
30.8 
10.6 
9. Precarious 
99.6 
64.4 
36.1 
20.6 
9.3 
10. Escapists 
92.8 
59.3 
33.7 
21.9 
12.2 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

However, touchpoints come in different forms and 
should not be generalized. Not every touchpoint generates 
the same impact. It is generally acknowledged in marketing 
and sales, that mass communication touchpoints (e.g., adver-
tising campaigns and information brochures) are best suita-
ble to transfer consumers through the first stages of DM, 
especially awareness, but knowledge as well and, to a lesser 
extent, interest. Furthermore, personal communication 
touchpoints (e.g., sales talks) are best suitable to transfer 
consumers through the last stages of DM, especially inten-
tion, but conviction as well and, to a lesser extent, interest 
[9]. Hence, we detect an increased impact in the beginning 
and a decreased impact towards the end of DM, due to mass 
communication. Furthermore, we detect a decreased impact 
in the beginning and an increased impact towards the end of 
DM, due to personal communication. This phenomena of 
different impacts of touchpoints can be reflected in the ABM 
by incorporating a correction factor in the additions to the 
threshold variable. The correction factor is decreasing for 
mass communication and increasing for personal communi-
cation with every following step in the DM process. 
Within the model, different amounts of mass and person-
al communication that an agent is exposed to in a period, can 
be set. The model can calculate the costs of these different 
mixes (of mass and personal communication), as these two 
types of communication vary greatly in price.  
By varying the mixes of mass and personal communica-
tion, the model can explore: 
1. How many homeowners reach a refurbishment intention 
under the impact of a set mix of mass and personal 
communication, and, 
2. the costs for that specific mass and personal communi-
cation mix. 
As described in Section I, time and especially accelera-
tion of refurbishment behavior is important. For this reason, 
a budget can be set. The simulation can explore the impact of 
different mass and personal communication mixes in time, as 
long as the total costs are below the budget. In this way, the 
factor time (acceleration) can be considered as well. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Heating Germany’s residential buildings consumes too 
much energy and is accompanied by a huge ecological foot-
print. Governments have been using especially marketing-
like measures (e.g., mass media campaigns) to push residen-
tial refurbishment among homeowners. Only recently, more 
sales-like activities (e.g., visits of energy consultants) have 
been offered for that purpose. This idea contribution deals 
with the question asking, how governments can optimally 
push homeowners in the direction of a positive refurbishing 
decision with the help of marketing and sales measures. 
Future work consists of implementing (developing and 
coding) an ABM for refurbishment within an ABM model-
ing environment, according to the logic described in Section 
III. During the initialization (or set up) of the model, differ-
ent agent groups should be created according to the size and 
distribution of Sinus lifestyles in Germany to take repre-
sentativeness into account. This counts as well, for the status 
quo of the agents’ refurbishment DM, as displayed in Ta-
ble I. Furthermore, attention will be paid to the following 
tasks: 
A. Costs of mass and personal communication touchpoints 
As discussed in Section III, many different touchpoints 
exist. Modeling results will be driven directly and strongly 
by the average costs assumed for mass and personal commu-
nication, which is why they should be researched carefully. 
B. Mixes of mass and personal communication 
Different mixes of mass and personal communication can 
be seen as scenarios for system refurbishment behavior. So, 
it is important to develop mixes of mass and personal com-
munication that help the evaluation of policy effectiveness. 
C. Budgetting approach 
Speed is an important aspect of refurbishment, which can 
be simulated by a budgeting approach (see Section III). A 
budget must be developed to simulate time factors. 
 
After successful implementation of these tasks, the ABM 
will enable the assessment of the impact of different mixes of 
mass and personal communication to push refurbishment. In 
this way, it can lead to recommendations on cost and time 
efficient approaches to push energetic refurbishment among 
German homeowners. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Verhoog, “Steuerung von Akteuren und Entscheidungen 
in Baunetzwerken [in English: Controlling Actors and 
Decisions in Construction Networks]”, Springer Gabler, 
Wiesbaden, 2018, ISBN 978-3658205867. 
[2] H. Du, Q. Han, and B. de Vries, Modelling energy-efficient 
renovation adoption and diffusion process for households: a 
review and a way forward, in: Sustainable Cities and Society, 
Vol. 
77, 
pp. 
1-10, 
2022, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.scs.2021.103560. 
[3] W. Jager, “The four P's in social simulation, a perspective on 
how marketing could benefit from the use of social 
simulation”, in: Journal of Business Research, Vol. 60, Issue 
8, 
pp. 
868–875, 
2007, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jbusres.2007.02.003. 
[4] S.A. Delre, W. Jager, T.H.A. Bijmolt and M.A. Janssen, 
“Targeting and timing promotional activities: An agent-based 
model for the takeoff of new products“ in: Journal of Business 
Research, 
Vol. 
60, 
Issue 
8, 
pp. 
826–835, 
2007, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.02.002. 
[5] M. Verhoog, “A target group-specific communication 
approach to push refurbishment”, Energy for Sustainability 
International Conference, Funchal, pp. 1-9, 2017. 
[6] T. Barry, “The Development of the Hierarchy of Effects: An 
Historical Perspective”, in: Current Issues & Research in 
Advertising, Vol. 10, Issue 2, pp. 251-295, 1987, DOI: 
10.1080/01633392.1987.10504921. 
[7] R. Lavidge and G. Steiner, “A Model For Predictive 
Measurements of Advertising Effectiveness.”, in: Journal of 
Marketing 25, pp. 59-62, 1961, https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
002224296102500611. 
[8] S. Railsback and V. Grimm, “Agent-Based and Individual-
Based Modeling“, University Press, Princeton, 2012, ISBN 
978-0691136745. 
[9] P. de Pelsmacker, M. Geuens and J. Van den Bergh, 
“Marketing communications”, 6th edition, Pearson Education, 
Harlow, 2017, ISBN 978-1292135762. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

