A Consideration of Added Value Which Inﬂuences Information Diffusion
Yuya Ota
Soka University
Tokyo, Japan
Email: e18m5222@soka-u.jp
Norihiko Shinomiya
Soka University
Tokyo, Japan
Email: shinomi@soka.ac.jp
Abstract—In the case of existing information diffusion models,
probability of information diffusion only follows parameters
of neighbor nodes sending and receiving information. But,
the momentum of diffusion gains in an exponential fashion
whenever the information passes through inﬂuential nodes in a
real network. For example, when information diffuses through
social networking service (SNS), the speed of diffusion increases
whenever information passes nodes that is inﬂuential users. This
paper quantiﬁes the degree of inﬂuence as information vitality,
and proposes the model using it. In addition, the paper considers
relationship between diffusion speed and information vitality in
simulation of the model.
Keywords–Information diffusion; Social network; Independent
cascade model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in communication technology have made
it possible to increase individual information transmission
capacity, thus social network was formed on the Internet. It
enabled people to diffuse information wildly and rapidly with-
out existing mass media. On the other hand, the anonymity of
the network accelerates irresponsible information transmission;
thus, social problems that are like fake news or hate speech
are increasing. For example, fake news was used to attack
political opponent and appeal the electorate in the American
presidential election in 2016. There is large risk to change the
result by wrong information. To solve the problem, we need
to make mathematical model to predict information diffuse in
the society, and ﬁnd the factor to inﬂuence the diffusion.
Ample studies have proposed the information diffusion
model, however, the model does not consider the change of
added information value in the diffusion process because the
probability depends completely on initial parameter that net-
work nodes and edges have. One of the value is diffusion trend
that is determined by the contents of the information.The paper
by Vosoughi et al. [1] have concluded that wrong information
spread 20 times faster than right one. This means that the speed
of information diffusion depends on the content. Another study
analyzes the big contents data that is collected from SNS to
ﬁnd the diffusion trend [2]. These studies elucidate how the
content inﬂuences the diffusion process; however, it cannot
lead to predict the information diffusion.
The purpose of our study is making the information diffu-
sion model to explain how the change of added information
value inﬂuences the diffusion process. To test the hypothesis
that the information diffusion depends on the value change
in the process, we have examined whether the centrality of
network for information diffusion has correlation with range
of the diffusion. To this end, we have performed a series of
different simulation with stochastic model.
In Section 2, information diffusion model using added
information value is explained. In Section 3, method of simula-
tions and results are illustrated. Finally, considering and future
work were suggested in Section 4.
II.
MODEL REPRESENTATION
This model considers the added information value, for
example the number of re-tweet on Twitter, as the factor which
inﬂuences the diffusion process. As shown in Table 1, these
kinds of parameter can be considered as the added information
value. The value is deﬁned by information engine theory as
the name of ”information vitality (IV)” [3]. The ﬁrst question
which we have to answer in this paper is how the IV works
in the information diffusion process.
Information engine theory has supposed that information
has two parameters which are entropy and IV. Entropy is a
parameter which is used in thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics and considered as a physical quantity that expresses
“ambiguity” in information theory. Information which has
higher entropy is more likely to diffuse, so entropy and initial
IV have a correlation.
In the IV model, we have used directed graph, and regarded
the node receiving the information as active node, the ones not
receiving node as inactive node, and the human relationship as
edges. We have also considered the IV of the active nodes
as diffusion probability pu,v (0 ≤ pu,v
≤ 1). When a
node becomes active, the node tries to make neighbor nodes
active only once in the next step. In addition, every node has
the parameter named ”logical work” that change IV. When
information passes through the nodes, each node gives logical
work q (q ∈ R) to the information, and change the IV.
Therefore, when a node becomes active in the probability of
pu,v, the node tries to diffuse in the probability of pu,v + q
in next step. Although the probability of information diffusion
does not change in previous independent cascade (IC) model
as ﬁgure 1 shows, in the case of Figure 2, initial IV is 0.2,
and when it makes next node active, it becomes 0.21. This
simulation keeps going until the state does not change. This
model can explain spread of news or advertisement on SNS
as information initiative model.
III.
SIMULATION
We have performed diffusion simulation to assess the
performance of proposed model using large network of news
communication web site. For comparison, we have also per-
formed simulation using IC model.
The network is a directed graph, and has 30398 nodes and
87627 arcs. We chose one node which has enough diffusing
capacity as the starting node. In the case of IC model, we set
20% diffusion probability for every arc, whereas in the case
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE I. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION PROPERTY
Figure 1. Concept of IC model
of IV model, the diffusion probability is increasing by logical
work of every node which the information has passed.
Figure 3 shows that when the diffusion ends before it
spreads widely, there is little difference between two mod-
els. The only difference is that threshold to cause explosive
diffusion became high because of increasing IV. Next, Figure
4 shows the data of explosive diffusion. The simulation data
demonstrates that IV changes the explosive diffusion wide and
high frequency.
The second simulation has been designed to assess degree
of the diffusion suppression per three types of centrality includ-
ing degree centrality, page-rank, and personalized page-rank.
Only personalized page-rank rates the closeness of the nodes
to the starting node. We sorted all nodes according to each
centrality, then decreased the probability of the nodes in order
of the centrality. The simulation investigated how distance
from the starting node inﬂuences to the centrality of the node
in aspect of information diffusion. Results of the simulation,
as illustrated in Figure 5, when we use personalized page-
rank, information diffusion is well suppressed, and variation
Figure 2. Concept of Information vitality model
Figure 3. Scatter plot for small-scale diffusion (less than 1000 nodes)
Figure 4. Histogram for Large-scale diffusion (more than 1000 nodes)
rate is the least in these types of centrality. It is reasonable
to support that early stage of information diffusion has big
chance to change conclusive wideness of diffusion, and it is
more important to weaken the nodes which are close to the
starting node than the nodes which have high degree.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In order to make the model that explains information
diffusion phenomena especially in social networks on the In-
ternet, we quantiﬁed the added information value as IV. Then,
we made the information diffusion model that the diffusion
probability changes according to the diffusion process. As a
result, it was found that in the case of small-scale diffusion
with less than 1000 active nodes, the inﬂuence of added
information value remained on the change of threshold leading
to large-scale diffusion.
On the other hand, in the case of large-scale diffusion with
1000 or more active nodes, the range of diffusion increased
more than the case that the added information value was not
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 5. Diffusion suppression per each centrality
taken into account. Information such as the number of views
on YouTube can be considered to have the effect to expand
the range of spreads explosively after the video spread more
than a certain range. In order to accurately model the actual
information diffusion which is determined by human, more
complicated algorithm will be necessary. We will examine and
work on the construction of the more accurate information
diffusion model.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Vosoughi, D. Roy, and S. Aral, The spread of true and false news
online, Science: Vol. 359, Issue 6380, pp. 1146-1151, March 2018.
[2]
K. Ohara, R. Odagiri, and S. Shirakawa, On a Topic-based Information
Diffusion Model, SIG-KBS/SIG-KBS,B5(01) pp. 13-17, 2015.
[3]
H. Watanabe, ”A Basic Theory of Information Network”, IEICE TRANS
FUNDAMENTALS, VOL.E76-A, NO.3, pp.265-276, March 1993.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

