Alternative System Design Based on Reliability Analysis and Simulation 
 
Merve Uzuner, Berna Dengiz 
Industrial Engineering Department 
Baskent University, Ankara, Turkey 
e-mails: {muzuner, bdengiz}@baskent.edu.tr 
 
Abstract—The purpose of this study is the integration of 
reliability-availability analysis and simulation modeling to 
improve the productivity of the battery production system. The 
throughput of the system is increased by using integrated 
reliability-availability and simulation approach together and 
the proposed system design is more reliable than the current 
design. Moreover, system availability provides a valuable input 
for the company to realize the production plan for the future.  
Keywords-simulation 
modeling; 
reliability-availability 
analysis; battery production system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper presents a real case study of a multi-stage 
production line in battery production factory. In today’s 
highly competitive industry, a company must be able to 
adapt to its customers’ ever changing needs and improve the 
reliability of their system and products in order to survive. 
The battery production system of a company in Ankara, 
Turkey, is a complex system as is often the case in 
manufacturing environments, and so, to predict the 
throughput and to investigate the stochastic behavior of this 
system, simulation model could not be used alone. Although 
most operation units have stochastic operation times, curing 
unit has much longer constant operation time than the other 
operation units. Therefore, under its dominant effect, the 
simulation model works like a deterministic model not a 
stochastic. Although failure time, mean time to failure and 
down time are known for each machine working at all 
stations failures could not been considered in the simulation 
model. Because simulation run time of this very complex 
system already takes too long time such as 60 hrs even 
without considering failures. Therefore, simulation model of 
this system is built without failures. However, it is needed an 
additional method to imitate thestochastic nature of this 
system to be able to get true response from the system to 
improve system performance. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
In today’s automated systems, to analyze production 
rates and system qualifications, reliability is one of the most 
important metrics of components and systems. Reliability 
could be analyzed in two main headings, product reliability 
and system reliability. Product reliability is the probability 
that a product will operate properly for a specified period of 
time. System reliability can be computed based on system 
configuration where all components are connected in series, 
in parallel or as networks. Some metrics related to reliability 
of components and systems are mean time to failure [1], the 
failure rates of components or system [2], the availability of 
components or system [3], and the repair rate of system [4].  
Companies should present more reliable products in current 
competitive market; otherwise, customer satisfaction could 
not be provided and products are not preferred. Therefore, 
reliability and availability analysis in production fields have 
attracted interest recently, although in the literature, 
reliability analysis and availability analysis generally have 
been considered in electronic fields. 
The battery is the main power component of the vehicles. 
Any failure of the battery (not working appropriately) could 
cause problems about vehicle or driver. It is desired that it 
has high reliability and availability. Therefore, reliability 
computation of production systems is important. 
In this study, we propose to use the integration of 
reliability-availability analysis and simulation modeling to 
improve the productivity of the system because of system 
characteristics. In addition, overall system availability will 
provide a valuable input for realization of production planfor 
the future. Hence, in practice, production planning 
department can find valuable evaluation value to improve the 
system productivity. To the best of our knowledge the 
proposed method in this work is the first application in this 
area. 
This study will proceed as follows: Firstly, a new system 
design is obtained based on reliability and availability 
analysis of the current system. The reliability block diagram 
method is used for the computation of reliability of existing 
and proposed complex battery production system. Secondly, 
we investigate the system behavior to find out bottlenecks 
and see the throughput rates under assumption of no failures 
with the simulation model.  
III. 
CASE STUDY 
In the eleven stations, only machines are taken into 
account for system reliability and availability analysis. In 
each operation units, all components are defined and their 
failure times and repair times are obtained from historical 
data. Failure distributions and their parameters are estimated 
and repair rate of the system are calculated [5]. The battery 
production system is analyzed and reliability block diagram 
is drawn considering their series or parallel configuration. 
The reliability block diagram of current battery production 
system is shown in Figure 1.  
System reliability and system availability is computed 
[6]. The reliability equation of current system is obtained 
based on [7]. The system availability of current system is 
0,890309 per month. 
System reliability and availability is calculated again for 
new proposed system. System availability for alternative 
system is 0,899266 per month. 
Using the reliability and availability analysis, new system   
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
Figure1. Reliability Block Diagram of current battery production system. 
 
is developed to improve the system productivity. To get a 
more reliable alternative system some stations (components) 
are added to the current system. Thus, a new series and 
parallel alternative system is designed. 
Secondly, we investigate the system behavior to find out 
bottlenecks and see the throughput rates under assumption of 
no failures with the simulation model of existing and 
proposed alternative systems. In our approach, a simulation 
model is constructed using discrete event simulation. The 
ARENA simulation package [8] is preferred for its 
capability. Actual data from the production was utilized to 
determine the inputs for each process. Simulation model is 
modified and used to estimate the throughput of this 
alternative system. It is 7411 batteries per month. 
Finally, using the simulation result and system 
availability value, expected production rates are obtained 
considering failures as follows. It is calculated that 6384 
batteries can be produced each month by the current 
production system. The actual throughput considering 
failures is 6664,46 in the proposed new system. It can be said 
that using integrated reliability-availability and simulation 
approach together it can be obtained more reliable alternative 
system design with 6664 throughput (battery), which is more 
than the current system. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a new method to improve the 
productivity of the battery production systemof a company in 
Ankara, 
Turkey. 
Because 
of 
system 
characteristics, 
reliability-availability analysis and simulation approach are 
used together to analyze system and obtain throughput 
(battery). Finally, it is seen that the proposed new system 
design is more reliable than the existing system design and it 
is produced more battery than the existing system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Rausand and A.  Hoyland, System Reliability Theory, 
Models, Statistical Methods, And Applications, 2nd ed., 
Wiley Interscience, p.8, 2004. 
[2] E. A. Elsayed, Reliability Engineering, Addison Wesley 
Longman, p.6, 1996. 
[3] E. A. Elsayed, Reliability Engineering, Addison Wesley 
Longman, p.180, 1996. 
[4] M. Rausand and A.  Hoyland, System Reliability Theory, 
Models, Statistical Methods, And Applications, 2nd ed., 
Wiley Interscience, p.189, 2004. 
[5] Johnson Space Center, Mean time to repair predictions. 
Available 
from: 
oce.jpl.nasa.gov/practices/at2.pdf 
[Oct. 
2015]. 
[6] M. Rausand and A.  Hoyland, System Reliability Theory, 
Models, Statistical Methods, And Applications, 2nd ed., 
Wiley Interscience, p.7, 2004. 
[7] V. 
Faraci, 
“Calculating 
Failure 
Rates 
Series/Parallel 
Networks”, The Journal of Alion’s, System Reliability Center, 
2006. 
[8] A. M. Law, Simulation Modeling&Analysis, 4th ed., 
McGraw-Hill, p.70, 2007.  
 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

