Evaluating Options of Viennese Commuters to Use Sustainable Transport Modes  
 
Gerda Hartl, Gabriel Wurzer 
Institute of Architectural Sciences: Digital Architecture and Planning  
Vienna University of Technology 
Treitlstraße 3, 1st floor, 1040 Vienna, Austria 
hartl@iemar.tuwien.ac.at, wurzer@iemar.tuwien.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract—The 2-degree guardrail of global warming, together 
with accelerating urbanization and growing scarcity of oil, 
demands a redesign of todays’ sprawling cities in order to limit 
greenhouse gases and bring about efficiently built-up 
structures. In 2001, 42 percent of commuter paths within 
Vienna are traveled by private cars. This week-daily, recurring 
traffic pattern causes tons of Co2 and supports low-density 
housing at urban fringes. In front of this background, we 
employ an agent-based simulation model to evaluate if 
commuters in Vienna who currently use motorized modes 
(especially car-drivers) have options to change to low-carbon 
transport modes (pedestrian, bicyclist, public transport) 
without raising costs of travel time. Using a detailed network, 
the identified present and alternative routes can be displayed 
as edge-, node-, or zonal through-traffic, highlighting 
differences in transport mode usage throughout the city.  
Keywords-commuter 
traffic 
simulation; 
multi 
modal 
transportation network; sustainable city; agent-based modeling  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Economic life in cities today stipulates employees 
commuting to their workplace (and back again) at rush 
hours. A commuter is a person who doesn’t work at his/her 
residence, but rather leaves it for their workplace, adopting a 
week-daily spatial-temporal rhythm. The traffic load caused 
by these daily paths, irrespective of transport mode, is called 
commuter traffic. With regard to sustainability aims, 
bicyclist traffic and pedestrian circulation are transport 
modes of zero carbon emission. Public transports’ usage of 
fossil fuel causes greenhouse gases, yet compensates these 
by high rates of passenger occupancy, less overall space for 
infrastructure and hierarchical service line organization. On 
the contrary, automobile transports’ low occupancy rates 
cause extensive energy consumption, high output of toxic 
emissions [1] and long-term effects on land-use allocation 
[2], i.e., urban sprawl. For example, workplace locations tend 
to agglomerate while residential locations tend to spread out 
[3]. Vienna clearly exhibits this pattern, which one of our 
spatial analysis, based on finely grained statistical data 
(2001: Statistics Austria, retrieved: July, 2013) has shown. 
Thus, todays’ patterns of private car commuting are a mirror 
image of cheap oil availability and low restrictions to built-
up densities in past urban planning decisions.  
If the 2-degree guardrail of global warming, agreed upon 
in Cancun 2010 [4], is to be taken seriously, a re-design of 
today’s’ cities, facing accelerating urbanization until 2050, is 
crucial. This re-design has to involve both re-densification 
and reduction of traffic-related emissions, because land use 
and transportation are a closely intertwined system [5]. In 
this paper, however, we focus on evaluating status-quo 
commuters’ possibilities to change to “greener” transport 
modes than they currently use. The reason is that quicker 
adaptation to rising oil prizes [6] can be expected in the 
domain of transport mode choice [3].  
First, we introduce the utilized data and explain the 
motivation of our agent-based simulation model. Next, we 
describe the details of our shortest-path algorithm and 
compare it to existing literature. Finally, we will discuss 
benefits and weak points, unsolved issues and future work.  
II. 
MODEL DESCRIPTION  
A. Data Description 
In a preliminary study [unpublished], district-wise census 
data (from 2009: Statistics Austria) on commuters who live 
and work in Vienna, distinguished by the transport modes 
pedestrian, bicycle, public transport and private car (2001: 
Statistics Austria, retrieved: July, 2013), were used to build a 
commuter model. Holding modal split equal, commuter 
relations were spread to the level of 281 sub-districts, using 
the weights of employee and workplace distribution, both 
taken from the Viennese Transport Model of the City of 
Vienna [7]. Furthermore, this model provides separate GIS 
transport networks (pedestrian, bicycle, public transport, 
individual transport), each consisting of nodes and directed 
edges. In these, maximum speed limits and metric lengths 
are attributed to the edges (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Networks of pedestrian circulation and individual 
transportation, for the latter examples of maximum speed are displayed.  
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

B. Scientific Background  
This information enables us to calculate basic travel time 
necessary for passing an edge, (travel time = metric length / 
maximum speed), while running the simulation. We use this 
indicator as weight during path finding. This way, we can 
highlight status quos’ advantageous usage of fast lanes and 
highways in individual traffic and research if changes from, 
e.g., this mode to pedestrian circulation bring about either 
travel time rises or travel time savings for a single commuter 
traveling from one zone to another. Travel time is an 
important indicator in transportation science: being a 
function of speed and distance, fast transport modes have 
enlarged travel distance distributions to big amounts because 
time used for mobility is, on average, almost constant since 
years [8]. Thus, rising travel time durations for commuting, 
due to transport mode shifts, are unlikely to be accepted 
unless hard constraints in the form of monetary costs or 
regulations are employed. Vienna has recently introduced 
parking bans for non-Viennese residents, prohibiting surface 
parking for incoming commuters. Since then, regional trains 
are 
on 
overload. 
For 
Viennese 
residents, 
parking 
management has been established in many districts too, 
partly forcing commuters to switch to other modes. 
However, our focal point is a precedent one: Can 
commuters’ switchover to low-carbon transport modes be 
advantageous in terms of time-savings?  
C. Model Design 
The progression of our simulation model is as follows: in 
the first step, commuters are distributed to random vertices 
within their residential zones (source zones). These vertices 
need to belong to the networks initially required by the 
commuters, e.g., employees singularly using their private car 
are distributed to vertices of the individual transport network. 
Likewise, target vertices are selected in their workplace 
zones (destination zones). Using travel time on the respective 
network as weight for procession along the graph, the 
commuter now determines their initial shortest path, the total 
duration of which is stored. After all commuters have done 
so, we have our baseline model of shortest paths for the 
status quo situation in Vienna. Now, in our reallocation 
model, commuters try to optimize their baseline paths with 
regard to travel time by changing to alternative transport 
modes. Table 1 shows, which alternative modes are allowed 
for consideration for a current mode, indicating that switches 
to sustainable transport are preferable.  
TABLE I.  
OPTIONS FOR SWITCHING CURRENT MODE OF TRANSPORT  
Current Transport Mode 
Allowed Next Transport Mode 
Individual Transport 
Public Transport, Pedestrian 
Public Transport 
Pedestrian 
Pedestrian 
Pedestrian 
 
Concerning transport mode availability, this decision 
table is strictly logic: once a commuter has, e.g., abandoned 
his car to use public transport instead, he cannot use it 
anymore in his subsequent path [9]. Note that we have left 
out bicycle traffic in this study because its network is largely 
identical to the pedestrian network, except for higher 
velocities at the edges. 
       
 
Figure 2.   Decision process of a commuter in the reallocation model as 
based on Table 1. 
Figure 2 shows a representation of the agents’ decision 
process, evaluating their options of changing transport 
modes. Originally, the agent uses his private car (Figure 2a). 
First, they try to get to their destination by foot (Figure 2b), 
which does not result in travel time-savings. Consulting 
Table 1 for other allowed options (here: public transport), 
which are available at the 2nd node of their initial journey, 
they try again (Figure 2c). Taking this mode brings them to 
another current node. Looking up which other modes are 
available then, pedestrian mode is used to access their final 
destination node.  
D. Model Execution 
We have imported the GIS-network data, describe above, 
into a NETLOGO 3D model [10], extended by a plug-in for 
shortest path inquiry. Arrival data is loaded from 
spreadsheets obtained in the commuter model. Due to lack of 
data, arrival times could not be considered, thus, our 
simulation pictures rush hour traffic as an “interesting” time 
span. In detail, the simulation executes the following steps: 
• 
For each agent using a current mode, there are 
allowed next modes. 
• 
The agent evaluates mode switch options at a current 
node. It examines if there are alternative routes with 
the allowed next modes in the following manner: if 
there is a route with an alternative transport mode 
which meets the baseline route again, the agent 
changes his transport mode and takes this route 
(Figure 2). If the last current node is not the 
destination node, the agent iterates this process: it 
examines Table 1 again and takes one of the allowed 
next transportation means in order to arrive at his 
final node.  
• 
Once the agent is at his destination node, the travel 
costs of the alternative route are compared to the 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

baseline route. In case there is a benefit, the 
alternative solution is accepted. In all other cases, the 
agent backtracks to the node at which the 
disadvantageous fork was conducted. It continues to 
the next node along the hitherto existing route and 
tries to switch transport modes again.  
III. 
DISCUSSION 
Reviewing the preliminary outcomes of our promising 
work-in-progress research, there are the following issues, 
which deserve second thought:  
• 
The given GIS-networks do not reflect reality in the 
minutest detail.  Agents of our model may only 
change their transport mode, where the different 
networks (pedestrian, bicycle, public transport, 
individual transport) explicitly meet at nodes. The 
outcome is that less mode shifts are performed. The 
introduction of catchment areas would be useful to 
enable smoother transfers if, e.g., car-driving agents 
are in the surroundings of, e.g., public transport 
stops. This would facilitate better results towards 
mode shift options, while the networks themselves 
would not need to be extended. 
• 
Additional information, like parking space, is 
missing, which poses a problem because agents may 
change to public transport as soon as a street node 
meets a station, regardless of the fact that there may 
be no parking space given. Yet, this specific 
information is altogether rare, looking at open data 
resources of the city of Vienna. Surface parking is 
generally widespread but is newly regulated and 
time-dependent in availability. Solving this task may 
be challenging for a multi-modal transportation 
simulation. For our aims and purposes, this level of 
detail is not adequate.  
• 
It is inherent to models that reality cannot be 
depicted sufficiently. Our sub-district commuter 
model may only output travel times between zones 
as depending on randomly selected start or end 
vertices. Exact distribution of commuters within 
these sub-districts is unknown. Therefore, we cannot 
produce better results than our background data 
allows us to, concluding that a finer-level simulation 
is useless.  
• 
So far, we did not consider time schedules or 
passage times in public transport; neither did we 
enable changes within this network itself due to 
complex model building, big data volumes and 
processing time. Especially for public transport, 
complex travel time is relevant [11]. It combines 
waiting times, changing times, egress times, travel 
time on board, etc. Egress describes the time needed 
to access public transport stations, i.e., a commuter 
has to walk from their residence to a station, wait for 
a train, get on the train, travel for some time, get off 
the train and finally, walk from the station to their 
workplace.  
• 
In this research we meet the general problem if a 
multi-modal shortest path algorithm may produce 
“optimal” results. Service quality and quantity in 
Vienna is high, comprising of many different routes 
of almost the same trip duration. As said before, 
representing a highly advanced simulation like that 
is not our major goal.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our work-in-progress contribution addresses interesting 
up-to-date topics in the field of sustainable urban planning as 
concerned 
with 
future 
needs 
for 
de-carbonization. 
Automobile transportation, widely used in commuter traffic 
today, obviously has some advantages as compared to public 
transport. These are: lack of egress, changing and waiting 
times, little to no body energy requirements, comfort, the 
option to store luggage and, most of all: constant, 
unscheduled availability while offering high speed travel. 
Automobile transport is very time efficient. Even more so, its 
manifold toxic emissions and its sprawling effects on 
functional, densely organized urban structures are at 
opposites with the imperative of restrictive environmental 
policies, necessary to avoid unpredictable global climate 
change. Therefore, our research is not aiming at solutions to 
technical optimization problems but rather poses the general 
question of what prize cities and their inhabitants would need 
to pay if seriously considering a major turn towards 
sustainability.  
 
Figure 3.  Utilization of the 281 zones of Vienna by automobile commuter 
through-traffic.  
In Figure 3, the zones most frequently traversed by status 
quos’ commuters using automobiles, are depicted by 
elevation. One of the main highways, passing Vienna from 
the middle-north to the southeast of its border, is clearly 
visible. The same utilization, elaborated for public transport 
users of our baseline model, would look quite different and, 
would be much more agreeable.  
Our contribution offers a smooth application of the 
shortest-path algorithm as applied to a multi-modal 
transportation network under the premises of commuters 
switching to low-carbon transport modes. We can show a 
nice visual comparison of transport modes routes with regard 
to travel durations. Figure 4 shows an alternative path per 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

public transport, found for a current route traveled by 
individual traffic. Accepting only mode shifts to less 
polluting transport modes, we highlight the solution space of 
de-carbonization in commuter traffic, already available 
today.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Utilization of the 281 zones of Vienna by automobile commuter 
through-traffic.  
ACKKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We want to thank the Municipal Department 18 of the 
City of Vienna (Urban Development and Planning) for the 
provision of the Viennese Transport Model of the City of 
Vienna.   
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.R. Kenworthy, “Energy use and CO2 production in the 
urban passenger transport systems of 84 international cities: 
findings and policy implications”, in: Urban Energy 
Transition, P. Droege, Ed., Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2008, pp. 
211-236. 
[2] P.W.G. Newman and J.R. Kenworthy, “The land use-
transport connection: An overview”, in: Land Use Policy, 
vol.13/1, pp. 1-22,1996. 
[3] G.Franck and M. Wegener, “Die Dynamik räumlicher 
Prozesse” in: Raumzeitpolitik, D. Henckel and M. Eberling, 
Eds, Opladen: Leske & Budrich, 2002, pp. 145-162. 
[4] United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 
http//unfccc.int, 30.09.2013. 
[5] M. Wegener, “Overview of land-use transport models”, in: 
Transport Geography and Spatial Systems, Handbook in 
Transport, vol. 5, D. A. Henscher and K. Button, Eds. 
Kidlington: Pergamon/Elsevier Science, 2004, pp. 127-146.  
[6] C. J. Campbell, “The Rimini Protocol an oil depletion 
protocol: Heading off economic chaos and political conflict 
during the second half of the age of oil” in: Energy Policy, 
vol. 34/12, pp. 1319-1325, 2006.  
[7] Magistrat der Stadt Wien (MA 18) Stadtplanung und 
Stadtentwicklung, “Verkehrsmodell Wien der Stadt Wien”: 
PTV VISUM Transportation Model, 2001.  
[8] A. Schafer, “The global demand for motorized mobility” in: 
Transportation Research Part A, vol. 32/6, pp. 455-477, 1998. 
[9] M.J. Huguet, D. Kirchler, P. Parent, R. W. Calvo, “Efficient 
algorithms for the 2-way multi modal shortest path problem” 
in: Electronic Notes in Discrete Mathematics, vol. 41, pp. 
431-437, 2013. 
[10] Wilensky, 
U. 
(1999). 
NetLogo. 
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/. 
Center 
for 
Connected 
Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, IL. 
[11] K. 
Walther, 
“Nachfrageorientierte 
Bewertung 
der 
Streckenführung im Öffentlichen Personennahverkehr” in: 
Forschungsberichte des Landes Nordrhein-Westfahlen vol. 
2356, Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1973, pp. 9-142. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

