Performance of Storage Strategies in a Highbay Warehouse 
 
Frank Herrmann 
Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule Regensburg - University of Applied Sciences Regensburg 
Innovation and Competence Centre for Production Logistics and Factory Planning (IPF) 
PO box 120327, 93025 Regensburg, Germany 
E-Mail: Frank.Herrmann@OTH-Regensburg.de  
 
Abstract— Storage and retrieval times of goods in inventory 
processes determine the efficiency of highbay warehouses in 
companies. These times are highly dependent on the 
performance of rack feeders. Storage strategies have the greatest 
influence on this performance. This paper shows the impact of 
an efficient control of rack feeders through storage strategies. 
Storage strategies which are typically used in industrial 
inventory processes are analysed. For the analysis, a simulation 
system is implemented, so that the real process times are similar 
to the simulated ones. This results in recommendations for the 
use of storage strategies in companies. 
Keywords-Inventory processes, simulation of storages and 
retrievals of goods, storage strategies, highbay warehouse. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
In industrial production, huge warehouses, mostly in the 
form of a highbay warehouse, are used for the coordination of 
procurement processes, production processes and distribution 
processes within an enterprise and also between enterprises 
along the logistic process chain (see Figure 1 and [1][2][4]-
[10][12]). In addition to this time bridging structure,  inventory 
management becomes more and more important which 
realises an efficient order related picking [2][3][5]-[8][12]. 
Particularly, with an almost fully occupied automatic 
warehouse, the performance necessary for the handling of 
goods is not reached for picking in the warehouse. 
Attempts are often made to improve the performance of 
warehouses by elaborate storage and handling measures 
[1][2][4][5][12]. In addition, in very highly automated compa- 
 
 
 
Figure 1. View of a highbay warehouse – provided by Klug GmbH 
integrated systems. 
nies, special approaches from research, as described in [14], 
can be used. An important performance criterion is the 
maximization of the handling of goods in the warehouse, i.e. 
the warehouse should be able to transfer to stock or to remove 
from stock as many storage units as possible within a given 
time span (e.g., an hour) [1][2][5]-[8][12][13]. 
       The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
describes storage in large warehouses, Section III presents the 
key performance indicators, Section IV describes some storage 
strategies, followed by the testbed problem in Section V. 
Section VI presents the simulation study, with the results in 
Section VII. An analysis of the results is done in Section VIII 
and we conclude the work in Section IX. 
II. STORAGE 
With automatic warehouses, the product is stored in free-
mounted racks. Figure 2 shows a model of a rack of the length 
L, height H and depth T (see [1][2][5]-[8]) and a Rack Feeder 
(RF). The RF is used to access the stored product. 
The RF accesses the stored product usually stacked on 
palettes. A RF is an automated conveyor which simultaneously 
drives through a lane in a warehouse, heads for a certain rack 
shelf of height H about a lifting device and moves its load 
suspension device (LSD) into the rack shelves of depth T in 
order to pick or lay bins.  
 
 
RF
I/O Point
Shelf
Lifting Device 
with Bin
Figure 2. Model of a rack with rack feeder (RF) and entry (I) / exit (O) 
point (I/O point); speed (v) – see e.g. [8] 
 
A rack feeder [1][2][4][8] can be used with single cycle or 
double cycle. With a single cycle, the rack feeder in the entry 
(I) / exit (O) point (I/O point) of the rack waits for a transport 
order. In the case of a transfer to stock, a bin is laid in the 
nearest free rack shelf. Afterwards, the rack feeder returns to 
the transfer point. In the case of a removal from stock, the 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

needed rack shelf is headed and the bin is provided in the 
transfer point. With a double cycle, however, the rack feeder 
after an occurred storage (transfer to stock) can head 
immediately for another rack shelf from which a retrieval 
(remove from stock) should be affected.  
             III.  KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
The rack feeder operation has an effect on storage and 
retrieval times. These times are determined by the trajectory 
for the carriage and for the lift, because the number of goods 
which are transferred to stock or removed from stock are to be 
held steady during the analysis period. Such a trajectory is 
called working cycle, and the required time is called cycle 
time. The trajectory of the rack feeder consists of these phases: 
accelerating, driving at steady speed, braking, positioning at 
the destination. At the destination, a load suspension device 
cycle is carried out to take up or to deliver a bin. Such a cycle 
consists of extending the telescopic fork or table, lifting the lift 
truck, retracting the telescopic fork and lowering the lift truck 
– with a belt conveyor, there is no lifting and lowering. 
Working cycles have variable driving times. The real speed 
is shown in Figure 3 (see also [1][2][5][7]). In most 
publications, times for accelerating, braking and positioning 
are not regarded. Instead, the well-known Tschebyscheff 
metric is applied on the constant speed in x and y directions.  
 
t
v
real speed 
course
trapeze  
run
slink  
run
triangle
  run
 
Figure 3. Real and simplified speed course (v). 
 
Beside these variable driving times, a load suspension 
device cycle has constant times for positioning, for controlling 
that the correct shelf was reached and for switching as well as 
controlling operations. These times depend on specific 
technical data of a rack feeder. Altogether, this time is called 
“dead time“.  
In [1] and [7], for each single time, a formula is deduced in 
detail. The used simulation system calculates the single times 
by these formulas and their sum is the (total) cycle time. For 
the test problem which is described below, cycle times were 
measured and compared to the calculated ones. In each case, 
the difference between these times was less than one second. 
Therefore, the simulation of storages and retrievals of goods in 
a warehouse by a rack feeder corresponds to reality.  
IV.  STORAGE STRATEGIES 
In today's industrial warehouse processes, the following 
storage strategies are applied [1][2][5]-[7]: 
 
 
 
1. Accidental (storage):  
By an accidental storage, any free shelf is selected for 
the bin to be stored. Only restrictions about the size of 
a shelf and the allowed weight are considered. 
2. (Storage after) Zones:  
The shelves in the warehouse are divided into zones. 
Each item is stored in exactly one zone. Therefore, 
each product has a so-called zone flag. For storing a 
product with zone flag F, a free shelf near to the I/O 
point with zone flag F is chosen.  
3. (Strategy of the) Fastest neighbour:  
With double cycles, a storage shelf A to a retrieval 
shelf B is selected so that A can be reached from B as 
quickly as possible. With single cycles, the shelf for 
storage is chosen so that it can be reached from the 
storage track as quickly as possible. 
4. Channel (optimized storage):  
In a multiple-depth warehouse, the bins are stored in a 
channel from two consecutive shelves. A free channel 
is searched so that: 
• as many bins as possible of the load suspension 
device fit – different bin types are often excluded 
for channels – and 
• the beginning of the allocation of a channel is 
avoided. 
5. Combination of different storage strategies: A strategy 
is the combination of the strategies zones and fastest 
neighbour. In the case of single cycles, the strategy 
after zones is used. With double cycles, the strategy of 
the fastest neighbour is applied. In addition, various 
combinations of the strategies zones and channel – 
with various channels – are regarded.  
In a multiple-deep warehouse, various combinations 
of the strategies zones and channel are investigated. 
Normally, bins are stored by strategy zones. Only in 
special cases a specific type of strategy channel is 
used. These are: 
• Combination of strategies zones and channel 1: 
If all bins on the Load Suspension Device (LSD) 
have the same zone flag and in this zone no 
channel with suitable depth is free, then a suitable 
channel in an adjacent zone is chosen. 
• Combination of strategies zones and channel 2:  
a channel with the zone Flag (F) of the bin at 
position 1 in the LSD is chosen. This ensures that 
at least one bin is in the correct zone z. If the zone 
z is occupied, then a free shelf nearby zone z is 
chosen.  
• Combination of strategies zones and channel 3: 
The normal procedure that the bins are stored by 
strategy zones is used if all bins on the LSD have 
the same zone flag. Otherwise, strategy channel 
is applied.  
If the suitable zone is occupied, then strategy 
channel is applied. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

V.  TEST PROBLEM 
The problem is a modification of a small sized highbay 
warehouse at Leopold Fiebig GmbH in Karlsruhe, Germany. 
It consists of one aisle and two racks. Each rack has 10 fields 
in x direction (compare with Figure 2) and 32 fields in y 
direction. In z direction, there are two shelves, one behind the 
other. Each shelf can carry a bin. If both shelves are used and 
only the bin in the second shelf is taken, a stock transfer is 
necessary. Altogether, the warehouse has 1280 shelves. A rack 
is 4.5 m long, 8.5 m high and 1.30 m deep. The fields are 
started by a rack feeder which owns a load suspension device 
with two shelves. By a lifting bar construction of the rack 
feeder, high speeds in x and y direction are realized. Loading 
aids are stored twofold-depth or fourfold-depth. Such types of 
highbay warehouse are discussed in the literature under the 
name Commissioner (see, e.g. [4][9][10]). 
                               VI.  SIMULATION STUDY 
For the simulation study, common commercially available 
simulation tools such as Plant Simulation from Siemens were 
first evaluated against a proprietary development. The tools 
allow extensive visualisations of the processes. However, they 
cannot significantly reduce the development effort required to 
control the handling of randomly arriving orders in and out of 
storage.  
A tool is developed to simulate and analyse various 
highbay warehouses and storage strategies. It is implemented 
in C++. The tool uses an Oracle database for permanent data 
storage and to support the search for bays. 
To validate the model, log files of the rack feeders in the 
highbay warehouse at Leopold Fiebig GmbH in Karlsruhe, 
Germany, were evaluated. These files were used to determine 
the driving time between the coordinates approached. With the 
help of a test module, the driving times of the rack feeders are 
calculated in the simulation for the same coordinates. 
Positioning times and grinding times are added to the 
calculated driving times and these are then compared with the 
real driving times. The differences in the driving times are less 
than one second. The simplifications mentioned above are 
likely to have a certain impact. This deviation is acceptable for 
the simulation. Thus, the simulation model and reality are 
identical if the simulation runs only slowly enough.  
Due to the above-mentioned log files, accidental storages 
and retrievals appear – as typical in warehouses. In this case, 
they are normally distributed. 
VII.  NUMERICAL RESULTS 
In industrial warehouses, the storage and retrieval of orders 
vary based on their importance described by an ABC indicator. 
For the simulations of an ABC indicator with the storage and 
retrieval orders 80% of A bin, 15% of B bin and 5% of C bin 
was chosen. With the single cycles or with the single and 
double cycles, 15 is the number of storages and retrievals per 
simulation experiment and 5 is the standard deviation. With 
pure double cycles, the standard deviation is put on 0 to receive 
the same number of storage and retrieval orders for every 
simulation experiment. The highbay warehouse in the test 
problem has three channels. Therefore, there are three 
combinations of the strategy zones and optimized channel, 
namely “combination of zone and channel 1”, “combination of 
zone and channel 2” as well as “combination of zone and 
channel 3”.  
In the case of single cycles, Figure 4 shows the mean cycle 
times for the different storage strategies. These cycle times 
increase with the warehouse utilization. The increase is about 
5 to 10% if the warehouse utilization rises from 50% to 99%. 
The strategy “channel” is mostly influenced by the warehouse 
utilization. With a warehouse utilization of 50% and 80%, the 
strategy “zone” delivers the maximum mean cycle times. With 
a warehouse utilization of 99%, the strategy “channel” has the 
worst value. The strategy “combination of zone and channel 
3“ always delivers the minimum mean cycle times. The 
percental deviation of the best strategy to the worst strategy 
amounts with a warehouse utilization of 50% to 7.96%, with a 
warehouse utilization of 80% to 6.96 %, and with a warehouse 
utilization of 99% to 5.08%. So, the increase in output by the 
application of the best storage strategy with rising warehouse 
utilization becomes smaller. 
 
 
Figure 4. Mean cycle times with single cycles. 
 
The use of the strategy “combination of zone and channel 
3“ causes the least stock transfers, see Figure 5. The decrease 
of the number of stock transfers arises by accidental 
determination of the number of bins for retrievals – in this 
case, the number of bins for retrievals decreases. The 
probability of stock transfers is between 44% and 52%. The 
smallest values are reached for every warehouse filling degree 
by the strategy “combination of zone and channel 3“. 
 
Figure 5. Number of stock transfers with single cycles. 
 
Single cycles and double cycles give the same results 
structurally like with the single cycles; they are shown in 
11,5
12
12,5
13
13,5
14
14,5
50%
80%
99%
warehouse fill degree
seconds
Zones
Channel
combination of zone and
channel 1
combination of zone and
channel 2
combination of zone and
channel 3
620
640
660
680
700
720
740
760
780
800
820
50%
80%
99%
warehouse fill degree
number of stock transfers
Zones
Channel
Combination of zone and
channel 1
Combination of zone and
channel 2
Combination of zone and
channel 3
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 6. The percental deviation shows that the relative 
difference decreases between the best strategy and the worst 
strategy with rising warehouse filling degree and also the 
improvement in performance decreases by the use of the most 
favorable strategy. Also, in this case, the mean cycle time 
correlates with the warehouse filling degree. 
Figure 6 shows the stock transfers to the single warehouse 
filling degrees for every storage strategy. The strategy 
“combination of zone and channel 3“ has the smallest number 
of stock transfers at the warehouse filling degrees of 50% and 
80%. With a warehouse filling degree of 99%, the strategy 
“channel” causes the smallest values. 
 
Figure 6. Mean cycle times with single and double cycles. 
 
Comparing Figure 6 and Figure 7 shows that the strategy 
with the highest mean cycle times does not always have the 
most stock transfers and vice versa. Also, the strategies with 
the smallest mean cycle times do not always have the least 
stock transfers. Therefore, based on the number of stock 
transfers, one cannot make a statement about the quality of a 
strategy. 
 
 
Figure 7. Number of stock transfers with single and double cycles. 
 
The results for double cycles are essentially the same as the 
ones with single cycle and double cycle. They are shown in 
Figure 8 and Figure 9. Also, here, the strategies of type 
“combination of zone and channel“ react most clearly to the 
increase of the warehouse filling degree. A comparison of 
these deviations with the deviations from both previous 
simulation runs shows that with double cycle the relative profit 
is the largest by the most favorable storage strategy. Indeed, 
the improvement in performance here also decreases with the 
warehouse filling degree. 
 
 
Figure 8. Mean cycle times with double cycles. 
 
 
Figure 9. Number of stock transfers with double cycles. 
 
There is no warehouse strategy that always generates the 
most or the least stock transfers. With a warehouse filling 
degree of 50%, there is a correlation between the number of 
stock transfers and the mean cycle time. Such a correlation 
does not exist with other warehouse filling degrees. Hence, the 
number of stock transfers cannot be inferred from the mean 
cycle time and vice versa. 
 
VIII.  IMPROVED ANALYSIS COMPARED TO 
LITERATURE 
Lipplot and Blunck specify in [11] the increase of the 
handling of goods in warehouses with zones compared with 
warehouses without zones is between 15% and 20%. Gudehus 
says in [4] that the increase of the handling of goods by using 
zones is limited to 15%. The simulation shows that the mean 
cycle times by strategy zones is lower about 40% than by 
strategy channel in the case of a warehouse utilization of 50%. 
With increasing warehouse utilization the relative reduction is 
lower; in the case of a warehouse utilization of 99% the  
general proves that the improvement in performance depends 
on  the ABC indicator of orders, the warehouse utilization as 
well as the sequence of storages and retrievals.   
Seemüller regards in [7] the strategies chaotic storage, 
which fits with the strategy accidental (storage), storage close 
to retrieval, which is comparable to the strategy of the fastest 
neighbour, and multiple storage in which several bins are 
stored side by side. In his calculations, Seemüller regards a 
rack feeder with three load suspension devices (next to one 
another). In a single-deep warehouse, the performance of the 
strategy chaotic storage is independent of the warehouse 
9,5
10
10,5
11
11,5
12
12,5
13
13,5
50%
80%
99%
warehouse fill degree
seconds
Zones
Channel
Combination of zone and
channel 1
Combination of zone and
channel 2
Combination of zone and
channel 3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
50%
80%
99%
warehouse fill degree
number of stock transfers
Zones
Channel
Combination of zone and
channel 1
Combination of zone and
channel 2
Combination of zone and
channel 3
9
9,5
10
10,5
11
11,5
12
12,5
50%
80%
99%
warehouse fill degree
seconds
Zones
Channel
Combination of zone and
channel 1
Combination of zone and
channel 2
Combination of zone and
channel 3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
50%
80%
99%
warehouse fill degree
number of stock transfers
Zones
Channel
Combination of zone and
channel 1
Combination of zone and
channel 2
Combination of zone and
channel 3
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

utilization and significantly lower than using the other two 
strategies. This investigation exposes the same results. 
Seemüller approves a reduction in the mean cycle times by 
using double cycles which is approved by this investigation as 
well. But, this investigation in particular and a simulation in 
general, show concrete values.  
There are no quantitative results published about the 
improvement in performance of multiple-deep warehouses by 
storage strategies. Nevertheless, investigations about storage 
strategies for multiple-deep warehouses were published. 
Seemüller regards in [7] the strategies chaotic storage, 
storage close to retrieval and multiple storage for multiple-
deep warehouses. So, the most effective strategy in this 
investigation is not investigated by Seemüller. 
The probability of stock transfers is analyzed in [6]. The 
authors describe the run of the probabilities of stock transfers 
in a twice-deep warehouse as a function of the warehouse 
utilization by a curve. For a warehouse utilization of 50%, the 
probability of stock transfers is 32%, for a utilization of 80%, 
the probability for stock transfers is 45% and at a utilization of 
100% the probability is 50%. The probabilities for stock 
transfers in this investigation are higher. With a warehouse 
utilization of 50%, the probability for stock transfers is already 
44%. Furthermore, probabilities for stock transfers of more 
than 50% appear. The number of stock transfers is determined 
by the retrievals. The retrievals depend on the orders. Hence, 
a stochastic process is given which is not considered in the 
static curve in [6]. By allowing the beginning of the allocation 
of a channel even if this can be avoided, the probability for 
stock transfers should become smaller. This will be analyzed 
in further investigations at the IPF. 
IX.  CONCLUSION 
The state of the art in the literature comprises non-
quantitative statements. By the simulation introduced here, 
quantitative results for concrete enterprises and warehouses, 
respectively, are delivered. Compared with the published 
results, the investigation proves partly clearly higher 
performance in the handling of goods and probabilities of 
stock transfers. 
For a specific small highbay warehouse, the one of 
Leopold Fiebig GmbH in Karlsruhe, Germany, actual driving 
times were used by simulation. The results differ significantly 
from those results published in the literature. Finally, such an 
effective and efficient implementation is a good basis for 
newer approaches, which are elaborated in [15], among others. 
For the concrete storage strategies, it was proven that all 
together, a combination of the strategies zones and channel 
causes the best results. 
Preliminary measurements suggest that similar results are 
observed in other warehouses. Further development of this 
into significant measurements and results is one of the tasks at 
the IPF. 
Methodically quite demanding, but very interesting, is a 
generalization of these results for as many warehouse types as 
possible. The IPF will also continue to research this problem 
in the future.             
                                                                                                                                 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Arnold, „Materialflusslehre [Material Flow Theory]“. Vieweg 
Verlag, 2nd edition, 1998. 
[2] D. Arnold, „Materialfluss in Logistiksystemen [Material flow in 
logistic systems]“, Springer-Verlag, 2005. 
[3] T. Gudehus, „Grundlagen der Kommissioniertechnik [Basics of picking 
technology]“. Verlag W. Girardet, Essen, 1973. 
[4] T. Gudehus and H. Kotzab, „Comprehensive Logistics“. Springer-
Verlag, 2012. 
[5] M. Heindl and  F. Herrmann, „Verkürzung von Ein- und Auslagerzeiten 
in Lagerprozessen [Shortening of storage and retrieval times in 
warehouse processes]“, in: PPS Management, GITO Verlag, Berlin, 
November (4) 2007, p. 47 – 50. 
[6] C.R. Lippolt and D. Arnold, „Hochregallager mit doppelttiefer 
Lagerung [Highbay warehouse with double-deep storage]“, in: F + H 
Fördern und Heben, 2004. 
[7] S. Seemüller, „Durchsatzberechnung automatischer Kleinteilelager im 
Umfeld des elektronischen Handels [Throughput calculation of 
automatic small parts warehouses in the field of electronic commerce]“, 
Technische Universität München, Diss., 2005. 
[8] J.A. Tompkins and J.D. Smith (Editors), „The Warehouse Management 
Handbook” Tompkins, Raleigh, 1998. 
[9] G. Richards, „Warehouse Management: The Definitive Guide to 
Improving Efficiency and Minimizing Costs in the Modern 
Warehouse“, Kogan Page, 2021. 
[10] J.A. Tompkins, J.A. White, Y.A. Bozer, E.H. Frazelle, J.M.A. 
Tanchovo, and J. Trevino, „Facilities Planning”. Wiley, New York, 2nd 
edition, 1996. 
[11] C.R. Lippolt and S. Blunck, „Zonenbildung in Hochregallagern bei 
beliebiger Lage der Übergabestellen am Regalrand [Zone formation in 
high-bay warehouses with any position of the transfer points at the edge 
of the rack]“, in Operations Research Proceedings, Springer-Verlag, 
2000. 
[12] J. Heizer, B. Render, and C. Munson, “Principles of Operations 
Management: Sustainability and Supply Chain Management”. Pearson 
Education Limited, 2020. 
[13] R.V.Subrahmanyam, M.K. Kumar, S. Nair, S.  Warrier, and B.N. 
Prashanth, “Design and development of automatic warehouse sorting 
rover”, in Materialstoday: Proceedings, vol. 46, Part 10, pp. 4497 – 
4503, 2021. 
[14] D. Roy, S. Nigam, R. de Koster, I. Adan, and J. Resing, “Robot-storage 
zone assignment strategies in mobile fulfillment systems”, in 
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 
vol. 122, pp. 119 - 142, 2019. 
[15] N. Sundararajan and R. Terkar, “Improving productivity in fastener 
manufacturing through the application of Lean-Kaizen principles”, 
Materials Today: Proceedings, vol. 62, Part 2, pp. 1169 - 1178, 2022. 
                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

