Production-Sales Policies for New Product Diffusion under Stochastic Supply
Ashkan Negahban and Jeffrey S. Smith
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, AL, USA
Email: {anegahban, jsmith}@auburn.edu
Abstract—In this study, we highlight the importance of produc-
tion and sales plans for new products and illustrate the need
for explicitly modeling supply uncertainties when making such
decisions. We consider the case of variability in the production
yield and perform extensive simulation experiments to study
its impact on the performance of myopic and build-up policies
in terms of the expected proﬁt and risk measures. Managerial
implications concerning selection of the production and sales plan
are also discussed. The results show that ignoring the production
yield variation can result in potentially incorrect decisions on the
product launch time. The results also show that the policy selected
based on the expected proﬁt does not necessarily minimize risk.
Keywords–Innovation diffusion; Production uncertainty; Pro-
duction planning; Inventory management; Monte Carlo simulation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
New products play an important role in today’s competitive
marketplace. More than 30% percent of overall sales and proﬁt
of companies, on average, come from their new products
[1][2]. It has long been known that the demand of new
products follows diffusion patterns similar to those observed
in epidemiology and natural sciences [3]. Once a new product
is introduced into the market, some individuals (innovators)
decide to adopt the product independently of others’ decision
while the timing of the adoption decision of imitators is
inﬂuenced by word of mouth and pressure for adoption from
the social system. Under certain circumstances and in the
presence of extensive word of mouth spreading from past sales,
if the company starts selling as many units as possible without
building an initial inventory (myopic policy) the demand for
the new product grows rapidly and soon may exceed the
ﬁrm’s capacity resulting in lost sales. To avoid this problem,
companies generally delay product launch in order to build
sufﬁcient inventory prior to starting sales (build-up policy).
Decision making regarding an appropriate production-sales
policy requires a deep understanding of the underlying dy-
namics of diffusion processes and can be difﬁcult even for
companies with a lot of experience in successful new product
launches. For instance, Sony Electronics Inc. lost $1.8B in its
game division and eventually laid off 3% of its workforce due
to incorrect over-anticipation of the demand for PlayStation R
⃝3
[4]. In another case, Motorola Inc. who manufactured Power
Mac G4 chips for Apple Inc., was unable to keep up with the
rapid growth of demand for the computer [5]. Bandai Co. faced
a similar problem in 1996 when the demand for TamagotchiTM,
the ﬁrst virtual pet, rapidly grew beyond expectations and led
to lost sales. The company lost even more money when the
demand declined right after they expanded their capacity in
1998 resulting in a $123 million in after-tax losses [6].
These cases prove that an effective production-sales plan is
crucial to successful new product introduction. Several stud-
ies have addressed supply-restricted diffusion and evaluated
various production-sales policies. However, existing literature
ignores an important characteristic of any manufacturing en-
vironment: production uncertainty. Production systems exhibit
signiﬁcant uncertainties due to machine breakdowns, stochastic
processing/tool changeover/setup times, labor availability, and
quality uncertainty. These factors directly affect the supply lev-
els and thus can inﬂuence the time to market the new product.
As an example, in 2001, Microsoft Co. had to postpone the
launch of Xbox R
⃝ in Japan until next year and in the US by
a week since they failed to meet the targeted initial inventory
[7][8]. In this example, due to production uncertainties, the
company needed more time than was expected to fully build
the necessary inventory before the product launch. Therefore,
the current literature leaves an important question unanswered:
How does uncertainty in production yield affect the company’s
choice of the production and sales plan?
This paper aims to answer the above question by in-
vestigating supply-constrained new product diffusion in the
presence of production uncertainties. More speciﬁcally, using
a Monte Carlo simulation model, we evaluate the performance
of different production-sales policies with respect to three
performance measures, namely the expected Net Present Value
(NPV) of proﬁt over the product’s life cycle and the 25th
and 75th percentiles of the NPV of proﬁt as two measures
of risk. Through extensive experimentation, we demonstrate
that ignoring production uncertainties can lead to an incorrect
decision on the best production and sales plan under certain
circumstances. Furthermore, the results indicate that the cost
of making such incorrect decision is expected to increase with
higher levels of uncertainty in the production environment.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II provides a literature review and highlights the main contri-
butions of this work. Section III describes the Monte Carlo
simulation model. Experimental design and results are pro-
vided in Sections IV and V, respectively. Finally, conclusions
and future research considerations are discussed in Section VI.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
There are two main related streams of studies in the mar-
keting and manufacturing literature. Both areas have been stud-
ied extensively. In fact, early studies on production/inventory
management or diffusion models go back to as early as the
1960’s [9][10]. The marketing literature primarily focuses on
developing diffusion models to enhance demand forecasting
while ignoring capacity constraints and assuming unlimited
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

supply [11]. The manufacturing literature, on the other hand,
typically involves ﬁnding the optimal production plan where
the demand is assumed to be either deterministic or stochastic
but following a known distribution [12][13]. In the real world,
however, production constraints exist and the demand process
is not exogenous. Therefore, what these studies fail to capture
is the fact that supply constraints affect sales and past sales in
turn have an impact on the future demand.
More recently, several studies have addressed the above is-
sue which can be divided into two main categories based on the
primary analysis tool used: analytical models and simulation
studies. In the context of analytical studies, an equation-based
model is proposed by Kumar and Swaminathan [14] to account
for supply-constrained diffusion. The proposed diffusion model
is used to evaluate the performance of myopic and build-up
policies (calculated through numerical experiments) against the
optimal policy (obtained by solving a mathematical model). In
another study and using a similar diffusion model, closed-form
expressions are derived for the demand and sales under supply
constraints [15]. These expressions are then used to ﬁnd the
optimal capacity and time to market the new product. Myopic
and build-up policies have also been studied in the presence
of negative word of mouth from dissatisﬁed adopters [16]. A
few studies also develop mixed-integer optimization models to
ﬁnd the optimal production and sales plan [17] and the optimal
conﬁguration of the supply chain for new products [18][19].
The primary performance measure used in all of the analytical
studies presented here is the expected discounted proﬁt over
the life cycle of the new product. Moreover, none of these
studies consider production/supply uncertainties.
The results of a recent survey on the application of Agent-
Based Modeling and Simulation (ABMS) by Negahban and
Yilmaz [11] indicate that only a few simulation studies have
addressed supply-constrained diffusion processes. In [20], an
ABMS is used to evaluate the performance of myopic and
build-up policies with respect to the NPV of proﬁt and lost
sales under a ﬁxed deterministic production level. In another
ABMS study, Negahban et al. [21] develop a model where
the company adjusts its production level based on forecasts
of future demand and a production management strategy. In
other words, adjustable production level is used as a substitute
for building initial inventory. They evaluate the performance
of different production management strategies with respect to
the NPV of proﬁt and lost sales under different planning hori-
zons, social network structures, coefﬁcients of innovation and
imitation, and discount rates. Although the production level
is not ﬁxed, variation in production yield is not considered.
Finally, a simulation framework is proposed by Negahban [22]
for the newsvendor problem where the demand distribution is
ﬁrst predicted by ABMS while Monte Carlo simulation is used
to select the optimal order quantity. The expected proﬁt is the
only performance measure while the underlying assumption is
that the order will be available in full by the product launch
(i.e., no variation in the supplier’s production processes).
Our literature review reveals two major gaps in the existing
body of knowledge. First, the impact of production uncertain-
ties is not studied. Secondly, existing studies mainly focus
only on the expected proﬁt to select the best production-sales
policy while the risk (which is generally an important factor
for managers when making any ﬁnancial investment) is not
considered in the decision making process. The current paper
contributes to the literature in three signiﬁcant ways: (1) to the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that introduces
the important notion of production uncertainty into the ﬁeld of
new product diffusion; (2) it uses percentiles to characterize
the risk associated with different production-sales policies and
shows that the policy with the highest expected proﬁt is not
necessarily the best choice under risk considerations; and, (3)
it shows that the optimal production and sales plan can change
based on the level of uncertainty in the production process.
III.
MONTE CARLO SIMULATION MODEL
A. Conceptual Model: Supply-Restricted Diffusion
The Bass model [10] is perhaps the most fundamental and
widely used analytical diffusion model in the literature with
the majority of other models being rooted in this model [23].
According to the Bass model, the demand of a new durable
product at time period t, d(t), is a function of the coefﬁcient
of innovation, p, coefﬁcient of imitation, q, market size, m,
and the cumulative number of adopters up to time t, D(t), as
follows: d(t) = p(m − D(t)) + (q/m)D(t)(m − D(t)). The
Bass model was originally developed for diffusion of a product
class (supposedly produced by many different ﬁrms) making
supply constraints less relevant. However, here, we consider
the case where the new product is produced and marketed
by a single company. Therefore, it is possible that due to
supply shortage, some adopters will not be able to purchase the
product. As a result, the cumulative sales up to time t, S(t),
can be different from the cumulative demand, D(t). Assuming
that only those customers who have actually made the purchase
will spread word of mouth about the product, supply shortage
can inﬂuence word of mouth and demand growth rate.
Based on the above, we need a model that can capture the
effect of supply constraints on the demand dynamics. In this
paper, we use a modiﬁed Bass model proposed independently
in [14] and [15]. The model can be expressed as follows:
d(t) = p(m − D(t)) + (q/m)S(t)(m − D(t)). Thus, for a
market with size m and at any given time t, a proportion of p
of the remaining potential adopters (innovators) will adopt the
product independently of the word of mouth inﬂuence. On the
other hand, from the remaining potential adopters, the number
of imitators that will adopt the product is proportional to the
cumulative sales up to time t, S(t), representing the effect
of word of mouth. It is worth noting that the model is valid
regardless of whether unmet demand D(t) − S(t) is lost or
backlogged for later fulﬁllment [14]. The model is also valid
for the case of unlimited supply which essentially results in
S(t) being equal to D(t) for all t. Therefore, the model is able
to capture the impact of past sales on future demand. We will
use this model to calculate the demand of the new product in
the proposed Monte Carlo simulation model discussed below.
B. Monte Carlo Simulation Algorithm
In this model, there is a single company with a ﬁxed
average production level of L that markets the new product.
In order to capture the impact of production yield uncertainty,
we assume that the production yield varies around the average
production level. The magnitude of this variation is determined
by the percentage of variation in production yield, v. The actual
production yield at each time step t, y(t), is randomly sampled
from the interval [L(1 − v), L(1 + v))] based on a uniform
distribution. Given I(t − 1) as the inventory carried over from
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE I. PARAMETER CHOICES FOR SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS
Parameter
Value/Range
Population-related parameters
Coefﬁcient of innovation, p
0.01, 0.03, 0.05
Coefﬁcient of imitation, q
0.2, 0.4, 0.6
Market size, m
3000
Backlogging percentage, β
0, 0.5, 0.8, 1
Production-related parameters
Average production level, L
100
Variation in production yield, v
0%, 5%, 10%, 15%
Unit production cost, c
1.0
Unit inventory/holding cost, h
0.001, 0.005, 0.01
Per customer waiting cost, w
0.001, 0.005, 0.01
Unit selling price, π
1.1, 1.2, 1.3
Discount rate, r
0, 0.003, 0.005, 0.01
Parameter related to the production-sales policy
Number of inventory build-up periods, TBuild−up
0 – 25
the previous period, the total amount of supply at each time
step will be y(t)+I(t−1). The modiﬁed Bass model is used to
calculate the new demand of the product at each time period,
d(t). Given there is backlogged demand waiting to be fulﬁlled
from the previous period, B(t − 1), the total demand for the
current time step will be d(t) + B(t − 1). Thus, assuming the
company has already started selling the product, the instanta-
neous sales at t, s(t), will be the minimum of supply and total
demand, i.e., min(y(t)+I(t−1), d(t)+B(t−1)); otherwise,
if the sales has not started yet (during periods of build-up),
s(t) will be zero. We assume that β percent of customers
with unmet demand will wait to purchase the product later.
At the end of each time period, the proﬁt is calculated by
subtracting the production cost, inventory cost, and cost of
waiting customers from the revenue. At the end of the run
(once the potential market m is almost entirely exhausted),
the net present value of the proﬁt over the diffusion time is
calculated based on the given discount rate. The logic of the
Monte Carlo model can be summarized in Figure 1.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
The experimental design is summarized in Table I. In order
to select reasonable parameter choices and provide a common
ground for comparison, the values/ranges are adopted from
previous studies in the ﬁeld [14][21]. It is worth noting that
under each parameter conﬁguration, we evaluate all integers
between 0 and 25 for the number of build-up periods (with zero
representing the myopic policy) and choose the best alternative
as the best policy. Therefore, a total of 404,352 scenarios are
studied. The simulation model is developed in MATLAB R
⃝ and
simulation experiments are run on a standard DellTM desktop
with a 3.00GHz quad-core CPU and 8GB of RAM.
V.
ANALYSIS OF SIMULATION RESULTS
Once the Monte Carlo simulation model is developed and
veriﬁed, it is used to evaluate the performance of myopic and
build-up production-sales policies with respect to three metrics,
namely the expected net present value of proﬁt and the 25th and
75th percentiles of the NPV of proﬁt as measures of risk [24].
The best production and sales plan is then the one that has the
highest estimated value of the metric under consideration. In
this section, we present the results of our extensive simulation
experiments and outline the important ﬁndings.
Figure 1. Pseudo-code of the Monte Carlo simulation model.
A. Expected Proﬁt vs. Risk
While previous studies only use the expected proﬁt to select
the best policy, with the presence of production uncertainty, we
can also evaluate the associated risk. The research question
under investigation then becomes whether the best policy
changes based on risk. In order to answer this question, for
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE II. NUMBER OF CASES WHERE THE BEST POLICY IS DIFFERENT
BASED ON RISK MEASURES
Risk Measure
Production Variation (v)
5%
10%
15%
25th percentile of proﬁt
28
73
109
75th percentile of proﬁt
29
51
90
Total
57
124
199
all parameter conﬁgurations, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the best policy
under each of the above three criteria. We then identify the
scenarios where the best number of build-up periods based on
the expected NPV of proﬁt is different from the best policy
based on the 25th or 75th percentiles. Statistical hypothesis
tests are then performed to detect statistical difference between
the corresponding percentiles of the resulting two candidate
policies. If a statistical difference exists, then we can conclude
that the risk associated with the policy selected based on the
percentile under consideration is actually more desirable than
the policy with the best NPV of proﬁt.
The number of scenarios (out of 3,888 parameter conﬁgura-
tions) where a signiﬁcant statistical difference was detected is
provided in Table II. The results show that the policy with the
highest NPV of proﬁt does not necessarily have the minimum
risk. In other words, the decision on the production-sales plan
can change if the primary criterion is risk rather than the
expected proﬁt. This is an important ﬁnding since existing
studies select the best policy only based on the expected proﬁt
while the risk has been ignored. High levels of production
uncertainty not only increase variability in production cost,
but also affect supply which in turn has an impact on future
demand. As a result, a higher uncertainty level is expected
to increase variability of NPV of proﬁt and have a greater
impact on the risk associated with it making consideration of
risk measures even more important.
We also investigate the impact of production variation
under different diffusion parameters namely coefﬁcients of
innovation (p) and imitation (q). Given p, q, and v, there are
432 scenarios. Figure 2 shows the number of cases where
the best number of build-up periods chosen based on risk is
different (statistically) from the one based on the average NPV.
The ﬁgure shows that the impact of production uncertainty
varies based on p and q. We believe this is mainly due the fact
that different combinations of p and q impact the dynamics
of the problem in a different way (essentially, p and q affect
initial demand and its growth rate). For instance, when both
p and q are small, the initial demand levels are low and
the demand grows slowly. In such cases and under the best
policy, the demand rarely exceeds supply resulting in almost no
backlogged or lost demand (supply abundance). On the other
hand, when both p and q are large, the initial demand level
and its growth rate are both high resulting in high levels of
backlogged or lost sales (supply scarcity) which in turn affect
the future sales and demand. Therefore, for other combinations
of p and q, we expect to see different degrees of these two
effects and thus a different impact by production yield variation
on the best number of build-up periods as shown in the ﬁgure.
It is worth noting that since standard hypothesis testing
procedures are not readily available for comparing ordinal
values of two populations, nonparametric tests will be nec-
Figure 2. Number of cases where the best policy is different based on risk.
essary when comparing percentiles [25]. In this paper, for all
of the statistical tests for comparing the percentiles, we use
a nonparametric double bootstrap method which is also based
on Monte Carlo simulation sampling; however, since statistical
techniques are out of the scope of this paper and for the sake
of conciseness, the details are not provided here. The reader is
referred to Spiegelman and Gates [26] for more information.
B. Deterministic vs. Stochastic Production Yield
The results presented in this section assess the impact
of supply uncertainty on the best production-sales policy.
Although the case of Xbox R
⃝ in 2001 (discussed earlier in
the paper) shows that such uncertainties matter, no theoretical
work has been done in this area. The research question to be
answered is whether the best policy can change if variation in
production yield is explicitly considered. In order to answer
this question, for each performance measure, we ﬁrst identify
the scenarios where the best number of build-up periods for
the deterministic case (v = 0) is different from the best policy
with production yield variation taken into account (v > 0).
Statistical tests are then performed to test the signiﬁcance
of these differences. For the resulting two candidate policies,
Welch’s t-test is used to test the difference in average NPV of
proﬁt while a double bootstrap method is used for comparing
the 25th and 75th percentiles of the proﬁt.
The number of cases (out of 3,888 parameter conﬁgura-
tions) where production yield variation has actually changed
the best number of build-up periods is provided in Table III.
For instance, when the 75th percentile of the proﬁt is used
as the primary performance measure, a 15% variation in the
production yield results the optimal decision to be different
from the deterministic case in 179 parameter conﬁgurations.
The results are inline with our expectation from empirical
ﬁndings that supply uncertainties affect the number of build-
up periods needed to build the required initial inventory.
Therefore, we have shown that variation in production yield
is an important factor that needs to be explicitly modeled
when evaluating production-sales policies. The results also
suggest that, in general, higher levels of production variation
is expected to increase the likelihood of making an incorrect
decision on the best number of build-up periods if ignored.
Given p, q, and v, Figure 3 shows the number of scenarios
(out of 432) where the best number of build-up periods is
different (statistically) from the deterministic case for at least
one of the three performance measures. As expected, for
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE III. NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT STATISTICAL DIFFERENCES FROM
THE DETERMINISTIC CASE
Performance Measure
Production Variation (v)
5%
10%
15%
Average NPV of proﬁt
64
53
79
25th percentile of proﬁt
83
88
101
75th percentile of proﬁt
75
108
179
Total
222
249
359
Figure 3. Number of statistical differences from the deterministic case.
all combinations of p and q, we see an increasing trend
in the number of changes in the best production-sales plan.
Furthermore, similar to the results of the previous section, due
to the complex supply-sales-demand inter-dependencies and
also the nonlinear effect of the coefﬁcient of imitation, we
expect the impact of production yield variation on the best
policy to vary for different levels of p and q.
C. Practical Implications
We have shown that production uncertainties affect the best
production-sales plan. Companies can easily overlook these
uncertainties and thus make a potentially incorrect decision
about the required level of initial inventory and time to market
the product. In this section, we present three main aspects of
our ﬁndings that can provide deeper insights for managers.
Change in the best number of build-up periods: The results
show that in the presence of production uncertainties, the
length of the build-up period can range from as much as 2
periods shorter to 3 periods longer than the deterministic case,
illustrating a signiﬁcant perspective difference from the case
where production variation is ignored (Figure 4). However, in
most cases, this difference is only one period. In the presence
of variation, if the company gets lucky (if they produce
more than the average production level in several consecutive
periods), it is possible that they can reach the targeted initial
inventory faster enabling the company to market the product
earlier. This will move the revenues closer to the present
time and reduce inventory costs resulting in higher proﬁts.
Therefore, when using the average NPV or the 75th percentile
of proﬁt, in most cases, ignoring production uncertainties
would yield to a policy where the length of the build-up period
is one period longer. On the other hand, in order to guarantee
that the initial inventory will be met by product launch, the
company will generally need longer periods of build-up to
reduce the loss of sales due to insufﬁcient supply which is why
TABLE IV. MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE OF DIFFERENCE FROM THE
DETERMINISTIC CASE (v = 0)
Risk Measure
Production Variation (v)
5%
10%
15%
Average NPV of proﬁt
0.22
0.35
0.53
25th percentile of proﬁt
0.30
0.54
0.94
75th percentile of proﬁt
0.39
0.78
1.03
for the case of the 25th percentile, if production uncertainty is
ignored, it is more likely that we incorrectly select a build-up
period that is one period shorter than the actual best value.
Magnitude of statistical differences: The magnitude of
difference from the deterministic case can be thought of as
the expected cost of making an incorrect decision by ignoring
production uncertainties. This cost is expected to increase
with higher levels of variation which also matches the results
presented in Table IV. Moreover, the results also indicate that
the 75th percentile is more sensitive to these variations than the
other two performance measures for all levels of v. Therefore,
when the probability of making higher proﬁts is the primary
risk factor, considering the uncertainties in the production
processes becomes even more important for companies.
Practical difference: The magnitude of difference discussed
above is also important when considering the concept of
meaningful practical difference (δ) deﬁned as the minimum
difference that is important to detect. Thus, a difference of less
than δ between the performance of two policies is considered
practically insigniﬁcant although a statistical difference is
detected. For example, if a difference of d is detected between
the performance of the best policies in the deterministic and
stochastic cases, the effect of production variability is practi-
cally insigniﬁcant if d < δ. The minimum practical difference
can also be used to determine the number of replications. When
comparing two different policies, a sufﬁciently large sample
will suggest a statistical difference at any level of signiﬁcance
since it enables us to detect even minute differences between
the two samples. Therefore, after running the model for an
initial number of replications, we can stop if a difference of
less than δ is detected suggesting that the two alternatives are
not practically different. Using the same approach, the number
of replications for our experiments was chosen to be 1,000
based on a set of pilot runs.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Through comprehensive experimentation using Monte
Carlo simulation, we investigate the effect of production uncer-
tainty on the best production and sales plan for new products
and show that the time to market can be affected by variations
in production yield. We also compare production-sales policies
with respect to measures of risk and show that the policy with
the maximum expected proﬁt does not necessarily minimize
risk. Finally, we discuss theoretical and practical implications
of the ﬁndings to provide deeper insights on supply-restricted
diffusion for both researchers and practitioners.
Myopic and build-up plans are heuristic policies that may
not necessarily lead to the optimal policy [14]. The impact
of supply uncertainties on the optimal production-sales plan
is currently under investigation by the authors. Moreover, the
only type of uncertainty considered here is production yield
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 4. Distribution of the change in the best number of build-up periods from the deterministic case.
variation. Different sources of uncertainties exist in a supply
chain making the study of the impact of other types of un-
certainties on diffusion dynamics an interesting area for future
research. Finally, studying the impact of other distributions
for variations in production yield on the ﬁndings of this paper
would be another interesting extension for future research.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Hauser, G. J. Tellis, and A. Grifﬁn, “Research on innovation: A review
and agenda for marketing science,” Marketing Science, vol. 25, no. 6,
2006, pp. 687–717.
[2]
A. Grifﬁn, “PDMA research on new product development practices:
Updating trends and benchmarking best practices,” Journal of Product
Innovation Management, vol. 14, no. 6, 1997, pp. 429–458.
[3]
V. Mahajan, E. Muller, and F. M. Bass, “New product diffusion
models in marketing: A review and directions for research,” Journal
of Marketing, vol. 54, no. 1, 1990, pp. 1–26.
[4]
“Sony to cut game workers in US,” Los Angeles Times, June 7, 2007.
[5]
“Shortage chips Apple net – supplier delays will hold results down,”
New York Post, September 21, 1999.
[6]
T. Higuchi and M. D. Troutt, “Dynamic simulation of the supply
chain for a short life cycle product–lessons from the Tamagotchi case,”
Computers & Operations Research, vol. 31, no. 7, 2004, pp. 1097–1114.
[7]
“Microsoft puts off introduction of Xbox game console in Japan,” New
York Times, August 27, 2001.
[8]
“Microsoft delays release of Xbox game system by a week,” New York
Times, September 22, 2001.
[9]
A. J. Clark and H. Scarf, “Optimal policies for a multi-echelon inventory
problem,” Management Science, vol. 6, no. 4, 1960, pp. 475–490.
[10]
F. M. Bass, “A new product growth for model consumer durables,”
Management Science, vol. 15, no. 5, 1969, pp. 215–227.
[11]
A. Negahban and L. Yilmaz, “Agent-based simulation applications in
marketing research: An integrated review,” Journal of Simulation, vol. 8,
2014, pp. 129–142.
[12]
M. Stevenson, L. C. Hendry, and B. G. Kingsman, “A review of
production planning and control: The applicability of key concepts
to the make-to-order industry,” International Journal of Production
Research, vol. 43, no. 5, 2005, pp. 869–898.
[13]
J. Mula, R. Poler, J. Garcia-Sabater, and F. Lario, “Models for pro-
duction planning under uncertainty: A review,” International Journal of
Production Economics, vol. 103, no. 1, 2006, pp. 271–285.
[14]
S. Kumar and J. M. Swaminathan, “Diffusion of innovations under
supply constraints,” Operations Research, vol. 51, no. 6, 2003, pp. 866–
879.
[15]
T.-H. Ho, S. Savin, and C. Terwiesch, “Managing demand and sales dy-
namics in new product diffusion under supply constraint,” Management
Science, vol. 48, no. 2, 2002, pp. 187–206.
[16]
Y. Xiaoming, P. Cao, M. Zhang, and K. Liu, “The optimal production
and sales policy for a new product with negative word-of-mouth,”
Journal of Industrial and Management Optimization, vol. 7, no. 1, 2011,
pp. 117–137.
[17]
M. Cantamessa and C. Valentini, “Planning and managing manufactur-
ing capacity when demand is subject to diffusion effects,” International
Journal of Production Economics, vol. 66, no. 3, 2000, pp. 227–240.
[18]
M. Amini and H. Li, “Supply chain conﬁguration for diffusion of new
products: An integrated optimization approach,” Omega, vol. 39, no. 3,
2011, pp. 313–322.
[19]
H. Li and M. Amini, “A hybrid optimisation approach to conﬁgure
a supply chain for new product diffusion: A case study of multiple-
sourcing strategy,” International Journal of Production Research, vol. 50,
no. 11, 2012, pp. 3152–3171.
[20]
M. Amini, T. Wakolbinger, M. Racer, and M. G. Nejad, “Alternative
supply chain production-sales policies for new product diffusion: An
agent-based modeling and simulation approach,” European Journal of
Operational Research, vol. 216, no. 2, 2012, pp. 301–311.
[21]
A.
Negahban,
L.
Yilmaz,
and
T.
Nall,
“Managing
produc-
tion level in new product diffusion: An agent-based simulation
approach,”
International
Journal
of
Production
Research,
2014,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2014.885663.
[22]
A. Negahban, “A hybrid simulation framework for the newsvendor
problem with advertising and viral marketing,” in Proceedings of the
2013 Winter Simulation Conference, R. Pasupathy, S.-H. Kim, A. Tolk,
R. Hill, and M. E. Kuhl, Eds.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Inc., 2013, pp. 1613–1624.
[23]
F. M. Bass, “Comments on “A new product growth for model consumer
durables”,” Management Science, vol. 50, no. 12, 2004, pp. 1833–1840.
[24]
B. L. Nelson, “The MORE plot: Displaying measures of risk & error
from simulation output,” in Proceedings of the 2008 Winter Simulation
Conference, S. Mason, R. Hill, L. Monch, O. Rose, T. Jefferson, and
J. Fowler, Eds.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.,
2008, pp. 413–416.
[25]
W. J. Conover, Practical Nonparametric Statistics, 3rd ed.
New York,
NY, USA: John Wiley Inc., 1980.
[26]
C. Spiegelman and T. J. Gates, “Post hoc quantile test for one-way
analysis of variance using a double bootstrap method,” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, vol.
1908, 2005, pp. 19–25.
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

