KNX-Based Home Automation Systems for Android Mobile Devices 
 
G. De Luca, P. Lillo, L. Mainetti, V. Mighali, L. Patrono, I. Sergi  
Dept. of Innovation Engineering 
University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy 
{luca.mainetti, vincenzo.mighali, luigi.patrono, ilaria.sergi}@unisalento.it 
 
Abstract—The adoption of smart environments is becoming 
more and more important in many applicative scenarios such 
as healthcare, asset management, environmental monitoring, 
and building automation. This last issue represents a very 
attractive use-case because of several scientific challenges that 
must be addressed in order to satisfy user requirements, which 
are mainly focused on the management of home’s comfort 
parameters. The main goal of this work is to develop and 
validate an architecture, both hardware and software, able to 
monitor and manage a Konnex-based home automation system 
through an Android mobile device in an efficient and safe way. 
In this perspective, an Android application is realized based on 
a specific Java library, called Calimero, that provides several 
methods 
for 
interaction 
with 
the 
Konnex 
implant. 
Furthermore, a software system able to configure the Android 
application consistently with the home automation implant is 
designed and implemented. The proposed architecture was 
tested from both functional and performance point of view and 
the obtained results prove that it provides high performance in 
comparison with other solutions already affirmed on the 
market. 
Keywords- KNX; Android; Smart Home; ETS; Test bed.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The ability to sense environmental parameters is 
becoming more and more important in many applicative 
scenarios. This trend aims to spread smart environments able 
to capture, in a pervasive way, all useful information from 
the real world, contributing to assert the Internet of Things 
(IoT) concept. It refers to the extension of the Internet to the 
world of concrete objects and places, which can 
communicate data about themselves and access aggregated 
information from other objects or places. In this way, the 
Human-to-Machine (H2M) paradigm  is increasingly moving 
toward the new Machine-to-Machine (M2M) paradigm, so 
leading to an improvement of several aspects in everyday 
life. In this context, cities management (Smart City), energy 
saving (Smart Energy), buildings and homes automation 
(Smart Building and Smart Home) are typical scenarios for 
the use of such technologies. Among these potential 
applications, home and building automation issues are 
particularly important, since they represent the link among 
the individual (city dweller, consumer) and abstraction layers 
allowing the adoption of the IoT paradigm.  
Smart Home & Building applications are wide and varied 
since there are many fields where they can be applied. In 
addition to well-established solutions, there are various 
projects in experimental stage, which mainly concern the 
energy consumption and security management, implant 
maintenance, and environment management. 
Another technological component, closely related to the 
automated home management, is represented by mobile 
devices. They are becoming more and more important in 
everyday life, since they are not only communication means, 
but also technological tools for controlling other devices. 
However, in the home automation field, the integration 
among the mobile world and home automation systems 
encounters several limits generally due to poorly user-
friendly application, the inability to remotely control the 
home automation system, and the low security level in the 
data exchange between mobile device and home automation 
system.  
Therefore, the aim of this work is to propose an 
automation system able to overcome these limits. The system 
allows the user to monitor and manage a home automation 
implant in a flexible, simple and safe way by providing a 
high level of abstraction of real devices. For this purpose, an 
architecture, able to combine the widespread Android 
Operating System (OS) and Konnex (KNX) standard [1], 
was designed and developed. The functional validation of the 
proposed architecture was carried out in collaboration with 
Gewiss S.p.A. company of Bergamo (Italy) [2], that is one of 
the most important vendors for building automation 
solutions. By exploiting this important industrial support, a 
real KNX system was configured in order to test the 
designed and implemented architecture. This functional 
validation showed that, through the proposed solution, it is 
possible to safely control each KNX device both locally and 
remotely and to monitor implant status anytime and 
anywhere thanks to the real-time feedbacks sent by the home 
automation system to Android device. The peculiar feature 
of the proposed application is that it can be downloaded from 
the Android market as “generic application”, that means 
without any customization. Then, after the installation of the 
KNX implant, it can be consistently customized for the 
specific home automation system by using the output file 
provided by the Engineering Tool Software (ETS) [3]. 
Finally, a performance validation was carried out to 
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed architecture. 
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the state 
of the art on KNX-based home automation systems and on 
techniques used for their management is summarized. In 
Section III, a technical overview of the main standards and 
software libraries used in this work is presented. In Section 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

IV, the proposed architecture is described and all its features 
are presented. The test environment used to validate the 
whole system is shown in Section V, whereas the functional 
and performance validation results are discussed in Section 
VI. Conclusions are drawn in Section VII.    
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In recent literature, the topic of smart environment is 
widely discussed, and particular attention is given to Home 
and Building Automation systems based on the KNX 
standard. This topic is addressed according to three main 
aspects: safety, congestion control, and energy saving in 
domestic implants. From the safety point of view, in [4], a 
technique to guarantee a secure data transmission for home 
and building automation networks is proposed and 
implemented in a KNX-based environment, which does not 
natively provide any security mechanism.  
The congestion problem is addressed in [5] and [6]. In 
KNXnet/Internet Protocol (IP) systems this problem is due to 
the presence of a particular device, called KNXnet/IP router, 
that allows the integration of different KNX networks 
through an IP network. Since the bandwidth of a KNX 
network is limited, if the KNXnet/IP router receives more 
messages than it is able to send, it can represent a bottleneck 
in routing these messages to the KNX devices. For this 
reason, in [6], authors recommend the adoption of efficient 
forwarding rules in the implementation of KNXnet/IP 
routers. 
The home energy consumption is a topic of interest for 
both researchers and consumers since it concerns the 
reduction of power consumption and the protection of the 
environment. In this context, in [7], a simulator of a 
household was developed and a strategy for the energy 
efficiency and user comfort based on neural networks was 
proposed and tested by using an experimental KNX-bus 
platform. 
Beyond the aspects previously described, it is important 
to note that smart environments based on KNX standard are 
designed to improve the quality of people's lives by the 
creation of new systems able to control comfort parameters. 
To achieve this goal, the integration among wired and 
wireless networks is increasingly used. In [8], for example, 
the comfort into an office building is ensured by designing a 
KNX-based system joined with Wireless Sensor Network 
(WSN) [9][10] components able to monitor and control the 
lighting, heating and air ventilation. The use of a WSN 
provides the system with information about environment 
conditions allowing a better control of comfort parameters, 
with minimum energy consumption [11]. 
Another example of integration between a wireless 
technology and a KNX system is reported in [12], in which a 
ZigBee network, well suited to home automation, is 
integrated with the wired home automation system. A 
KNX/ZigBee gateway is proposed as an interface between 
KNX and ZigBee networks. 
Finally, since the management of home automation 
systems is more and more entrusted to mobile devices, in 
[13], the design and implementation of an iPhone application 
that allows the integration of mobile devices in an existing 
KNX home automation system are presented. Similarly to 
this work, the Android market offers some applications, such 
as [14] and [15], which allow the management of a KNX-
based implant through an Android device. However, such 
applications suffer some drawbacks particularly due to poor 
usability and a poor abstraction of real devices.  
III. 
TECHNICAL OVERVIEW 
In this section, the main technologies used in the present 
work are briefly described. 
A. KNX 
KNX is the worldwide standard for home and building 
control; it exploits a software tool, called ETS, for planning 
and designing implant of KNX-certified devices and for 
implementing interactions among these devices. Compared 
to conventional electrical installations, a smart control and 
automation system has clear benefits since all the different 
subsystems are integrated into the building, optimizing 
performance and energy efficiency by using the KNX bus.  
The standard includes two different configuration modes 
for the home automation devices:  
• 
System Mode (S-Mode) for well-trained KNX 
installers that want to realize sophisticated building 
control functions; 
• 
Easy 
Mode 
(E-Mode), 
that 
provides limited 
functions compared to the S-Mode, and that it is 
intended for installers with basic KNX training. 
The KNX standard allows each manufacturer to select 
the most ideal configuration mode and to choose the right 
combination for the target market segment and application.  
B. Android Operating System 
Android is a mobile Operating System (OS) developed 
by Google. It is based on the open Linux kernel and it is 
open source, which means developers can modify and 
customize the OS for each phone. Therefore, different 
Android-based phones may have different Graphical User 
Interfaces (GUIs) even though they use the same OS. 
Android phones typically come with several built-in 
applications 
and 
also 
support 
third-party 
programs. 
Developers can create programs for Android (Apps) using 
the free Android Software Developer Kit (SDK). Android 
programs are written in Java and run through Google's 
"Davlik" virtual machine, which is optimized for mobile 
devices. Users can download Android applications from the 
online Android Market. 
C. Calimero 
Calimero [16] is a Java library that enables the access to 
KNX systems. It consists of a collection of Java Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs) fundamental for workstation-
based KNX/European Installation Bus (EIB) applications. 
Still, these APIs can be used independently and their ease of 
use enables client applications to communicate with KNX 
devices hiding network protocol details. The development of 
Calimero evolves constantly and when new features have to 
be included, the developers try to add them maintaining both 
ease of use and a compact footprint. Therefore, a 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

considerable reorganization effort was undertaken, leading to 
a redesign of the user API as well as internal architectural 
aspects. The new Calimero Next Generation (NG) API now 
supports additional connection protocols, management, 
property access, high-level convenience methods for 
common tasks, and more. 
IV. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
In Figure 1, the proposed system architecture is shown. 
The KNX system is equipped with a special device, called 
KNX/IP router, which links the KNX environment to the IP 
network in order to exchange KNX messages with remote 
devices. The KNX/IP router communicates through the 
KNXnet/IP protocol and includes, in addition to the 
tunneling function for the point-to-point connection, the line 
coupler function (i.e. routing), which allows the IP router to 
distribute and receive messages to other lines and areas. 
Since in the considered scenario there is only one home 
automation implant, the KNX/IP router is used in tunneling 
mode in order to exchange messages with Android 
smartphone across the IP network.  
As mentioned in the previous section, the communication 
between the Android application and the KNX system is 
enabled by the Calimero library, whereas the local Wi-Fi 
router features guarantee an adequate security level for the 
home automation system management. In fact, in addition to 
the local access guaranteed by the Wi-Fi access point, the 
end-user can remotely control the home automation system 
through the smartphone by using a Virtual Private Network 
(VPN) tunnel between mobile device and local router. Once 
this access occurred, whether local or remote, the end user 
can act on her/his home automation system devices (e.g., 
switch, dimmer, heating, air conditioning) and monitor the 
environment status at any time. Also a manual change on the 
home automation system is shown on the smartphone display 
in real-time.  
It is important to note that the application downloaded 
from the Android Market is a generic application: once 
downloaded and started, the application asks the user for a 
configuration file; this file is produced by a Java application, 
called “App Configurator”, used by the technician in order to 
configure the App in accordance with user requirements. 
Relevant information for this configuration can be 
automatically extracted from the output file exported by ETS 
or they can be manually entered. These interactions are 
summarized in Figure 2. The App Configurator helps the 
technician to set up the access parameters, build the screens, 
and place the control/monitoring components. 
V. 
TEST ENVIRONMENT 
The test environment used in the validation phase reflects 
a simple scenario of a two-floor home (Figure 3). The 
ground floor consists of a single room containing a light. The 
first floor consist of three rooms: a living room containing 
two lights and a thermostat; a bathroom containing a light 
(managed through a dimmer) and a rolling shutter; and a hall 
in which there are two controls that trigger two different 
home scenarios. In particular, these scenarios are: morning 
scenario (all lights are off and the rolling shutter is pulled up) 
and night scenario (all lights are on and the rolling shutter is 
lowered).  
In order to reproduce the described environment, a 
system consisting of the following KNX devices was 
realized: actuators and push button panels for lighting, a 
dimmer, a power supply and a KNX/IP router. In particular, 
all electric devices used in the test are compliant with KNX 
standard and made by Gewiss.  
Two different types of user access were emulated: a local 
Wi-Fi access, inside the home, and a 3G access for remote 
control. In particular, if the access to the KNX network is 
local, the wireless access point connected to the home router 
assigns a private address to the Android device by using its 
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) server, so 
that the mobile device can communicate with the KNX/IP 
 
Figure 1. Proposed system architecture. 
 
Figure 2. Android App configuration. 
 
Figure 3. Test environment. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

router. Instead, if the access is remote, a VPN tunnel is 
established between the smartphone and the home router. In 
this way, the smartphone becomes a local network device 
and it can communicate with the KNX/IP router as in the 
previous case. 
VI. 
FUNCTIONAL VALIDATION AND SYSTEM 
PERFORMANCE 
In the functional validation phase, the application was 
tested to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
architecture. 
In 
particular, 
each 
KNX 
device 
was 
successfully managed by using the Android application 
running on the smartphone. Furthermore, any status change 
manually carried out on the home automation system was 
displayed in the end-user interface. 
In parallel to this test, another type of validation was 
performed. Its purpose was to demonstrate the efficiency of 
the proposed solution from the point of view of smartphone 
resources usage. In particular, the application was deployed 
on two different types of smartphone (i.e., Samsung Galaxy 
SIII and Samsung Galaxy Nexus) and it was compared with 
the two other applications already mentioned in Section II. 
The comparison results, reported in Table I, demonstrate that 
the proposed Android App is not only perfectly comparable 
to the other two applications for both the memory usage and 
CPU peak load, but it also shows to have higher 
performance. In fact, during this performance validation, the 
competitor applications were tested by managing only one or 
two devices, whereas the devices managed by the proposed 
application were eight. Similar results were obtained with 
both smartphone models. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this work, the problem of the interaction between a 
KNX-based home automation system and an Android mobile 
device is afforded. More specifically, a complete hardware 
and software architecture has been designed, implemented 
and tested. The validation phase was carried out in laboratory 
by reproducing a real KNX home automation system. The 
proposed solution is able to guarantee an end-user secure 
access to monitor and manage the home automation system, 
both locally and remotely. The results obtained in both 
functional and performance validations are substantial. In 
fact, the proposed solution presents higher performance 
compared to other consolidated solutions.  
Ongoing and future works aim to extend the application 
to the use of iOS mobile devices and to carry out a 
performance validation by comparing an increasing number 
of heterogeneous mobile devices. Finally, a more stressful 
validation of the proposed solution in wider scenarios (e.g. 
building automation) will be carried out, in order to further 
appreciate its flexibility and scalability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank GEWISS SpA of Bergamo, ITALY, 
for their precious support. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] http://www.knx.org/. Retrieved: March, 2013. 
[2] http://www.gewiss.com/prv/it_IT.html. 
Retrieved: 
March, 
2013. 
[3] http://www.knx.org/knx-tools/ets4/description/. 
Retrieved: 
March, 2013. 
[4] S. Cavalieri, G. Cutulu, and M. Malgeri, “A Studt on Security 
Mechanism in KNX-based Home/Building Automation 
Networks,” IEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies and 
Factory Automation (ETFA), pp. 1-4, Sept. 2010. 
[5] G. Neugschwandtner and W. Kastner, “Congestion Control in 
Building Automation Networks: Considerations for KNX,” 
Industrial Electronics (IECON), Nov. 2009, 35th Annual 
Conference of IEEE, pp. 4149-4154. 
[6] S. Cavalieri, “Estimating KNXnet/IP Routing Congetion,” 
Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), Jun. 2011, pp. 
1200-1205. 
[7] P. Kordìk, M. Hasaj, M. Tvdý, and M. Šnorek, “Building 
Automation Simulator and Control Strategy for Intelligent 
and Energy Efficient Home,” 3rd UKSim European 
Symposium on Computer Modeling and Simulation (EMS), 
Nov. 2009, pp. 154-159. 
[8] C. Bujdei and S. A. Moraru, “Ensuring Comfort in Office 
Buildings: Design a KNX Monitoring and Control System,” 
7th International Conference on Intelligent Environments 
(IE), Jul. 2011, pp. 222-229. 
[9] L. Mainetti, L. Patrono, and A. Vilei, “Evolution of Wireless 
Sensor Networks Towards the Internet of Things: a Survey”, 
19th 
International 
Conference 
on Software, 
Telecommunications and Computer Networks (SoftCOM), 
Sept. 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[10] D. Alessandrelli, A. Azzarà, M. Petracca, C. Nastasi, and P. 
Pagano, “ScanTraffic: Smart Camera Network for Traffic 
Information Collection” Proc. European Conference on 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks, 
2012, 
pp. 
196-211, 
ISBN:9783642281686. 
[11] D. Alessandrelli et al., “Performance Evaluation of an 
Energy-Efficient MAC Scheduler by using a Test Bed 
Approach”, Journal of Communication Software and Systems, 
vol 9, no 1, 2013, pp. 84-96. 
[12] W. S. Lee and S. h. Homg, “Implementation of a KNX-
ZigBee Gateway for Home Automation”, 13th IEEE 
International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE), 
May 2009, pp. 545-549. 
[13] B. Bittins, J. Sieck, and M. Herzog “Supervision and 
Regulation of Home Automation Systems with Smartphones”, 
UKSim European Symposium on Computer Modeling and 
Simulation (EMS), Nov. 2010, pp. 444-448. 
[14] http://aycontrol.com/en. Retrieved: March, 2013.  
[15] https://sites.google.com/site/knxcontroller/. Retrieved: March, 
2013. 
[16] http://calimero.sourceforge.net/. Retrieved: March, 2013.
 
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE VALIDATION RESULTS 
 
ayControl 
KNXController 
Proposed 
solution 
Nr. devices 
2 
1 
8 
Memory 
usage 
49 MB 
41 MB 
31 MB 
CPU peak 
load 
~ 30mW 
~ 30mW 
~ 30mW 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

