Smart Interfaces at ESTIA, zer da hori?
Jean Esterle
ESTIA
Bidart, F-64210
Email: j.esterle@estia.fr
Abstract—Smart Interfaces at ESTIA, what is that (zer da hori
in the local basque language) ? Smart Interfaces for Engineering
is one of the topics of the iaria conference at Venice. This
notion emerged as a unifying research theme at the engineering
school ESTIA at the end of the year 2014, after several years of
common work between researchers in Sciences and Technology
and researchers in Management Sciences. There is a good ﬂow of
papers on various aspects of smart interfaces, but it is not easy
to ﬁnd in the literature a global approach to this notion. The
purpose of this paper is to contribute tio ﬁll this gap. In section
2 we give some historical background, going back to the Macy
Conferences and the Palo Alto group, to Levins equation and
Action Research, and to Edgar Morins approach to complexity. In
section 3 we analyze several recent thesis at ESTIA and show how
the notion of smart interfaces for engineering appears on topics
as different as, for example, ﬂight critical systems, isolated rural
microgrids and the Lean approaches in corporate management.
We hope that this survey will contribute to the stucturation of
Smart Interfaces for Engineering as a branch of modern research.
Index Terms—smart interfaces for engineering, complex sys-
tems, microgrids
I. INTRODUCTION
ESTIA-Recherche started as a research team in 2008, when
GRAPHOS (Groupe de Recherches Appliqu´ees Pluridisci-
plinaire sur l’Hˆopital et les Organisations de Sant´e) and LIPSI
(Laboratoire en Ing´enierie des Processus et des Services Indus-
triels) decided to merge in order to work together to develop
research activities in both Management Sciences and Sciences
and Technology, and at the crossroads of these domains.
Research at ESTIA is aimed at:
Giving ESTIA engineering students an opportunity to work
with established researchers who belong to both national and
international scientiﬁc networks.
Developing a synergy between research works and evolution
of academic programs.
Proposing innovative answers to technological, economic
and societal questions.
Raising awareness among students and companies about the
practice of research.
Contributing to the inﬂuence of ESTIA and to the attractiv-
ity of the territory.
The research project concerns engineering and technology;
hence complex systems, open and self-organizing, in which
there are also (and mainly) human beings, users, managers,
etc. The dynamics of ESTIA-Recherche follows from the
action of constraints, goals and objectives which may ap-
pear as contradictory: there is a need to obtain applications
while producing theoretical contributions, and to contribute to
transfert of technology while insuring academic valorization
of research results through publications in internationnally
recognized journals; also the researchers at ESTIA need to
develop scientiﬁc links with Bordeaux University, but they are
employed by ESTIA, a private entity linked to the Chamber of
Commerce and Industry of Bayonne-Pays Basque and their re-
search is partially supported from answers to calls for projects.
They have to combinate in investigations about corporate
management individual initiative and top-down approach, and
to provide a continuous ﬂow of electricity from intermittent
sources, etc.
Generally speaking, scientiﬁc activity at ESTIA consists in
studying interactions inside systems which are often complex.
Hence, researchers at ESTIA try to address simultaneously
the need for academic recognition and the need for concrete
beneﬁts for ﬁrms. This double need lies at the heart of
the research strategy of ESTIA. This explains why part of
the research, especially the part which involves Creativity,
Innovation and Management Sciences is performed through
Action-Research, as explained below.
ESTIA-Recherche relies on an interdisciplinary team of
researchers working on scientiﬁc, technological and societal
topics in order to adress transversal projects. Innovation re-
quires common work between specialists in sciences and
technologies, but also between specialists in sciences and
technologies and researchers in human sciences. Hybridation
of ideas, concepts, methods and scientiﬁc domains is there a
powerful fertilizer.
The prospective discussions within ESTIA-Recherche to
prepare the external evaluation performed in January 2015
by ANR (Agence Nationale de la Recherche) led to the
elaboration of the concept of Smart Interfaces for Engineering.
Before illustrating this concept through examples we will go
through a little amount of historical background.
II. SOME HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
A. Interaction: Macy Conferences and the Palo Alto group
The objective of Macy Conferences, organised from 1942 to
1953 (at Hotel Beekman, 575, Park Avenue, New-York, except
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

for the last one, organized at auberge Nassau, Princeton, New-
Jersey), was nothing less than building a general science of
the way thinking works. These conferences were organized
by a pluridisciplinary group of mathematicians, logicians,
anthropologists, psychologists and economists. A description
of these ten conferences can be found on Wikipedia [30].
There were two main participating groups, the ﬁrst wished
to establish an interaction between mathematics, physics and
well-established psychological sciences, and the second, a
group of ”cyberneticians”, including the famous mathemati-
cian Norbert Wiener, that wanted to ﬁght well-established
psychological sciences on behalf of mathematical and physical
sciences. The group also included John Von Neumann, another
prominent mathematician who played an important role at
the beginning of computer science. This cycle of conferences
played a seminal role in the emergence of Information Theory,
Cybernetics and Cognitive Science, and led one of the partic-
ipants, the anthropologist Gregory Bateson, to form a group,
known as the Palo Alto group. The object of this group was to
study the ”paradox of abstraction in communication”. We refer
to [35] for more information about this group, whose work led
to a deep change in the diagnostic of mental illness. Analyzing
a ”personnality” is impossible without taking into account the
complex network of interpersonal relationships. Schizophrenia
can be understood as a way for the patient to adapt to the
pathological structure of his relations with his family [9]. They
also thought that the best moment for a therapist to intervene
was during a crisis, when the patient would be ready to do
something to ﬁnd a new equilibrium, unlike the traditional
method of waiting for the patient to ”cool down”. Of course
ESTIA Recherche does not intend to perform mental therapy,
but the idea of taking into consideration the interactions of
a person or a system with external environment plays an
important role in the scientiﬁc approach developed at ESTIA.
B. B = f(P, E), Lewin’s equation and Action-Research
Action-Research did not arise all of a sudden from nowhere.
In the XIX-th century, Karl Marx encouraged workers in
industry to think about their living conditions by answer-
ing questionnaires (used as militant tools). This tradition
of ”inquiries” about peasant and/or worker situations and
movements was followed more recently by Robert Linhart
in his study of the struggle of workers in northeastern sugar
areas of Brasil [24]. Of course ESTIA, which was created
by the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Bayonne-
Pays Basque, does not have any revolutionnary goal in its
research objectives, but Lewin’s equation B = f(P, E)[23],
which states that the behavior B is a function f of the
person P and her or his environment E, describes heuristically
various aspects of Estia-Recherche investigations. Kurt Lewin
was a professor at Berlin University, specialized in Gelstat
psychology. At the beginning, he was mostly interested in
child psychology, and after moving to the United States he
played a crucial role in the development of Action-Research,
a research method where the researcher intervenes during the
research and in the research, in order to bring positive changes
and also to produce knowledge and theory. (He became very
inﬂuential, and the U.S. government asked him during World
War 2 to help dealing with food scarcity by helping customers
to learn how to use and cook cheap cuts of cattle, like heart,
tongue, tripe and kidneys). These ideas had been introduced by
the ”Chicago group,” which asked sociologists to rely on lead-
ers of communities under consideration (population of poor
neighborhoods, ethnic minorities, professional groups) in order
to elaborate knowledge which comes from the bottom and
goes back to the bottom. Thus, the academic researcher and
community leaders become ”co-researchers” who produce new
knowledge and act together in various domains. We refer to [8]
and [19] for modern developments of Action-Research. This
approach, which sometimes relies on a thorough investigation
of a single case, inspired a lot of the research performed at
ESTIA on innovation and on change in corporate management
and organization.
C. Complex systems and the principle of dialogy
The dialogy principle is a concept introduced by Edgar
Morin to understand complex systems. ”The dialogy principle
means that two or several different ”logics” are linked in a
single entity, in a complex way (complementary, concurrently
and antagonistically) without the duality getting lost in unity.
Hence the unity of european culture is not a judeo-christian-
greek-roman synthesis, it is the game not only complementary,
but also concurrent and antagonistic, between these cultures
which have their own logic: this is their dialogy” [28], p. 28.
” ”The number and depth of interactions increase when one
goes to the level of interactions, not only between particles, but
between organized systems, atoms, stars, molecules, and over
all living being, societies ..., and the diversity and complexity
of effects and transformations produced by these interactions
increases as well. Once the organisations that are the atoms and
the stars are in place, the rules of the game of interactions may
appear as Laws of Nature. Hence interaction is a hub between
disorder, order and organization. This means in turn that order,
disorder and organization are now tied, via interactions, in
a single interdependent loop, where none of them can be
conceived without refereeing to the others, and there they have
complex (dialogic) relations, that is to say complementary,
concurrent and antagonistic [27].
We refer, for example, to [3] for a survey of Edgar Morin’s
contributions to complexity theory. It is not necessary to
perform research at ESTIA to have read the six volumes of
La M´ethode, or to understand deeply the ﬁliation between the
principle of dialogy and the idea of dialectics (Heraclite, de
Cruse, Hegel, Marx), but the fact that ESTIA Recherche arose
from the union of research groups from Engineering Sciences
and Management Sciences which have been working together
since 2008 allows all these researchers to have a systemic
approach in their various research directions, and one could
say that the concept of Smart Interfaces for Industry comes
from a sucessful dialogy between these two groups.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

The module ”Transform´ees” for second year students, which
is taught at ESTIA by the author of the present paper,
culminates with the celebrated Shannon sampling theorem,
which reconstructs all the values of a square integrable func-
tion having a compactly supported Fourier transform from
the values it takes on the integers, [22] (th´eor`eme 9.5.1 p.
131). Claude Shannon was working as an engineer for Bell
Telephone company, and attended the 7th, 8th and 10th Macy
Conference, where he presented his Information Theory in
which signiﬁcation was deliberately not taken into account.
Reading Edgar Morin during the preparation of this paper,
I realized that the approach to noise which was presented
during some conferences on signal that I attended rather
recently were based on Shannon’s approach - where noise is a
form of disorder which should be eliminated from the signal,
while other appoaches could rely on ﬁnding some order in
the disorder related to the dialogy order/disorder. Of course
experts in signal theory are aware of this.
III. WORKING ON SMART INTERFACES FOR ENGINEERING
We now brieﬂy describe the eight theses completed at
ESTIA during the years 2015 and 2016. At ﬁrst glance the
topics look different:
Augmented Reality applied to conception, gestion and
maintenance of urban structures and furnitures; use of model
reduction algorithms to optimize placement of robotized ﬁbers,
reduced model of scavenging to optimize cylinder for a 2-
stroke diesel engine; design of an architecture for measurement
and diagnosis of physical parameters in critical airborne sys-
tems, algorithms and architectures for control and diagnosis
of ﬂight critical systems; study of a hybrid fuel cell/turbine
system in the context of an isolated rural microgrid; visual-
ization for an informed decision to design space exploration
by shopping, accompanying maturation of concepts in eco-
innovation, taking in account human factors to overcome the
limitations of the Lean approaches.
But, in all situations the researchers dealt with complex
systems, for which a smart approach is proposed:
Combining a monocular georeferenced tactile device with
a topography laser in order to diminish the edition and
interpretation errors of cartography of urban structures;
Using model reduction algorithms to reduce the number of
parameters in optimization of placement of robotized ﬁbers,
and introducing a cognitive dimension in reduced and sep-
arated meta-models of the scavenging by ports in 2-stroke
Diesel engines;
Relaxing tolerance to the defects of the processing chain of
signal obtained from the captor by improving the mathematical
model of the processing chain and introducing dynamical
models in measurement, diagnosis and control of ﬂight critical
systems;
Combining a fuel cell of type SOFC and a microturbine to
reach the best electrical performance with a low environment
impact for isolated rural microgrids;
Finding efﬁcient graphs for information visualization in
design space exploration according to the paradigm design
by shopping, supporting the maturation of eco-innovative
concepts to overcome the so-called collective ﬁxations during
the development of eco-innovations, deﬁning a performance
model supporting an actor vision of man at work to overcome
the limitations of the Lean approaches.
From these eight theses, which we now describe brieﬂy,
we see why the notion of Smart Interfaces for Engineering
emerged at ESTIA.
Environment of Augmented Reality for conception, ges-
tion and maintenance of urban structures and furnitures
is the topic of the University of Bordeaux thesis of Emeric
Baldisser in computer science, prepared at ESTIA (2013-
2016) under a CIFRE contract [18] with SIG-IMAGE, a
company located at Technopole Izarbel at Bidart [7]. This
work points out the relevance of Augmented Reality in order to
diminish the edition and interpretation errors in cartography of
structures. A prototype is proposed, evaluated and discussed.
It combines a monocular georeferenced tactile device with
a topography laser. It allows to draw and consult technical
plans on a 2D representation of the site in real-time. The
validity of this approach with respect to french reglementation
remains limited. Another approach is proposed, which consists
in ﬁtting/matching the clouds of dense points obtained from
topography scanners with the orthoscopic 2D representation
of the site. The interactions in the augmented environment
of the site then depend on its cloud of points. They are
geolocalized and follow the paradgim of Picking-Outlining-
Annotating. These interactions are described in [6].
Development of model reduction algorithms to opti-
mize the PFR process is the topic of the UTC (Universit´e
Technologique de Compi`egne) thesis of Nicolas Bur, prepared
at ESTIA (2012-2015) [15]. The realization by robotized
processes of composites parts intends to improve produc-
tivity. Nevertheless the ”Placement de Fibres Robotis´ees”
(PFR) is still at a stage of maturation and requires numerous
developments, in particular in the case of composites with
thermoplastic matrix or with dry ﬁbers. The thesis proposes
different tools in order to determine in advance the best heating
power to implement these composites. The difﬁculty arises
from the fact that this power depends on many parameters,
arising not only from the components (density, etc.) but also
from the process itself (moving speed, number and orientation
of the folds). The technique called Proper Generalized Decom-
position (PGD) has been used to construct a reduced multi-
parametric model and thus overcome the complexity of the
system. The results were compared to those obtained by more
conventional methods and also to experimental data, [14].
Reduced and separated meta-models of the scavenging
by ports in 2-stroke Diesel engines to use evolutionary
algorithms in search space is the topic of the thesis prepared
at ESTIA by St´ephanie Cagin [16], [17]. The use of numerical
methods to design a product became more and more common
over the past 30 years. However, numerical models are still
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

specialized and they do not run fast which makes their use
problematic. So, some reduced models of scavenging have
been developed. These models are analytical and generic; they
run quickly and avoid the numerical treatment problems. They
are also efﬁcient tools in the search of design solutions. The
work carried out has led to a new methodology based on a
behavioral meta-model called neuro-separated including a neu-
ronal model of state, a pseudo-dynamic neuronal model and a
model with separated variables. Then, exploiting the models
previously developed, a process of decision with evolutionary
algorithms (genetic algorithms) is used to determine optimal
designs and the fast behavioral simulation of the optimal
designs solutions is done, thanks to the kriging approach. This
design approach is multi-viewpoints, multi-criteria and multi-
physics. It also includes a cognitive dimension: both free and
controlled evolutionary explorations of solution spaces have
been done. To validate the method, some qualiﬁcation criteria
have been evaluated for each model. They allow to understand
and to assume the gap between the reduced models and the
initial CFD base (where the model are coming from). This
approach has led to the development of a tool of model and
decision aids using Python and Matlab software programs
Study of an hybrid system fuel cell/turbine in the context
of an isolated rural microgrid is the topic of the Bordeaux
University thesis of Sylvain Baudouin (2012-2015) [11]. Rural
areas, often located far away from the main electrical network,
are particularly suitable for deploying microgrids (MG), which
allow to use efﬁciently a large number of renewable energy
sources. Biogaz, obtained from methanation of agricultural
waste, is a renewable energy source available in rural areas
which is esay to store in large quantities, and more reliable and
less dependent from random phenomena than solar or wind
turbine energy.
A study of the state of the art leads to the conclusion
that an hybrid system combining a fuel cell of type SOFC
and a microturbine (MT) allows to reach the best electrical
performance with a low environmenral impact. A unique
multilevel converter of type SLNPC has been used to integrate
the microgrid to the main electrical network. The ﬁrst objective
of the command strategy applied to the SLNPC converter was
to regulate the power of the SOFC fuel cell to its nominal
value, and the second objective was to ﬁx the tension and
the frequency of the microgrid when it is disconnected from
the main electrical network. This system has been tested and
validated through simulation and then experimentally on the
EnerGea platform [21] of ESTIA.
Design of an architecture for measurement and diagnosis
of physical parameters in critical airborne systems is the
topic of the University of Bordeaux thesis of Romain Martin
(2012-2015) [26]. The objective of this work was to propose
a new architecture for measurement of physical parameters as
temperature, pression and speed in airborne systems in critical
situations. The goal for this architecture is to improve the
integrity of the measured data while keeping their level of
disponibility and ﬁability in highly critical airborne systems.
The solution consits in relaxing tolerance to the defects of
the processing chain of signal obtained from the captor. In
order to do this more functions are introduced, including the
mathematical model of the processing chain, to make the
system smarter. The thesis was supported by a CIFRE contract
[18] with the Thales company [34].
Algorithms and architectures for control and diagnosis
of ﬂight critical system is the topic of the Bordeaux thesis
prepared at the same time by Alexandre Bobrinskoy [12],[13].
Flight-Critical Systems such as Electromechanical Actuators
driven by Engine Control Units (ECU) or Flight Control Units
(FCU) are designed and developed regarding drastic safety
requirements. In this study, an actuator control and monitoring
ECU architecture based on analytic redundancy is proposed.
In case of fault occurrences, material redundancies in avionic
equipment allow certain critical systems to reconﬁgure or
to switch into a safe mode. However, material redundancies
increase aircraft equipment size, weight and power (SWaP).
Monitoring based on dynamical models is an interesting way
to further enhance safetyand availability without increasing the
number of redundant items. Model-base default detection and
isolation such as observers and parity space are recalled in
this study. The properties of differential ﬂatness for nonlinear
systems and endogenous feedback linearisation are used with
nonlinear diagnosis models. Linear and nonlinear observers
are then compared with an application on hybrid stepper motor
(HSM). A testing bench was specially designed to observe in
real-time the behaviour of the diagnosis models when faults
occur on the stator windings of a HSM. The thesis was also
supported by a CIFRE contract with the Thales company.
Information Vizualization for an informed decision to
design space exploration by shopping is the topic of the
Centrale-Supelec thesis prepared by Audrey Abi Akle at
ESTIA (2012-2015) [2]. In Design space exploration, the
resulting data, from simulation of large amount of new design
alternatives, can lead to information overload when one good
design solution must be chosen. The design space exploration
relates to a multi-criteria optimization method in design but
in manual mode, for which appropriate tools to support multi-
dimensional data visualization are employed. For the designer,
a three-phase process - discovery, optimization, selection - is
followed according to a paradigm called Design by Shopping.
Exploring the design space helps to gain insight into both
feasible and infeasible solutions subspaces, and into solutions
presenting good trade-offs. Designers learn during these graph-
ical data manipulations and the selection of an optimal solution
is based on a so-called informed decision. The objective of
this research is the performance of graphs for design space
exploration according to the three phases of the Design by
Shopping process.
The results reveal three efﬁcient graphs for the design space
exploration: the Scatter Plot Matrix for the discovery phase
and for informed decision-making, the Simple Scatter Plot for
the optimization phase and the Parallel Coordinate Plot for the
selection phase in a multi-attribute as well as multi-objective
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

situation. In consequence, ﬁve graphs, identiﬁed as potentially
efﬁcient, are tested through two experiments. In the ﬁrst,
thirty participants tested three graphs, in three design scenarios
where one car must be chosen out of a total of forty, for the
selection phase in a multi-attribute situation where preferences
are enounced. A response quality index is proposed to compute
the choice quality for each of the three given scenarios, the
optimal solutions being compared to the ones resulting from
the graphical manipulations. In the second experiment, forty-
two novice designers solved two design problems with three
graphs. In this case, the performance of graphs is tested for
informed decision-making and for the three phases of the
process in a multi-objective situation. Part of this work was
presented in [1].
How to support the maturation of eco-innovative con-
cepts?: proposition of the method MIRAS to overcome
collective lock-ins and explore stakeholder networks is the
topic of the thesis prepared at ESTIA by Marion Real [31],
[32], using a Research-Action approach inside the support
group APESA. During the development of eco-innovations,
companies are looking to implement a new activity that can
create ruptures with its existing practices and cause many
changes in their business model. In such complex situations,
the stakeholders of emerging projects have some difﬁculties
to consciously deviate from existing cognitive frameworks to
explore alternatives in line with the initial goals of the project.
Thus, they take trajectories that may lead to a dilution of the
environmental and social values or cause the abandonment
of projects. The work presented in the thesis focuses on the
maturation of eco-innovative concepts and seeks to develop
tools and methods to avoid and overcome such situations
called collective ﬁxations. The methodological approach is
structured in two steps:- The analysis of three case-studies
of eco-innovative projects allowed to characterize supporting
practices and deepen the knowledge on the collective ﬁxation
present during the maturation of concepts. This ﬁrst study has
fueled the design process of the MIRAS method, the main
contribution of this research. The MIRAS method offers a
toolkit designed for eco-innovation intermediaries in order to
help them to structure their intervention during the stage of
concept maturation. Speciﬁcally the tools help to improve
the sustainability potential of concepts, to analyze project
group behaviors during sessions and to revisit stakeholder
networks so as to anticipate future mutations and news ways
of incubation.
Taking into account the human factor to overcome
the limitations of the Lean approaches: proposal for a
performance model and an accompanying methodology is
the topic of the thesis prepared by Patrick Badets at ESTIA [4],
[5]. Lean is an approach aiming at eliminating non-value added
operations, used by companies to improve the performance of
their production activities. Companies applying this approach
are observing rapid gains in operational terms but gradually
some observe a fall in operating results or a degradation of
the health of work force. The objective of the thesis was to
overcome these limits and improve the ability of those of the
company to anticipate and to take corrective actions. The per-
formance model and the decision adopted by corporate actors
to deploy Lean was questioned. It is proposed that corporate
actors evaluate the efﬁciency of production, processed by the
Lean approaches, taking into account not only the operational
level of performance, but also the human dimension integrating
realwork activity. A performance model that supports a kind of
actor vision of man at work is deﬁned. To help corporate actors
to change their existing model of Lean performance, a support
methodology based on a reengineering approach integrating
coaching aimed at changing there presentations of the actors
by a sociocognitive learning is offered. This methodology is
based on modeling tools to represent the impact of this new
performance model on the decision and on the sustainability
of the lean beneﬁts.
IV. CONCLUSION
We hope that this survey will help the researchers in the
ﬁeld of Smart Interfaces to Industry to have a more global
vision of scientiﬁc activities in this direction and understand
how science and technology and management sciences can
help each other. We also hope that this paper will help
other scientists to discover this emerging subject, and, more
generally, to get interested in a systemic approach to complex
systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author, who has been the Research Director of ESTIA
from november 2007 to July 2015 and is still present at ESTIA,
would like to thank all the members of ESTIA-Recherche for
the warm and creative pluridisciplinary environment he has
been enjoying there during all these years. He also wishes to
thank Jean-Roch Guiresse, who was director of ESTIA until
March 2016, and the new director Patxi Elissalde, as well as
the ESTIA corporate fund for their constant support to research
activities. The intervention of Patxi Elissalde at the symposium
on Smart Interfaces held at ESTIA on November 18, 2016
gave an interesting synthesis about complex systems and the
societal, environnemental and economic, technological and
conceptual challenges that need to be adressed by researchers
at ESTIA working on Smart Interfaces for Engineering in
the following years [20]. The author also beneﬁted from
many conferences given at ESTIA, in particular from the
conference given before the opening of the 2012 edition of
”24h de l’Innovation” by Jeremy Rifkin, an internationnally
recognized expert in scientiﬁc and economic prospective [33],
who presented in October 2012 at ESTIA his convictions
concerning the challenges of globalisation, the emergency of
climate change and the impact of energy revolutions which
change the economic paradigm.
REFERENCES
[1] Audrey Abi Akle, St´ephanie Minel, and Bernard Yannou, Information
visualization for selection in Design by Shopping, Research in Engineer-
ing Design 28 1 (2017), 99-117.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

[2] Audrey Abi Akle, Visualisation d’information pour une d´ecision in-
form´ee en exploration d’espace de conception par shopping, th`ese, Ecole
Centrale Paris, 2015.
[3] Ali A¨ıt Abdelmalek, Edgar Morin, sociologue et th´eoricien de la
complexit´e, Soci´et´es 86 4 (2004), 99-117.
[4] Patrick Badets, V´eronique Pilni`ere, and Christophe Merlo, Kaizen en
contexte Lean : La sant´e des op´erateurs mise `a mal, Projectics/ Proyctica
/ Projectique, 13 1 (2015) 11-22.
[5] Patrick Badets, Prise en compte du facteur humain pour pallier les limites
d’une d´emarche Lean: proposition d’un mod`ele de performance et d’une
m´ethode d’accompagnement, th`ese, Universit´e de Bordeaux, 2016.
[6] Emeric Baldisser, Jean-Marc Cieutat, and Pascal Guitton, Apports de la
R´ealit´e Augment´ee `a la Gestion de R´eseaux et de Mobiliers Urbains,
8`emes journ´ees de l’Association Franc¸aise de R´ealit´e Virtuelle, Aug-
ment´ee, Mixte et d’Interaction 3D, Oct 2013, Laval, France.
[7] Emeric Baldisser, Environnement de r´ealit´e augment´ee pour la concep-
tion, la gestion et la maintenance d’ouvrages et de mobiliers urbains,
th`ese, Universit´e de Bordeaux, 2016.
[8] Ren´e Barbier, La Recherche-Action, collection Anthropos, 1996.
[9] Gregory Bateson, Don D. Jackson, Jay Haley and John Weakland,
Toward a theory of schizophrenia, Behavioral Science 1 4 (1956), 251-
254.
[10] Sylvain Baudoin, Ionel Vechiu, Haritza Camblong-Ruiz, Jean- Michel
Vinassa, and Linda Barelli, Sizing and control of a Solid Oxide Fuel
Cell/Gas microTurbine hybrid power system using a unique inverter for
rural microgrid integration, Applied Energy 176 (2016), 272-281.
[11] Sylvain
Baudoin,
Etude
d’un
syst`eme
hybride
pile
`a
combustible/microturbine dans un contexte micror´eseau rural isol´e,
th`ese, Universit´e de Bordeaux, 2015.
[12] Alexandre
Bobrinskoy,
Franck
Cazaurang,
Michel
Gatti,
Olivier
Gu´erineau, and Benoˆıt Bluteau, Model-based fault detection and iso-
lation design for ﬂight-critical actuators in a harsh environment, 31st
Digital Avionics Systems Conference (2012), Williamsburg, ´Etats-Unis.
[13] Alexandre Bobrinskoy, Algorithms and architectures for control and
diagnosis of ﬂight critical systems, th`ese, Universit´e de Bordeaux, 2015.
[14] Nicolas Bur, Pierre Joyot, Chady Ghnatios, Pierre Villon, Elas Cueto,
and Francisco Chinesta, On the use of model order reduction for
simulating automated ﬁbre placement processes, Advanced Modeling
and Simulation in Engineering Sciences, 3 1 (2016), 1-18.
[15] Nicolas Bur, D´eveloppement d’algorithmes de r´eduction de mod`eles
pour l’optimisation du proc´ed´e de Placement de Fibres Robotis´e, Th`ese,
Universit´e de Technologie de Compi`egne, 2015.
[16] St´ephanie Cagin, Xavier Fischer, Eric Delacourt, Nachida Bourabaa,
C´eline Morin, Daniel Coutellier, Bernard Carre, and Sylvain Loum´e, A
new reduced model of scavenging to optimize cylinder design, Simu-
lation Transactions of the Society for Modeling Design, 92 3 (2016),
507-520.
[17] St´ephanie Cagin, M´eta-mod`eles r´eduits et s´epar´es du comportement de
balayage d’un moteur Diesel 2-temps pour l’exploration ´evolutionnaire
des espaces de solutions, th`ese, Universit´e de Bordeaux, 2015.
[18] Conventions CIFRE cifre.anrt.asso.fr
[19] Linda Dickens, and Karen Watkins, Action research: rethinking Lewin,
Management Learning, 30 2 (1999), 127-140.
[20] Patxi Elissalde, oral communication, Workshop on Smart Interfaces, 11
november 2016, ESTIA, Bidart (France), in Rapport d’Activit Scien-
tiﬁque 2015-2016 de l’ESTIA, chap. 3, ESTIA, 2017.
[21] Plateforme Technologique EnerGea energea.estia.fr
[22] Jean Esterle, Transform´ees, cours ESTIA, 2017.
[23] Kurt Lewin, Principles of Topological Psychology, translated by Fritz
and Grace Heider, McGraw-Hill, New-York, 1936.
[24] Robert Linhart, Le Sucre et la Faim, Enquˆete dans les r´egions sucri`eres
du Nord-Est br´esilien, Editions de Minuit, 1981. (ISBN 978-2-7013-
0306-6)
[25] Romain Martin, Guillaume Terrasson, Renaud Briand, Michel Gatti,
and Olivier Gu´erineau, Process for Diagnosis Method Selection of
Flight Critical Systems, Proceedings of the Digital Avionics Systems
Conference- 31st DASC (2012), Williamsburg, ´Etats-Unis.
[26] Romain Martin, Design of an architecture for measurement and diagno-
sis of physical parameters in critical airborne systems, th`ese, Universit´e
de Bordeaux, 2015.
[27] Edgar Morin, La M´ethode: la Nature de la nature, Editions du Seuil,
Paris, 1977
[28] Edgar Morin, Penser l’Europe, Gallimard, Paris, 1987.
[29] Edgar Morin, Introduction `a la pens´ee complexe, Editions du Seuil,
Paris,1990.
[30] Wikipedia, Conf´erences Macy, 2017.
[31] Marion Real, Iban Lizarralde, J´er´emy Legardeur, Benjamin Tyl, and Do-
minique Millet, A cognitive approach to complement support practices
for the maturation of eco-innovations, Projectics / Proyctica Projectique,
14 1(2015), 23-39.
[32] Marion Real, Accompagner la maturation des concepts au sein de l’eco-
innovation: proposition de la m´ethode MIRAS, pour aider `a surmonter
les ﬁxations collectives et explorer les r´eseaux de parties prenantes,
th`ese, Universit´e de Bordeaux, 2015.
[33] Jeremy Rifkin, The third Industrial Revolution, Palgrave MacMillan,
2011, ISBN 978-0230341975
[34] Groupe Thales www.thalesgroup.com/fr
[35] Jean-Jacques Wittezaele, and Teresa Garcia, A la recherche de l’Ecole
de Palo-Alto, Seuil, Paris, 1992. (ISBN 2020136260)
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

