A Universally Designed and Accessible
Indoor Air Quality Monitoring and Warning System
Tamugri King Asa Musoro
OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan University
Oslo, Norway
e-mail: tamugri.mu@outlook.com
Raju Shrestha
OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan University
Oslo, Norway
e-mail: raju.shrestha@oslomet.no
Abstract – A Universal Design (UD) approach to develop
technology for combating health problems due to Indoor Air
Pollution (IAP) from burning solid fuels leads to better
accessibility and inclusivity. This concept guided the design
and implementation of the prototype designated as Universally
Designed and Accessible Indoor Air Quality Monitoring and
Warning System (UD-IAQMWS). The system is a network of
sensor-nodes that collaboratively check the Indoor Air Quality
(IAQ) and notify users by means of a three-color code,
auditory, visual and tactile notifications, of changes in the air
quality. The notifications are designed to serve visually and
hearing impaired for improved accessibility. Data from the
World Health Organization (WHO), Laboratory tests, field
interview data from potential users, and the use of personas in
system evaluation, address user disabilities to render the
system
inclusive.
The
integration
of
Human-Computer
Interaction (HCI), as well as a special feature (concept)
specifically designed to prevent child exposure to IAP for
increase accessibility, are a few innovative aspects of the
system.
Keywords - Universal Design; Accessibility; HCI; Solid fuel;
Indoor Air Quality; Indoor Air Pollution; Sensor Network;
UD-IAQMWS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Many
systems
have
been
invented,
designed
and
developed to combat Household Air Pollution (HAP), a
global health problem as declared in the WHO Factsheet
292, (updated May 2018). This Factsheet shows a high
mortality and morbidity rate of about 3.8 million annual
deaths due to HAP [1][2]. Good Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) is
essential for households dependent on solid fuels for
sustenance. However, some smoke detectors and fire alarms
are audible but not visual, hence not very practical for
hearing impaired users [5]. How then does a smoke detector
address the needs of a blind or deaf person? Could there be a
better way to design such a system so that it is accessible to
users with disabilities or impairments?
Indoor Air Pollution (IAP) as a result of cooking with
solid fuels accounts for most health-related issues, of which
respiratory diseases are responsible for the high worldwide
morbidity
and
mortality.
Many
WHO
studies
and
publications confirm indoor air pollution as one of the major
contributors to the causes of pneumonia, bronchitis and
other chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases worldwide [1].
Also, from Figure 1, it can be observed that the pneumonia
rate is rather high in children with increased exposure to
carbon monoxide. That is, hypoxemic cases rise to about 25
and above for levels higher than 3 ppms, and more than 50
children are affected, for CO levels exceeding 3 ppms.
Figure 1. Physician-diagnosed pneumonia due to Carbon Monoxide (CO)
exposure [2].
Any solution proposed as a means of solving or
preventing some of these health problems must be without
impediments. Otherwise, these would have to be studied,
understood
and
overcome.
Perhaps
through
research,
development,
and
innovation,
a
proper
technological
solution can be found. This would lead to designing a
system that monitors IAQ in homes using solid fuels for
cooking or heating as a preventive measure to any resulting
health hazards.
The Universally Designed and Accessible Indoor Air
Quality Monitoring and Warning System (UD-IAQMWS)
we propose is a universally designed IAQ sensor warning
system integrating sensor network and Human-Computer
Interaction (HCI) that offers a more accessible innovative
approach to detect pollutants. A network of sensor-nodes
checks IAQ and provides visual, auditory and tactile warning
signals to any user or users exposed to IAP or HAP [2][4].
The system is mainly composed of the hardware unit and the
mobile app that enables the system to connect to a
smartphone via Bluetooth. The power and the potential of
the mobile platform are harnessed for accessibility and
inclusivity. The concept of UD-IAQMWS came as a
research and development project partly sponsored by the
Mozambique-Norway Accessibility Partnership (MAP) that
was carried out in Mozambique. This paper presents a
simplistic view into an otherwise complex project, with the
hope of reaching the widest possible audience.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-767-2
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

The goal of the project is to research, design and develop
an IAQ sensor and warning system for homes using solid
fuels as the main energy source. Its deployment where the
risk for harmful emission could be hazardous to human
health must provide an effective preventive solution. The
system could hence be described as a Sense-Detect-Warn
system,
easy
to
use
and
maintain.
The
design
and
development are in accordance with the Universal Design
(UD) principles. UD is defined as the design of products and
environments to be usable by all people, to the greatest
extent
possible,
without
the
need
for
adaptation
or
specialized design [3]. The system also encompasses
accessibility, inclusivity and the integration of a sensor
network with HCI [4].
Through
research,
experiments,
measurements,
and
testing, pollutant properties and the threshold for detection
were determined. Built to specification, the system must be
able to detect the pollutants given their characteristics. For
example, an odorless and colorless gas, such as CO, is a
dangerous gas to breathe in. It is about the same density as
air,
it
is
emitted
from
burning
solid
fuels
and,
if
concentrated
at
12.5%
to
74.5%,
it
would
explode.
However, at concentrations of about 75%, it will burn in the
air if ignited and can thus be used as fuel [5]. To detect CO,
a standard sensor must be used to calibrate the sensor
intended for use to keep all detection levels and thresholds
on a par.
After the introduction section, Section II discusses
related works. The research methodology is described in
Section III. Section IV presents the design and development
process. Section V describes user testing. Section VI
presents the results and the results are evaluated and
discussed in Section VII. Finally, Section VIII concludes the
paper.
II.
RELATED WORKS
IAP has been a serious problem ever since human beings
started cooking inside their homes instead of out in the
open,
and
it
has
health
as
well
as
economic
and
environmental impact.
A.
Health effects
Research by the WHO shows severe health outcomes
due to emissions from indoor cooking. WHO states on its
website in Factsheet number 313, updated September 2016,
the following summarized points [6]. In 2014, 92% of the
world population was living in places where the WHO air
quality guidelines levels were not met [6][7]. Three billion
people are also at risk due to exposure to indoor pollution
from using biomass and coal [7][8].
In poorer communities, the way of life requires men to
be out fending for their families. Therefore, women and
children who spend more time home, especially in the
kitchen, cooking, are the most affected by HAP [9]. For
example, the 95,000 Nigerian annual deaths related to
cooking with solid fuels, include children below 5 years.
The Nigeria Demographic and Health Surveys (NDHS)
2003-2013 study also indicates an about 0.8%, 42.9%, and
36.3%
of
neonatal,
post-neonatal,
and
child
deaths
respectively [10].
B. Economic and environmental impact
Energy potential decreases with poverty, therefore,
reliance on solid fuels often leads to the environmental
quagmire of deforestation. A 2011 World Bank project
reports
health
and
environmental
benefits
from
the
promotion and use of cooking stoves. Improvements in the
efficiency of the stove would greatly reduce emissions, such
as carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO2) [9].
The impact of burning biomass is often stated as a global
environmental problem that affects poorer countries and
hence poor people [2]. In the United Kingdom, solid fuel
emissions
were
24.7
µg/m3/ppm
relative
to
CO
for
Manchester [11]. In 2000, household use of coal and
biomass in India and China produced 86% of their
combined Black Carbon (BC) emissions [12].
C. Available solutions
Conventional, technological and innovative solutions are
the different approaches to limiting HAP, reducing health
hazards and improving IAQ. Conventional solutions involve
taking preventive measures without the use of any advanced
technology to stop emissions from the source. Essentially,
indoor pollution is tackled by rudimentary means and
improvisation.
Studies show that applying WHO guidelines for source
control significantly reduces risks in the health outcomes for
children and adults by 20 to 50 percent [13]. According to
the United States Environmental Protection (EPA), the basic
techniques (conventional solutions) for an improved IAQ
must involve source control, improved ventilation and air
cleaners. Also, homes must be designed to include external
and
or
well-ventilated
kitchens
[14].
In
summary,
controlling the source of indoor pollution is like closing the
tap, thereby stopping the flow [14][15].
Technology and innovation centered sense-and-detect
systems are arguably the most effective solutions for
combating HAP. Detection of indoor pollutants is a
preventive measure and detection devices include smoke
detectors, such as the one developed by Loepfe et al. [16],
which detects the presence of smoke from two spectrally
different scattered light measurements using the principle of
diffraction.
Yang’s Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) harness a
cluster of autonomous nodes that are commanded to
wirelessly communicate with the controlling infrastructure
whose environmental condition is being monitored [17].
Jung and Kim [18] collaboratively developed a system that
incorporates a sensor network into an air conditioning and
ventilation system to monitor and maintain healthy levels of
IAQ. The system sounds an alarm when the measured
concentrations of pollutants, such as CO and CO2, exceed
healthy levels.
Of the many commercially available systems developed
to deal with HAP, most are designed for detection and
warning. These systems vary in design, size, type, and
technology from the simplest to the most sophisticated.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-767-2
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

However, despite innovation and advances in technology,
these detection systems have the following limitations in
common:
 Chirping: It is common for most smoke detectors to
produce a chirping noise when the battery power is low or
runs out. Many users would remove the battery when
chirping noise becomes a nuisance. Due to human
negligence, users may fail to replace the batteries thereby
exposing the entire household to the effects of pollution
and its consequences.
 Loud Alarms: Many home smoke detectors have loud
noisy alarms or sirens that may be a nuisance to users.
Some impatient users who cannot bear the noise would
then disconnect the device thereby risking their health and
possibly death from pollution.
 Limited notification modality: Most devices or systems
offer mostly auditory notification in the form of an alarm,
typically in the form of a loud alarm and a blinking light.
 Single sensor: Most of the systems use a single sensor,
whose sensitivity largely depends on sensor positioning.
If the sensor is too far from the source, detection could
occur when pollution levels are already too high. On the
other hand, false alarms might also be frequent if it is
placed
too
close to a heated
or steaming source.
Therefore, the sensitivity of such systems would largely
depend on the position of the sensor.
 Lack of UD: To our knowledge, none of the existing
systems took into account the UD and accessibility
aspects. One system described as a Tactile and Visual
Smoke Detector System, as per patent [26], is among a
few existing accessible systems. It is a multi-feedback fire
alarm that includes one or more wearable (bracelet-style)
signal detection and notification devices. Users are
notified even when not in proximity of the detection unit.
The wearable delivers different lighting and vibration
patterns and alarm signals depending on the risk of
pollution and informs hearing-impaired users of the threat
type. However, the audible notification is not a voice
notification but an alarm sound signal of sorts.
III.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The research method most suitable for carrying out this
research project would be a mixed method. It combines both
quantitative and qualitative data to achieve a design that
meets the objectives of the project. Wisdom and Creswell
[19]
from
George
Washington
and
Nebraska-Lincoln
Universities, respectively, in their paper titled, “Mixed
methods:
Integrating
quantitative
and
qualitative
data
collection and analysis”, have defined mixed research
method as an emergent methodology of research that
advances
the
systematic
integration,
or
“mixing,”
of
quantitative
and
qualitative
data
within
a
single
investigation or sustained program of inquiry.
Information, data, and guidelines from WHO led the
project’s development. As shown in Figure 2, quantitative
and qualitative data from WHO is complemented by the
data from laboratory experiments and measurements, as
well as from test and qualitative data from user interviews to
accomplish the goals of the project. This methodology
assures an interlock of qualitative and quantitative data to
achieve an almost flawless convergence to the objectives of
the study and, hence, the project [19].
IV.
SYSTEM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
The system consists of two main blocks (the Hardware
Unit and the Mobile Application) and their sub-systems.
Figure 3 shows the two main blocks, the air quality sensor
and how they connect.
Figure 3. A block diagram of the main system units.
Simplicity,
flexibility,
portability,
and
accessibility
guided the development throughout the design process. The
hardware, software and mobile app are all built on open-
source platforms. The design process considers the most
essential features that would render the system inclusive to
address the needs of users with disabilities or impairments
[6].
A. Hardware
The hardware unit is essentially a sensor-node designed
in the KiCad Electronic Design Automation (EDA) Suite [8].
The node integrates a Grove-air quality sensor v1.3,
responsive to carbon monoxide (CO), alcohol, carbon
dioxide (CO2), and Particulate Matters (PM), such as smoke,
liquified petroleum gases and other volatile substances [2].
The node also has an ATmega328 powered microcontroller,
a Radio Frequency (RF) and Bluetooth transceivers. All
components are fused into one Printed Circuit Board (PCB)
unit compatible with the Arduino Integrated Development
Environment (IDE). There, sketches (small C-language
programs written in Arduino IDE) are compiled and
uploaded to run the hardware or sensor-node [9]. Figure 4
shows a complete sensor-node.
Figure 2. Applied mixed research method and data collection mechanism.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-767-2
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

B. Software
The software combines an Arduino sketch and a mobile
app developed in MIT App Inventor 2, which is a drag-and-
drop, block-based visual programming language for creating
Android devices mobile apps [7].
Figure 4. Complete Sensor-Node; open and encased unit.
C. Concept and system functionality
The concept is built around an IAQ monitoring and
multiple forms of user notification of the IAQ-status.
Suppose the IAQ status in a room changed, say due to
cooking with wood, with the system installed, one or more
sensors on the sensor-nodes might pick up emissions. When
this happens, the sensor-node determines if the IAQ is good,
poor or bad by processing the sensor data pollutant level. A
good IAQ level sets a 3-in-1 Light-Emitting Diode (tri-LED)
to Green. However, if the IAQ is poor, the tri-LED changes
to Yellow and sounds the alarm. On the other hand, if the
IAQ is bad, the tri-LED will be Red.
Figure 5 shows a mother and a child in the kitchen
cooking with a wood stove, close to the right-hand corner of
the room. The child is holding a toy in which a sensor-node
has been embedded. Node 2 is designed to be wearable;
Node 3 is mounted on the wall and is linked to a mobile
smartphone via Bluetooth. All three nodes plus the toy are
connected in an RF network with each other.
Figure 5. A pictorial diagram illustrating the UD-IAQMWS concept.
The IAQ status is displayed and audio notifications are
made in the smartphone. Poor IAQ status will cause the toy
to stop working. Consequently, the child will most probably
complain to the mother and she would take the child out of
the kitchen, open the windows or ensure proper ventilation of
the room [7][10][13]. If the mother’s actions improve the
IAQ status back to ‘Good’, the child’s toy would start to
work again. With time, parental guidance, education or basic
infant instinct, the child learns to avoid areas with poor IAQ,
thereby staying healthy. Depending on the sensor readings,
the phone will also display the Green or Yellow or Red
emojis (as can be seen in Figure 6) on the screen, with text,
and audio-voice message that would say “Code-Green,
Good” if the IAQ was good or “Code-Yellow, Poor” if the
IAQ was poor and “Code-Red, Bad” if the IAQ was bad.
Except for the “Good IAQ”, each node will sound alarms
different in tone and frequency depending on whether the
IAQ status was poor or bad. Note that every user action on
the app is complemented by voice feedback describing the
action.
Figure 6. Network communication, system function, and notification.
V.
USER TESTING
User testing was done in 2 phases. First, measurements
were taken in the kitchen while the participant was cooking.
They could operate the system (mobile App) by themselves
or observe. Afterwards, an interview session in which
participants had to answer 12 questions in about 30 minutes
was scheduled according to mutual consent. There were 6
interviewees, 4 males, and 2 females. Each participant was
given a unique identification number or ID. For example,
#111-F corresponds to participant 1, household 1, interview
position 1, and gender female [20].
Participant #111-F did not know much about technology
but liked that the system could potentially keep people safe.
Both #534-F and #333-M thought it would have been better
if they were about to test a commercial sample. However,
all participants agree they would buy the system at a
reasonable price and all of them said they had an overall
positive opinion about the system. Also, participant #222-F
suggested that the final product should include a smartphone
in the package and #535-M liked the multiple warning
levels and the different notifications associated with the
IAQ-status at each level.
VI.
RESULTS
The results from the laboratory experiments show that the
system can detect and respond to alcohol, CO, CO2, smoke,
as well as Liquified Petroleum Gas (LPG). Table I shows
their detectability along with the sensor’s calibration status.
The system’s sensor is calibrated such that the threshold for
CO detection keeps the user well within the exposure levels
proposed
by
the
WHO
guidelines,
which
provide
a
comprehensive, scientific and ethical standard for measures
taken to curb pollution and ensure a healthy environment.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-767-2
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

The carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) levels resulting from
the reaction of CO with the Hemoglobin (Hb) in the blood
must not exceed 2% of the blood hemoglobin for a typical
indoor situation. 100 mg/m3 for 15 minutes and 35 mg/m3
for an hour are recommended for exposures occurring no
more than once a day [21]. For 24 hours of exposure, 7
mg/m3 is recommended for a no-exercise daily routine.
Exposure patterns vary with age, socio-economic status,
type of home, and duration of exposure. Pollution levels that
reach 50 times the WHO guidelines for clean air confirm the
health outcome risk for women and children who typically
spend more time inside the home than men [7][22].
TABLE I. RESULTS FROM LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS.
Test element
Detection
Status
Alcohol
CO
CO2
Smoke
LPG
Possible
,,
,,
,,
,,
Uncalibrated
Calibrated
Uncalibrated
,,
,,
The system is by design sensitive to the risk levels; thus,
detections and warnings are issued to the users, based on a
series of leveled thresholds, starting from IAQ status Good
through Poor, to Bad with increasing pollutant levels and
risk.
VII.
EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
Of all the interviewees, five said the Mobile App was
simple and easy to use (one touch to connect, one-touch
‘ON’, one-touch ‘OFF’). It works as long as the Bluetooth
connection is active or even when the phone’s screen is
locked. Anyone with a basic mobile phone knowledge could
use the app intuitively with ease. Although the evaluation of
health outcomes was not the focus of the project, the
interviewees were still asked if they had experienced any
health problems that might have resulted from the use of
solid fuels. All 6 initially answered they had not. However,
participant #333-M specifically stated that he had migraines.
A follow-up question was asked to ascertain how the
respondent could be so sure. He then responded he
experienced that only when he was using charcoal for
cooking, implying the migraines could only have resulted
from the use of charcoal.
The challenges encountered during the research were due
to low statistical samples for testing, lack of participants
qualified for the indoor (not outdoor) context of testing,
language barrier and lack of participants for accessibility
and inclusivity evaluation, which led to the use of personas.
Persona characters, such as Karol–deaf and Xendu–blind,
were correspondingly served by the tactile, auditory, and
visual notifications on the smartphone [23]. Ngong–motor-
impaired could still use the app since no complex gestures
were required. Persona characteristics that bare a direct
relation to requirements defined by the project, ensure that
the context is preserved [24].
Distinguishing between systems designed to carry out
similar tasks, such as detection of pollutants or monitoring
of IAQ on the bases of technology and innovation is not an
easy task. Systems that employ the same technology might
differ in concept, design and implementation but not
necessarily in principle. These coupled with the speed of
development
of the
Information
and
Communications
Technology (ICT) field diminish the ease of developing a
novelty. However, when fully developed, the prototype UD-
IAQMWS will stand apart from the other systems due to the
following attributes:
 Accessibility/HCI: The system is built for all persons,
whether impaired or unimpaired. A special system further
utilizes HCI to address child exposure.
 Multimodal
notification:
The
system
offers
visual,
auditory and tactile (distinctive mobile vibrations that
notify the visually and hearing impaired) notifications on
a mobile device.
 Multiple sensors: A network of many sensor-nodes offers
possibilities for multiple sensor connection system. Thus,
different
kinds
of
pollutants
can
be
detected
simultaneously
or
contrastingly
(by
comparing
the
oxygen-to-pollutant ratio in a target area) if an oxygen
sensor was also used in the network.
 Interconnecting
systems:
Neighboring
systems
can
communicated
by
configuring
them
properly.
Such
information exchange between the systems enables an
assistance to an impaired neighbor (who could be a family
member).
 Hardware flexibility: The hardware can operate as a
standalone system or in a network with other sensor-
nodes. The user can also choose whether to connect a
mobile phone or not. Each node has an inbuilt charging
circuit and can charge its batteries via USB or solar panel.
 Open technology: Both hardware and software are built
for simplicity and on open-source platforms. The user can
change the sensors by simply plugging in another
compatible sensor. However, such changes might require
slight modifications in Arduino with either serial or
Universal Asynchronous Receiver-Transmitter (UART)
protocol.
 Wireless connectivity: The system connects and sends
user notifications to a mobile device via Bluetooth. IAQ
status and values are also sent and displayed on the phone
screen.
 Compliance with UD principles: The system complies
with at least the first five UD principles [25], therefore, is
accessible to a wide range of users, more than traditional
smoke detectors or similar systems ever could provide.
There were some limitations in the study due to language
barriers, low number of participants, limited time, and
resources.
However,
we
think
that
the
design
and
implementation of the prototype presented in this study can
be considered as a novel start.
As it is still under
development, we believe that further study can be done with
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-767-2
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

more participants and hope that the system will reach its full
potential in the near future.
It should be noted that the system was designed and
tested only on Android systems. However, it could easily be
ported in other platforms such as iOS and Windows.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a universally designed and
accessible Indoor Air Quality Monitoring and Warning
System (UD-IAQMWS). The system can detect several
pollutants, such as alcohol, carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, smoke and liquified petroleum gas. IAQ status
notifications are provided audibly, visually, and through
tactile vibrations. The displayed status can be made
accessible to the users with vision problems using a screen
reader. Moreover, the system is customizable to fit any
user’s needs by simply updating the software. The mobile
app’s simplicity cannot be overemphasized: only 2 buttons
are required to operate and there are no complex gestures
needed. Any mobile user, including people with disabilities,
can use the system with ease; no special training is required.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Mozambique-
Norway Accessibility Partnership (MAP) project and the
people involved for their support and help in carrying out
this research project.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. F. Akunne, V. R. Louis, M. Sanon, and R. Sauerborn,
“Biomass solid fuel and acute respiratory infections: the
ventilation factor,” International journal of hygiene and
environmental health, vol. 209, no. 5, pp. 445-450, 2006.
[2]
K. R. Smith et al., "Millions dead: how do we know and what
does it mean? Methods used in the comparative risk
assessment of household air pollution," Annual review of
public health, vol. 35, pp. 185-206, 2014.
[3]
E. Steinfeld and J. Maisel, Universal design: Creating
inclusive environments: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[4]
R. Imrie, “Universalism, universal design and equitable
access
to
the
built
environment,”
Disability
and
Rehabilitation, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 873-882, 2012.
[5]
J. Yang, J. Zhou, Z. Lv, W. Wei, and H. Song, “A real-time
monitoring system of industry carbon monoxide based on
wireless sensor networks,” Sensors, vol. 15, no. 11, pp.
29535-29546, 2015.
[6]
WHO, "Air quality and health: Fact Sheet No. 313." WHO.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/.
[Last
access: Jan. 2020]
[7]
WHO, Guidelines for Indoor Air Quality: Household Fuel
Combustion, WHO, 2015.
[8]
WHO, "Air quality and health. Fact Sheet No. 292." WHO.
https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
household-air-pollution-and-health. [Last access: Jan. 2020]
[9]
W. J. Martin, R. I. Glass, J. M. Balbus, and F. S. Collins, “A
major environmental cause of death,” Science, vol. 334, no.
6053, pp. 180-181, 2011.
[10] O. K. Ezeh, K. E. Agho, M. J. Dibley, J. J. Hall, and A. N.
Page, “The effect of solid fuel use on childhood mortality in
Nigeria: evidence from the 2013 cross-sectional household
survey,” Environmental Health, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 113, 2014.
[11] J. Allan et al., “Contributions from transport, solid fuel
burning and cooking to primary organic aerosols in two UK
cities,” Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 647-668, 2010.
[12] Z. A. Chafe et al., “Household cooking with solid fuels
contributes to ambient PM2. 5 air pollution and the burden of
disease,” Environmental health perspectives, vol. 122, no. 12,
pp. 1314, 2014.
[13] N. Bruce et al., “WHO indoor air quality guidelines on
household fuel combustion: Strategy implications of new
evidence on interventions and exposure–risk functions,”
Atmospheric Environment, vol. 106, pp. 451-457, 2015.
[14] US EPA, "Improving Indoor Air Quality." United States
Environmental
Protection
Agency.
https://www.epa.gov/
indoor-air-quality-iaq/improving-indoor-air-quality.
[Last
access: Jan. 2020]
[15] US EPA, "Indoor Air Quality (IAQ): Improving Indoor Air
Quality." United States Environmental Protection Agency.
https://www.epa.gov/indoor-air-quality-iaq/improving-indoor-
air-quality. [Last access: Jan. 2020]
[16] M. Loepfe, K. Mueller, G. A. Tenchio, and W. Vollenweider,
"Smoke detection by way of two spectrally different scattered
light measurements," Google Patents, 2011.
[17] S. Yang, Wireless Sensor Networks_ Principles, Design and
Applications
(Signals
and
Communication
Technology).
London: Springer, 2014, pp. 1-6.
[18] J. J. Kim, S. K. Jung, and J. T. Kim, “Wireless Monitoring of
Indoor Air Quality by a Sensor Network,” Indoor and Built
Environment, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 145-150, 2010.
[19] J. Wisdom and J. W. Creswell, “Mixed methods: integrating
quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis while
studying patient-centered medical home models,” Rockville:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2013.
[20] S. A. Jacob and S. P. Furgerson, “Writing interview protocols
and conducting interviews: Tips for students new to the field
of qualitative research,” The Qualitative Report, vol. 17, no.
42, pp. 1-10, 2012.
[21] WHO,
"Household
air
pollution
and
health."
http://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/household-
air-pollution-and-health. [Last access: Jan. 2020].
[22] S. C. Anenberg et al., "Cleaner cooking solutions to achieve
health, climate, and economic cobenefits," ACS Publications,
2013.
[23] T. Adlin and J. Pruitt, The Essential Persona Lifecycle: Your
Guide to Building and Using Personas, pp. 57-58: Elsevier
Science, 2010.
[24] S. Marsh, User Research: A Practical Guide to Designing
Better Products and Services: Kogan Page, 2018.
[25] The Center For Universal Design. 1997. The Principles of
Universal Design. Raleigh, NC: American Association of
People
with
Disabilities
(AAPD).
https://artsandculture.
google.com/asset/the-principles-of-universal-design/
8AGJJITf6Go5FQ. [Last access: Jan. 2020]
[26] J. R. Wright, "Tactile and Visual Smoke Detector System,"
US Patent, US20140313040A1, 2014.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-767-2
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

