An RFID-based Smart Cage for Animal Behavior Analysis
Luca Mainetti, Luigi Patrono, Andrea Secco, Ilaria
Sergi
Department of Innovation Engineering
University of Salento
Lecce, ITALY
{luca.mainetti, luigi.patrono, andrea.secco,
ilaria.sergi}@unisalento.it
Stefano Pieretti
Department of the Therapeutic Research and Medicine
Evaluation
Italian National Institute of Health
Rome, ITALY
stefano.pieretti@iss.it
Abstract—An innovative tracking system based on passive
Radio Frequency Identification technology in Ultra High
Frequency band, able to perform behavior analysis of small
laboratory animals, is presented in this work. The proposed
smart
system consists
of both hardware and software
components
and it is able to extract
main
behavioral
parameters exploiting raw animals tracking data captured by a
Radio Frequency Identification reader system. The proposed
solution allows overcoming some limits of typical analysis
methods commonly used in research laboratories for the same
purposes, such as systems based on video technology and
human observations, while providing the same information
content. It is cheaper and guarantees better performance even
in case of strong similarity among animals and in poor lighting
conditions. Different tests were carried out in order to
demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed
system using laboratory mice. The software component is able
to provide, via Web, a user-friendly tool containing main
animal behavioral information such as statistical analysis and
graphs regarding animal displacements, indication about the
locomotor
activity
and
detection of specific conditions
including isolation and aggregation phenomena.
Keywords-animals behavior; animal tracking system; Radio
Frequency Identification; UHF; Web application.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The animal behavior analysis is a very important research
area, which involves several scientific disciplines, such as
biology, physiology, pharmacology, toxicology, and so on. It
is used to analyze neuropsychiatric diseases or to test the
effects of new drugs and vaccines before being placed on the
market. The traditional method to collect this information
exploits video recordings that can easily gather information
about many aspects of the situation in which animals interact
with each other or with the environment. In addition, the
video recording makes offline research possible by a skilled
operator that observes the video and annotates the animal
behavior manually. This is a time and labor consuming
process and the analysis results may vary among different
observers that can introduce subjective interpretations.
For this reason, the study of animal behavior supported
by automatic system based on video technology has become
increasingly popular. The use of visual systems, equipped
with proprietary software tools, enables automatic analysis of
information acquired by video in order to obtain statistical
data and behavioral information. However, these software
solutions are often very expensive and the usability is
generally restricted to basic functions.
In the literature, several works propose solutions able to
automatically collect behavioral information using the Radio
Frequency Identification (RFID) technology, which allows
the identification of a tag when it is in the region covered by
an electromagnetic field generated by an RFID reader
antenna system. A significant example is presented by
Kritzler et al. [1], in which Low Frequency (LF) RFID
systems are used and a semi-natural environment is
reproduced. Nevertheless, mice are forced to follow
obligatory paths in order to detect their movements. In
addition, LF band does not allow simultaneous reading of a
lot of tags because it is not compatible with the EPC Class1
Gen2 standard [2] and it is only able to guarantee a very
limited reading range, i.e., less than 1 cm distance between
tag and reader antenna.
The RFID technology in High Frequency (HF) band is
used by Aguzzi et al. [3] to capture the behavior of marine
animals. Also in this context, HF band does not allow
simultaneous reading of a lot of tags and, consequently, it
cannot be used to track simultaneously a lot of animals in
order to identify social behaviors.
In this paper, an innovative RFID-based tracking system
able to overcome some limits previously described is
presented. This smart system uses the passive Ultra High
Frequency (UHF) RFID technology and it is able to track an
entire animal colony. In fact, unlike the LF or HF bands, the
RFID technology in the UHF band is compliant with the
EPC Class1 Gen2 standard, allowing a reading of about 100-
1500 tags/s. Furthermore, the proposed system is able to
summarize, in terms of graphs and statistical dashboards, the
behavior analysis of each laboratory animal. To make this
possible, a passive Near Field (NF) UHF RFID tag must be
implanted in every animal (e.g., mouse, rat, etc.). For such a
reason, a strong effort has been dedicated to the implant
technique in order to allow the RFID tags to keep on
working in the time and not to procure distress to the animal.
Some results of these experimental tests on laboratory mice
are presented by Catarinucci et al. [4] and confirmed in this
paper through an analysis of the implanted mice performed
long time after the date of the tag implantation. Instead, the
main results obtained in the tests performed on the hardware
component (i.e., on the prototypal reader antenna system)
and reported by Catarinucci et al. [5] allowed to establish the
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

proper distance between two adjacent antennas and between
the RFID tag and the reader antenna plane in order to
guarantee a correct tracking of the animals in the cage.
In addition to long-term analysis on the implanted tags,
the tests presented in this work had two major goals. The
first goal was to demonstrate the scalability of the proposed
system. To achieve this goal, the system should be able to
effectively work regardless of the hardware configuration
(i.e., the number of reader antennas) and of the number of
RFID tags involved in tests (i.e., the number of mice in the
smart cage). The second goal was to prove that the RFID
system is able to extract correct behavioral information
useful to support the operator work. In order to prove this
capability, the results obtained by the proposed system were
compared with a video analysis performed by a skilled
operator.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the
architecture of the proposed smart system is presented
whereas details regarding the test procedures are reported in
Section III. The results of the performed tests are discussed
in Section IV. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section
V.
II.
ANIMAL TRACKING SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The architecture of the proposed smart cage, shown in
Figure 1, is a hybrid (i.e., hardware and software) system
composed of two main components.
The hardware component is mainly based on a NF
antenna system working in the UHF bandwidth (i.e., 860-960
MHz). Such a system is composed of a matrix of antennas
each one able to univocally localize the animal in an
elementary cell as large as 12 cm x 12 cm. In order to
guarantee an accurate identification and localization of the
animals moving within the cage, each single antenna satisfies
specific requirements fulfilled through the design of
optimized segmented loops: first, it irradiates a magnetic
field as confined as possible in the related cell. Moreover, it
guarantees a uniform magnetic field within the cell in order
to minimize the localization uncertainty. Finally, it
minimizes the far field radiation in order to avoid potential
spurious readings of tags located in different cells. Such a
system is thought to be positioned right below the cage in
correspondence of each elementary cell and is connected to
the RFID reader through a multiplexer allowing the
management of up to 32 reader antennas. In this way, even
large environments can be monitored and the behavior study
of many animals at the same time can be performed. Let us
observe that there are no obligatory paths for animal
movements. The reader antenna system was widely tested
and validated by the same authors [5].
Instead, the software component consists mainly of two
modules: (i) the acquisition module, described and validated
by Catarinucci et al. [6], developed by using the graphical
programming environment LabVIEW [7] and responsible for
managing the hardware component and collecting the raw
readings coming from the reader antenna system, and (ii) the
Web application able to support the researchers in animal
behavior analysis.
The Web application is able to extract raw data, stored in
a MySQL [8] relational database, in order to provide the end-
users with an effective analysis that summarizes main
behavioral parameters. The choice to adopt a Web solution is
motivated by the need to guarantee a behavioral data access
from anywhere by using a simple Internet access. In
addition, different operators can access the same data from
different locations. In particular, the Web application firstly
processes the raw data by using the three phases of the RCP
(RSSI Chebyshev Ping-pong) algorithm able to discriminate
the correct mouse position. In fact, when only one of the
reader antennas reads an RFID tag, the animal position is
uniquely individuated. Nevertheless, if several reader
antennas read the same RFID tag, a position ambiguity
occurs and the RCP algorithm works to solve it by using the
following three processing phases:
1.
Identification of simultaneous readings and data
discrimination based on the Received Signal Strength
Indication (RSSI) value.
2.
Check of adjacent cells exploiting the Chebyshev
distance [9] method.
3.
Removal of the "ping-pong" effect, which occurs when
a tag is positioned between two cells. This generates a
continuous alternation of the position between the two
involved cells.
The pseudo-code of the proposed algorithm is shown in
Figure 2.
The Web application provides the end-user with several
information about the behavior of each mouse in the smart
cage in the form of tables or graphs. This feature was
obtained using the JFreeChart [10] Java library. This open
source library can dynamically create graphs starting from
Figure 1.
System architecture.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

the source data stored in the database. The Web application
adopts a client-server architecture and is developed by using
Struts2 [11]. This framework, distributed by Apache, is
completely based on Java. In order to manage the Web
pages, SiteMesh framework [12] was used. It offers an
important support for the Web pages decoration and layout,
by effectively managing the navigation and allowing the
generation of composed pages. Finally, a tracking module
allows the user to show a screen in which the smart cage
surface is replicated in order to provide information about
the displacement of each mouse in the cage (Figure 3.a). In
this way, it is possible to track and evaluate animal behavior
and reactions to particular solicitations (e.g., drugs or
vaccines administration). The Web application also provides
a 3D video that reproduces the mice movements in the cage.
The user can manage the video reproduction by using the
Play, Stop and Restart buttons. Furthermore, the user can
insert several objects in the experimental scene (i.e., cage)
reproducing accurately the real scene. In this scene, a sphere
of a different color that moves in the cage represents each
mouse (Figure 3.b). In order to develop the 3D component,
the WebGL [13] technology was chosen because it is able to
generate and manage three-dimensional graphics directly on
Web pages, allowing the interaction with the 3D
environment.
From the computational point of view, it is worth
highlighting that the acquisition module was designed and
implemented separately from the others components in order
to guarantee effectiveness and scalability. In fact, in this
way, the acquisition module and the processing module may
evolve independently allowing, for instance, different
processing systems to be associated with the same
acquisition system. Furthermore, this choice relieves the
computational load of the acquisition module.
It is worth noting that the implantation of an RFID tag in
each mouse represents a decisive procedure. For this reason,
much time was spent in this direction. First, a careful
technological scouting was performed in order to select,
among all the commercial tags, those most suitable to be
implanted in laboratory mice, characterized by small size and
high performance. Then, the best tag implantation technique
in laboratory animals was evaluated through some tests
carried out by using mice.
In particular, the choice of the better tag to implant in the
mouse took into account the main requirements reported
below: (i) to guarantee a long-term readability of implanted
tags, and (ii) not cause discomfort to the animals or changes
in their behavior.
III.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
In this section, details regarding the test procedures and
the proposed goals for each test are reported.
A.
Tags implantation procedure
The first phase of this work focused on the choice of the
best passive UHF RFID tag able to satisfy the stringent
requirements such as high tolerance to mechanical stress,
high reading performance in presence of liquids, and low
cost. Preliminary tests, presented by Catarinucci et al. [4],
were carried out in order to select the best candidate tag able
to ensure high performance for a long time after its
implantation in laboratory mice. Furthermore, a feasibility
for each tag ID{
for each sampling interval{
PHASE 1:
store the sample with max RSSI value
and all
samples with RSSI value in the
interval(RSSImax –  RSSI) in List1.
}
PHASE2:
for each sample in List1{
if distance [i , i+1] ≤ 2
add i+1 sample in List2;
else if distance [i + 1, i + 2]>2
discarded i+1 sample;
else add i+1 sample in
List2;
}
PHASE3:
for each sample in List2{
if i ≠ i+1{
if i-1=1+1
discarded i sample: ping-
pong effect!;
else add i sample in List3;
else add i sample in List3;
}
store all sample in List3 in the
database
}
Figure 2.
The pseudo-code of the proposed RCP algorithm.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.
Screenshots of the tracking module: (a) displacement of a mouse in the smart cage; (b) 3D reconstruction of the smart cage.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

study on the tag implantation methodology in the animal was
performed. As result of these preliminary tests, the tag with
higher performance has a layout characterized by an antenna
size of 15 mm x10 mm, die-cut size of 19 mm x14 mm, an
Impinj Monza4D chip, and a PVC plasticization with
thickness of 80 µm per side. The plasticization preserves the
tag conservation, protects it from corrosion due to animal
tissue composition, and ensures the reliability of the
implanted tags in the time. The first tests, performed to select
the best tag, lasted for about a month. Instead, the tests
presented in this study are long-term analysis and covered a
period of about one year. In this regard, the long-term
analysis concerned several mice in each of which the
selected tag was implanted. In order to evaluate the
readability of all implanted tags, each implanted mouse was
placed in proximity of the reader antenna for 30 seconds.
Then, the ratio between the number of readings performed
by the system and the total number of expected readings was
calculated in different time instants starting from the
implantation date (i.e., 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after the
implantation date). Because the system, in a configuration
with a single reader antenna, is able to intercept about twelve
readings per second, and the considered time interval was 30
seconds long, the total number of expected readings is 360.
Finally, for each time instant, the performance of the tags
was evaluated as the percentage of the average readings.
The surgical tag implantation required multidisciplinary
skills and this task was executed in cooperation with the
Istituto Superiore di Sanità (Italian National Institute of
Health) in Rome, which made possible the testing of passive
UHF RFID solutions in laboratory mice. The surgical
implantation details are reported by Catarinucci et al. [4]. All
procedures involving animals were approved by the Service
for Biotechnology and Animal Welfare of the Italian
National Institute of Health and authorized by the Italian
Ministry of Health, according to Legislative Decree 116/92,
which implemented the European Directive 86/609/EEC on
laboratory animal protection in Italy.
B.
RFID devices
The proposed tracking system consists of a 4-port Impinj
Speedway Revolution R420 reader connected to an Impinj
GPIO adapter via one HD15 cable. The GPIO adapter allows
for the connection up to four Impinj Antenna Hub, acting as
multiplexers, each of which accepts up to eight reader
antennas. Each Antenna Hub is connected to the GPIO
adapter via a straight Ethernet cable and to the reader with a
SMA-male to R-TNC-female coaxial cable. Each reader
antenna is connected to its Antenna Hub via a SMA-male to
SMA-male coaxial cable. The reader antennas are powered
in time division through the four ports of the RFID reader.
More specifically, at a generic time, only a single antenna is
powered, thus reducing potential array effects and energy
wasting. In such a context, the multiplexing system allows a
switching time between reader antennas inferior to 200 µs
and a switching time between two Antenna Hubs amounted
to 25 ms. This means that, even in presence of the worst
computational case (i.e.,
with 32 reader antennas), a time
distance between two consecutive interrogation of the same
antenna is inferior to 6.4 ms, which is about eight times less
of the minimum time required for a mouse to cross a cell.
This ensures an accurate tracking, without loss of positional
information. If all 32 reader antennas are connected based on
a 4x8 matrix, the size of the arena can reach about 48 cm x
96 cm, enabling the testing of a high number of animals.
C.
Tests setting for system scalability and animal behavior
In the test aimed at evaluating the scalability of the
proposed system, different system configurations were used,
as reported in Table I. In each cell, in correspondence of
each reader antenna, two RFID tags were placed: one was
placed in the center of the cell and the other tag was placed
randomly on the cell. The power transmission of each reader
antenna was set to 27 dBm
and, for
each system
configuration, the test was 30 minutes long and was repeated
five times. Then, the percentage of incorrect tag localizations
was calculated before and after the data processing carried
out by the RCP algorithm. The percentage of incorrect
localizations was calculated as the ratio between the number
of localization errors and the total number of readings
detected by the RFID system.
A final test was performed in order to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed system to correctly detect
animal behavior. In this three hours long test, a system
configuration,
consisting 
of 
twelve 
reader 
antennas
according to a 4x3 matrix and four implanted mice, was
used. The test environment is shown in Figure 4. A cage of
dimension 36 cm x 48 cm was used and on the bottom of the
test cage, the sawdust was placed in order to absorb mice
feces and urine. The transmission power of the reader
Figure 4.
The proposed system during a test performed by using
laboratory mice.
TABLE I.
SYSTEM CONFIGURATIONS USED IN THE SCALABILITY
TEST
Number of cells
Number of tags
3
6
6
12
12
24
24
48
32
64
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

antennas was set to 30 dBm. The behavior of the mice in the
cage was monitored by using both the proposed RFID
system and a video camera (i.e., a Canon MVK 460). In this
way, it was possible to compare the results obtained through
the proposed system with those obtained by a video analysis
performed by a skilled operator. The operator, by using a
stopwatch, measured and recorded how many seconds the
mice spent alone, manifesting an isolation attitude, or in
group of at least two mice, manifesting an aggregation
attitude. In particular, an event was considered an isolation
phenomena if a mouse remained alone in a cell cage for at
least 100 seconds. Vice versa, an event was considered an
aggregation phenomena if at least two mice remained in the
same cell for at least 25 seconds. The correlation between the
results obtained through the two methods was measured by
using the Pearson correlation coefficient (r). It measures the
strength of a linear association between two variables, where
the value r = 1 means a perfect positive correlation and the
value r = -1 means a perfect negative correlation.
IV.
RESULTS
All tests reported in this paper were performed in order to
ensure statistically relevant results, with a confidence
interval of 95% and a maximum relative error of 5%.
Before analyzing the results obtained in the tests aimed to
evaluate the scalability of the proposed system and its
capability to detect behavioral information, it is worth
highlighting the high performance of the selected RFID tag.
In fact, one year after the surgical implantation, all implanted
tags were still readable. Table II shows that the average
percentage of readings is 100% one month after the
implantation date (i.e., all tags are still readable) and it is not
below 98% even one year after the implantation date. This is
a very interesting result that demonstrates not only the
robustness of the RFID technology in the UHF band for
animal tracking purposes, but also that the tag implantation
does not cause pain or discomfort to the mice. In fact, after
one year, the mice had not removed the tag and did not suffer
from health effects. Regular checks on the implanted animals
carried out by the researchers of the Italian National Institute
of Health in Rome, Italy, demonstrated that this surgical
practice does not affect the animals’ behavior. In fact,
implanted mice behavior is not different from that of sham
operated mice as well as their health conditions.
The results regarding the system scalability are reported
in Figure 5 where, for each system configuration, the average
percentage of incorrect localization, before and after data
processing performed by the RCP algorithm, are reported. It
is possible to notice that, before the data processing, the
percentage of incorrect locations varies between 33.74% (in
the system configuration with three cells) to 58.73% (in the
system configuration with six cells). These localization
errors were caused by tags positioned between two cells,
which were read simultaneously from more than one
antenna, leading to an ambiguity of their position. After the
data processing, the percentage of incorrect localization was
less than 0.4% in all system configurations. These results
prove the effectiveness of the RCP algorithm and that the
system is scalable because it works well regardless the
number of considered cells and involved tags.
In Table III, the results of the comparison between the
proposed system and the operator analysis in the test aimed
to evaluate the ability of the RFID system to detect animal
behavior are reported. In particular, the values represent the
average isolation time and the average aggregation time
detected during the test by both the RFID system and the
operator analysis. The Table III shows as the results obtained
using the two methods are very similar to each other and
prove that the proposed system is able to correctly detect the
animal behavior. These considerations are also proved by the
correlation graphs, reported in Figure 6. In fact, the
correlation values are 0.97 and 0.92 in the detecting of
isolation
phenomena 
(Figure
6.a)
and 
aggregation
phenomena (Figure 6.b), respectively. This reveals a strong
positive correlation between the two compared methods and
indicates that high values of the isolation (aggregation) time
detected by the RFID-based system corresponds to high
values of the isolation (aggregation) time detected by the
operator video analysis (and vice versa). The RFID system
extracts higher values compared those recorded by the
operator because the proposed system is able to provide
measurements that are more accurate.
TABLE II.
AVERAGE PERCENTAGE OF READINGS FOR ALL
IMPLANTED TAGS 1, 3, 6, AND 12 MONTHS AFTER THE IMPLANTATION
DATE
Observation
time
% reading
1 month
100%
3 months
99%
6 months
98%
12 months
98%
Figure 5.
Percentage of incorrect localizations before and after the
RCP algorithm processing for different RFID system configurations.
TABLE III.
SOCIAL INTERACTIONS TESTS, DETECTION OF THE
ISOLATION AND AGGREGATION EVENTS
RFID-based
system
Skilled operator
Isolation time [s]
231.80a
192.5
Aggregation time [s]
31.3
28.75
a. Data are reported as mean of the values obtained using four mice in 3 hours test.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, an innovative and complete UHF RFID-
based system able to extract behavioral analysis of small
laboratory mice is presented.
Although RFID technology in LF or HF (Near Field
Communication – NFC) bands allows the simultaneous
reading of tags, the number of tags that can be read at the
same time is limited. RFID tags in LF or HF band are
generally used for proximity applications or when the
distance and the population of the tags are not excessive.
Instead, the UHF RFID technology allows reading many tags
simultaneously, making it the ideal candidate for the study of
colonial animals' behavior. Although some materials (e.g,
liquids or metals) may absorb or reflect the waves, altering
the conditions of writing and reading of UHF tags, the results
obtained in tests on the proposed system shown that the use
of this technology is effective for the declared purposes.
The proposed smart cage allows overcoming some of the
inherent limitations of methods commonly used in research
laboratories for the same purposes, such as systems based on
video technology and human observations by using a hybrid
system consisting of hardware and software components.
Different tests were carried out in order to demonstrate
the feasibility of the proposed system, its scalability and its
efficiency in terms of detection of social events involving the
observed animals. The performed tests demonstrated the
feasibility of implantation of a small RFID tag in a mouse
and the effectiveness of the RFID technology for the
behavior analysis of laboratory mice. Moreover, the
proposed system offers a low-cost, user-friendly and time-
saving solution to support the researches in the animal
behavior analysis.
Currently, the RFID system is under evaluation at the
Italian National Institute of Health, Rome, Italy, where
skilled operators are testing it in real-world scenarios.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Prof. Luca Catarinucci and Dr.
Riccardo Colella of the University of Salento, Lecce,
ITALY, for their precious support in the realization of the
prototypal reader antenna.
This work partially fulfills the research objectives of the
PON 02_00563_3470993 project "VINCENTE - A Virtual
collective INtelligenCe ENvironment to develop sustainable
Technology Entrepreneurship ecosystems" funded by the
Italian Ministry of University and Research (MIUR).
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Kritzler, L. Lewejohann, A. Krüger, M. Raubal, and N.
Sachser, “An RFID-based tracking system for laboratory mice
in a semi-natural environment,” PTA2006 Workshop,
PERVASIVE. Dublin, Ireland, 2006, pp. 1-6.
[2]
EPCglobal UHF Air Protocol Standard. Available from:
http://www.gs1.org/gsmp/kc/epcglobal/uhfc1g2 
[retrieved:
May, 2014].
[3]
J. Aguzzi et al.,
“A new laboratory radio frequency
identification (RFID) system for behavioural tracking of
marine organisms,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 11, no. 10, 2011,
pp. 9532-9548.
[4]
L. Catarinucci et al., “An RFID tracking system supporting
the behavior analysis of colonial laboratory animals”,
International Journal of RF Technologies: Research and
Applications, vol. 5 (1-2), 2013, pp. 63-80, doi: 10.3233/RFT-
130048.
[5]
L. Catarinucci et al., “Near field UHF RFID antenna system
enabling the tracking of small laboratory animals”,
International Journal of Antennas and Propagation, 2013, pp.
1-10, doi: 10.1155/2013/713943.
[6]
L. Catarinucci et al., “Performance evaluation of a novel
animals tracking system based on UHF RFID technology”,
Journal of Communications Software and Systems, vol. 9, no.
1, 2013, pp. 4-13.
[7]
National Instruments, LabVIEW  System Design Software.
Available
from:
http://www.ni.com/labview/i/ [retrieved:
May, 2014].
[8]
MySQL. Available from: https://www.mysql.it/ [retrieved:
May, 2014].
[9]
T. Kløve, T. T. Lin, S.C. Tsai, and W.G. Tzeng, “Permutation
arrays under the Chebyshev distance,” IEEE Transactions on
InformationTheory, vol. 56, no. 6, 2010, pp. 2611–2617.
[10] JFreeChart 
Java 
Lybrary. 
Available
from:
http://www.jfree.org/jfreechart/ [retrieved: May, 2014].
[11] Apache 
Struts2. 
Available
from:
http://struts.apache.org/development/2.x/ 
[retrieved: 
May,
2014].
[12] SiteMesh. 
Available
from:
http://wiki.sitemesh.org/wiki/display/sitemesh/Home
[retrieved: May, 2014].
[13] WebGL 
Specifications. 
Available
from:
https://www.khronos.org/registry/webgl/specs/1.0/ [retrieved:
May, 2014].
(a)                                                                                                                         (b)
Figure 6.
Graphs of the correlation between the proposed RFID system and the operator video analysis: (a) detecting of the isolation time; (b)
detecting of the aggregation time.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

