Citizen Participation through Digital Platforms: the Challenging Question of
Data Processing for Cities
Noémie Lago, Marianne Durieux, Jean-Alexandre
Pouleur and Chantal Scoubeau
Research Center URBAInE, Research Institute HumanOrg
University of Mons
Mons, Belgium
e-mail: {noemie.lago; marianne.durieux; jean-
alexandre.pouleur; chantal.scoubeau}@umons.ac.be
Catherine Elsen and Clémentine Schelings
LUCID Lab for User Cognition and Innovative Design
University of Liège
Liège, Belgium
e-mail: {catherine.elsen; clementine.schelings}@uliege.be
Abstract—This paper focuses on digital platforms supporting
citizen participation in the era of Smart Cities. Our study
presents and analyses two examples of online participation
platforms, implemented by two Walloon cities: Mons and
Liège (Belgium). These two cases highlight the differences and
the similarities between both cities’ interpretation of digital
participation, as well as the difficulties they faced, especially
considering the data processing by city officials. In light of the
challenges observed through those two cases, we suggest that
digital platforms might potentially be misused, and somehow
bias the whole digital participatory process. We therefore issue
recommendations about how to design, launch and manage
such platforms and, moreover, suggest that platforms should
be supplemented by other digital or traditional participatory
processes in order to reach higher levels of participation.
Keywords-citizen
participation;
digital
platform;
data
processing; Smart City; Belgium.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Facing demographic and environmental issues [1], many
cities worldwide are looking for a new urban ideal and are
moving towards a development strategy based on the Smart
City concepts [2]. This “smart” phenomenon gives rise to
citizens’ participation, which is a crucial dimension to ensure
social sustainability of Smart Cities [3]. Cities consequently
face the challenge of organizing such participation as
efficiently as possible, which in turn leads to the proliferation
of digital platforms for citizen participation. This research
aims at studying those popular digital platforms, through the
analysis and the comparison of two platforms implemented
in two Belgian cities, namely Mons and Liège. How are such
digital platforms administered and exploited? What are the
assets and the limits of those platforms? How could such
digital participatory process be enhanced?
This paper is structured in four additional sections.
Section II provides a short literature review about the
emergence of citizen participation as a key aspect of the
Smart
City
and
summarizes
new
interpretations
of
participatory processes in the digital era, including digital
platforms. Section III then gives a global overview of both
Walloon platforms, while Section IV delves into the results
of the two initiatives. Our methodology is briefly mentioned
in Subsection A, followed by our analysis of both platforms
regarding the topics (Subsection B), the “likes” (Subsection
C) and the priority actions (Subsection D) as implemented by
one of the two cities. Finally, Section V focuses on the main
limits
of
both
digital
platforms
and
provides
recommendations to improve such participatory process.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Citizen participation has always been an important part
of urban governance, this concept being inextricably and
intrinsically linked to the very essence of democracy [4].
Participation of the civic society is therefore much older than
would appear at first sight, considering that the appeal for
participatory action dates back to the events of May 1968
[5].
Since
then,
recurrent
limits
(regarding
“true”
participation) have been continuously reported in the state of
the art, and among them tokenism has been considered as
one of the main risks for participation, i.e., symbolically
hearing the citizens’ voice rather than concretely taking their
comments into account or giving them real decision power
[6]. Over the past 50 years, the public participation has
grown in popularity and citizens are nowadays more and
more empowered to take part in decision-making processes
in their city, especially regarding current issues, such as
environmental and technological developments [7]. Whilst
designers and architects integrate their users’ needs and ideas
through co-design processes [8], policy makers gradually
realize the importance of involving residents in participatory
processes in order to collect their citizen expertise, i.e., an
intertwined
body
of
knowledge
built
on
their
past
experiences, local perceptions and field understanding [9].
In the Smart City context, this collective intelligence is
now recognized as the main source of smartness, ex-aequo
with digital technologies [1]. Until recently, Smart Cities
lacked citizen perspective and were essentially focused on
the
introduction
of
new
technologies
[10][11].
This
technocentric approach has the disadvantage to impose
solutions to the city users, without knowing if those users
really want or need them, and thus without ensuring that they
will eventually use them [3]. Consequently, citizens have
recently been more and more considered as key stakeholders
regarding the overall success or failure of the Smart City,
since they can choose to accept or reject smart solutions and
technologies [10]. The sustainability of the global smart
model thus relies on the active involvement of the residents,
through citizen participation and co-design processes [3].
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Considering the current digital era, enthusiasm for
participation has been growing higher than ever and several
tools have been developed to collect citizens’ point of view.
Along
with
traditional
methods
(e.g.,
surveys,
panel
discussions, advisory boards, workshops, etc.), new forms of
digital participation have consequently emerged in the Smart
City context. Based on Arnstein’s eight-level ladder of
citizen participation [6], Douay proposes a classification of
those emerging digital participatory processes according to
citizens’ decision power (see Table 1 below) [12]. This
renewed ladder of participation shows that, according to this
author, the digital era has not changed the types and levels of
participation, but rather offers new and dematerialized tools
to achieve them. According to the literature, Douay’s model
could be complemented by several other examples of digital
participatory modes. For instance, sensors and wearables
collect
information
from
a
large
number
of
people,
sometimes unwittingly, and the aggregated data reveals
trends and patterns attesting to habits and lifestyles [13]. In
the same vein, big data can also be generated from
smartphone applications through which citizens can share
real-time, geolocated information with the community and
the municipality [14]. Additionally, one has to observe that
Douay’s ladder does not yet include digital platforms for
citizen participation. Often assimilated to online suggestion
boxes, those platforms become a place to submit ideas for
one’s city and to vote for the ideas that should take
precedence, according to the voters’ points of view, and
therefore be implemented through concrete projects or
policies [1]. In that regard, those platforms enable active,
bottom-up involvement of citizens.
TABLE I.
LADDER OF PARTICIPATION ADAPTED TO DIGITAL
PROCESSES [12]
Participation type
Activities
Platform examples
Co-decision
Deliberation
Debates and votes
DemocracyOS
Co-decision
Law or program
design
Consultation on the
bill for a digital
Republic
Contribution
Co-design
Collaborative
design of digitals
platforms
Hackathons
Partnership
Co-construction of
programs and
decision sharing
participatory budget
Civic dialogue
Consultation
Survey
Online votes
Communication
Dialogue by
message exchange
Chat, Hangout
Information
Information 2.0
Top-down
communication with
the possibility of
commenting or
reacting (like)
Social networks
Information 1.0
Top-down
information without
the possibility of
communication
Newsletter
In 2016, the French Digital Secretariat of State has
developed a classification of “Civic Technology”, based on
the Knight Foundation [15] and adjusted to the French
context. This classification is divided into “technology for
democracy” or “Gov Tech”, and “technology for civic
engagement” or “Civic Tech”. On the one hand, Gov Tech
are top-down tools which aim to improve public services
and democratic practices (e.g., public spaces reporting
tools). Civic Tech, on the other hand, are bottom-up tools,
aiming to improve civic engagement of citizens (e.g.,
participatory budgets). In this classification, platforms of
citizen participation are located at the intersection of the two
categories. They indeed meet cities’ interest in collecting
citizens’ opinions in a convenient way, while encouraging
citizens to get involved in the development of their city [16].
In the European context, these platforms seem to grow as
the most popular form of digital participation as many cities
use them to reach citizens’ views and local concerns
[17][18]. Wallonia is no exception: since 2017 cities such as
Mons and Liège (among others) launched their first digital
platforms for citizen participation. How were both processes
organized?
What
were
the
results?
Where
do
those
platforms
rank
in
the
renewed
ladder
of
citizen
participation? Are these platforms used as Gov Tech and/or
Civic Tech tools?
III.
PRESENTATION OF THE STUDIED PLATFORMS
Respectively called “Demain, Mons” and “Réinventons
Liège”, the two Walloon initiatives appear similar in many
ways, since both platforms are supplied by the same
company, CitizenLab. However, they have been customized
for each city, implemented independently, and several
discrepancies are observed between the two processes. Table
II presents a comparison of both platforms and emphasizes
their commonalities and differences, often stemming from
the choices of the municipality.
As far as the monitoring of the project is concerned, a
major difference exists between the two cases. The city of
Liège has published the results of the platform in November
2017, and it is not yet the case in Mons, since the project has
been put on hold around municipal elections in October
2018. One has to observe that CitizenLab, the provider of the
two platforms, did not offer data analysis services in 2017.
Both cities received the data in Excel format and had to
analyze it. This is a real challenge for cities not used to deal
with big data, and might partly explain why Mons at the
present time still experiences some difficulties in pursuing
with concrete proposals.
IV.
RESULTS
A.
Methodology
We collected the ideas and votes of both platforms in
Excel format. The city of Mons directly transmitted the data
to us, but in order to protect citizens' personal data, they only
sent us the content visible on the platform.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

TABLE II.
COMPARISON OF “DEMAIN MONS” AND “RÉINVENTONS
LIÈGE”.
Context
City
Mons
95 000 inhabitants
Liège
196 000 inhabitants
Platform
name
“Demain, Mons” = “Mons
Tomorrow”
“Réinventons Liège” =
“Let’s reinvent Liège”
Timing
Process
One single phase: idea
submission and vote at
the same time
3 phases:
(1) Idea submission
(2) Vote
(3) Analysis by the city
and communication
of the results
Duration
9 months from May 2017
to January 2018
8.5 months from March
to November 2017
Information
Communi
-cation
- Municipal newspaper
- 21 meetings between
citizens and the
municipal council, in
different neighborhoods
- Municipal newspaper
- 2 info sessions for the
students of the
University of Liège
Inspiration
- weekly email with
newly submitted ideas
- 22 ideas submitted by
the city
- 5 thematic conferences
- 20 first ideas submitted
by the city
Updates
Reminder emails
Reminder emails,
promotional videos and
Facebook posts
Idea submission
Participa-
tory modes
- online platform
- paper form to send
- 5 thematic workshops
- online platform
- 5 workshops with
neighborhood
committees
Number
of topics
12 topics: multiple
choices are allowed
5 (then 7) topics: only
one topic per idea
Number
of ideas
909 ideas, including 113
via paper form put online
by the city for vote
983 ideas
Number
of ideas’
authors
286 online, unknown for
paper form
353
Idea
selection
Number
of votes
9,960 votes
8,336 likes
1,624 dislikes
94,688 votes
84,130 likes
10,558 dislikes
Results
No official analysis nor
communication of results
77 priority actions
In Liège, we manually collected the data directly from
the platform, but since November 2018 the city has made
them available on its open data platform [19]. In both cities,
we therefore received no access to the personal data of the
contributors (age, living place, number of votes, etc.) nor the
number or duration of citizens’ connections and so on. As a
result, our study focuses on the citizens' ideas and on the
cities’ data management and processing. More specifically,
our research is not intended to be an exhaustive analysis of
both
platforms,
but
rather focuses on
the challenges
encountered by both cities in terms of data processing. In
further research, our analysis should be complemented by a
study of participants: profiles, representativeness, digital
divide, pressure groups, etc.
In order to gain a better understanding of the challenges
encountered through data processing, we conducted 3 semi-
structured interviews: the first one with the Mons Smart
City
Manager,
the
second
one
with
the
Mons
Communication Manager, and the third with the CitizenLab
Director of Francophone Markets. In Liège, we were offered
no opportunity to meet any of the city representatives
despite our repeated solicitations. We also attended several
presentations by CitizenLab during 2018, when they were
developing a data analysis method with “Demain, Mons” as
an example.
Moreover, in order to be able to conduct critical review
of the data processing as managed by the cities, we made
our own qualitative and quantitative analysis of the data.
The first step of our data analysis consisted in reviewing the
whole set of ideas in order to check the number of
suggestions associated with each predefined topic. We also
checked the consistency between the detailed description of
those ideas and the topic chosen by the participants or the
city. Beyond the number of ideas, we also studied the
allocated number of likes and dislikes, as a supposed marker
of popularity for the ideas. However, those figures reveal to
be insufficient to get a global overview of the citizens’
proposals, which content and keywords are also important.
Therefore,
we
additionally
conducted
a
more
micro
perspective analysis and developed a tree-like structure of
the submitted ideas, which are organized by thematic
clusters.
B.
Analysis of the predefined topics
In Mons, when a citizen suggested an idea, he/she had to
link it to one or more topics among the 12 predefined ones,
namely: Mobility; Urbanism and heritage; Social cohesion;
Culture
and
tourism;
Sustainable
development;
Employment, economy and trade; Cleanliness; Security;
Education and training; Sport and associative life; Local
governance; Housing. In Liège, 5 topics were proposed to
citizens
during
the
ideas’
submission
phase:
Energy
transition;
Social
inclusion;
Citizen
participation;
Collaborative practices and creative approaches; Digital
revolution. We observe a difference between the two cities:
the topics in Mons are more precise and focused on citizens'
day-to-day lives whereas in Liège they are broader and more
theoretical. These choices of topics reflect local political
projects, and this way guide and may restrict citizens'
proposals. Our analysis of the data reveals some ideas off
topics but still relevant for the city. It shows that citizens use
the platforms to express themselves, even though their ideas
deviate from the topics chosen by the city.
In Mons, in order to process the collected data, the city
decided to associate a unique topic to each proposal. The
goal was, according to the interviewed city representatives,
to avoid duplicates and to be able to transmit each idea to
the aldermen and to the concerned technical services for an
expert opinion. The possibility for citizens to choose several
topics
made
this
selection
step
complex,
particularly
because many proposals pointed to several subjects (e.g.,
“redevelop a green space and create a parking relay”). As
we compare the multiple topics chosen by the citizens and
the unique ones later defined by the city agents (see Figure
1), we observe that several topics appear popular (for
instance “social cohesion” and “sustainable development”)
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

as they are retained for many proposals, but yet being the
main subject for only 30% of the original ideas.
Figure 1.
Topics comparison for “Demain, Mons”
We also compared these topics to those proposed by
CitizenLab, the platform provider, obtained through their
Natural
Language
Processing
(NLP)
algorithm.
This
algorithm analyses the content of the proposals, gathers
similar ideas and extracts keywords. The operating details
are a trade secret closely guarded by CitizenLab. Some of
the main keywords highlighted by the algorithm are
identical to the platform’s topics. But interestingly, the
algorithm did not keep three topics (i.e., Security, Urbanism
and heritage, Local governance) and created two (Public
spaces and Citizenship). Yet, “Citizenship” appears only
once in the 909 citizens’ text ideas, which are therefore
somehow
interpreted
by
the
algorithm.
Without
transparency on the method or open source software, how to
be sure that the results reflect citizen ideas? Moreover, the
“Public spaces” topic includes the largest number of
proposals according to the algorithm, ranking first in front
of the “Mobility” topic that was #1 in citizen and city
rankings. This is not surprising knowing that “Public
spaces” is an inclusive notion concerning every city. Indeed,
cycle paths, waste management or car parks can be linked to
public spaces. The negative aspect of such a broad topic is
its low operationality: it requires skills spread across many
technical city services to be realized and it is redundant with
topics such as mobility, security, cleanliness, etc. Thus, the
predefined topics should remain as precise as possible, or at
least correspond to the same level of detail in order to avoid
overlaps between topics.
In Liège, of the process the city, has modified some
predefined topics and reorganized the classification of
citizens’ proposals. These successive changes are shown in
Table 3. We observe that the topics were strongly modified
after the ideas deposit phase. Three out of five topics have
been
merged
(to
become
a
single
“Participative,
collaborative
and
digital
city”
concept),
while
five
completely new topics appeared, more focused on their
terminology and urban-planning oriented. Moreover, the
creation of the topic “unclassifiable” is a recognition of
citizens proposals that fall outside any predefined scopes.
However, none of these 57 “unclassifiable” ideas is part of
the 77 priority actions to be carried out. Thus, the topics’
reorganization after the ideas generation phase and before
the voting phase is a function of many parameters: citizen’
ideas of course, but also, and perhaps more surprisingly,
general city policy.
Moreover, after
the
voting
phase and
before the
presentation of the results, two topics were again modified
without any impact on the ideas distribution. “Green spaces,
greening, urban agriculture” has become “Greening and
urban agriculture” and “Equip, plan and embellish the city”
was modified into “Green, collective and peaceful areas”.
From a technical point of view, one could wonder: how did
“green spaces” change from one topic to another without
impacting the ideas classification? And, from a semantic
point of view: why choose to separate “green spaces” from
“greening”, but to associate them with “collective” and
“peaceful” spaces? Despite a greener coloration, the topic
“Green, collective and peaceful areas” grows closer to the
idea of “public space” put forward in Mons by CitizenLab’s
NLP algorithm. As for Mons, we observe that this large
topic lumps together a variety of sub-questions, which raises
again the challenge of low operationality. In that regard, one
would wonder why any city would want to bring out the
issue of public (green, collective and peaceful) spaces as the
main topic. We interpret this as a purely political choice.
To conclude, our study of the topics shows that the
choice of topic title can create big variations in the obtained
results. To promote objectivity in the presentation of the
results, an a priori scientific reflection on the naming of the
topics therefore seems essential. In addition, transparency
regarding the designation of topics and their modification
during the process can avoid accusations of civic washing.
TABLE III.
EVOLUTION OF THE TOPICS THROUGH EACH SUCCESSIVE
PHASE IN LIÈGE.
Phase 1
Ideas
Phase 2
Votes
Phase 3
Results
Submitted
ideas
Selected
ideas
Energy transition
30
11
Social inclusion
47
12
Citizen
participation
Participative, collaborative and
digital city
154
10
Collaborative
practices and
creative
approaches
Digital
revolution
Green spaces,
greening,
urban
agriculture
Greening and
urban
agriculture
110
14
Equip, plan
and embellish
the city
Green,
collective and
peaceful areas
287
11
Mobility
180
9
Art, culture, heritage, toursim
118
10
Unclassifiable
57
0
TOTAL
983
77
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

C.
Analysis of the “likes” and “dislikes”
The voters had the opportunity to “like” the ideas that
they wanted to see implemented, but also to “dislike” some
in
order
to
demonstrate
their
rejection
against
some
proposals. Analyzing the “likes” and “dislikes”, a large
discrepancy is observed between the two platforms: there are
almost 10 times fewer votes in Mons (around 10,000) than in
Liège (around 100,000), while it has been possible to vote
for 9 months in Mons and only for one month in Liège. In
Liège, the voting phase took place distinctively after the
submission phase, while these two phases were concomitant
in Mons. Thereby, Liège did two distinct communication
campaigns (about ideas submission then about votes), while
in Mons, communication was all along centered on ideas
submission. We suggest the discrepancy is a consequence of
the temporal organization of each process, but is also
probably linked to the potential number of voters (around
200,000 inhabitants in Liège; less than 100,000 in Mons).
In Mons, out of 910 proposals, only 360 received more
than 5 cumulative likes, and only 15 proposals (i.e., 1.6%)
got more than 50. The “cumulative likes” here corresponds
to the total number of votes, each “dislike” subtracting one
point from the total number of “likes”, each counting for one
point. In Liège, 882/983 proposals received more than 5
cumulative likes, and 514 ideas (i.e., 52%) obtained more
than 50. Therefore, the study of “likes” as a legitimization
marker of ideas has limited interest for "Demain, Mons" but
more meaning for "Réinventons Liège".
To deepen our analysis, we compared the likes to the
number of propositions on the same topic. For "Réinventons
Liège", as shown in Table 4 below, this radically changes the
ranking. In terms of the number of proposals, the category
"Green spaces, collective spaces, peaceful spaces" gathers
twice as many proposals as other topics. When we look at
the cumulative number of likes, yet, the mobility category
becomes the priority concern of citizens, with twice as much
likes as the second topic. Finally, when we look at the ratio
of likes to the number of proposals, it is the “Energy
transition” topic that becomes the main concern, with a ratio
40% higher than the second topic.
TABLE IV.
COMPARISON OF LIKES AND NUMBER OF IDEAS BY TOPICS
FOR “RÉINVENTONS LIÈGE”.
Liège/ topics
Number
of ideas
Cumulative
likes
Ratio
likes/ideas
Green, collective and peaceful areas
287
12664 (#3)
44 (#7)
Mobility
180
26446 (#1)
136 (#2)
Participative, collaborative and
digital city
154
7760 (#5)
57 (#6)
Art, culture, heritage, tourism
118
10073 (#4)
85 (#5)
Greening and urban agriculture
110
13497 (#2)
126 (#3)
Social inclusion
47
4781 (#7)
106 (#4)
Energy transition
30
6025 (#6)
194 (#1)
In that regard, one would wonder which ranking best
reflects the citizens’ expectations. Our hypothesis is that too
many similar proposals lead to the distribution of votes, and
as a consequence generate a bias effect in terms of (variety
of possible) ranking. To improve the process, it would be
interesting for a citizen to be informed of the existence of
proposals close to his/her own idea, in order to avoid
creating duplicates. Then, before the voting phase, the
platform could submit to the citizens an aggregated version
of similar ideas, in order to avoid scattering the votes. A
smaller number of proposals could also allow each citizen to
browse
through all the proposals, which
was
almost
impossible to proceed with considering the 1000 proposals
of “Demain, Mons” and “Réinventons Liège”.
D.
Analysis of the priority actions
The city of Liège was the only one to go through the
whole process and to identify 77 priority actions. Those
priority actions have been selected out from every topic,
except from the “unclassifiable” one. None of these 57 “out
of the box” ideas have indeed been kept as priority actions.
Considering the twenty-first ideas submitted by the city,
nineteen of them have become priority actions. This pseudo
success may reflect two phenomena. On the one hand, the
twenty ideas supposed to encourage and inspire participants
were projected actions that would probably have been
implemented even without the digital platform and the
citizen participation. Indeed, those ideas are not necessarily
the ones with the highest like-scores: only three of them are
in the top 77, but almost all of them will be realized.
Furthermore, there is even one proposal that got more
“dislikes” than “likes” but still remains a priority action. On
the other hand, those twenty ideas impacted the next
proposals, which are sometimes similar or even duplicates.
Therefore, the number of cumulative “likes” increased and
enabled some ideas submitted by the city to rank higher. In
addition, even if it was not intended, the first twenty
proposals might have put on blinders rather than opened the
discussion with the participants, which have certainly been
influenced by the twenty-first interpretations of the five
imposed topics. This snowball effect testifies either to the
importance and the interest related to those ideas apparently
reflecting actual citizens’ concerns, or to the potential misuse
of those digital platforms in a manipulative way.
Moreover, when comes time to determine the priority
actions, logic would dictate to select the ideas with the
highest number of votes and to transform them into concrete
projects. However, considering the dilution effect of the
votes between several similar or even identical ideas, this
obvious choice would not exactly reflect the citizens’ voice.
Therefore, in order to rank the submitted ideas (and their
associated votes) in a clearer way, we established our own
thematic clusters by gathering ideas in subtopics (sometimes
associating close, or identical ideas), then organizing them in
a tree-like structure and thickening the branches according to
the associated cumulative number of likes. At the end of
every branch, we also noted the identification code of each
related idea in order to ease going back to the full
descriptions when needed. Figure 2 is an example of a tree-
like structure for the Liège platform, which more precisely
structures the ideas generated in regard of the most popular
topic, i.e., “Green, collective and peaceful areas”. For
reasons of scale and readability, we simplify this tree by
indicating here the number of ideas for each subtopic rather
than the identification codes of all corresponding projects.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 2.
Tree of ideas for the Liège’s topic “Green, collective and peaceful areas”.
We suggest using the resulting visual map as a decision-
support tool, revealing the sub-thematic nodes with the
highest citizen interest, i.e., a relative huge number of
combined likes and/or proposals that are assimilable and
consistent with each other. This could help merging the
closest ideas and creating more precise subtopics, which
would in turn be useful to navigate on the platform.
V.
CONCLUSION
Our
analysis
of
the
data
generated
through
two
participative platforms, as well as the analysis of the data
processing conducted by both cities, highlight several
challenges and paths for future improvements. Our analysis
of the topics (subsection IV B) underlines the importance of
defining clear and distinct topics, as well as transparency
regarding their selection and modifications during the
process. Our analysis of the likes (subsection IV C) suggests
merging and co-managing similar ideas, in order to decrease
the risk of scattering the votes and to ease the global
visualization of the ongoing process. To achieve that goal,
each proposal must contain only one idea, and keywords can
be defined by the citizens in order to facilitate the search for
similar ideas and allow to summarize and clarify each idea.
Another possibility is to limit the number of characters, like
on Twitter, which would reduce the risk to receive ideas
spanning over multiple topics, but would also considerably
impoverish the qualitative understanding of each idea.
Concerning the voting phase, our analysis suggests that
citizens invest themselves more when this phase takes place
after the idea submission phase. Then, our analysis of the
priority actions (subsection IV D) shows the necessity of
making qualitative content analysis in addition to votes. If an
algorithm is used, open source software is a first step
towards transparency of the process. Thus, it is essential to
think about data processing before creating the platform.
For Mons and Liège, these first attempts of citizen
participation platforms served as “digital ideas boxes”. In
Liège, it seems that the tool has been oriented to legitimize
actions previously envisioned by the city. In Mons, it seems
it mainly helped to adapt the electoral program for the
municipal elections, the decision makers currently trying to
transform
the
consultation
into
concrete
actions.
We
therefore classify the two platforms as Gov Tech and Citizen
consultation
tools.
According
to
Arnstein’s
ladder,
consultation is part of symbolic participation because
citizens don’t get a decision power [6], although one might
argue that it depends on how the decision makers eventually
use the collected feedback. To achieve this goal in a more
participative way, it would be interesting to associate
platforms with a participatory budget for instance. The
proposals
receiving
the
most
votes
(considering
the
previously stated precautionary principles in terms of
objectifying the total number of votes) would share the
participatory budget and the citizens would realize their idea
with the help of city technical services. This would also be a
motivation for voting, and more votes would mean more
legitimacy for the selected projects.
In the same vein, going one step further, it would be
interesting to let citizen co-create the platform. Indeed, our
analysis demonstrates the impact of the framework and the
process on the results (in terms of topic selection, timing for
the voting phase, etc.). Leaving the citizens with the
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

opportunity to co-construct the framework would help to
orient the platform towards citizens’ concerns rather than
reflect political projects. Hackathons or Living Labs would
be appropriate ecosystems to conduct such co-creation.
Hackathons, as well as participatory budgets are classified by
Douay (see Table 1) as co-design tools and constitute forms
of
“contribution”
in
regard
of
the
ladder
of
citizen
participation. Involving citizens in every step would promote
empowerment and civic engagement, which would make
digital platforms a Civic Tech tool. Thus, digital platforms
for citizens participation could serve different levels in the
ladder of participation, depending on their framework, their
underlying process and the goal pursued by the project
managers.
Side-by-side with such digital platforms, we suggest that
face-to-face exchanges would foster additional debates and
offer complementary richness through dialogue. Given the
complexity of smart urban challenges, participants indeed
often need some support in order to extract and produce
concrete ideas from their citizen expertise, based on their
past experiences, actual needs and perceptions. We therefore
suggest
that
more
“traditional”
participatory
modes,
especially
co-design
workshops
with
lay
people
and
professional experts, offers additional added values in regard
of digital platforms and enable participants to move from
concerns to projects. Moreover, in-person participation gives
depth to an idea, does not limit to a one-shot online
submission and this way can be enhanced and justified
through the workshop
Eventually, we emphasize here that it is normal to
encounter difficulties when setting up a new tool, and that
our neutral, remote assessment should nurture a process of
continuous improvement. In that regard, we particularly
insist on the fact that technical and administrative support is
essential to ensure that the citizens understand the feasibility
criteria before making suggestions that would anyway be
automatically rejected by the city officials during the
analysis phase. Such technical and administrative support
could be administered through the various meetings, info
sessions and conferences organized prior and during the
whole idea generation process. Additionally, communicating
the results of this evaluation to the citizens would be a
recognition of their commitment and an encouragement to
pursue participation in the future.
In terms of future work, analysis should be conducted
about the participants (their age, gender, profession, socio-
economic
profile,
etc.)
in
order
to
reach
a
better
understanding of the citizens’ representativity, and possible
digital divide, and thus analyze the impact such digital
participation platforms might have on the representativity
issues.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is part of the “Wal-e-Cities” project, funded
by the FEDER and the Walloon region. We would like to
thank the funding authorities, as well as the interviewed city
representatives of Mons and the CitizenLab Director of
Francophone Markets.
REFERENCES
[1]
D.
Gooch,
A.
Wolff,
G.
Kortuem,
and
R.
Brown,
“Reimagining the role of citizens in smart city projects,”
Adjunct Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and
Proceedings, New York, pp. 1587–1594, 2015.
[2]
M. Bulu, “Upgrading a city via technology,” Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 89, pp. 63–67, 2014.
[3]
T. Monfaredzadeh and R. Krueger, “Investigating social
factors
of
sustainability
in
a
smart
city,”
Procedia
Engineering, vol. 118, pp. 1112-1118, 2015.
[4]
J. le Maire, La grammaire participative. Architectural and
urban theories and pratices 1904-1968. University Paris I
Panthéon-Sorbonne, 2009.
[5]
M.-H. Bacqué and M. Gauthier, "Participation, urbanism and
urban studies. Four decades of debate and experience since S.
R. Arnstein's A ladder of citizen participation”, Participations,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 36–66, 2011.
[6]
S. R. Arnstein, “A Ladder Of Citizen Participation,” Journal
of the American Planning Association, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
216–224, 1969.
[7]
G. Rowe and L. J. Frewer, “Public participation methods: a
framework for evaluation,” vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 3-29, 2000.
[8]
E. B.-N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Co-creation and the new
landscapes of design,” CoDesign, vol. 4, pp. 1–16, 2008.
[9]
Y. Sintomer, “From the user knowledge to the citizen job ? ”,
Political Reasons, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 115–133, 2008
[10] H. Chourabi et al., “Understanding smart cities: an integrative
framework,” 45th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, HICSS, Maui, 2012, pp. 2289-2297.
[11] T. Guelzim, M. S. Obaidat, and B. Sadoun, “Introduction and
overview of key enabling technologies for smart cities and
homes,”
in
Smart
Cities
and
Homes:
Key
Enabling
Technologies, Elsevier, pp. 1–16, 2016.
[12] N. Douay. Urban Planning in the Digital Age [Online].
Available
from:
www.researchgate.net/publication/315782172_Planifier_a_l'h
eure_du_numerique [retrieved: 06, 2019]
[13] J. Bohn, M. Langheinrich, F. Mattern, and M. Rohs, “Living
in a world of smart everyday objects - Social, economic and
ethical
implications,”
Human
and
Ecological
Risk
Assessment, 2007.
[14] A. Vanolo, “Is there anybody out there? The place and role of
citizens in tomorrow’s smart cities,” Futures, vol. 82, pp. 26-
36, 2016.
[15] Knight Foundation. What does the civic tech landscape look
like?
[Online].
Available
from:
https://knightfoundation.org/features/civictech/ [retrieved: 06,
2019]
[16] C. Mabi, “Citizen hacker,” in Life of ideas [Online].
Available from: www.laviedesidees.fr/Citoyen-hackeur.html
[retrieved: 06, 2019]
[17] S. Niederer and R. Priester, “Smart citizens: exploring the
tools
of
the
urban
bottom-up
movement,”
Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, vol. 25, no. 2–3, pp. 137–152,
2016.
[18] J. Willems, J. Van den Bergh, and S. Viaene, “Smart city
projects and citizen participation: the case of London,” in
Public
sector
management
in
a
globalized
world,
R.
Andeßner, D. Greiling and R. Vogel, Eds. Wiesbaden:
NPOManagement, Springer Gabler, pp. 249-266, 2017.
[19] City of Liège, Open data platform [Online]. Available from:
opendata.liege.be [retrieved: 04, 2019]
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

