Many Faces of Mobile Contactless Ticketing 
Jonathan Ouoba 
LaBRI-University of Bordeaux 
Bordeaux, France 
jonathan.ouoba@labri.fr 
Erkki Siira 
VTT Technical Research Centre 
Oulu, Finland 
erkki.siira@vtt.fi
 
Abstract—Smart cities must offer innovative mobile 
services in the areas of transport and culture. In this 
context, the ticketing services, which are key elements in 
the domains of transport and culture, have to be 
provided. In this respect, the impact of technological 
developments, including those related to NFC (Near 
Field Communication), which is a short range wireless 
technology, lead to the deployment of mobile contactless 
solutions. We highlight, in the paper, seven models to 
manage all or part of mobile contactless ticketing 
systems within smart cities. This study is based on the 
research conducted in the contactless ticketing area and 
on the return of experience gained within a European 
project. The models, which give a realistic picture of the 
various faces of such systems, are: the operator-centric 
model, 
the 
manufacturer-centric 
model, 
the 
identification-based model, the peer-to-peer model, the 
smart card-based model, the leeched smart card-based 
model, and the inverse reader model. We detail the 
characteristics of each model and present use cases. 
Furthermore, we present tracks indicating that these 
models may coexist within smart cities and we derive 
some perspectives on the evolution of these ticketing 
services by explaining that two models could be 
dominant. 
 
Keywords-mobile services; mobile ticketing; contactless; NFC 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The concept of smart cities refers to cities that have 
consented to invest in information and communication 
technologies so that innovative services can be deployed to 
facilitate the operations of daily life for the citizens [1]. 
Within smart cities, information and communication 
technologies are used to improve the legacy systems in the 
areas of transportation, education, commerce, culture or 
administration while preserving their successful integration 
into the urban environment of the end-users.  
The mobile phone has become an ubiquitous tool to 
interact with smart cities services, because of its penetration 
within the population. For example a citizen could use the 
same mobile equipment to pay for transit ticket (for a bus) 
and view the real-time traffic of buses. Thus, smart cities, 
through mobile services based on new technologies, must 
provide their citizens with services in the areas of 
transportation, education, commerce, and culture. In the 
domains of transport and culture, a key parameter is the 
ticketing management system. Indeed, access to means of 
transport or to events is determined by the fact that the users 
hold valid tickets. The ticketing services are therefore 
essential and mobile-based solutions must be developed. 
One of the promising technologies for the mobile services 
is the contactless technology. The vision is that smart cities 
can exploit this technology in the domains of transportation 
and culture to offer ticketing services. The trick is that the 
end-user only touches dedicated equipment with the mobile 
phone, accepts the transaction and gets the access to the 
proposed service. This is, in our terminology, an example of 
mobile contactless city services. Mobile contactless services 
in smart cities are and will be based on Near Field 
Communication (NFC) [2], which is a wireless technology 
that takes its roots in Radio Frequency Identification (RFID). 
It has a range of about 10 centimeters. NFC offers three 
modes of operation: reader/writer, peer-to-peer and card 
emulation. The reader/writer mode makes it possible for 
NFC devices to interact with passive NFC tags. The peer-to-
peer (P2P) mode supports direct communication between 
NFC devices, and the card emulation mode allows a NFC 
device to act as if it were a smart card. In the latter case, in 
order to store sensitive data, NFC devices offer support for 
an embedded smart card chip that is called a secure element. 
In the framework of the Smart Urban Spaces (SUS) 
European project [3], we explored the possibilities offered by 
the NFC technology in the field of mobile ticketing for city 
services. The question that arises is: what are the different 
models of efficient NFC-enabled mobile ticketing systems 
that can be deployed in smart cities. The aim of our work is 
thus to present and analyze systems dedicated to mobile 
contactless ticketing that we consider relevant in the context 
of smart cities. In the remaining of the paper, we first 
propose an overview of some research projects regarding the 
concept of contactless ticketing. Then, in section III we give 
a description of the key elements in the environment of 
mobile contactless ticketing while section IV presents the 
different models, used to provide the ticketing services, 
which we choose to highlight. Finally, in section V we 
delineate some perspectives to understand the possible 
evolution of mobile contactless ticketing services before 
concluding. 
II. 
STATE-OF-ART IN CONTACTLESS TICKETING 
Ticketing systems aim at proposing solutions with 
electronic tickets (e-tickets) and paperless operations. The 
use of NFC is one of the most appropriate options to provide 
such systems. We present here some projects, in the domains 
of transportation and events management, which are 
representative of what is done for contactless ticketing. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

A. The domain of transportation 
Public transport operators are very keen on deploying 
contactless e-ticketing systems. For example, the Oyster 
card in London [4] and the Yikatong in Beijing [5] are 
transportation cards based on the MIFARE technology [6]. 
As another example, in Hong Kong, the Octopus Card [7] is 
a transport operator card based on the FeliCa technology 
[8]. MIFARE and FeliCa are contactless cards technologies. 
In these systems, the loading of tickets is done either online 
or via dedicated machines. Then, the users get access to the 
stations just by touching specific readers with their cards. 
Another interesting project is the Virtual Ticketing 
application. Indeed, by taking advantage of the NFC 
technology, Ghiron et al. [9] proposed a ticketing 
application for transport in Rome. In the developed 
prototype, the virtual tickets are stored in a mobile 
equipment which is used to perform the different operations. 
The French transportation company Ligne d’Azur in 
collaboration with the Cityzi project in Nice offers a similar 
service for buses [10]. With a dedicated mobile application 
loaded on a mobile phone, the users are able to buy tickets 
and validate them by using NFC.   
More generally, Widman et al. discuss in [11] the 
integration of NFC ticketing systems into existing transport 
infrastructure. Such systems can be successfully integrated 
by considering, among other things, the following points: 
the distribution of the application, the distribution of the 
tickets, the display of the tickets (to inform the user), and 
the procedures of inspection (to check the validity of 
presented tickets). The relevance of the scenario is 
demonstrated by applying the concept to the VDV 
(Association of German Transport Companies) Core 
Application.  
B. The domain of events management 
The events e-ticketing initiatives that rely on the use of 
contactless technologies are very limited. However, these 
initiatives demonstrate the added value of NFC in ticketing 
services. An interesting project is the Tapango system [12], 
implemented by the Artesis’ research lab. It is an electronic 
voucher system based on e-Wallets with the use of NFC 
smart cards or NFC-enabled mobile phones. The objective 
of the system is to reduce the use of paper tickets. With 
Tapango, the users first buy tickets via a web interface. 
Then, at the event location they synchronize their e-Wallet 
(by interacting, through their cards or their mobile phones, 
with a machine connected to the Internet) to “physically” 
obtain the tickets and finally they can present the acquired 
tickets to get access to the show.  
Another interesting example is the pilot [13] related to 
events ticketing in the theatre of the city of Oulu (Finland) 
that was deployed in the framework of the SmartTouch 
project [14]. At the theatre site, the users interacted with 
specific equipment in a point of sale to receive the 
purchased tickets on their NFC-enabled phones. The 
inspection of the presented tickets was achieved with 
another NFC-enabled mobile phone by using the NFC peer-
to-peer mode. 
III. 
MOBILE CONTACTLESS TICKETING ENVIRONMENT 
Contactless card environment was brought to mass market 
in 1997 when Hong Kong introduced their Octopus card 
system. The same contactless smart card standard (ISO/IEC 
14443) has been carried to the mobile contactless world so 
that NFC devices can interact and communicate with 
compatible contactless smart cards and readers. This 
backward compatibility gives the already existing ecosystem 
a domain to tap into. 
The card emulation mode of NFC, which offers a support 
for a secure element, is the one that has been designed to be 
used with ticketing. There are several options for the secure 
element. The two most prominent are the embedded secure 
element option where the secure element is controlled by a 
manufacturer and the UICC (Universal Integrated Circuit 
Card) option where the secure element is controlled by a 
mobile network operator. The strict control of the secure 
element is essential to ensure the security of the chip, but it 
prevents an efficient utilization of the chip by 3rd parties. In 
section IV we present different ticketing models, some of 
them require a restricted platform and thus make use of the 
secure element.  
A Gartner predicts that in 2015 50% of smart phones 
would be equipped with NFC [15]. This means that mass 
market ticketing schemes can start adopting mobile 
contactless ticketing but, at the same time, it cannot abandon 
the current plastic card infrastructure. SMS-based and web-
based ticketing solutions are already so cost-efficient, that 
mobile contactless ticketing needs to find its edge 
somewhere else. User experience is usually considered to be 
the selling point for contactless services and the ticketing 
domain should be no different.  
IV. 
MODELS FOR MOBILE CONTACTLESS TICKETING 
Due the complexity of mobile contactless ticketing 
environment, there are many possibilities on how to develop 
solutions.  In this section, we present seven different ways 
that seem most relevant, in the context of smart cities, to 
manage mobile contactless ticketing systems.  
A. Operator-centric model 
GSMA is the global association of network operators that 
has created a model to build mobile contactless services 
which ticketing is one of. The GSMA’s operator-centric 
model is based on the use of an UICC as a secure element 
[16][17]. The use of UICC, which is inserted in a mobile 
device, gives operators the control of the mobile contactless 
ecosystem. Because there are several operators and service 
providers would like their services to be available for all 
possible customers, the operator-centric model requires the 
use of an entity called the Trusted Service Manager (TSM). 
TSM creates an interface for service providers so that they 
can seamlessly deploy the ticketing applications via this 
interface, which hides the diversity of operators. TSM can 
also be the actor that is really in contact with the customer 
UICC by using the security keys provided by the operators. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

As the services are in the UICC, they are transferred along 
when the consumer changes his or her mobile device to 
another. An acknowledged problem with this model is the 
still undefined process of secure element roaming when the 
user travels in countries with another operator’s network. In 
others words, the problem is to know how the home operator 
would update and communicate with the secure element in a 
roaming context. The architecture of the model is presented 
in the Fig. 1.  
 
Figure 1. Architecture of the operator-centric model 
 
The operator-centric model is in operation for example in 
France which is a pioneer of NFC ecosystems with the Cityzi 
smart city initiative. The operator-centric model is the closest 
to the industry standard at this time. The major players are 
behind it and NFC Forum, as a standardization body in the 
NFC ecosystem, has promoted it as well. Transport For 
London deployed a mobile contactless ticketing pilot in 2012 
[18]. They considered it to be a failed one because the read-
speed of ticket when using the UICC as a secure element was 
too slow for them. Current Oyster card operates at speed of 
300ms but the operator-centric model was not able to 
achieve a validation speed of 500ms that has been considered 
as a limit for smooth ticketing. 
B. Manufacturer-centric model 
Similar to the operator-centric model is the manufacturer-
centric model in which an embedded secure element (in the 
mobile equipment) is used the storage of sensitive 
information [16]. The embedded secure element is controlled 
by the manufacturer. The architecture of the model is 
presented in the Fig. 2.   
For the consumer they seem to be quite similar and most 
of the difference appears when the consumer changes his or 
her mobile device (to use the mobile phone of another 
manufacturer) and the services cannot be transferred in the 
process. As the model is operator agnostic, the user may 
change his or her operator easier. The manufacturer-centric 
model is championed by Google currently. Nokia was also 
formerly involved in the promotion of the model, but it 
changed to the operator-centric model.  
 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of the manufacturer-centric model 
 
In practical way, the manufacturer-centric model is used 
in the Google Wallet –application where the sensitive data is 
stored in the embedded secure element of Google compliant 
mobile phones.  
C. Identification-based ticketing 
Identification-based ticketing tries to circumvent the need 
to store dynamic information in the device of the user. In this 
context the ticket can be seen as dynamic information which 
changes for every separate ticketing case. The assumption is 
that there is a static identifier stored in the secure element of 
the user’s mobile device. The same static identifier is also 
stored in the ticket issuer’s backend system where all the 
dynamic information is processed. 
 
Figure 3. Architecture of the identification-based model 
 
This ticketing system requires a secure element to be 
available in the user’s mobile device so that the static 
identifier can be stored. This secure element may be a UICC 
or another secure element that is embedded in the device. 
The ticketing architecture is described in the Fig. 3. At the 
gate, the right to enter is verified by reading the identifier 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

from the secure element of the user’s mobile device and then 
sending it to the ticket issuer’s system. It returns the 
authorization (or not) to enter. When the user buys a ticket 
for a specific event from a ticket issuer, the ticket is stored in 
the ticket issuer’s back end system and it is connected to the 
static identifier stored in the user’s mobile device secure 
element. The identifier-based ticketing model is used in Oulu 
(Finland) where the city card chip ID is the relevant key to 
manage the access rights. Thus far, only smart cards are 
commonly used but the mobile phone use has already been 
tested [19].  
D. Peer-to-peer ticketing 
Peer-to-peer ticketing does not offer the same level of 
security than the one that can be achieved, for example, with 
the operator-centric model. However, it excels in creating a 
light-weight open ticketing system without the need of big 
companies that control the market with secure elements [20]. 
 
 
Figure 4. Architecture of the peer-to-peer model 
 
In the peer-to-peer model, the ticket is stored in the user’s 
phone memory when it is bought over the air. During the 
validation phase, the NFC peer-to-peer functionality is used 
to transfer the ticket from the user’s mobile device to the 
validator’s mobile device where the ticket’s validity is 
checked as described in the Fig. 4. The validator device must 
keep track of the presented tickets and must contain the 
mechanisms to check the validity of the tickets. This 
procedure is made possible by the fact that the validator 
application is provided, beforehand, with the necessary 
information regarding the validation process.  
This ticketing model was tested and piloted in Bordeaux 
during social events of computer science conferences and 
projects meetings (among the pilots deployed during the 
SUS project).  
E. Smart card –based mobile ticketing 
Smart card –based mobile ticketing is the model which is 
the closest to the legacy model of ticketing. The basic 
infrastructure, which is composed of a smart card and a 
reader, is changed into an infrastructure with a smart card 
and a mobile device. The description of the architecture, 
where the ticket issuance is not considered, is presented in 
the Fig. 5. The functionalities are the same and the great 
benefit is that the old legacy (smart card-based) systems can 
work with new mobile devices equipped with the reader 
technology. Mobile devices that require a human being to 
operate them are not economically feasible in comparison to 
the automatic readers used in public transportation. The 
advantage comes from having a mobile platform that can be 
deployed at small costs anywhere. This light-weight 
approach is suitable, for example, in events where there is a 
temporary need to have personnel on the field.  
 
 
Figure 5. Architecture of the smart card-based model 
 
This model has been deployed in Turku, Finland, where 
inspectors have used mobile phones when inspecting tickets 
in busses and other public transportation vehicles (among the 
pilots deployed during the SUS project). 
F. Leeched smart card –based ticketing 
       The leeched smart card –based ticketing model is 
founded on the principle that the general populace has 
already a variety of plastic cards which can be transport 
cards, payment cards or loyalty cards. This medium can be 
used as an identifier platform that is linked to a ticket that is 
stored in the back end system.  
 
Figure 6. Architecture of the leeched smart card model 
 
        An example of this ticketing model was piloted during 
the Open Europeans 2011 sailing event where Helsinki 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Region Transport –card was used as a ticketing medium 
[21]. There were two technical options: to use the card ID or 
the ID of an application stored in the card. The latter was 
chosen as Helsinki Region Transport Authority wanted to 
test its feasibility. In addition, the users used the public 
transportation with the same card.  
     The validation of the ticket is done by a mobile phone. A 
validating person reads the identifier from the smart card 
with his or her mobile device. The identifier is sent to the 
back end system where the validity of the ticket is checked. 
The information is then returned back to the mobile device 
where the screen shows if the ticket was valid or not. All this 
process is presented in the Fig. 6.  
G. Inverse Reader ticketing 
Saminger et al. [22] are suggesting that reversing the 
architecture of ticketing could be a possible way to go 
around the secure element problem. As the mobile device 
environment is closed regarding the secure element 
architecture, the inverse reader ticketing achieves the 
validation process through a NFC mode mismatch. 
 
 
Figure 7. Architecture of the inverse reader model 
 
The system works in a way that the mobile device is in 
reader/writer mode and the reader, which is linked to a 
server, operates in card emulation mode (Fig. 7). The ticket 
itself is stored in the mobile device. When the ticket is 
presented, the server checks the validity and returns the 
information to the mobile device. The advantage of this 
solution lied in the good level of interoperability, in the 
coverage of interoperable reader/writer mode, and in the use 
of a light-weight protocol stack of card emulation.   
H. Summary 
Table I and Table II integrate the 7 models presented for 
the mobile contactless ticketing options. To highlight their 
differences and their specificities, the proposed tables 
provide an overview of the models regarding different 
classification categories.  
 
TABLE I. DIFFERENT MOBILE CONTACTLESS TICKETING 
MODELS 
 
TABLE II. DETAILS OF DIFFERENT MOBILE CONTACTLESS 
TICKETING MODELS 
 
In our opinion, the relevant categories are: the customer 
device, the reader device, the place of the ticket, the need of 
network, the contactless protocol, and the suggested usage.  
V. 
WHAT’S IN THE FUTURE? 
The diversity of situations an end-user may encounter and 
the compliance with its preferences makes it necessary to 
provide mobile contactless ticketing systems of different 
types. It is also essential for the proposed (innovative) 
solutions to be interoperable with legacy systems. These 
elements allow us to assume that the presented ticketing 
systems can coexist. For example, an end-user, with the 
same mobile phone, could use a peer-to-peer system to 
attend a small exhibition while he would use a secure 
element -based system to store a ticket to a concert. 
However, we also assume that MNOs and manufacturers 
of mobile phones, because of their economic power, can put 
forward (what they already do) the operator-based and the 
manufacturer-based models. They have many customers and 
they can, somehow, impose their rules on some practices. It 
is currently unclear which of the two models could 
eventually be preeminent. We can still note that in some 
Ticketing model 
Customer 
device 
Reader 
device 
Place 
of 
ticket 
Operator-centric 
model 
Mobile phone 
Ticket 
reader 
UICC 
Manufacturer- 
centric model 
Mobile phone 
Ticket 
reader 
Embedded 
SE 
Peer-to-Peer 
ticketing 
Mobile phone 
Mobile 
phone 
Phone 
memory 
ID-based ticketing 
Mobile phone 
Mobile 
phone 
Back end 
server 
Leeched smart card 
–ticketing 
Smart card 
Mobile 
phone 
Back end 
system 
Smart card- 
ticketing 
Smart card 
Mobile 
phone 
Smart card 
Inverse reader 
ticketing 
Mobile phone 
Ticket 
reader 
Phone 
memory 
Ticketing 
model 
Need 
of 
network 
Contactless 
protocol 
Suggested 
usage 
Operator-
centric model 
No 
Card emulation 
All 
ticketing 
(too 
slow 
for 
transport?) 
Manufacturer- 
centric model 
No 
Card emulation 
All ticketing 
Peer-to-Peer 
ticketing 
No 
Peer-to-Peer 
Small 
event 
ticketing 
ID-based 
ticketing 
Yes 
Card emulation 
Non-transport 
ticketing 
Leeched smart 
card –ticketing 
Yes 
Tag reading 
Event ticketing 
Smart card- 
ticketing 
No 
Tag reading 
All ticketing 
Inverse reader 
ticketing 
Yes 
Tag reading / 
card emulation 
Non-transport 
ticketing 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

areas, notably the transportation domain, infrastructures are 
difficult to change (due to the costs of investments and the 
practical problems of passenger flow) which does not make 
obvious the possibility of imposing rules on some practices. 
In our opinion, the challenge lies in being able to present a 
clear and coherent picture of the environment so that the end-
users can easily understand what the most suitable service is 
in each possible situation. In the case the different models 
coexist, it will probably be necessary to provide a service 
aggregator adapted to the context (automatic selection of the 
proper application, interoperability between the applications, 
etc.) in order to foster the user friendliness and keep the end-
user at the center of the process.    
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
One characteristic of smart cities is the possibility to 
grant a person a right to do something. These rights are 
usually controlled by tickets which represent proofs of 
entitlement. For example, a transport ticket gives its holder a 
right to travel to a given destination. Mobile contactless 
ticketing aims at making the ticketing systems smarter and 
easier to use. 
There are several models available to manage mobile 
contactless ticketing. We have presented seven different 
models that are already in use or are in proof-of-concept 
phase. The presented models are: the operator-centric model, 
the manufacturer-centric model, the peer-to-peer ticketing, 
the ID-based ticketing, the leeched smart card model, the 
smart card ticketing model, and the inverse reader ticketing 
model. The first two models are the industry pushed models 
and they should become more prominent. The other five 
models are suitable for smaller and more focused use cases 
and will certainly coexist in the smart cities environment. 
The role of the secure element will continue to pose 
problems in the future if the relevant stakeholders do not 
cooperate in building a robust and clear ecosystem for 
ticketing. This situation opens a room for the existence of 
non-secure element ticketing solutions which should excel 
regarding friendliness aspects to be profitable.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would especially like to thank all the partners of 
the Smart Urban Spaces (SUS) project with whom we have 
been working for 3 years and whose valuable contributions 
have made this work possible. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  G. Rudolf, C. Fertner, H. Kramar, R. Kalasek, N. Pichler-
Milanovic, and E. Meijers, “Smart cities, ranking of european 
medium-sized cities”, Vienna Centre of Regional Science, 
2007. 
[2]  E. Haselsteiner and K. Breitfuss, “Security in Near Field 
Communications (NFC)”, Semiconductors, vol. 11, 2006, p 
71.  
[3]  “The Smart Urban Spaces Project”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], 
[Online] Available: http://www.smarturbanspaces.org/. 
[4]  “Oyster card”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], [Online] Available: 
https://oyster.tfl.gov.uk. 
[5]  “BMAC  Card”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], [Online] Available: 
http://www.watchdata.com/transportation/10150.html. 
[6]  “MIFARE MF1S5009, “  NXP, 2010. 
[7]  “The Octopus card”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], [Online] 
Available: http://www.octopus.com.hk/home/en/index.html. 
[8]  “The Felica page”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], [Online] 
Available: http://www.sony.net/Products/felica/. 
[9]  S. L. Ghiron, S. Sposato, C. M. Medaglia, and A. Moroni, 
“NFC ticketing: A prototype and usability test of an NFC-
based virtual ticketing application”, Proceedings of the First 
International Workshop on Near Field Communication, 2009, 
pp. 45-50.  
[10]  “The B Pass page”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], [Online] 
Available: http://www.veolia.com/fr/realisations/b-pass-billet-
electronique.htm. 
[11]  R. Widmann, S. Grunberger, B. Stadlmann, and J. Langer, 
“System Integration of NFC Ticketing into an Existing Public 
Transport Infrastructure”, Proceedings of the 4th International 
Workshop on Near Field Communication, 2012, pp. 13-18.  
[12]  J. Neefs, F. Schrooyen, J. Doggen, and K. Renckens, “Paper 
Ticketing vs. Electronic Ticketing Based on Off-Line System 
'Tapango'”, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Second 
International 
Workshop on Near Field Communication, 2010, pp. 3-8. 
[13]  O. Rouru-Kuivala, “Vision: Touching the Future of 
ticketing”, VTT Research notes 2492, 2009. 
[14]  “The SmartTouch project”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], [Online]. 
Available: http://ttuki.vtt.fi/smarttouch/www/?info=intro. 
[15]  “NFC Smartphones and Physical Access Control Systems”, 
[Retrieved: 
2013, 
april], 
[Online] 
Available: 
http://blogs.gartner.com/mark-diodati/2011/10/31/how-soon-
is-now-nfc-smartphones-and-physical-access-control-
systems/. 
[16] Gerald Madlmayr, Josef Langer, and Josef Scharinger, 
“Managing an NFC Ecosystem”, Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on Mobile Business, 2008, pp. 95-
101. 
[17] GlobalPlatform 
White 
Paper, 
“The 
GlobalPlatform 
Proposition for NFC Mobile: Secure Element Management 
and Messaging”, April 2009. 
[18] “Transport For London pilot”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], 
[Online] Available: http://www.pcworld.com/article/256397/. 
[19]  T. Tuikka, E. Siira, and M. Saukko, “City service discovery 
and access with near field communication”, Proceedings of 
the 5th International Conference on New Trends in 
Information Science and Service Science, 2011, pp. 116-121.  
[20]  S. Chaumette, D. Dubernet, J. Ouoba, E. Siira and, T. Tuikka, 
“Architecture and Evaluation of a User-Centric NFC-Enabled 
Ticketing System for Small Events”, Proceedings of 
MobiCASE, 2011, pp. 137-151. 
[21]  “Open Europeans 2011”, [Retrieved: 2013, april], [Online] 
Available: http://www.forumvirium.fi/en/project-areas/smart-
city/smart-urban-spaces/open-europeans-2011-helsinki-ended. 
[22]  C. Saminger, S. Grünberger, and J. Langer, “An NFC 
Ticketing System with a new approach of an Inverse Reader 
Mode”, Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on 
Near Field Communication, 2013, pp. 1-5. 
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

