  Smartness of Smart Sustainable Cities: 
a Multidimensional Dynamic Process Fostering Sustainable Development 
Sukaina Al-Nasrawi 
Department of Mathematics and 
Computer Science 
Beirut Arab University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
email: sukaina_nasrawi@hotmail.com 
Carl Adams 
School of Computing 
University of Portsmouth 
Portsmouth, United Kingdom  
email: carl.adams@port.ac.uk 
Ali El-Zaart 
Department of Mathematics and 
Computer Science 
Beirut Arab University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
email: elzaart@bau.edu.lb 
 
 
Abstract — Smart Sustainable Cities are gaining global 
attention rapidly. They are becoming a reality and hundreds of 
related initiatives around the world are taking place. 
Accordingly, cities are claiming to be smart and even smarter 
than others. However, smartness, as a concept, still has no 
standardized definition noting that it does not exist until it is 
defined 
and 
measured. 
For 
selected 
researchers 
and 
practitioners, it is assessed through the city’s participatory 
governance, economy, mobility, environmental strategy and 
management of natural resources, and the presence of aware 
citizens. Others focus on the advancement of technologies and 
the infrastructure needed to introduce smart solutions. For 
smartness to be properly assessed, its boundaries should be 
clearly 
set. 
By 
setting 
these 
boundaries 
through 
a 
comprehensive definition, it becomes possible to build an 
assessment model that methodologically monitors smartness of 
cities. In this research, a literature review on existing 
interpretations of smartness is presented and followed by an 
analysis of the goals of a Smart Sustainable City with lights 
shed on the quest of sustainable development. Through an 
analytical discussion, smartness is proved to be a dynamic 
process enabling change. It uses technologies to infuse 
innovation 
thereby 
achieving 
multidimensional 
urban 
efficiency. Also, a mutually reinforcing relationship between 
smartness and sustainable development is shown. The research 
paper concludes with introducing a holistic definition of 
smartness which contributes to clarifying the concept and 
constitutes a cornerstone in assessing the performance of 
Smart Sustainable Cities. It also provides the grounds for 
supporting or defying self proclamation of a city for being 
smart and/ or smarter than others. 
Keywords- Smart Sustainable City; Smartness; Development; 
Information and communication Technology; Innovation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the transition from the 20th to the 21st century, 
overpopulation became one of the core concerns in relation 
to urban growth and sustainability of cities. Today, 54% of 
the world’s population lives in urban areas, a proportion that 
is estimated to reach 66% by 2050 [1]. Urban growth is 
expected to continue and this requires a major change in the 
approaches of urban planners. Cities should be turned into 
safe, healthy, efficient and attractive places for people to live 
in. Attention should be attributed to different variables 
constituting the base for a Smart Sustainable City (SSC) [2]. 
Though advanced, SSCs are becoming a reality and hundreds 
of related initiatives around the world are taking place [3]. 
Currently, there exists a competition on how to interpret the 
concept of a SSC. It has become a notion with a relatively 
positive connotation [4]. Many cities around the world 
embarked on the SSCs bandwagon labeling themselves as 
“smart” believing that it is a sign of development [5] whereas 
smartness does not exist until it is properly defined and 
measured [6]. 
Smartness, used to assess the performance of a SSC, is 
still not a well rooted concept in the literature. It is regarded 
differently by different researchers and practitioners. One 
group of countries claims to be smart by associating 
smartness to the development of the technical infrastructure 
needed for a SSC. Another group refers to smartness as the 
improvement of e-government services considered to be a 
prerequisite for the development of a SSC [7]. The variance 
in the interpretation of the concept makes it difficult to set 
the boundaries for assessing and reviewing the performance 
of a SSC and to overcome self proclamations of cities for 
being smart and sustainable. Therefore, this research aims at 
filling this gap in knowledge. 
The main driving question to identify smartness is “What 
could be the main elements that make a city smartly 
sustainable”? Is it governance, technology, communication, 
transport, 
infrastructure, 
people, 
economy, 
culture, 
environment, natural resources, innovation, quality of living 
or something else? By answering this question, we would be 
identifying the main elements and potential cross cutting 
issues in a SSC that city planners and decision makers 
should consider when assessing the performance of a 
selected city. Therefore, identifying, through a critical 
analysis, the boundaries of smartness either by adopting an 
existing definition or by putting forward a new one that 
captures the elements needed to be present for a city to be 
smart and sustainable is needed. By bridging this gap in 
knowledge, this paper aims at providing guidance on the 
main issues to look at when assessing smartness and 
explaining what it really means for a city to be smarter than 
another in the urban sphere. In addition to framing the core 
elements constituting smartness of SSCs, the introduced 
definition is anticipated to provide basis for building a 
comprehensive model to monitor smartness on one hand and 
to assist policy and decision makers in urban planning for the 
betterment of their cities on another hand [8]. Also, this 
paper links smartness to the quest of sustainable 
development, a concept that is widespread at the global level. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
 
Figure 1.  Dimensions of a Smart Sustainable City 
Section 2 of this paper explores the concept of smartness and 
its exiting definitions. Section 3 critically analyzes the 
definitions of smartness and sheds light on its alignment to 
the principles of sustainable development. Section 4 
highlights enablers and cross cutting issues affecting 
smartness and proves it to be a dynamic process. Section 5 
overviews the expected outcomes of the research. The paper 
concludes with Section 6. 
II. 
SMARTNESS: CONCEPT AND DEFINITION 
This section sheds light on the definitions of a SSC and 
smartness as available in the litterature and touches on 
different related concepts. 
A. Definition of a SSC 
The definitions of a SSC are numerous and so is the 
interpretation of smartness. The concept is getting popular 
around the world but it is being referred to in different names 
and in varied contexts which makes it fuzzy. There is neither 
a single template for framing this concept nor a unique 
definition [9]. In order to address this gap in knowledge, the 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
- 
Telecommunication 
Standardization 
Sector 
(ITU-T), 
responsible for standardizing telecommunications related 
issues at the global level, formed a technical focus group 
named the ITU-T Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities 
(FG-SSC). The latter, after an extensive participatory effort, 
standardized the definition of a SSC as follows: “A smart 
sustainable city is an innovative city that uses Information 
and Communication Technologies (ICTs) and other means to 
improve quality of life, efficiency of urban operation and 
services, and competitiveness, while ensuring that it meets 
the needs of present and future generations with respect to 
economic, social, environmental as well as cultural aspects" 
[10].  
Variance in relation to the dimensions of a SSC also exists 
in the literature [11], but the majority of the approaches 
agree on six dimensions, namely smart economy, smart 
environment, smart governance, smart living, smart mobility 
and smart people [12] as depicted in Fig. 1. The ITU through 
its ITU-T/FG-SSC referred to these dimensions as the 
primary indicators for a SSC. Given the adoption of these six 
dimensions by the international community and their strong 
academic foundation, they are used in this research to 
represent the dimensions of a SSC. The integration of these 
dimensions among others will constitute the main blocks of 
smartness. 
B. Definition of Smartness 
Tracing the roots of the term “smartness” in the context of 
cities can contribute to a better understanding of what this 
term denotes and connotes in the urban sphere. In the 
marketing language, smartness is centered on a user 
perspective [13]. In the urban planning field, it refers to the 
intelligent use of ICTs to improve the productivity and 
efficiency of a city’s infrastructure and services [14]. In the 
technology context, smartness implies the automatic 
computing principle such as self-configuration, self-healing, 
self-protection, and self-optimization [15]. In the urban 
growth context, smartness is treated as a normative claim and 
ideological dimension. Being smarter entails strategic 
directions and adaptation to user needs [16]. Nowadays, 
governments and public agencies at all levels are embracing 
the notion of smartness to distinguish their new policies, 
strategies, and programs for targeting development, 
economic growth, and better quality of life for their citizens 
[17].  
Academics, professionals, private sector and governments, 
despite few commonalities, refer to smartness differently.  
“Smartness” of a city describes its ability to bring together 
all its resources to effectively and seamlessly achieve the 
goals and the targets it has set to itself [18]. Thus, smartness 
is mainly linked to seamless integration and interoperability. 
In some instances, smartness is interpreted as being strictly 
linked to urban efficiency at the level of economic 
development, environment, human capital, culture and 
leisure, and e-governance [19]. It is also regarded as urban 
efficiency along the six dimensions previously mentioned 
and considered intelligence as the use of ICTs infrastructure 
as the "glue" which integrates all the other elements of the 
smartness of the city [20].  Another approach groups the core 
factors leading to smartness into three categories, namely 
technology, people and institution and refers to smartness, in 
this case, as the urban efficiency reached via the intersection 
of these three groups [21].  Also, literature research shows 
that core smartness factors are also focused on sustainability 
and livability [22]. The latter lists internal and external 
factors grouped into eight clusters, namely management and 
organization, technology, governance, policy, people and 
communities, economy, built infrastructure and the natural 
environment. Therefore, smartness is the result of the 
achievement of these factors all together aiming at achieving 
urban efficiency. According to the European Union, 
smartness is a concept associated with the model of a 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

technologically advanced, green and economically attractive 
city [23].  The ITU-T/FG-SSC considers smartness as an 
attribute of the SSC along the six different dimensions 
shown in Fig. 1. It also looks at smartness in terms of finding 
smart solutions instead of conventional ones to address the 
needs of citizens. Therefore, smartness refers to addressing 
the needs of citizens via innovative technologically oriented 
solutions. In-line with this focus on innovation, selected 
researchers 
and 
practitioners 
interpret 
smartness 
as 
innovativeness [24].  
Different approaches highlighted the role of technology 
and mainly ICTs as crucial to smartness since it transforms 
life and work within a city in significant and fundamental 
ways [25]. However, researchers argue that without the real 
engagement and willingness to collaborate and cooperate 
between public institutions, private sector, voluntary 
organizations, schools and citizens, smartness will not be 
reached [26]. Therefore, ICTs are essential for smartness but 
collaboration and partnerships amongst the different 
elements of the city is a must. 
The list of definitions is long which clearly shows that 
the concept is still vague. No effort was so far conducted to 
come up with a synthesized definition capturing the main 
elements of smartness in the context of SSCs. In what 
follows, a discussion of the aforementioned definitions is 
presented and a holistic definition of smartness framing its 
related elements is introduced. 
III. 
SMARTNESS OF A SSC: TOWARDS A HOLISTIC 
DEFINITION 
This section discusses the above mentioned definitions of 
smartness and shows that smartness is a multidimensional 
dynamic process fostering the principles of sustainable 
development. 
A. Discussion of Definitions 
The presented definitions of smartness show the 
variance in interpreting the concept amongst governments, 
international organizations, academia, private sector, civil 
society organizations and others. They focus on innovation 
and technology as being important elements of a SSC and 
the majority considers ICTs and other means as enablers for 
city’s advancement and sustainability. They also consider it 
as a facilitator for ensuring integration and interoperability 
amongst the different systems of the city.  Moreover, the 
approaches either consider smartness as the process of 
achieving urban efficiency at the aforementioned six 
different dimensions or along a subset of these dimensions.  
In addition to achieving urban integration and 
interoperability, thus efficiency through innovative use of 
technologies and other means, several points are important to 
note. These are the adaptation to citizens’ needs and their 
quality of life. Also, different definitions shed light on the 
role of citizen engagement and on selected means of 
implementation of a SSC like partnerships between the 
different stakeholders in a city as a mean for advancing the 
realization of a SSC. Accordingly, smartness could be 
associated to the use of ICTs and other means to advance 
innovation throughout the different dimensions of a city to 
achieve urban efficiency. Smartness necessitates undertaking 
a series of actions to achieve urban efficiency; In other 
words, smartness is a process aimed at achieving urban 
efficiency. The latter is achieved by following an integrated 
approach which addresses the citizens’ needs while 
advancing economic growth and being environmentally 
friendly. This lies at the core of the concept of Sustainable 
Development and its principles which commit to equality, 
inclusion and justice, the precautionary principle, and the 
integration of the complex interconnections that exist 
between the environment, economy, and society. Therefore, 
smartness of a city is related to the quest of sustainable 
development. In the following section, we will explore in 
more details the concept of sustainable development,   its 
pillars and relation to the objectives of a SSC, thus its role in 
identifying the smartness of a selected SSC. 
B. Alignment with the Principles of Sustainable 
Development 
This section highlights the alignment existing between 
the goals of a SSC and the core principles of sustainable 
development. Thus, it justifies the mutually reinforcing 
linkage we create between smartness and sustainable 
development. 
To start with, the concept of sustainable development 
became well known after the launch of “Our Common 
Future”, a report published by the World Commission on 
Environment and Development in 1987. This report, also 
known as the Brundtland report, refers to sustainable 
development as “development which meets the needs of the 
present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs.”  The concept received 
global support after its acceptance by the United Nations 
General Assembly. In 1992, leaders of states around the 
world set out the principles of sustainable development at the 
United 
Nations 
Conference 
on 
Environment 
and 
Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil [27]. These principles 
focused among others on social equality and inclusion which 
is in itself challenging as it requires moving beyond meeting 
immediate needs and investing in solutions that lead, in the 
long term, to sustainable and resilient outcomes in the lives 
and livelihoods of populations [28]. The key principle of 
sustainable development underlying all others is the 
integration of environmental, social, and economic concerns 
into all aspects of decision making and governance systems. 
This integrated rather than fragmented approach is essential 
to urban efficiency in the context of SSCs and they are 
explicitly mentioned in the ITU definition of a SSC. 
Therefore, a relationship between the smartness and 
sustainable development is identified.  
Since the Brundtland report and the Rio Summit, 
sustainable development has transitioned from being a 
debatable concept, to one that has widespread endorsement 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
Figure 2.   Aspects of Sustainable Development 
 
by international institutions, governments, businesses, and 
civil society. It recognizes that growth must be inclusive and 
environmentally sound to reduce poverty and build shared 
prosperity for today’s population and to continue to meet the 
needs of future generations. It focuses on carefully planning 
to deliver both immediate and long-term benefits for people, 
planet, and prosperity [29]. Also, sustainable and resilient 
livelihoods denote granting sustainable and resilient good 
quality of life which is an objective of a SSC. 
The concept supports economic and social development, 
in particular for people with a low standard of living and in 
parallel highlights the need for protecting natural resources 
and the environment [19]. It has generally been recognized 
for main aspects, namely Economic, Environmental and 
Social along with synergies amongst them and implications 
on governance systems. The economic aspect focuses on the 
ability to produce goods and services on a continuing basis, 
to maintain manageable levels of government and external 
debt, and to avoid extreme imbalances. The environmental 
aspect maintains a stable resource base. The social aspect 
focuses on achieving distributional equity, adequate 
provision of social services including health and education, 
gender, and political accountability and participation. Fig. 2 
shows the synergies between these aspects.  
Given the above, sustainable development is considered 
as a process and sustainability is the state where the key 
goals of sustainable development are addressed: a high 
quality of life is achieved and the environment is preserved 
[30]. To attain an improved quality of life, which is one of 
the main goals of SSC, the city should be people-centered. It 
should address the needs of its citizens especially those of 
the poor to which main priority should be given as it 
constitutes the greatest challenge and indispensable 
requirement for achieving sustainable development [28]. 
Also, attaining a high quality of life requires reducing 
inequalities, considered to be a core driver for advancing 
sustainable development. Therefore, contributing to the 
process of sustainable development results in a contribution 
to smartness in the context of cities and vice versa, thus the 
relationship identified above could be regarded as mutual in 
nature. 
It is important to note that culture can be a powerful driver 
for development, with social, economic and environmental 
impacts at the community level [30]. Development 
approaches that are responsive to the cultural context and the 
specificities of a place and community, and advance a 
human-centered approach to development, are most 
effective, and likely to yield sustainable, inclusive and 
equitable outcomes [28]. Acknowledging and promoting 
respect for cultural diversity can facilitate achieving 
development goals and improving quality of life. Culture, 
understood this way, makes, development more sustainable, 
urban efficiency higher and cities smarter. Therefore culture 
further strengthens the linkage between smartness and the 
alignment with sustainable development 
Last but not least, in September 2015, during the United 
Nations Summit, the Sustainable Development Goals were 
announced and adopted by the world governments. They 
replace the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to 
present a holistic approach to development by embracing 
integrated economic, social and environmental dimensions. 
They constitute a set of 17 goals and 169 global development 
targets defining the global sustainable development agenda 
[31]. Goal 11 is dedicated to SSCs and communities which 
further supports our approach in linking smartness to 
sustainable development. 
This alignment is of upmost importance since, if properly 
implemented, it addresses many of the criticisms facing 
SSCs. For instance, one of the reported criticisms of SSCs is 
the possibility of widening digital gap and the alienation of a 
big portion of the society, namely the technology illiterate. 
Following this example, when measuring smartness bearing 
in mind the principles of sustainable development, we would 
not only measure availability of services but also equal 
accessibility. 
Therefore, 
smartness, 
when 
linked 
to 
sustainable development, will advance concepts of equality 
and inclusion and respond to comparable criticisms. It will 
also highlight the integration needed to be present among the 
different aspects of a city. Up to this point, smartness in 
addition to being associated to the use of ICTs and other 
means to advance innovation at the different dimensions of 
the city to achieve urban efficiency, it is proved to be a 
process that enjoys a mutually reinforcing relationship with 
sustainable development. 
C.  Smartness: a Multidimensional Dynamic Process 
In what follows, a discussion highlighting cross cutting 
issues and enablers of SSCs and which affect smartness of 
cities is provided. The dynamicity of the smartness process is 
also underlined. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

1) Smartness Cross cutting Issues and Enablers 
As 
mentioned 
previously, 
the 
integration 
of 
environmental, social, and economic concerns into all 
aspects of decision making and governance systems are 
essential to sustainable urban efficiency [32]. Recalling the 
SSC definition of ITU, we note that not only integration is 
needed but also innovation. ITU refers to a SSC as an 
innovative city. Therefore, innovation lies at the core of 
SSCs and relates to the different dimensions of a city. Also, 
ICTs and other means are considered as the nerve connecting 
all dimensions of a city to grant efficiency. 
The main challenge towards the transition to a more 
equitable and environmentally aware growth is to address the 
innovation issue not only from an economic, but also from 
social and environmental dimensions [30]. Also, for 
sustainable development, the challenge for innovation does 
not rest solely on economic benefits and opportunities, but 
also in the societal changes induced by innovative capacity 
and the consequences of this for the environmental and 
social 
sustainability. 
Innovation 
can 
lead 
to 
the 
transformation of systems, values and culture as well as the 
production of new and/or improved products or processes 
[33]. Innovation serves as a crucial driver of rising 
prosperity and improved national competitiveness [34]. It 
fosters the wheel of sustainable development [35], thus 
fosters the realization of SSCs and affects their smartness. 
In addition to innovation, we regard ICTs as an 
enabler for achieving urban efficiency and improving 
quality of life of citizens.  ICTs alone are rarely the key to 
unlocking economic value, but it induces real wealth 
creation when it is combined with new ways of doing 
business and provides an important opportunity for 
technological leapfrogging, in particular through mobile 
telephony [36]. ICTs allow the production of better statistics 
leading to better decision making, deployment of an 
intelligent 
infrastructure, 
advancement 
of 
social 
inclusiveness and citizens’ engagement, enhancement of 
economic competitiveness, establishment of low carbon 
businesses and promotion of sustainability [37]. In addition, 
the fragmented approach to development resulted in having 
applications that live in silos. Business as usual cannot 
continue when implementing SSCs and trying to monitor 
smartness. Integration between the different dimensions of a 
city should be promoted to grant sustainability. This 
technical integration amongst different platforms constitutes 
one of the main roles that ICTs can play in a SSC, thus 
smartness.  
Researchers refer to technology differently. Some of 
them consider technology as a crucial dimension of a SSC 
[21] while others believe that it is an indispensable 
ingredient of the SSC that acts as glue connecting different 
everyday living services to public infrastructures thus 
ensuring 
integration 
and 
interoperability. 
It 
is 
the 
orchestrator of the various elements of the SSC which should 
coexist [3].  The ITU-T/FG-SSC highlights the crucial 
existence of technologies due to their ability to act as a 
digital platform from which an information and knowledge 
network can be created [5]. Such a network allows for the 
aggregation of information and data not only for the purpose 
of data analysis, but also towards an improved understanding 
on how the city is functioning in terms of resource 
consumption, services, and lifestyles. Information made 
available by these digital platforms would serve as a 
reference for stakeholders to take action and create policy 
directions that would eventually improve the quality of life 
for the citizens and the society as a whole. Therefore, ICTs 
constitute an enabler for SSCs and a tool to be harnessed for 
ensuring sustainable development. Therefore, ICTs provide 
opportunities for increasing integration among the different 
dimensions thereby attaining urban efficiency. Harnessing 
ICTs for realizing sustainable development enforces the 
importance of highlighting it in the definition of smartness as 
a tool to achieve urban efficiency. Therefore, smartness, up 
to this point, denotes the use of ICTs and other means to 
infuse innovation at all dimensions of a city thereby 
advancing urban efficiency.  
2) Smartness: a Dynamic Process 
Having defined the main elements of smartness, its 
enablers and the mutually reinforcing relationship with 
sustainable development, it is important to show whether it is 
a snapshot or a process and whether it is of dynamic or static 
nature. So far, we clearly see that there have been three 
distinct phases of how cities transformed from being 
technology driven to city government driven and lately to be 
citizens driven. The first phase of SSCs is characterized by 
technology providers encouraging the adoption of their 
solutions to cities without taking into consideration their 
impact on citizens and their quality of life. Thus, smartness is 
solely connoting the adoption of advanced technical 
solutions. A shift in the manifestation of SSCs occurred thus 
a new phase of cities with a different interpretation of 
smartness took place.  This phase was led by city planners 
instead of technology providers and they focused on 
technology solutions aimed at improving the quality of life 
of citizens. In this case, the concept of smartness changed to 
include the impact of the adopted solutions on people. 
Lately, leading SSCs started to embrace citizen co-creation 
models for helping to drive the next generation of smarter 
cities where the engagement of citizens lie at the core of the 
advancement of cities. Smartness, in this case, focuses on 
citizen’s engagement and social inclusion, a core principle in 
the sphere of sustainable development. These different 
phases or manifestations of SSCs denote the dynamicity of 
the concept of smartness. Also, it sheds the light on the need 
for technology to provide services and ensure coherence 
amongst the city’s systems and governments to properly 
adopt technology enabled solution for the betterment of the 
city and the lives of its citizens. These objectives lie at the 
core of the philosophy of sustainable development. These 
concepts of equality added to the elements previously 
mentioned constitute the basis for sustainable development 
which is on its own a process, not an end in itself. [38].  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
Figure 3.   Smartness Dynamics of a Smart Sustainable City 
Having discussed the dynamicity of smartness as a 
process, the dimensions to consider for urban efficiency, the 
cross-cutting issues and enablers, and the need for alignment 
with the principles of sustainable development principles, it 
becomes possible to introduce a new holistic definition 
which reads as follows: “Smartness is a dynamic process 
through which ICTs and other means are used to advance 
innovative multidimensional urban efficiency in line with the 
principles of sustainable development”. Each city is unique 
with distinctive economic, environmental and social contexts 
and will have to determine its own path to becoming smart 
and sustainable while benefiting from available and related 
good practices. Becoming a SSC is not an end goal but rather 
a process enabling change. Fig. 3 depicts the result of 
analyzing the concept of smartness.  
IV. 
EXPECTED OUTCOME 
The discussion above clearly indicates the lack of a clear 
harmonized and holistic definition of smartness in the 
context of SSCs. By following a hybrid approach, this 
research puts forward a definition for smartness. It 
highlights the importance of ICTs and other means as 
enablers to advance innovative multidimensional urban 
efficiency while ensuring alignment with sustainable 
development principles. This introduced concept is expected 
to constitute the foundation of a methodological model 
aimed at assessing the performance of a SSC, thus 
monitoring its smartness. This is important given the 
inexistence of such a model and its importance in assisting 
policy and decision makers in urban planning in the 
prioritization of efforts for the betterment of their cities [8] 
[39]. 
By observing smartness and the quest of sustainable 
development, 
we 
highlight 
a 
mutually 
reinforcing 
relationship among them. Both, to be achieved, for instance, 
should be people centered and should grant people a high 
quality of life. By linking both processes, we note that 
smartness is not only about technologies and use of smart 
solutions but rather about achieving economic development 
with environmental ceiling and social foundation touching 
on, just to name few, social equity, gender equality, health, 
jobs, education and others. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
There exists a theoretical debate as to what smartness 
means for cities in different contexts. In this research, we 
showed that smartness is a dynamic process enabling change. 
It uses technologies to infuse innovation in the systems of the 
city and achieve urban efficiency at different dimensions 
while being aligned with the principles of sustainable 
development which is in itself a process rather than an end.  
Cities 
continue 
to 
develop 
and 
refine 
their 
environmentally friendly economic and social goals and the 
strategies to achieve them. To take advantage of how 
smarter city approaches can help advance those strategies, 
city authorities and stakeholders need to understand how 
their city is performing today and where progress is being 
achieved in infusing smartness into their systems.  Defining 
smartness and setting its boundaries contribute to assessing 
the performance of a SSC. Such an assessment can identify 
emerging strengths and weaknesses and highlight where real 
progress is occurring and inform a plan for future 
improvements. It will assist city managers and policy makers 
in monitoring the complexity of the factors that make up a 
city smart and sustainable noting the uniqueness of each city 
in terms of its economic, environmental and social contexts. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] UN, World’s Population Increasingly Urban with more than 
Half 
Living 
in 
Urban 
areas, 
available 
from: 
http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/news/population/wor
ld-urbanization-prospects-2014.html, Jul. 2014. [retrieved: 
Dec., 2015]. 
[2] T. Daniels, “A Trail Across Time: American Environmental 
Planning from City Beautiful to Sustainability,” Journal of the 
American Planning Association, vol. 75, no. 2, 2009, pp. 178-
192. 
[3] IEEE, Smart Cities, available from: http://smartcities.ieee.org/ 
about.html, [retrieved: May., 2015]. 
[4] Forbes, Smart Cities -- A $1.5 Trillion Market Opportunity, 
Forbes LLC., available from: http://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
sarwantsingh/2014/06/19/smart-cities-a-1-5-trillion-market-
opportunity/, Jun. 2014. [retrieved: Nov., 2015]. 
[5] ITU-T FG-SSC, An Overview of Smart Sustainable Cities 
and 
the 
Role 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies, Geneva: International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU-T) Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities (FG-
SSC), Oct. 2014.  
[6] S. Al-Nasrawi, C. Adams, and A. El-Zaart, “Measuring 
Smartness and Sustainability of Cities,” 23rd European 
Conference on Information Systems - Resilience and 
Information Systems, Muenster: Germany, May. 2015, 
unpublished. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

[7] S. Y. Lee, K. Y. Jin, and S. H. Choi, A Study on Convergence 
Technology for Building of Smart City. ICCA 2013, ASTL 
vol. 24, 2013, pp. 113-116. 
[8] S. Al-Nasrawi, C. Adams, and A. El-Zaart, “A Conceptual 
Multidimensional Model for Assessing Smart Sustainable 
Cities,” Journal of Information Systems and Technology 
Management (JISTEM), vol. 12, no. 3, Sept/Dec. 2015, pp. 
559-576, doi: 10.4301/S1807-17752015000300003. 
 
[9] M. O’Grady and G. O’Hare, “How Smart Is Your City?,” 
Science, vol. 335, no. 3, Sep. 2009, pp. 1581-1582. 
[10] ITU, Shaping Smarter and more Sustainable Cities: Streving 
for Sustainable Development Goals, Geneva: International 
Telecommunication Union, Jan. 2016. 
[11] M. Ibrahim, S. Al-Nasrawi, C. Adams, and A. El-Zaart, 
“Challenges Facing E-Government and Smart Sustainable 
Cities: An Arab Region Perspective,” Proc. of the 15th 
European Conference on eGovernment (ECEG2015), Jun. 
2015, pp. 396-402. 
[12] R. Giffinger, et al., Smart Cities: Ranking of European 
Medium-sized 
Cities, 
Vienna: 
Vienna 
University 
of 
Technology, Oct. 2007. 
[13] C. Klein and G. Kaefer, “From smart homes to smart cities: 
Opportunities and challenges from an industrial perspective,” 
Proc. of the 8th International Conference, NEW2AN and 1st 
Russian Conference on SmartSpaces, ruSMART,  vol. 5174, 
2008, pp. 260-260.  
[14] S. Hodgkingson, Is Your City Smart Enough?, London: 
OVUM, Mar. 2011. 
[15] W. S. Spangler, et al., “A smarter process for sensing the 
information 
space,” 
IBM 
Journal 
of 
Research 
and 
Development, vol. 54, no. 4, Sep. 2010, pp. 1-13, 
doi:10.1147/JRD.2010.2050541.  
[16] I. Marsa-Maestre, M. A. Lopez-Carmona, J. R. Velasco, and 
A. Navarro, “Mobile agents for service personalization in 
smart environments,” Journal of Networks, vol. 3, no. 5, May. 
2008, pp. 30-41. 
[17] Center on Governance, Smart Capital Evaluation Guidelines 
Report: Performance Measurement and Assessment of  Smart 
Capital, Ottawa: University of Ottawa, 2003. 
[18] ISO/IEC, Smart Cities – Preliminary Report (2014), Geneva: 
International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization 
and 
International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC), 2015. 
[19] M. Velpuri and A. Pidugu, Enabling Smart and Sustainable 
Cities Through Real Estate and City Biodiversity Indices, FIG 
Working Week 2015, From the Wisdom of the Ages to the 
Challenges of the Modern World, May. 2015. 
[20] UN-Habitat, Habitat Issue Paper on Smart Cities, New York: 
United Nations Habitat, May. 2015. 
[21] T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Conceptualizing Smart City with 
Dimensions of Technology, People, and Institutions,” Proc. of 
the 12th Annual International Digital Government Research 
Conference, 2011, pp. 282-291. 
[22] H. Chourabi, et al., “Understanding Smart Cities: An 
Integrative 
Framework,” 
Proc. 
of 
the 
45th 
Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE, 
Jan.2012, pp. 2289-2297, doi:10.1109/HICSS.2012.615. 
[23] European 
Union 
(EU), 
“Cities 
of 
Tomorrow,” 
doi:10.2776/41803, 
available 
from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/studies/
pdf/citiesoftomorrow/citiesoftomorrow_final.pdf , [retrieved: 
March, 2016]. 
[24] K. Grumadaitė, “Innovation Dimension in the Concept of a 
Smart City: Is the Innovativeness the Main Attribute of Being 
Smart?,” 8th International Scientific Conference “Business 
and Management 2014”, May. 2014, pp. 903-910. 
[25] R. G. Hollands, “Will the Real Smart City Please Stand up?,” 
City: Analysis of Urban trends, culture, theory, policy, action 
vol. 12. Nov. 2008, pp. 303-320. 
[26] H. Lindskog, “Smart communities initiatives,” Proc. of the 
3rd ISOneWorld Conference, 2005, pp. 83-101.  
[27] J. Drexhage and D. Murphy, Sustainable Development: From 
Brundtland to Rio 2012, New York: International Institute for 
Sustainable Development (IISD), Sept. 2010. 
[28] DSD, Future We want, New York: United Nations, Devision 
for Sustainable Development (DSD), Dec. 2011.  
[29] The World Bank, Sustainable Development, avaialble from: 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/sustainabledevelopment/o
verview#1. [retrieved: Dec., 2015]. 
[30] R. Bleischwitz, et al., Eco-innovation: putting the EU on the 
path to a resource and energy efficient economy, Brussles: 
Europena Parlimint, Mar. 2009 
[31] SDKP, Transforming our World: the 2030 Agena for 
sustainable 
Development, 
New 
York: 
Sustainable 
Development Knowledge Platform,  avaiable from: https:// 
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworl
d, 2016. [retrieved: Jan., 2016]. 
[32] R. Emas, The Concept of Sustainable Development: 
Definition and Defining Principles Rachel Emas, Florida: 
Florida International University, 2015. 
[33] N. Gjoksi, Innovation and sustainable development: Linkages 
and perspectives for policies in Europe, Vienna: European 
Sustainable Development Network (ESDN), Jun. 2011. 
[34] UN, Science, technology, and innovation for sustainable 
development in the global partnership for development 
beyond 2015, New York: United Nations Systems Task Team 
on the POST-2015 UN Development Agenda, 2015.  
[35] G. M. Marcelle, Redefining Innovation in the Global South: 
Critical Imperatives, Budapest: United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development, 2015-2016. 
[36] UN, Innovation for Sustainable Development: Local Case 
Studies from Africa, New Yor: United Nations, Apr. 2008.  
[37] B. Jamoussi, Shaping Tomorrow’s Smart Sustainable Cities, 
available form: http://unctad.org/meetings/en/Presentation/ 
CSTD_2015_ppt13_Jamoussi_ITU_en.pdf, 
Jan. 
2016.  
[retrieved: Jan., 2016]. 
[38] UNECE, Sustainable development - concept and action, 
Geneva: United Nation Economic Commission for Europe, 
2016. [retrieved: Jan., 2016]. 
[39] IBM Global Business Services, How Smart is Your City? - 
Helping Cities Measure Progress, Somer: IBM Corporation, 
Sept. 2009. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

