Economic Impact of Adopting Assistive Technologies on Quality Adjusted Life Years and Work 
Productivity 
Siny Joseph & Caden Brond 
Department of Integrated Studies 
Kansas State University 
Manhattan, KS, USA 
siny@k-state.edu, cdbrond@k-state.edu 
Vinod Namboodiri 
School of Computing 
Wichita State University 
Wichita, KS, USA 
vinod.namboodiri@wichita.edu 
 
 
Abstract—This paper discusses the development of a novel 
survey instrument to measure the impact of adopting assistive 
technologies. The goal is to determine the quality of life 
improvements and increase in work productivity for people 
with disabilities with the use of assistive technologies. The task 
of Wayfinding is presented as a case study to evaluate the 
benefit to people with disabilities. This paper contributes to the 
Accessibility Devices and Applications track of the conference.   
Keywords-accessibility; assisitve technology; quality adjusted 
life years; work productivity. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Assistive Technologies (AT) are a concept of an item or 
piece of equipment that enables individuals with disabilities 
to enjoy full inclusion and integration in society. While 
accessibility focuses on giving “similar” access capabilities 
to a specific device or service, AT is broader, with a focus 
on enabling core human tasks.  
Technological advances in health and social care have 
led to a plethora of ATs that enable people with 
impairments or disabilities to ameliorate their impact to 
varying extents. There is an increasing awareness that there 
are many barriers, physical or otherwise, that impede 
opportunities for work, education, and participation by 
people with disabilities. Technology has tremendous 
potential for removing accessibility barriers. For example, 
mapping and localization systems deployed in public spaces 
support orientation and wayfinding, or to identify safe paths 
to traverse for wheelchair users [1], [2], [3]. 
Often ATs are developed with the claim it is useful and 
has potential to ameliorate the life of people with disabilities 
[4], [5]. Quantifying the benefits of ATs is an important 
consideration towards its development and adoptability. 
Central to quantifying these benefits is the use of survey 
instruments. Common survey instruments adopted for 
measuring health utility are EQ-5D-3L developed by the 
EuroQol Group, Health Utilities Index Mark 3 scale (HUI3), 
SF-6D scale developed from SF-36. Questionnaires to 
evaluate at-work disability and productivity loss are Work 
Limitations Questionnaire (WLQ-25) and Workplace 
Activity Limitation Scale (WALS).  The most common 
questionnaire to measure Quality-Adjusted Life Years 
(QALY) is EQ-5D-3L, where three levels of severity are 
assigned to five dimensions of quality of life, namely, 
mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, and 
anxiety/depression. 
Similarly, 
HUI3 
considers 
eight 
attributes of 5 to 6 levels.  
There are no survey instruments developed that 
standardizes aspects related to both QALY and work 
productivity 
jointly. 
Most 
health 
utility 
capturing 
instruments (such as EQ-5D-3L and SF-36) address quality 
of life, while other instruments such as WALS and WALQ-
25 measure the work dimension. Primarily these instruments 
evaluate the impact of interventions such as a drug or 
medical treatments and in some cases commonly used ATs 
(hearing aids, rollators) [6]. QALY could serve as a proxy 
for work productivity but it lacks explicit work-related 
metrics, making it an abstract measure of work productivity. 
The impact of ATs on QALY and work productivity can be 
separately measured by different instruments designed for 
this purpose. However, it is beneficial, meaningful, and 
efficient to have an instrument that measures both 
dimensions, especially when an AT such as a wayfinding 
tool cuts across dimensions. Measuring the impact for 
people with disabilities using a single instrument 
embodying both QALY and work productivity, allows for 
robust analysis of the AT. 
Thus, the objective of this work is to develop a unique 
standardized survey instrument that measures both health 
utility and work productivity as it applies to adopting ATs 
by people with disabilities. The questionnaire developed 
will assess utility weights for quality of work-life and 
quality of life, and will be deployed widely to gather 
statistics from individuals with a wide range of disabilities, 
namely impairments related to visual, hearing, motor, 
cognitive and elderly. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the methodology. Section III provides a 
description of the evaluation tasks and the framework on 
which 
future 
work 
will 
be 
accomplished. 
The 
acknowledgement and conclusions close the article. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The unique questionnaire designed to address health and 
work productivity follows the construct to calculate Quality-
Adjusted Life Years (QALY). QALY is a well-known 
measure that attempts to show the extent to which a 
particular treatment or system extends life and improves the 
quality of life at the same time [6], [7], [8], [9]. It is a tool 
aimed at incorporating all the essential dimensions of health, 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-988-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

ability, and length of life. It combines the effects of health 
interventions on morbidity (quality of life) and mortality 
(quantity of life) into a single index. QALY has been largely 
used by insurance providers to weigh the benefits of a drug 
or medical treatment for patients [8], [10], [11]. 
QALY determines by how much not being in health 
impacts a person’s quality of life. QALY’s do this by 
assigning a number between 0 and 1, called a health utility, 
to the various conditions a person’s health could be in. A 0 
would represent the lowest possible quality of life, while a 1 
would represent the highest possible quality of life. Health 
utilities are typically derived from surveys (EQ-5D-3L, SF-
36), which attempt to determine how much survey 
participants would prefer to be in one health state as 
compared to another. Health states do not correspond 
directly to specific disabilities- they instead represent the 
degree of impairment a person has in specific, limited 
categories of functioning (such as mobility, ability to 
perform tasks, etc.). However, most disabilities share some 
or all characteristics of a health state. Goal of a health utility 
as measured by the instrument is to measure the degree to 
which a particular disability negatively impacts quality of 
life as compared to a state of perfect health. After 
determining the health utility, the decimal is multiplied by 
the number of years (quantity of life) that the AT is 
expected to cover. The quantity can be the number of years 
by which the system extends their life or enhances 
productivity at work, i.e., the number of years a person 
expects to use AT over their lifetime in being able to 
maintain a certain standard of living and work [12] 
effectively. Similarly, some states are identified that relate 
to quality of work-life [13], [14], [15]. These states help 
explain impact on work productivity. Figure 1 breaks down 
health and quality of work-life dimensions from which 
health and work utilities are calculated. Adoption of ATs are 
expected to change the utilities, thereby aiding in measuring 
changes in QALY and work productivity. This would 
further help in determining the cost-effectiveness of 
adopting AT. 
 
Figure 1. Design of the survey instrument 
 
III. 
DESCRIPTION 
To evaluate the economic impact of adopting an assistive 
technology in alleviating health and work productivity of a 
person with disability, the following is undertaken in this 
research work: 
A. 
Use of Instruments for AT applications:  
A feasibility study of popularly used and industry 
accepted survey instruments (EQ-5D-3L, SF-36, WALS and 
WLQ) is conducted to measure the impact of ATs in quality 
of life and work productivity for people with disabilities. 
This scoping literature review across various domains 
(healthcare, information technology, transportation etc.) 
shows despite the wide-spread use of the survey 
instruments, there is not much analysis of AT adoptability. 
The landscape is dominated by instruments gauging the 
impact of drugs or medical treatments. Table 1 provides a 
snapshot of limited work published in literature applying 
instruments to measure the impact of AT on people with 
disabilities. While there are some evidences of using EQ-
5D-3L and SF-36 in measuring AT adoptability, there is 
hardly any of WALS and WLQ use. 
B. 
Comparative study of Instruments:  
A comparative study of the four instruments listed 
above is conducted on various criteria to gauge its degree of 
suitability in measuring both aspects of life and work 
productivity together with AT interventions. The study finds 
that these instruments are typically used in a mutually 
exclusive form i.e., measures either quality of life or work 
productivity. However, ATs can be instrumental in 
improving both aspects. The comparative study provides a 
benchmark to develop a unique standardized instrument that 
accomplishes the objective outlined in this research. Table 2 
evaluates the four survey instruments on the following 
criteria, a) the nature of questions the survey seeks to 
evaluate, b) format of the questions, c) the prevalent 
applicability of the instrument, d) accessibility of the 
instrument, e) strengths, and weaknesses of the instrument. 
This evaluation of commonly used survey instruments that 
serve as the industry standard guides the development of the 
novel instrument proposed in this paper. 
C. 
Case Study of Wayfinding systems: 
A unique standardized instrument is developed that 
measures the joint impact of ATs in both quality of life and 
quality of work-life. A smartphone-based indoor/outdoor 
wayfinding application for persons with disabilities is used 
as a case study for applying this instrument. This instrument 
is calibrated against established instruments (EQ-5D-3L, 
SF-36, WALS and WLQ) and provides a detailed 
framework to measure both QALY and work productivity. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-988-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Figure 1 provides the structure of the instrument and its 
design. Similar to the EQ-5D-3L instrument, 5 health states 
are defined and responses will be gathered at 5 levels 
spanning no problems at all to extreme problems. To 
measure work productivity, 5 more states are defined 
specific to work experience and these follow the same 
construct of measuring responses at 5 levels. The unique 
instrument with standardized 10 dimensions and 5 levels of 
responses to each dimension will allow for determining 
utility values or index values. The index values will be used 
to calculate QALY and work productivity aspects jointly for 
different groups of people with disabilities. Additionally, 
the developed instrument will also be administered to 
people with no disabilities to serve as a benchmark. The 
instrument will allow for evaluating the changes in index 
values based on adoption of the wayfinding system. Further, 
the cost-effectiveness of adopting wayfinding system can be 
computed from QALY and Work Productivity calculations.  
Future work will involve gathering data by administering 
the designed instrument to persons with disabilities related 
to impairments such as cognitive, visual, hearing, motor, 
and elderly and also to persons with no disabilities. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper we introduce a unique survey instrument in 
the context of established separate questionnaires for health 
and work-life that contributes to the literature in two ways. 
A survey instrument that evaluates both the health and 
work-life domains jointly, and secondly, analyses the use of 
assistive technologies on quality of life and work 
productivity in the targeted population.  This work 
addresses the gap in the literature where studies focus on the 
impact of interventions such as a drug or medical treatment 
and in some cases AT, either on the quality of life or work 
productivity. 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are grateful for the support for this work by 
NSF grant # 1951864. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Ahmetovic, C. Gleason, C. Ruan, K. Kitani, H. Takagi, and 
C. Asakawa. Navcog: A navigational cognitive assistant for the 
blind. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, 
MobileHCI '16, pages 90--99, New York, NY, USA, 2016. 
 [2] S. A. Cheraghi, Vinod Namboodiri, Guler Arsal. SafeExit4AII: 
An Inclusive Indoor Emergency Evacuation System for People 
With Disabilities. W4A '19: Proceedings of the 16th Web For All 
May 2019 Article No: 29 Pages 1–10. 
[3] S. A. Cheraghi, V. Namboodiri, and L. Walker. Guidebeacon: 
Beacon-based indoor wayfinding for the blind, visually impaired, 
and disoriented. IEEE Pervasive Communications (PerCom), 2016. 
[4] A. M. Cook, J. M. Polgar, Essentials of Assistive Technologies, 
1st Edition, 2014 
[5] A. M. Cook, J. M. Polgar, P. Encarnação, Assistive 
Technologies: Principles and Practice, 5th Edition, 2019 
 [6] Brandt Å, Alwin J, Persson J, Husberg M. Can we rely on 
QALYs for assistive technologies? Technology & Disability. 
2012;24 (1):93-100  
 [7] M. C. Weinstein, G. Torrance and A. McGuire, QALYs: the 
basics, Value in Health 12 (Suppl 1) 2009, S5-S9. 
[8] “Quality-Adjusted Life Years and the Devaluation of Life with 
Disability”, National Council on Disability, November 6, 2019, 
https://ncd.gov/sites/default/files/NCD_Quality_Adjusted_Life_Re
port_508.pdf 
[9] “Health Related Quality of Life”, Centers for Disease Control 
and 
Prevention, 
updated 
October 
31, 
2018, 
https://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/concept.htm. 
[10] B. Solow and E. J. Pezalla, “Commentary: ISPOR’s Initiative 
on US Value Assessment Frameworks: The Use of Cost-
Effectiveness Research in Decision Making US Insurers”. Value in 
Health 21 (2018) 166-167. 
[11] D. Roland, Obscure Model puts a price on good health- and 
drives 
down 
drug 
costs, 
Wall 
Street 
Journal 
(2019) 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/obscure-model-puts-a-price-on-
good-healthand-drives-down-drug-costs-11572885123 
[12] Joseph, S., and Vinod Namboodiri (2020) “Assessment of 
Economic Value of Assistive Technologies through  Quality-
Adjusted Work-Life Years (QAWLY),” in Computers Helping 
People with Special Needs - 17th International Conference, 
ICCHP 
2020, 
Lecco, 
Italy, 
September 
9-11, 
2020, 
Proceedings, Part II, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, K. 
Miesenberger, R. Manduchi, M. C. Rodriguez, and P. Penáz, Eds., 
vol. 
12377. 
Springer, 
2020, 
pp. 
480–
488.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58805-2_57 
[13] Horst, D.J., Broday, E.E., Bondarick, R., Serpe, L.F., & 
Pilatti, L.A. (2014). Quality of Working Life and Productivity: An 
Overview of the Conceptual Framework. International Journal 
of Managerial Studies and Research (IJMSR) Volume 2, 
Issue 5, PP 87-98 
[14] Almarsh, Sultan O.. “A Measurement Scale for Evaluating 
Quality 
of Work Life: Conceptualization 
and Empirical 
Validation.” Trends in Applied Sciences Research 10 (2015): 143-
156. 
[15] Afroz, Saman. (2018). Quality of Work Life: A Conceptual 
Model. Advances in Economics and Business Management 
(AEBM) Volume 4, Issue 8; October-December, 2017, pp. 570-
578 
 [16] Øksnebjerg, L., Woods, B., Vilsen, C. R., Ruth, K., 
Gustafsson, M., Ringkøbing, S. P., & Waldemar, G. (2020). Self-
management and cognitive rehabilitation in early stage dementia – 
merging methods to promote coping and adoption of assistive 
technology. A pilot study. Aging & Mental Health, 24(11), 1894–
1903 
[17] 
Rebecca 
J. 
Kelly-Campbell 
& 
Kamea 
Lessoway (2015) Hearing aid and hearing assistance technology 
use 
in 
Aotearoa/New 
Zealand, International 
Journal 
of 
Audiology, 54:5, 308-315, DOI: 10.3109/14992027.2014.979952 
[18] Thompson, W. W., Zack, M. M., Krahn, G. L., Andresen, E. 
M., & Barile, J. P. (2012). Health-Related Quality of Life Among 
Older Adults With and Without Functional Limitations. American 
Journal of Public Health, 102(3), 496–502.  
[19] Pettersson, I., Hagberg, L., Fredriksson, C., & Hermansson, L. 
N. (2016). The effect of powered scooters on activity, participation 
and quality of life in elderly users. Disability & Rehabilitation: 
Assistive Technology, 11(7), 558–563.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-988-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

[20] Vincent, C., Gagnon, D. H., & Dumont, F. (2019). Pain, 
fatigue, function and participation among long-term manual 
wheelchair users partnered with a mobility service dog. Disability 
and Rehabilitation. Assistive Technology, 14(2), 99–108.  
[21] Arun, S., Marbaniang, B., Borgohain, B., & Kanagaraj, S. 
(2020). Rehabilitation evaluation of the newly developed 
polymeric based passive polycentric knee joint. Disability and 
Rehabilitation. Assistive Technology, 15(8), 871–877.  
[22] Huang, C.-C., Chen, W.-S., Tsai, M.-W., & Wang, W. T.-J. 
(2017). Comparing the Chinese versions of two knee-specific 
questionnaires (IKDC and KOOS): reliability, validity, and 
responsiveness. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 15(1), 238.  
[23] Demers, L., Fuhrer, M. J., Jutai, J. W., Scherer, M. J., 
Pervieux, I., & DeRuyter, F. (2008). Tracking mobility-related 
assistive technology in an outcomes study. Assistive Technology : 
The Official Journal of RESNA, 20(2), 73–83.  
[24] Howard, R., Gathercole, R., Bradley, R., Harper, E., Davis, 
L., Pank, L., Lam, N., Talbot, E., Hooper, E., Winson, R., Scutt, 
B., Montano, V. O., Nunn, S., Lavelle, G., Bateman, A., Bentham, 
P., Burns, A., Dunk, B., Forsyth, K., & Fox, C. (2021). The 
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of assistive technology and 
telecare for independent living in dementia: a randomised 
controlled trial. Age and Ageing, 50(3), 882–890. 
[25] Vuorialho, A., Karinen, P., & Sorri, M. (2006). Effect of 
hearing aids on hearing disability and quality of life in the 
elderly. International Journal of Audiology, 45(7), 400–405.  
[26] Van Walsem, M. R., Howe, E. I., Frich, J. C., & Andelic, N. 
(2016). Assistive Technology for Cognition and Health-related 
Quality of Life in Huntington’s Disease. Journal of Huntington’s 
Disease, 5(3), 261–270.  
[27] Nollett, C., Lewis, C., Kitchiner, N., Roberts, N., Addison, K., 
Brookes-Howell, L., Cosgrove, S., Cullen, K., Ehlers, A., Heke, S., 
Kelson, M., Lovell, K., Madden, K., McEwan, K., McNamara, R., 
Phillips, C., Pickles, T., Simon, N., & Bisson, J. (2018). Pragmatic 
RAndomised controlled trial of a trauma-focused guided self-help 
Programme 
versus 
InDividual 
trauma-focused 
cognitive 
Behavioural therapy for post-traumatic stress disorder (RAPID): 
trial protocol. BMC Psychiatry, 18(1), 77.  
[28] Okullo, G. O., Flores, M. J., Peck, C. J., Socci, A. R., & 
Kisitu, D. K. (2022). Adverse events in the treatment of 
motorcycle-related isolated limb injuries at a regional hospital in 
Uganda: 
a 
prospective 
clinical 
analysis. International 
Orthopaedics, 46(1), 71–77.  
[29] Bray, N., Edwards, R. T., Squires, L., & Morrison, V. (2019). 
Perceptions of the impact of disability and impairment on health, 
quality of life and capability. BMC Research Notes, 12(1), 287.  
[30] Hammond, A., O’Brien, R., Woodbridge, S., Bradshaw, L., 
Prior, Y., Radford, K., Culley, J., Whitham, D., &amp; Pulikottil-
Jacob, R. (2017, July 21). Job retention vocational rehabilitation 
for employed people with inflammatory arthritis (work-IA): A 
feasibility randomized controlled trial - BMC musculoskeletal 
disorders. BioMed Central.  
 
  
TABLE 1: SURVEY INSTRUMENTS MEASURING AT ADOPTIONS 
 
Authors 
 
Year 
 
Title of Paper 
 
Instrument 
Used 
AT Used 
 
[6] 
 
2012 
 
Can we rely on QALYs for assistive technologies? 
 
EQ-5D 
 
Various 
 
[16] 
  
2020 
  
Self-management and cognitive rehabilitation in early stage dementia – merging 
methods to promote coping and adoption of assistive technology. A pilot study. 
 
EQ-5D 
  
ReACT app 
  
[17] 
  
2015 
 
Hearing aid and hearing assistance technology use in Aotearoa/New Zealand. 
 
SF-36  
 
Hearing Aid 
 
[18] 
  
2011 
  
Health-Related Quality of Life Among Older Adults With and Without Functional 
Limitations. 
 
SF-36 
  
Various 
 
[19] 
  
2015 
  
The effect of powered scooters on activity, participation and quality of life in elderly 
users. 
 
SF-36 
  
Powered Mobility 
Devices 
 
[20] 
  
2017 
  
Pain, fatigue, function and participation among long-term manual wheelchair users 
partnered with a mobility service dog. 
 
SF-36 
  
Mobility Service Dogs 
 
[21] 
  
2019 
  
Rehabilitation evaluation of the newly developed polymeric based passive polycentric 
knee joint. 
 
SF-36 
  
Polycentric Knee Joint 
 
[22] 
  
2017 
  
Comparing the Chinese versions of two knee-specific questionnaires (IKDC and 
KOOS): reliability, validity, and responsiveness. 
 
SF-36 
  
Comparing 2 AT Surveys 
 
[23] 
 
2008 
 
Tracking mobility-related assistive technology in an outcomes study. 
 
SF-36 
 
Mobility Assistive 
Technology Devices 
[24] 
  
2021 
  
The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of assistive technology and telecare for 
independent living in dementia: a randomized controlled trial. 
 
EQ-5D 
  
Assistive Technology and 
Telecare (dementia) 
[25] 
 
2012 
 
Effect of hearing aids on hearing disability and quality of life in the elderly. 
 
EQ-5D 
 
Hearing Aid 
 
[26] 
 
 
 
  
2016 
 
 
 
  
Assistive Technology for Cognition and Health-related Quality of Life in 
Huntington’s Disease. 
 
 
  
EQ-5D 
 
 
 
  
Assistive Technology for 
Cognition to improve 
HRQoL (health related 
quality of life) 
  
[27] 
 
  
2018 
 
  
Pragmatic randomized controlled trial of a trauma-focused guided self-help Program 
versus Individual trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy for post-traumatic 
stress disorder (RAPID): trial protocol. 
 
EQ-5D 
 
  
Online Guided Self Help 
Program 
 
[28] 
  
2022 
  
Adverse events in the treatment of motorcycle-related isolated limb injuries at a 
regional hospital in Uganda: a prospective clinical analysis. 
 
EQ-5D 
  
Addressing Clinical 
Adverse Events in 
regards to limbs 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-988-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

[29] 
  
2019 
  
Perceptions of the impact of disability and impairment on health, quality of life and 
capability. 
 
EQ-5D  
  
Various 
 
[30] 
 
 
 
  
2017 
 
 
  
Job retention vocational rehabilitation for employed people with inflammatory 
arthritis (WORK-IA): a feasibility randomized controlled trial. 
 
  
WLQ  
 
 
  
VR/AR 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
TABLE 2: COMPARISON OF SURVEY INSTRUMENTS 
 
Instrument 
Features 
SF-36 
 
EQ-5D-3L 
 
WALS 
WLQ 
Questions 
Focused on Health 
General health, emotional and 
social activities question. 
 
Focused on Health 
Specific disability questions, and 
the severity of that disability 
based on the scale presented. 
Focused on Work 
 
Focused on Work 
Focused on symptoms/impacts from 
the past 2 weeks 
Each question asks about a different 
aspect of work.  
Format 
36 questions, divided into 8 
different domains 
5 domains, with three different 
levels of responses 
  
12 questions, 4 levels of 
answers 
  
25 questions divided into 4 subscales, 
rating scale from 1-6 
  
Intent 
Intended for use with arthritis  
  
Intended for use with arthritis  
  
Intended for use with arthritis 
  
Intended to assess various states of 
workplace disabilities 
  
Accessibility Given the simplicity of the 
questions, it is very accessible  
Very accessible because of the 
ease of answer choices regarding 
the scale 
Very accessible given the short 
length of the survey 
Semi-accessible a bit of a longer 
survey but goes more in depth 
Strengths 
Simple answer choices to 
questions makes it easier for 
people to fill out.  
Covers a lot of ground 
regarding limitations of 
activities, and it dives into the 
specifics of what one has 
trouble with. 
More responsive to 
improvement/decline in people’s 
condition in terms of mobility 
The scale has “states” which are 
worse than death. This helps 
people understand the 
seriousness of the diseases these 
people have and helps 
professionals assist them 
appropriately. 
No recall period 
Does not go into depth on each 
individual thing making it easy 
to understand and fill out 
  
Very easy to complete 
Goes in depth into the areas it covers 
Higher work limitation numbers, 
which means this survey is more 
sensitive 
  
Weaknesses Missing values estimated 
through the mean of answered 
data in the same scale for 
patients with responses for at 
least half of the domain 
questions. 
Given the above is true, the 
results may not be accurate in 
those cases. 
Not effective for use with 
hearing impaired individuals 
Patient excluded of specific 
analysis if any question is left 
unanswered. 
  
If 2 questions are left 
unanswered the patient is left 
out of special analysis 
Does not go in depth into the 
problems 
  
With only 5 questions, it does not 
cover everything in which someone 
might need. 
Uses reverse instructions which can be 
confusing for individuals 
Not very intuitive for blind people, 
they may be confused with all of the 
different choices. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-988-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

