WiFi and LoRa Energy Consumption Comparison in IoT ESP 32/ SX1278 Devices 
 
 
Laura García, Jose M. Jimenez, Jaime Lloret 
Integrated Management Coastal Research Institute 
Universitat Politècnica de València 
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: laugarg2@teleco.upv.es, jojiher@dcom.upv.es, 
jlloret@dcom.upv.es 
Pascal Lorenz 
Network and Telecommunication Research Group 
University of Haute Alsace 
Colmar, France 
e-mail: lorenz@ieee.org
 
 
Abstract—The use of Internet of Things (IoT) devices has 
spread through many different fields. Transport, health, and 
energy management of farming are some of the areas where 
IoT systems are being utilized. The selection of the wireless 
communication technology for the IoT system is paramount for 
its optimal performance. However, factors such as desired 
coverage or energy consumption must be considered for this 
selection. In this paper, several tests to determine the battery 
life that can be obtained after performing WiFi and LoRa Low 
Power Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) transmissions with a 
low-cost IoT device has been performed. With a 5 second 
transmission interval and default settings, similar results were 
obtained for both WiFi and LoRa. Furthermore, WiFi 
outperformed LoRa with the default settings and a 30 second 
transmission interval. Lastly, LoRa did outperform WiFi when 
the settings where changed so as the transmission power of 
LoRa was that of 10 dBm. 
Keywords-Energy consumption; battery life; WiFi; LoRa; 
transmission power. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, IoT devices are used in a wide variety of 
areas. According to IoT Analytics [1] the areas where IoT 
was most used in 2018 are Smart homes, Wearables, Smart 
Cities, Smart grids, Industrial internet, Connected cars, 
Connected 
Health 
(Digital 
health 
/ 
Telehealth 
/ 
Telemedicine), Smart retail, Smart Supply chain and Smart 
farming. In order to improve the performance of the 
implanted systems, it is necessary for the results observed by 
the sensors to be sent to other systems. The processing and 
storage capacities of IoT devices are generally very limited. 
Usually, in the case of wanting to correct an error or wanting 
to optimize the performance of the observed elements or 
environments, after processing the data, the appropriate 
corrective measures are taken to optimize the observed 
functions. To transmit the information, which is captured by 
the sensors connected to the nodes, both wired and wireless 
technology are used depending on the ease of installation of 
the physical infrastructure in the observed areas. 
In a large number of cases, the sensors used to monitor 
the IoT devices need to establish a wireless communication 
to transmit the observed data. Garcia et al. [2] presented a 
review of wireless technologies that were employed in Smart 
cities, their comparison and the problems that make their 
coexistence difficult. 
One of the areas in which the use of wireless technology 
becomes more evident is in Smart farming. Currently, it is 
very difficult to connect IoT devices that are located in large 
tracts of land through a wired network. In addition, when 
using agricultural machinery, which is often heavy vehicles, 
it is very difficult not to deteriorate or break the copper or 
fiber optic wires deployed in the fields. It is very easy for 
situations to appear where the tools attached to the vehicles 
can drag the cables. For this reason, Smart farming is one of 
the ideal areas where wireless technology should be used. 
Aspects such as foliage density, which can change according 
to the seasons or depending on the growth state of the plant, 
should be considered as they can affect the wireless 
transmission. These types of smart systems for agriculture 
monitor parameters such as irrigation, the humidity and 
temperature of the soil or the environmental conditions. 
There is a wide range of wireless technologies, among 
which we can highlight those that comply with the IEEE 
wireless standards such as IEEE 802.11 [3], IEEE 802.15 
[4], and IEEE 802.16 [5]; we also find mobile technologies 
such as 3G [6], 4G, 5G. In addition, we can find other 
proprietary technologies such as LoRa [8], NB-IoT [9], and 
Sigfox [10]. 
In some situations, it is necessary to use a large number 
of sensor nodes. Obviously, the cost of the nodes, if they are 
used in large numbers, can be prohibitive. In addition, if 
mobile technologies are used to establish transmissions, such 
as 4G or any other, the cost of the node is significantly 
increased, and maintenance is also expensive. Furthermore, it 
would be necessary to hire the services of a mobile operator 
that has coverage in the space that will be monitored. 
We have observed that inexpensive nodes that include 
wireless technologies are available on the market. Among 
the most currently employed we can find nodes that include 
IEEE 802.11n interfaces, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) and 
LoRaWan. 
One of the main problems that we found when 
implementing a solution is the energy consumption of the 
nodes. If the nodes remain active in real time, to know at any 
moment the parameters that are considered necessary, they 
will consume a large amount of energy. Assuming that the 
nodes are distributed in dispersed locations, where it is not 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

possible to bring the energy at reasonable costs, the supply of 
electrical power can become a big problem. Depending on 
the needs of different crops, the observation time may vary, 
but if the difference in energy consumption of the nodes is 
based fundamentally on the employed wireless technology, 
our interest is focused on selecting the most appropriate 
technology, so that energy consumption is minimal. 
For all the reasons described previously, we have carried 
out some tests to identify which of the two wireless 
technologies considered in this paper can be used in such a 
way that it extends the transmission capacity as much as 
possible, provided that the transmitted data are identical. In 
our work we have studied WiFi and LoRaWan technologies, 
which are supported by our sensor nodes. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents the related work. A background in WiFi and LoRa 
technologies is presented in Section 3. The testbed is 
explained in Section 4. Section 5 depicts the obtained results. 
Lastly, the conclusion and future work are presented in 
Section 6. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, the related work on energy consumption 
studies for WiFi and LoRa is going to be presented. 
When selecting the communication technology for an 
IoT deployment, the energy consumption is one of the most 
considered factors. Several papers focus on determining the 
energy consumption of LoRa and WiFi. 
Ayele et al. [11] performed a simulated comparison of 
the energy consumption of BLE and LoRa in a Wildlife 
Monitoring System. The authors proposed a dual radio 
network model. The nodes were deployed on the collars of 
the animals. The communication between the nodes was 
performed over BLE until it reached a cluster head. Then, the 
cluster head communicated through LoRa to a Lora gateway. 
The energy consumed by the LoRa star topology increased 
as the nodes increased, due to the overhead. However, the 
proposed solution eliminated the energy consumption caused 
by the overhead. The results showed a reduction of energy 
consumption of 97% compared to LoRaWAN. Bor et al. [12] 
presented an analysis of the parameters of LoRa 
transmissions. The authors focused on the effects of 
parameter 
selection 
in 
energy 
consumption 
and 
communication performance. The authors stated that an 
Spreading Factor (SF) of 8, a bandwidth of 500 MHz, 4/5 
coding rate and 8dBm of transmission power (tx power) 
consumed 2.31 mJ and the optimal settings were a SF of 7, a 
bandwidth of 500 MHz, a coding rate of 4/5 and a tx power 
of 11 dBm which had an energy consumption of 1.60 mJ. 
Furthermore, the authors proposed an algorithm that was 
able to probe different settings and selected the best option in 
order to balance the energy consumption. Several 
experiments on the Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) 
channel access mechanisms of LoRa were performed by 
Phan [13]. The author presented an adaptation of the 802.11 
CSMA protocol for LoRa and a new CSMA protocol. The 
energy consumption of the adaptation and the new proposal 
with different settings was compared as well. The results 
showed the new proposal had a lower energy consumption 
for all settings compared to the adaptation from 802.11. 
Moreover, Pötsch et al. [14] discussed the limitations of 
LoRa gateway deployment. The overhead caused by the 
LoRa gateways is analyzed as well. The energy consumption 
was compared for different spreading factors and bandwidths 
of 125MHz, 250 MHz and 500 MHz. The results showed 
less energy consumption as the spreading factor decreased 
and the bandwidth increased. Furthermore, the energy 
consumption increased as the tx power increased, being 50 
mA approximately for a tx power of 5 dBm and slightly 
above 120 dBm for a tx power of 19 dBm. 
The energy consumption of WiFi nodes has been studied 
as well. Mesquita et al. [15] performed a study on the 
performance of ESP8266 WiFi modules which are branded 
as ultra-low power. The authors performed several 
experiments to measure the energy consumption with sleep 
modes and different transmission configurations. The authors 
stated that the usual configuration of a Delivery Traffic 
Indication Message (DTIM) period of 3 and a 100 ms beacon 
interval had the lowest average current consumption, namely 
14.71 mA. They also stated that ESP8266 modules were able 
to operate for 2 to 4 days with a small battery of 1000mAh of 
capacity. Montori et al. [16] presented a performance study 
on WiFi for IoT systems. The authors utilized ESP-12 SoC 
modules to study their energy consumption under variations 
of the connectivity settings. Tests were performed with Lo-
Po, alkaline and NiMH batteries. The results showed similar 
performances for all batteries with the same configurations. 
Furthermore, the difference in energy consumption between 
awake and sleep mode was less than that stated on 
datasheets. Lastly, Putra et al. [17] performed an energy 
consumption comparison between BLE and WiFi with 
different settings for the beacons. Tests were performed for 
an iPhone device. The results showed BLE had a 30% more 
energy efficiency than WiFi. Furthermore, the battery life of 
the smartphone was of 14 hours and 46 minutes for WiFi and 
16 hours and 38 minutes for BLE. 
To the best of our knowledge, no comparison between 
the energy consumption of WiFi and LoRa in IoT devices 
has been performed before. Therefore, in this paper, we 
compare the effects of WiFi and LoRa transmissions on 
battery life. 
III. 
WIFI AND LORA TECHNOLOGIES 
The two wireless technologies on which we have done 
our work are IEEE 802.11 (also known as WiFi) and LoRa. 
Next, we will describe the main characteristics of both 
technologies. 
A. IEEE 802.11 technology 
In this subsection, a background on the IEEE 802.11 
standards is going to be provided. 
The 802.11 standards use the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands. 
These bands are known as Industrial, Scientific and Medical 
(ISM) radio bands. They are defined in Article 5 of the Radio 
Regulations of the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU) [18]. These bands do not need a license for their 
operation, but they differ according to the regulations of each 
country. The problem that can arise when using them is that 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

other devices can create interference if they work in the same 
bands. 
The modulation techniques most used by the standard 
are: Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK), Quadrature Phase 
Shift Keying (QPSK), Quadrature Amplitude Modulation 
(QAM), Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS), 
Complementary code keying (CKK) and Orthogonal 
Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM). 
There are three types of frames that are used by the 
standard: data frames, control frames and management 
frames. 
Data frames transport data between connected stations. 
The control frames next to the data frames are used to carry 
out area cleaning operations, channel acquisition and 
maintenance functions associated with the carrier and 
acknowledgments (ACK). The management frames are used 
to join or leave the wireless network and move associations 
of access points. All data frames that are transmitted must 
have an Acknowledgment of Receipt (ACK), otherwise the 
transmission will be considered failed. 
Figure 1 shows a generic 802.11 data frame. An 
important difference that can be appreciated, if we compare 
it with an Ethernet frame, is the larger size of the data field. 
While a standard Ethernet II frame has a size of 1500 bytes, 
the data field of an 802.11 frame reaches up to 2312 bytes. 
 
Frame 
Control
Duration
ID
Add 1
receiver
Add 2
sender
Add 3
filtering
Seq-ctl
Add 3
optional
FCS
Frame 
Body
2 Bytes
2 Bytes
6 Bytes
6 Bytes
6 Bytes
6 Bytes
0 – 2312 Bytes
2 Bytes
4 Bytes  
Figure 1.  802.11 generic data frame 
The ACK frames have a much shorter length, only 14 
bytes. Other frames that should be highlighted in the 
standard are the Request to Send (RTS) and Clear to Send 
(CTS) frames. RTS and CTS frames are used to avoid 
collisions. The size of the CTS frame is 14 bytes while the 
RTS frame has a length of 20 bytes. 
Within the IEEE 802.11 standard, our nodes have 
implemented the IEEE 802.11n, but working in the 2.4 GHz 
band. As defined in the standard, if 20 MHz channels are 
used, the theoretical maximum data transmission speed is of 
72.2 Mbps, and if 40 MHz channels are used, the maximum 
theoretical data transmission speed is of 150 Mbps, when a 
single stream of spatial data is transmitted. 
With regard to power management, the 802.11 standard 
has a defined system. It is a mechanism that allows energy 
savings and is called Power Saving. The stations that work in 
that mode are known as PS-STAs (Power Save Stations). In 
order for them to work properly, their control must be carried 
out by an Access Point (AP). The AP must have all the PS-
STAs registered. If a station is not active, the AP will store 
the packets that are directed to the station until it requires 
them. Periodically, the stations must be activated in order to 
listen if the AP has data for them. 
B. LoRa technology 
In this subsection, a background on LoRa and the 
structure of LoRa packets is going to be provided. 
LoRa stands for Long Range and is a patented spread 
spectrum technology developed by Semtech Corporation. 
LoRa operates in the lower ISM bands (EU: 868MHz and 
433 MHz, USA: 915MHz and 433 MHz). The transmission 
data rate can be from 0.3 kbps to 27 Kbps with a bandwidth 
of 125 KHz. It is widely used for Machine To Machine 
(M2M) applications from IoT. 
LoRa uses a modulation technique derived from Chirp 
Spread Spectrum (CSS). It applies an adaptive modulation 
technique with a multichannel multimode transceiver in the 
base station to receive a multiple number of messages from 
the channels. The relationship between the required data bit 
rate with the chirp rate and the symbol rate in the LoRa 
modulation technique [19] is defined as follows: 
 
Rb = SF · 1 / (2SF/BW)  bits/s 
(1) 
 
where Rb is the modulation bit rate for LoRa, SF is the 
scattering factor and BW is the modulation bandwidth in Hz. 
As seen in (1), the data rate Rb is directly proportional to the 
scattering factor SF. 
Figure 2 shows the structure of a LoRa packet. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Structure of a LoRa packet. 
SF is the ratio between the symbol rate and chip rate. The 
higher the dispersion factor, the higher the Signal to Noise 
Ratio (SNR). The number of chips per symbol is calculated 
as 2SF. For example, if the scattering factor SF is 12, 4096 
chips / symbol are used. Each time SF is increased, the 
transmission speed is halved. This causes the duration of the 
transmission to be doubled, which leads to an increase in 
energy consumption. 
The nodes are transmitted directly to a gateway that 
connects to the backbone network. Gateways are capable of 
receiving and decoding multiple simultaneous transmissions 
(up to 50). 
Three node classes [20] have been defined: 
1) Class A devices:  
The node transmits to the gateway when necessary. After 
transmission, the node opens a reception window to obtain 
messages from the gateway. 
2) Class B final devices with programmed reception 
spaces: 
The node behaves like a Class A node but opens 
additional reception windows at scheduled times. Beacons 
from the gateway are used for the timing of the end devices. 
3) Class C terminal devices with maximum reception 
spaces: 
These nodes are continuous listening, which makes them 
unsuitable for battery operations. 
To configure a LoRa interface, we must take into account 
the following four parameters: carrier frequency, spreading 
factor, bandwidth and coding rate. Depending on the 
parameters that are selected, the energy consumption, 
transmission range and resilience to noise will be 
determined. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

IV. 
TESTBED 
In this section, the node and the explanation of the test 
are going to be presented. 
In order to perform the tests on energy consumption, we 
utilized the Heltec WiFi LoRa 32 node which is presented in 
Figure 3. It is able to transmit with both WiFi and LoRa. 
This node has an ESP32 microprocessor and a LoRa SX1278 
node chip. It has an SH1.25-2 battery interface onboard as 
well and an integrated management system for lithium 
batteries so as to manage charge and discharge, switch 
automatically between USB and battery power, protect 
against overcharge and detect battery power. It also has an 
integrated OLED (Organic Light-Emitting Diode) display, a 
CP2102 USB to serial port chip and supports the Arduino 
IDE (Integrated Development Environment). It is comprised 
of 29 general GPIO (General Purpose Input7Output) ports. It 
has 
3 
UART 
(Universal 
Asynchronous 
Receiver-
Transmitter) ports, 2, SPI (Serial Peripheral Interface) ports, 
2 I2C (Inter-Integrated Circuit) ports and one I2S (Inter-IC 
Sound) port. It also has a 4 MB flash memory. Table 1 
shows the energy consumption provided by the manufacturer 
[21].  
In order to perform the tests, the Heltec WiFi LoRa 32 v2 
was programmed using the Arduino IDE. The WiFi.h and 
LoRa.h libraries were utilized to establish the connection 
between the two Heltec WiFi LoRa 32 v2 nodes. The default 
settings were utilized for both WiFi and LoRa. Table 1 
shows the default settings for LoRa. The forwarded data was 
the same for both WiFi and LoRa transmissions and it had a 
length of 80 bytes. 
Tests were performed forwarding a packet with a 5 
second interval and a 30 second interval. The utilized battery 
was a 4955 power bank with a capacity of 2000 mAh and an 
output of 5V DC and 1000 mAh.  
V. 
RESULTS 
In this section, the obtained results are going to be 
presented.  
The tests on the energy consumption of WiFi were 
performed for the two selected transmission time intervals. 
Figure 4 shows the average battery life for each transmission 
interval. As it can be seen, a difference of 1 hour was 
obtained between transmitting with each time interval. For 
the time interval of 5 seconds, the obtained battery life was 
10 hours and 10 minutes whereas 11 hours and 14 minutes of 
battery life was obtained for the 30 seconds time interval. 
Therefore, the transmission interval can severely affect the 
energy consumption of the devices that utilize WiFi for their 
communication. 
The tests performed with LoRa considered 5 seconds and 
30 seconds time intervals as well. However, no significant 
differences were obtained between both transmission 
intervals. In fact, the average battery life for the 30 seconds 
transmission interval was 26 minutes less than that of the 5 
seconds transmission interval. As it can be seen in Figure 5, 
the lifetime of the battery was approximately 10 hours. 
As the manufacturer stated, the power consumption for 
both WiFi and LoRa transmissions is practically the same 
with transmission powers of 17 dBm or 18 dBm. It is 
surprising as LoRa is branded as a low-power consumption 
communication protocol. Therefore, the transmission power 
of LoRa has to be decreased so as to improve its battery 
consumption, which leads to less coverage. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Utilized Heltec WiFi LoRa 32 node 
TABLE I.  
ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF THE NODE 
Mode 
Energy consumption 
LoRa 10 dB tx power 
50 mA 
LoRa 12 dB tx power 
60 mA 
LoRa 15 dB tx power 
110 mA 
LoRa 20 dB tx power 
130 mA 
WiFi AP mode 
135 mA 
WiFi scan mode 
115 mA 
 
TABLE II.  
ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF THE NODE 
 
Tx Power 
17 dB 
Frequency 
433 MHz 
SF 
7 
Signal Bandwidth 
125 KHz 
Coding rate 
4/5 
Preamble length 
8 Symbols 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Battery life with WiFi communication 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
 
Figure 5.  Battery life with LoRa communication 
 
Figure 6.  Battery life with LoRa communication and 10 dBm of tx power 
To assess if the battery life was increased when 
transmitting with less transmission power, another test was 
performed changing the tx power of the LoRa transmissions 
to 10 dBm. The time interval for this test was 30 seconds. 
The average battery life for this case is presented in Figure 6. 
As it can be seen, the battery life improved compared to that 
with a transmission power of 17 dB, obtaining more than one 
hour more of battery life. Furthermore, the battery life 
surpassed that of WiFi with a transmission interval of 30 
seconds in 20 minutes. The difference would be then more 
noticeable when utilizing batteries with more capacity. 
However, the overall difference between the power 
consumed by both technologies is not that great. Therefore, 
other factors, such as the range that can be reached with each 
technology or the data rate may be the factors to be 
considered when selecting the wireless technology to be 
utilized in an IoT system. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
When designing an IoT system, the selection of the 
communication technology is of great importance. LoRa is 
supposed to have less power consumption than WiFi but the 
difference is not that evident and LoRa settings have to be 
changed to lower transmission power values, lower SF and 
increase bandwidth for it to consume less power. In the case 
of the Heltec WiFi LoRa 32 device, similar results have been 
obtained for both LoRa and WiFi with the default settings 
and 5 seconds of transmission interval. However, WiFi 
outperformed LoRa with a 30 second transmission interval. 
A similar battery life was obtained when lowering LoRa 
transmission power to 10 dBm. 
As future work, we will implement WiFi and LoRa in an 
agriculture and irrigation monitoring system selecting the 
technology depending on the range that needs to be reached. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by European Union 
through the ERANETMED (Euromediterranean Cooperation 
through ERANET joint activities and beyond) project 
ERANETMED3-227 SMARTWATIR. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] The 10 most popular Internet of Things applications right 
now. Available at: https://iot-analytics.com/10-internet-of-
things-applications/ [Last accessed on July 3, 2019] 
[2] L. García, J. M. Jimenez, M. Taha and J. Lloret, “Wireless 
Technologies for IoT in Smart Cities”, Network Protocols and 
Algorithms, 2018, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 23-64, ISSN 1943-3581 
[3] IEEE GET Program. GET 802(R) Standards. IEEE 802.11: 
Wireless 
LANs. 
Available 
at: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/browse/standards/get-
program/page/series?id=68 [Last accessed on July 3, 2019] 
[4] IEEE GET Program. GET 802(R) Standards. IEEE 802.15: 
Wireless 
PANs. 
Available 
at: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/browse/standards/get-
program/page/series?id=68 [Last accessed on July 3, 2019]  
[5] IEEE GET Program. GET 802(R) Standards. IEEE 802.16: 
Broadband 
Wireless 
MANs. 
Available 
at: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/browse/standards/get-
program/page/series?id=68 [Last accessed on July 3, 2019] 
[6] The Mobile Broadband Standard. About 3GPP. Available at: 
https://www.3gpp.org/about-3gpp [Last accessed on July 3, 
2019] 
[7] 5G - Fifth generation of mobile technologies. Available at: 
https://www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/backgrounders/Pages/5G-
fifth-generation-of-mobile-technologies.aspx [Last accessed 
on July 3, 2019] 
[8] LoRa Alliance. Available at: https://lora-alliance.org/ [Last 
accessed on July 3, 2019] 
[9] Standardization of NB-IOT completed. 3GPP A Global 
Initiative. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.3gpp.org/news-
events/1785-nb_iot_complete [Last accessed on July 3, 2019] 
[10] Sigfox, 
a 
0G 
Network. 
Sigfox. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.sigfox.com/en [Last accessed on July 3, 2019] 
[11] E. D. Ayele, K. Das, N. Meratnia and P. J. M. Havinga, 
“Leveraging BLE and LoRa in IoT Network for Wildlife 
Monitoring System (WMS)”, IEEE 4th World Forum on 
Internet of Things, Singapore, Singapore, 5-8 February 2018, 
pp. 342-348. 
[12] M. Bor and U. Roedig, “LoRa Transmission Parameter 
Selection”, 13th International Conference on Distributed 
Computing in Sensor Systems, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 5-7 June 
2017, pp. 27-34. 
[13] C. Pham, “Investigating and Experimenting CSMA Channel 
Access Mechanisms for LoRa IoT Networks”, IEEE Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference, Barcelona, 
Spain, 15-18 April 2018, pp. 1-6. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

[14] A. Pötsch and F. Haslhofer, “Practical Limitations for 
Deployment of LoRa Gateways”, IEEE International 
Workshop on Measurement and Networking, Naples, Italy, 
27-29 September 2017, pp. 1-6. 
[15] J. Mesquita, D. Guimaraes, C. Pereira, F. Santos and L. 
Almeida, “Assessing the ESP8266 WiFi module for the 
Internet of Things”, IEEE 23rd International Conference on 
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, Turin, Italy, 
4-7 September 2018, pp. 784-791. 
[16] F. Montori, R. Contigiani and L. Bedgoni, “Is WiFi suitable 
for energy efficient IoT deployments? A performance study”, 
IEEE 3rd International Forum on Research and Technologies 
for Society and Industry, Modena, Italy, 11-13 September 
2017, pp. 1-5. 
[17] G. D. Putra, A. R. Pratama, A. Lazovik and M. Aiello, 
“Comparison of Energy Consumption in WiFi and Bluetooth 
Communication in a Smart Building”, IEEE 7th Annual 
Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference, 
Las Vegas, NV, USA, 9-11 January 2017, pp. 1-6. 
[18] About 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
(ITU). 
Available at: https://www.itu.int/en/about/Pages/default.aspx. 
[Last accessed on July 3, 2019]  
[19] Semtech, AN 120022, LoRa Modulation Basics, May, 2015. 
Available: 
https://www.semtech.com/uploads/documents/an1200.22.pdf 
[Last accessed on July 3, 2019]  
[20] R. S. Sinha, Y. Wei and S. Hwang, “A survey on LPWA 
technology: LoRa and NB-IoT”, ICT Express, Vol. 3, No. 1, 
pp. 14-21, March 2017. 
[21] Specifications of the Heltec WiFi LoRa 32. Available at 
https://heltec.org/project/wifi-lora-32/ [Last accessed on July 
3, 2019] 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

