Audio Guided Driving for People with Blindness  
with Seated Self-balancing Personal Transporters 
 
Andreas Hub 
BNI Blindnavigation International gGmbH 
Ayestr. 2 
88441 Mittelbiberach, Germany  
e-mail: andreas.hub@blindnavigation.org 
 
Jutta Cook 
CO4 Communications 
Talfeldstr.10 
88400 Biberach, Germany 
e-mail: jutta.cook@co4-communications.com
 
Abstract—This paper presents a new approach to increase 
the range of mobility for people with blindness or severe visual 
impairments, while enhancing interaction-driven accessibility 
with sighted people. For the blind or visually impaired, 
covering longer distances often poses a special challenge; 
prolonged use of a cane or leaning on a sighted person can be 
exhausting and can lead to unhealthy and non-ergonomic 
motions. Guided use of a modified seated, self-balanced single 
person vehicle enhances accessibility of various environments, 
serves as physical training, offers great experiences and fosters 
both self-esteem and independence – thus serving as a catalyst 
for positive changes in many different aspects of life. Moving 
together constitutes implicit social interaction and social 
participation. In this paper, we describe the practical 
implementation and address challenges concerning the blind 
drivers’ perception of velocity and direction of movement. We 
expect these challenges to be solved in the near future through 
the application of either existing or new haptic devices. Our 
tests with persons having visual, other sensory, or mobility 
impairments show that they are perfectly capable of driving an 
AddSeat®, which contributed to significantly increasing 
accessible environments, enhanced their mobility, expanded 
their social interaction, increased their physical fitness and 
greatly improved their general outlook on life. 
Keywords-Interaction-driven 
accessibility; 
visual 
impairments; self-balancing personal transporter; physical 
therapy training. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
For people with blindness, it is often a special challenge 
to cover longer distances. A prolonged use of a cane can be 
exhausting for the muscles in the hand, arm and shoulder. 
Walking alongside a sighted person for longer periods of 
time can be stressful, too, for people with visual 
impairments. Both can lead to unhealthy and non-ergonomic 
motions, causing muscle sores, cramps and other discomfort 
in the musculoskeletal system. Another aspect is that many 
people with sensory deficits have difficulties or are (for good 
reasons) afraid of using personal single seat vehicles 
developed for sighted drivers, such as bicycles, motor bikes 
or others, such as the Segway® PT (Personal Transporter) 
[1] that are operated in a standing position. 
For a number of years, there has been ongoing research 
as summarized, e.g., by Mandel in [2] and there is an array of 
products on the market with a more or less implicit aim of 
autonomous driving for wheelchair users. 
 
 
Figure 1. The picture shows a blind AddSeat® driver in an indoor 
environment. 
In contrast to these projects, our study focused on the 
idea of letting blind people drive on their own as much as 
possible and be in charge of the device. We assumed that this 
in 
particular 
provides 
a 
feeling 
of 
freedom 
and 
independence, especially when the additional hints given by 
a sighted guide could be kept to a minimum.  
For a few years, there have been several special 
wheelchairs on the market with only two wheels based on 
Segway® PT self-balancing technologies, such as a model 
named Genny Urban 2.0L and one named Freee F2, both 
available from Urban Mobility 24 [3][4]. 
Swedish manufacturer AddMovement [5] has one seated, 
single person vehicle also based on a Segway® PT, which 
we deemed suitable for this study. Their so-called AddSeat® 
comes equipped with a panic-braking mechanism that can be 
easily triggered by moving the seat glider backwards – a 
feature we thought useful as it compensates for the time-laps 
between the advice given by the guide and the actual reaction 
of the blind driver. 
For our tests, we used an AddSeat® based on a Segway® 
PT i2 suitable for indoor environments (Figure 1) as well as 
outdoors (Figure 2).  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
Figure 2. The photo depicts one of our blind test persons outdoors in a 
full stop emergency brake action.  
The dimensions of this model are quite narrow, making it 
hardly any wider than the shoulders of our drivers. This 
allows for access to any standard elevator. In addition, the 
AddSeat can turn on the spot as it only has one axle and does 
not need the additional front wheels of a conventional 
wheelchair. In outdoor tests with sighted people, it could be 
shown that the AddSeat® is suitable for gradual inclines as 
well as demanding ground conditions such as gravel, grass or 
even firm sand. The vehicle also mastered snowy spots 
where maneuvering a conventional wheelchair would be 
challenging. In tests with people with mobility impairments 
(amputations, paraplegia, autoimmune disorders, etc.) seated 
self-balancing transporters have already been proven to be a 
life-changing addition. Customers reported a tremendous 
increase in quality of life as it enhanced their mobility and 
independence, it opened up their social range of motion and 
allowed them to take on completely new roles within their 
family lives. The changes included self-determined shopping 
tours, and taking on considerably more responsibility for 
others, e.g., own young children or domestic animals [6][7]. 
With these great gains in mind, the question was, if those 
could also be transferred to people with visual impairments.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II 
describes the technical features of the AddSeat® and its 
benefits for daily life. We also explain the briefing method 
used for our test persons. Section III describes the resulting 
feedback from our test drivers as well as possible 
implications. In section IV, we conclude with lessons learned 
and suggestions for future work, including desirable 
technical adaptions and how to enhance the enforcement of 
the rights of persons with disabilities. 
II. 
METHODS 
Device: Driving an AddSeat® is quite simple and 
intuitive. For our tests, we used an AddSeat® model 5.1, 
equipped with a seat featuring pneumatic suspension and 
height adjustment. Those features bring a range of 
advantages. For one, it is more comfortable than a model 
with a fixed seat. Secondly, the user can raise the seat to a 
height that allows communication with standing people 
almost at eye level (depending on the person’s height).  
Sighted Addseat® drivers told us the elevated position 
also reduces or annihilates the claustrophobic feelings they 
often experience in crowds, when all they get to see in a 
regular lower wheelchair is the less attractive middle part of 
others’ bodies. This feature is not only comfortable for both 
sides during talks, it also changes perception as it literally 
raises both partners onto the same level and thereby avoids 
the unpleasant feeling of being talked down to many people 
with all kinds of handicaps have to experience on a daily 
basis. 
Handling: With both parking brakes on, the user places 
himself on the AddSeat®. Then the parking handles on the 
right and left side have to be released. Now, the PT is in 
balance mode and the user can start driving. A forward 
motion is achieved by moving the upper part of the body 
forward, backwards 
correspondingly. The underlying 
technical principle is a shift in the center of gravity. The 
AddSeat®’s seat is mounted on a sliding rail, enabling the 
driver to very rapidly shift his center of mass. A quick 
backwards or forwards shift allows the driver to perform 
very precise driving motions, such as needed in order to 
avoid moving obstacles. The quick backwards shift can also 
be used to rapidly stop the vehicle in an effective full stop 
emergency brake maneuver. This use of a sliding mechanism 
can reduce the braking distance by several meters, especially 
when moving at velocities greater than 10 km/h. For blind 
drivers, reconnaissance of moving obstacles or other people 
and animals definitely requires a sighted person to move 
along and advise appropriately, especially at higher speeds. 
Our two blind test persons – one adult woman and one 
adult man – first received a short introduction to the 
functionality of the AddSeat®. Both test persons were 
working for several years as consultants, providing advice on 
medical aids to people with visual impairments. We knew of 
both being physically active and having good body tension. 
Therefore, we expected both to be able to steer the 
AddSeat® with controlled movements of the upper part of 
their bodies. In fact, we realized very quickly that they 
performed much better than some sighted subjects, even 
without visual feedback. Both drivers quickly grasped how 
to move forward and backward, how to navigate turns and 
how to stop using the gliding seat. They intuitively were able 
to turn in place, e.g., within a narrow elevator. This brief 
driving lesson only took a few minutes and in principle 
enabled our blind test drivers to handle the vehicle by 
themselves. During those explanations, haptic support was 
used to provide principle movement and velocity information 
as well as direction suggestions. For this, we used a haptic 
training method comparable to Riitta Lathinen’s haptices and 
haptemes advices [8]. This method of very short haptic signs 
was originally developed to provide complex information 
such as room structures within seconds, using the surface of 
body parts of people with deafblindness. We adapted this 
method for navigation purposes. The role of the sighted 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

guide was then to give either acoustical hints such as “more 
left or right” or “slower and faster” or to provide this kind of 
short haptic navigation advices. To enhance the forward 
movement, the sighted guide gave a gentle tap on the 
driver’s upper back until the velocity was appropriate with 
respect to the environment and the driver’s capacities. To 
trigger a left or a right turn, a finger tap was given on the 
corresponding shoulder. Braking or velocity reduction were 
induced by a softer and longer tip with the finger or hand on 
the front of the driver’s shoulder. 
After this “haptic” driving lesson, further minimal 
driving hints were provided acoustically by the sighted guide 
– comparable to guided alpine or cross-country skiing. We 
consider this to be the preferred guiding method as long as 
there are no hearing problems or noisy environments. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Both blind drivers learned to understand, to steer and to 
control the AddSeat® within a few minutes. Bigger 
challenges arose for the sighted guides, who had to keep up 
and provide adequate and precise acoustical navigation 
advice. 
As part of the results we would like to cite one of our 
blind test drivers (A.K.): “At the exhibition “RehaCare” in 
Düsseldorf, I had the great possibility to take a ride on the 
AddSeat. 
First, I had to find out how to really get myself 
positioned on the seat and that I could easily determine 
directions by moving my body forward, backward and to the 
sides. The first motions were a little bit shaky, but once I got 
used to the AddSeat and learned how to control it, riding 
became more and more fun. After a short while, I got a good 
feeling on how to move backward and forward and how to 
slow down or to speed up. After we moved around through 
the halls for a while, we went outside and I could ride the 
Add-Seat in “open-air”. I enjoyed moving through the 
crowd, listening to the noises around me. In addition, it was a 
warm, lovely afternoon. Much too soon, the ride was over 
and we had to get back to the booth where we had started off. 
In a nutshell: I enjoyed this experience a lot and would do it 
again any time.” The statement of the second person (S.P.) 
was quite similar with regard to contents. 
Both blind test persons reported that it was not always 
clear for them whether they were driving forward or 
backward as they were missing visual input, in particular 
when moving slowly. For the same reason they reported 
difficulties estimating their current velocity. 
Although blind use of an AddSeat® is not completely 
without risks, the atmosphere during the tests was very 
relaxed. And it turned out that joining in this new type of 
sports activity offered pure fun for the test drivers as well as 
for the sighted guides. While guided skiing can only be done 
in special places and when snow is available, guided driving 
with AddSeats® does not have those restrictions. It can 
generally be performed anywhere at any given time.  
The results from additional test drives and discussions 
with other blind people about seated self-balancing personal 
transporters were that these vehicles can and will have many 
more implications aside from fun and sporting activities. We 
include these implications in the following section. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The idea of letting blind people by themselves handle a 
vehicle that can travel up to 20 km/h might at first glance 
look somewhat dangerous. And many people with sensory 
deficits have difficulties or are afraid of using personal single 
seat vehicles developed for sighted drivers, such as bicycles, 
motor bikes or vehicles operated in a standing position like a 
regular Segway® PT.  
On the other hand, blind skiers proved able to reach 
amazing speeds beyond 100 km/h. In our study, it was not 
our aim to determine how fast one can go or to look into 
legal aspects such as registration, liability insurance or 
restrictions to access in different places. Our main focus was: 
can persons with blindness or visual impairments safely 
maneuver an AddSeat®, and what positive implications do 
they stand to gain?  
During our test drives we learned:  
 
Driving an AddSeat® is not without risks (which 
might be the nature of many things fun) – in 
particular when driving with visual impairments or 
blind. 
 
Under the pre-condition of good control over the 
upper part of their body, driving an AddSeat® can 
greatly enhance the quality of life for the blind as 
well as people with visual impairments.  
 
Steering an AddSeat® is sport and good physio, as it 
provides training for a better control of the upper 
body in an ergonomic position by supporting 
improvements of the abdominal and back muscles. 
 
Even drivers lacking physical fitness are able to 
cover long distances in a healthier position for the 
upper part of their body, compared to conventional 
wheelchairs. The range of an AddSeat® can extend 
30 km depending on several factors such as wind 
speed and direction, the driver’s weight, the contour 
of the terrain or the traction of the wheels. This 
greatly enhances the radius self-determined and 
largely independent movement for the driver. 
 
We are sure that audio pilot systems used in blind 
alpine skiing can significantly enhance the quality of 
navigation advices as well as allow for better and 
more regular conversation between the blind driver 
and the guide.  
 
From our tests with sighted people with mobility 
restrictions, we established the large influence of the 
AddSeat® on the aspects of life we differentiated as 
“fun”, “freedom” and “family & friends”, resulting 
in a more self-determined, independent, non-
discriminated and equitable life. We do not see any 
reasons why those results should not apply to blind 
people. However, we recommend that blind people 
drive only with an experienced guide – perhaps on a 
second vehicle in order to keep up – especially in 
challenging environments such country lanes, steep 
roads etc., and most certainly at higher speeds. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
After all our experience concerning navigation 
support for people with blindness and deafblindness 
[9]-[11], there is no doubt that quite a number of 
them will be able to profit from driving AddSeat®. 
However, people with complete deafblindness will 
benefit strongly from additional interfaces to interact 
with the sighted guide. One option would be to use 
slightly modified systems, such as the NavBelt [13]. 
Alternatively, other additional handheld devices 
offering adaptive control elements and a haptic 
compass could be applied [14]. 
 
Guided AddSeat® driving might be the basis for 
important additional social interactions as well as a 
healthy, ergonomic way of moving also for people 
with multiple mobility restrictions concerning 
sensory and/or physical aspects. 
FUTURE WORK: To solve the issues of missing 
information for blind drivers concerning current position, 
movement 
direction, 
orientation 
and 
velocity, 
we 
implemented human advice. In the future, we suggest to 
standardize acoustical or haptic advices or the use of 
additional technical support. So far, we identified two 
possibilities. One: Haptic devices to be either carried on the 
driver’s body or mounted to the AddSeat®’s seat or steering 
bar. The other option would be the implementation of 
autonomous driving systems used in cars or other 
wheelchairs with four wheels. During our experiments 
however, we gained the impression that our test persons 
appreciated the self-determination and independence coming 
with being in control of the machine. 
Future work should also include the question, if the 
AddSeat® can be used to support more people with visual 
impairments and different degrees of restrictions. More 
research should be conducted to determine whether the 
positive effects of using an AddSeat® can be translated into 
other aspects of life, such as the workplace. Maybe it is 
possible to create new kinds of workplaces or make existing 
employment opportunities accessible for these groups of 
people. 
Lastly, one of the major stumbling blocks also needs to 
be addressed in the near future: the question under which 
legal conditions and/or training requirements the blind driver 
and the guide are allowed to drive on public streets in 
different countries. Our tests have shown that suitable, 
hearing test persons were able to steer seated personal 
transporters indoors and outdoors with a high degree of 
precision, supported by a sighted guide. The United Nations’ 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities [15] 
requires all parties to support technologies and solutions 
affording persons with disabilities include the rights to 
accessibility, the rights to live independently and be included 
in the community (Article 19), to personal mobility (article 
20), habilitation and rehabilitation (Article 26), and to 
participation in political, public, and cultural life as well as 
recreation and sport (Articles 29 and 30). Therefore, rules 
and regulations on a national, regional and local level should 
be amended in order to allow for blind people to operate 
such vehicles in combination with a guide. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like thank our test drivers Anne Kochanek and 
Sascha Paul. Additionally, we would like to thank Mike 
Redford with AddMovement AB for providing us with the 
test vehicle for this research experiments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] http://www.segway.com/ 2018.03.07 
[2] C. Mandel. Navigation of the Smart Wheelchair Rolland. 
Kumulative Dissertation, 2007. 
[3] http://www.urbanmobility24.de/genny.html 2018.01.31 
[4] http://www.urbanmobility24.de/Freee.html 2018.01.31 
[5] http://addmovement.com/ 2018.03.07 
[6] http://addmovement.com/customervideos.html 2018.01.31 
[7] http://addmovement.com/AddMvideos.html 2018.01.31 
[8] R. Lahtinen. Haptices and haptemes. A case study of 
developmental process in touch-based communication of 
acquired deafblind people. PhD thesis, 2008. 
[9] A. Hub, J. Diepstraten and T. Ertl, “Design and development 
of an indoor navigation and object identification system for 
the blind” Assets '04: Proceedings of the 6th international 
ACM 
SIGACCESS 
conference 
on 
Computers 
and 
accessibility, pp. 147-152, 2004. 
[10] A. Hub, “Map Requirements and Attainable Public Policy for 
an Installation-free Worldwide Navigation and Information 
System for the Blind” In: Proceedings of the 9th International 
Conference on Low Vision (Vision 2008), July 7-11 
Montreal, Canada, 2008. [Online]. Available from:  
 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.230
.927&rep=rep1&type=pdf 2018.02.04 
[11] A. Hub, “Integration of Active Tactile Control Braille 
Technology into Portable Navigation and Object Recognition 
Systems for the Blind and Deafblind” In: Proceedings of the 
9th International Conference on Low Vision (Vision 2008), 
July 7-11 Montreal, Canada, 2008. [Online]. Available from: 
ftp://ftp.informatik.uni-
stuttgart.de/pub/library/ncstrl.ustuttgart_fi/INPROC-2008-
128/INPROC-2008-128.pdf 2018.01.01 
[12] A. Hub, “Guiding Grids in Augmented Maps for Precise 
Installation-Free 
Worldwide 
Blind 
Navigation” 
In: 
Proceedings of the California State University Northridge 
Center on Disabilities' 23rd Annual International Technology 
and Persons with Disabilities Conference (CSUN 2008), 
March 10-15, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2008. [Online]. 
Available from:  
 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.230
.1905&rep=rep1&type=pdf 2018.02.04 
[13] J. Borenstein, “The NavBelt - A Computerized Multi-Sensor 
Travel Aid for Active Guidance of the Blind” In: Proceedings 
of the CSUN's Fifth Annual Conference on Technology and 
Persons with Disabilities, Los Angeles, California, March 21-
24, pp. 107-116, 1990. 
[14] J. Winterholler and B. Janny, “Innovative Haptic Interface for 
Navigation” In: Proceedings of the California State University 
Northridge Center on Disabilities 28th Annual International 
Technology and Persons with Disabilities Conference (CSUN 
2013), February 25 - March 2, San Diego, CA, USA, 2013. 
[Online]. Available from:  
 
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conference/2013/sessions/index.php
/public/presentations/view/130 2018.02.01 
[15] United Nations. Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. [Online]. Available from: 
 
http://www.un.org/disabilities/documents/convention/convopt
prot-e.pdf 2018.01.30 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

