Sensors and the Smart City  
Creating a Research Design for Sensor-based Smart City Projects 
 
Lasse Berntzen, Marius Rohde Johannessen 
School of Business and Faculty of Social Sciences 
University College of Southeast Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
{lasse.berntzen, marius.johannessen}@hbv.no 
Adrian Florea 
Faculty of Engineering 
“Lucian Blaga” University of Sibiu 
Sibiu, Romania 
adrian.florea@ulbsibiu.ro
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we present a proposal for a research 
design, based on the argument that there is a connection 
between smart cities and the concepts of “smart buildings” and 
“smart users”. Smart cities refer to “places where information 
technology is combined with infrastructure, architecture, 
everyday objects, and even our bodies to address social, 
economic, and environmental problems”. Smart buildings 
refer to ICT-enabled and networked constructions such as 
traffic cameras and lights, buildings and other man-made 
structures. With inexpensive hardware such as the Raspberry 
Pi, Edison, Arduino, and their ecosystems of sensors, we can 
equip these structures with sensors. Smart users refer to the 
high level of education in western societies, which allows us to 
utilize technology such as smart phones to create better cities. 
Citizens can provide data through their smart phones, and 
these data can, together with sensor data from buildings, be 
used to analyze and visualize a range of different variables 
aimed at creating smarter cities. We propose that a first step of 
smart city research should be a thorough process of identifying 
and collecting input from relevant stakeholders in order to find 
the most relevant objectives for research. 
Keywords- smart cities; smart buildings, smart citizens; 
sensors; research design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As of 2009, more than 50 percent of the world’s 
population lives in urban areas [1], and this number is 
forecasted to increase in the coming years. Cities occupy 
only 2 percent of the planet, but account for 60-80 percent of 
energy consumption [2]. As the sizes of cities grow, so do 
the challenges facing cities [3]. These challenges include 
issues related to public health and socio-economic factors 
[4], 
energy 
consumption, 
transport 
planning 
and 
environmental issues [5]. Air pollution caused by traffic jams 
is but one concrete example of the many challenges facing 
growing cities [6]. In order to reduce traffic and 
environmental impact it is necessary to implement safe, 
reliable, rapid and inexpensive public transport. Therefore, it 
is an obvious need for cities to be smart. Dameri and Coccia 
[7] summarize the major objectives of smart cities:  
• 
Improve environmental quality in urban space, 
reducing CO2 emissions, traffic and waste;  
• 
Optimize energy consumption, by making buildings, 
household appliances and electronic devices more 
energy efficient, supplemented by recycling energy 
and use of renewable energy;  
• 
Increase quality of life, delivering better public and 
private services, such as local public transport, 
health services, and so on.  
In this paper, we argue for the application of sensors and 
data analytics for resolving some of the challenges facing 
cities. There is a connection between smart cities and the 
concepts of smart buildings and smart users. Smart cities 
refer to places where information technology is combined 
with infrastructure, architecture, everyday objects, and even 
our bodies to address social, economic, and environmental 
problems [8]. Examining how to achieve this connection 
between ICTs and the world around us is the focus of our 
paper.  
Smart buildings and smart homes refer to the use of built-
in 
infrastructure 
to 
provide 
safety 
and 
security, 
entertainment, improved energy management, and health 
monitoring [9]. A smart building or a smart home relies on 
the use of sensor technologies to achieve this. The data 
collected by such sensors can also be aggregated and used by 
the city for various purposes. Sensors can provide 
information to law enforcement, emergency response, power 
management, home care services, environmental protection, 
city planning, and intelligent transport systems. 
The Internet-of-Things (IoT) refers to devices connected 
to the Internet that can exchange data with external 
computerized systems. In the context of smart cities, such 
devices can monitor traffic, pollution, noise level, use of 
electrical power, etc. 
Inexpensive hardware such as the Raspberry Pi, Edison, 
Arduino, and their ecosystems of sensors, enables us to 
deploy sensor technology on a large scale. Such low cost 
devices can provide valuable information for optimizing 
energy use, infrastructure and public transport planning, as 
well as emergency response and other vital services. 
Applying sensors is just the first step towards smarter cities. 
The next step involves smart users. 
Smart users refer to the high level of education in 
western societies, which allows us to utilize technology such 
as smart phones to create better cities. Cities in and of 
themselves are not smart, nor is a smart phone or computer 
smart unless the person using it does so with a specific 
purpose in mind. Actually, the apparent intelligence of the 
computing systems comes from the amount of human 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

intelligence that was invested in it. Citizen participation is 
seen as an important element in smart cities [10]. Studies 
show a causal relation between high levels of education and 
growth in the number of available jobs [11]. In our context, 
we see citizens both as providing input through traditional 
participation projects, but also as providers of data for 
analysis. Citizens can provide data through their smart 
phones, either actively or passively (with consent), and these 
data can, together with sensor data from buildings, be used to 
analyze and visualize traffic patterns, movement through the 
city and between cities, environmental factors etc. 
We apply these concepts to the framework for smart city 
planning [10], in order to present an experimental research 
design for the application of sensors and analytics in Smart 
City planning. This approach is in part the result of an 
ongoing collaboration with regional analytics businesses. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
discusses the use of sensors for data collection. Section 3 
discusses how analytics can be applied as input for 
participatory planning, and section 4 presents the outline of a 
research design, using the Smart City framework of [10]. 
Section 5 presents a brief overview of a possible case where 
this design will be applied. 
II. 
A WORLD OF SENSORS 
A sensor is a component able to detect a change in its 
environment and convert this change into an electrical signal. 
The signal returned by a sensor may be binary (on/off), a 
value within a range, e.g., temperature, light, wind, humidity, 
precipitation, position, and acceleration. Camera sensors 
return images or even image streams. Since sensors are 
operating in real time, they can produce large amounts of 
information. Therefore, sensors are normally connected to 
some kind of unit that monitors changes, and forwards 
information at regular intervals, or when the change is big 
enough. The left part of Figure 1 shows how sensors are 
connected to an aggregation and preprocessing unit. 
Many mobile devices have built in sensors, e.g., a GPS 
sensor, camera or accelerometer. The number of built-in 
sensors is expected to increase with new versions. Newer 
cars also have built-in computers handling sensor input, 
local processing and communications [12]. According to 
Abdelhamid et al. [13] a 2013 model car has on average 70 
sensors, while luxury models may have more than 100 
sensors. The number of sensors is expected to grow. 
Typical applications for hand-held or car mounted 
devices are traffic monitoring and prediction. The devices 
send their coordinates, and the server software receiving this 
information decides if a specific traffic route is clogged or 
not. 
Another application is environmental monitoring. One 
example is the Green Watch project [14]. The project 
distributed 200 smart devices to citizens of Paris. The 
devices sensed ozone and noise levels as the citizens lived 
their normal lives, and the results where shared through a 
mapping engine. The project showed how a grassroots-
sensing network could reduce costs dramatically, and also 
engage citizens in environmental monitoring and regulation. 
Bröring et al. [15], used the built-in diagnostic interface of 
cars (OBD-II) to obtain sensor data used to estimate current 
fuel consumption, CO2 emission, noise, standing time and 
slow moving traffic. 
Citizens can also act as sensors themselves, by reporting 
what they observe. One example is FixMyStreet.com, a web 
application that enables citizens to report problems with 
roads and other infrastructure. 
Today, low cost devices (e.g., Raspberry Pi, Edison and 
Arduino), have both processing and communication 
capabilities. Such devices can easily be connected to 
different types of sensors [16] [17], and can do local 
processing of data, before packing the results and sending it 
to a central processing facility for further processing, 
analytics and visualization. Raspberry Pi 3 and Edison have 
built-in wireless communication capabilities, which make 
connection to city-wide WiFi networks even easier. 
Separate components are available to connect such devices 
to mobile networks. 
A. Applications 
Sensor networks may have a wide range of applications. 
The most obvious examples can be found within the 
following fields: 
• 
Safety and security  
• 
Energy monitoring and control: Smart power meters  
• 
Environmental protection  
• 
Health 
B. Safety and Security 
An important aspect of smart cities and smart buildings 
is to make people feel safe and secure. Sensors can be used 
for a multitude of application, both to secure property and to 
keep citizens safe. This includes intrusion alarms, 
surveillance cameras, fire detection and flood alarms. Such 
alarms can connect to law enforcement and emergency 
response, but also to private operators and trusted neighbors. 
C. Energy Monitoring and Control 
Sensors can be used to monitor temperature and lights. 
Detection of movements can turn lights on, and heating and 
air-conditioning can be optimized to not spill unnecessary 
energy. Smart meters can provide information useful for 
energy planning, and also prevent blackouts and brownouts 
by adjusting the price of electrical power.  
D. Environmental Monitoring and Protection 
By collecting environmental data, the building itself and 
the city can get early warnings on pollution levels and other 
environmental problems, and initiate necessary actions.  
E. Health 
Old people want to live in their homes as long as they 
feel safe. Sensors can be used for daily health monitoring, 
where data are sent to medical professionals, but also detect 
medical emergencies, like fall detection.  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

F. Privacy Issues 
Deploying large networks of sensors (proximity sensors, 
presence sensors, surveillance cameras, gas and smoke 
sensors), and in particular the data collection from personal 
devices raise some concerns related to privacy of the 
individual. Therefore, it is necessary to implement legal 
mechanisms to regulate how information can be obtained, 
what information can be obtained, and for what purpose the 
information can be used. The public must be informed and 
give their consent of use of the information. 
 
 
Figure 1. Sensor network, analyzing and visualization architecture 
III. 
APPLYING ANALYTICS AND VISALIZATION IN 
PARTICIPATORY PLANNING 
Mining and analyzing data has been on the agenda of 
researchers since the 1960’s. However, the period from ca. 
2000 to present is the most interesting one in the history of 
data mining, because of the emergence of the Web and the 
large amounts of data generated from the web [18]. A review 
of data mining literature between 2000 and 2011 reveals that 
a number of different areas have been developed, all of 
which can be used for various types of analysis [18]:  
• 
Neural Networks - For classification, time series 
prediction, pattern recognition  
• 
Algorithm architecture - For calculation, data 
processing, clustering  
• 
Dynamic prediction - For prediction, forecasting and 
tracking  
• 
System architecture - For association, decision 
making and Consumer behavior  
• 
Intelligent 
agent 
systems 
- 
For 
autonomous 
observation and acting on external input  
• 
Data modeling - For representation or acquisition of 
expert knowledge  
• 
Knowledge-based 
systems 
- 
For 
knowledge 
discovery and representation  
Most of these can be applied in collecting data from 
sensors, and there are many examples from literature. One 
study shows how data mining and predictive analytical 
techniques can be applied to predict the number of vacant 
properties in a city [19]. Geographic information can be 
combined with a plethora of different data to provide 
valuable information for decision makers. Massa and 
Campagna show how geographic data extracted from social 
media can improve urban planning in a smart city context, 
and present a methodology for social media geographic 
information analytics [20]. A similar study mines data from 
the location-based social network FourSquare to identify 
under-developed neighborhoods [21].  
De Amicis et al. [22] have developed a geo-visual 
analytics platform for land planning and urban design, and 
argue for the importance of visual, 3D analytics. Another 
system, STAR CITY, uses sensor data from both machine 
and human-operated sensors to analyze traffic patterns in 
cities. The prototype has been tested in Dublin, Bologna, 
Miami and Rio de Janeiro [23]. Another study uses sensor 
data to model traffic noise and predict which areas were most 
likely to experience noise on a given day [24]. 
Energy monitoring for the purpose of reducing the city’s 
carbon footprint is another area made possible by analytics. 
Researchers are working on a framework, which would 
allow for integration of energy monitoring in entire 
neighborhoods [25]. 
Visualization of the results produced by the analytics, can 
help decision-making. Information can be presented real 
time through the use of dashboards, using different types of 
graphical visualizations show issues that need to be dealt 
with. The combination of analytics and visualization is 
shown in the right portion of Figure 1. 
This section has provided a brief overview of analytics 
and its coupling to visualization, and also given examples of 
existing systems that at various levels and from several 
perspectives provide decision makers with important input. 
The combination of sensors, geographic information and 
user-generated data can, especially when coupled with some 
form of visualization, be a powerful instrument for decision 
makers. Coupled with citizen participation [26] projects, this 
can be a great resource for the development of smart cities. 
In the next section we provide a brief outline of a possible 
research design for participatory- and sensor-based smart 
city projects. 
 
IV. 
TOWARDS A RESEARCH DESIGN FOR PARTICIPATORY 
PLANNING OF SMART CITIES 
Chourabi et al. [10] presents a framework for smart city 
initiatives, which is separated into internal and external 
factors (Figure 2). These factors influence each other, and 
depending on the type of project, some are more important 
than others. The framework can be applied as a tool for 
planning smart city initiatives, and we will in this section 
discuss how it can be applied as the foundation for a research 
design. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
Figure 2. The Smart City Initiatives framework [10]. 
Our objective is to create a research projects where 
sensor data from buildings, cars and people are collected, 
analyzed and visualized, so that decision makers have 
access to data about issues related to transport and 
movement, pollution and city planning. With this in mind, 
the framework of Chourabi et al. [10] can be used for the 
initial project planning: 
The Smart City Initiative is as described above. In our 
home regions, there are several smaller cities in close 
distance to each other, and we are working to set up a case 
study of how sensor technologies can help these cities 
become even more integrated as one single job and housing 
region. The approach may be influenced by urban 
congestion and by city topographic classes: compact, river 
and seaside. 
The Technology consists of sensors, software and 
hardware for data mining and analytics. Using existing 
technologies such as the Raspberry Pi, Edison, Arduino and 
smart phones would be a natural first step of such projects. 
A second step could be to evaluate the use of existing 
technology in order to examine if there is a need for further 
custom development. We have already developed a unit for 
environmental monitoring based on the Edison platform and 
one Arduino-based unit for detecting physical proximity, 
e.g., to detect if a parking spot is occupied or not. 
Technological challenges include IT skills of the end 
users, and issues related to organizational culture [27]. One 
of our projects partners is a company specializing in 
analytics, and the population generally has good IT skills, so 
this challenge is not a major one. The bigger challenge 
would be to overcome organizational barriers. We propose 
that the cities involved in the project be responsible for 
setting goals and objectives, recruiting participants and for 
procurement of necessary hardware and software, as well as 
placement of sensors. Local media could also be a partner in 
recruiting participants. The analytics companies would 
implement the software solution (collecting, analyzing and 
visualizing data) and we, as researchers would be 
responsible for the overall project organization and 
coordination between other actors. 
For the Organization and Policy factors, there are some 
challenges to be addressed. Organizational issues include 
alignment of goals and turf wars, and both formal (legal) 
and informal(normative) challenges as issues to consider 
when making new policy [10]. The region in which our 
project will take place already has a formalized 
collaboration on a range of different issues. This means that 
most of the factors related to governance and policy have 
already been addressed in previous collaborations. The 
major challenge will be to get the different cities to agree on 
a set of goals, as well as what these goals mean in practice. 
The external factors of our projects will also have 
implications. The framework lists collaboration, leadership, 
participation, communication, data-exchange, integration, 
accountability and transparency as typical Governance 
issues. Again, the established collaboration between the 
project partners should help alleviate these challenges.  
The People and Communities factor involves issues 
such 
as 
accessibility, 
quality 
of 
life, 
education, 
communication and participation. Citizen participation 
through the use of smart phone sensors will be a key factor 
in our project, so recruiting participants is a major issue. As 
the objective of the project ultimately is to create regions 
that are better to live and work in, and to travel between, we 
will need to be very clear about the potential benefits of 
participation. Communicating these through traditional and 
new media will most likely be essential. We address this 
factor in more detail below. 
Economy and Built infrastructure: Smart city initiatives 
are easier to implement in areas with high levels of 
education, entrepreneurial businesses and a good ICT 
infrastructure [10]. The cities we are trying to set up our 
project with all have challenges related to growth, but there 
are several innovative businesses and industries in the 
region. A challenge often facing these businesses is how to 
attract the right employees, so it is likely that they will be 
positive towards any initiative where this could be an 
outcome. The IT infrastructure in the region is good, but 
there will likely be some challenges in more remote parts. 
For example, there are still areas without 3G or 4G mobile 
data coverage, and some of these areas could be in places 
where it would be useful to place sensors.  
The final factor, Natural environment, addresses the 
need for more sustainable and greener cities. Therefore, 
placing sensors that monitor traffic patterns, building usage 
and learning more about how and where the people in the 
region travel, are objectives in our proposed study. Knowing 
more about travel patterns allows for optimal use of 
available public transport, and could also facilitate the 
creation of apps for carpooling. Another use of sensors 
could be to scan cars passing tollbooths, and to impose 
higher tolls on vehicles with higher CO2 and NOX 
emissions. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

A. Recruitment and Participation 
We would argue that the people and communities factor 
is essential in our proposed project. Close collaboration with 
the people who would be affected by any policy changes 
that might come from the project might help alleviate some 
of the resistance that could otherwise arise. As the brief 
overview of sensor technology and existing research 
projects show, there are so many possibilities that some kind 
of process is needed to narrow the scope of the project. 
Because cities and regions have different challenges, we 
propose to gather relevant stakeholders in a planning 
workshop, where the objective is a) to identify the most 
pressing objectives for the region in question, and b) to 
figure out the technical, legal and organizational challenges 
facing each individual objective. Identifying relevant 
stakeholders can be done for example through the 
stakeholder framework of Podnar and Jankic [28].  
Participation and collaboration between government, 
citizens and organizations is seen as essential in the 
development of smart communities [29]. Many of the 
activities (parks and recreation, planning and community 
development) typically involved in smart city projects can 
benefit greatly from citizen participation [26], and there is a 
clear 
correlation 
between 
cities’ 
adoption 
and 
implementation of sustainability policies and public 
participation in policy formulation [30].  
The EU-supported NET-EUCEN thematic network has 
proposed a framework for measuring user involvement, with 
indicators for how well users are involved in defining, 
developing and assessing digital government [31]. While 
this framework was developed for eGovernment in general, 
the principles of involvement can be transferred to the Smart 
City context. The individual indicators for the three 
dimensions are presented in Table I. 
Our goal is to involve users and stakeholders in all 
phases of the project. In the definition phase, the users and 
stakeholders will discuss and decide on issues where senor 
input, analytics and visualization will be of most value. In 
the development phase, the users and stakeholders will be 
involved in the design and development process to make sure 
that both technology and visual output is useful to handle the 
issues found during the definition phase. In the assessment 
phase, the users and stakeholders will be asked to provide 
feedback on possible modification or extensions.  
TABLE I. DIMENSIONS AND INDICATORS OF USER 
INVOLVEMENT [31]. 
  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we propose a research design for smart city 
projects where sensors are used to collect data on a range of 
variables related to transport, energy use, safety, health and 
the environment. The sensors may be stationary (., fixed to 
buildings), mobile (e.g., mounted in cars) or part of 
smartphones and their ecosystem (e.g., smart watches 
containing sensors). 
The collected data can be analyzed and visualized so that 
decision makers are able to make better informed decisions 
related to day to day management of cities. The collected 
data can also be used for prediction of what will happen in 
the future. 
We apply the smart city framework of Chourabi et al. 
[10] to address the potential issues involved in such projects. 
In addition, we argue that it is essential for smart city 
projects to find ways of involving key stakeholders, as 
different cities and regions are faced with different 
challenges. Key stakeholders should be involved in both 
project 
definition, 
project 
development 
and 
project 
assessment. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Dirks and M. Keeling, “A Vision of Smarter Cities: How Cities 
Can Lead the Way into a Prosperous and Sustainable Future,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www-03.ibm.com/press/attachments/ 
IBV_Smarter_Cities_-_Final.pdf. 
[2] 
J. M. Barrionuevo, P. Berrone, and J. E. Ricart, “Smart Cities, 
Sustainable Progress,” IESE Insight, no. 14, pp. 50-57, 2012. 
[3] 
B. Johnson, 
“Cities 
systems 
of 
innovation 
and 
economic 
development,” Innovation: Management, Policy & Practice, vol. 10, 
no. 2-3, pp. 146–155, 2008. 
[4] 
B. A. Israel, J. Krieger, D. Vlahov, S. Ciske, M. Foley, P. Fortin, J. R. 
Guzman, R. Lichtenstein, R. McGranaghan, A. Palermo, and 
G. Tang, “Challenges and Facilitating Factors in Sustaining 
Community-Based Participatory Research Partnerships: Lessons 
Learned from the Detroit New York City and Seattle Urban Research 
Centers,” J Urban Health, vol. 83, no. 6, pp. 1022–1040, 2006. 
[5] 
E. Holden and I. Norland, “Three Challenges for the Compact City as 
a Sustainable Urban Form: Household Consumption of Energy and 
Transport in Eight Residential Areas in the Greater Oslo Region,” 
Urban Studies, vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 2145–2166, 2005. 
[6] 
P. Sanders. “How Traffic Jams Affect Air Quality,” Environmental 
Leader, Jan 5, 2012 [Online] http://www.environmentalleader.com/ 
2012/01/05/how-traffic-jams-affect-air-quality/ 
[7] 
R.P. Dameri and A. Cocchia, “Smart City and Digital City: Twenty 
Years of Terminology Evolution,” in X Conference of the Italian 
Chapter of AIS, ITAIS, pp. 1–8, 2013. 
[8] 
A. Townsend, Smart Cities: Big Data, Civic Hackers, and the Quest 
for a New Utopia. W.W Norton & Company, 2014. 
[9] 
BIT. “Final Program Guide and Abstract Book,” U-Homes: “Smart 
Living with Automation”, Hefei, China, 2011. 
[10] H. Chourabi, T. Nam, S. Walker, J. R. Gil-Garcia, S. Mellouli, 
K. Nahon, T. A. Pardo, and H. J. Scholl, “Understanding Smart 
Cities: An Integrative Framework,” in 45th Hawaii International 
Conference 
on 
System 
Sciences. 
IEEE, 
2012. 
[Online]. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/hicss.2012.615 
[11] J. M. Shapiro, “Smart Cities: Quality of Life Productivity, and the 
Growth Effects of Human Capital” Review of Economics and 
Statistics, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 324–335, 2006. 
[12] R. Newman, “The next groundbreaking mobile device: your car.” 
[Online] 
http://finance.yahoo.com/news/the-next-groundbreaking-
mobile-device--your-car-191728738.html 
[13] S. Abdelhamid, H. S. Hassanein, and G. Takahara, “Vehicle as a 
Mobile Sensor,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 34, pp. 286–295, 
2014. 
[14] C. Ratti and A. Townsend, “Smarter Cities - The Social Nexus,” 
Scientific American, vol. 305, No. 3, pp. 42–48, 2011. 
[15] A. Bröring, A. Remke, C. Stash, C. Auterman, M. Rieke, and 
J. Möllers, “enviroCar: A Citizen Science Platform for Analyzing and 
Mapping Crowd-Sourced Car Sensor Data,” Transactions in GIS, 
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 362–376, 2015. 
[16] K. Karvinen, T. Karvinen, and V. Valtokari, Make: Sensors, A 
Hands-On Primer for Monitoring the Real World with Arduino and 
Raspberry Pi. Maker Media, 2014. 
[17] E. Gertz and P. D. Justo, Environmental Monitoring with Arduino - 
Watching our World with Sensors. Maker Media, 2012. 
[18] S.-H. Liao, P.-H. Chu, and P.-Y. Hsiao, “Data mining techniques and 
applications – A decade review from 2000 to 2011,” Expert Systems 
with Applications, vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 11 303–11 311, 2012. 
[19] S. U. Appel, D. Botti, J. Jamison, L. Plant, J. Y. Shyr, and L. R. 
Varshney, “Predictive analytics can facilitate proactive property 
vacancy policies for cities,” Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change, vol. 89, pp. 161–173, 2014. 
[20] P. Massa and M. Campagna, “Social Media Geographic Information: 
Recent Findings and Opportunities for Smart Spatial Planning,” 2014. 
[21] D. Quercia and D. Saez, “Mining Urban Deprivation from 
Foursquare: Implicit Crowdsourcing of City Land Use,” IEEE 
Pervasive Comput., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 30–36, 2014.  
[22] R. de Amicis, G. Conti, B. Simões, R. Lattuca, N. Tosi, S. Piffer, and 
G. Pellitteri, “Geo-visual analytics for urban design in the context of 
future internet,” International Journal on Interactive Design and 
Manufacturing (IJIDeM), vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 55–63, 2009. 
[23] F. Lécué, 
S. Tallevi-Diotallevi, 
J. Hayes, 
R. Tucker, 
V. Bicer, 
M. Sbodio, and P. Tommasi, “Smart traffic analytics in the semantic 
web with STAR-CITY: Scenarios system and lessons learned in 
Dublin City,” Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the 
World Wide Web, vol. 27-28, pp. 26–33, 2014. 
[24] E. Y. W. Seto, A. Holt, T. Rivard and R. Bhatia, “Spatial distribution 
of traffic induced noise exposures in a US city: an analytic tool for 
assessing the health impacts of urban planning decisions.” 
International Journal of Health Geographics, vol. 6, no. 24, 2007. 
[25] O. Pol, P. Palensky, C. Kuh, K. Leutgöb, J. Page, and G. Zucker, 
“Integration of centralized energy monitoring specifications into the 
planning process of a new urban development area: a step towards 
smart cities,” e & i Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik, vol. 129, 
no. 4, pp. 258–264, 2012. 
[26] K. Yang and S. K. Pandey, “Further Dissecting the Black Box of 
Citizen Participation: When Does Citizen Involvement Lead to Good 
Outcomes?” Public Administration Review, vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 880–
892, 2011. 
[27] Z. Ebrahim and Z. Irani, “E-government adoption: architecture and 
barriers,” Business Process Management Journal, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 
589–611, 2005. 
[28] K. Podnar and Z. Jancic, “Towards a Categorization of Stakeholder 
Groups: An Empirical Verification of a Three-Level Model,” Journal 
of Marketing Communications, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 297–308, 2006. 
[29] A. Coe, 
G. Paquet, 
and 
J. Roy, 
“E-Governance 
and 
Smart 
Communities: A Social Learning Challenge,” Social Science 
Computer Review, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 80–93, feb 2001. 
[30] K. E. Portney and J. M. Berry, “Participation and the Pursuit of 
Sustainability in U.S. Cities,” Urban Affairs Review, vol. 46, no. 1, 
pp. 119–139, 2010. 
[31] L. Berntzen, 
“Citizen-centric 
eGovernment 
Services: 
Use 
of 
indicators to measure degree of user involvement in eGovernment 
service development,” in CENTRIC 2013 : The Sixth International 
Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized 
Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services. 2013. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

