The “Bottom-up Smart City”: Filling the Gap Between Theory and Practice 
 
Clémentine Schelings & Catherine Elsen 
LUCID Lab for User Cognition & Innovative Design 
University of Liège 
Liège, Belgium 
e-mail: clementine.schelings@uliege.be; catherine.elsen@uliege.be
 
 
Abstract—This paper explores the relatively new phenomenon 
of citizen participation in the Smart City context. We present a 
case study comparative analysis of two participatory 
approaches implemented in two European Smart Cities. Each 
of those operational perspectives is studied in view of the 
theoretical concepts conveyed by the scientific state of the art, 
this way highlighting similarities and gaps between theory and 
practice. The results are focused on the various existing 
interpretations of the “citizen participation” and the “Smart 
City” definitions, and on the different selection processes 
applied in both cases to recruit the participating citizens. The 
article closes with a discussion about key elements to keep in 
mind when implementing a bottom-up participative approach 
in the context of a Smart City. 
Keywords-Smart City; citizen participation; Smart City 
definitions; operational perspective; selection of participants. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The first Smart Cities were essentially focused on 
technological deployment aiming at optimizing urban 
performances, for instance thanks to freely accessible 
internet access, sensors and other pervasive devices. After 
this first wave of completely top-down and techno-centric 
cities (such as Songdo in South Korea or Masdar in the 
United Arab Emirates), we are slowly entering the era of a 
more bottom-up and participative model of Smart Cities. The 
citizens are now given an increasingly important role in the 
making of their smart built environments, because their 
acceptability is essential to insure the sustainability of the 
global smart model [1]. If many researchers acknowledge the 
fact that smart citizens are indeed key to Smart Cities, few 
information is yet available about how to implement a 
renewed participative approach, built on 1970 participatory 
models, in the making of such smart urban environments.  
This research is one of the first steps of a larger research 
project, that is mainly focused on the citizens’ perspective 
regarding the Smart City and the participative approach. This 
paper rather aims at studying and comparing different 
participatory 
initiatives 
conducted 
in 
Smart 
Cities 
particularly known for their citizen engagement and their 
bottom-up dynamics. The goal here is to document actual 
participative approaches in order to extract some key 
elements regarding citizen participation in the Smart City.  
Comparing scientific perspectives with day-to-day, 
operational implementations of Smart City initiatives, this 
paper is structured in four more sections. In Section II, we 
present a short literature review about participation in the 
Smart City. Section III then describes the interview-based 
methodology used for the comparative analysis of 
participative processes implemented in two carefully selected 
Smart Cities (one in the United Kingdom, one in the 
Netherlands). Section IV describes the obtained results: 
Subsection A gives the participatory context, while 
Subsection B is focused on the practical vision of two key 
definitions (Smart City and citizen participation) compared 
to more theoretical ones coming from the literature review, 
Subsection C presents the participants’ selection processes in 
both chosen cases. Section V discusses the results and raises 
some questions in regard of what both chosen Smart Cities 
consider as “best practices”, given their specific contexts. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
This state of the art is kept voluntary short and will only 
present major theoretical models underlying the concepts of 
Smart City and citizen participation. Our subsequent 
intention is indeed to further study literature review in regard 
of empirical results in order to establish a comparison 
between theoretical and operational perspectives. 
Two main concepts are at the root of this research 
project, namely “Smart City” and “citizen participation”. 
Both concepts carry a multitude of (sometimes confused) 
definitions as they designate multifaceted realities [2][3]. As 
far as the “Smart City” concept is concerned, there are 
indeed a multitude of definitions and no real consensus about 
the meaning of this “buzzword” [4]. Giffinger’s definition, 
one of the most frequently referred to, dissects the concept 
into six axes: economy, environment, governance, living, 
mobility and people [5]. Especially because of this “people” 
component, the citizen participation has lately become more 
and more popular in the Smart City context [6][7], building 
on the realization that citizens’ potential rejection of the 
Smart 
City 
concepts 
could 
entirely 
jeopardize 
the 
sustainability of the global smart model itself [4][8]. Citizens 
are thus considered as key actors of the making of the Smart 
City and their sensitization and participation are the first 
steps towards awareness and acceptability [2]. Gradually, the 
techno-centric smart environments give way to more eco-
systemic Smart Cities and a shift is observed from the triple 
helix to the quadruple-helix model [9][10]. Side by side with 
universities, governments and industries, citizens are 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

henceforth recognized as the fourth main stakeholder of the 
smart innovation [11]. Even though many authors nowadays 
share this viewpoint and promote citizens’ engagement and 
empowerment, few information is available about how to 
concretely apply citizen participation to the context of Smart 
Cities [12]. Moreover, we suggest that older models of 
citizen participation, such as Arstein’s ladder or Glass’ 
objectives of participation [13][14], should be re-interpreted 
and might differently take place in practice given the 
opportunities offered by new technologies.  
It is therefore crucial to confront theoretical and practical 
realities and to explore what local actors have in mind when 
referring to citizen participation in the Smart City. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The methodology used to conduct this research is a 
comparative analysis of two cases, nurtured by semi-
structured interviews with several stakeholders linked to 
smart projects and participative initiatives in each of those 
cases. This paper focuses on two European Smart Cities, one 
in the United Kingdom and the other one in the Netherlands. 
In both cities, one research lab was chosen because it meets 
the following criteria: it is localized in an internationally 
recognized Smart City, it works in collaboration with the city 
officials and its main research activities are linked to citizen 
participation in future urban environments. Beyond those 
similarities, the two research centers remain quite different in 
their approaches. The Dutch lab generally considers self-
organized citizens’ communities and bottom-up movements 
as essential triggers for any launched project, while the 
British lab rather tries to integrate a participative dimension 
to existing projects that would not make sense otherwise. 
Thus, the Dutch lab is always involved in participatory 
initiatives, but the British lab also conducts some research 
projects without any citizen participation. Another difference 
between the labs lies in the end-use of the material produced 
through the participative process. The British lab seeks to 
develop a marketable product, while the Dutch lab rather 
promotes open-access material that can be freely reused after 
the end of each project. A last difference is due to the various 
profiles and backgrounds of the members of the two labs that 
therefore develop different identities. The British lab is 
mainly composed of computer scientists using data for a 
socio-technological purpose. The Dutch lab brings together 
researchers with data, design and digital humanities 
backgrounds.  
In practice, each interview was expected to last about one 
hour, but the effective length varies between forty and eighty 
minutes. Several types of stakeholders were interviewed: 
directors of the research centers, labs’ team members, Smart 
City managers, city officials and other experts from the fields 
of participation, technology and urban planning. Given this 
variety of interviewees’ profiles, different sets of questions 
were prepared, in line with the specific expertise of each 
actor. In addition, some essential issues were discussed with 
the complete sample of respondents, such as their own 
definitions of “Smart City” and “citizen participation”.  
As a first step of our comparative analysis, this paper will 
focus on only four interviews and more specifically on the 
results of meetings conducted with two lab directors and two 
team members. We decided to start our study with those 
stakeholders because they are very close to the realities on 
the ground: the team members are the day-to-day operational 
actors, while the directors are the spokespersons of each lab 
and therefore structure those labs’ vision and attitude. The 
idea is to understand both global visions of those two labs 
and to compare their different interpretation of the 
participative approach, given their actual perception of the 
Smart City.  
Globally, eight main themes are addressed through the 
interviews (see Table 1). Additional questions regarding the 
presentation of the city (specificities, history, population) 
and the policy (objectives, priorities, citizens’ input) are 
discussed with city officials and Smart City managers, but 
won’t be presented in this paper. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results of the four interviews are structured in three 
subsections. First, we will present the contexts in which 
citizens become active participants for both cities. Then, we 
will present interviewees’ definitions of the Smart City and 
the citizen participation, in comparison with the scientific 
state of the art. Eventually, we will compare the participants’ 
selection processes as conducted in both labs and we will 
study the impact such processes have on the recruited 
citizens’ profiles. 
A. Participatory context 
The citizen participation is a complex process that may 
tire the citizens if their input is repeatedly requested for each 
and every project related to the Smart City. Therefore, it is of 
crucial importance to wisely choose topics for which 
participants’ contribution is considered essential. Both labs 
have a different strategy regarding this issue. The British lab 
focuses on “the stress points in the city (…), priorities, which 
have been identified with the council” and uses citizen 
participation mainly to get feedbacks about the solutions 
developed by the researchers in cooperation with the local 
authorities. The logic of the Dutch lab is quite different. 
Once again, they start from context-specific urban problems, 
but the chosen topics result from shared interests between the 
citizens’ preoccupations and the local authorities’ priorities. 
Thus  citizens  are  always  involved  in  projects  that they feel  
TABLE I.  
MAIN THEMES STRUCTURING THE INTERVIEWS WITH THE 
DIRECTORS AND THE TEAM MEMBERS OF THE LAB 
Common themes 
Directors 
- Presentation of each actor 
(background and role) 
- Own definitions of the two 
main concepts (Smart City and 
citizen participation) 
- Presentation of concrete 
projects (context, success 
stories, possible improvements) 
- Participatory approach 
(benefits, drawbacks, 
challenges) 
- Technology (role, ethics, 
privacy) 
 
 
- Contacts with other stakeholders 
of the ecosystem (city officials, 
citizens, industrial partners) 
 
 
Team members 
- Participatory methodology 
(phases, methods, objectives) 
- Participants (roles, selection 
criteria, profiles) 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

concerned about, and that they wanted to integrate even prior 
to any involvement from the city itself. Another difference 
between the two approaches is that British citizens often 
participate at the end of the process, while the Dutch citizens 
always participate from the beginning and generally during 
the whole project. 
B. Definitions 
The two following subsections aim to define the Smart 
City and the citizen participation on basis of the 
interpretations proposed by the four interviewees. The results 
are examined with respect to the state of the art, highlighting 
the convergences and the divergences between theory and 
practice. 
1) Smart City: This section focuses on the definition of 
the Smart City, as perceived by the stakeholders interviewed 
on the ground. On the basis of the most widespread 
definitions, we will compare the different visions hold by 
those experts (see Table 2 and Table 3). 
The first interesting observation is that there is a distinction 
between their current vision (see Table 2) and their 
prospective vision (see Table 3) of what the Smart City is. 
In other words, the interviewees are fully conscious that the 
Smart City is an ongoing process that can be described on 
the one hand on the basis of current initiatives, with their 
promising  achievements  and  their  manifest  limitations,  or,  
TABLE II.  
INTERVIEWEES’ CURRENT VISION OF THE SMART CITY 
The Smart 
City is… 
Smart City 
United-Kingdom 
Netherlands 
Interviewees 
Directors 
of the labs 
DU1 a technology- 
         connoted word 
DU2 a city for one  
         citizen category 
DN1 a set of fully autonomous  
         systems 
DN2 a top-down controlled 
         city 
DN3 an easily managed city 
DN4 a city of “dumb citizens” 
Team 
members 
MU1 a smartphone- 
         adapted city 
MU2 a fuzzy concept 
MN1 a set of technological  
         infrastructures 
MN2 a product of big  
         technology companies 
MN3 a concept disconnected  
         from citizens 
MN4 an optimized and  
         efficient city 
TABLE III.  
INTERVIEWEES’ PROSPECTIVE VISION OF THE SMART CITY 
Smart City 
should be … 
Smart City 
United-Kingdom 
Netherlands 
Interviewees 
Directors 
of the labs 
DU3 a technology- 
         improved city 
DU4 an inclusive 
         city 
DN5 a less obvious city  
         management 
DN6 a city of creative citizens 
DN7 a city of “smart citizens    
        that are able to fulfill their   
        own information needs” 
Team 
members 
MU3 a set of 
         facilitating  
         technologies 
MU4 a support in  
         daily life 
MU5 an assistance  
         for everybody 
MN5 / 
 
DU = Director of the lab in the United-Kingdom (UK); DN = Director of the lab in the Netherlands; 
MU = team Member of the lab in the UK; MN = team Member of the lab in the Netherlands  
on the other hand, on the basis of the likely evolutions and 
hopes for the future. 
In the interviewees’ discourses, we obviously find key 
elements that meet some definitions from the state of the art. 
The interviewees’ propositions are identified by codes (see 
Table  2  and  Table  3),  which  are  referenced  in  brackets 
hereafter. 
First of all, each expert mentions the technological aspect of 
the Smart City, be it considered as a positive or a negative 
element (DU1, DU3, MU1, MU3, DN1, MN1-2). Following 
some authors, new technologies are obviously part of the 
Smart City, in the sense that they support any other key 
aspect of the city such as wellbeing and quality of life 
[6][15]. This vision is shared by the interviewees, but 
perhaps in a more nuanced way as they feel that actual 
Smart Cities may misinterpret this use of technology, 
making it an end per se especially due the market pressure. 
However, the British team member still believes that 
technological developments will evolve into daily-life 
facilitators (MU3-4). The Dutch lab is more cautious and 
considers that the current practical message conveyed by the 
Smart City is not yet the perfect solution for our future 
urban ideal (MN5). Actually, this nuance is also the 
consequence of an almost exclusively top-down governance 
of many smart projects (DN2). This approach, although 
neglecting citizens’ input (MN3), provides the advantage of 
easily managing the city (DN3, DN5) and rather efficiently 
optimizing its day-to-day operation [5][16]. Ben Letaifa yet 
emphasizes the importance of a complementary bottom-up 
approach through citizen participation [4]. Furthermore, 
Giffinger insists on the fact that a city cannot be smart and 
efficient (MN4) unless citizen’s intelligence is valued and 
exploited [5]. According to the interviewees, citizens should 
indeed play a specific role in their smart urban 
environments, and they should be empowered in order to 
actively participate (DN4, DN6-7). The Dutch director even 
specifies that citizens should themselves be able to respond 
to their information needs, i.e., to become “self-decisive, 
independent and aware citizens” [5]. This citizen autonomy 
is only possible in an inclusive Smart City (DU2, DU4, 
MU5) and one of the next big challenges is to limit 
obstacles to such inclusion, such as the digital divide [17]. 
Finally, compared to the literature, one important aspect is 
missing from the interviewees’ discourses: sustainability. 
Surprisingly, no participant refers to environmental and 
demographic issues while those are among the main reasons 
to promote smart initiatives, offering a long-term solution 
for our urban environments [18][19]. This demonstrates the 
extent to which the Smart City is a complex concept with 
many meanings and no unanimous definition, especially in 
regard of specific, locally constrained situations (MU2). 
2) Citizen participation: Another notion difficult to 
grasp is the citizen participation, although this time it goes 
back to a nearly fifty-year-old concept [20]. Throughout the 
years, the participatory approach has evolved into new 
practices and its “smart” interpretation is certainly still 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

another perspective to take into account. Based on the 
experts’ interviews and the keywords they use, we identify 
four main axes around which we summarize their 
propositions in order to characterize participation in the age 
of Smart Cities: communication, citizen control, conditions 
and data manipulation (Figure 1).  
The two labs generally tend to agree on some key aspects of 
citizen participation, but they both insist on different axes. 
First of all, the British lab notices that participation is above 
all 
communication, 
and 
most 
preferably 
two-way 
communication. Information has to be exchanged between 
citizens and power holders, be they researchers or local 
authorities, because every actor’s perspective is valuable 
and should at least be listened to. There are several levels of 
communication depending on the contribution of the 
participants, who can either just receive information, 
propose their own ideas or even negotiate with the power 
holders. British Lab’s actors put a certain emphasis on 
verbal exchanges, which do not yet suffice to qualify as 
participation according to some authors [21]. One step 
further, both labs agree with Arnstein and consider that 
“citizen participation is citizen power”, meaning that 
citizens should have a real impact on the decision-making of 
any participative process [13]. Citizens are not just 
informed, educated or consulted to ease tensions, but should 
have an actual voice translated into action [13][22]. The 
Dutch lab considers that this citizen control goes hand in 
hand with involved and empowered citizens, which means 
that they are given the opportunity to actively and wisely 
participate. Furthermore, anybody should enjoy such 
opportunity, according to both labs, irrespective of gender, 
social   status   or   even   technology   acquaintance.  Beyond  
 
 
Figure 1.  Axes of citizen participation on basis of interviewees’ visions 
being offered with the possibility to participate, both labs 
are conscious that citizens’ willingness to participate is 
crucial and that they are some conditions that can ease the 
participative process and impact its implementation. The 
Dutch  lab,  in  accordance  with  Klandermans  and  Oegema, 
specifies that the participants have to be motivated in order 
to actually take part to the project [23]. More importantly, 
participation often arises from an information need, directly 
expressed by the participants or identified after a stimulation 
phase. Consequently, citizens should be present from the 
early phases of the project [24], in order to make sure their 
needs will nurture the project definition. Moreover, the 
British lab is convinced that participation cannot efficiently 
operate without trust and benefits. Citizens are indeed more 
prone to participate if they “foresee the benefits in the long 
run”, such as time and money savings. Finally, the fourth 
axis concerns data manipulation, which is intrinsically 
linked to the era of the Smart Cities. This axis has yet not 
been extensively documented in the literature review about 
citizen participation, maybe because there is a temporal gap 
between participatory theories introduced in the 70s and the 
first references to smart technologies appearing in the early 
2000s. The “data manipulation” designates the way citizens 
interact with the data produced through the participative 
process. According to the Dutch lab, citizen participation is 
not limited to data collection, but should extend to their 
understanding, appropriation (interrogation and relation), 
analysis and usage by the citizens in order to create new 
knowledge. Indeed, new technologies might impact 
participative processes and are seen as an empowering 
factor, since “digital technology allows cities to engage with 
citizens in decision-making processes” [7].  
C. Selection of participants 
Given their different approaches, the two labs also show 
some discrepancies regarding the participants’ selection. 
This section will present which participant profiles are 
targeted when a participative process is implemented, 
according to each Smart City. One recurrent goal in 
participatory processes is to make everyone participate, but 
in practice it is considered as nearly impossible. To select the 
participants, both labs therefore start from a local 
neighborhood, but their different interpretation of “local” has 
implications on the profiles of the sampled participants. 
Figure 2 summarizes the descriptions proposed by the two 
labs regarding recurrent citizen profiles taking part to their 
smart initiatives. The two shaded zones in Figure 2 highlight 
the keywords discribing similar citizens’ profiles in both 
labs. 
The Dutch lab “select(s) (...) citizens basically by tapping 
into existing platforms or organizations that feed into the 
community” while the British lab focuses on one specific 
geographical area. As a matter of fact, the Dutch 
interpretation is linked to existing communities that have 
already initiated some projects in order to solve local issues. 
In line with its research interests, the Dutch lab chooses to 
support  and  develop  the  ideas  of  the  community, because it  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 2.  Participants’ profiles on basis of interviewees’ selection process 
seems more relevant to tackle actual people’s concerns and 
to meet a real need. The British perspective is quite different 
and rather aims at testing on pilot sites some technologies, 
that would in fine be deployed at scale, requiring to get 
more “general users”. Therefore, the British researchers just 
select a neighborhood and consequently the  whole  group of  
people living there. Given this divergent selection criterion, 
participants present different profiles in both samples. As far 
as the Dutch community members are concerned, they are 
of course very active and are described as “involved” and 
“invested” in the topic or even in concrete actions. This also 
means more environmental-conscious citizens that are 
generally interested in any initiative related to the smart city 
agenda. Since the British recruitment is made on a voluntary 
basis, the same super-enthusiastic profiles are also present 
but this time they are not self-organized around common 
values. The only condition to participate to the British 
project is to be equipped, i.e., for instance in a project of 
garden watering the condition is to have a garden. Besides 
the always-involved people, other profiles show up such as 
careless people, technology- and green-reluctant citizens 
that may decide to participate in order to save time or 
money for instance. Contrary to the Dutch communities, the 
British participants therefore constitute a less homogeneous 
sample presenting a limited amount of shared values and 
interests, but rather a group of people motivated to 
participate for various reasons. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The participative approach is gaining more and more 
popularity in Smart City projects, but there is very little 
practical advice about how to conduct a participatory 
methodology in such specific context. Given the ground 
experience of the interviewed experts, we identify several 
questions emerging from their ongoing and completed 
projects in terms of concept definitions and selection of 
participants. Those key elements provide useful information 
both for scientific researchers and operational stakeholders. 
First, the various existing interpretations of the Smart 
City concept definitely have an impact on its operational 
implementation. For instance, the concept of pervasive 
technology seems to play a major part in the current vision of 
the Smart City, but the citizen is expected to play a larger 
role in our future smart cities. The interviewees’ prospective 
vision of the Smart City is generally closer to the definitions 
found in the scientific state of the art, while their current 
vision is less optimistic and is probably nurtured by the first 
failures encountered by Smart City projects around the 
world. Moreover, this variety of interpretations is linked to 
the fact that “the smart city concept encompasses intangible 
aspects such quality of life and well-being components, 
whose measurement is subjective and difficult to perform” 
[25]. Given the plethora of definitions, each ecosystem of 
actors working on smart initiatives should at least, and as a 
priority, agree on a shared vision, generating clear objectives 
and means to achieve them. The question to keep in mind is: 
how do we define the Smart City, and especially regarding 
the roles played by the technologies and by the citizens? 
The second attention point concerns the definition of the 
citizen participation. Among the four axes previously 
identified (Figure 1), the communication, the citizen control 
and the conditions are explicitly discussed in the literature 
review, but the data manipulation is not yet part of the 
traditional scientific discourse. Citizen appropriation of the 
produced data is nonetheless a new form of participation and 
this technological dimension is even more crucial in the 
current smart context. This late integration of this data 
component as an additional facet of the citizen participation 
is clue that older concepts introduced in the 70s should 
evolve and that new participatory tools and methods are 
necessary to complement the existing ones. Therefore, one 
question to ask is: how can the new technologies support the 
participative process and the citizens’ active, inclusive 
involvement? Furthermore, the interviewees’ interpretations 
about citizen participation introduce the notion of citizens’ 
motivation, nurturing our third focus point.  
The results regarding the selection of the citizens show 
that participants can be characterized by different motivation 
spectrums: Dutch citizens share the same values while the 
British participants have more diverse interests. Following 
Deci, the participants’ motivation may have intrinsic or 
extrinsic sources [26]. In other words, the citizens can 
respectively decide to participate “because it is inherently 
interesting or enjoyable” or “because it leads to a separable 
outcome” like for instance a reward [26]. In our case, the 
benefits promoted by the British lab, such as technology 
exclusivity, time or money savings, might be identified as 
extrinsic motivations. The Dutch participants rather seem to 
be motivated by intrinsic factors, such as the personal 
willingness to take part to the life of their community. 
According to Amabile’s extensive research on the subject, 
this dichotomy between extrinsic and intrinsic motivations 
has consequences on the participants’ creativity: extrinsic 
motivations could undermine the intrinsic motivation and the 
creative outputs, because the subject is not performing for its 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

own sake anymore but rather for an external purpose [27]. 
Therefore, in our opinion, extrinsically motivated people will 
maybe more easily grow weary than intrinsically motivated 
citizens, who will probably commit themselves to participate 
in the long run. Consequently, our third question is: what are 
the citizens’ motivations and what is the potential impact on 
the participants’ long-term involvement within the project? 
Another 
important 
consequence 
regarding 
the 
participants’ selection of the participants is related to the 
representativeness of the sample. One recurrent wish of the 
interviewees is to reach everybody, but they agree that this 
dream scenario is too optimistic. Therefore, the two labs 
developed their own practical approach. On the one hand, the 
Dutch lab relies on existing communities, already active and 
probably prone to participate. On the other hand, the British 
lab recruits the most motivated citizens from a limited 
geographical area, based on some kind of “first come, first 
served” rule. The British lab then hopes to get more “general 
users” in the sense that the researchers do not know anything 
about the selected citizens, nor about their diverse 
motivations, leaving the possibility to include participants 
who have reservations about some aspects of the project. 
Even if the British sample is more heterogeneous, none of 
the two labs insures a representative sample. We should then 
be aware that each approach provides different target 
audiences and ask ourselves: how will the participants be 
selected and what are the consequences on the variety of the 
citizen profiles and, as a result, on the project outcomes? 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper considers the citizen participation in the Smart 
City from the operational perspective. Based on interviews 
with ground actors, two Smart Cities’ perceptions and 
participative approaches are compared and confronted with 
the literature review. The results show that the theoretical 
definitions of the “Smart City” rather correspond to the 
interviewees’ prospective visions, while their current vision 
is not that optimistic, especially regarding the role played by 
the citizens. The interviewees’ interpretation of the “citizen 
participation” is close to the existing theoretical models, but 
enriched by a new dimension related to the technological era, 
that we call “data manipulation”. Regarding the participants’ 
selection, striving to reach every citizen is seen as an un-
achievable ideal and both labs develop their own alternative 
approach, tapping into existing communities or focusing on a 
specific geographical area. This choice has a direct impact on 
the participants’ profiles, in terms of interests and 
motivations, or even creativity and commitment to the 
project. The nuanced interviewees’ visions highlight key 
elements that should be kept in mind while implementing a 
participative approach in the Smart City. Given the variety of 
interpretations, further research will explore other case 
studies nurturing our comparative analysis. Future work will 
also focus on the citizens’ perspective regarding their 
participation in the Smart City (preferences, barriers and 
motivations). 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is part of the “Wal-e-Cities” project, 
funded by the FEDER and the Walloon region. The authors 
would like to thank the funding authorities, as well as all 
who contributed to this research, in particular the 
interviewed lab directors and team members.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Monfaredzadeh and R. Krueger, “Investigating social 
factors of sustainability in a smart city,” Procedia 
Engineering, vol. 118, pp. 1112-1118, 2015. 
[2] M. Angelidou, “Smart city policies: a spatial approach,” 
Cities, vol. 41, pp. S3-S11,  2014. 
[3] K. Maier, “Citizen participation in planning: climbing a 
ladder?, ” European Planning Studies, 9-6, pp. 707-719, 2001. 
[4] S. Ben Letaifa, “How to strategize smart cities: revealing the 
SMART model,” J. of Business Research, vol. 68, pp. 1414-
1419, 2015. 
[5] R. Giffinger et al., Smart cities: ranking of European medium-
sized cities. Centre of Regional Science, Vienna University of 
Technology, 2007. 
[6] R. G. Hollands, “Will the real smart city please stand up? 
Intelligent, progressive or entrepreneurial,” City, vol. 12, no. 
3, pp. 303-320, 2008. 
[7] J. Willems, J. Van den Bergh, and S. Viaene, “Smart city 
projects and citizen participation: the case of London,”  in 
Public sector management in a globalized world, R. 
Andeßner, D. Greiling and R. Vogel, Eds. Wiesbaden: NPO-
Management, Springer Gabler, pp. 249-266, 2017. 
[8] A.-G. Paetz, E. Dütschke, and W. Fichtner, “Smart homes as 
a means to sustainable energy consumption: a study of 
consumer perceptions,” Journal of Consumer Policy, vol. 35, 
pp. 23-41, 2012. 
[9] L. Leydesdorff and M. Deakin, “The triple-helix model of 
smart cities: a neo-evolutionary perspective,” Journal of 
Urban Technology, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 53-63, 2011. 
[10] R. P. Dameri, “Comparing smart and digital city: initiatives 
and strategies in Amsterdam and Genoa. Are they digital 
and/or smart?,” in Smart City, R. P. Dameri and C. Rosenthal-
Sabroux, Eds. Cham: Springer, pp. 45-88, 2014. 
[11] D. Schuurman, B. Baccarne, L. De Marez, and P. Mechant, 
“Smart ideas for smart cities: investigating crowdsourcing for 
generating and selecting ideas for ICT innovation in a city 
context,” Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic 
Commerce Research, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 49-62, 2012. 
[12] V. Thomas, D. Wang, L. Mullagh, and N. Dunn, “Where’s 
Wally? In search of citizen perspectives on the smart city ,” 
Sustainability, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 207-219, 2016. 
[13] S. R. Arnsteain, “A ladder of citizen participation,” J. of the 
American Institute of Planners, vol. 35-4, pp. 216-224, 1969. 
[14] J. J. Glass, “Citizen participation in planning: the relationship 
between objectives and techniques,” Journal of the American 
Institute of Planners, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 180-189, 1979. 
[15] R. P. Dameri, “Searching for smart city definition: a 
comprehensive proposal,” International Journal of Computers 
& Technology, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 2544-2551, 2013,  
[16] S. P. Hall, “Creative cities and economic development,” 
Urban Studies, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 639-649, 2000. 
[17] D. Gooch, A. Wolff, G. Kortuem, and R. Brown,  
“Reimagining the role of citizens in smart city projects,” 
Adjunct Proc. of the 2015 ACM Int. Joint Conf. on Pervasive 
and Ubiquitous Computing, New York, 2015, pp. 1587-1594. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

[18] A. Vanolo, “Is there anybody out there? The place and role of 
citizens in tomorrow’s smart cities,” Futures, vol. 82, pp. 26-
36, 2016. 
[19] H. Chourabi et al., “Understanding smart cities: an integrative 
framework,” 45th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, HICSS, Maui, 2012, pp. 2289-2297. 
[20] M.-H. Bacqué and M. Gauthier, “Participation, urban 
planning and urban studies,” Participations, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 
36-66, 2011. 
[21] R. Luck, “Dialogue in participatory design,” Design studies, 
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 523-535, 2003. 
[22] R. Luck, “Learning to talk to users in participatory design 
situations,” Design Studies, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 217-242, 2007. 
[23] B. Klandermans and D. Oegema, “Potentials, networks, 
motivations, and barriers: steps towards participation in social 
movements,”, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 519-531, 1987. 
[24] G. Rowe and L. J. Frewer, “Public participation methods: a 
framework for evaluation,” vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 3-29, 2000. 
[25] R. Carli, M. Dotoli, R. Pellegrino, and L. Ranieri, “Measuring 
and managing the smartness of cities: a framework for 
classifying performance indicators,” 2013 IEEE International 
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 
1288-1293, 2013. 
[26] R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivations: 
classic 
definitions 
and 
new 
directions,” 
Contemporary Educ. Psychology, vol. 25, pp. 54-67, 2000. 
[27] T. M. Amabile, “Social environments that kill creativity,” in 
Readings in Innovation, S. S. Gryskiewiz and D. A. Hills, 
Eds. Greensboro, NC: Center for Creative Leadership, 1992.
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

