Business Model Scenarios for an Open Service Platform for Multi-Modal Electric 
Vehicle Sharing  
 
Uschi Buchinger, Sven Lindmark, Olivier Braet  
iMinds-SMIT, Vrije Universiteit Brussel 
Brussels, Belgium 
e-mail: uschi.buchinger@iminds.be, sven.lindmark@iminds.be, olivier.braet@vub.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract—Triggered 
by 
environmental 
concerns, 
smart 
mobility solutions have expanded in recent years. This includes 
the development of an electric vehicle market, car- and bike 
sharing concepts and better route planning systems for public 
transportation. The fusion of these approaches opens the door 
for new business models for cooperating industries in the field 
of multi-modal electric mobility. This paper provides a 
selection of scenarios about how the interplay between 
mobility- and infrastructure providers can affect their business 
models. It concludes that the continuous technical and business 
interactions between multiple partners would profit from the 
integration of an Open Service Platform that handles data 
management and coordination tasks for the partners. 
Keywords-Business models; Electric vehicles; Charging 
infrastructure 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Triggered by climate change and global resource 
shortages, the transportation industry faces times of changes. 
As a consequence, there is an increased industry and policy 
interest to develop and improve electric vehicles (EVs) and 
make them more commercially viable [1], [2], [3].  
But the EV industry is confronted with many challenges 
of technical, economical, organizational and social nature. 
Customers are skeptical regarding long charging times, short 
driving range or the height of initial investments for the 
vehicles or components such as the rechargeable batteries. 
The fragmentation of players on the supply side (battery 
provider, car manufacturer, infrastructure provider, etc.) 
causes a lack of a single point of sale, which creates 
additional hurdles for customer adoption [4], [5]. 
These challenges can be addressed in many ways. Some 
approaches have arisen in the mobility industry including i) 
better utilization of vehicle capacity through leasing, sharing 
and co-using programs [6] and ii) the development of smart 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) systems. 
By being able to consult smart technology previous to the 
journey, wayside and on board (e.g., while driving via 
roadside 
information 
panels), 
integrated 
multi-modal 
traveling and the easy changing of transport systems is 
facilitated [6], [7]. 
Kley et al. [8] classify all these emerging trends in the 
electric mobility sector in three segments: vehicle and 
battery, infrastructure, and system services (or integration 
into the energy system). 
Earlier studies, such as the EURELECTRIC concept 
paper [19], and the report on Electric Vehicles in Urban 
Europe [20] analyzed various market models, key players 
and B2B cooperation in these segments. Thereby they define 
the requirements for the expansion of an electric vehicle 
market. However, there is no research on business model of 
integrative Open Service Platforms (see below).   
New technology (platforms) forms a logical next phase 
by searching for ways to combining the three segments and 
thereby supporting networked electric mobility patterns. 
In 
Belgium, 
a 
personal 
card 
where 
individual 
transportation contracts can be stored (called MOBIB card), 
is one of the pioneers of offering a networked mobility 
solution. It integrates multiple mobility services. However, 
MOBIB is not focused on electric mobility [9]. 
Instead, it is the National Railway Company of Belgium 
(NMBS/SNCB – Nationale Maatschappij der Belgische 
Spoorwegen/Société Nationale des Chemins de fer Belges) 
that moved forward by creating an Open Service Platform 
(OSP) where various players from the (electric) mobility 
industries are linked. This includes amongst others car 
manufacturers, charging pole providers, energy providers 
and –distributors or mobility data providers. The platform is 
operated under the name “Olympus” and provides since 
2012, services related to namely the sharing of electric cars, 
scooters and bicycles in four cities of Flanders. Embedded in 
a test bed, the project aims at generating insights into the 
market throughout its operation period of three years [10].  
Hence, NMBS/SNCB combines two strategic points that 
are recommended by Shaheen et al. [11] to stimulate the 
development of the vehicle sharing industry. These include i) 
the coordination and linkage of several services from the 
mobility and non-mobility sectors and ii) the incorporation of 
superior 
communication, 
reservation, 
and 
billing 
technologies [11]. 
The construction of such an Open Service Platform that 
enables EV-sharing and coordination of shared (public) EV-
infrastructure requires an adequate service offer to a wide 
range of partners from all three segments defined before: 
vehicle and battery, infrastructure and electricity sector. The 
task 
that 
the 
Olympus 
platform 
performs, 
namely 
coordination of EV-sharing and EV infrastructure sharing, is 
here abbreviated by EV-I-sharing. Joining such a network 
necessitates the restructuring of business models for (so far 
independent) industries. Various options emerge that might 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

result in the reallocation of control parameters and value 
creation for the individual partners.   
This paper will examine how the business models of 
existing and new entities in the EV-I-sharing ecosystem 
could look like. Within this paper, the focus will be on a 
consumer-oriented approach. The obvious contact points for 
consumers are either the mobility- or infrastructure sector. 
Consequently, in this paper, we delimit ourselves from 
analyzing the electricity or other relevant sectors. 
By doing so we will be able to answer the question: How 
can smart technology enable coordination of existing - and 
facilitation of new business models in the EV-I-sharing 
sector in order to provide multi-modal mobility alternatives 
to end customers. 
The paper will use the value network and business model 
matrix developed by Ballon [12], elaborated in Section II. 
On the basis of this framework, Section III develops the 
value network. It will incorporate the actors, tasks or roles 
and relationships of the mobility and infrastructure sector. It 
will also introduce the dominant “As-is” business model, i.e., 
the one operated today by multiple EV-sharing providers and 
which will serve as a starting point for the introduction of 
further business model scenarios. 
The business models are presented and analyzed in 
Section IV. In Section V, we compare the different scenarios 
and 
give 
suggestions 
of 
their 
ability 
of 
real-life 
implementation. We end with a conclusion and suggestion 
for further research in Section VI. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
In this paper, preceding the description of various 
business models, the value network of the EV-I-sharing 
concept will be envisaged. The value network consists of 
three 
building 
blocks: 
business 
actors 
(persons 
or 
corporations mobilizing tangible or intangible resources), 
business roles (business processes fulfilled by one or more 
actors) and business relationships (the contractual exchanges 
of products or services for financial payments or other 
resources; represented through value chains). In this paper, 
actors are described also as partners.  
Based on this generic value network canvas, alternative 
business model scenarios will be constructed and compared. 
While there are many business model frameworks proposed 
in the literature, notably Osterwalder [13] and Chesbrough 
[14], these are usually more suited for aiding individual 
firms and less suited for guiding collective innovation 
processes. It is therefore necessary to consider a stream of 
research that attempts to provide a more coherent treatment 
of the most relevant business model parameters while at the 
same time focusing mainly on the relationships between the 
stakeholders involved.  
Hence, we will follow the framework of Ballon [12], 
displayed in TABLE I, which defines several parameters 
upon which business networks can be analyzed. The 
parameters encompass the value network, the functional 
architecture and financial model, and value configuration 
[12], [15]. 
 
TABLE I. 
BUSINESS MODEL MATRIX (SOURCE: [12]) 
CONTROL PARAMETERS 
VALUE PARAMETERS 
Value Network 
Parameters 
Functional 
Architecture 
Parameters 
Financial model 
Parameters 
Value 
Configuration 
Parameters 
Combination of 
Assets 
Modularity 
Cost (Sharing) 
Model 
Positioning 
Concentrated 
Distributed 
Modular 
Integrated 
Concentrated 
Distributed 
Complement 
Substitute 
Vertical 
Integration 
Distribution of 
Intelligence 
Revenue Model 
User 
Involvement 
Integrated 
Disintegrated 
Centralized 
Distributed 
Direct 
Indirect 
High 
Low 
Customer 
Ownership 
Interoperability 
Revenue Sharing 
Model 
Intended Value 
Direct 
Inter-
mediated 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Price/Quality 
Lock-in 
 
From the given parameters, we chose five upon which 
the succeeding business models are analyzed. These are the 
Combination of Assets, Customer Ownership, Distribution 
of Intelligence, Cost (Sharing) - and Revenue (Sharing) 
Model.  
The five parameters are defined as follows [12]: 
Combination of assets is a value network parameter that 
focuses on the input, usage and combination of resources 
from all partners. 
Customer ownership, also a value network parameter, 
refers to the relationship with the end customer examining, 
amongst others, the access to key information of the 
customer, the type of contact (direct or intermediated), the 
level of intensity and proximity to the customer. 
Distribution of Intelligence belongs to the parameters 
describing the functional architecture of business networks. 
In ICT systems, this refers to the distribution of processing 
power, control and (management of) functionality across the 
system. 
Cost (Sharing) Model and Revenue (Sharing) Model are 
both financial model parameters. The former discusses how 
costs (investment) for design, development and exploitation 
of a product or service are shared in the business network. It 
relates to sunk costs or up-front investment and marginal 
costs. The latter examines the business model with regard to 
income streams (direct/indirect) and whether and how 
revenues are shared. Apart from distribution revenues over 
several actors, it can also concentrate on one actor. 
Considering the information made available by the 
project partners, these were the parameters on which 
empirical data could be collected during expert interviews 
and 
interactive 
business 
modeling 
workshops. 
The 
information gathered during these interactive moments were 
extended with data gathered from desk research and 
literature review.  
III. 
EV- AND EV-INFRASTRUCTURE-SHARING  
A. Value Network Description 
When illustrating the value network of EV-I-sharing, we 
identified three industrial streams. Each stream focuses on 
different vertical market segments and consists of the roles 
that together build the value chains. For the Open Service 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Platform (OSP), we distinguished a 
mobility-, an 
infrastructure-, and an interactivity- and data stream (Fig.1). 
Further streams (e.g., electricity) are not considered within 
the scope of this paper. The value chains of each stream will 
be divided into three phases: the service development/ 
creation phase, the service delivery/distribution phase and 
the service consumption/usage phase. 
Firstly, the mobility stream comprises the provision of 
an electric vehicle (e.g., electric cars, bicycles or scooters). 
In the service delivery phase the “enabling” services 
precedent to the usage of the EV are placed. They 
encompass registration of customers, authentication-token 
provision, reservation of mobility items, billing of 
customers, clearing tasks and authentication of the token on 
the spot. The actual usage of the mobility item is the contact 
point for the customer and is placed in the service usage 
phase. Roles only describe the task itself, not the specific 
configuration. For example, “billing” includes all variations 
and frequency of payment: flat rate fees prior to the usage, 
during the times of membership (e.g., subscription) or after 
the usage (e.g., pay-per-use) as well as combinations of 
these. 
Secondly, the interactivity and data stream focuses 
mainly on data gathering and processing and thus represents 
the application intelligence of a value chain. These data 
processes actually exist in each of the other streams (and 
even in each role itself). Since this is a layer of intersection, 
it is however singled out and builds an own stream in this 
value network. Hence is thus conducted here that data from 
resources (i.e., vehicles and charging infrastructure 
equipment), customers and events (i.e., changes in the status 
of resources) are recorded, aggregated and encoded. 
Encoded 
data 
is 
edited. 
Data 
sharing, 
extraction, 
recombination and usage by all business partners happen in 
the usage phase.  
Third, the infrastructure stream focuses on EV 
infrastructure supply, e.g., charging poles and parking 
facilities. It comprises hardware and software development 
in 
the 
service 
development 
phase. 
Infrastructure 
deployment/maintenance follows in the service delivery 
phase. In existing business models of charging pole/parking 
lot providers, it is not uncommon to have similar procedures 
in the service delivery phase of the infrastructure stream as 
in the mobility stream. In public and semi-public 
parking/charging facilities, EV owners can subscribe for the 
usage of parking lots/charging poles whereby the parking 
lot/charging pole providers take care of registration of 
customers, authentication-token provision, reservation of 
according items, billing of customers, (clearing tasks in the 
B2B sector) and authentication of the token on the spot [16]. 
For simplicity, in our scenarios, the sole initial money 
flow will come from the customer’s EV usage (mobility 
stream). 
   
Figure 1. Generic EV- and EV-infrastructure-sharing value network 
The costs of the infrastructure provider and other network 
partners need to be covered by B2B clearing. Data 
extraction/sharing and infrastructure usage will demand 
revenue sharing. Along the value chains, data/services flow 
down (indicated by a filled arrow) while money flows up 
(indicated by a plain arrow). Fig. 1 illustrates the value 
network of the EV-I-sharing ecosystem. 
In what follows, multiple business models are outlined, 
mapping various partners, and cooperation between them.  
The term ‘infrastructure provider’ will be used for a 
charging 
pole/parking 
lot 
provider 
and 
the 
term 
‘infrastructure’ for charging/parking spots. 
B.  “As-is” business model 
The initial model is applicable to existing EV-sharing 
concepts (see for example Autolib’ [17] or Zen Car [18]) 
Tasks of the mobility stream are operated by the mobility 
provider who registers its own customers, provides a token 
or access code for the vehicle, handles the reservation 
process, bills the customers and enables authentication at the 
resources to unlock/start the vehicle. In this scenario, only 
the development of infrastructure hardware and software 
components is outsourced. The mobility provider deploys, 
manages and maintains acquired charging and parking 
infrastructure. The execution of enabling services for the 
infrastructure usage is taken care of by the corresponding 
ones of the mobility item usage. Data is aggregated in house 
limited to the mobility provider’s data aggregation system.  
For the customer, the procedures of the service delivery 
phase need revision for each new mobility provider with 
whom he/she signs a contract. The customer needs to 
register separately for each mobility provider and can 
charge the vehicles solely at the declared charging facilities. 
Fig. 2 illustrates the “As-is” business model. The grey boxes 
indicate the partners who conduct roles. They consist of the 
mobility provider, infrastructure provider and customer. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 2. ‘As-is’ business model 
The “As-is” business model construe the chosen 
parameters: 
Combination of assets: The mobility provider integrates 
all relevant assets for the EV-I-sharing process. It buys or 
licenses charging equipment and parking facilities. Due to 
the conjunction of vehicles and infrastructure, services in 
the delivery phase (‘enabling services’) need to be 
conducted only once. Assets are concentrated. 
Customer ownership: Solely the mobility provider has 
customer ownership. 
Distribution of intelligence: Intelligence is concentrated 
at the mobility provider. 
Cost sharing model: There is no cost-sharing model, all 
(up-front) investment and operating costs are borne by the 
mobility provider. 
Revenue (sharing) model: No revenue sharing model is 
necessary in the single operator scenario; revenues are 
concentrated with a single actor. 
IV. 
BUSINESS MODEL SCENARIOS 
The previous section introduced the value network of the 
EV-I-sharing concept and the established business model of 
mobility providers.  
Taking into account the high of investment and potential 
risk for each market entrant, business partners might look 
for cooperation and joint ventures with other partners in the 
electric mobility sector. Given the possibilities that emerge 
from the development of smart ICT, this is becoming more 
and more feasible. We will therefore introduce three 
business model scenarios where various players are 
included, namely mobility providers (including, e.g., EV-
sharing or -leasing companies), infrastructure providers 
(parking spot and charging pole providers), the Open 
Service Platform (OSP) and the customer. The scenarios 
were selected because of their potential to illustrate 
sufficiently contrasting industrial options and their coverage 
of many aspects in the EV-I-sharing scheme. 
 
Figure 3. Independent Partner Scenario 
A. Independent Partner Scenario 
This scenario assumes that the mobility provider 
facilitates the usage of other public or semi-public 
charging/parking spots; other than the own (home) 
charging/parking spots. 
The Independent Partner Scenario illustrated in Fig. 3, 
shows the setup where two companies (mobility- and 
infrastructure provider) cooperate, but independently 
execute the roles of the own value chain. No OSP is 
included. 
The data of a registering customer is automatically or 
on-demand (if the customer explicitly asks for the service) 
forwarded to the infrastructure provider. After registering 
the customer in the own database, the infrastructure provider 
issues a separate token, enables the customer access to the 
reservation process (if existent), and facilitates the 
authentication at the charging pole. 
Combination of assets: Resources as well as applications 
necessary to fulfill the ‘enabling services’ in the service 
delivery phase are properties of either the mobility provider 
or infrastructure provider. Each partner aggregates data of 
resources and events (changing in the status of resources) 
separately in its system. Only the mobility provider 
aggregates customer data. 
Customer ownership: In this scenario, both partners 
have customer ownership (the infrastructure provider, e.g., 
through the provision of the authentication token). The 
difference is in the billing process; the mobility partner 
includes this role exclusively in its customer relationship. 
Distribution of intelligence: Both partners have their 
own system of managing the roles along the value chains: 
their data aggregation pools, processing power and control. 
Intelligence is distributed in the value network. 
Cost sharing model: Each partner is itself responsible 
for (up-front) investment in design, development and 
exploitation of products and services that are used in the 
network. Investments are therefore distributed over various 
partners. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Revenue (sharing) model: Only the mobility provider is 
in the position of billing the customer. In the business 
cooperation, some form of clearing (i.e., revenue sharing) 
will be necessary to pay the usage of charging poles/parking 
spots. It is due to bilateral agreements. 
While this scenario is suitable for two partners, the more 
EV-I-sharing industries join the network, the more complex 
it will become to handle business relationships through 
bilateral agreements. The complexity rises also for the 
customer who gets multiple access tokens for EVs and EV-
infrastructure. For example he/she might need to swipe a 
card over a reader for opening a car (provided by the 
mobility provider) and a different one for stopping the 
charging process and unplugging the car from the energy 
system (provided by the infrastructure provider). 
B. Intervening Partner Scenario 
The following variation of the partner model shows how 
one partner can expand its roles by taking over partner roles 
in the service delivery phase, as portrayed in Fig. 4. The 
scenario illustrates the provision of a shared token, meaning 
that one token of the mobility provider gives access to all 
infrastructure resources. This actor steers the authentication 
at the resources. 
At the same time the scenario shows a possible way of 
how the OSP fits in the value network and how it can 
possibly take over a role in one of the value chains, namely 
the “registration” of customers for the infrastructure 
providers. A probable use case should describe this: if a 
customer registers at the mobility provider the OSP enables 
that he/she is automatically registered for infrastructure 
providers’ services.  
Second, the OSP collects and passes on all event data in 
the network. When a vehicle is reserved at the mobility 
provider, the OSP can coordinate with all infrastructure 
providers of where and when the vehicle is reserved, what 
the battery status needs to be, where the vehicle can be 
plugged at the final destination, etc. 
Its main role however is to aggregate events or changes 
in the status of resources. The OSP collects information 
about the exact times of the usage of services and resources 
and acts as a trusted party in the clearing process. 
 Combination of Assets: The assets are spread between 
the partners in the system. Whereas the mobility provider 
(and partly the infrastructure provider) has leading parts, the 
OSP is mainly a supporting partner.  
The mobility provider, apart from allocating resources, 
has a system for registering new customers. The OSP then 
collects this data from the initial registering partner 
(mobility provider) and registers the new customer for 
partner services. The requirements to make a positive new 
registration of a customer at a partner service might be more 
demanding however than the data that is provided by the 
initial registering actor (e.g., more sophisticated data needed 
or other registration forms in place). This problem needs to 
be solved by arrangements between the partners. 
Figure 4. Intervening Partner Scenario 
Customer Ownership: The takeover of the registration 
process of new customers comes with the power over 
customer 
data 
and 
its 
processing 
and 
forwarding 
responsibly. In this scenario, solely the mobility provider 
has direct customer ownership. However, the OSP 
aggregates customer- and token data collected from all 
partners. 
Distribution of intelligence: Intelligent poles are placed 
at two edges: the mobility provider that takes over token 
provision for multiple partners and the OSP that registers 
customers at partner services. Additionally the OSP collects 
data of events taking place in the network. By ceding roles 
to other partners, the infrastructure provider cedes a certain 
amount of control over certain processes within its value 
chain. 
Cost sharing model: The mobility provider expands its 
systems in terms of opening token provision system as well 
as implementing the authentication system backend and on 
the spot. It might require a large up-front investment. The 
OSP at the same time needs to invest in a registration 
system that meets all partner-requirements. Infrastructure 
providers save costs by not having to develop and maintain 
customer databases and authentication mechanisms. 
Revenue (sharing) model: The income from the usage of 
the vehicles has to cover the expenses of the infrastructure 
provider (through bilateral billing agreements) and the Open 
Service Platform. The mobility provider is the single contact 
point for the customer; a revenue sharing model must be set 
up. 
Having only two partners in the scenario, an OSP might 
not be necessary. However, the more partners the ecosystem 
includes on both sides of the value network, the more 
complex the scheme with bilateral agreements gets, and the 
higher the value of a regulatory, coordinating system. When 
workload and coordination tasks are growing, the OSP can 
be consulted either for sole data pooling or for fulfilling 
roles itself.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

C. 
Open Service Platform Scenario 
The OSP scenario (Fig. 5) shows a model where the 
OSP is responsible for fulfilling all roles of all partners in 
the service delivery phase. This is possible due to data 
exchange between the partners for customers and resources. 
All data about customers and infrastructure resources (e.g., 
location, type, availability) is aggregated in the OSP. The 
business model is depicted on the value network canvas in 
Fig. 5. 
Combination of assets: This model illustrates the 
centralization of most assets at the OSP. The OSP has to 
construct 
(administrative) 
systems, 
processes 
and 
mechanisms that cover all requirements of the ‘enabling 
services’ for both mobility- and infrastructure provider. This 
raises many challenges. It might be that the applicant is only 
interested in one or more services of the network but not all 
that are offered (e.g., only electric bike sharing). It might be 
that he/she is not entitled to use multiple services (e.g., no 
driving license). This selection must result in an adjusted 
registration and invoicing of the customer. The data needs to 
be reflected on the authentication token. The right modules 
need to be loaded on the tokens - modules that describe 
which services are available to the token holder. If he/she 
subscribed for electric bike sharing, the token shall not give 
access to, e.g., electric cars. 
The mobility provider solely provides EVs. The 
infrastructure provider is responsible for development, 
deployment and maintenance of charging poles/parking lots. 
All other tasks are outsourced to the OSP. 
Customer ownership: Neither the mobility- nor the 
infrastructure provider have direct customer ownership. For 
the customer, the Open Service Platform appears as the sole 
service provider.  
This can be seen as a form of indirect customer 
ownership. Registration of new customers is done for all 
partners in the network that can encompass multiple 
mobility- and infrastructure providers. Tokens are handed 
out by the OSP and are valid for all resources. Data from all 
roles are aggregated by the OSP and can be extracted and 
used by the partners in the network. Billing of customers 
and clearing between the partners in the network is 
conducted by the OSP based on self-generated data. This 
scenario aims at a single-access-point strategy towards the 
customer. 
Distribution of intelligence: The scenario shows a 
strongly centralized intelligence in the system architecture. 
By the aggregation of data, the OSP is competent to control 
and process most events in the system. 
Cost sharing model: The OSP invests in the platform 
solution for EV-I-sharing concepts regarding customer and 
infrastructure 
resource 
management. 
Mobility- 
and 
infrastructure provider need only to invest in and provide 
the respective resources. 
  
 
Figure 5. Open Service Platform Scenario 
Revenue (sharing) model: Payment for the vehicle usage 
flows to the OSP instead of the actual service developer 
(indirect revenue flow). A revenue sharing model must be 
implemented between the partners. 
In this scenario, the OSP is not exclusively a B2B 
service enabling factor, but an entity in direct contact with 
the customer. For the mobility- and infrastructure providers, 
joining such network structure makes them dependent on 
the performance of the platform. The mobility- and 
infrastructure providers have no control over systems, 
processes and mechanism of the customer relationship. For 
this matter, as for the questions of clearing, a strong and 
trusted partnership and a high level of transparency are 
necessary. It is unlikely that partners agree to such a 
structure where they have only a minimum of control. It 
needs to be stated however that this represents an extreme 
scenario and less extreme variations are possible. 
Nevertheless, from joining such a centrally controlled 
network, partners profit from the opening of service to a 
broad customer base and thus a potentially higher usage. 
V. 
BUSINESS SCENARIO COMPARISON 
In TABLE II, a contrasting comparison of the different 
models that were presented in Section IV is given, rated on 
the five Business model parameters. Some additional 
dimensions that emerged in the analytical process are 
included and rated at the end of the table. They can be 
mainly affiliated to a dominant parameter that indicates their 
probability and value in the network. This is expressed with 
plus and minus. 
First it is the suitability of integrating more partners in 
the network. This mainly depends on the openness of the 
network and the intelligence of the system. The integration 
of the OSP is an indicator that systems are open and thus 
capable to integrate and coordinate multiple network partners 
and their technical standards. Contrary, if system intelligence 
is centralized either at a mobility- or infrastructure provider, 
new entrants will likely have to adapt and synchronize their 
systems. This can be an entrance barrier. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Independency of partners refers to the range of roles and 
level of vertical integration one partner has to cede to other 
network partners. The more roles are taken over by one 
entity the more dependent are the others on its performance. 
Ease/Simplicity for customers rates the level of difficulty 
for the customer to understand the service infrastructure and 
his/her possibilities of how and what to use it for. Issuing 
multiple access tokens decreases for example the usability 
contrary to using one access token for all resources. This 
applies for all service deliveries towards the customer. The 
more partners have direct customer ownership, the higher the 
level of complexity. 
Service offer towards customers rates the options for the 
customer for each scenario. The more partners that are (or 
can easily be integrated) in the network, the bigger the range 
of service options for the customer. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
This paper illustrated the value network and various 
possible business models for EV-sharing and coordination 
of shared EV infrastructure. On a generic value network 
canvas, four business model scenarios were illustrated that 
describe possible variations of the interplay between the 
partners with the focus on mobility- and infrastructure 
providers. 
For each scenario we analysed the impact on five 
different business model parameters: Combination of 
Assets, Customer Ownership, Distribution of Intelligence, 
Cost (Sharing) Model and Revenue (Sharing) Model. 
Additionally each concept was analyzed upon the suitability 
of integrating more partners, independency of partners, 
ease/simplicity for customers and service offer towards 
customers. 
Following the comparison of the scenarios, we conclude 
that the more partners in the network that conduct the same 
roles for EV-sharing and the coordination of infrastructure, 
the larger the need for an central intelligence system. A 
coordinating Open Service Platform can therefore be 
integrated either as a pure data hub or as a partner that takes 
over roles itself in the value network. Dependent on the 
level of control the partners are willing to cede and the 
perceived value coming with this, an OSP scheme is 
feasible that has the power to establish a smart sharing 
network, open enough to include further players from the 
sector. The authors infer that the more partners are to be 
coordinated in the network, the higher the incentives to have 
a centralized intelligence and data exchange system – thus 
an OSP. 
In conclusion, this paper serves as an approach of how 
mobility and infrastructure provider can coordinate services 
to enable a united, attractive multi-modal mobility offer to 
the customer. 
Further research is required when it comes to the 
implementation of additional value streams, as for example, 
the electricity sector as well as the outlining of further 
business model scenarios. Such research should include also 
investigations into the acceptance and usage of such EV-I-
sharing concept by the end-user. Second the aspect of 
handling data is a topic for further research. It needs to be 
stated that the OSP scheme requires the implementation of 
data protection- and security standards. Appropriate 
measures need to be implemented in the intelligence system. 
It is thus a question of further analysis of who can 
implement adequate technical systems to guarantee these 
standards and which requirements these standards have to 
fulfill. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Olympus is a R&D (Research and Development) project 
TABLE II.
BUSINESS MODEL COMPARISON  
 
Business Model 
Mobility Provider Scenario 
Independent Partner 
Scenario 
Intervening Partner 
Scenario 
OSP Scenario 
Combination of Assets 
Concentrated (MPa.) 
Distributed 
Distributed 
Distributed 
Customer Ownership 
Direct 
Direct for both partners 
Intermediated, only MP has 
direct customer ownership 
Intermediated, only OSP has 
direct customer ownership 
Distribution of Intelligence 
Centralised at the MP, single 
system 
Distributed, two separate 
systems 
Distributed, tendency of 
centralization at OSP 
Centralized (OSP) 
Cost (Sharing) Model 
Concentrated, all investment 
from the MP 
Distributed 
Distributed, investments 
mainly MP and OSP 
Distributed 
Revenue (Sharing) Model 
Direct revenue flow to MP, 
no revenue sharing 
Direct revenue flow to MP, 
sharing with IP 
Direct revenue flow to the 
MP, sharing with IP and 
OSP 
Indirect revenue flow to 
OSP, sharing with MP and 
IP 
Suitability of integrating 
more partners 
N/A 
- 
+ 
++ 
Independency of partners 
++ 
++ 
+ 
- 
Ease/Simplicity for 
Customer 
++ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Service Offer towards 
Customer 
+ 
+ 
+ 
++ 
a. MP = Mobility Provider, IP = Infrastructure Provider, OSP = Open Service Platform, C = Customer 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

cofunded by IWT (Agentschap voor Innovatie door 
Wetenschap en Technologie), the government agency for 
innovation by science and technology founded by the 
Flemish Government. Companies and organizations involved 
in the project are NMBS/SNCB-Holding, Blue-mobility, 
Infrabel, Optimobil Vlaanderen, Recticel, Green City Tours, 
Stad Gent, Stad Hasselt, Stad Leuven, Stad Antwerpen, 
Vlaams Instituut voor Mobiliteit, Transport & Mobility 
Leuven, Universiteit Gent, Vrije Universiteit Brussel and 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
European Commission, “The EU climate and energy 
package," Climate Action, 2012. [Online]. Available: 
www.ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/package/index_en.html. 
[Accessed: 19-Dec-2012]. 
[2] 
European Commission. Directive 2009/30/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009. 
[3] 
J. Addison, “Top 10 electric car makers,” Clean Fleet 
Report, 
2010. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.cleanfleetreport.com/top-electric-cars-2010/. 
[Accessed: 08-Jan-2013]. 
[4] 
R. Graham, “Comparing the benefits and impacts of hybrid 
electric vehicle options,” Electric Power Research Institute 
(EPRI), Palo Alto, CA: 2001. 1000349. 
[5] 
F. Kley, M. Wietschel, and D. Dallinger, “Evaluation of 
European electric vehicle support schemes,” in Paving the 
Road to Sustainable Transport, 1st ed., Oxon: Routledge, 
2012, pp. 75–95. 
[6] 
S. G. Stradling, M. L. Meadows, and S. Beatty, “Helping 
drivers out of their cars. Integrating transport policy and 
social psychology for sustainable change,” in Transport 
Policy, vol. 7, no. 3, Jul. 2000, pp. 207–215.  
[7] 
J. W. Grotenhuis, B. W. Wiegmans, and P. Rietveld, “The 
desired quality of integrated multimodal travel information 
in public transport: Customer needs for time and effort 
savings,” Transport Policy, vol. 14, no. 1, 2007, pp. 27–38. 
[8] 
F. Kley, C. Lerch, and D. Dallinger, “New business models 
for electric cars - A holistic approach,” Energy Policy, vol. 
39, no. 6, 2011, pp. 3392–3403. 
[9] 
MOBIB, “MOBIB, a world of advantages,” MIVB/STIB. 
Your 
journey, 
2007. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.stib.be/mobib.html?l=en. [Accessed: 11-Jan-2013]. 
[10] 
SNCB-Holding, “Olympus” Projects. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.b-holding.be/fr/projets/olympus. [Accessed: 09-
Jan-2013]. 
[11] 
S. Shaheen and A. Cohen, “Growth in worldwide 
carsharing: An international comparison,” Transportation 
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research 
Board, vol. 1992, no. 1, Jan. 2007, pp. 81–89. 
[12] 
P. Ballon, “Business modelling revisited: the configuration 
of control and value,” Info, vol. 9, no. 5, 2007, pp. 6–19. 
[13] 
A. Osterwalder, “The business model ontology: a 
proposition in a design science approach,” HEC Lausanne, 
2004. 
[14] 
H. W. Chesbrough "Open Business Models: How to thrive 
in the new innovation landscape," Boston, Massachusetts: 
Harvard Business Press, 2006. 
[15] 
E. Faber, P. Ballon, H. Bouwman, T. Haaker, O. Rietkerk, 
and M. Steen, “Designing business models for mobile ICT 
services,” 
in 
Workshop 
on 
concepts, 
metrics 
& 
visualization, at the 16th Bled Electronic Commerce 
Conference eTransformation, Slovenia, 2003, pp. 9–11. 
[16] 
Servipark, 
“Servipark,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.servipark.com/be/Default.aspx?culture=en-GB. 
[Accessed: 10-Aug-2012]. 
[17] 
Autolib’, 
“Autolib’," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.autolib.eu/economy/. 
[Accessed: 
10-Aug-
2012]. 
[18] 
Zen Car, “Zen Car: The electric solution of car-sharing in 
Brussels,” 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.zencar.eu/en/about_concept.cfm. 
[Accessed: 
10-Aug-2012]. 
[19] 
EURELECTRIC, "Market Models for the Roll-Out of 
Electric 
Vehicle 
Public 
Charging 
Infrastructure. 
A 
EURELECTRIC concept paper," Brussels: The Union of 
the Electricity Industry, 2010. 
[20] 
O. Rodrigues, "EVUE: Electric Vehicles in Urban Europe," 
Lisbon: URBACT, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

