Smart Mobility and Cultural Tourism:
The Termini-Centocelle Train Museum, an Example
of “Smartourism” Project in Rome
Michele Angelaccio, Berta Buttarazzi and Marco Marrozzini
Department of Enterprise Engineering, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy
Email: angelaccio@dii.uniroma2.it, buttarazzi@dii.uniroma2.it,marco@marrozziniengineering.it
and Claudio Gnessi, Romina Peritore
Associazione per l’Ecomuseo Casilino
Email: claudio.gnessi@gmail.com, rperitore@gmail.com
Abstract—Many recent trends in mobile Web and context aware
applications are leading to consider new applicative scenarios
including the so called smart services which are characterized
by the use of autonomous devices connected to the Internet
(sensors, beacons, etc.) and cooperating with user personal mobile
devices (tablet, smartphone, etc.). In the case of urban mobility
management, several issues are related to local mobility especially
for tourism and cultural cases. We consider one of this related to
old train re-using in Rome which has been selected as a pilot test
for future sustainable transportation systems. We are able to show
that, in this case, an effective system with mobile applications
could leverage a real contribution both for mobile museums and
for geo annotation of peripherical urban lands.
Keywords—Internet of Cultural Things, Internet of Things,
Mobile First, Mobile Web, Smart City, Smart Mobility.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the continuous development of Information and Com-
munication technologies and Smart City for Cultural heritage,
it is possible, thanks to the Internet of Things (IoT) imple-
mentation, to have smart systems connected to Wi-Fi, to rev-
olutionize the management of tourism, promoting sustainable
economic development, engaging the citizens effectively, as
well as reducing mobility costs and resource consumption. To
this purpose, we proposed the ﬁrst applicative framework for
Smart City named STREET WEB [1]. STREET WEB is a
platform to distribute tourist information ”on the road” without
Internet connection. The physical architecture of STREET
WEB is composed of a network of different nodes called Smart
Box (SB), each representing a complete working station linked
to a node sensor station to improve locality visibility. It is
based on the Mobile First paradigm for adapting graphical
user interface to multiple browsers and device sizes. In this
paper, the purpose is to extend STREET WEB functionality
to provide cultural contents and services to all visitors in the
context of Smart Mobility (an important ﬁeld belonging to
the ecosystem of the Smart Cities). The fundamental issues
of this approach, based on the integration of tourism, cultural
heritage and mobility, are not only to enhance the cultural
heritage present in the territory, but also to increase the tourists
ﬂow (cultural, scenic, artistic, gastronomic, etc.) and ﬁnally, to
create new conditions for sustainable territorial socio-economic
development. The paper is organised as follows: Section II
introduces the Smart Mobility Context of the Mobility Project
and the main issues of the Architectural Design. Section III
gives the detailed description of the Platform used to distribute
tourist information ”on the road”, based on Digital Niches
Model and Microservers System. Section IV concludes the
paper introducing implications and potential results yielding
in the ﬁeld of Sustainable Transport and Smartourism for
obtaining information related to touristic Point of Interests in
the land.
II.
SCENARIO OVERVIEW
The use case scenario is related to a mobile system for
exploring the “Ecomuseo Casilino”, a type of museum [3]
managed by the “Association Ecomuseum Casilino - Ad Duas
Lauros” which aims to show and protect the cultural area
[2] named “Comprensorio Casilino - Ad Duas Lauros”.” The
Ecomuseo Casilino hosts many archaeological resources, such
as: Mausoleum of Elena (the mother of Emperor Constantine),
the Catacombs of Marcellinus and Peter, the Roman villas in
the Park of Centocelle, the Park of Villa dei Gordiani, and
various Roman tombs. The archaeological and green area of
the Ecomuseo Casilino includes two ancient Roman roads: via
Casilina and via Prenestina and is traversed by the railway
Roma-Giardinetti. Since 2012, the Association ”Ecomuseum
Casilino Ad Duas Lauros” promoted the use of the train as
a cultural and tourist discovery tool. To enhance the public
transport infrastructure and at the same time to enhance the
area in which it travels, it was necessary to equip the train
with a technological tool that can ”augment” the features as a
comprehensive virtual guide.
These reasons motivate the use of an ad hoc mobile system
designed for such cultural train. To this purpose, we combined
STREET WEB architecture with Digital Niches Model to
implement a mobile cultural info-system. As shown in Figure
1, each train stop is represented by a sensor included in a
Digital Niche and managed by a devoted Web-gis (Microserver
Niche). Through a set of train stops and urban surroundings,
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

which are geo tagged and linked to a mobile cultural info-
system, it is possible to notify passengers and citizen in
Ecomuseo Casilino while walking close to train stops. As
referred in [9], a Digital Niche includes a set of sensors
managed by a devoted Web-gis microserver.
To our knowledge, our proposed solution is a new wireless
mobile system which differs from others due to the following
reasons:
•
It is the ﬁrst mobile Web gis which is conﬁgurable and
tailored to the scenario
•
It will integrate map based on the wi-ﬁ location system
working on the train
•
It is a complete Web based app connected to a local
server providing up to date information
III.
THE MOBILE CULTURAL TRANSPORT DIGITAL
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
This section gives the detailed description of the platform
used to distribute tourist information useful for exploring
the “Ecomusem Casilino” by using the the railway Roma-
Giardinetti [6], called Train-Ecomuseum in Figure 1. The
platform used consists of some microserver and sensors, dis-
tributed on the area to support mobile users moving in smart
scenarios with the aim to combine context aware information
and high quality geo marketing services. Our App works on the
same web infrastructure enhanced with sensor and it is com-
posed by two front-ends. The ﬁrst one for interfacing the train,
and showing the various stops of the route by highlighting that
to which we are closer. The other one serves to locate on the
map georeferenced the touristic points of interest (t-PoIs). To
this purpose, a platform is used, which is able to manage the
set of train stops and the urban surroundings which are geo
tagged and linked to a mobile cultural info-system able to
notify passengers and citizen in Rome while walking close to
train stops. Generally speaking, Info Urban Mobility systems
are well known systems, often implemented through Internet
connected geo-referenced apps. Unfortunately, it also happens
that these applications are not well designed and synchronized
with peripheral areas where there is a great amount of cultural
elements distributed at different levels and that are hard to
explain without being close to them. Moreover, there are
technical problems to keep the user connected while using
the train due historical problems and consequently connecting
technology must be adapted to be used through IoT (Internet
of Things) paradigm in which it occurs to sense mobile users
in proximity and trying to push as much as possible the
information close to them without using an external Internet
provider. These reasons motivate the use of STREET WEB
as an ad hoc mobile system designed for such cultural train
museum. We adopt a paradigm deﬁned in accord to Digital
Niches Models in which each train stop is represented as a
set of points included in a Digital Niche and managed by a
devoted Web-gis (Microserver Niche).
A. STREET WEB and Digital Niches
STREET (Sensor network ”on The Road ” for EnhancEd
Internet of Touristic things) Web, as described in [1] is a
conceptual framework, useful to support mobile users moving
in smart scenarios with the aim to combine context aware
information and high quality geo marketing services in the
same Web infrastructure enhanced with sensors. STREET Web
makes possible to implement smart services in an easy way by
integrating microservers, distributed in the scenario (servers on
the road), called smart boxes, working as a geo based Cloud
system in an autonomous way, as a Distributed Local Storage
system, without remote Internet access, working as a geo based
Distributed Local Storage system. The physical architecture
of the system is based on a network of microservers (called
Smart Box -SB), each representing a complete working station
linked with a node sensor station composed of a localization
device BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) Beacon, eventually en-
riched with QR (Quick Response) code or NFC (Ner Field
Communication) tag to improve locality visibility and based
on the Mobile First paradigm. Each microserver is devoted to
three main tasks:
1)
to allow mobile users to access stored data;
2)
to listen to data sent by the connected sensor;
3)
to store data in database MySQL or NoSQL(InﬂuxDB);
The proposed microserver is realized by Raspberry Pi 2
- Model B. Raspberry Pi is a fully-functional single-board
computer with a Broadcom processor. It has programmable
I/O pins where you can attach physical devices and sensors.
Main Features:
•
RAM:1GB LPDDR2 SDRAM
•
CPU: 900 MHz quad-core ARM Cortex-A7;
•
Raspberry Pi 2 can run as Operating System the full
range of ARM GNU/Linux distributions.
Through STREET Web platform, the users ﬁt together
all necessary activities concerning communications, mobility,
environment, energetic efﬁciency, shopping (digital business)
and social networking. The icon depicted in Figure 2 shows the
logical architecture of STREET Web model, based on a generic
mobile device, equipped with a Mobile-First application front-
end working in accord to three types of interactions: event-
alerting, local content interaction, dynamic map navigation.
The logical architecture of Street Web assumes that a Wi-Fi
zone is offering local service without connection to a global
Internet provider.
If we consider that a Wi-Fi zone is deﬁned as a logical zone
useful to be considered equivalent to a niche of tourism or set
of touristic Point of Interests (t-PoIs), we can merge different
niches contiguous or close to each other in a cloud of niches
(Figure 3).
B. Microservers and APP Deﬁnition
As mentioned before, thanks to the microservers platform,
it is possible to acquire information about cultural points of
interest that are the one for which the user interested to reach
from the selected stop without the need to connect to remote
servers. To furnish the access to this cultural content to all
visitors walking in such place, we consider two app layers:
•
APP on TRAIN (TRAIN APP)
•
APP niche (STOP APP e other t-PoIs APPs)
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Fig. 1: TRAIN-ECOMUSEO Working Scenario
Fig. 2: The STREET WEB Model for Web 4.0
Fig. 3: The Application Architecture of Digital Niches.
Fig. 4: Screen Train APP -Microserver
The former one (TRAIN Mobile APP) at each train stop
shows the name of the train-stop place. Then, once a passenger
gets off the train area, he can adopt the STOP APP front-end
to see what’s interesting in the neighbourhood. Figure 4 shows
the front end of the STOP APP that is useful to display the
digital niches on the map.
When being near a niche, the user can access digital content
using 2 buttons: the button that indicates the global access
makes use of the Web Internet. The button that refers to the t-
PoIs is coupled to the local Cloud (represented by Street Web
microserver). It is linked through the Wi-Fi address. If the
user clicks the t-PoIs button, he goes to the microserver home
where the local content can be found. The working scenario
depicted in Figure 1 shows the pathway executed by a generic
mobile visitor, equipped with a Mobile-First application front
end. Through a localization/alerting system (based on BLE
Beacon) the user, while walking, is notiﬁed of all application
steps. These steps are organized in accord to three types of
interaction: event-alerting, local content interaction, dynamic
map navigation. Figure 3 describes the type of application used
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Fig. 5: Screen STOP APP –Microserver
Fig. 6: Home Screen of the APP–Microserver
in the TRAIN while moving and before arriving to the next
stop. In this case the user is notiﬁed of the next stop and could
be alerted for any message related to that niche before to leave
the train. After niche-stop notiﬁcation from the microserver,
the user automatically is guided to selected an area in which
further details on the selected monuments will be provide by
the corresponding microserver of the niche (5).
In every case, the user is alerted without any external beacon
or another means but just through well known alerting system
prompting a pop up window for selecting current wiﬁ network
address (see Figure 6).
Fig. 7: Wireless Audio systems scenario
Fig. 8: TRAIN-ECOMUSEUM by STREET WEB
comparison with global Web and local audio wireless systems
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The Microserver based TRAIN – Mobile System ( Figure
1) allows an effective way to mobile users for obtaining
information related to touristic Points of Interest on land.
To our knowledge this might be considered a ﬁrst Web 4.0
solution in the sense that the host provider is no long external
to the current niche but it is implemented inside the niche
through a complete local Wi-Fi. The only comparable solutions
come from a different technological point of view, that is
wireless audio system. For instance, Quietvox [8] is a wireless
audio communication system. As shown in Figure 7, the
system is related to wireless audio communication designed
primarily for museum with a large nuber of people. In the
case of TRAIN ECOMUSEUM, however, the problem is
due to the fact that such systems are not adequate. On the
contrary, Digital Niches and Street Web Model gives the access
through a generic smartphone (hence alwais connected system
principle) following a mobile ﬁrst interface paradigm.
Our solution hence goes a step further with respect to
voice systems thus providing a true and effective mobile
system without any non standard device and by following Web
application paradigms (see Figure 8).
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Angelaccio and B. Buttarazzi, Street Web A Framework for -Web
on the Road - Smart Services, Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Web Information Systems and Technologies, WEBIST
2016, Volume 1, SciTePress 2016, ISBN 978-989-758-186-1, Rome,
Italy, April 23-25, 2016.
[2]
M. Angelaccio, A. Basili, B. Buttarazzi, and W. Liguori, Smart and
Mobile Access to Cultural Heritage Resources: a Case Study on An-
cient Italian Renaissance Villas– IEEE Wetice Copech 2012, Toulouse,
(France),June 25-27 2012.
[3]
J. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Development of Local Cultural Resources Based on
the Concept of Ecomuseum -Focusing on Cheorwon, Gangwon Province,
International Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering, pp.297-
302,Vol.8, No.5 (2013).
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

[4]
N. Viswanadham, S. Kameshwaran, Ecosystem Aware Global Supply
Chain Management, World Scientiﬁc 2013
[5]
Dr.P.D. SireeshaKumari, Mosalikanti.Subha Lakshmi, Internet of Things
(IoT) gateway to smart villages, International Journal of Innovative
Research in Advanced Engineering (IJIRAE) ISSN: 2349-2763, Issue
12, Volume 3 December 2016
[6]
Ecomuseo Casilino, http://www.tramroma.com/tramroma/rete\ ext/sfv/
storia/sfvsto02\ 1.
[7]
Internet of Things: Converging Technology for Smart Environments and
Integrated Ecosystems (River Publishers series in Information Science
and Technology), June 2013, Editors OvidiuVermesan and Peter Fries
[8]
Wireless Audio System QuietVox Report, http://www.quietvox.com/
[9]
M. Angelaccio, B. Buttarazzi, A “Mobile ﬁrst“ perspective for Future
Internet– ICIW 2017 IARIA Conference, Venice (italy), June 25-29
2017.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

