Real-Time Monitoring of Heart Rate by Processing of Near Infrared Generated 
Streams
Ilaria Bosi, Chiara Cogerino, Marco Bazzani 
ISMB - Istituto Superiore Mario Boella 
Turin, Italy 
e-mail: {bosi, cogerino, bazzani}@ismb.it 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a novel solution for non-invasive 
real-time heart rate monitoring by processing of Near Infrared 
(NIR) generated streams, provided by a low-cost, easy-to-use 
sensor, such as Microsoft Kinect™. The standard method to 
monitor 
physiological 
information 
exploits 
photoplethysmographic images. In fact, the changes in blood 
volume can be determined from the spectra of radiation 
reflected from (or transmitted through) body tissues. Using a 
mathematical processing, the study shows how it is possible to 
real-time estimate the heart rate of people sitting for 1 minute 
in front of the sensor at distance 1 meter by analysing the NIR 
stream and without wearing any other sensors. In order to 
prove the correctness of the method proposed, 35 different 
subjects are involved in the test phase. During the tests, each 
subject wears also a pulse oximeter for comparing the values 
calculated by our method. 
Keywords: Heart rate; Near Infrared channel; real-time; 
Kinect™ 2.0. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The scope of this work is to present a new solution for 
non-invasive remote monitoring of vital signs (in particular 
heart rate), using an algorithm that processes the data 
acquired by the NIR channel of the Kinect™ sensor at 
medium distance (1 m). By analysing the raw signals with an 
appropriate mathematical elaboration, the cardiac pulse is 
extrapolated in "real-time" mode. In this way, it is possible to 
monitor the heart activity during playing games or during the 
execution 
of 
training 
programs 
(e.g., 
rehabilitation 
programs), even when light conditions are not optimal, 
without having to combine additional medical devices that 
are often invasive. 
The Kinect™ 2.0 sensor, by combining a HD camera and 
an infrared camera (to estimate the depth), uses a human 
morphological model to match the silhouette seen through 
the infrared camera and to provide the position (X,Y,Z) for 
each one of  25 joints. In addition, each data stream (RGB, 
infrared) could be autonomously gathered for more accurate 
data analysis [1][2]. 
By thoroughly analyzing the work and the criticalities 
that have emerged in the previous tests on real-time heart 
rate determination via RGB channels [3], one of the key 
requirements for proper setup is the right lighting (natural or 
artificial). For this reason, it has been decided to take 
advantage of the supplied sensor at Kinect™ to use the near-
infrared imaging technique (NIR) [4]. NIR is a source of 
electromagnetic radiation at the beginning of the infrared 
spectrum range and borders on the spectrum of visible light. 
Its benefits include the ability to be reflected from objects, 
penetrating glass and serving as an active source of 
illumination [5]. While most face sensors use color images as 
inputs, lighting variance remains a challenge because 
lighting can alter the color intensity in an image. 
Especially in low light conditions, some faces may have 
a minimum contrast of intensity with the dark background, 
resulting in facial detection. IR images, on the contrary, 
remain the same despite the changes in lighting. Even in the 
dark, IR images can capture distinct details of the face [6]. 
The paper is organized as follows. The study begins in 
Section II with a general overview of the devices available 
on the market and referring to the telemedicine and various 
sensors for cardiac monitoring. In Section III, the analysis of 
the state of the art of the already implemented methods for 
remote monitoring of vital signs is presented. The core of 
this work is descripted in Section IV and the developed 
algorithms with the procedures adopted for their validations 
and tests are presented in Section V. In Section VII, the 
discussion of the results of the entire work and the 
conclusions are proposed in Section VIII. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The topic of non-invasively detection of vital parameters 
has been successful increased in the last few years, in part 
due to the use of new technologies in hospital wards and 
surroundings, in part because the majority of patients is in 
favour of personalized assistance instead of health care 
services provided up to now [7][8]. 
The market is witnessing the continuous spread of new 
devices and software systems that allow monitoring the vital 
parameters (e.g., heart rate, oxygen saturation, respiratory 
rate) or setting personalized triggered alerts. In this 
perspective, in order to enhance the daily management of 
diseases by facilitating self-care, e-Health and related 
personalized health services are steadily growing [9][10]. 
A further step towards non-invasive systems has been 
taken with the introduction of the pulse oximeter, an 
instrument 
that, 
thanks 
to 
the 
principles 
of 
photoplethysmography, is able to detect the oxygen 
saturation of the blood and the heart rate simply by 
exploiting 
the 
changes 
in 
blood 
volume 
in 
the 
microcirculation of the human tissues [11]. 
Considering the Physiology, the impulse of cardio-
vascular wave that flows through the body periodically, 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

causes stretch in the vessel walls. The volumetric changes 
due to fluctuations in the amount of blood or air contained 
within 
the 
human 
body 
can 
be 
measured 
by 
photoplethysmography (PPG) [12].  
These fluctuations modulate the absorbance of light 
passing through a given volume of tissue, so it is possible to 
evaluate the variation of light during a normal cardiac cycle. 
If these changes are recorded, they originate a waveform that 
corresponds to the changes in the pulsatile arterial blood in 
the tissue [13].  
It is worth noting that the PPG is usually performed with 
a dedicated light’s source and it considers environmental 
light as a source of noise. Then, applying the PPG at 
medium/long distance (2.5m - 3m) implicates that the 
environmental noise becomes more relevant.  
The absorbed light of a human in NIR consists of two 
components [14]: one static absorption constant from 
muscles, fat, bones and venous blood (de-oxyhemoglobin) 
and 
one 
varying 
component 
from 
arterial 
blood 
(oxyhemoglobin). As the heart beats, the concentration of 
oxyhemoglobin will fluctuate in the body and effect the light 
absorption subsequently [15]. The red color of the blood is 
caused by the fact that absorption coefficient is low for the 
red wavelengths (620 - 700nm) and high for the other 
wavelengths of visible light, meaning that only the red light 
is reflected. The light absorption coefficient in NIR (700 - 
1400nm) is very low: 5.7 cm−1 in 850nm. The wavelength of 
540nm (green light) has around a 50 times higher absorption 
coefficient than what NIR has [16]. Another difference 
between RGB-videos and NIR-videos are the number of 
wavelengths captured. An RGB-camera records three 
wavelengths simultaneously while a monochrome NIR-
camera only records one. The benefit of having more than 
one frequency is to use the other wavelengths that have a 
lower oxyhemoglobin absorption as reference to cancel out 
ambient light and noise as Verkruysse et al [17]. 
III. 
STATE OF THE ART 
     In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the 
study of remote monitoring of vital signs using webcam and 
algorithms with computational software. 
One of the first experiments to extract heartbeat from 
video (with a webcam) was conducted by Poh at al. [18] in 
2010 at MIT in Boston: they have recorded videos of a 
minute and then completed processing of signals from the 
RGB channels by computer's webcam. The results obtained 
from MIT are based on studies conducted few years before: 
Verkruysse et al. [17] had demonstrated that the blood 
absorbs light more than the surrounding tissues and this 
application can also be used to evaluate the heart rate and 
breathing (photoplethysmography). 
Moreover, the studies conducted by Takano et al. [19] 
considered the use of a charge coupled device (CCD) 
camera for the acquisition of the person's face every 30 
seconds: from these studies, it was possible to extract the 
heart rate and respiratory rate. 
Another webcam-based heart rate measurement method, was 
studied in 2013 using Laplacian Eigenmap (LE) [20]: this 
technique is used to extract the volume of blood pressure 
(BVP) from subjects’ videos acquired. 
In recent publications [21], different tests has been 
conducted in order to change the technology used, by 
adopting a camera with five channels and demonstrating that 
the alternation of the frequency bands, in particular the 
orange band, allows a physiological measurements much 
more correlated to the values obtainable with a classic pulse 
oximeter. However, this type of camera is not included in 
most of the commercial devices.  
The use of the Microsoft Kinect™ device is certainly 
linked to gaming platforms, rather than to other areas [22]. 
Recently, the Polytechnic University of Marche has 
presented a method for measuring heart and respiratory rate 
[23] by using the Kinect™ 1.0 sensor. The study has been 
based on the detection of micro-movements of the neck, 
abdomen and chest of supine subjects, placed a short 
distance (<1m) from the sensor.  
In the Healthcare Innovation Conference (HIC) [24] it 
has been presented a study that uses a Kinect™ camera 
mounted on the car’s dashboard in order to collect video and 
to calculate the driver’s heart rate in real time. 
Finally, our paper presented at SpliTech 2016 [3] 
described the implementation and the tests of a novel 
methodology for evaluating the heart rhythm by a non-
invasive monitoring system based on Kinect™ 2.0 sensor, 
acting at medium/long distance (2.5 m). Furthermore, this 
work highlights the capability to monitor the cardiac pulse 
rate during the performance of physical exercises. 
About Infrared system, in 2015 Zeng presented in a paper 
a non-invasive heart rate detection process using Kinect™ to 
measure the heart rate via the obtained near-infrared video, 
in order to decrease the interference from light and establish 
a non-invasive system via near-infrared camera [25]. 
Procházka [26] detect possible medical and neurological 
disorders using Microsoft Kinect™ sensors for non-contact 
monitoring of breathing and heart rate estimation: video 
sequences of facial features and thorax movements are 
recorded by device image, depth and infrared sensors to 
enable their time analysis in selected regions of interest. 
Spectral analysis of the time evolution of the mouth area 
video frames (infrared data) was also used for heart rate 
estimation. 
IV. 
METHODS 
The combination of the Depth camera of the Kinect™ 
sensor and the information contained in the signal emitted by 
the major surface vessels is the base of the real-time method 
developed for monitoring the heart rate without the direct 
contact between the instrument and the patient. The solution 
proposed is able to solve some of the problems related to an 
invasive monitoring system, ambient light conditions and, at 
the same time, to ensure the reliability of the results from a 
physiological point of view. In these terms, the Kinect™ 
camera detects the changes of blood flow (and thus the work 
done by the heart) by collecting the mixture of the reflected 
photoplethysmographic signal (with the fluctuations based 
on the amount of reflected light) and the volumetric changes 
of the blood vessels.  
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

In order to choose the region of interest (ROI), the most 
suitable areas for the detection of heart rate are the forehead 
and cheeks [27][28]. A rectangle (size 100x140 pixels) that 
includes the person's face and tracks it during movements is 
designed from the neck joint. The sizes of the ROI are the 
best compromise in order to reduce the background noise 
and analyse the most significant pixels. Furthermore, it is 
decided to use the neck joint because the Kinect™ has 
encountered problems in identifying and tracking the face of 
people wearing glasses with anti-reflective lenses.  
The software developed for this study, integrates a C# 
code able to activate the Kinect™ sensor, to detect the 
person’s face and to proceed with the acquisition of the raw 
signals from the NIR channel and a Python code used for the 
data processing and the analysis of the signals. In this way, 
the Kinect™ sensor is able to maintain the 30 fps real-time 
images acquisition and to implement the mathematical 
algorithm processing, without creating duplication or data 
loss. Indeed, the raw IR data, i.e., the intensity average of the 
pixels of the ROI, are sent to the Python processes, while the 
Kinect™ sensor continues the real time acquisition of the 
frames. In order to mitigate the background noise, a 
bandpass Butterworth filter with infinite impulse response, 
double-pass, 7th order, and bandpass [0.85 ÷ 3.5 Hz] is 
applied. 
Then, the spectral analysis (by Fast Fourier Transform) 
of the average of the filtered IR pixels is applied in order to 
represent the distribution of the power of the signal itself.  
The FFT of the IR signal allows deciding the frequency 
corresponding to the maximum peak’s intensity in the same 
band of the filter [0.85 ÷ 3.5 Hz], that corresponds to the 
range [51 to 210 bpm] of the heart rate: in this interval it is 
surely contained the normal range of physiological heart rate 
values for healthy people [60÷100 bpm] [29]. The average 
beats per minutes are obtained by the multiplication by 60 of 
this value of frequency. Every new 60 frames acquired, this 
analysis is re-performed. In this way, a new heart rate value 
is generated every two seconds. In Figure 1, the block 
diagram of the whole implemented algorithm is reported. 
 
 
Figure. 1.  Block diagram real-time processing NIR channel. 
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
The technical equipment used for performing the test is 
based on the Microsoft Kinect™ 2.0 sensor. All the videos 
are acquired in NIR (8-bit IR) at maximum frame rate 
available (30 fps - sufficient to generate a valid real time 
value for the heart rate) and with a resolution of 512x424 
pixels. 
A test is performed by 35 participants (18 men and 17 
women), between the ages of 24-60 years, in good health 
(some of which are also well-trained) and with different 
features (beard, moustache, glasses, foundation creams). 
During tests, they wear a GIMA OXI-10 pulse-oximeter (in 
order to make a later comparison of the obtained values) 
[30]. 
 The distance between the subject and the sensor is 
approximately set to 1 meter. The choice of the distance is 
given after a pre-test where the subjects are placed to 
different distances: 1m, 2m and 3m. It is worth noting that 
there are not any relevant deviations of the heart rate values 
calculated from the Kinect™ sensor due to the distances 
[31].  
Figure 2 well represents the experimental setup created 
during tests in laboratory environment.  
 
Figure. 2.  Experimental Setup. 
 
During the different tests to find the right setup of 
Microsoft Kinect™, is used a dual data acquisition that 
involves real-time heart rate detection using the RGB 
channels and infrared channel available to device. 
By analyzing the Microsoft device used, Figure 3 
compares the infrared sensor with the RGB channels of 
Kinect™ [32]. 
As shown in Figure 4, the two cameras are placed few 
centimetres far. This implicates that also the sensor area of 
coverage is slightly different: for this reason it is necessary to 
proceed with a pre-calibration to align as much as possible 
the size of the ROI gained through RGB and the ROI gained 
through NIR, especially if the facial rectangle is constructed 
following the skeleton joint's trend. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
 
Figure 3. Sensors and IO parameters of RGB and IR cameras estimated 
during the camera calibration procedure for Kinect 2.0. 
 
 
Figure. 4.  Kinect™ features. 
 
After all these considerations, to choose the best setup, 
the participants are standing and sitting in front of the 
Kinect™ sensor, at approximately 1 meter far from the built-
in camera, while the system calculates the heart rate in real 
time mode using the NIR channel. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
For each subject, the graph comparing the timely 
progression of the heartbeat detected both by Kinect™ 
sensor and the pulse oximeter has been plotted. Then, it has 
been decided to calculate the heartbeat’s average in the time 
interval considered. 
The percentage error of the mean of heart rhythm 
detected by the Kinect™ sensor and the one obtained by 
averaging the incoming values from the pulse oximeter are 
also calculated. 
Plots in Figure 5 show the graphs of heart rate value 
acquired by the Kinect™ based system (red line) and 
gathered by pulse oximeter (blue line) during the test. 
 
 
Figure. 5.  Representation of heart rate-time during two different tests. 
In Figure 6, the scatter graphs of mean value between 
Kinect™ and pulse oximeter are plotted for each test 
conducted: a linear trend line has been added for better 
understanding the graphs and the correlation coefficient (R) 
and the level of significance (p) are also calculated. 
 
 
Figure. 6.  Representation of scatter plot Kinect™/pulse oximeter. 
 
The correlation coefficient (R) is a number between –1 
and 1 that determines whether two paired sets of data are 
related: the weakest linear relationship is indicated by a 
correlation coefficient equal to 0. So the coefficient for the 
test shows a moderate positive correlation between data of 
heartbeat from Kinect™ and from the pulse oximeter. The p-
value is a number between 0 and 1 that determines whether 
the correlation between variables is significant. A p-value (as 
calculated for the still test) of 0.30 indicates that the risk of 
concluding that a correlation exists—when, actually, no 
correlation exists—is about 30%. [33]. 
For each tester the average heart rate (HR) calculated is 
also reported in Figure 7, considering the device used and the 
type of the test performed. The table well summarize the 
comparison of the mean heart rate values obtained from 
Kinect™ and from pulse oximeter, according with the 
relative percentage error calculation. 
 
 
 
Figure. 7.  Results of (HR) average of different tests and relative error. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

By considering these three factors, i.e., value of 
correlation coefficient (R), the p-value and the relative errors 
(acceptable within 10%), it is possible to say that, the values 
of the heart rate calculated with this novel solution are 
comparable with the values gathered by the medical device 
only during the still tests. Moreover, the obtained values are 
also comparable with the previously acquired data and 
analyzed through RGB channels of the Kinect™. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
As discussed above, it is possible to consider the system 
implemented as a valid system for gathering the real-time 
heart rate values in static position, even when light 
conditions are not optimal. While considering the pulse 
oximeter as a reliable system, the device used has inherent 
accuracy ±2%. For these reasons, part of the deviation 
between the values gathered by the Kinect™ sensor and the 
GIMA oximeter should be related to a non-correct use of the 
oximeter. 
Finally, not significant variations of the results are due to 
gender, age and fitness status of the testers. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
This work describes the implementation and the tests of a 
novel methodology for evaluating the heart rhythm acting at 
medium distance (1 m), by analysing the NIR stream. The 
performance of the proposed method (applied in real-time) is 
tested in adverse situations, such as in the dim light 
condition. The study starts showing the real-time processing 
of the video acquired by the Kinect™ built-in NIR camera. 
The procedure begins with the automatically choice of the 
ROI with a strong passage of blood modulation and with the 
reduction of the background noise with a band-pass filter. 
Then, it continues with the analysis the signals coming from 
the IR channel of camera and it finishes by creating an ad-
hoc algorithm for accurate heart rate detection using FFT. 
The system and the algorithm implemented are validated 
by 35 participants sitting in front of the sensor at 
approximately 1 meter. 
As described in the results, the study has shown a quite 
good reliability in detection of heartbeat at distance and in 
real-time, when the subject is in a static position in front of 
the sensor. 
As a future development, it could be considered the 
possibility of applying this heart rate detection solution using 
infrared sensor, in situations where it is difficult to wear 
sensors for a long period of time (e.g., driving,  neonatal 
department, etc.). Generally this type of monitoring can be 
useful in all the situations in which acquiring remote vital 
parameters is easier than wearing medical devices. 
After the results obtained with a sufficiently reasonable 
number of testers, as a future work, it is designed to continue 
the study with large-scale testing to validate and perform the 
entire algorithm in a robust manner. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the European Union through 
the my-AHA project (H2020 - PHC 21 – 2015, grant 
agreement no. 689592). 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Bosi, C. Cogerino, and M. Bazzani, "Real-time monitoring 
of heart rate by processing of Microsoft Kinect™ 2.0 
generated 
streams." 
Computer 
and 
Energy 
Science 
(SpliTech), International Multidisciplinary Conference on. 
IEEE, 2016. 
[2] R.Tranfaglia, U. Bracale, and M. Bracale, "E-Health systems 
for the continuity of care from the hospital to the home care." 
[3] F. Han, B. Reily, W. Hoff, and H. Zhang, "Space-time 
representation of people based on 3D skeletal data: A 
review". Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 158, 85-
105, 2017. 
[4] X. Zou, J. Kittler, and K. Messer, "Illumination invariant face 
recognition: A survey." Biometrics: Theory, Applications, and 
Systems, 2007. BTAS 2007. First IEEE International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2007. 
[5] S. Z. Li, R. Chu, S. Liao, and L. Zhang, "Illumination 
invariant face recognition using near-infrared images." IEEE 
Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 
29.4 (2007). 
[6] Fong, K. KaYan, "IR-Depth Face Detection and Lip 
Localization Using Kinect V2". Diss. California Polytechnic 
State University, San Luis Obispo, 2015. 
[7] S. Cook, M. Togni, M. C. Schaub, P. Wenaweser, and O. M. 
Hess, "High heart rate: a cardiovascular risk factor?." 
European heart journal 27.20 (2006): 2387-2393. 
[8] I. Korhonen, J. Parkka, and M. Van Gils, "Health monitoring 
in the home of the future." IEEE Engineering in medicine and 
biology magazine 22.3 (2003): 66-73. 
[9] S. Kwon, H. Kim, and K. S. Park, "Validation of heart rate 
extraction using video imaging on a built-in camera system of 
a smartphone." Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 
(EMBC), 2012 Annual International Conference of the IEEE. 
IEEE, 2012. 
[10] M. Lewandowska, J. Rumiński, T. Kocejko, and J. Nowak,  
"Measuring pulse rate with a webcam—a non-contact method 
for evaluating cardiac activity." Computer Science and 
Information Systems (FedCSIS), 2011 Federated Conference 
on. IEEE, 2011. 
[11] M. Garbey, N. Sun, A. Merla, and I. Pavlidis, "Contact-free 
measurement of cardiac pulse based on the analysis of 
thermal imagery." IEEE Transactions on Biomedical 
Engineering 54.8 (2007): 1418-1426. 
[12] I. Pavlidis, J. Dowdall, N. Sun, C. Puri, J. Fei, and M. Garbey, 
"Interacting with human physiology." Computer Vision and 
Image Understanding 108.1 (2007): 150-170. 
[13] J. Allen, "Photoplethysmography and its application in 
clinical 
physiological 
measurement." 
Physiological 
measurement 28.3 (2007): R1. 
[14] A. Lindqvist and M. Lindelow, "Remote Heart Rate 
Extraction from Near Infrared Videos." 
[15] L. J. Mengelkoch, D. Martin, and J. Lawler, "A review of the 
principles of pulse oximetry and accuracy of pulse oximeter 
estimates during exercise." Physical therapy 74.1 (1994): 40-
49. 
[16] S. Prahl, "Molar extinction coefficients of oxy and 
deoxyhemoglobin." URL:http://omlc.org/spectra/hemoglobin/ 
(2017). 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

[17] W. Verkruysse, L. O. Svaasand, and J. S. Nelson, "Remote 
plethysmographic imaging using ambient light." Optics 
express 16.26 (2008): 21434-21445. 
[18] M. Z. Poh, D. J. McDuff, and R. W. Picard. "Non-contact, 
automated cardiac pulse measurements using video imaging 
and blind source separation." Optics express 18.10 (2010): 
10762-10774. 
[19] C. Takano and Y. Ohta, "Heart rate measurement based on a 
time-lapse image." Medical engineering & physics 29.8 
(2007): 853-857. 
[20] L. Wei, Y. Tian, Y. Wang, T. Ebrahimi, and T. Huang,  
"Automatic webcam-based human heart rate measurements 
using laplacian eigenmap." Asian Conference on Computer 
Vision. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. 
[21] D. McDuff, S. Gontarek, and R. W. Picard, "Improvements in 
remote cardiopulmonary measurement using a five band 
digital 
camera." 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Biomedical 
Engineering 61.10 (2014): 2593-2601. 
[22] D. Haas, S. Phommahavong, J. Yu, S. Krüger-Ziolek, K. 
Möller, and J. Kretschmer, "Kinect based physiotherapy 
system for home use." Current Directions in Biomedical 
Engineering 1.1 (2015): 180-183". 
[23] N. Bernacchia, L. Scalise, L. Casacanditella, I. Ercoli, P. 
Marchionni, and E. P. & Tomasini, "Non contact 
measurement of heart and respiration rates based on 
Kinect™." 
Medical 
Measurements 
and 
Applications 
(MeMeA), 2014 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 
2014. 
[24] T. Smilkstein, M. Buenrostro, A. Kenyon, M. Lienemann, and 
G. Larson, "Heart rate monitoring using Kinect and color 
amplification." Healthcare Innovation Conference (HIC), 
2014 IEEE. IEEE, 2014. 
[25] A. C. Burton, "The range and variability of the blood flow in 
the human fingers and the vasomotor regulation of body 
temperature." American Journal of Physiology--Legacy 
Content 127.3 (1939): 437-453. 
[26] W. Zeng, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhou, G. Xu, and G. Liang, "Infrared 
video based non-invasive heart rate measurement." Robotics 
and Biomimetics (ROBIO), 2015 IEEE International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2015. 
[27] A. Procházka, M. Schätz, O. Vyšata, and M. Vališ, "Microsoft 
Kinect Visual and Depth Sensors for Breathing and Heart 
Rate Analysis." Sensors 16.7 (2016): 996. 
[28] A. V. J. Challoner, "Photoelectric plethysmography for 
estimating cutaneous blood flow." Non-invasive physiological 
measurements 1 (1979): 125-151. 
[29] [Online] Avaible: http://www.livescience.com/42081-normal-
heart-rate.html (2017). 
[30] [Online] 
Avaible: 
http://www.gimaitaly.com/default.asp 
(2017). 
[31] A. Shagholi, M. Charmi, and H. Rakhshan, "The effect of the 
distance from the webcam in heart rate estimation from face 
video images." Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis 
(IPRIA), 2015 2nd International Conference on. IEEE, 2015. 
[32] D. Pagliari and L. Pinto, "Calibration of kinect for xbox one 
and comparison between the two generations of Microsoft 
sensors." Sensors 15.11 (2015): 27569-27589. 
[33] N. Fenton and M. Neil, Risk assessment and decision analysis 
with Bayesian networks. Crc Press, 2012. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

