Energy Consumer Knowledge Through Eco-visualization Evolution
Vitória Vasconcelos, Erika C. Campos, Hugo L. Macedo, Daniel S. Carvalho, Felipe Ferraz   
CESAR - Center of Study and Advanced Systems of Recife 
Recife, Brazil 
email: {vjvv, ecmc, hlbm, fsf}@cesar.org.br 
email: {dcarvalhod}@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—This paper present energy consumer knowledge, 
through eco-visualization evolution in an attempt to identify 
how solutions, and their related technologies are evolving and 
what the perspectives for the future of the field are. Consumer 
awareness of energy use showed to be one of the roots to 
energy conservation. Technology, through digital artifacts, 
appears as an important factor to provide better feedbacks 
and, among with this, eco-visualization appears as one key 
enabler. The analysis was conducted by an ontological design 
and sustainable interaction perspective. This short paper 
presents this analysis and how eco-visualization solutions 
evolved through time in complexity and interactivity with 
features including, among other things, motivational and 
persuasive aspects and a tendency to use ubiquitous 
technologies. 
Keywords-Energy consumption; interaction design; eco-
visualization; sustainability, eco-feedback. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There is a need for cities worldwide to become smarter in 
how they manage their infrastructure and resources to cater 
to the existing and future needs of their citizenry - economic 
growth, 
technological 
progress, 
and 
environmental 
sustainability are the drivers for this new found urgency [1]. 
Focusing on global energy challenges, one important way of 
achieving sustainable behavior change is to provide better 
feedback on energy consumption (eco-feedback) [2].  People 
are often unaware of the extent of theirs immediate 
consumption of energy [3]. According to Sun [4], consumer 
awareness of energy use and their act in energy conservation 
are inextricably linked because the former enables informed 
decision-making and motivates behavior change.  
How this information should be presented is not yet well 
understood, but apparently the digital artifact ability to 
provide meaningful information and usability are very 
important factors to increase energy consumer knowledge 
through eco-visualization [5]. Based on the problem of 
providing effective energy feedback to changing consuming 
behaviors in positive ways, the objective of this paper is to 
show energy consumer knowledge through eco-visualization 
evolution in the last ten years in an attempt to identify: (i) 
how solutions and their related technologies are evolving, (ii) 
what are the perspectives for the future of the field and (iii) 
what is the impact of time in the design of eco-visualization 
applications.  The term “solution” is used in this work to 
indicate digital artifacts (prototypes and products currently 
on the market or not) addressed to fix the problem.  
This paper is organized as follows: theoretical 
background on eco-feedback and ontological design ways of 
sustainable interaction are presented in Section II. The 
methodology used in this work is presented in Section III. 
Related work in energy knowledge consumer field is 
presented in Section IV. Relevant solutions comparative 
analyses and finding results are presented in Section V. 
Some final considerations and next steps are presented in 
Section VI.  
II. 
ABOUT ECO-FEEDBACK TECHNOLOGIES AND 
ONTOLOGICAL DESIGN WAYS 
This section will depict some theoretical aspects of eco-
feedback technologies (with focus in energy consumer 
knowledge) and a framework for ontological design 
sustainable intervention. 
A. Eco-feedback Technologies 
Eco-feedback 
technologies 
can 
be 
defined 
as: 
“technology that provides feedback on individual or group 
behaviors with a goal of reducing environmental impact” 
[2]. These are generic definitions that can be applied to 
many contexts (water, energy, and solid waste or carbon 
footprint, for example).  In this work, the focus is energy, 
and the terms eco-feedback and eco-visualization are used 
most of the time as synonyms. Metrics, frequency, 
granularity and other factors play a role in the design of data 
feedback [6] and some possible ways to categorize these 
systems are by commitment (social or individual) [5], data 
visualization (pragmatic or artistic) type  [7], or the support 
to  the user behavior change (raise awareness, inform 
complex changes, and maintain sustainable routines) [8]. 
Few Human Computer Interaction (HCI) eco-feedback 
studies have attempted to measure behavior change [2]. In 
many cases, it is difficult to evaluate the efficiency of these 
artifacts in long-term usage because experiments reported in 
the literature were tested (validated) with a relatively small 
number of users, for a short period of time or both. 
B. Ontological Design Ways of Sustainable Intervention 
The solutions were analyzed grounded in the notion of an 
ontological design framework with the following aspects: 
Balancing (B), Prevention (Pv), Persuation (Ps), and self-
Motivation (M) [9], as shown in Figure 1.  Analyzing eco-
feedback technologies through this view makes sense, since 
these solutions have the goal of reducing environmental 
impact. According to Kim [9]: 
 
Exploring design activity to synthesize technological 
effect,  understanding users’ practices and local 
environments as an ever-changing complex and 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

applying appropriate technologies and services are 
some actions that can be performed to promote the 
balancing between now and the future (B);  
 
Prevention (Pv) of environmental problems involves, 
among 
other 
things, 
avoiding 
 
superfluous 
consumption and reducing the use of  materials or 
energy; 
 
Understanding a digital artifact as a communicative 
possibility for transmitting sustainable meanings, 
indicating the efficiency of energy and materiality, 
and encouraging sustainable behaviors are some 
actions that can be performed to persuade (Ps) users 
to engage in sustainable practices;  
 
Self-motivation (M) involves, among other things, 
discovering how to empower and motivate users and 
groups or communities to organize their own 
thinking and act for ecological satisfaction. 
 
 
Figure 1. Ontological Design framework [9] 
 
Originally, the framework presents a design perspective, 
but it can be applied during the entire  process of new 
products creation. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
To achieve the objectives, a literature review to form a 
theoretical basis and a benchmark was conducted. The goal 
of this activity was to find previous works related to the 
issue of providing effective energy feedback. The intention 
was not to collect cases in terms of quantity, but to choose 
cases in a representative way according to their impact, 
creativity and diversity. 
Following the criteria mentioned before, five solutions 
were selected - some of them are currently on the market 
(Cloogy [15] and Power2Switch [12]) and other represent 
early experimental functional prototypes (The Ténéré [11], 
Power-Aware Cord [10] and PowerViz [7]). They are 
presented in chronological order pointing in many aspects to 
an evolution along the years. After that, we analysed each 
one of those solutions, in order to validate and gather how 
they changed, or did not change, the way in which an energy 
assessment is done. 
The findings from previous step were analyzed through 
the concept of an ontological design and a sustainable 
interaction 
framework 
[9] 
following 
these 
aspects: 
Balancing between now and the future (B), Prevention of 
environmental problems (Pv), technologies that Persuade 
users to engage in sustainable practices (Ps), and 
empowering self-Motivation (M). In order to perform the 
evaluation, these aspects were linked to some eco-feedback  
relevant characteristics that might be present or not in the 
selected solutions, such as: commitment, data visualization, 
support to user behavior change and the additional electric 
power consumption the solution could cause. 
Finally, an analyses was conducted comparing one 
solution with another, to better understand how this field is 
evolving and how the next generation of eco-feedback 
digital artifacts is expected to be and  cover. 
The implementation and creation of a new approach to 
this matter was not part of this work. 
IV. 
EXISTING SOLUTIONS  
This section will depict the main features of existing 
solutions for analysis. 
A. Power-Aware Cord 
Power-Aware Cord is a re-design of a common electrical 
power strip that displays the amount of energy passing 
through it at any given moment. It uses dynamic glowing 
patterns produced by electroluminescent wires molded into 
the transparent electrical cord, as shown in Figure 2.  By 
using   this   functional   prototype, the authors of the project 
investigated how ambient displays could be used to increase 
the awareness about energy consumption [10].   
 
 
Figure 2. Power-Aware Cord prototype [10] 
 
The system uses individual commitment, feedback and 
abstract data visualization to increase awareness. It causes  
additional electrical use and long-term use may reduce the 
effect of meaningful and emotional appeal. According to 
Gustafsson and Gyllenswärd [10], the prototype was 
validated by fifteen users in the original study. 
B. The Ténéré 
Ténéré is a power wall tap and power extension cord that 
connects end products to energy source to measure and 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

indicate the power use, as shown in Figure 3. It was designed 
to support people’s energy conservation behaviors, focusing 
on providing appropriate energy awareness information in 
meaningful and emotional ways while products are being 
used [11].  A narrative of tree (which names the project) was 
used to indicate energy use, symbolizing the environmental 
consequences of human activity.  
 
 
Figure 3. Ténére extension cord extension cord and wall tap type; Screen 
transitions that reflect current power usage [11] 
 
The system uses individual commitment feedback and 
abstract data visualization to raise awareness. It causes 
additional electrical usage and long term usage may reduce 
the effect of meaningful and emotional appeal [11]. 
C. PowerViz 
PowerViz is a prototype to an always-on eco-feedback 
display, which provides information about people’s power 
usage in their homes at an appliance level [7]; as shown in 
Figure 4. The system draws its data from a smart home 
energy metering system, obtaining usage data from each 
outlet in the household. User interface consists of four 
individual screens: current usage (screen saver), usage 
history, appliance usage, and appliance history. 
  
 
Figure 4. PowerViz usage [7] 
The system uses individual and social commitment 
feedback and abstract and pragmatic data visualization to 
raise awareness. It causes additional electrical usage. 
According to Pierce et al [7], the prototype was validated 
with 3 end users (a very low number) in the original study. 
D. Power2Switch 
Power2Switch is an American startup that offers as 
service the account bill redesign and helps to find the best 
supplier (in many American cities consumers can choose the 
energy company) [12]. The redesign uses color, variation in 
font sizes and graphics that help to emphasize the most 
important information in the account and also to reduce 
noise and little relevance information [13]; as shown in 
Figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5. Account bill redesign sample [13] 
 
It gives a better understanding of how much is paid by 
electricity (Supply), how much is paid to energy delivery 
and how much is paid in taxes [14]. 
E. Cloogy 
Cloogy is an energy management solution that allows 
monitoring energy consumption. The device is Portuguese 
and was launched in late 2012. It promises savings of up to 
25% on energy bill. Some system features are: simulate 
tariffs, set personal goals, create user profile, obtain 
forecasts of consumption and comparison between periods 
of times, control equipment remotely in real time and 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

schedule the equipment operations [15]. The system uses 
individual commitment feedback and pragmatic data 
visualization to raise awareness, inform complex changes, 
and maintain sustainable routines. 
V. 
ANALYSIS 
It would be difficult to provide an in-depth comparison 
between the commercial and prototype solutions presented. 
This is due to the fact that, despite having the same purpose 
they have distinct characteristics and use different 
technologies. But, using a framework, as described in 
Section II, could help in the analysis. The main 
characteristics 
considered 
in 
this 
evaluation 
were: 
commitment, data visualization, support to user behavior 
change and the additional electric power consumption the 
solution could cause.  
Motivation can be interconnected with many elements. 
Although, for simplifying, commitment was related to 
Motivation in this analysis: social commitment was 
considered more motivating than individual commitment.  
Data visualization types were related to Persuasion: offering 
both pragmatic and abstract visualization modes or mixing 
up both was considered  more persuasive than using just one 
kind. Support to user  behavior change was related to 
Balancing and Prevention. If a  solution uses a lot of electric 
power it can contribute negatively to Balancing and 
Prevention.  
As shown in Table 1, the analysis of the selected 
solutions states a tendency to combine the multiple factors 
listed before in order to achieve greater effectiveness. The 
findings also state a tendency to eco-visualization solutions 
adoption in homes, along with the use of ubiquitous and 
pervasive technologies [7][12][15] to control and monitor 
power consumption remotely from devices with internet 
connection. 
TABLE I.  
SUSTAINABLE INTERACTION 
Year 
Sustainable interaction 
Solutions 
B 
Pv 
M 
Ps 
2005 
Power-Aware Cord 
✖ 
✖ 
✔ 
✔ 
2009 
Ténéré 
✖ 
✖ 
✔ 
✔ 
2010 
PowerViz 
✖ 
✖ 
✔ 
✔ 
2010 
Power2Switch 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
2012 
Cloogy 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
✔ 
 
The latest solutions presented, especially Power2Switch 
and Cloogy have several improvements in usability and 
show consistent Balancing (B),  Prevention (Pr), Persuasion 
(Ps) and self-Motivation (M) by mixing forms of abstract 
and artistic visualization. They involve different types of 
commitment and can be more economic in power 
consumption compared to earliest artifacts that serve as the 
foundation for this evolution indicating somehow the impact 
of time in the design of eco-visualisation applications and 
the field development . 
VI. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
It is already known that meaningful information and 
usability are very important factors to increase energy 
consumer 
knowledge 
through 
eco-visualization 
[5]. 
Legibility of energy data in real time (or not) thought 
information systems with or without big data helps users to 
control, define goals and improve energy use contributing to 
sustainable behavior. In some cases, the available solutions 
analyzed expose to the user a consumer profile, turning 
power information more transparent and knowledgeable 
[12][15].  
Energy consumer knowledge through eco-visualization 
evolved thought time in complexity and interactivity with 
features including, among other things, motivational and 
persuasive aspects. The related work analysis shows a great 
solutions range: pragmatic and abstract data visualization 
[7][10][11], narratives to meaningful and emotional ways 
[11], with social and individual commitment [7], energy 
management [15] and account bill redesign [12]. It is 
interesting to observe that the research field extrapolated to 
and generated new business and products with end users. It is 
possible to notice consistent and useful products currently on 
market. 
As future works, it is intended to improve validation 
techniques from the framework factors of the conducted 
study and use it as metrics to better evaluate and design eco-
feedback technologies. That may contribute to developing 
more sustainable digital artefacts and user experiences. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Naphade, G. Banavar, C. Harrison, J. Paraszczak and R. 
Morris, “Smarter cities and their innovation challenges,” 
Computer (Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. 44, 2011, pp. 32–39. 
[2] J. Froehlich, L. Findlater, J. Landay and C. Science, “The 
Design of Eco-Feedback Technology,” Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems,  ACM, 2010, pp. 1999-2008. 
[3] S. Darby, “The Effectiveness of Feedback on Energy 
Consumption,” A Review for Defra of the Literature on 
Metering , Billing and Direct Displays, Environ. Chang. Inst. 
Univ. Oxford, vol. 22, no. April, 2006, pp. 1–21. 
[4] M. Sun, “Exploring Aesthetic Visualization for Promoting 
Consumer Energy Conservation,” Diss. Communication, Art 
& Technology: School of Interactive Arts and Technology, 
2014. 
[5] J. Paay, J. Kjeldskov, M. B. Skov, D. Lund, T. Madsen and 
M. Nielsen, “Design of an Appliance Level Eco-Feedback 
Display for Domestic Electricity Consumption,” In Proc. 
OzCHI 2014, ACM Press, 2014, pp. 332-341. 
[6] G. Fitzpatrick and G. Smith, “Technology-enabled feedback 
on domestic energy consumption: Articulating a set of design 
concerns,” Pervasive Computing 8, 1, 2009, pp. 37–44. 
[7] J. Pierce, W. Odom and E. Blevis, “Energy aware dwelling: A 
critical survey of interaction design for eco-visualizations,” In 
Proc. OzCHI 2008, ACM Press, 2008, pp. 1–8. 
[8] Y. Riche, J. Dodge and R. Metoyer. A., “Studying always-on 
electricity feedback in the home,” In Proc. CHI 2010, ACM 
Press, 2010, pp. 1995–1998. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

[9] H. 
Kim, 
“Ontological 
Design 
Ways of 
Sustainable 
Intervention : A Conceptual Framework,” Des. Res. Soc. 
2010, 2010. 
[10] A. Gustafsson and M. Gyllenswärd, “The power-aware cord: 
energy awareness through ambient information display,” 
Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst., 2005, pp. 1423–1426. 
[11] J.-W. Kim, Y.-K. Kim and T.-J. Nam, “The ténéré: design for 
supporting energy conservation behaviors,” Proc. 27th Int. 
Conf. Ext. Abstr. Hum. factors Comput. Syst., 2009, pp. 
2643–2646. 
[12]  “Power2Switch” [Online] Available from: https://power 
2switch.com/ [Retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[13] “Electricity 
bill 
redesign” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://chocoladesign.com/redesign-da-conta-de-luz/ 
[Retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[14] “An electricity bill much easier to understand” [Online]. 
Available from: 
http://www.updateordie.com/2012/06/04/uma-conta-de-luz-
bem-mais-facil-de-entender/ [Retrieved: May, 2015]. 
[15] “Cloogy” [Online]. Available from: http://shop.cloogy.pt/  
[Retrieved: May, 2015]
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

