 
 
Inclusive and Accessible Homes for Older People: The Preparation of Guidelines for 
Home Design 
 
Sandeep Sankat  
Department of Architecture 
School of Planning and Architecture, Bhopal 
Bhopal, India 
e-mail: sandeepsankat@spabhopal.ac.in 
 
 
Abstract— The target of this research is to create an inclusive 
living environment in urban houses for Indian older people 
through guidelines for home design. Along with the study of 
associated problems of older people and international concepts, 
an extensive literature review has been performed to 
understand the theoretical and methodological foundations. 
Preliminary diagnostic surveys are performed to study and 
establish the need for the creation of inclusive living 
environments for Indian older people for the built environment 
design. Field surveys were conducted to identify the challenges/ 
issues that older people face in the ‘Activities of Daily Living’ 
(ADLs). The surveys are performed for the upcoming urban 
housing typologies in India. The upcoming typologies were 
identified through the scientific layering of the data with a 
market survey. Older people in the existing urban housing 
typologies and in the age group of 60 to 85 years, independent 
elderly, frail elderly, and dependent elderly were studied using 
environment-behavior study tools. The data collected from 
interview questionnaires, audio, trace-study, and photographs, 
were analyzed to identify environmental issues. Analysis and 
synthesis are done based on these issues to identify the 
possibilities of interventions for the built environment in 
housing. It has been established through validation and testing 
that the gap to create inclusive living environments for Indian 
older people can be filled by guidelines for home design. Thus, 
a methodology to develop the guidelines to create ‘Inclusive 
and Accessible Homes for the Indian Older People’ is 
prepared. With help of these guidelines ‘Inclusive and 
Accessible Homes’ in urban residences can be designed for 
Indian older people. 
Keywords- Older people; Inclusive and Accessible Homes; 
Environment-behavior Research Tools; Guidelines 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
In India, the increased life expectancy, decreased 
mortality rate, and increased birth rate, are resulting in an 
increasing older people population. Longevity by itself is to 
be celebrated, but increasing vulnerabilities of older people 
arising out of income insecurity, poverty, rural living, 
illiteracy, dependency, age-related morbidity, and decreasing 
support base require attention [1]-[4].  
The physical environment, as it relates to the 
dependencies of older people, remains one of the most 
overlooked areas in the built-environment design. The 
people who are responsible for planning that environment 
must develop a new understanding of ways in which their 
influence can improve older people’s physical and mental 
functioning [3][4]. 
The paper has been structured to give the background of 
the study in section A. The aim of the study and the 
objectives has been stated in section B and C. In section II, 
the complete methodology followed for the conduct of the 
field survey, identifying the issues from the transcriptions of 
the interviews, and the coding of statements to identify the 
issues has been detailed. It further explains the methods 
adopted to achieve the guidelines for home design, for older 
people. The paper concludes by stating that ‘Inclusive and 
Accessible Homes’ for Indian older people can be created 
following these developed guidelines.   
 
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
As people age, certain sensory changes cause them to 
perceive and respond to the physical environment in different 
ways: a person may move more deliberately, hold reading 
material farther from their eyes, walk more slowly, or strain 
to distinguish a voice in the crowd. The person becomes 
more dependent on the environment for support as 
limitations in functioning are experienced, [3] [4]. As the 
sensory organs incur deprivation, strength fails, and the 
individual experiencing these losses reaches out to both the 
physical environment and the general social environment in 
order to continue functioning [5]. Sensory changes are 
usually compounded by the simultaneous occurrence of 
changes in several sensory systems, and it increases as 
people grow older. However, the rate of decline for these 
functions differs markedly within the various sensory 
systems [4][6]. 
The Indian situations, with the huge size of the country, 
diversity of political, economic, social, and cultural 
background, and wide variety of people with different 
religions, cast, etc. are very complex. [4][7]. The Indian 
situations are very different from the Western world because 
of the characteristically interdependent social scenarios, 
severely different demographics, religious and traditional 
systems, a culturally different society, a wide range of 
economic disparity, and beliefs [8].  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
The paradigm change in the model of disability from the 
linear model to a model which emphasizes the role of the 
environment to reduce or enhance the individuals’ ability to 
perform, specifies the role of designers, architects, and 
planners because it is their creation of built-environment, 
which makes them struggle or let them use it comfortably 
[4]. 
 
The aim of the research is to understand the situations of 
Indian older people and to generate design guidelines, that 
when followed will create, ‘Inclusive and Accessible 
Homes’ for the Indian older people.  
 
The objectives of the study are: 
 
To study and understand Indian older people, their 
residences, and residential neighborhood environment. 
 
To study the ‘Activities of Daily Living’ of Indian 
older people in their residential environment. 
 
To conduct a field survey to identify the issues, based 
on the ‘Activities of Daily Living’, which the Indian 
older people face while interacting with their residential 
environment. 
 
Based on the identified issues, and the elements of 
residence, develop guidelines for the creation of an 
‘Inclusive and Accessible Homes’ with the help of 
identified and validated list of enabling environmental 
issues for Indian older people. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The study investigates the problems and issues, Indian 
older people face with their built environment and attempts 
to identify the issues to enumerate, analyze and synthesize 
them, to develop a set of guidelines, to create inclusive, and 
accessible homes for Indian older people [4]. Refer the 
methodology diagram as shown in Figure 1.  
Initially, preliminary diagnostic surveys are done to study 
and establish the need for the creation of inclusive and 
accessible homes for Indian older people. Then a field survey 
is performed to identify the challenges that older people face 
in their ‘Activities of Daily Living’ (ADLs) in the Indian 
context. The survey is done for the upcoming urban housing 
typologies in India. These upcoming typologies are 
identified with market surveys and scientific layering of the 
data. Then older people in the age group of 60 to 85 years 
representing independent older people, frail older people, 
and dependent older people are studied using environment-
behavior research tools, living in joint and nuclear families, 
in identified urban housing typologies [4]. The collected data 
from 
interview 
questionnaires, 
audio 
recordings 
of 
interviews, trace-study, and study of photographs, is 
analyzed in layers to identify twenty environmental issues. 
Based on these identified issues, analysis and synthesis are 
done to identify the possibilities of interventions at the 
architecture design level for the built environment in 
housing. It has been established through testing and 
validation that the gap can be filled by guidelines to create, 
Inclusive and Accessible Homes for Indian older people [4]. 
Thus, a methodology to develop the guidelines has been 
prepared. Following the developed guidelines, inclusive and 
accessible homes in urban residences can be designed for 
Indian older people [4]. 
 
 
“Figure 1. The Methodology” 
A. The Field Survey 
The field survey was conducted to identify the 
challenges/ issues Indian older people face in the residential 
environment, using multiple environmental-behavior tools as 
shown in Figure 2 [10][13]. The focus of this survey was to 
understand the situations of Indian older people in their  
residential environment. And it aimed to identify the issues 
that older people face in their ‘Activities of Daily Living’. 
Based on these identifications a comprehensive list of issues 
for the challenges that older people face was identified [4]. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
 
“Figure 2. The Field Survey” 
B. Housing Typologies and Selection of Older People 
The prevalent upcoming typologies are identified with a 
market survey of the new housings in the city of Bhopal, 
India. A system of scientific layering of the data was adopted 
to identify the prevalent newer housing typologies. The 
overlapping of various floor plans of apartments, row 
houses, single houses, detached and semi-detached houses 
was done to select the sample of housing typologies [4]. 
Older people residing in these housing typologies were 
identified based on age and type of family settings. Total 48 
elderly were selected as sample. Table I shows the sample of 
older people as per the age groups and distribution in the 
housing typologies. The sample of these 48 older people was 
then interviewed for the identification of issues based on 
their ‘Activities of Daily Living’. Out of these 48 samples, in 
7 cases the answers and the interview talk seemed to be 
biased because of the influence and presence of the other 
family members or due to non-interest or being in hurry due 
to some other work, etc. These cases of biased opinion were 
not considered for the analysis and removed from the list of 
samples. This resulted in the sample size of 41 older people 
of which 34 were from the newer housing typologies and 7 
were from the existing old age homes. The interview started 
appearing repetitive after almost 30 interviews. Therefore, 
the overall number of older people interviewed has not 
increased beyond a total number of 48 samples. 
TABLE I THE OLDER PEOPLE IN HOUSING TYPOLOGY 
C. Research Tools 
The field survey was an attempt to collect qualitative data 
by understanding the ‘Activities of Daily Living’ of Indian 
older people. Multiple layering of the below-mentioned tools 
was applied for the collection of data [4]. 
 
Interviews with a semi-structured questionnaires. 
 
Audio recordings of the interviews. 
 
Annotated diagrams. 
 
Trace study. 
 
Photographs and observations. 
D. Semi-structured Interviews 
The interviews aimed to identify ‘Activities of Daily 
Living’ to understand the complete daily routine of older 
people. It is focused to identify the activities in terms of early 
morning activities, using the toilet, bowel/ bladder control, 
oral hygiene, grooming, pooja (prayer), dressing, cooking, 
meal planning, eating, mobility inside the residence, using 
stairs, mobility outside the residence, daily job/ work, 
driving, household chores, doing laundry, using phone, 
money management, managing own medications, etc. in 
detail [4]. 
E. Audio Recordings 
The audio of each interview is transcribed to identify the 
statements. From these statements of the samples, the 
categories were derived and then from these categories, the 
built environment design issues have been identified and 
ascertained as shown in Table II.  
TABLE II.  
IDENTIFICATION OF ISSUES OLDER 
PEOPLE FACE 
 
F. Annotated Diagrams 
After each interview, rough annotated diagrams were 
prepared to understand the pattern of spatial usage. Findings 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
from these documented diagrams are then analyzed to 
understand the issues faced by older people [4].  
G. Environmental Observations and Trace- Study 
The environment of older people is also analyzed through 
environmental observation and trace study to further identify 
the challenges as shown in Figure 3. 
  
 
 
“Figure 3. Environmental Observations”  
H. Method of Identification of Issues 
The identified issues through all tools are then overlaid to 
formulate a common list of issues faced by older people. 
Every issue is rated for its level of importance and the Table 
III below lists these issues in random order.  
TABLE III.  
IDENTIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 
Identified environmental issues 
1 
Safety  
11 
Socio-cultural 
disconnect 
2 
Environmental Support for 
mobility, balance, and slow 
movement 
12 
Affordability 
3 
Environmental support for 
better vision 
13 
Leisure and recreation 
4 
Environmental support for 
better hearing 
14 
Security 
5 
Light Ventilation 
15 
Live with nature 
6 
Health 
16 
Spiritual connect 
7 
Memory   
17 
Technology Disconnect 
8 
Privacy and Personalization 
18 
Usable 
9 
Degree of Independence 
19 
Emotional comfort 
10 
Interdependence  
20 
Loneliness 
IV. 
DEVELOPMENT OF GUIDELINES 
The methodology followed to develop the guidelines 
investigates each element of residence for its design to be 
inclusive for older people with respect to the identified 
enabling environmental design issues.  
A systematic sequential process has been followed to 
achieve the enabling environmental design guidelines for the 
residences. All the identified enabling environmental issues 
were considered to generate guidelines for each element of 
residence design. Combining all the guidelines generated 
with respect to each element gave the final guidelines for the 
whole residence. Figure 4 below defines the pattern of 
development of guidelines. 
 
X
Y
Z
RESIDENCE, SUBDIVIDED INTO 11 ELEMENTS
20 IDENTIFIED ENABLING ENVIRONMENT ISSUES
SUBDIVISION OF ELEMENT INTO 7 SUBHEADS 
GUIDELINES FOR EACH ELEMENT 
( i.e. ELEMENT Vs 20 ISSUES 
GUIDELINES W.R.T SUBDIVISION OF ELEMENT
( i.e. 7 SUBDIVISION OF  ELEMENT Vs 20 ISSUES
DESIGN OF RESIDENCE
( i.e. ELEMENT Vs SUBDIVISION OF ELEMENTS)
 
 
“Figure 4. Pattern of the Development of Guidelines” 
 
The pattern of development of guidelines is a 
simultaneous considerations of three major components 
namely; 
 
The Residence, subdivided into 11 elements. 
 
The subdivision of the element into 7 subheads. 
 
The twenty identified enabling environmental 
issues. 
 
A. The Residence, subdivided into 11 elements 
The Residence is subdivided into 11 elements (the 
elements of residence) taken along the X axis as shown in 
Figure 4 and listed in Table IV. The elements of the 
residence are the various spaces of a residence. The 
residences under consideration are the urban residences 
having typologies of;  
 Detached and semi-detached houses 
 Row Houses 
 Apartments 
 Bungalows. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
These typologies are the upcoming, prevalent housing 
typologies identified for the urban areas. The common 
elements of all the above-mentioned typologies are listed 
below in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
LIST OF ELEMENTS OF RESIDENCE 
 
B. The subdivision of seven elements into 7 subheads 
The subdivision of the element into 7 subheads is seen 
with respect to the design of the element as the major 
component and under design the subheads are; 
 
Furniture, 
 
Circulation, 
 
Openings 
 
Surfaces 
 
Light and ventilation 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
Material characteristics,  
 
These 7 subheads are shown along the Y-axis in Figure 4. 
For this the major components of an element of residence are 
considered with respect to Design: The design of the 
elements of the residence. The design is the main head and 
its 7 subdivisions considered are: 
 
Furniture: The furniture of the elements of the 
residence and all accessories of the spaces such as; 
furniture, street furniture, lamp posts, post boxes, 
etc. in case of outdoor spaces, and carpets, scatter 
rugs, sculpture painting, and products, etc. in case 
of indoor spaces. 
 
Circulation: The circulation space of the residence 
and its element with clearances. 
 
Openings: All the openings in the form of doors, 
windows, and ventilators in the indoor areas, and 
entries, gates, etc. in the outdoor areas. 
 
Surfaces: All surfaces of the elements of residence, 
the ground, vertical, and ceiling surfaces. 
 
Light and ventilation: The provision of light and 
ventilation in the whole residence and its elements, 
whether it is natural or artificial. 
 
Miscellaneous: Anything not covered in the above-
stated components of the residence design or need 
to be highlighted as an important guideline. 
 
Material characteristics: The characteristic features 
of the material required for residence and its 
element. 
C. The Twenty Identified Enabling Environmental Issues 
The twenty identified enabling environmental issues 
taken along the Z axis are listed in Figure 4. Below 
mentioned is the list of identified enabling environmental 
issues. The guidelines were developed considering each of 
these issues. 
TABLE V.  
LIST OF IDENTIFIED ENABLING 
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 
List of Identified Enabling Environmental Issues  
1 
Safety in environment 
11 
Environmental support 
for sociocultural connect 
2 
Environmental Support for 
mobility, balance, and slow 
movement 
12 
Affordable environments 
3 
Environmental support for 
better vision 
13 
Environment to support 
leisure and recreation 
4 
Environmental support for 
better hearing 
14 
Environment to support 
security 
5 
Light and ventilation in the 
environment 
15 
Environment to live with 
nature 
6 
Environment to support better 
health 
16 
Environment to support 
spiritual connect 
7 
Environment to support 
memory loss  
17 
Technology connect in 
the environment 
8 
Privacy and personalization 
in the environment 
18 
Usable environment 
9 
Degree of independence in 
the environment 
19 
Environment to provide 
emotional comfort  
10 
Environmental support for 
interdependence  
20 
Environment to address 
loneliness 
 
Thus, the hierarchy followed to subdivide the residence 
into its components for in-depth and detailed development of 
guidelines is mentioned below; 
TABLE VI.  
RESIDENCE AND ITS ELEMENTS 
Residenc
e 
11 Elements of residence 
( as mentioned in table III) 
7 subdivisions ( as 
mentioned in above) 
 
Thus, the formula for the preparation of the guideline for 
each element of residence is mentioned below; 
 
Guidelines for Z = X1Y1, X1Z1, Y1Z1 
 
Where Z = Guidelines for the elements of the residence. 
For example Z1 = Guideline for the element of residence, 
"Entrance and Porch". 
 The combinations along all three axes generated the 
guidelines as mention-below;  
X1 Y1 = Residence (subdivided into 11 elements) and 
subdivisions of elements (i.e. 7 subdivisions) 
This explains the hierarchy as, residence → 11 Elements 
of residence → 7 Subdivisions (i.e.  Subdivision of element 
Elements of Residence 
1 
Entrance and Porch  
7 
Bath rooms 
2 
Garden  
8 
Balconies and Terraces 
 
3 
Verandah/ Lobby 
9 
Stairs 
4 
Drawing room  Living 
room and Dining room 
10 
Ramps 
5 
Kitchen 
11 
Lifts 
6 
Bedroom 
 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
of residence into 7 subheads, under the main heading 
design). 
X1 Z1 = Elements of residence and 20 identified 
enabling environmental issues 
This will generate guidelines for each element with 
respect to the 20 issues. 
 Y1 Z1 = Subdivision of elements (i.e., 7 subdivisions 
under design) and 20 identified enabling environment 
issues 
This will generate guidelines for each element (when the 
element is seen as a spatial subdivision into seven subheads) 
with respect to twenty enabling environmental issues under 
the main heading design. 
 Similarly, for all the remaining 20 enabling 
environmental issues, the guidelines were developed. 
Following the pattern of development of guideline as 
explained in the methodology above the guidelines for each 
element of residence is developed.  
Explanation of development of guidelines for elements of 
residence:  
A systematic stepwise process is adopted for the 
preparation of guidelines for each element of residence 
design based on the above-mentioned pattern of development 
of guidelines. 
Step 1: Sequentially, an element is selected for the 
preparation of guidelines from the list of the elements of the 
residence. 
Step 2: The element is subdivided into 7 subdivisions 
under the main heading design. 
Step 3: Guidelines with respect to each subdivision and 
the main heading design were developed for twenty enabling 
environmental issues. 
This process gave the guidelines for each element of the 
residence design (listed in Table III) these are the separate 
detailed guideline for all 11 elements of the residence. (The 
detailed guidelines for all 11 elements of the residence with 
respect to twenty enabling environmental issues is not part of 
this paper due to a large number of pages). 
D. Final Guidelines to Create Inclusive and Accessible 
Environment in Urban Residences for the Indian Older 
People 
The guidelines for each element of the residence were 
prepared separately with respect to the twenty enabling 
environmental issues. Due to the reoccurrence of the spatial 
and material characteristics for the issues, there was a lot of 
repetition and overlap. To remove this overlap and repetition, 
the guidelines for urban residences are prepared by 
combining the guidelines of all elements of the residence. 
The development of these guidelines was based on the 
concept that, "with the solution of the twenty identified 
enabling environmental issues, inclusive living environments 
can be created for the older people in urban residences. Thus, 
following the methodology and pattern of development of 
guidelines, first the guidelines for each element of residence, 
(as listed in Table IV) is prepared. Then the separately 
developed guidelines for each element of residence are 
combined with respect to each enabling environmental issue 
to finalize the guidelines for the urban residences.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The situations of demography, a characteristically 
interdependent social scenario, a culturally different society, 
a wide range of economic disparity, religious and traditional 
systems, and beliefs, the Indian situations are entirely 
different from the other countries [14].  This research study 
focused on the ‘Activities of Daily Living’ of older people 
and investigates and identifies the issues faced by older 
people while using their built environment. Improvements in 
the built environment with respect to the needs of older 
people can improve the situation of Indian older people. 
Thus, the construction of urban residences following the 
developed guidelines will result in the inclusion of older 
people and ultimately result in ‘Inclusive and Accessible 
Homes for Older People in India’. 
The outcome in the form of guidelines is the reference 
and guide for the creation of an inclusive built environment 
for Indian older people but, the same has opened newer 
avenues as mentioned below; 
 
The developed guidelines are qualitative, but the area 
has the potential to develop quantitative guidelines and 
developing standards specific to older people. 
 The guidelines developed can be applied to the 
upcoming typologies of residences and followed for 
home modification for Indian older people. 
 The identified issues and the guidelines can be 
collectively pursued to create smart homes for the ease 
and comfort of older people. The same has the potential 
to be the background and initiation for the design of 
assistive devices required in the homes of older people. 
 Developing 
designs 
focused 
on 
vernacular 
and 
indigenous solutions based on these findings can be 
another area for future design research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I hereby acknowledge the sincere help, guidance, and 
support always given by my guide Prof. Rachna Khare who 
has been the major role player in this study. I also 
acknowledge the contribution of Prof. Abir Mullick and Prof. 
Lalit Das and all those wonderful older people who were part 
of this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Drue Lawlor, Michael A. Thomas, “Residential design for 
aging in place”, John wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 
August 2008 
[2] Edward Steinfeld and  G. Scott Danford, “Enabling 
environments; measuring the impact of environment on 
disability and rehabilitation” Springer New York, NY, 29 
June 2013. 
[3] M. A. Christenson, Ellen D. Taira, “Aging in the designed 
environment”, The Haworth Press, New York, London, 1990 . 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
[4] Sandeep Sankat, Rachna Khare, “Advances in Design for 
Inclusion”, Springer international publishing, Springer, Walt 
Disney World, Florida, USA, July 27-31, 2016. 
[5] J. Corso, “Sensory process of age effects in normal adults, 
Journal of Gerontology, vol. 26, no 1, pp. 90-105, 1971. 
[6] H. B. Chanana, P. P. Talwar, “Aging in India: Its Socio 
economic and Health Implications” Asia-Pacific Population 
Journal, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 23- 38, 1987 
[7] Indira Jaiprakash, “Aging in India” a document prepared for 
WHO Geneva, 1999. 
[8] S. Irudaya Rajan, Gayathri Balagopal, “Elderly carec in India: 
Societal and state responses”, Springer, 2021 
[9] John Zeisel, “Inquiry by Design”, W. W. Norton & Company, 
New York, 1981. 
[10] Leonard F. Heumann, Duncan P. Boldy (1993), “Aging in 
place with dignity” Praeger publisher, Greenwood publishing 
group, USA 1993. 
[11] S. Siva Raju, “Chapter, Studies on ageing in India: a review”, 
“Population ageing in India”, edited by, G. Giridhar, K. M. 
Sathyanarayana, Sanjay Kumar, K. S. James and Moneer 
Alam, Cambridge university press, Cambridge house, 
Daryaganj, New Delhi, 2014 
[12] Rachna Khare, “Designing inclusive educational spaces for 
autism”, PhD Thesis Document, India, 2009.  
[13] Ursula Dallinger, University of Jena, “older people Care in 
the family in Germany.” Paper presented at: COST 13A 
Meeting in Copenhagen, Friday 19. April 2002  
[14] Shilpa Amarya, Kalyani Singh and Manisha Sabharwal, 
“Open access per reviewed chapter, Ageing process and 
physiological changes”, from the edited volume, Gerontology, 
by Grazia D’Onofrio, Antonio Greco and Daniele Sancarl, 
July 2018 
[15] Wolfgang F. E. Preiser & Korydon H. Smith, “Universal 
design handbook”, McGraw-hill, U.S.A, 2011.  
[16] Ellen D. Taira, Jodi L Carlson, “Aging in Place” Designing 
adapting and enhancing the home environment, The Haworth 
press, Binghamton, New York. 
[17] https://ahfe.org/files/books2016/TOC/Design-forInclusion 
9783319419619-t1.pdf, 21 March 2023  
[18] https://ud2014.se/wpcontent/uploads/submissions/ud2014_su
bmission_96.pdf?cv=1 
[19] https://www.springerprofessional.de/en/creating-inclusive-
living-environment-in-urban-residences-for-
in/10588830?cv=1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

