Visual Accessibility and Inclusion 
An Exploratory Study to Understand Visual Accessibility in the Built Environment 
Camelia Chivăran 
Department of Engineering / Engineering Design Centre 
University of Campania / University of Cambridge 
Aversa, Italy / Cambridge, United Kingdom 
e-mail: camelia.chivaran@unicampania.it/ 
cc2093@cam.ac.uk 
Matteo Zallio, Sam Waller, P. John Clarkson 
Department of Engineering, Engineering Design Centre 
University of Cambridge 
Cambridge, United Kingdom 
e-mail: mz461, sdw32, pjc10@cam.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— Current research shows that visual accessibility 
assessment in the built environment typically considers 
objectively measurable parameters. However, considering 
subjective visual perception for architectural characteristics is 
extremely important.  Visual perception can vary depending 
on environmental factors and personal factors and is 
particularly relevant for people with low to mild visual 
impairments. This explorative research studied the current 
state of the art of tools and systems that support the assessment 
of visual accessibility and investigated new ways of 
experiencing visual accessibility in the built environment. After 
identifying gaps in the current scenario, the Cambridge 
simulation glasses were selected as a tool to simulate visual 
impairments and therefore experience visual accessibility in 
the built environment. A pilot study was conducted by 
navigating a publicly accessible building and experiencing how 
clearly visible certain architectural characteristics were, while 
walking with and without wearing the glasses. The goal of this 
study was to understand their potential use in different settings 
and explore how to offer an empathic experience of visual 
accessibility with a low-cost tool for different stakeholders.  
 
Keywords- Visual accessibility; Built environment; Simulated 
impairment; Empathic approach; Inclusive Design  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Since the early cultural and social movements from the 
1960’s, a growing attention to designing for accessibility and 
for people with disabilities flourished [1]. As an example, the 
movement on rights for people with disabilities brought the 
creation of the first federal law requiring accessibility in 
government buildings in the USA, the Architectural Barriers 
Act - 1968 [2]. In the following decades, the importance of 
accessibility in buildings evolved and started to embrace a 
wider concept, expressed with the release of the Americans 
with Disabilities Act [3] and the emergence of disciplines, 
such as Universal Design (UD) [4] and Inclusive Design (ID) 
[5]. On a parallel path, with the increase of knowledge and 
awareness on accessible design, the creation of standards to 
support designers, engineers, and architects in developing 
and assessing accessible and inclusive buildings, grew [6]. 
Currently, the practice of assessing accessibility in built 
environments is carried out by professional experts, such as 
access consultants, auditors, or architects, who objectively 
measure several variables of the building and check if they 
comply with regulations. For a long time, the focus has been 
oriented towards physical accessibility, such as how a 
wheelchair can access a ramp or enter through a door [7] [8].  
Guidance on visual accessibility of buildings is related to 
some objective factors that do not truly represent what 
people with different visual abilities could experience. For 
example, people with mild loss of visual acuity, and those 
with colour vision deficiency (e.g., colour blindness) might 
not have their voice fully heard when accessibility audits are 
carried 
out. 
Most 
international 
standards 
indicate 
dimensional features of architectural elements to regulate 
physical accessibility, as well as other subjects (e.g., the 
correct use of materials and colours to avoid glare [9]). With 
the advancements in human factors and usability standards, it 
is necessary to additionally take into consideration sensory 
and cognitive aspects of the visual perception, as they 
strongly influence the use and experience of a building [10]. 
Hence, there is a need to go beyond physical access, and 
discover what combination of tools and assessment protocols 
could extend the consideration of visual accessibility in the 
built environment, to cover the experience for people with 
mild visual impairments.  
With this explorative research, the current state of the art 
of tools and systems that support the assessment of visual 
accessibility was studied, with a first goal to identify gaps in 
the current scenario, as described in Section 2 of the paper. 
After having identified challenges, Section 3 reports how the 
Cambridge simulation glasses were selected as a tool to 
simulate visual impairments and therefore to empathically 
understand visual accessibility in the built environment [11]. 
Section 4 of the paper reports and discusses the pilot study 
conducted by walking with and without wearing the glasses 
in a publicly accessible building and experiencing how 
clearly visible certain architectural characteristics were. The 
goal of this study was to understand their potential use in 
different settings and explore how to offer an empathic, 
immersive experience [12] of visual accessibility with a low-
cost tool for different stakeholders. The final Section of the 
paper states the conclusion and further developments for the 
study. 
II. 
VISUAL ACCESSIBILITY IN THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT  
Visual accessibility is defined as the property that allows 
the use of vision to travel efficiently and safely through a 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-876-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

space, by perceiving the spatial layout of key features in the 
environment and keeping track of one’s location [13]. 
When it comes to visual accessibility in the built 
environment, various approaches have been studied so far. 
Some researchers focused on developing tools and strategies 
for wayfinding in the case of visually impaired people, such 
as the PERCEPT indoor navigation system for the blind and 
visually impaired [14] or the BIT kit wayfinding [15]. While 
the PERCEPT system provides guidance to the user towards 
a desired location with the support of passive radio 
frequency identification (RFID) tags deployed in the 
environment, the BIT kit includes a strategy for assessing the 
experience of visually impaired people in the built 
environment through the combination of various methods. 
Several similar apps or systems address indoor or outdoor 
wayfinding for visually impaired people [16] [17] [18]. 
Although these all represent advanced approaches and have 
important benefits in guiding users with specific visual 
difficulties, they present no particular guidance for the 
assessment and actual improvement of features such as 
visual acuity, clarity, or legibility for specific elements in the 
built environment. Research shows that most of indoor and 
public outdoor spaces do not provide the necessary clarity of 
vision for users such as older adults [19]. To approach this 
topic, in 2017, Motamedi et al. [20] proposed a tool that uses 
Building Information Modelling and Virtual Reality systems 
to assess sign visibility and legibility. The system simulates 
the movement of pedestrians and uses algorithms to calculate 
the visibility of signs, therefore contributing to the 
assessment and improvement of their placement. Similar 
approaches that use the “Digital Human” approach to 
evaluate visibility and simulate design signage can be found 
in literature [21] [22]. However, in these cases, there seems 
to be a lack of consideration for the observer’s subjective 
experience and the different visual capabilities, therefore 
with no empathic involvement of users. 
Furthermore, clarity of vision does not affect only 
signage and signs but could also affect components of the 
space such as staircase nosing, door handles, furniture, and a 
variety of other elements of the building. Thompson et al. 
[13] focused on mimicking the effects of reduced acuity and 
contrast by applying filters to calibrated High Dynamic 
Range (HDR) photographs of a space. Through the use of 
computer simulations, this approach allows the identification 
of potential mobility hazards and landmarks that might go 
unrecognized by low vision individuals. However, the 
complexity of the algorithm makes it rather hardly accessible 
to the general audience belonging to different age groups 
[19] [23]. 
An additional challenge concerns people with colour 
blindness, who experience difficulties in distinguishing 
certain hues and shades. To overcome this issue, the Adobe 
Accessibility Tools [24] provide designers with the 
opportunity to check a specific combination of colours 
against three most common types of colour blindness such as 
deuteranopia, protanopia and tritanopia, and therefore 
experience a simulated view of how a specific colour 
combination may appear. Although particularly useful to 
simulate how specific colour contrasts are perceived by 
users, it is limited to a combination of five colours and it 
addresses the pre-design process, being strictly applied 
through computer simulations.  
In order to have a sense of what is accessible, currently 
visual accessibility regulations and guidelines tend to define 
specific objective parameters for visual accessibility, such as 
lighting and contrast levels, text size and spacing. The 
Canadian Accessibility criteria introduces, together with 
various physical-dimensional criteria, information regarding 
the colour-contrast values that need to be considered during 
the design process [25]. The Design Guidelines for the 
Visual Environments instead, highlight that people with low 
vision often experience the loss of contrast sensitivity [26]. 
Therefore, contrasting values should be used to define 
elements within a space, such as an edge of a step, level 
change or an object in the pathway.  
To this end, CROMOCON is a tool developed to 
measure colour contrast values with the goal to understand 
the visibility level of objects, texts or building components 
for an impaired person before and after manufacture or 
installation [27]. The tool, composed by a Light Reflectance 
Value (LRV) meter, is based on a study that identified five 
key factors which affect visual capabilities, namely the 
visual ability of the observer, tonal contrast difference of the 
object to background, lighting intensity, projected width and 
height of the object, and distance from the object to viewer. 
The contrast between surfaces in a building is measured as 
the difference between 2 LRVs (Light Reflectance Value), 
by taking into consideration the previously mentioned factors 
[28]. The CROMOCON appears to be very useful for 
building features like stair nosing, however it seems less 
intuitive for use with more complicated features such as text 
or icons on signage for wayfinding. It represents a rather 
partial objective evaluation, without empathically offering 
the experience a person with visual impairments might have 
in a specific space, to the person without an impairment. 
The state-of-the-art research highlighted the complex 
interaction between environmental variables and people 
capabilities, as well as a lack of specific bespoke design 
requirements for wayfinding in a space, making visual 
accessibility in the space hard to achieve. To this end, Arditi 
notes that there are several variables that determine the 
legibility of a sign (e.g., viewing distance, typeface, x-height, 
stroke thickness, intensity and directionality of lighting, 
foreground colour, background colour, etc.). These variables 
interact in complex ways, so it is not possible to ensure the 
legibility of a sign (for a specified degree of visual-acuity 
loss) by setting pass/fail threshold values for each of these 
variables [29].  
Instead, Arditi makes the case that human observers with 
simulated impairments can assess the legibility of a sign, 
which provides a simple and practical method that takes 
account of all of these variables [29]. He proposes simulating 
impairment by adjusting the viewing distance. This has the 
advantage of being easy to apply without any tools but 
requires sufficient space in the actual environment to walk 
considerably backwards from the normal viewing distance. 
Moreover, it only works if the lighting conditions do not 
change with this adjusted viewing distance or at different 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-876-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

times during the day. However, in many real-life situations 
in the built environment, either or both of these assumptions 
may not be viable. Herein, we explore simulating 
impairments through wearable glasses, which use a similar 
theoretical approach, transferred into a practically viable 
strategy to support assessments within real buildings. 
Furthermore, visual accessibility in the built environment 
ought to consider more than just signage, and the approach 
of using human observers with simulated impairment readily 
generalises to consider all aspects of the built environment, 
including other features such as controls for heating, lighting 
and ventilation, door handles, stair nosing, to name just a 
few. 
III. 
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY TO EMPATHICALLY 
UNDERSTAND VISUAL ACCESSIBILITY IN THE BUILT 
ENVIRONMENT 
Visual accessibility and inclusion in buildings are 
extremely important to guarantee pleasurable experiences. 
Wayfinding represents just one of the aspects of visual 
accessibility in buildings, but there are several other 
components of the space that might lead to exclusion 
depending on the visual capabilities of human beings. To 
support the assessment and design of visually accessible 
spaces, different tools are currently present in the market, 
however few of them can empathically offer the auditor a 
subjective, 
empathic 
understanding 
of 
whether 
an 
environment or object is visually accessible [12]. To bridge 
this gap, the Cambridge simulation glasses were selected to 
experience the built environment with visual impairments 
and understand what could be improved. The glasses were 
designed to offer insights into a general loss of the capacity 
to distinguish fine detail, such as the inability to achieve a 
correct focus, reduced sensitivity of retinal cells, and 
problems with internal parts of the eye becoming cloudy 
[11]. To note that they do not simulate the real condition of 
living with such impairment, providing a constrained 
experience of capability loss, and they do not convey the 
frustration, social consequences or coping strategies involved 
in living with an impairment on a daily basis [30]. The 
Cambridge simulation glasses, as shown in Figure 1, are 
composed by four pairs of identical glasses, which can be 
overlapped to simulate four levels of visual capacity of the 
user.   
While one set of glasses simulates mild vision loss, if 
multiple glasses are worn, they can simulate more severe 
levels of impairment. To explore how the simulation glasses 
can help to assess whether indoor environments are inclusive 
for people with mild visual impairments, three different 
features present in many public buildings were examined. 
Staircase nosing, signage and wayfinding were object of the 
test, held in a publicly accessible educational building. 
Staircase nosing was chosen because it is covered within 
building regulations [31] [32]. Therefore we investigated if 
the glasses allowed to clearly identify the stair nosing that 
were compliant with these regulations, and compare to stairs 
that were not. Signage and wayfinding in architecture were 
chosen because, while in a few countries these are somehow 
included in the mandatory pass/fail requirements within 
building regulations [33] [34], there is still an exploratory 
curiosity behind empathically perceiving their visual 
accessibility from people with different visual capabilities 
[35]. A team of three researchers with no visual impairment 
examined these features multiple times, firstly without any 
glasses, and then repeated with 3 or 4 layers of glasses held 
in front of the eyes. As described within the Inclusive Design 
Toolkit [11], 3 pairs of glasses make the vision 0.49 
logMAR worse, and 4 pairs makes the vision 0.74 logMAR 
worse. Given the starting visual ability of the researchers 
(approximately VA 6/5), this means 3 pairs simulate a level 
of vision ability that would be borderline for being able to 
drive (approximately VA 6/16), and 4 pairs simulate a level 
that would be registrable as partially sighted [36] 
(approximately VA 6/27). According to the instructions 
provided with the glasses, features that remain visible with 4 
pairs of simulation glasses worn simultaneously should mean 
that the exclusion due to visual acuity issues is less than 1%. 
IV. 
NAVIGATING AN INDOOR SPACE WITH THE 
CAMBRIDGE SIMULATION GLASSES 
While exploring the publicly accessible educational 
building, we found examples of stairs with and without 
contrasted stair nosing, as shown in Figure 2.  
We found an example of wayfinding signage that had 
issues due to the directionality of the lighting, and another 
example of an informative sign that was difficult to see 
because of the contrast difference between foreground and 
background. These are both shown in Figure 3.  
As this was an exploratory study, we did not seek to 
quantify the number of staircases that did or did not have 
perceivable nosing, nor to quantify the number of signs that 
did or did not have issues. Additionally, we did not seek to 
evaluate whether this particular building was better or worse 
than any other buildings of a similar purpose, nor to 
determine whether the building was compliant or not to any 
particular set of regulations. The examples presented in this 
paper were chosen solely to demonstrate the potential of the 
simulation glasses.  
Figure 1. One pair of the Cambridge simulation glasses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-876-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Figure 2. Staircase case study. From left: steps with no edging strip, without glasses (a) steps with no edging strip, with simulation glasses (b), steps 
with yellow edging strips, without glasses (c), steps with yellow edging strip, with simulation glasses (d). 
 
 
Figure 3. Signage case study. From left: signage without glasses (a), signage with simulation glasses (b), information desk text without glasses (c), 
information desk text with simulation glasses (d). 
 
Firstly, considering stair nosing, it is known by building 
standards, such as the BS 8300:2018 [37], that the nosing of 
stairs should be clearly visible from distance. Standards also 
provide recommendations for operating a visual contrast 
between the leading part of the tread and its remainder as a 
supporting feature for visually impaired people [9]. The 
stairs without edging strips are shown in Figure 2(a), and 
with simulated impairment (wearing and taking a picture 
with 4 pairs of glasses) in Figure 2(b). The stairs that did 
have edging strips are shown in Figure 2(c), and with 
simulated impairment (wearing and taking a picture with 4 
pairs of glasses) in Figure 2(d). 
When the researchers navigated the stairs without the 
simulation glasses, as shown in Figure 2(a) and 2(c), no 
particular issues with visually identifying the edges of the 
steps, regardless of whether or not the steps had the high 
contrast edgings, were recorded. Comparatively, when the 
simulation glasses were worn, the edges of the steps without 
yellow edging strips completely disappeared, as shown in 
Figure 2(b). To report the subjective views of the researchers 
who undertook the experience, descending these steps felt 
“unnerving” and required “considerable concentration to 
place the feet on each step”. While wearing the simulation 
glasses and descending the stairs that did have the high 
contrast edges, as shown in Figure 2(d), the edges of the 
steps remained visible, and the experience of descending was 
“considerably more pleasant” and “felt safer”, as the 
researchers performing the experience reported. Although 
high contrast edging strips on stairs is part of building 
regulations, the glasses offered a unique empathic 
perspective on why these strips are so important. If an access 
consultant was seeking to convince someone that a set of 
stairs needed improving, the glasses would be an excellent 
tool to help build a persuasive case for change. 
Considering wayfinding, Figure 3(a) shows an example 
of a wayfinding sign, and Figure 3(b) shows the same sign 
with 4 pairs of simulation glasses overlapped. The distance 
from the viewer and the object was constant in both cases 
(150cm) as well as the luminance and focal length of the 
camera used to take pictures.  
When 
viewing 
the 
signage 
without 
simulated 
impairment, as shown in Figure 3(a), the researchers were 
able to identify the directions of the arrows that exist within 
the sign and read all of the text. The researchers noticed a bit 
of glare on the sign due to the lighting, but this was not 
unduly problematic. However, when viewing the same sign 
with simulated impairment, as shown in Figure 3(b), it 
became clear that it was considerably difficult to read. After 
further investigation, the researchers apprehended that this 
particular sign was harder to read because of the large 
amount of light provided by the sky light from behind the 
sign, which becomes considerably unhelpful. Furthermore, 
the casing of the sign has a slightly reflective coating, which 
gives further unwanted glare effects. 
When considering the informative text label without 
simulated impairment, as shown in Figure 3(c), the 
researchers were able to easily read the text. However, when 
considering the same sign with simulated impairment, as 
shown in Figure 3(d), the researchers realised that this 
particular sign was difficult to read because there is not much 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-876-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

contrast difference between the text and its background, even 
though it appears considerably large.  
Considering both examples, they illustrate how the 
legibility of a sign depends on a complex combination of 
numerous variables, which cover both the technical details of 
the sign and the contextual environmental factors. 
It appears that the simulation glasses provided a method 
to empathically understand visual accessibility through a 
simple, low-cost tool that enabled all of these complex 
variables to be considered. It is important to highlight the 
fact that the assessment of the visual accessibility of features 
while wearing simulation glasses remains subjective. There 
may be situations where one assessor considers that a sign is 
visible while wearing four pairs of simulation glasses, yet 
another assessor may disagree. Partly, this may be due to 
different starting eyesight abilities of different assessors, but 
it may also be due to the subjective nature of perception and 
its interaction with prior knowledge of the visual stimulus.  
Mandatory accessibility requirements have to be 
completely objective, such that there can be no doubt as to 
whether they are successfully met. The scope of such 
mandatory requirements therefore remains limited to areas 
where it is viable to provide a meaningful, yet objective 
technical specification of a feature that is compliant. Stair 
nosing is closer to be an example where this is possible, 
based on technical specifications of the width of the strip, to 
increase the contrast difference between the strip and the 
step, and the minimum level of ambient illumination. 
In cases where these mandatory requirements have been 
developed, the glasses are not necessary to consider whether 
such feature is compliant. However, they remain extremely 
useful to communicate the benefit of meeting these technical 
specifications, and to make a persuasive case for change. 
Furthermore, functioning effectively within indoor 
environments involves perceiving many features that are not 
completely covered through building regulations or 
accessibility requirements, such as wayfinding, signage, and 
controls for heating ventilation and lighting. The simulation 
glasses offer a simple method for this considerably extended 
set of features. This paper particularly emphasizes 
wayfinding and signage, as a first step towards considering 
an extended scope. For visual features that are not covered 
by mandatory technical requirements, current best practice 
for considering the visual accessibility of these features 
involves one or more of the following: 
• 
With a subjective experience, it is possible to assess 
whether a feature of the built environment is easy to 
see, based mostly on personal beliefs and taste (e.g., 
interior designer, non-expert user). 
• 
With a trained subjective experience, the subjective 
assessment of whether a feature is easy to see is 
informed through training (e.g., access consultant). 
• 
With an impaired 
subjective 
experience, the 
assessment of whether a feature is easy to see is 
evaluated by persons with a particular level of visual 
impairment (e.g., a user with VA 6/18). 
• 
With heuristic guidelines, the assessment of whether a 
feature is easy to see is evaluated according to whether 
it follows a set of best practice guidelines. 
Of these currently available methods, the impaired 
subjective experience ought to be the most valid for truly 
determining the visual accessibility of these features. 
However, recruiting users with particular target levels of 
vision impairment is not straightforward. It is far easier to 
recruit normally sighted participants and give them a known 
level of visual impairment [38]. With this pilot study, we 
aimed to consider whether the Cambridge simulation glasses 
could improve these existing methods, and we discovered 
two additional opportunities as follows:  
• 
With a simulated empathic subjective experience, the 
assessment of whether a feature is easy to see is 
evaluated by an assessor with simulated visual 
impairment (e.g., wearing 4 pairs of Cambridge 
simulation glasses). 
• 
With a shared empathic experience, a person wearing 
Cambridge simulation glasses assesses the feature in 
collaboration with an impaired user. 
With a simulated empathic subjective experience, people 
who have not had trained experience about accessibility can 
increase their awareness of how an impaired user might 
experience the space. This experience can be extremely 
engaging and informative, and it considerably improves the 
previous approaches that were named subjective experience 
and trained subjective experience. Furthermore, they can 
help to understand and interpret the heuristic guidelines and 
may help to pick up on issues that were not adequately 
covered within existing best practice guidelines. 
With a shared empathic experience, the simulation 
glasses can help the communication between an architect or 
designer and a user with impaired vision. Such expert users 
can offer great insight into the issues they experience, but by 
experiencing these issues themselves, the architect or 
designer can offer great insight into how the experience can 
be improved, for example by choosing different colours, 
materials, or altering the lighting. With this approach, the 
shared empathic experience considerably approves on the 
previous approach that was named “impaired subjective 
experience”. In advocating these opportunities for using the 
simulation glasses, it is vital to remember that the glasses 
will never cover the full spectrum of experience that visually 
impaired people have on a daily basis. Nevertheless, the 
glasses can be an informative, educational, inspirational, and 
experiential tool, that can leverage the power of empathy 
with a wider audience [12] [39]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on more than eight years of research on the use of 
the Cambridge Simulation Glasses for the assessment of 
visual accessibility of products, this paper introduces their 
use for examining visual accessibility in the built 
environment. Their potential use from stakeholders such as 
access consultants and design professionals can support an 
empathic experience of visually accessible features in the 
built environment. This preliminary work highlights 
potential benefits in raising awareness and educate 
stakeholders by using a low-cost tool to create a shared 
empathic experience across different stakeholders. Further 
work is planned to engage other users with the goal to 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-876-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

explore other use cases by using these glasses and measure 
their benefit in daily working practice. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie 
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement N° 846284. The introduction 
was elaborated by all authors, Ms. Camelia Chivăran wrote chapters 
2 and 3, Dr. Matteo Zallio wrote chapters 4 and 5, Dr. Sam Waller 
contributed to the research, reviewed and edited the article, Prof. P. 
John Clarkson supervised and contributed to the research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Chapman, B. Hedrick, J. Little, D. Nosker, and T. Nugent, 
Expanding Horizons. A History of the First 50 Years of the 
Division of Rehabilitation – Education Services at the 
University of Illinois. Champaign, IL: Roxford DT 
Publishing, 1998. 
[2] American National Standards Institute, American national 
standard specifications for making buildings and facilities 
accessible to and usable by physically handicapped people. 
New York: American National Standards Institute, 1980. 
[3] United States Department of Justice. Americans with 
Disabilities 
Act, 
1990. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ada.gov/ [retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[4] M. F. Story, J. Mueller, and R. L. Mace, The Universal 
Design File: Designing for People of All Ages and Abilities. 
Revised Edition. North Carolina, US: NC State University, 
The Center for Universal Design, 1998. 
[5] R. Coleman, “The case for Inclusive Design an overview,” 
Proc. 12th Triennial Congress, International Ergonomics 
Association and the Human Factors Association of Canada, 
Toronto, Canada, pp. 250-252, 1994. 
[6] M. Zallio and J. Clarkson, “On inclusion, diversity, equity, 
and accessibility in civil engineering and architectural design. 
A review of assessment tools,” Proc. 23rd International 
Conference on Engineering Design (ICED21), Gothenburg, 
Sweden, 16-20 August 2021, in press.  
[7] M. Zallio, D. Berry, and N. Casiddu, “Adaptive environments 
for enabling senior citizens: An holistic assessment tool for 
housing design and IoT-based technologies,” IEEE 3rd World 
Forum on Internet of Things (Wf-IoT), 2016, pp. 419-424, 
ISBN: 9781509041305. 
[8] M. Zallio and N. Casiddu, “Lifelong Housing Design: User 
feedback evaluation of smart objects and accessible houses 
for healthy ageing,” the 9th ACM International Conference on 
PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments 
PETRA Corfù, Greece, pp. 1-8, June 2016, ISBN: 
9781450343374. 
[9] United States Department of Justice. 2010 ADA Standards for 
Accessible 
Design. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.ada.gov/2010ADAstandards_index.htm 
[retrieved: February, 2021].  
[10] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 9241-11: 
2018 Ergonomics of human-system interaction. Available 
from: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/63500.html 
[retrieved 
April, 2021]. 
[11] Engineering Design Centre. Cambridge Simulation Glasses. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://www.inclusivedesigntoolkit.com/csg/csg.html, 
2017 
[retrieved: April, 2021]. 
[12] K. Hutton and M. Maguire, “How ‘empathetic modelling’ 
positively influences architects’ empathy, informing their 
Inclusive Design-Thinking,” in Ergonomics & Human Factors 
2021, CIEHF, R. Charles and D. Golightly, Eds. April 2021. 
[13] W. B. Thompson, G. E. Legge, D. J. Kersten, R. A. 
Shakespeare, and Q. Lei, “Simulating visibility under reduced 
acuity and contrast sensitivity,” J Opt Soc Am A Opt Image 
Sci 
Vis., 
vol. 
34 
(4), 
pp. 
583-593, 
April 
2017, 
doi:10.1364/JOSAA.34.000583. 
[14] A. Ganz et al., “PERCEPT indoor navigation system for the 
blind 
and 
visually 
impaired: 
architecture 
and 
experimentation,” Int J Telemed Appl, vol. 2012: 894869, 
Dec. 2012, doi:10.1155/2012/894869. 
[15] L. J. Mcintyre and V. L. Hanson, “Buildings and users with 
visual impairment: uncovering factors for accessibility using 
BIT-Kit,” ASSETS '14: Proc. 16th international ACM 
SIGACCESS conference on Computers & accessibility, Oct. 
2014, pp. 59–66, doi:10.1145/2661334.2661371. 
[16] Z. Hunaiti, V. Garaj, and W. Balachandran, “A remote vision 
guidance system for visually impaired pedestrians,” Int J 
Navig, 
vol. 
59 
(3), 
pp. 
497-504, 
2006, 
doi: 
10.1017/S0373463306003894. 
[17] P. Baranski, M. Polanczyk, and P. Strumillo, “A remote 
guidance system for the blind,” Proc. The 12th IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
e-Health 
Networking 
Applications and Services, 2010, pp. 386-390, doi: 
10.1109/HEALTH.2010.5556539. 
[18] H. Fernandes, V. Filipe, P. Costa, and J. Barroso, “Location 
based services for the blind supported by RFID technology,” 
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 27, pp. 2-8, 2014. 
[19] M. Iwata and H. Kitamoto, “Study on visual acuity curves of 
the elderly”, Jpn Archit Rev, vol. 3 (1), pp. 135-143, Jan. 
2020 [Journal of Environmental Engineering (Transactions of 
AIJ), vol. 80 (709), pp. 203-209, 2015]. 
[20] A. Motamedi, Z. Wang, and N. Yabuki, “Signage visibility 
analysis and optimization system using BIM-enabled virtual 
reality 
(VR) 
environments,” 
Advanced 
Engineering 
Informatics, vol. 32, pp. 248-262, April 2017. 
[21] T. Maruyama, S. Kanai, H. Date, and M. Tada, “Simulation-
based evaluation of ease of wayfinding using digital human 
and as-is environment models,” ISPRS Int J Geo-Inf, vol. 
6(9), pp. 267-289, 2017, doi: 10.3390/ijgi6090267. 
[22] R. K. Dubey, W. P. Khoo, M. G. Morad, C. Holscher, and M. 
Kapadia, 
“AUTOSIGN: 
A 
multi-criteria 
optimization 
approach to computer aided design of signage layouts in 
complex buildings,” Computers & Graphics, vol. 88, pp. 13-
23, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.cag.2020.02.007. 
[23] M. Mahjoob, S. Heydarian, and S. Koochi, “Effect of yellow 
filter on visual acuity and contrast sensitivity under glare 
condition among different age groups,” International 
Ophthalmology, 
vol. 
36, 
pp. 
509-514, 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1007/s10792-015-0154-7. 
[24] H. Svadja. Celebrate Global Accessibility Awareness Day 
with 
Adobe 
Color. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://blog.adobe.com/en/2020/05/21/celebrate-global-
accessibility-awareness-day-with-adobe-color.html#gs.x8sqbl 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
[25] A. Ratelle, L. Lemay, and S. Kreis, Accessibility criteria to 
meet the needs of visually impaired people, A practical tool 
for the design of premises. Montréal: Institut Nazareth et 
Louis-Braille et Société Logique, 2003. 
[26] National Institute of Building Sciences, Design Guidelines for 
the Visual Environment: Version 6. U.S.: National Institute of 
Building Sciences, May 2015. 
[27] H. Dalke et al., “A colour contrast assessment system: design 
for people with visual impairment,” in Designing Inclusive 
Interactions, P. Langdon, P. J. Clarkson, and P. Robinson, 
Eds. London: Springer, pp. 1-10, 2010, doi:10.1007/978-1-
84996-166-0_10. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-876-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

[28] CROMOCON Ltd. Cromocon Light Reflectance Value (LRV) 
Meter. 
[Online] 
Available 
from 
http://cromocon.com/ 
[retrieved: April, 2021]. 
[29] A. Arditi, “Rethinking ADA signage standards for low-vision 
accessibility,” Journal of Vision, vol. 17 (5):8, pp. 1-20, May 
2017, doi: 10.1167/17.5.8. 
[30] J. Goodman-Deane, S. Waller, A. C. Collins, and J. Clarkson, 
“Simulating Vision Loss: What Levels of Impairment Are 
Actually Represented?,” Contemporary Ergonomics and 
Human Factors 2013, Institute of Ergonomics & Human 
Factors, April 2013, pp. 347-354, ISBN 9781138000421 
[31] HM Government, The Building Regulations 2010 Protection 
from falling, collision and impact K. UK: HM Government, 
2013 edition. 
[32] HM Government, The Building Regulations 2010 Access to 
and use of buildings M. UK: HM Government, 2015 edition.  
[33] Ministry 
of 
Business, 
Innovation 
and 
Employment, 
Acceptable Solutions and Verification Methods For New 
Zealand Building Code Clause. F8 Signs. New Zealand: New 
Zealand Government, 2016. 
[34] Standards Australia, AS 1428.4.2:2018 Design for access and 
mobility, Part 4.2: Means to assist the orientation of people 
with vision impairment - Wayfinding signs. Australia: 
Standards Australia, 2018. 
[35] NHS. Wayfinding. Effective wayfinding and signing systems. 
Guidance for Healthcare Facilities (supersedes HTM 65 
‘Signs’). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/s
ystem/uploads/attachment_data/file/148500/Wayfinding.pdf 
[retrieved: April, 2021]. 
[36] Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB). The criteria 
for 
certification. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.rnib.org.uk/eye-health/registering-your-sight-
loss/criteria-certification [retrieved: April, 2021]. 
[37] British Standards Institution, BS 8300-2:2018 Design of an 
accessible and inclusive built environment. Buildings - code 
of practice. London, UK: British Standards Institution, 2018. 
[38] K. Latham, S. Waller, and J. Schaitel, “Do best practice 
guidelines improve the legibility of pharmacy labels for the 
visually impaired?,” Ophthalmic Physiol Opt, vol. 31 (3), pp. 
275–282, May 2011, doi:10.1111/j.1475‐1313.2010.00816. 
[39] S. Cook and E. Zitkus, “Teaching Inclusive Design”, Design 
For All India, vol. 15 (11), pp. 22-29, Nov. 2020. 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-876-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

