 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 1. Number of conferences (a) and procedings’ pages (b) 
between 2006 and 2014 
Greening the Scientific Conferences 
 
 
Amin Anjomshoaa, Carlo Ratti 
SENSEable City Laboratory 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
Cambridge, MA, USA 
e-mail:{amina, ratti}@mit.edu 
Frial Shayeganfar 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: ferial@ifs.tuwien.ac.at
 
 
Abstract—Today we are facing an increasing number of 
scientific conferences that play an important role in the 
exchange of information for academia and researchers. In 
order to attend a conference, attendees travel to the conference 
city from all over the world and for bigger meetings this will 
produce a significant amount of carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gasses. In sustainable urban environments, various 
mobility solutions such as public transport, car sharing, and 
ride sharing are offered to enable seamless multimodality and 
reducing the urban pollution. However, the urban impact of 
the academic events needs to be addressed on a larger spatial 
scale. In scientific conferences, the conference location is 
decided during the early stages of conference planning and is 
announced by way of a Call For Papers. To this end, the 
conference location is merely decided based on economic, 
political, or city-attractiveness concerns. In this paper, we will 
first articulate the importance of the conference location by 
analyzing the real world data of some past conferences. Next, 
we show that there is a strong correlation between the emission 
rate per capita of the contributing authors and the final 
attendees of the conference. Based on this finding, we will then 
propose the idea of variable conference location that suggests 
deferring the selection of conference city to the paper 
submission deadline. As a result, it would be possible to make 
an informed and environmental-friendly decision about the 
conference location. 
Keywords - greenhouse gasses; emission; conference 
management; green events 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Scientific conferences are an integral part of the science 
and academic life. Every year millions of scientists and 
researchers around the world attend a meeting or conference 
for presenting their works, receiving feedback, and doing 
face-to-face interaction and networking. The meetings have 
also emerged as a significant contributor to national 
economies. According to a 2009 UNEP green meeting 
guideline, every year over 80 million people around the 
world attend a meeting or conference and even more attend 
trade shows or exhibitions [1][2]. Another study states that in 
2012, 
there 
have 
been 
284,600 
conventions/conferences/trade shows in the US alone, with a 
total of 87 million attendees [3]. Also, according to the U.S. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, conventions and events sector is 
the fastest growing occupation and is expected to expand by 
43.7 percent from 2010 to 2020 [4]. 
Over the past several years, the number of conferences 
and scientific papers has increased significantly. For 
instance, according to one of the proceedings databases [5], 
which contain listings of thousands of conference 
publications, the number of conferences, as well as the 
proceedings’ volumes, are two-folded. Figure 1 shows the 
increasing 
rate 
of 
scientific 
conferences 
and 
their 
proceedings volume between 2006 and 2014.  
There are a number of arguments that might explain this 
phenomenon. One reason could be the broad acceptance of 
academic publications and citations as the evidence of 
research impact of scientists. This puts much pressure on 
scientific communities to sustain their career and academic 
promotion via publishing more papers and attending many 
scientific conferences. Besides, the recent advances in virtual 
meetings, digital communication, and webinars have not 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
Figure 2. Determining the conference location at various phases of a 
scientific conference 
impacted the value of face-to-face communication and in-
person meetings. Accordingly, it seems that the widespread 
adoption of such technologies may be years away [6][7].   
This global rise of conferences and meetings imposes a 
bigger number of travels and consequently causes a 
significant amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other 
greenhouse gasses. The transportation and especially the 
long-haul travels of attendees are the major source of 
conference-related emissions. So, minimizing the travel path 
to the attendees’ home country and city would significantly 
reduce the carbon footprint of the conference. 
In order to reduce the contribution of transportation to 
urban pollution, the city designers try to shorten the paths to 
daily living destinations and make them accessible within a 
walkable distance. In the case of academic events, we are 
dealing with the same optimization problem on a larger 
spatial scale. However, neither the conference location nor 
the attendee location is flexible which hinders the 
optimization of the traveling distances and reduction of the 
urban pollution. Consequently, little attention is paid to the 
environmental impact of the conference location. The 
conference 
location 
is 
usually 
decided 
based 
on 
administrative or city-attractiveness factors. As such, the 
conference location is predetermined and the volume of 
emissions can be calculated only after the conference 
registration phase when the participation list is completed. 
Supposing that the conference location could be variable, it 
would be possible to calculate the optimal conference 
location based on the participants’ list and their travel path to 
the conference location. Although the post-determination of 
conference city may reduce the emission, but in practice, this 
does not seem to be feasible. One of the major problems of 
this approach is the narrow timeframe for the participants 
and the conference organizers. This issue will not allow 
participants to plan the travel and address the formal 
requirements such as submitting the travel request to their 
organization or applying for the visa of the target country. 
Also, the conference organizers will not have enough time to 
plan the conference tasks and organize the local chairs and 
local staff competently.  
In the present work, we first articulate the importance of 
the conference location by analyzing the real world data of 
some past conferences. Next, we show that there is a strong 
correlation between the emission rate per capita of the 
contributing authors and the final attendees of the 
conference. Finally, as depicted in Figure 2, we suggest a 
data-driven approach for selecting an environmental-friendly 
conference location.  
The major contribution of this paper is to establish a 
data-driven approach to approximate the emission per capita 
of conferences based on the submitted papers and their 
prospective presenters. As such, the conference location can 
be determined as early as the paper submission phase. This 
will give enough time to the conference organizers to plan 
the logistic and organizational tasks, as well as attendees to 
plan their travel accordingly. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
reviews the state of the art. Section 3 introduces the data 
resources and the semantic data integration process for 
enriching the data and filling the missing values. Section 4 
presents the emission calculation method for determining the 
emission per capita of conference participants. The proposed 
approach of this work is presented and discussed in Sections 
5 and 6. Finally, Section 7 describes the future work and 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
According to United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP), “a meeting or conference can be considered climate 
neutral when all possible efforts have been made to reduce 
the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions arising from the 
organization of the meeting and when carbon offsets have 
been purchased to compensate for the unavoidable 
emissions” [1]. Since a significant part of the conferences’ 
emission is associated with participants’ travel activities, the 
conference location plays a significant role. There are a few 
guidelines for greening the meetings and the most common 
recommendation about the location of meetings is to 
minimize the local and long distance transportation needs for 
participants and products. However, in the specific case of 
scientific conferences attendees and their origin countries are 
unknown at the early stages of the conference planning and 
as a result optimizing the distances for long-haul travels is 
not possible.  
Another proposed option for reducing the emission is to 
restrict meetings to major cities because holding them in 
outlying areas will require more connecting flights and 
subsequently more emissions [8]. There are also a few other 
proposals that suggest organizing fewer meetings or 
restricting the number of attendees but as discussed in the 
previous section, these suggestions are already neglected and 
overridden by the scientific community. 
Other options are the virtual meetings [8] and the 
amplified conferences [9] that use ICT and networked 
technologies in order to extend the reach of the conference 
and liberate the participants from traveling to the conference 
location [10]. Although the virtual meetings are a great 
alternative to physical conferences in order to reduce 
emissions, but the trade-off is the limitation in social and 
networking activities. 
III. DATA RESOURCES 
The dataset of this study is taken from an integrated 
conference management system that offers various modules 
for paper management and conference registration. The 
selected dataset contains the paper submission and 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
Figure 3. number of paper contributors, accepted authors, and attendees of selected conferences 
 
SELECT str(?city_name) str(?country_name) WHERE  
{ 
   OPTIONAL { 
<http://dbpedia.org/page/Massachusetts_Institute_of_Tech
nology> dbp:city ?city  
<http://dbpedia.org/page/Massachusetts_Institute_of_Tech
nology> dbo:city ?city }  
 
   ?city rdfs:label ?city_name . 
   ?city dbo:country ?country . 
   ?country rdfs:label ?country_name 
     
    FILTER (lang(?city_name) = 'en') 
    FILTER (lang(?country_name) = 'en') 
}  
 
registration records of seven international conferences 
between 2010 and 2015. Each conference comprises a 
collection of co-located conferences and workshops. The 
attendees of these conferences range between 300 to 600 and 
the conferences have various acceptance rates. Figure 3 
shows conference cities as well as the number of paper 
contributors, accepted authors, and attendees of these 
conferences.  
Selection of paper contributors and accepted authors is 
based on the contact author of submitted papers during the 
paper submission phase. Each contact author may contribute 
one or more papers and will be considered as accepted 
author if at least one of the submissions is accepted.  
Usually, conference organizers require at least one 
registration per accepted paper in order to include the papers 
in the conference proceedings and urge the authors of 
accepted papers to register and present their work in person.   
In order to calculate the emission rates, we would need to 
identify the city and country of the contributing authors. 
Since the dataset of conference management system contains 
only the author’s affiliation, we used the open data to acquire 
their city and country names. To this end, we first used the 
DBPedia lookup service [11] to disambiguate the affiliations 
and match them with the DBpedia resources. To increase the 
precision of results, the queries were limited to the 
“Organization” class of DBPedia ontology and the 
affiliations were annotated with their DBPedia URIs. For 
instance, the lookup service assigns the DBPedia resource 
[12] 
to 
the 
affiliations 
containing 
text 
“MIT” 
or 
“Massachusetts Institute of technology”.   
After this step, we used the DBPedia SPARQL endpoint 
to extract the city and country name of each affiliation by 
using the specific property names of DBPedia ontology as 
shown in Figure 4. 
We used the OpenRefine tool [13] to automate the above-
mentioned steps and could disambiguate and reconcile a big 
portion of the data. For the remaining part, which was not 
recognized by the DBPedia, we made an intensive data 
cleaning and manual matching to create a complete and 
concise 
dataset 
for 
our 
analysis.  
As the final step, we used an online API [14] to calculate the 
distance 
between 
the 
conference 
location 
and 
the 
corresponding cities of the contributors and participants. 
 
Figure 4. SPARQL query for extracting city and country names based on 
affiliation 
IV. EMISSION CALCULATION 
For estimation of CO2 and other greenhouse gasses, we 
have used an adapted version of the emission factor 
calculation proposed by UK Department for Environment 
Food & Rural Affairs [15]. This method uses a simple model 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
Figure 5. Emission saving per person for Conf 6 in Valencia Spain (kg 
CO2e) 
to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) of the 
travel emissions, which includes CO2, CH4, and N2O 
weighted according to their global warming potentials. 
For specifying the emission conversion factor, we 
suppose that all participants within a reasonable short 
distance to the conference location use train and others with 
longer distances take a flight. To this end, we define three 
distance categories for domestic rail transport, short-haul 
flight, and long-haul flight as shown in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
DISTANCE CATEGORIES AND THEIR EMISSION FACTORS 
Transportation 
Type 
Distance Range 
Emission Factor 
(kg CO2/pkm) 
Domestic (rail) 
Less than 785km 
0.01205 
Short-haul flight 
Between 785km and 3,700km  
0.0831 
Long-haul flight 
Greater than 3,700km 
0.097 
 
The amount of carbon dioxide equivalent for each 
conference participant, is then calculated as follows:  
 
Emission = Round-trip Distance * Emission Factor *  
             Uplift Factor 
 
where the emission factor for each transportation type comes 
from the recent report of [16] and the uplift factor is an 
adjustment factor to consider non-direct routes, delays, and 
circling of flights. For rail transport, it will be set to one and 
for flights, it comes from the IPCC Aviation and the global 
Atmosphere 8.2.2.3 [17]. Although the uplift factors for 
short-haul and long-haul distances are different (higher for 
short-haul flights and lower for long-haul flights), but 
currently only a uniform value of 1.09 is used by the airline 
industry which seems to be good enough for the purposes of 
this paper. 
V. 
APPROACH 
Using the dataset of the conference management system 
and the above-mentioned emission calculation method, we 
have assessed the emission per capita for registered 
participants, contributing authors, and the accepted authors.  
The registration dataset includes city and country 
information of each participant, which makes it possible to 
make a near-real calculation of conference emission caused 
by participant’s travel. It is important to note that this value 
could be calculated only after the finalization of the 
registration process. Therefore, it can be only considered as 
an informative/evaluation indicator and cannot be used in a 
proactive way to reduce the conference emissions. In order to 
highlight the decisive role of conference location in causing 
emissions and as a demonstrative example, consider the case 
of CONF-6, which took place in Valencia, Spain. The 
calculation of carbon emissions shows that by relocating the 
conference to other cities, a reasonable fraction of the carbon 
emission will be reduced. Figure 6 shows the amount of 
emission savings per capita by relocating the CONF-6 to 
Berlin, Rome, Tunis, or Paris.  
If we consider the number of submitted papers per 
country and compare it with the emission savings (Table II), 
we find that the host countries with a higher number of 
submissions do not necessarily provide a higher rate of 
emission saving. For instance, in the case of the CONF-6, the 
top three countries namely France, Tunisia, and Italy are not 
the optimal location for organizing the conference. 
Furthermore, a country like Brazil with a high number of 
submissions will cause a huge amount of emission per 
capita. 
TABLE II.  
SUBMITTED PAPERS VS. EMISSION SAVING 
City, Country 
Submitted Papers  
Emission Saving 
Paris, France 
31 
38.26 
Tunis, Tunisia 
31 
10.33 
Rome, Italy 
29 
44.72 
Berlin, Germany 
21 
47.72 
Brasília, Brazil 
20 
-1262.77 
 
We now extended the emission calculations to the other 
two groups namely the contributing and accepted authors. In 
the dataset of conference management system, each 
submitted paper has a contact author who upon acceptance of 
the paper, will register for the paper and attend the 
conference. Each contact author might have also multiple 
paper submissions but will be counted only once in the 
emission calculation lists. This is in line with the economic 
and budget considerations of the participating organizations 
that usually prefer to reduce the size of their delegates to the 
conferences and ask a single author to present multiple 
papers.  
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
Figure 6. Emission per capita for selected groups and cities (kg CO2e) 
In the case of contributing authors, the dataset does not 
contain the city information of authors and instead we used 
the distance between the conference location and centroid of 
author’s country for calculating the emissions.  
Figure 6 shows the emission per capita for the selected 
target groups and cities. This empirical result shows a 
correlation of 0.97 between accepted-registered authors and a 
correlation of 0.95 between submitted-registered authors. 
The latter correlation is especially interesting because the list 
of contributing authors is typically known at the early stages 
of the conference lifecycle. So, independent of the review 
and evaluation processes, it can be used as an effective 
indicator to decide about conference locations. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
With the current trend in the scientific conferences, it 
seems to be improbable that the alternative communication 
models such as virtual conferences replace the physical 
conferences. So, it makes sense to make the conferences as 
green as possible.  
The preliminary results of this research show that at the 
early phases of conferences and with a rather good accuracy, 
the carbon emission of a conference can be estimated. As 
such, the conference-positioning problem will turn into a 
well-known 1-center problem [18], where the cost between 
nodes will be the carbon emission of travel between those 
nodes. This process will result in a short list of candidate 
nodes (cities) that produce a lower amount of CO2 emission. 
As such, the conference organizers will be able to consider 
the candidate cities as well as other organizational policies to 
make a data-driven and environmental-friendly decision 
about the conference location. 
Due to the absence of some required data in our dataset, 
we have made some simplifications to our emission 
calculation 
method. 
These 
include 
restricting 
the 
transportation vehicle to the railway for short distances (less 
than 785 km) and considering the country centroids for 
distance calculation. But, comparing the emission of 
registered participant and contributing authors shows that 
these simplifications do not have significant impacts on the 
estimation of travels’ emission. Furthermore, the data 
preparation for the simplified model requires less effort and 
as a result, it would be more convenient for the conference 
organizers to apply it in practice.  
Despite proof of feasibility and environmental benefits of 
the proposed approach, acceptance of variable conference 
location by the academic community might need a longer 
time. Nevertheless, compared to other proposed options such 
as virtual meetings, less frequent meetings, or limiting 
number of attendance, the proposed solution does not 
restrain the quality of participants’ communication and 
networking activities. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our analysis shows that there is a big potential for 
emission reduction of scientific conferences. The existing 
options for emission reduction are typically decreasing the 
quality of social interaction and face-to-face.  
The proposed idea of “variable conference location” 
suggests deferring the selection of conference city to the 
paper submission deadline. The empirical results show a 
rather strong correlation between the emission per capita of 
contributing authors and the conference attendees. As a 
result, it would be possible to make an informed and 
environmental-friendly decision about the conference 
location when the paper submission is over. This will give 
enough time to both attendees and organizers to accomplish 
the conference preparation tasks. 
In order to realize the concept of variable conference 
location, we would need datasets and services that take the 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

environmental concerns into account. For instance, instead of 
restricting the transportation method to railway or flight, we 
may be able to plan multimodal trips that consider the 
environmental concerns provided that the required datasets 
and services are available. Currently, there are a growing 
number 
of 
cities 
that 
promote 
the 
multimodality 
transportation at the urban level. As such, people will be able 
to plan their transport based on a network of transit option or 
even combine them to address the individual needs. 
Unfortunately, the multimodality concept is not yet well 
established for the case of international trips and the existing 
trip planning services usually support only a single mode of 
transportation. This problem is mainly because of the 
disconnected information resources in transportation domain 
and lack of standards for data exchange between them. 
Furthermore, we would need information services that are 
capable of examining the alternative travel itineraries in 
order to identify the environmental-friendly variant. So, 
future work should aim to refine the proposed approach by 
considering various factors, such as alternative modes of 
transportation, multi-stop flights, and multimodal trips. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The financial support of the Austrian Science Foundation 
(FWF) through the Erwin-Schrödinger Grant No. J3693-N30 
is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would like also to 
thank Accenture China, American Air Liquide, Dallas Area 
Rapid Transit, ENEL Foundation, Ericsson, the Fraunhofer 
Institute, Liberty Mutual Institute, Philips, the Kuwait-MIT 
Center for Natural Resources and the Environment, 
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology 
(SMART), Volkswagen Electronics Research Laboratory, 
and all the members of the MIT Senseable City Lab 
Consortium for supporting this research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
United Nations Environment Programme, “Green Meeting Guide”, 
2009. Retrieved: April, 2016, from 
http://www.unep.org/pdf/GreenMeetingGuide.pdf . 
[2] 
Manchester City Council, “A guide to greening your event”, 2009. 
Retrieved: April, 2016, from 
http://www.sniffer.org.uk/files/5313/4183/8033/Green_events.pdf . 
[3] 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, “The economic significance of 
meetings to the US economy”, Convention Industry Council, 
February 
2011. 
Retrieved 
April, 
2016, 
from 
http://www.conventionindustry.org/docs/default-
source/ess/CIC_Final_Report_Executive_Summary.pdf . 
[4] 
C. B. Lockard, and M. Wolf. “Occupational employment projections 
to 2020”. Monthly Lab, 2012, Rev. 135, p. 84.  
[5] 
Curran Associates, Proceedings Database. Retrieved: April, 2016, 
from http://www.proceedings.com/ . 
[6] 
D. M. Pearlman and N. A. Gates, “Hosting business meetings and 
special events in virtual worlds: a fad or the future?”, Journal of 
Convention & Event Tourism, Taylor & Francis Group, Vol. 11, No. 
4, 2010, pp. 247-265. 
[7] 
D. Getz, "Event Studies: Theory, Research and Policy for Planned 
Events", Routledge, 2012, ISBN-13: 978-0080969534. 
[8] 
B. Lester, “Greening the meeting. Science”. 2007;318:36–8. 
[9] 
Amplified Conference, Wikipedia. Retrieved April, 2016, from 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amplified_conference. 
[10] S. N. Young, “Rethinking scientific meetings: an imperative in an era 
of climate change”. Journal of psychiatry & neuroscience: JPN, 34(5), 
2009, 341. 
[11] C. Bizer, J. Lehmann, G. Kobilarov, S. Auer, C. Becker, R. Cyganiak, 
and S. Hellmann, “DBpedia-A crystallization point for the Web of 
Data”. Web Semantics: science, services and agents on the world 
wide web, 7(3), 2009, pp. 154-165. 
[12] DBpedia resource page for MIT. Retrieved: April, 2016, from   
http://dbpedia.org/resource/Massachusetts_Institute_of_Technology 
[13] Open Refine. Retrieved: April, 2016, from http://openrefine.org/ . 
[14] Distance 24 API. Retrieved: April, 2016, from 
http://www.distance24.org/ . 
[15] N. Hill, H. Walker, S. Choudrie, and K. James, “Guidelines to 
Defra/DECC’s GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting: 
Methodology Paper for Emission Factors”, Department for 
Environment. Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), 2012. 
[16] N. Hill, C. Dun, R. Watson, and K. James, “Government GHG 
conversion factors for company reporting: methodology paper for 
emission factors”. DEFRA, WRAP, and DECC, 2015. 
[17] Uplift factor, IPCC Aviation and the global Atmosphere. Retrieved: 
April 2016, from 
http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/sres/aviation/121.htm#8223. 
[18] N. 
Megiddo, 
“The 
weighted 
Euclidean 
1-center 
problem”. 
Mathematics of Operations Research, 8(4), 1983, pp. 498-504. 
 
 
 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

