AMBLoRa: a Wireless Tracking and Sensor System Using Long Range 
Communication to Monitor Animal Behavior 
 
 
Thierry Antoine-Santoni 
antoine-santoni@univ-corse.fr 
UMR CNRS 6134 SPE 
University of Corsica 
Corte, France 
 
Jean-Sebastien Gualtieri 
js.gualtieri@sitec.corsica 
SITEC 
Parc Technologique 
d’Erbajolo 
BP 651 20601 Furiani 
 
François-Marie Manicacci 
manicacci_fm@univ-corse.fr 
UMR CNRS 6134 SPE 
University of Corsica 
Corte, France 
 
Antoine Aiello 
aiello@univ-corse.fr  
UMS CNRS 3114 Stella Mare 
University of Corsica 
Biguglia, France 
 
 
 
Abstract—The University of Corsica decided to create in 2010 the 
platform STELLA MARE (Sustainable TEchnologies for 
LittoraL Aquaculture and MArine Research) and its platform 
CNRS-Università 
di 
Corsica 
 
leads 
a 
project 
called 
AMB.I.EN.T.E (AMBient Intelligence for Environment using 
Technical Efficiency) to develop some tools to follow the 
terrestrial and underwater activities of animal. Global 
Positioning System (GPS) is considered as an essential key in the 
monitoring of animal activity. Indeed, the knowledge of the 
movement, the reproduction and spawning areas are important 
for the researchers. We were able to study some research on GPS 
tracking system however the energy consumption, a quick 
deployment and real-time data visualization are not clearly 
expressed in a same technical solution. In this paper, we 
introduce a prototype of GPS tracker system using LoRa (for 
Long Range) technology according to these three previous needs. 
Keywords: GPS; LoRa; Tracking System; IoT 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The continuous tracking devices can be fine in several 
applications in the literature. Indeed, in several experiments 
(patients, vehicles, objects, etc.),  the researchers try to 
optimize the devices to allow a complete monitoring and long 
life time of the system. Monitoring animal behavior is an 
important research topic to understand the relations between 
the animals and their environment. To know the position of 
the animal, we can distinguish two types of action: 
• 
Active tracking where the animal is equipped by a 
tag (sonar, RFID, etc.) and the researcher try to 
detect, to find a signal in a determined area 
• 
Passive tracking where the signal is send towards the 
research. 
The second method is often based on Global Positioning 
System inserted in a collar.  
In [1], the authors have collected more information about 
GSP tracking works in Australia to explain the relative 
success of GPS Collars. Indeed, it appears a clear benefit of 
these solutions however the main used tools are not 
consumption optimized, real-time configured and long range 
developed. The two mains solutions [2] [3] cited in this study 
demonstrate clearly their benefits but we note some lack in our 
research approach : a real time data visualization, a long life 
battery and wireless network system manageable. The 
University of Corsica leads a project called AMB.I.EN.T.E 
(AMBient Intelligence for Environment using Technical 
Efficiency) to develop some tools to follow the terrestrial and 
underwater activities of animals ; it was financed by an 
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the 
Regional council of Corsica. 
In [2], the authors try to evaluate the state of art in the using 
of LoRa based technologies. The first conclusions of this 
contribution show the capacity of long range communication 
and low power consumption of this technology in this area of  
research. Numbers of application [3]-[6] use this LoRa 
technology showing the potential of this communication 
media in the tracking system.  
We propose in Section II a survey of animal monitoring tool 
in this research area. We introduce in Section III the 
AMBLoRa system and we present in Section IV the main 
results. We conclude in Section V with the future evolution of 
our system. 
II. 
A SURVEY IN THIS AREA OF RESEARCH 
In this section, we propose to discuss on different major 
works on wildlife monitoring system using a collar approach. 
LynxNet is a wild animal monitoring system using sensor 
network [9] with an animal-centric paradigm. This system is 
based on Tmote Mini sensor, with a 433 MHz transceiver, is 
mobile sensing and uses sparse radio connectivity network. 
The LinxNet collar device produces two types of data:  
1. GPS location with temperature, humidity and 
ambient light,  
2. 3D accelometer and 2D gyroscope to calculate 
motion vector. 
This LynxNet prototype is interesting but we do not have 
precisions on the components consumption and battery life 
time. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

ZebraNet [10] uses a wireless system to monitor the Zebra 
migration in Kenya. Based on energy consumption approach, 
the authors try to conciliate accuracy and energy efficiency. 
An important step in their research and development activities 
is to use two separate microcontrollers, one for the sensors 
software and another for GPS, to reduce energy budget. We 
can note the incapacity to communicate on more than one 
kilometer. 
The wildCENSE illustrated is considered by the authors 
[11] as a new approach of wildlife monitoring based on a 
wireless sensor system different of ZebraNet. It is a WSN 
system to monitor the behavior and migration patterns of 
Swam Deer. Based on GPS and different sensors 
(temperature, humidity, accelerometer and light), the 
wildCENSE node manages the energy consumption by active 
or sleeping states. The data are collected every 3 minutes and 
a data transmission towards the base station is allowed every 
30 minutes. The system proposes a range of more than a 
kilometer. 
In [12], the authors introduce a system using Long-Range 
Wireless Sensor Network for Geo-location for livestock 
animals tracking. The system illustrated shows the capacity of 
dynamic tracking and LoRa capacity however there is no 
approach on energy consumption and real-time. A Wildlife 
Monitoring System [12] was developed using a special IoT 
Infrastructure. Based on a hybrid communication system, 
using LoRaWan standard and Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), 
WMS. The capacity to communicate with a low power 
consumption on several kilometers is an important point in 
this system. 
WMS simulation results seem clearly an efficient 
architecture using two kinds of communication support 
however the information of battery life and the real-time 
monitoring system are not presented.  
The collar approach and Lora technology are clearly 
important benefit points. However we can note some needs in 
our vision on the new design of wildlife tracking system 
comparison as showed on Table 1. 
TABLE I.  COMPARISON OF COLLAR SYSTEM FOR ANIMAL TRACKING 
 
After this survey of major works on animal tracking system 
using a collar, we decided to develop our collar according to 
four needs for our experiment : quickly deployable, energy 
efficient with relative real-time data visualization system 
associated. We propose in previous part a presentation of our 
solution and the first results in this work. 
III. 
AMBLORA : GPS TRACKING SYSTEM AND RELATIVE 
REAL-TIME DATA VISUALIZATION 
We describe in this part the method implemented for the 
GPS tracking of Corsican deer (Cervus elaphus corsicanus) 
[13]. We made a tracking collar consisting of a waterproof 
case containing the AMBLoRa card integrated in a Lora 
system architecture. 
The monitoring experiment described took place on the 
east coast of Corsica Island (red point on Figure 1) in an 
enclosure of the regional natural park of Corsica [14]. 
 
 
Figure 1: Casabianda in Corsica Island 
  
Deers coming from Sardinia, pass by an enclosure before 
being released in Corsica. This is the case for the Casabianda 
enclosure (Figure 2). This enclosure of approximately 20.5 ha 
is used to keep the deer in semi-freedom and to prevent any 
health risks. The plant tissue is mainly composed of small 
bushes and some trees. The ground is relatively flat. There is 
no electrical source on site but GSM coverage in the area is 
good for our operators. About 40 individuals were identified in 
the enclosure in 2015. We can see in this Casabianda closed 
space (Figure 7 red lines) the area where the staff feed the deers 
(yellow circle) and clearing areas (green circles). After a time 
of quarantine, they are released in the Corsican Mountains. 
 
 
Figure 2: Closed space of Casabianda 
Important 
Contributions 
Energy 
RT 
Data 
Long 
range 
quick 
deployme
nt 
LynxNet[9] 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
ZebraNet [10] 
- 
- 
+ 
- 
Wildcense [11] 
 
 
+ 
+ 
WMS [12] 
- 
- 
++ 
- 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

We tested our GPS tracking system on a young male deer 
in this enclosure to validate its proof of concept (autonomy, 
real time visualization, long range communication  and quick 
deployment ). 
 
A. The Network architecture  
We propose to develop a basic architecture developed in 
two parts as showed on the Figure 3 : 
1. Lora Antenna towards the monitored area : a LoRa 
tracker is integrated in a collar AMBLoRa. A LoRa 
network is deployed trough a KerlinK antenna ; 
2. Lora Antenna towards the server database : a GSM 
connection allows a data transmission towards our 
data server. 
 
B. The Lora Tracker 
We designed a GPS tracking collar (Figure 4) using a 
classic hardware architecture of GPS tracking devices : a 
microcontroller, a battery, a network transmitter and a GPS. 
The embedded card is based on a microcontroller, a Microchip 
PIC24FJ128GA310.  
This block, showed on Figure 5, receives the GPS location 
data, codifies and transmits this information to the data base 
with a LoRa transmitter. This module uses a high-performance, 
low-current Microchip RN2483. With a power supply of 3.6 
V, the transceiver offers a sensitivity of -148 dBm and a 
maximum output power of +14 dBm, allowing long-distance 
communication at 868 MHz frequency 
Our GPS receiver is an Origin GPS ORG1208. This block 
is the most energy-consuming with 100mA when it is working. 
But the fast position fix (± 5s) and the high sensitivity of -
162dBm allows us to have low power consumption. We have 
also integrated an accelerometer into the embedded card (an 
Analog Devices Inc ADXL345) measuring the tagged animal 
activity. It allows to know if the tracking collar falls to the 
ground : loose collar or dead animal.  
The GPS and GSM antennas of the AMBLoRa card were 
attached to the outside of the waterproof case using the collar. 
technology is used as wide area network wireless technology. 
We can use different frequency bands defined (US 928 
MHz, EU 863 MHz, China 787 MHz) ; it is a low power, long 
range and low data rate based technology developed with 
initiative by Semtech. 
 
 
 
Figure 5 : block diagram of the proposed wireless embedded card 
 
The main part of the embedded card is the microcontroller, 
a Microchip PIC24FJ128GA310. This block receives the 
location data from the GPS, codifies and transmits this 
information to the data base by using the LoRa transmitter.  
 
C. Autonomous LoRa Network 
All messages of the AMBLoRa card (ID, GPS position, 
accelerometer data, and time stamp) are transmitted to our 
servers via the LoRa network. We have deployed an antenna 
that covers the entire monitoring area. This antenna is 
autonomous in energy and communication network (Figure 6). 
This gateway module is based on a high-performance, low-
current Microchip RN2483. With a power supply of 3.6 V, the 
transceiver offers a sensitivity of -148 dBm and a maximum 
output power of +14 dBm, which allows long-distance 
communication at 868 MHz frequency. 
Figure 4 : GPS Collar on a young deer using LoRa communication 
Figure 3 : Sytem architecture 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
 
Figure 6 : autonomous LoRa antenna system 
 
The autonomous antenna system consists of a EPsolar 
LandStar LS1024B PWM Solar Battery Charge Controller 
10A 12/24V, a 25W solar panel, a lead acid battery 105Ah 12V 
and a Kerlink LoRa IoT Station. The Kerlink gateway uses the 
cellular network (2G/3G) to communicate with our servers 
[17].  
The components we have used allows us to have a LoRa 
network gateway that we can deploy in a natural environment 
without the need for a power supply or communication 
network. 
 
D. The relative real-time data vizualisation 
The supervision software is available as a web application 
enabling users and administrators, among other things, to 
visualize the position of their devices. We made the choice to 
build a web application because we needed to access our data 
at any time on the largest number of devices. It offers four 
different services called real time, alerts, history and 
administration interface. Because it is the easiest way to 
display positions data on a screen, all data displaying is based 
on interactive maps. We also provide tables whose data can be 
exported. 
The main purpose of the real time section is to display the 
latest position on the map of each individuals. We follow the 
positions of the fixed devices such as LoRa gateways are also 
available. Every target is represented by an interactive marker. 
The course shows the fifty latest positions as markers linked 
by lines that are dotted with arrows to indicate the direction.  
The Web application is able to compute received data to extract 
useful information. By analyzing the target positions, we are 
able to determine if it is in trouble or not : for example a deer 
which is not moving during twenty-four hours. With these 
computed data the web application can emit alerts. Once an 
alert is emitted the corresponding marker on the real time 
section turns to red and it is visible into the alert section with 
more details available. Users can check alerts via a table which 
lists all current alerts and can acknowledge it. At the moment 
the system is able to issue alerts regarding the targets, the 
devices equipping these targets and the LoRa antennas. The 
web application enables us to be aware of the state of our 
facilities. We created the history section to store data and 
extract old courses. 
The data produced by the devices must be stored to be 
accessible by the end users. We provide a very simple network 
architecture using two separate servers called respectively 
application server and database server. We used Laravel [18], 
a powerful and well documented PHP framework possessing a 
large community, to create both the web application and the 
API. 
The supervision software (Figure 7) is available as a web 
application enabling users and administrators, among other 
things, to visualize the position of their devices.  
 
 
Figure 7 : Real-time section with a selected target. Specific target 
information is displayed into the sidebar. Popup gives restricted information 
and offers the possibilities to display the recent course of the target 
 
We made the choice to build a web application because we 
needed to access our data at any time and on the largest number 
of mobile devices (smartphone). It offers four different 
services called real time, alerts, history and administration 
interface. 
IV. 
FIRST RESULTS 
In this part we present the first results of our 
experimentation according to two parts : data visualization 
and energy consumption.  
A. Data visualization 
 
The interpretation of the results is the last part of our work. 
We mainly worked with the historical section ; given that the 
deer was in a closed modest sized enclosure, it was not able to 
travel long distances. Its position belonging to a known 
interval, the real-time section was therefore useless. Hence we 
focused on studying its travels over short periods, ranging from 
1 to 2 days, as well as on determining the most frequented 
places. Choosing a maximum gap of 2 days ensues from an 
obvious constraint. Considering the selected data sending 
frequency, it was not possible using the map to study the 
movement of the animal on a larger period of time, on such a 
small area, as this resulted in a mass of points and lines that 
could not be interpreted. We will see afterwards that another 
technique has been favored. 
Nevertheless, as shown in the Figure 8, it is possible to 
study the animal behavior over the short term via our web 
application.  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

We can have a yellow point for each position of the dear 
after 10 minutes, determine a trajectory, and we can extract the 
history of a course for a post treatment of the data. For the 
longest periods of time, we have carried out a data export, still 
via our interface, in order to integrate them into a tools fitted 
software adapted to this amount of data. The following figure 
shows that it is not possible to extract a behavioral analysis 
from the raw data.  
 
 
Figure 8 : History section. The course of the deer between the 15th and the 
16th March 
 
We requested to display all the geolocation data collected 
for the deer. It did not give us any useful information, besides 
it overloaded the web application making it slower to run, 
degrading the user’s experience. We have found one of the 
limitations of using such a solution for animal tracking. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 9 : Data visualization (a) massive point representation (b) QGIS GIS 
analysis 
 
On the Figure 9, (a) shows a massive amount of points 
which are the whole positions that we collected during our 
experimentations. (b) shows the corresponding heat map 
generated via QGIS highlighting the most frequented location. 
In order to overcome these limitations we imported the data 
into the QGIS GIS software. This enabled to generate heat 
maps from the data. Thanks to this map, we would highlight 
two areas : the closest to the hut, symbolized in green, is the 
area where the animal was fed and the cleared glade.  
There are several advantages to have a real-time 
visualization of tracking data: 
• 
Possibility to acquire remote positions (as, for 
example, for VHF tracking), 
• 
Detection of abnormal behavior : short distance 
traveled, death of the animal, animal isolated from 
livestock, etc. 
• 
Be alerted if an animal get out of a virtual enclosure 
(rambling, flight, etc.) 
B. Energy consumption of AMBLoRa 
In this part we introduce the first elements of energy 
consumption approach. 
The Figure 10 shows the battery lifetime on the gateway 
and the charge level according to the sunshine. We can 
observe the robustness of the system. Figure 10 shows that the 
charge level of the battery used to power the LoRa gateway 
increases throughout the tracking, even if the sunshine is low 
for several days. 
 
 
Figure 10 : daily average of the charge level of the antenna battery 
according to the sunshine (gray) 
 
The energy consumption of the AMBLoRa card is an 
important issue for us. Our goal was to have a one year 
tracking time with one GPS location per hour. We can see on 
the Figure 11 the AMBLoRa battery life according to the 
number of GPS messages/hour. 
 
We measured the energy consumption of each component of 
the card when they are on, and also in standby. The GPS is the 
block that consumes the most during its fixed time with 90 to 
Figure 11 : Battery Lifetime of AMBLora 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

100 mA. The LoRa transmitter consumes 12.8 mA during 
sending 
and 
all other components 
(microcontroller, 
accelerometer, etc.) not more than 1.4 mA. In standby, the 
GPS consumes less than 40µA, the LoRa module between 30 
and 40µA, the microcontroller less than 10µA in "sleep-deep" 
mode and the accelerometer less than 1µA.  
These performances allow us to consider up to 5 GPS position 
transmissions per hour for a tracking period of one year. For 
1 GPS position transmission per hour, we can reach a follow-
up period of  2 years.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
AMBLoRa is a complete system that allows the researchers 
to visualize the relative real-time data from GPS tracking collar 
using LoRa communication, a designed low consumption 
support of communication. According to this first experiment, 
we conclude that AMBLoRa has achieved the four desired 
objectives : long range communication, low power 
consumption of the system, quick deployment and relative real 
time visualization. However we must enhance some 
parameters. 
We get a position after a certain amount of time ; we can 
consider that it is a relative real time ; we must reduce the send 
period to minimum. But, there will always be a delay due to all 
the processes involved in the sending and displaying chain.  
We only use one collar and it is essential to develop a 
massive experiment with more GPS trackers. 
The size of AMBLoRa is still too large and we must reduce 
its size. 
We must continue to reduce energy consumption, key of 
efficient animal tracking system. 
We need to switch towards a LoRaWAN protocol in order 
to integrate a Medium Access Control optimized secured 
communication. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Matthews, et al.  “The success of GPS collar 
deployments 
on 
mammals 
in 
Australia”. 
Australian 
Mammalogy 35, 2013, pp. 65-83. 
[2] M. Saari, A. Muzaffar bin Baharudin, P. Sillberg, S. 
Hyrynsalmi and W. Yan, “LoRa - A Survey of Recent 
Research 
Trends” 
41st 
International 
Convention 
on 
Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and 
Microelectronics Proceedings, Croatia, pp 1035-1040, 2018 
[3] D. H. Kim, J. B. Park, J. H. Shin, and J. D. Kim, “Design 
and implementation of object tracking system based on LoRa,” 
2017 International Conference on Information Networking 
(ICOIN), pp.463–467, 2017. 
[4] L. Li, J. Ren, and Q. Zhu, “On the application of LoRa 
LPWAN technology in Sailing Monitoring System,” 2017 
13th Annual Conference on Wireless On-Demand Network 
Systems and Services, WONS 2017 - Proceedings, pp. 77–80, 
2017. 
[5] W. San-Um, P. Lekbunyasin, M. Kodyoo, W. Wongsuwan, 
J. Makfak, and J. Kerdsri, “A long-range low-power wireless 
sensor network based on U-LoRa technology for tactical troops 
tracking systems,” in 2017 Third Asian Conference on 
Defence Technology (ACDT). IEEE, pp. 32–35, 2017 
[6] B. C. Fargas and M. N. Petersen, “GPS-free geolocation 
using LoRa in low-power WANs,” in 2017 Global Internet of 
Things Summit (GIoTS). IEEE, pp. 1–6, 2017. 
[7]http://sirtrack.co.nz/index.php/terrestrialmain/gps/collar 
retrieved: May 2018  
[8]https://www.telemetrysolutions.com/wildlife-tracking-
devices/gps-collars/ retrieved: April 2018 
[9] R. Zviedris, A. Elsts, G. Strazdins, A. Mednis, and L. 
Selavo. 2010. “LynxNet: wild animal monitoring using sensor 
networks.” In Proceedings of the 4th international conference 
on Real-world wireless sensor networks (REALWSN'10), 
2010, pp. 170-173. 
[10] P. Zhang, C. M. Sadler, S. A. Lyon and M. Martonosi, 
“Hardware design experiences in ZebraNet”, Proceedings of 
the 2nd international conference on Embedded networked 
sensor systems, November 03-05, 2004, Baltimore, MD, USA 
[11] R. Bagree, V. R. Jain, A. Kumar and P. Ranjan, 
“wildCENSE: 
GPS 
based 
animal 
tracking 
system” 
Proceedings of International Conference on Intelligent 
Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing, 2008. 
[12] E. D. Ayele, N. Meratnia and P. J. M. Havinga. “Towards 
A New Opportunistic IoT Network Architecture for Wildlife 
Monitoring System” Proceeding of 9th IFIP International 
Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security 
(NTMS), 2018, Paris, France.  
[13] N. Kidjo, et al. (2007). Extirpation and reintroduction of 
the Corsican red deer Cervus elaphus corsicanus in Corsica. 
Oryx, 41(4), 488. 
[14] http://www.pnr.corsica/grande-faune/ May 2018 
[15] LoRa Alliance. White Paper: A Technical Overview of 
Lora and Lorawan; The LoRa Alliance: San Ramon, CA, USA, 
2015 
[16] M. Printice, et al. Enabling Miniature Position Tracker 
Using LoRa and GPS Technology. European Conference on 
Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), Apr 2016, Davos, 
Switzerland. CS09.1: Antenna for IoT applications (2905-
2908), 2016, Proc. European Conference on Antennas and 
Propagation (EuCAP). 
[17] LoRa IoT Station 868 MHz - Kerlink | M2m : Solutions 
de communication machinetomachine. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/docs/gateways/kerlink/ 
(visited on Mar. 26 2018) 
[18] https://laravel.com/ retrieved: April 2018 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

