Advanced Street Lighting Control through Neural Network Ensembling 
 
Stefano Pizzuti, Fabio Moretti, Mauro Annunziato 
ENEA (Energy New technology and Environment Agency) 
Rome, Italy 
stefano.pizzuti@enea.it 
fabio.moretti@enea.it 
mauro.annunziato@enea.it 
 
Stefano Panzieri 
Università Roma Tre 
DIA (Department of Informatics and Automation) 
Rome, Italy 
panzieri@dia.uniroma3.it 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this work, we propose an innovative street 
lighting energy management system in order to reduce energy 
consumption. The main goal is to provide ‘energy on demand’ 
such that energy, in this case light, is provided only when 
needed. In order to achieve this purpose it is critical to have a 
reliable demand model, which in the case of street lighting 
turns out to be a traffic flow rate forecasting model. Several 
methods has been compared in order to find out one hour 
prediction model. In our case studies, Artificial Neural 
Networks performed best results. Moreover, several control 
strategies have been tested and the one which gave the best 
energy savings is the adaptive one we carried out. 
Experimentation has been carried out on two different case 
studies. In particular we focused our experimentation on 
public street of a small and a medium sized cities. Our studies 
show that with the proposed approach it is possible to save up 
to 50% of energy compared to no regulation systems 
Keywords-Lighting 
Efficiency; 
Energy 
Management 
Systems;  Adaptive Control; Neural-Network models 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since the first international recommendations for the 
lighting of roads [1], power consumption and environmental 
aspects have become more and more important and at the 
same time, the improved performance of luminaires and 
lamps, and especially the introduction of electronic control 
gears, has made it possible to introduce adaptive lighting for 
motorized roads and pedestrians areas. 
A structured model has been developed for the selection of 
the appropriate lighting classes [2] (M, C, or P), based on 
the luminance concept, taking into account the different 
parameters relevant for the given visual tasks. Applying for 
example time dependent variables like traffic volume or 
weather conditions, the model offers the possibility to use 
adaptive 
lighting 
systems 
with 
remarkable 
energy 
consumption savings and therefore high financial benefits 
for those municipalities [3] where street lighting is a high 
percentage of the electrical bill.   
Today, lighting control approaches ranges from simple 
on/off to regulation systems.  
On/off systems include timers, twilight and astronomical 
clocks. The first one is a static system which turns on and 
off street lights always according to fixed times. The second 
one has light-sensitive photocells to turn them on at dusk 
and off at dawn [5]. The third ones are GPS based street 
light controllers which operate the on/off of the street light 
according to the location features (longitude, latitude, 
sunrise, sunset times).  
Regulations systems are based on dimmable LED or high 
pressure sodium vapor lights [4] and allow to schedule 
lights on or off and set dimming levels of individual or 
groups of lights. 
All these systems have one common feature: they do not 
care about the real on-line demand and this is a source of 
high inefficiency.  
Thus, in order to overcome the main lack of the current 
regulation systems, it has recently started the new Intelligent 
Street Lighting (ISL) approach which looks very promising 
[5]-[6]. Therefore, here we propose an ISL approach (Smart 
Adaptive Control) based on the concept of „energy on 
demand‟, whose goal is to dynamically set the light intensity 
as function of the foreseen demand, namely the traffic flow 
rate 1 hour forecast. 
Thus, in such context the demand model has a critical role 
and its accuracy strongly affects the performance of the 
regulation system.    
In the last decade, one of the most widely used method in 
order to solve modeling problems is that of Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANN) [7]-[8]. In particular, traffic flow 
forecasting issue has been tackled through ANN since the 
nineties [9]-[19]. As example, among the most recent work 
[19] focuses on traffic flow forecasting approach based on 
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) with Wavelet Network 
Model (WNM). Pamula [16] reviews neural networks 
applications in urban traffic management systems and 
presents a method of traffic flow prediction based on neural 
networks. Bucur et al. [17] proposes the use of a self-
adaptive fuzzy neural network for traffic prediction 
suggesting an architecture which tracks probability 
distribution drifts due to weather conditions, season, or 
other factors.  
All the mentioned applications have one feature in common: 
they use one single global model in order to perform the 
prediction. Our approach is to use not only one model but an 
ensemble of models. In Section II an overview of modeling 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

methods used is given, in particular statistical and Artificial 
Neural Network based models and their combination trough 
ensembling. In Section III we show results obtained on two 
case studies and then in Section IV we discuss future works. 
II. 
MODELING METHODS 
In this section, we shortly describe the modeling and control 
techniques we compared in the experimentation.  
 
A. Statistical Modeling 
One the simplest and most widely used model is to build an 
average weekly distribution of the traffic flow rate sampled 
hourly. Thus, from the data we compute for each day the 
average traffic flow rate hour by hour in such a way that we 
get an average distribution made of 24X7=168 points. 
B. Artificial Neural Networks 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) are computational 
models which try to simulate some properties of biological 
neural networks in order to solve complex modeling 
problems of non-linear systems. An ANN is an 
interconnected group of artificial neurons (called also 
nodes) that uses a mathematical or computational model for 
information processing based on a connectionistic approach 
to computation. In more practical terms ANN are non-linear 
data modeling or decision making tools which can be used 
to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs 
or to find patterns in data. ANN are referred also as black-
box or data-driven models and they are mainly used when 
analytical or transparent models cannot be applied. Building 
such models needs several stages as input analysis and 
training through algorithms which minimize the error 
between the real values to be modeled and the ANN output. 
ANN demonstrated their effectiveness in modeling many 
real-world applications.  
Once we model an ANN model, we must take into account 
three basic components. First, the synapses of the biological 
neuron are modeled as weights. Let us remember that the 
synapse of the biological neuron is the one which 
interconnects the neural network and gives the strength of 
the connection. For an artificial neuron, the weight is a 
number, and represents the synapse. A negative weight 
reflects an inhibitory connection, while positive values 
designate 
excitatory 
connections. 
The 
following 
components of the model represent the actual activity of the 
neuron cell. All inputs are summed altogether and modified 
by the weights. This activity is referred as a linear 
combination. Finally, an activation function controls the 
amplitude of the output. Mathematically, this process is 
described in Figure 1. From this model the activity of the 
neuron can be shown to be: 
y=fa(wixi - )                                        (1) 
where  is a threshold called BIAS (Basic Input Activation 
System) which identifies the sensitivity of the neuron to 
respond to the external inputs. The most common function 
used to model fa are the hyperbolic tangent, the sigmoid and 
the linear function. 
 
Figure  1. Artificial Neuron Model 
 
Therefore each unit performs a relatively simple job: receive 
input from neighbors or external sources and use this to 
compute an output signal which is propagated to other units. 
Apart from this processing, a second task is the adjustment 
of the weights. The system is inherently parallel in the sense 
that many units can carry out their computations at the same 
time. Within neural systems it is useful to distinguish three 
types of units: input units which receive data from outside 
the neural network, output units which send data out of the 
neural network, and hidden units whose input and output 
signals remain within the network.  
The way units are connected defines the network topology 
or architecture. In the past years, many of them have been 
studied and the most widely used and is the feed-forward 
one. In this network structure, neurons are grouped into 
layers. There are at least two layers, the input and the 
output, which gather the corresponding input and output 
variables. This basic structure is also known as perceptron 
[20]. 
 
 
Figure  2. Feed-forward neural network topology 
 
Moreover, in order to let the model cope with non-linear 
problems, it is possible to add one or more intermediate 
layers, known as hidden layers. These models are also 
known as multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) [21]. 
The flow of data from input to output units is strictly in one 
direction (forward). The data processing can extend over 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

multiple (layers of) units, but no feedback connections are 
present, that is, connections extending from outputs of units 
to inputs of units in the same layer or previous layers. 
 
C. Ensembling 
The term „ensemble‟ describes a group of learning machines 
that work together on the same task, in the case of ANN 
they are trained on some data, run together and their outputs 
are combined as a single one. The goal is obtain better 
predictive performance than could be obtained from any of 
the constituent models. 
 
 
Figure 3. Ensembling 
 
In the last years several ensembling methods have been 
carried out [22],[23],[24]. The first one, also known as Basic 
Ensemble Method (BEM), is the simplest way to combine 
M neural networks as an arithmetic mean of their outputs yi. 
This method can improve the global performance [25],[26] 
although it does not takes into account that some models can 
be more accurate than others. This method has the 
advantage to be very easy to apply. 
A direct BEM extension is the Generalised Ensemble 
Method (GEM) [25],[26] in which the outputs of the single 
models are combined in a weighted average where the 
weights have to be properly set, sometimes after an 
expensive tuning process. 
Other methods are Bootstrap AGGregatING (BAGGING) 
[27] and Adaboost [28],[29]. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTATIONS 
In this section, we test and compare the methods presented 
in the previous sections. We used two test cases: one has 
concerned Terni  and the second regards S.Giovanni in 
Persiceto.  
In the first one, we focused on three different urban streets 
of Terni (Table I). The data set is made of 3 months (13 
weeks) of measurement corresponding to 2184 hourly 
samples. The data set has been partitioned into 
training/testing and validation made respectively of 10 and 3 
weeks each. 
 
 
TABLE I. STREET FEATURES 
 
Maximum traffic flow rate 
Street 1 
600 
Street 2 
800 
Street 3 
950 
A. Modeling 
The basic idea is to set the power level of the following hour 
as function of the ANN ensemble forecast. 
 
Pt+1 = f (t+1) 
 
 
      (2) 
 
where Pt+1 is the power level normalized in [0,1] to be set 
for the next hour, t+1 is the traffic flow rate neural forecast 
which is 
 
t+1 = anne(t, t-1,… , t-n)                    (3) 
 
where anne is the ANN ensemble result, t-i is the measured 
traffic flow rate at time t-i. 
For Street lighting applications function f in (2) can be 
shaped in different ways, among these we applied a linear 
profile although international standards [2] suggest a non-
linear one that we will apply in future work. 
 
If k< 0.25 then f = 0.5 
If k> 0.5 then f = 1 
Else f = 2k 
 
 
      (4)
 
 
where k is the predicted traffic flow rate at time k (3) 
normalized in [0,1]. 
The ANN are feed-forward MLP with 10 hidden neurons 
and one output (the one hour flow forecast) with sigmoid as 
activation function for all the neurons. The number of inputs 
is the same of the dynamics window length (3) and it has 
been chosen with a preliminary analysis by calculating the 
validation prediction error, after the ensembling stage, for 
different number of hourly samples (Table II). Since we 
obtained the minimum prediction error with a time window 
of eight hours, we chose the same number of inputs for the 
ANN, representing the length of time history window. So 
each input contains the traffic flow of one of eight hours of 
the time window. 
Training has been performed through the Back-Propagation 
algorithm with adaptive learning rate and momentum 
stopping after 108 iterations and a „save best‟ strategy to 
avoid overfitting.  The reported results are averaged over 10 
different runs (with standard deviation in brackets) and the 
ensemble is therefore made by the same 10 models. 
The reported errors are measured as: 
 
e = |x-y|/(M-m)                                       (5) 
 
Where x is the real value to be predicted, y is the output 
model, M is the real maximum value and m is the minimum. 
 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
TABLE II. WINDOW HISTORY LENGTH (HOURS) SELECTION 
Number of 
Samples 
Street 1 
Street 2 
Street 3 
3 
5.72% 
6.88% 
5.81% 
5 
3.9% 
5.07% 
3.99% 
8 
3.29% 
3.43% 
3.02% 
10 
3.54% 
4.12% 
3.74% 
 
At last, Table III shows the comparison of the models 
considered in this work in terms of prediction accuracy over 
the validation set. Figure 4 shows a graphical comparison. 
We compared real hourly traffic flow rate with prediction 
provided from statistical and neural network ensemble 
models. Ensemble models outperforms statistical in all 
cases. 
 
TABLE III. MODEL COMPARISON 
 
Statistic 
ANN 
ANN 
Ensembling 
Street 1 
5.90%  
3.74%  
(±0.10%) 
3.29% 
Street 2 
5.56% 
3.48%  
(±0.09%) 
3.02% 
Street 3 
7.14%  
4.00%  
(±0.10%) 
3.43% 
Average 
6.20% 
3.74%  
(±0.10%) 
3.25% 
 
From this analysis it is clear that in general the ensembling 
approach outperforms the statistical approach providing a 
remarkable improvement in prediction accuracy. Such level 
of precision is very important when dealing with 
applications like traffic and lighting control where the 
higher the model accuracy is the more effective the control 
system is.  
 
 
Figure  4. Models comparison 
 
From this graph it is clear that the ANN ensemble model 
performs much better than the statistical model because, 
when out of normal conditions the ANN ensembling takes 
into account the real traffic dynamics (3). 
 
B. Control 
In this section, we compare the results of the Static Control 
(StaC) and the Smart Adaptive Control (SmAC) introduced 
in Section III.  
In the experimentation we calculated the energy saving of 
the two methods with respect to the no-regulation strategy, 
namely when lights are always on at 100% of their power 
for the whole night. 
The light on demand control assumes dimmable lights (SAP 
or LED), on the streets we carried out this study there were 
no such lamps and data about the real consumptions were 
not available, therefore the experimentation has been carried 
out 
off-line 
by 
calculating 
the 
potential 
energy 
consumptions in the following way. It has been assumed the 
maximum hourly nominal power consumption to be one, 
then the following quantities have been calculated : 
 
C100 = ∑x1
i , x10 , 1 
 
      (6) 
 
Where x1
i  is the hourly power level for the ith sample 
according to the no control strategy (night power level 
always at 100%) and therefore C100 is its overall 
consumption. 
 
CStaC = ∑x2
i  , x20 , 0.5 , 1               (7) 
 
Where x2
i  is the hourly power level for the ith sample 
according to the static control (StaC) strategy (Fig. 4) and 
therefore CStaC is its overall consumption. 
 
CSmAC = ∑x3
i  , x3 [0 , 1]  
      (8) 
 
Where x3
i  is the hourly power level for the ith sample (4) 
according to the smart adaptive control (SmAC) strategy 
(Fig. 5) and therefore CSmAC is its overall consumption. 
These quantities have been calculated over three months of 
actual traffic flow rates obtained by on street coil sensors. 
Thus, we computed the consumption saving of the StaC and 
SmAC strategies with respect to the no control approach in 
the following way : 
 
SStaC= 1 - CStaC / C100  
 
      (9) 
SSmAC= 1 - CSmAC / C100 
 
    (10) 
 
In Table IV, we report these values for the three considered 
streets. 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
TABLE IV. CONTROL STRATEGY COMPARISON: ENERGY 
SAVING 
 
StaC 
SmAC 
Street 1 
25% 
44.5% 
Street 2 
25% 
47% 
Street 3 
25% 
37.5% 
Average 
25% 
43% 
 
 
Results show that it is possible to save on average 43% of 
energy, meaning that lamps will work at 57% of their 
nominal power having as inferior limit 50% (4) and Fig. 5 in 
order to avoid periods during normal operation with almost 
no light due to light output drop.     
 
From these results it is clear that the SmAC approach 
provides a remarkable improvement in terms of energy 
saving (43% on average) in particular on streets with 
medium-low traffic flow rate. 
Moreover, in Figure 5 it is shown an example of how the 
two strategies work, where on the Y axis we report the 
normalized traffic flow rate values and the normalized 
hourly power consumptions of the different strategies. From 
Figure 5 it is possible to see that the SmAC strategy is 
capable to follow the real demand (traffic flow rate) 
achieving the „energy on demand‟ concept. In particular, it 
is interesting to point out that SmAC improves not only 
energy efficiency (orange dotted area) but also safety 
(yellow dashed area) because it provides light when actually 
needed.     
 
 
Figure  5. Control strategy comparison 
 
Tests performed on S.Giovanni in Persiceto are based on a 
dataset of 123 days, sampled hourly, for a total of 2952 
hours. Once again we compared different forecasting 
system: 
 
Actual hour: next traffic flow prediction based on 
previous hour traffic flow 
 
Previous week: forecast based on the same hour 
and the same week day of the previous week 
 
Statistic model: averaged hourly profile 
 
Neural Ensembling: neural network ensembling 
based model 
 
TABEL V. COMPARISON OF FORECASTING MODELS ERRORS 
 
Actual 
Hour. 
Previous 
week 
Statistic 
model 
Neural 
Ensembling 
Error 
8.77% 
7% 
5.53% 
4.39% 
 
Results show that also in this case Neural Ensemble 
outperforms other methods. 
Then we compared three different control described above: 
constant, static and adaptive. As shown in Fig. 6 constant 
control does not take in account the traffic flow, static 
control does not overcome the variability of traffic flow 
meanwhile adaptive control provide energy to lighting spot 
proportional to traffic flow. 
 
Figure  6. Comparison of control strategies 
 
 
TABLE VI. CONTROL STRATEGY COMPARISON (ENERGY 
SAVING) 
Static Control 
Adaptive Control 
-12% 
-34% 
Energy saving show in Table VI is a theoretical evaluation 
respect of constant control.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this work, we proposed a new approach for adaptive 
street lighting control based on the „energy on demand‟ 
idea. In order to achieve this goal it is critical to have a 
reliable demand model, which in the case of street lighting 
turns out to be a traffic flow rate forecasting model.  
Thus, we showed a modeling approach based on Artificial 
Neural Networks Ensembling in order to provide a one hour 
forecast of urban traffic flow rates. Experimentation has 
been carried out on three different classes of real streets and 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

results showed that the proposed approach clearly 
outperforms the statistical methods (6% prediction error) 
achieving a 3% prediction error. The reason for that is that 
the neural ensembling model is capable to provide more 
reliable estimations when out of standard conditions because 
it considers the real traffic dynamics. 
Moreover, the proposed adaptive control strategy has 
been tested and compared to a traditional regulation system 
on the same streets. Results showed that the adaptive control 
provides, on average, energy savings almost doubled (43% 
vs 25%). 
Future work will firstly focus on dimming profiles 
according to international standards, then further modeling 
improvements 
(using 
more 
sophisticated 
ensembling 
methods as well as trying to develop hybrid models) will be 
investigated and lastly, the economic impact of the proposed 
methodology will be carried out. 
Moreover further forecasting model can be taken in account 
in order to validate the quality of results obtained.   
REFERENCES 
 
[1] CIE 115, “Recommendations for the Lighting of Roads for 
Motor and Pedestrian Traffic”, 1995. 
[2] CIE 115, “Lighting of Roads for Motor and Pedestrian 
Traffic”, 2010. 
[3] Transport, 
Environmental 
and 
community 
services 
committee. 
“Reducing 
Energy 
Consumption 
- 
Street 
Lighting”. Report No TEC/87/08. The Highland Council, 
2008.  
[4] M.S.Rea, J.D. Bullough, Y. Akashi, "Several views of metal 
halide and high pressure sodium lighting for outdoor 
applications". Lighting Research and Technology. p. 41(4): 
pp. 297–320, 2009. 
[5] “Intelligent Street Lighting Saves Up to 80% On Energy” , 
ScienceDaily, July 2011. 
[6] “New System of Intelligent Management of Street Lighting 
Enables 80% Savings in Energy” , ScienceDaily, November 
2011. 
[7] M.A. Arbib.  The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural 
Networks, The MIT Press, Cambridge (MA), 1995. 
[8] S. Haykin. Neural Networks, “A comprehensive foundation" 
(2nd edition), Neural Networks, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 
1995. 
[9] D. Canca, J. Larrañeta, S. Lozano, L.Onieva, “Traffic 
intensity forecast in urban networks using a multilayer 
perceptron”. Joint International Meeting,  Barcelona 1997. 
[10] M.S. Dougherty and M.Cobbett, “Short term inter-urban 
traffic forecasts using neural networks”. Proc. Second 
DRIVE-II Workshop on Short-Term Traffic Forecasting, 
Delft, The Netherlands, pp. 65-79, 1994. 
[11] S.Ishak, P. Kotha, C.Alecsandru, “Optimization of Dynamic 
Neural Network Performance for Short-Term Traffic 
Prediction”. In Transportation Research Record, 1836,  pp. 
45-56. 2003. 
[12] D. Park, L.R. Rilett, G. Han  “Spectral Basis Neural Networks 
for Real-Time Travel Time Forecasting”, Journal of 
Transportation Engineering 125(6), 1999, pp. 515-523. 
[13] C. Taylor and D.Meldrum, “Freeway traffic data prediction 
using neural networks”.  Proc. 6th VNIS Conference, Seattle, 
WA, pp. 225-230, 1995. 
[14] J.W.C. Van Lint, S.P.  Hoogendoorn, H.J. Van Zuylen, 
“Freeway Travel time Prediction with State-Space Neural 
Networks”, 
National 
Academies 
Press, 
Transportation 
Research Record 1811, pp. 30-39, , Washington D.C., 2003. 
[15] W.Zheng, L. Der-Horng, Q.Shi, “Short-Term Freeway Traffic 
Flow Pre-diction: Bayesian Combined Neural Network 
Approach”, Journal of Transportation Engineering, 2006, pp. 
114-121. 
[16] T. Pamula,“Road traffic parameters prediction in urban traffic 
management systems using neural networks”, Transport 
Problems, Volume 6 Issue 3, 2011, pp. 123-128. 
[17] L. Bucur, A.Florea, B.S.Petrescu, “An adaptive fuzzy neural 
network for traffic prediction”, Control & Automation 
(MED), 18th Mediterranean Conference , Marrakech, pp. 
1092 – 1096, 2011. 
[18] B.G. Çetiner, M.Sari, Q.Borat, ”A neural network based 
traffic 
flow 
prediction 
model”, 
Mathematical 
and 
Computational Applications, Vol. 15, No. 2, 2010, pp. 269-
278. 
[19] S.Jawanjal, P. Bajaj, “A design approach to traffic flow 
forecasting with soft computing tools”, Emerging Trends in 
Engineering and Technology (ICETET), 3rd International 
Conference, pp. 81-84, Goa, 2010. 
[20] F. Rosenblatt, “The perceptron: a perceiving and recognizing 
automaton”. 
Report 
85-460-1, 
Cornell 
Aeronautical 
Laboratory, 1957. 
[21] F. Rosenblatt, “Principles of neurodynamics: perceptrons and 
the theory of brain mechanisms”. Spartan Books, Washington 
D.C.,1961. 
[22] A. Krogh, J. Vedelsby, “Neural network ensembles, cross 
validation and active learning”, Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems, 7, pp. 231-238, MIT Press, 
1995. 
[23] Y. Liu, X. Yao, “Ensemble learning via negative correlation”, 
Neural Networks, 12(10), 1999, pp. 1399-1404. 
[24] L. Breiman, “Combining Predictors”, Combining Artificial 
Neural Nets - Ensemble and Modular Multi-net Systems, 
Springer, Berlin, pp. 31-50, 1999. 
[25] M.P. Perrone and L.N. Cooper, “When networks disagree: 
ensemble methods for hybrid neural networks”. Neural 
Networks for Speech and Image Processing, Chapman-Hall, 
1993. 
[26] C.M. Bishop, “Neural networks for pattern recognition”. 
Oxford University Press, pp. 364-369, 1995. 
[27] R. Kohavi and E. Bauer, “An empirical comparison of voting 
classification algorithms: Bagging, boosting and variants”, 
Machine Learning, 36 , 1999, pp. 105 - 142. 
[28] H. 
Drucker, 
“Improving 
regressors 
using 
boosting 
techniques”, 
Machine 
Learning, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Fourteenth International Conference, pp. 107-115, 1997. 
[29] R. Avnimelech and N. Intrator, “Boosting regression 
estimators”. Neural Computation, 11, 1999, pp. 491-513. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

