WADcher: a Unified Web Accessibility Assessment Framework 
 
Aggeliki Spyrou1, Nikolaos Kaklanis1, Dimitrios Tzovaras1, Yehya Mohamad2, Henrike Gappa2, Carlos A 
Velasco2, Martin Breidenbach2, Serena Caria3, Fabio Paternò3, Francesca Pulina3 
1Information Technologies Institute, Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, 6th Klm. Charilaou-Thermi Road, 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
email: {aspyrous, nkak, Dimitrios.Tzovaras}@iti.gr 
2Fraunhofer Institute for applied Information Technology (FIT), Schloss Birlinghoven, 53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany 
email: {yehya.mohamad, henrike.gappa, carlos.velasco, martin.breidenbach} @fit.fraunhofer.de 
3 CNR -ISTI, Human Interfaces in Information Systems Laboratory, 56124 Pisa, Italy 
email: {serena.caria, fabio.paterno, francesca.pulina}@isti.cnr.it 
  
 
Abstract— This paper presents the architecture of Web 
Accessibility 
Directive 
Decision 
Support 
Environment 
(WADcher), a unified web accessibility assessment framework 
for large-scale assessment of compliance against web 
accessibility recommendations and legislations. It aims to 
provide customized support for various user groups like web 
commissioners, web developers and accessibility experts. To 
achieve this, the WADcher platform offers tools and interfaces 
like an Observatory for visualization of the assessment results, 
a Decision Support Environment for expert reviews and 
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) to existing tools. 
Keywords- web accessibility; WCAG; WAD; web accessibility 
standards; EARL. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The web is a fundamental resource related with many 
aspects of daily life, e.g., work, leisure, education, commerce 
and social networking. Beyond this, access to services 
offered through the web provided by public authorities is 
important for all citizens to stay informed, interact with 
authorities, fulfill obligations and apply for benefits. To 
ensure access for disabled, elderly and other disadvantaged 
persons to websites and mobile applications of public 
authorities and essential web resources of the private sector, 
the EU Web Accessibility Directive (WAD) on the 
“accessibility of the websites and mobile applications of 
public sector bodies” came into force on 26/10/2016 [11]. 
The WAD’s accessibility requirements describe what must 
be achieved to enable the user to be able to perceive, operate, 
interpret and understand a website, a mobile application and 
related content. WAD aims to ensure that the websites and 
mobile applications of the public sector are made accessible 
on the basis of internationally acknowledged accessibility 
requirements. 
When aiming for web accessibility, it is inevitable to 
establish procedures to analyse how well the web can be 
used by people with different disabilities, i.e., assess the 
accessibility status of a website. Having an automated way to 
assess the accessibility of web pages opens the way to 
perform large-scale analysis of web accessibility [5][6]. 
Large-scale accessibility evaluations of the Web are not yet 
well established. This may be due to the dependency of 
computational resources for large-scale analysis [1][7]. 
Current assessment tools have a number of limitations, 
among others, they cannot detect all issues, manual checking 
with accessibility experts is still needed [9]. Moreover, the 
majority of current automatic accessibility assessment tools 
does not produce results in a standardized machine-readable 
format as Evaluation and Report Language (EARL) [12]. 
To push forward efforts in making web sites accessible 
European-wide, monitoring of the accessibility status of 
particularly public web sites by the EU has become part of 
WAD. For this purpose, the European funded research 
project WADcher aims to develop an integrated platform to 
verify the compliance of  websites and mobile applications 
of public sector bodies with the accessibility requirements set 
out in the WAD, and subsequent Commission implementing 
decisions on monitoring methodologies [13] and model 
accessibility statements [14]. WADcher will provide APIs to 
automatic web accessibility assessment tools, so any third- 
party tool can be connected to WADcher by just using the 
corresponding APIs.  The WADcher platform will provide 
support to conduct automatic assessment using any tool that 
is registered and supports the published WADcher APIs. 
Additionally, WADcher will provide a workbench to support 
manual checking conducted by accessibility experts and the 
production of customized reports for different target user 
groups in a standardized machine-readable EARL format. 
The WADcher system is built on proven state-of-the-art 
accessibility assessment tools and will provide an easy-to-
use, 
cost-effective, 
harmonised 
accessibility 
periodic 
monitoring platform that is transparent, transferable, 
comparable and reproducible to meet the European standard 
EN 301 549 V1.1.2 (2015-04) [15] as specified in the WAD. 
WADcher will provide a management layer that supports 
assessment and tracking of the accessibility requirements set 
out in the WAD.  
The Directive encourages both Member States and the 
Commission to promote use of such compatible tools. This 
paper elaborates on the following aspects: the state of the art 
of tools for accessibility validation, also considering studies 
conducted in WADcher to gather user requirements, the 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-692-7
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

main use cases identified for the pilots of WADcher and the 
general design and architecture. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the carried-out State of the Art Analysis. Section 
III describes the user requirements collected from users in 
specific 
countries. 
Section 
IV 
addresses 
WADcher 
architecture approach. Section V provides details about the 
use cases.  The acknowledgement and conclusions close the 
article. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART ANALYSIS 
In order to review the state of art in WADcher among the 
many tools available to developers for assessing the 
accessibility of websites, various open tools as well as well-
known commercial solutions for web accessibility services 
were examined. As a first source of information the list of 
tools provided by the W3C Consortium was considered, 
focusing first on those that check compliance against the 
WCAG 2.0 guidelines and support at least the English 
language (so, we have excluded tools like Hera FFX [1] and 
Vamolà [8], for example). Then, we looked at those 
supporting analysis of at least both (X) HTML and CSS, and 
covered most guidelines (thus we discarded those 
considering for example only colors) and that are freely 
accessible, available either online or as desktop applications. 
On the commercial side, we examined various tools such as 
those offered by imergo [10], Deque Systems [16], 
Siteimprove [17] and Make Sense [18]. The analysis 
conducted considers also the free Deque plugins for Chrome 
and Firefox – aXe plugins [19] – and the Siteimprove 
Accessibility checker for Chrome [20]. 
In addition to supporting WCAG 1.0 and WCAG 2.0, 
some of the considered tools allow web designers and 
developers to check the accessibility against additional 
national guidelines: MAUVE [1][3], for example, enables 
the user to select the Stanca Act for the assessment; 
Asqatasun the French guidelines (RGAA); AChecker [22] 
and imergo the guidelines of the German government 
(BITV); Siteimprove extends the available guidelines to the 
Japanese Industry Standard (JIS).  
When analyzing the tools’ features, various technical 
aspects were considered: firstly, the audit depth, that is the 
assessment scope (if tools can assess single web pages and/or 
entire websites, and also password protected pages); 
secondly, the type of input needed (e.g., URL, file upload, 
directly entered code). We have also checked if they allow 
the customization of accessibility audits, for example if the 
developer can specify the guidelines or their priority level for 
the assessment. 
Moreover, focus on the presentation of test results was 
given. First, we identified the report type: if it is mainly 
code-oriented, statistical, or graphical (or a mix of these). 
Then, we looked at the differentiation they make between 
different types of problems: errors, warnings, potential 
problems and information that usually require additional 
manual check. In the end, we observed both the summarizing 
overview and the full report of the assessment that they 
provide, and the kind of filtering that it is possible to apply to 
the results in order to get specific information. 
Among free accessibility assessment tools, Asqatasun, 
TAW Web [23], the A11Y Machine [24], WaaT [2] allow 
the web designer/developer to evaluate more than a single 
web page at a time (Total Validator [25] allow to evaluate 
entire websites in the Pro version). The assessment scope of 
the commercial services is extended to more than one web 
page at a time, except for Deque’s Amaze [26]. The 
extension of MAUVE to evaluation of multiple pages at the 
same time is under development. 
Customization of accessibility audits is supported by the 
majority of the free tools (9 out of 12): AChecker, 
Asqatasun, Cynthia Says, imergo, MAUVE, TAW Web, the 
A11Y Machine, Total Validator, and WaaT. However, there 
are different levels of customization: some of them allow the 
selection of the preferred guidelines only (among those 
supported) while others allow also the selection of the 
priority level of the guidelines. 
Regarding the presentation of the assessment results, a 
summarizing overview is mostly supported, which provides 
the total number of issues encountered, divided into the 
different kinds of problems found during assessment (errors, 
warnings, info/potential problems,), and some kind of 
filtering is also possible at this stage. Moreover, some of the 
tools – such as MAUVE, which is code oriented – provide 
the entire source code with errors and warnings highlighted, 
and each problem has a link to the corresponding W3C 
success criteria and techniques description. 
The majority of the tools do not provide visualization of 
the errors/warnings on rendered web page, since they are 
mostly code-oriented. WAVE is the only free tool that 
provides this kind of report, even if it provides also the 
pinpointing of problems in the source code. Regarding 
commercial solutions, Deque’s aXe browser extensions 
allows the developer to highlight issues on the running web 
page; Siteimprove extension provides this kind of 
pinpointing too. Thanks to its customised rendering engine, 
imergo® provides a detailed analysis of the accessibility 
issues of a website as perceived by the user in a browser. 
The A11Y Machine, Siteimprove Intelligence Platform 
and WorldSpace Comply [27] provide, in the full report, a 
dashboard 
that 
keeps 
tracks 
of 
the 
accessibility 
improvements, allowing the monitoring of the accessibility 
status over time. As regards other more specific information 
provided in the full reports, only the A11Y Machine 
provides the pinpointing of problems in the DOM.  
All the tools analyzed provide some sort of filtering of 
the results: among them, we found that Asqatasun is the only 
one that provides the filtering of reports by Web content 
type. An interesting feature offered by Siteimprove – both 
the Intelligence Platform and the browser extensions – is the 
possibility to filter the results taking into account the role of 
the user (Editor, Webmaster, and Developer). Deque 
Systems, instead, offers different services, each one tailored 
on the accessibility competence of the user: for example, 
Amaze is thought for developers who are not accessibility 
experts, while comply is addressed to accessibility managers 
and experts. 
From our analysis, we can identify three main findings. 
Firstly, reports provided are mainly code-oriented: the 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-692-7
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

visualization of fails and warnings on the rendered web page 
is a feature that could be useful for not accessibility experts 
and commissioners, who are not primarily interested into 
details related to the code to be fixed. Another feature that is 
not frequently supported is the locating of accessibility issues 
in the DOM that, on the other hand, is an information that 
could be useful for accessibility experts and developers. 
Secondly, other useful features that are not currently 
supported are related to the filtering of the results. In the 
summarizing overviews, it is always provided filtering by 
status of the issues and by priority level of the guidelines, but 
the possibility of filtering issues by web content type is never 
given to users. This kind of filtering could be provided also 
in the full report, as Asqatasun does. It would allow web 
developers and accessibility experts to better manage their 
work of fixing errors, by considering problems related to an 
aspect at a time. The last missing feature that we can point 
out is the possibility to filter the full report by the frequencies 
of the errors detected (e.g., single or common issues); as for 
the web content type filtering, it could be useful especially 
for the accessibility experts’ audience.  
WADcher aims to provide developers, designers, 
accessibility experts and policy makers an integrated and 
personalised web accessibility support environment by also 
addressing the aforementioned issues of existing tools.  
III. 
USER REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS 
The design of the WADcher framework is based on both 
analysis of existing tools, as presented in previous section, 
and the needs of target users. In order to identify and analyse 
the needs of the various target users involved, we carried out 
three main requirements elicitation activities: questionnaires, 
interviews and a workshop. In particular, for the 
questionnaires, 148 people across five countries (Ireland, 
Italy, Greece, Austria, and Germany) filled in the provided 
online questionnaires. As for the interviews, one interview 
was done in Germany and it involved a web content author/ 
accessibility expert; other two interviews were conducted in 
Italy and involved a web content editor and a web editorial 
staff member. In addition, a workshop was organized in 
which about forty people composed of mainly web 
developers, content writers and accessibility experts 
participated. 
A first general consideration is that people involved in 
our elicitation activities have limited knowledge of 
accessibility assessment tools, and they usually encounter 
difficulties in considering both accessibility and evaluating it 
in their projects. Regarding web commissioners, if they do 
not take into account accessibility is because of lacking 
knowledge and competences, and lack of time and resources. 
Web developers and accessibility experts, instead, cannot 
work towards ensuring that websites and application meet 
the accessibility standards because of commissioner’s 
imposition, lack of time, knowledge and for budget 
limitations. 
When working to ensure accessibility with the automatic 
assessment tools, the main difficulties regard the inclusion of 
dynamic content in the evaluation process, the restrictions 
imposed by Content Management Systems, and some 
limitations of such tools, such as: the detection of several 
false positives; they do not perform a thorough check (often 
not all guidelines are covered); the limited guidance on how 
to fix the detected issues, and more and clearer information 
(explanation, suggestions, examples) about the errors is 
desirable. 
Based on their knowledge of available accessibility 
assessment tools, they recommended the features they would 
expect from them. Among those, the following were 
indicated: adaptation of the report to the technical level of 
the user, by providing one more technical report addressed to 
developers, and one addressed to commissioners and content 
authors; analysis of dynamic content, suggestion for 
JavaScript frameworks and libraries; giving a percentage 
measure of the overall accessibility level reached. 
IV. 
WADCHER FRAMEWORK ARCHITECTURE 
The core components of the WADcher framework were 
designed by taking into account the requirements presented 
in the previous section and they can be split into four logical 
layers (See Figure 1. ). 
The knowledge layer includes all the knowledge/data 
needed for the proper functioning of the large scale 
components (e.g., list of web sites to be evaluated, guidelines 
and policies to be considered in web accessibility 
assessment, rule sets, etc.) as well as the knowledge/results 
that will be extracted (e.g., ontologies [28] that describe the 
guidelines of WCAG 2.x and ARIA standards in a semantic 
manner, etc.). 
The service layer includes all the core software 
components of the large-scale cloud-based architecture. This 
layer includes an Evaluation manager component that 
interacts with the registered tools (Imergo, MAUVE and 
WaaT) and the WADcher knowledge base, it also contains 
the Test sample definer that creates automatically test 
samples based on methodologies like, e.g., UWEM [3], 
which are limited either by the number of maximum pages or 
the focus on a specific technical aspect (e.g., certain web
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-692-7
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Figure 1.  WADcher’s architecture overview 
content types). The Rule Selector allows the user to 
select the rule set or subset of rules to be used for the 
validation of the testing sample. Through the Project 
manager component, the user defines the properties 
needed for a project which can be run multiple times 
having receptive versions. By that, the monitoring of a 
website at different times became possible. 
Then, the results from Evaluation manager are 
provided 
to 
the 
Automatic 
Web 
Accessibility 
Assessment component, which contains all the available 
tools (imergo, MAUVE and WaaT) and performs the 
evaluation which produces an EARL report that is 
provided to the Decision Support Environment and the 
Observatory modules. 
The Decision Support Environment (DSE) aims at 
empowering accessibility experts who conduct expert 
reviews and web commissioner to govern the accessibility 
policy, statements, etc. in order to achieve this it contains 
components like, the Results viewer component which 
presents the results to the user and provides assistance in 
solving detected issues, through solutions, examples and 
informations about the technology related to the issue. The 
Results filter provides filtering and grouping options (e.g., 
errors, cannot tells, web content type) for the results 
presented in Results viewer and Source code viewer, in 
addition the Source code viewer component provides 
access to the source code of the evaluated URL and 
enables the user to find issues inside the source code as 
well as on a rendered preview. Furthermore, the Feedback 
manager enables accessibility experts to provide valuable 
feedback to the Decision Support Environment, which is 
considered for the refinement of rules.  The goal is to 
make the DSE as autonomous as possible with the use of 
Machine learning algorithms that enable the automatic 
refinement of the rules by continuous usage. 
The DSE communicates with an Observatory module 
running also on a cloud environment, contains a 
Dashboard component that presents to the user the 
different projects according to the WADcher Observatory 
data model. The responsibility for performing periodic 
assessments on large sets of monitored web sites and 
triggering notifications when the accessibility level alters 
between different times assumed by the Evidence 
manager, moreover the Aggregation manager is 
responsible for aggregating different types of assessment 
results (i.e., results coming from automatic, semi-
automatic and manual tests performed by accessibility 
experts). In addition, a Big data analytics component 
aggregates all the testing results and, through advanced 
visualization mechanisms, allows the efficient monitoring 
of the quality of large volumes of web content. 
In order to generate the final report, the data from the 
Observatory are 
send to a Reporting 
manager 
component, which provides the final report in various 
types. The supported report types are: 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-692-7
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

i. 
A PDF report containing all the errors and cannot 
tells of the evaluated web page(s). 
ii. 
An EARL-based report of the detected errors and 
cannot tells. 
iii. 
A PDF version of the EARL-based report, 
containing all the information of the EARL-based 
report in human readable format. 
iv. 
A report containing all the HTTP content 
transferred between WADcher and the server that 
hosts the evaluated web application, using the 
HTTP Vocabulary in RDF. 
The Service Orchestrator is responsible for the 
management of the notifications between all WADcher’s 
components. 
Furthermore, a WADcher SDK provides a web-based 
API to enable access to the services of WADcher to other 
external applications. 
The security layer is responsible for the security, 
authentication and access rights management. 
The presentation layer includes all the user interfaces 
that enable user interaction with the large-scale services 
and through the UI manager component, presents the 
results in a unified matter regardless of the device used. 
V. 
INDICATIVE USE CASES 
As WADcher aims at providing support for different 
target groups, those have different requirements and 
approaches towards furthering accessibility in the web. As 
has been elicited in the user requirements phase of 
WADcher, web commissioners mainly require a high-level 
assessment of their web pages while accessibility experts 
and web developers need to have the option to drill down 
to the source code level in order to check for minuscule 
problems and solve those. Therefore, the usage patterns of 
these three groups diverge heavily from each other and it 
is important to understand each approach in order to 
provide a holistic solution for all users.  
Generally, WADcher is designed so that the users, 
especially those with little knowledge on accessibility 
assessment, do not have to worry about the report handling 
between the external assessment tools and WADcher, thus 
these steps are omitted in the use cases. 
As the web commissioners are the focal group who is 
responsible not only for producing reports but also for 
triggering assessments and improvements their Use Case 
shall be explored first.  
A. Web Commissioners 
The user experience for the web commissioners starts 
with the Observatory, which represents a summarized 
representation of all the reports that the web commissioner 
has issued for resources that belong to him (i.e., web pages 
he/she is responsible for). Along with the reports, some 
general statistics regarding the accessibility of the checked 
sites is also provided. Within the Observatory, the web 
commissioner has the option to either look at existing or 
new reports that have been automatically compiled or 
returned by web developers or accessibility experts. The 
primary task of the web commissioners is the issuing of 
new automatic checks. For that, first, the address of the 
sites to check has to be entered, then, the commissioner 
selects an automatic assessment tool out of a predefined 
list. Then, the rules or rulesets (e.g., WCAG 2.0 Level 
AA) upon which the site should be checked are selected 
and eventually the assessment process is started. Upon 
completion of the automatic assessment, the web 
commissioner is informed and can access the compiled 
report through the Observatory. These reports can be 
forwarded to accessibility experts for further investigation 
or to web developers for improvements both are provided 
in pre-defined lists in order to assure competent handling. 
As the EU Commission under the WAD requires an 
annual reporting, there is also the option to compile 
higher-level reports in accordance to national or EU 
requirements (EU 2018/1523). 
B. Accessibility Experts  
As most automatic assessment tools are not be able to 
test every possible accessibility issue in an automatic 
manner, the returned reports contain issues marked as 
“cannot tell”, which means that the tool is not sure whether 
there is a problem or not. These need manual checking 
through accessibility experts. 
The use case for the accessibility experts usually 
begins with a notification that a web commissioner has 
submitted an automatic assessment report to them and 
requests for manual checking by the expert. The 
accessibility expert then logs in to the Observatory and 
there receives the report for a first quick check on the 
identified errors and on the rules and guidelines that the 
sites have been checked for. For a more elaborate 
assessment, the accessibility expert is then able to drill 
down to a source code level and make annotations and 
comments directly to the code. After completing the 
manual assessment, the expert can send the supplemented 
report, along with a notification, back to the web 
commissioner for further action. 
C. Web Developers  
    The main task for web developers is the correction of 
identified accessibility issues. Therefore, a developer gets 
notified when a commissioner has submitted a report for 
improvement. As with the other roles, the developer then 
logs in to the Observatory to have a quick assessment of 
the identified issues as well as the rules and guidelines 
that were checked for. However, the central information 
for this group is provided on the source code level, which 
the web developer can drill down to and assess 
automatically identified errors or the annotations made by 
the accessibility expert. To support the improvement of 
sites, some guidelines and best practices are provided 
alongside the errors. After completing the changes, there 
is the option to rerun the existing report and forward the 
results to the web commissioner or to simply return a 
notification informing about the changes made. 
Besides these general use cases, all WADcher users are 
able to issue automatic assessment requests of web pages 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-692-7
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

through the Observatory on their own, for example if a 
web developer wants to check the accessibility of a newly 
developed site or an accessibility expert deems a site non-
accessible. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Digitalization is a rapidly moving on process affecting 
nearly all areas of our everyday life. Thus, it is of utmost 
importance that the result of this process will not lead to 
exclusion of user groups, such as disabled users or the 
elderly. For this purpose, the WAD directive became into 
force. However, its implementation requires effective tools 
for large-scale testing and monitoring of web applications 
also to ensure a harmonized evaluation and reporting 
approach throughout Europe. So far, such tools are not 
available and therefore will be in focus of the WADcher 
project. Intermediate results of this project are presented in 
this paper and will be summarized in the following. 
The core contribution of WADcher includes an 
integrated platform, which will offer tools and interfaces 
as described below to support its main stakeholders (web 
commissioner, web developers and expert reviewers): 
[1] An 
Observatory 
with 
dashboards 
for 
data 
visualization 
of 
aggregated 
assessment 
results 
enabling 
different 
stakeholders 
such 
as 
web 
commissioners, policy makers and the general public 
to monitor changes in the accessibility level of 
websites.  
[2] A 
Decision 
Support 
Environment 
for 
expert 
reviewers to detect barriers that need further manual 
investigation and guidance to Web developers in 
repairing accessibility errors 
[3] Infrastructure that provides also APIs to existing 
automatic assessment tools and other external tools 
like CMSs for checking webpages during design and 
content authoring to make them “born accessible”. 
To evaluate the usefulness of WADcher developments 
and satisfaction of main stakeholders, we also plan to 
empirically 
validate 
the 
results 
of 
the 
proposed 
accessibility infrastructures with the relevant communities 
in four European countries (Austria, Greece, Italy and 
Ireland). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the EU funded project 
WADcher (H2020 - 780206). 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. G. Schiavone and F. Paternò. “An extensible 
environment for guideline-based accessibility evaluation of 
dynamic Web applications,” Universal access in the 
information society, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 111-132, 2015. 
[2] C. A Velasco, D. Denev, D. Stegemann, and Y. Mohamad, 
“A web compliance engineering framework to support the 
development of accessible rich internet applications,” 
ACM. 978-1-60558-153-8 doi: 10.1145/1368044.1368054  
[3] C. Bühler, H. Heck, O. Perlick, A. Nietzio, and N. Ulltveit-
Moe, “Interpreting results from large scale automatic 
evaluation of web accessibility,” International Conference 
on Computers for Handicapped Persons, pp. 184-191, July 
2006.  
[4] F. Paternò and A. G. Schiavone, "The role of tool support 
in public policies and accessibility," ACM Interactions, vol. 
22, no. 3, pp. 60-63, 2015. 
[5] J. L. Fuertes, R. González, E. Gutiérrez, and L. Martínez, 
“Hera-FFX: a Firefox add-on for semi-automatic web 
accessibility evaluation,” International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibililty, p. 26-35, 2009. doi:  
10.1145/1535654.1535661 
[6] P. Ackermann, E. Vlachogiannis, and C. A. Velasco, 
“Developing Advanced Accessibility Conformance Tools 
for the Ubiquitous Web,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 
67, 
pp. 
452-457, 
ISSN 
1877-0509, 
2015. 
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.11.086 
[7] R. Lopes, D. Gomes, and L. Carriço, “Web not for all: a 
large scale study of web accessibility,” International Cross 
Disciplinary Confer-ence on Web Accessibility (W4A) ,p. 
10, ACM, April 2010. 
[8] S. Mirri, L. A. Muratori, M. Roccetti, and P. Salomoni, 
“Metrics for accessi-bility on the Vamolà project,” 
International Cross-Disciplinary Conference on Web 
Accessibililty (W4A) ,pp. 142-145, ACM, April 2009. 
[9] T. Oikonomou et al. , “Waat: personalised web 
accessibility evaluation tool”. Procs. International Cross-
Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibility ,p. 19, 
ACM, 2011. 
[10] Y. Mohamad, C. A. Velasco, N. Kaklanis, D. Tzovaras, and 
F. Paternò, “A Holistic Decision Support Environment for 
Web Accessibility,” Springer 2018, pp. 3-7, ISBN 978-3-
319-94276-6, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-94277-3_1 
[11] http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2016/2102/oj 
[12] https://www.w3.org/TR/EARL10-Schema/ 
[13] “Commission implementing decision on establishing a 
monitoring methodology and arrangements for reporting 
under the WAD” at https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-
regulation/initiatives/ares-2018-2604213/feedback/add_da 
[14] “Commission implementing decision on establishing a 
model accessibility statement under the WAD”, at 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-
regulation/initiatives/ares-2018-2604172_en  
[15] http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/301500_301599/301549
/01.01.02_60/en_301549v010102p.pdf Available from : 
2019.01.10 
[16] https://www.deque.com/  Available from : 2019.01.10 
[17] https://siteimprove.com/en/ Available from : 2019.01.10 
[18] http://mk-sense.com/ Available from : 2019.01.10 
[19] https://www.deque.com/axe/ Available from : 2019.01.10 
[20] https://support.siteimprove.com/hc/en-
gb/articles/115002413812-Siteimprove-Accessibility-
Checker-Chrome-Extension Available from : 2019.01.10 
[21] https://www.tawdis.net/ Available from : 2019.01.10 
[22] https://achecker.ca/checker/index.php Available from: 2019.01.10 
[23] https://www.tawdis.net/ Available from : 2019.01.10 
[24] https://www.npmjs.com/package/the-a11y-machine 
Available from : 2019.01.10 
[25] https://www.totalvalidator.com/index.html Available from : 
2019.01.10 
[26] https://www.deque.com/tools/amaze/  Available from : 
2019.01.10 
[27] https://www.deque.com/tools/worldspace-comply/ 
Available from : 2019.01.10 
[28] http://www.accessible-eu.org/index.php/ontology.html 
Available from : 2019.01.10 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-692-7
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

