Towards a New Model to Evaluate Smart Mobility in Latin America 
 
Eladio E. Martinez-Toro 
Universidad Paraguayo Alemana 
San Lorenzo, Paraguay 
e-mail: eladio.martinez@upa.edu.py 
Augustinus van der Krogt  
Universidad Paraguayo Alemana 
San Lorenzo, Paraguay 
e-mail: stijn.vanderkrogt@srh.de 
Carlos G. Samaniego-Orue 
Universidad Paraguayo Alemana 
San Lorenzo, Paraguay 
e-mail: cgsamanieg@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—The major metropolitan areas in Latin America are 
facing a fast-increasing transport crisis in terms of congestion 
and very long travel times, pollution, accidents, and user safety. 
Like cities in developed countries, many cities in the region have 
started smart mobility programs to address these issues. In 
recent years, many models have been developed to evaluate 
these programs but most of these models are using indicators 
that do not consider specific mobility problems in Latin 
America. This article has identified eight specific regional 
challenges to mobility and proposes a new model. The model 
includes a set of specific indicators and metrics that allow 
researchers to conduct a more realistic and data-driven 
comparative evaluation of mobility challenges and smart 
mobility programs Latin American cities. 
Keywords - smart mobility; mobility challenges in Latin 
America, mobility models. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The concept of mobility has been interpreted in a variety 
of ways. The National Research Council in its report Key 
Transportation Indicators defines that “mobility refers to the 
time and costs required for travel” [1]. With the field of 
mobility, urban mobility is of key importance because the 
cities are the center of the economic and social activities of 
human beings [2]. In recent years, there have been important 
economic, social, and technological changes that led to new 
models to understand and measure urban mobility. These 
urban models have been implemented throughout the world 
considering factors, such as the increase in average distances 
traveled, changes in the reasons for travel and changes in the 
location of productive activities [3].  
More recently the mobility models have evolved into the 
smart city model that considers a broader set of indicators. A 
smart city is characterized by seeking "the promotion of 
integrated and sustainable development, where cities become 
more innovative, competitive, attractive and resilient" [4].  
The Smart Cities Council Readiness Guide defines a smart 
city as one that uses Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) to improve its habitability, work capacity 
and sustainability [5]. Cohen and Obediente [6] propose that 
smart cities, through the application of technology in their 
different areas, become more efficient localities in the use of 
their resources, saving energy, improving the services 
provided and promoting sustainable development. In its 
report Smart Cities, Ranking of European medium-sized 
cities, Giffinger et al. [7], reviewed the common 
characteristics of several European cities classified as smart 
and proposed a model defined by six main pillars: smart 
people, 
smart 
economy, 
smart 
governance, 
smart 
environment, smart living, and smart mobility. 
Latin America is the world´s most urbanized developing 
region, characterized by high levels of economic and social 
inequality and fast-growing urbanization, resulting in 
increasing mobility problems [8]. Although some smart 
mobility and public transport integration projects have begun 
to be developed in Latin America to address these issues, 
smart mobility is one of the pending tasks for the region [9]. 
The evaluation of progress in smart mobility in Latin 
America is complicated since most of the smart mobility 
models were developed considering the mobility problems in 
developed countries. Consequently, there is no model that 
considers the specific characteristics and challenges of smart 
mobility in Latin American cities. The objective of this article 
is to identify a new smart mobility model for Latin America 
that can serve as the basis for a more effective comparative 
analysis of urban mobility in the region. To achieve this goal, 
this article offers a review of the literature of current mobility 
models and identifies the key indicators and their metrics 
mobility challenges in Latin America. 
In Section II, the general concept of smart mobility is 
defined and Section III describes a series of Smart Mobility 
Models and their indicators proposed by different authors. 
Section IV details the key mobility challenges in Latin 
American. Section V describes the proposed smart mobility 
model including indicators and metrics. Conclusions are 
presented in Section VI. 
II. 
SMART MOBILITY 
According to Carballo et al. [10], the concept of smart 
mobility is defined as the set of actions, techniques and 
infrastructures that lead to the improvement of mobility and 
the organization of traffic in cities. The main objective of 
smart mobility is the use of technology and data for the 
integration of all actors in displacement, to achieve greater 
efficiency and sustainability in cities [11]. Smart mobility 
seeks to address some of these problems through the 
application of technological tools such as ICT, allowing the 
establishment of specific objectives. The use of technology 
in smart mobility allows integrating the data of the road 
actors to automatically attend to incidents that occur on the 
routes, prediction and prevention of accidents and some 
trends in terms of behavior, such as hours and congested 
routes. In the same way, it is possible to have public transport 
integration systems, which facilitate connections between 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

one means of transport and another, while monitoring 
climatic and environmental conditions [12]. 
III. 
SMART MOBILITY MODELS AND INDICATORS 
Several researchers have developed smart mobility 
models that build on a combination of a series of underlying 
indicators to measure and compare the status of smart 
mobility in cities at global level. For this research, eleven of 
the most representative smart mobility models are analyzed 
as a starting point for the development of a suitable smart 
mobility model for Latin America. Cohen [13] in his research 
proposes a mobility index that considers three categories 
including efficient transport, multi-modal access, and 
technology infrastructure. Some of the indicators are clean-
energy transport, public transport, smart cards, and access to 
real-time information. The model of Lupiañez, and Fauli 
[14], evaluates the urban smart mobility projects based on 
inputs, outputs, and outcomes/impact. The most relevant 
outcome indicators are the number of personal vehicles per 
capita, the travel time, transport-related victims per 100,000 
inhabitants and the number of public transport services that 
offer real-time information to citizens.  
Battarra et al. [15] compare cities through indicators and 
smart actions developed in them. The categories evaluated in 
the model are accessibility, sustainability, and ICT. Each 
category was eventually divided into actions and these 
actions were divided in parameters. Aletà et al. [16] propose 
a model that compare cities through the evaluation of the 
following factors: sustainable mobility urban plans, 
integrated payments in multimodal transport systems, 
deployment of alternative transport modes and the use of ICT 
in traffic control. The model also proposes measurable direct 
evaluation metrics. Aini and Amani [17] consider a diversity 
of indicators classified in the following variables: location 
efficiency, 
reliable 
mobility, 
health 
and 
safety, 
environmental stewardship, social equity, and robust 
economy. 
The model of Orlowski and Romanowska [18] assesses 
the infrastructure of cities, their mobility methods and 
information management infrastructure using the following 
indicators including indicators on the technical infrastructure, 
information infrastructure, mobility methods, used vehicles 
and transport legislation. A complex model for European 
cities is proposed by Giffinger et al. [7], which evaluates local 
accessibility, national accessibility, availability of ICT 
infrastructure and a sustainable, innovative, and safe 
transport system. Also, the California Department of 
Transportation defines a series of indicators for smart 
mobility including location efficiency, reliable mobility, 
health and safety, environmental stewardship, social equity, 
and a robust economy [19]. Šurdonja et al. [20] presented a 
model that consisted of a questionnaire that allows evaluating 
the main aspects of the ideal model of a smart city.  
Factors like those mentioned previously were evaluated 
in the model proposed by Martinez-Toro et al. [9]. The model 
proposes five key indicators to evaluate mobility and 
transport integration including long-term mobility policies, 
resistance by transport operators to system integration and 
digital payment, limited use of bank accounts by the 
population, limited infrastructure in ICT and lack of financial 
resources to invest in mobility programs. Finally, we can 
mention the model presented by Berrone and Ricart [21], that 
evaluates and scores cities in nine main aspects: human 
capital, social cohesion, economy, governance, environment, 
mobility and transportation, urban planning, international 
projection, and technology. In this model the most 
representative indicators are traffic index, traffic inefficiency 
index, exponential traffic index, CO2 emissions, number of 
particles in the air (PM10 and PM 2.5) and the number of 
deaths from traffic accidents. The main advantage of the last 
two models is that it presents most of the Latin American 
countries, giving in advance an idea of how it would be 
possible to evaluate them and use the aspects they have 
developed. 
Most of the models that we mentioned above, except for 
the ones proposed by Martinez-Toro et al. [9], and Berrone 
and Ricart [21], were developed to evaluate smart mobility in 
highly developed cities in developed countries and do not 
consider mobility problems in Latin America as presented in 
Section II. Therefore, this article seeks to identify a model 
with the most relevant indicators for the problems identified 
in Latin America. 
IV. 
MOBILITY CHALLENGES IN LATIN AMERICA 
A key challenge to mobility is the advanced levels of 
urbanization in Latin America, at this moment the most 
urbanized developing region in the world. A United Nations 
study expresses that urbanity in Latin America has increased 
from 40% in 1950 to 80% in 2015 [22]. The high levels of 
urbanization combined with economic growth has also 
resulted in a fast level of motorization in the region. This is 
furthermore combined with a lack of road infrastructure 
planning in Latin America which leads to an increase in 
traffic congestion [23]. 
A further factor of concern is found in the great distances 
resulting in elevated travel time of citizens within the larger 
metropolitan areas such as Sao Paulo, Mexico City, Rio de 
Janeiro, and Lima, which represents great mobility problems 
in terms of transport time for both higher end and lower 
income citizens alike. These directly affect the well-being of 
populations as they must spend more time moving from one 
place to another to satisfy their social and economic needs 
[24]. 
According to a study developed by García [26], public 
transport allows people with limited resources to leave the 
precarious residential spaces where they live and the need to 
move to their places of work or study and to access services 
that these people need daily. However, the inoperative and 
incompleteness of the integration of transportation systems 
result in awfully long travel times and high cost of transport 
for lower income citizens that need to access work and 
training opportunities, as well as the services that people need 
daily to carry out their daily activities, despite some success 
stories such as the Transmilenio in Bogota, Colombia 
[26][27]. In many cities in the region people need to take 
various transport modes (bus, metro, train) that require more 
than two hours travel time per day. The study published by 
Martinez-Toro et al. [9] provides a detailed analysis of the 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

key challenges to the development of integrated and 
intelligent public transport systems in eight cities in Latin 
American. The main challenges identified were the resistance 
by transport operators thus resulting in incomplete physical 
integration of transport systems and related digital payment 
options. Also, the limited ICT infrastructure and a lack of 
financial resources assigned by most Latin American 
governments to invest in smart mobility programs and 
policies. 
In recent decades, precarious and dangerous transport 
conditions in Latin America are causing high levels of travel 
accidents. Today, traffic accidents are one of the leading 
causes of death in the region, mainly among people between 
the ages of 5 and 44 [28]. This implies that traffic accidents 
cause more than 100,000 deaths per year, and approximately 
more than 5 million people are injured [29].  
Traffic congestion and a lack of regulation of the quality, 
maintenance and age of car vehicles comes with 
environmental pollution, noise pollution, deterioration in the 
state of the streets. Traffic congestion and pollution comes 
with a high level of CO2 emission from vehicle combustion. 
As a result, high levels of air pollution in many Latin 
American cities represents the greatest environmental health 
risk today, and it is estimated to contribute to 7 million 
premature deaths each year [30]. According to the 2018 
World Air Quality Report published by Greenpeace and 
IQAir, Lima and Santiago are among the countries with the 
highest level of air pollution in the world. Peru is ranked 21st 
in the global ranking, while Chile is ranked 26th [31]. This 
places Latin America as a major source of pollution, posing 
a serious problem for the environment and the health of the 
inhabitants of this continent. 
Finally, we find an increasing problem caused by a lack 
of safety of the users of public transport. According to a study 
published by Jaitman [32], 50% of women in Lima and 
Asuncion use public transport as a daily means of travel. At 
least a third of these women experience unsafe transport 
conditions and report to have been robbed, insulted, suffered 
some type of verbal or even sexual assault while traveling 
with public transport. Another 30% of the women do not 
report these inconveniences because they do not believe it 
necessary or due to lack of time.  
In summary, to develop a relevant smart mobility model 
for Latin American cities, a new regional model that 
considers key indicators from the combination of different 
factors is needed. In the first place it is essential to consider 
physical indicators of smart mobility including vehicular 
congestion, travel times and the presence of an adequate and 
inclusive ICT infrastructure. Secondly advancement in smart 
mobility requires sufficient planning capacity of transport 
authorities and access to financial resources to implement 
smart mobility programs. Thirdly it is important to consider 
environmental factors represented by air pollution levels and 
to consider key indicators on security which can be expressed 
in the level of traffic accidents and user safety. 
V. 
PROPOSED SMART MOBILITY MODEL FOR LATIN 
AMERICA 
To determine the models that are best suited to evaluate 
smart mobility challenges and conditions in Latin America, 
the research team has conducted a detailed analysis of the 
indicators used by eleven smart mobility models and their 
relevance for the key challenges of urban mobility in the 
region. The combined models proposed by Martinez-Toro et 
al. [9], Lupiañez et al. [14] and Berrone et al. [21] are found 
to be most relevant to construct a new model to evaluate 
smart mobility that considers specific challenges and 
conditions in Latin America. Table 1 presents the proposed 
model that demonstrates the relation between the key 
mobility problems in the region, the indicators and metrics 
that enable future measurement of each indicator. 
TABLE I.  PROPOSED SMART MOBILITY MODEL FOR LATIN AMERICA 
Mobility 
Problem 
Indicator 
Metrics 
Author 
Vehicular 
congestion 
-Traffic index 
-Exponential 
traffic index 
-Traffic 
inefficiency 
index  
-Average one-
way travel time 
to work in 
minutes [33] 
-Estimation of 
dissatisfaction 
due to long 
commute times 
with exponential 
levels of 
dissatisfaction 
with travel time 
to work above 25 
minutes [33] 
-Estimation of 
inefficiencies in 
travel time 
caused by 
transport by 
private car 
compared to 
public transport 
[33] 
Berrone and 
Ricart, 2020. 
-Number of 
vehicles 
-Number of 
private vehicles 
per inhabitant   
Lupiañez, 
and Fauli, 
2017. 
Time spent 
traveling  
-Travel time 
-Additional time 
needed to 30 
minutes of travel 
distance  
Lupiañez, 
and Fauli, 
2017. 
ICT 
infrastructure 
-City-wide 
Internet coverage  
-Digital transport 
service platforms 
with real time 
information 
-Internet 
penetration rate 
per inhabitant in 
the city 
-Percentage of 
transport 
companies with 
digital transport 
service platforms 
that offer real 
time travel 
information 
Martinez-
Toro, et al., 
2019. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Transport 
system and 
payment 
integration  
-Geographically 
integrated 
transport modes 
-Integrated digital 
payment systems 
among transport 
modes 
-Percentage of 
transport service 
companies with 
integrated 
transport modes 
-Percentage of 
transport service 
companies with 
integrated digital 
payment systems 
among transport 
modes 
Martinez-
Toro, et al., 
2019. 
Financial 
resources  
-Public, private, 
and multi-lateral 
investments in 
mobility 
programs 
-Amount of total 
investment 
available for 
mobility per 
100,000 
inhabitants per 
year 
Martinez-
Toro, et al., 
2019. 
Environment
al pollution 
-Emission of 
CO2, PM10, and 
PM2.5 
-Emission CO2    
in grams per 
minute por 
passenger 
-Annual average 
of the number of 
particles PM10 
in the air whose 
diameter is less 
than 10 µm.  
-Annual average 
of the number of 
particles PM2.5 
in the air whose 
diameter is less 
than 10 µm.  
Berrone and 
Ricart, 2020. 
Traffic 
accidents 
-Number of 
deaths in 
accidents 
-Number of 
deaths in 
accidents per 
100,000 
inhabitants per 
vehicle   
Berrone and 
Ricart, 2020. 
User safety 
- Public transport 
services that offer 
real-time 
information  
-Victims related 
to transportation  
-Percentage of 
public transport 
companies that 
offer on-line and 
real-time travel 
information 
-Transport-
related victims 
per 100,000 
inhabitants 
Lupiañez, 
and Fauli, 
2017. 
Source: Own Elaboration 
 
The smart mobility model presented in Table 1 includes 
the interactions between key regional mobility challenges, 
their indicators and metrics to measure each indicator. To 
evaluate the eight mobility challenges, fourteen indicators 
were selected after the analysis of the most representative 
existing smart mobility models. The challenge of traffic 
congestion is measured by the traffic index, the exponential 
traffic index, the traffic inefficiency index and the number of 
vehicles. Excessive travel time in cities is evaluated by the 
additional travel time that is needed to travel in a 30-minute 
journey.  
City-wide internet coverage and the digital transport 
service platforms with real time information are key 
indicators to evaluate urban challenges in ICT infrastructure. 
Problems related to a lack of transport integration can be 
evaluated by looking at the level of integration of the 
different transport modes and payment systems. The 
availability of public, private and multilateral investment in 
mobility programs represents a good indicator of the 
challenge of limited access to financial resources. Finally, 
environmental challenges are compared by the level of CO2 
emission and PM10 and PM2.5 air particles. Transport safety 
considers the number of fatal traffic accidents and user safety 
is evaluated to the extent to which travelers can dispose of 
public transport services that offer real-time information and 
the number of victims in traffic. The combined set of 
indicators and metrics provide a new model that considers the 
specific regional mobility challenges and allows to compare 
the smart mobility performance between Latin American 
cities.   
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This study on smart mobility has identified key problems 
that are relevant to evaluate the progress in smart mobility in 
urban areas in Latin America. The challenges include the 
traditional factors related to elevated vehicular congestion 
and long travel times but also problems related to a lack of 
integrated transport and payment systems, deficiencies in 
ICT infrastructure and a lack of financial resources to finance 
smart mobility programs. Other important factors include air 
pollution, traffic accidents and user safety.  
The research also analyzed eleven models that evaluate 
smart mobility of which three models were found to be most 
relevant to evaluate the key smart mobility challenges in 
Latin America. The models developed by Martinez-Toro et 
al. [9], Lupiañez et al. [14] and Berrone et al. [21] together 
provide an accurate set of smart mobility factors and 
indicators that cover the aforementioned smart mobility 
challenges in the region. 
The new model enables researchers to conduct more 
realistic and effective data-driven evaluations of mobility 
challenges and the progress in smart mobility in different 
Latin American cities. In addition, it allows for the 
development of a comparative smart-mobility index of Latin 
American cities. To accomplish this, we propose to set up a 
panel 
of 
experts 
with 
representatives 
of 
mobility 
professionals and researchers, government, private industry, 
and end users. The panel is to validate and assign individual 
weightings to the model´s indicators and to homogenize the 
values obtained to have a uniform numerical index that 
facilitates a more realistic evaluation of smart mobility in 
Latin America. 
REFERENCES 
[1] National Research Council, Key transportation indicators: 
summary of a workshop, National Academies Press, 
Washington D.C., 2002. 
[2] A. Monzon, "Smart cities concept and challenges: Bases for the 
assessment of smart city projects," 2015 International 
Conference on Smart Cities and Green ICT Systems 
(SMARTGREENS), Lisbon, pp. 1-11, 2015. 
[3] C. Miralles-Guasch, City and transport: the imperfect 
binomial, Ariel, Barcelona. Ciudad y transporte: el binomio 
imperfecto, Ariel, Barcelona, 2002. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

[4] M. Bouskela, M. Casseb, S. Bassi, C. De Luca, and M.  
Facchina, The Road toward Smart Cities Migrating from 
Traditional City Management to the Smart City, Inter-
American Development Bank, 2016. Available from: 
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7743/La-
ruta-hacia-las-smart-cities-Migrando-de-una-gestion-
tradicional-a-la-ciudad-inteligente.pdf. [retrieved: 03, 2021] 
[5] Smart Cities Council. The definition of a smart city. [Online]. 
Available from: https://rg.smartcitiescouncil.com/readiness-
guide/article/definition-definition-smart-city. [retrieved: 03, 
2021] 
[6] B. Cohen, and E. Obediente, Study "Ranking of smart cities in 
Chile". Estudio "Ranking de ciudades inteligentes en Chile", 
2014. 
[7] R. Giffinger et al., Smart Cities: Ranking of European 
Medium-Sized Cities (Centre of Regional Science (SRF), 
Vienna, 2007. 
[8] D. Hidalgo and C. Huizenga, Implementation of sustainable 
urban transport in Latin America. Research in transportation 
economics, 40(1), pp. 66-77, 2013. 
[9] E. E. Martínez-Toro, A. Van der Krogt, and R. Sanchez-Flores, 
Mobility and Integration of Public Transport Systems in Latin 
America. MLMI 2019: Proceedings of the 2019 2nd 
International Conference on Machine Learning and Machine 
Intelligence, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1145/3366750.3366760   
[10] L. Carballo, A. Villagra, and M. Errecalde, Smart mobility: 
reduction of gas emissions, Scientific Technical Reports - 
UNPA, 11(2), pp. 53-69. Movilidad inteligente: reducción de 
emisión de gases, Informes Científicos Técnicos - UNPA, 
11(2), 
pp. 
53-69, 
2019. 
https://doi.org/10.22305/ict-
unpa.v11i2.786  
[11] E. Ontiveros, D. Vizcaíno, and V. L. Sabater, The cities of the 
future: smart, digital, and sustainable, Ariel. Las ciudades del 
futuro: inteligentes, digitales y sostenibles, Ariel, 2016.  
[12] I. De la Serna, The new mobility: from the Smart City to 
Industry 4.0. Towards a new mobility in cities, 62. La nueva 
movilidad: de la Smart City a la Industria 4.0. Hacia una nueva 
movilidad en las ciudades, 62, 2020. 
[13] B. Cohen, Smart city index master indicators survey. Smart 
cities council, 2014. 
[14] F. Lupiañez, and C. Fauli, Smart Cities: Social evaluation of 
Smart Cities projects, Center for Telecommunications Studies 
of Latin America. Ciudades Inteligentes: Evaluación social de 
proyectos de Smart Cities, Centro de Estudios de 
telecomunicaciones de América Latina, 2017.  
[15] R. Battarra, C. Gargiulo, M. R. Tremiterra, and F. Zucaro, 
Smart Mobility in Italian Metropolitan Cities: A comparative 
analysis through indicators and actions. Sustainable cities and 
society, 41, pp. 556-567, 2018.  
[16] N. B. Aletà, C. M. Alonso, and R. M. A. Ruiz, Smart Mobility 
and Smart Environment in the Spanish Cities. Transportation 
Research Procedia, 24, 2017.  
[17] N. N. Aini, and H. Amani, Indicators to measure smart 
mobility: An Indonesian perspective, In Proceedings of the 
2017 International Conference on Telecommunications and 
Communication Engineering, pp. 81-85, October 2017. 
[18] A. Orlowski, and P. Romanowska, Smart Cities Concept: 
Smart Mobility Indicator, Cybernetics, and Systems, 50(2), pp. 
118-131, 2019.  
[19] California Department of Transportation, Smart Mobility 
2010: A Call to Action for the New Decade, Sacramento, State 
of California: California Department of Transportation, 2010. 
[20] S. Šurdonja, T. Giuffrè, and A. Deluka-Tibljaš, Smart mobility 
solutions–necessary precondition for a well-functioning smart 
city, Transportation Research Procedia, 45, 2020. 
[21] P. Berrone, and J. E. Ricart, IESE cities in motion index 2020. 
Publications Service of the University of Navarra, 2020.  
[22] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Population Division, World Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 
Revision, Online Edition, 2018.  
[23] M. C. R. López, D. F. R. Melo, and Y. D. Wong, Transport 
barriers and its health implications in Asunción. Journal of 
Transport & Health, 14, 100579, 2019.  
[24] C. A. Tovar, Latin American city, and present conflicts. Urban-
Territorial Bitácora, 9 (1), pp. 64-8, 2005. Ciudad 
Latinoamericana y conflictos presentes. Bitácora Urbano-
Territorial, 9(1), pp. 64-81, 2005. 
[25] P. A. García, Qualitative research in the study of the 
relationships between daily mobility and poverty in the Latin 
American context: a case applied in metropolitan Lima. La 
investigación cualitativa en el estudio de las relaciones entre 
movilidad cotidiana y pobreza en el contexto latinoamericano: 
un caso aplicado en la Lima metropolitana, Documents 
d'anàlisi geogràfica, (55), pp. 57-76, 2009.  
[26] I. Chaparro, Evaluation of the socioeconomic impact of urban 
transport in the city of Bogotá: the case of the Transmilenio 
mass transport system. ECLAC. Evaluación del impacto 
socioeconómico del transporte urbano en la ciudad de Bogotá: 
el caso del sistema de transporte masivo Transmilenio. 
CEPAL, 2002. 
[27] L. S. Aparicio, The impact of transport on the organization of 
the city: the case of Transmilenio in Bogotá. Territories, (22), 
pp. 33-64, 2010. El impacto del transporte en el ordenamiento 
de la ciudad: el caso de Transmilenio en Bogotá. Territorios, 
(22), pp. 33-64, 2010. 
[28] WHO. Data Bank, Mortality caused by road traffic injuries (per 
100,000 people). Mortalidad provocada por lesiones por 
accidentes de tránsito (por cada 100.000 personas). [Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://datos.bancomundial.org/indicator/SH.STA.TRAF.P5?
most_recent_value_desc=false&view=map&year=2016 
[retrieved: 03, 2021] 
[29] R. Brandao, E. Diez-Roux, A. P. Taddia, S. M. De la Peña-
Mendoza, and E. De la Peña, Road safety diagnosis in Latin 
America and the Caribbean: 2005-2009. Diagnóstico de 
seguridad vial en América Latina y El Caribe: 2005-2009. 
Inter-American Development Bank, 2013. 
[30] WHO. 9 out of 10 people worldwide breathe polluted air, but 
more countries are taking action. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/02-05-2018-9-out-of-
10-people-worldwide-breathe-polluted-air-but-more-
countries-are-taking-action. [retrieved: 03, 2021] 
[31] World Air Quality Report 2018. Published by Greenpeace and 
IQAir. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.airvisual.com/world-most-polluted-cities/world-
air-quality-report-2018-en.pdf. [retrieved: 03, 2021] 
[32] L. Jaitman, Public Transport from a Gender Perspective: 
Insecurity and Victimization in Latin America, The Case of 
Lima and Asuncion Metropolitan Areas, Journal of Economics, 
Race, and Policy, 3(1), pp. 24-40, 2020. 
[33] Numbeo. 2021. About Traffic Indices at This Website. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.numbeo.com/traffic/indices_explained.jsp 
[retrieved: 04, 2021]
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

