Design of Non-Destructive Evaluation Robot Using Magnetic Flux Leakage for
Main Water Pipe
Jaekyu An
Manufacturing Robotics R&D Division
Korea Institute of Robot Convergence
Pohang, Republic of Korea
email: jkan@kiro.re.kr
Soeun Son
Manufacturing Robotics R&D Division
Korea Institute of Robot Convergence
Pohang, Republic of Korea
email: smallsilver@kiro.re.kr
Jongho Bae
Manufacturing Robotics R&D Division
Korea Institute of Robot Convergence
Pohang, Republic of Korea
email: jongho.bae@kiro.re.kr
Yong Sub Kwon
Manufacturing Robotics R&D Division
Korea Institute of Robot Convergence
Pohang, Republic of Korea
email: ys.kwon@kiro.re.kr
Eui-Jung Jung
Manufacturing Robotics R&D Division
Korea Institute of Robot Convergence
Pohang, Republic of Korea
email: ejjung@kiro.re.kr
Goobong Chung
Manufacturing Robotics R&D Division
Korea Institute of Robot Convergence
Pohang, Republic of Korea
email: goobongc@kiro.re.kr
Abstract—Many infrastructures in the world include pipe
systems, e.g., gas, oil, water, electricity, air circulation, etc.
Using a pipe system for the delivery of such materials allows
for easy human control. However, if the pipe is broken or
contaminated, the process is disturbed and the risk cost for the
society can increase substantially. For instance, contaminations
in fluids like air and water may result in spreading of diseases.
Therefore, maintenance of the pipe is crucial. For a long period
of time, identification of a pipe requiring a repair only
depended on its installation time because its condition was not
exposed until the pipe was destructed or cut. Recently, non-
destructive evaluation technology and robotics are changing
the paradigm of the identification process. Maintenance
technicians can identify faulty pipes from reliable data,
collected directly from the pipes, instead of relying on the
pipe’s installation period. In this paper, we propose a robot
design with Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE) for waterwork
pipes.
Keywords-main water pipe; waterworks; pipe; robot; NDE;
MFL.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A well-founded infrastructure plays a major role in city
development. The infrastructure is composed of systems
such as roads, electrical grids and water supply pipes. These
systems are the power sources running the society. If one of
the
systems
malfunctions,
the
society
suffers
from
inconvenience
and
the
productivity
drops.
Therefore,
monitoring
the
conditions
and
maintenance
of
the
infrastructure are directly correlated with the functionality of
the society.
This paper discusses a design of NDE in-pipe robot for
main water pipe. Many robots have already been used in
water pipes [1] with various inspection technologies [2].
Among the various attributes of such robots, this research
focuses on mobility using the Magnetic Flux Leakage (MFL)
method [3].
The majority of existing NDE systems attempt to cover
the whole pipe surface at the same time [4]. In order to cover
the entire inner surface of the pipe, the system often requires
a large number of attached sensors through the entire pipe.
Our proposed design decreases the complexity by moving
the sensors along the direction of the robot’s movement.
Also, to reduce the weight of the robot, our team considered
a moving sensor as in the Diakont robot [7], which uses
Electromagnetic Acoustic Transducer (EMAT). While this
type of sensor increases the difficulty of the signal
processing, our robot can still benefit in mobility by a
reduction in the number of sensors. The robot can also
smoothly carry the NDE modules at an inclined pipe, vertical
pipe, elbow, and miter type pipe.
Additionally, there are two advantages using the MFL
method. First, it is radiation free. Second, the method can be
used to sense the magnetic field without the medium. These
characteristics minimize possible water pollution that can
occur during the pipe inspection.
Through this paper, we complete a complete design of
the proposed robot. However, the future goal of the project is
to make a system with MFL modules moving in spiral
motion
(Figure
1)
when
facing
various
obstacles.
Consequently, the robot will be applied to real water main
pipes. The results show the possibility of overcoming
different obstacles present in pipes and a city will be able to
have integrated control for maintenance of the pipes.
1
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 1. Example of the spiral motion of MFL modules.
II.
DESIGN
A.
System Overview
The targeted performances of the robot in this paper are
stable spiral motion of the MFL modules and successful
climbing of a 22.5° slope. We chose spiral motion because
the spiral motion enables the robot to inspect the surface of
the pipe with the minimum number of the MFL modules,
resulting in a low system cost (weight, volume, power). The
22.5° slope is chosen because this is the value for the
majority of water pipes in Republic of Korea.
To fulfill the set goals, the robot requires rotation,
attachment and detachment actuators for the MFL module. A
linkage system with sufficient wheel grip force is also
required. Additionally, an odometer is required for locating
the defects. Electrically, for the locomotion of the robot and
visual inspection of the pipe condition, camera, Inertial
Measurement Unit (IMU), Light Detection and Ranging
(LiDAR),
Single
Board
Computer
(SBC),
and
Data
acquisition (DAQ) for the MFL are installed as in Figure 2.
Finally, the robot size is 1100 x 840~1100 x 300 (mm, L x H
x W; height is changeable to adapt to the ovality of the pipe).
The total weight is about 160 kg.
Figure 2. Components of the robot.
B.
Free Body Diagram
Using free body diagram of the concept design and
understanding about the system, the power of actuators
effected by the attraction force of MFL and weight of the
robot can be derived. MFL consists of magnet, hall sensor,
front-back shoe, and Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) cover,
as shown in Figure 3. The hall sensor senses leakages of the
magnetic field caused by reduction in pipe wall thickness.
The PTFE cover is used to decrease the friction between the
pipe and the MFL module.
Figure 3. The MFL module section view: Shoes help to make closed
magnetic field.
As depicted in Figure 4, the external forces are traction,
drag force and weight. The traction force (Frt : required
traction force) is decided by the torque driving the wheel
and the wheel grip force. The grip force is caused by the
normal force on the wheel from the surface. The drag force
of the MFL (Fmd) is generated from the attraction force of
magnet (Fm). The Fm can be calculated by (1). The size of
the magnet is 150x56x10 (unit mm, L x W x H) and flux
density is about 0.4 T (Tesla). The friction coefficient for
PTFE and steel is about 0.2 [5]. Eventually, Fm and Fmd are
2400 N and 480 N, respectively, because of two MFL
modules. Additionally, on the slope, the weight of the robot
creates a drag force. Therefore, considering the target
acceleration motion, the required traction force can be
obtained by (3), (4):
Fm = (B2·A)/(2μ0)
(1)
B: flux density
μ0 : the permeability of space(4πx10-7)
A: the area of each surface
Fmd = μ·Fm
(2)
ΣF = ma = Frt –Fwx- Fmd
(3)
Frt = ma + Fwx + Fmd
(4)
The velocity and acceleration of the robot are 300 mm/s
and 150 mm/s2, respectively. The Frt is about 1100 N. To
generate the force, a torque of a wheel motor must be 33
Nm under the condition of eight wheels, 250 mm wheel
diameter, and friction coefficient μ≒ 0.6 between rubber
(wheel tire) and steel [6]. For a stable locomotion, the non-
slip condition of the wheel has to be considered. The
condition states that the traction force generated by the
2
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

wheel torque should be smaller than the friction force of the
tire (Fnt) created by the weight (refer to (5)). The current Fnt
(680 N) is smaller than Frt from (6). For a non-slip motion,
Fwy can be increased by pushing on the pipe wall.
Fnt ≥ Frt
(5)
Fnt =μ· Fwy
(6)
Therefore, the minimum non-slip traction force is Frt,
which can be calculated from (7). Equations (8), (9)
represent the traction force of the bottom and upper wheel,
respectively.
Fnt =μ· (Fwy + F’p) + μ·Fp                      (7) 
Fbt =μ· (Fwy + F’p)                             (8) 
Fut = μ·Fp                                   (9) 
Fp = F’p
(10)
Fp ≥ (Frt - μ·Fwy) / (2·μ)                     (11) 
By using Fp (380 N), upper (6 Nm) and bottom (27 Nm),
the wheel torque is also calculated.
Figure 4. The free body diagram for understanding applied forces
C.
Simulation for Driving Wheel Torque
To verify the result from the Free Body Diagram (FBD),
we use a multibody dynamic analysis simulation tool:
DAFUL [8]. Conditions used in DAFUL are equal to the
values from the FBD, such as weight (1600 N), push force
(380 N), drag force by MFL (480 N), and slope (22.5°), as
in Figure 5. We are interested in the required torque in a
wheel. Under these conditions, by substituting the target
velocity of the wheel, DAFUL shows the resulting torque
about the wheel. The average values for upper and bottom
wheel are 20 Nm and 110 Nm, respectively. The robot
system has eight wheels in total, 4 at the top and 4 at the
bottom. Therefore, one top wheel needs about 5 Nm and one
bottom wheel needs about 27 Nm, see Figure 6. The
simulated values are shown to be very similar to our FBD
results.
Figure 5. Simple modeling at the DAFUL
Figure 6. Results of Time (s) – Torque (Nm): the average of blue chart is
about 27 Nm and red chart is about 5 Nm
D.
MFL Rotation and Attachment Mechanism
MFL sensor modules have spiral motion with attaching
condition on the pipe wall. It creates the friction force to be
in a distracting rotational direction, as shown in the free body
diagram section. The rotational torque can be found using
equation (12):
τ = d x Fmd
(12)
Fmd from the two MFL modules is about 480 N and the
torque is about 240 Nm. The pipe diameter is 1000 mm and
the axis of rotation of the MFL is at the center of the pipe.
To sustain the torque and rotational velocity (30 rpm), a
motor has to generate about 0.75 kW of power.
However, due to the large power source and motor
volume, we try to generate detachment force (Fd) rather than
turning to high power motors. The detachment force reduces
the total MFL drag force from (13).
Fmd = μ·(Fm - Fd)
(13)
3
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

To generate the Fd, pneumatic linear actuators are applied
(Figure 7). Using calibrated pressure, the actuators are able
to fully detach the MFL from the pipe wall or reduce the Fmd.
The actuator is designed to generate a detachment force
up to 1600 N at 0.65 MPa. By using the actuator, Fmd
decreased to 400 N resulting in a total required torque of 80
Nm and a motor power of 0.25 kW.
Figure 7. Rotating module: the MFL module and DAQ for sensing,
Ethernet hub for transferring the sensing data to server, sol-valve for
controlling the actuators, damper for reducing the sudden motion made by
magnetic force
The MFL module can rotate infinitely which may twist
the power and communication cables and air hose. To avoid
the twist, a slip ring is applied and swivel manifold are
specially designed. The swivel type causes the friction on the
seal, which depends on the compressed volume of the O-ring.
In our design, the volume is kept at half of the maximum
recommended by the manufacturer, to decrease the friction,
as in Figure 8.
Due to the decrease in the Fmd, the required wheel torque
is also decreased to 1 Nm (upper) and 22 Nm (bottom),
allowing the choice of general hub motor.
E.
Driving Wheel Attachment Mechanism
For a stable locomotion, wheels require a mechanism that
creates a push force and conform to a rough pipe surface. A
scissors mechanism is designed to lift the robot and push
against the wall for stable attachment. The reaction force is
the sum of push force and weight (14). The force is about
2000 N, weight 1600 N and push 380 N.
Figure 8. MFL modules rotating hinge mechanism
Fl = Fw + Fp
(14)
To generate the force, the mechanism (Figure 9) uses a
ball screw which requires about 0.6 Nm of torque.
Because the ball screw cannot be driven backwards, the
feedback current of the motor cannot be used to conform to
the rough pipe surface and welding bead. In order to
overcome this issue, we apply the load cell to directly read
the external forces changed by pipe conditions.
Figure 9. Wheel attachment mechanism
III.
CONCLUSION
This project aims to design and verify robot mobility and
motion of the sensors needed for a large water pipe
inspection. As the result, we design a robot system that can
climb a 22.5° slope and generate spiral motion for the
sensors. The key design factor is the use of the pneumatic
actuator. Using the compressibility of the air, compliance,
control is made simple without additional force-torque
4
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

sensor, complex system modeling and control strategies
compared to motor based systems. Additionally, because of
reduced magnetic attractive force, the system’s weight,
volume and power consumption can be decreased with a
low powered motor.
For the future work, we aim to overcome additional
obstacles, such as 45° and 22.5° miter type bend, water, and
spiral weld bead. Based on this research and development,
we will design another robot system that will be able to
overcome the additional obstacles marked in Figure 10. We
will also develop an algorithm to find defects from data
generated solely by the two MFL modules in spiral motion.
Figure 10. Final robot test bed: obstacles: 45°, 22.5° miter type elbow,
water section, about 30 m distance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
work
was
supported
by
Korea
Environment
Industry & Technology Institute (KEITI) through Advanced
Water Management Research Program, funded by Korea
Ministry of Environment (MOE) (RE201901020).
REFERENCES
[1]
J. M. Mirats Tur and W. Garthwaite, “Robotic Devices for
Water Main In-Pipe Inspection:A Survey,” in J. Field Robotics,
vol. 27, pp. 491-508, Apr. 2010, doi: 10.1002/rob.20347
[2]
Z. Liu and Y. Kleiner, “State of the art review of inspection
technologies for condition assessment of water pipes,” in
Measurement, vol. 46, pp. 1-15, Jan. 2013
[3]
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, M. Cai, and G. Jia, “Theory and
Application of Magnetic Flux Leakage Pipeline Detection,”
in Sensors, vol. 15(12), pp. 31036-31055, Dec., 2015
[4]
H. Song, L. Yang, G. Liu, G. Tian, D. Ona, Y. Song, and S.
Li,” Comparative Analysis of In-line Inspection Equipments
and Technologies,” in IOP Conf. Ser.: Mate. Sci. Eng., vol.
382, pp. 032021, Jul. 2018
[5]
W. G. Sawyer, K. D. Freudenberg, P. Bhimaraj, and L. S.
Schadler, “A study on the friction and wear behavior of PTFE
filled with alumina nanoparticles,” in Wear, vol. 254, pp 573-
580, Mar. 2003.
[6]
M. A. Cruz Gómez, E. A. Gallardo-Hernández, M. Vite Torres,
and A. Peña Bautista, “Rubber steel friction in contaminated
contacts,” in Wear, vol. 302, pp. 1421-1425, Feb. 2013.
[7]
Diakont,
http://www.diakont.com/energy_services/robotic_inline_inspec
tion.html [accessed July 2019]
[8]
C. W. Rim, J. S. Bang, S. J. Moon, T. Y. Chung, H. J. Cho,
and D. S. Bae, “Development of Software for Coupled Aero-
Elastic Dynamic Analysis of Wind Turbine System,” in
International Society of Offshore and Polar Engineers, Jan.
2010.
5
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-730-6
SMART 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

