Operational Evaluation of New Transportation Method for Smart City 
Use of Personal Mobility Vehicles under Three Different Scenarios 
Naohisa Hashimoto, Kohji Tomita, Ali Boyli, Osamu 
Matsumoto 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology (AIST) 
Tsukuba, Japan 
e-mail:{naohisa-hashimoto, k.tomita, ali-boyali, 
matsumoto.o}@aist.go.jp 
Alexander Smirnov1,2, Alexey Kashevnik1,2, Igor 
Lashkov2 
1 Institute for Informatics and Automation of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences (SPIIRAS), 
2 ITMO University 
St. Petersburg, Russia 
e-mail:{smir, alexey}@iias.spb.su, igor-lashkov@ya.ru
 
Abstract—One potential solution to traffic issues is to reduce 
traffic volumes in urban areas. A number of countries, 
particularly Japan, will face an unprecedented situation from 
an increasingly aging society. Thus, new eco-friendly universal 
mobility vehicles are expected to be developed. We proposed the 
use of personal mobility vehicles as a new type of transportation 
device. 
To 
evaluate 
the 
possibility 
of 
our 
proposed 
transportation device, it is necessary to conduct operational 
evaluations under real-world conditions by employing subjects 
in a pilot study. We used three experimental scenarios for an 
evaluation. 
The 
three 
scenarios 
used 
each 
different 
transportation route and subjects. Traveling data and 
questionnaire relating related to the velocity, stability, safety, 
and comfort of the proposed device were gathered. The results 
are valuable for evaluating the social receptivity, safety, and 
efficiency of a personal mobility device.  
Keywords- 
Personal 
Mobility 
Vehicle; 
ITS; 
New 
Transportation Device; Pilot Study. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many researchers have been seeking ways to solve traffic 
problems. The increase of urban traffic has led to increases in 
traffic jams, traffic accidents, and air pollution, all of which 
have resulted in serious damage [1][2]. One potential solution 
to these problems is to reduce the traffic volumes in urban 
areas. Modal shifts from conventional vehicles to public 
transportation and eco-vehicles, including personal vehicles, 
should also be considered to reduce urban traffic volumes. In 
this study, we focus on personal mobility to reduce traffic 
volumes in urban areas. 
The rapid increase in the proportion of elderly people in 
the population has caused several issues in Japan [3]. Elderly 
people in Japan account for more road fatalities than any other 
age group [4]. Automobiles are an optimal means of 
transportation for the elderly because automobiles allow for 
door-to-door transportation. However, to address the traffic 
problems described above, we have to shift at least some 
movement of people from individual automobiles to public 
transportation, some aspects of which are less than ideal for 
the elderly. To resolve this conflict, useful and eco-friendly 
transportation must be provided for the elderly people. 
Although public transportation is useful and eco-friendly, the 
last-mile problem remains, particular for elderly users [5]-[7]. 
Personal mobility is considered the only option for solving 
this problem. 
To address the aforementioned two challenges described 
above, we propose the use of personal vehicles as a means of 
future transportation. The main objective of this study is 
evaluating the feasibility of a new mobility device, i.e., a 
Winglet personal mobility vehicle, which is produced by the 
Toyota Motor Corporation of Japan. To obtain various types 
of related data, we prepared three different real-world 
scenarios under which we conducted an experiment using 
mobile sensors; in addition, we gathered questionnaire results 
regarding the subjects’ overall experience with these scenarios. 
Herein, in Section 2, the Tsukuba Designated Zone, where 
the real-world experiment was conducted, is described. In 
Section 3, we present the evaluation questionnaires provided. 
In Section 4, the results of the real-world experiment are all 
described. 
 
II. 
TSUKUBA DESIGNATED ZONE FOR EXPERIMENTS 
This section describes the Tsukuba Designated Zone, 
where the experiment was performed. This institution was 
formed to improve robotics technology (personal mobility is 
considered to be in the robotics category in Japan). It was 
officially approved as the Tsukuba Designated Zone by the 
Cabinet Office in Japan on January 29, 2010. The objective of 
this institution is described below. 
It is impossible to do real-world personal mobility 
experiments in public areas because personal vehicles 
(including mobile robots) are prohibited from traveling in 
public areas under current law. Personal vehicles and robots 
are expected to contribute to the welfare of future generations 
through their low carbon emissions and high levels of safety 
and security. In addition, robotics technology is expected to 
contribute to the creation and development of new industries. 
Since February 2012, Segway Japan, the Hitachi 
Corporation, and AIST have been engaged in conducting 
experiments in personal mobility, and more members, 
including private companies and universities, are planning to 
join them.  
The Designated Zone has two areas for conducting 
experiments. One is the Tsukuba Center Station area, and the 
other is the Kenkyugakuen Station area, shown in Figure 1. 
The Tsukuba Center Station area consists mainly of a 
pedestrian road from the University of Tsukuba to Akatsuka 
Park, with a major focus on Tsukuba Central Station, where a 
large shopping center and a bus terminal are located. The 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

width of this road is greater than 3 [m] and is sufficient to 
allow use by bicycles. For these reasons, this public area is 
appropriate for experimental studies. Even within the 
Tsukuba Designated Zone, there are some regulations that 
apply to conducting experiments. 
 
 
Figure 1. Tsukuba Designated Zone (Left: Tsukuba center area, Right: 
Kenkyugakuen area)  
 
III. 
OPERATIONAL EVALUATIONS IN THREE SCENARIOS 
We conducted an operational evaluation through real-world 
experiments. This section describes three scenarios employed 
in this study, the experimental conditions, the questionnaires 
provided, and the experimental results, as well as an overall 
discussion.  
A. Personal Mobility Vehicle 
The Winglet shown in Figure 2 was employed as the 
personal mobility vehicle in this study. The Winglet is an 
assistance-type mobility device that is ridden in a standing 
position and is designed to contribute to the realization of a 
world in which everyone can enjoy mobility freely and safely. 
The Winglet is more compact than a Segway personal 
mobility device [8]. We equipped each Winglet with several 
sensors to record data near incident scenes and record travel-
related data (velocity, accretion, yaw rate, and location). We 
chose a Winglet because it is a two-wheeled, self-balancing 
vehicle, and riding a self-balancing vehicle poses different 
risks than riding a bicycle or walking. 
 
 
Figure. 2 Winglets (equipped with mobile sensors) 
B. Experimental Scenarios 
All routes used in this study are located in the Tsukuba 
Designated Zone in Japan, which is described in section 2. 
We chose three scenarios, each of which has different 
features including a different route and subjects. Before 
conducting the experiments, we applied a risk assessment of 
riding a Winglet for every route. Each of the three scenarios 
is described in the following sub-sections. 
1) AIST to Tsukuba St. (Scenario 1) 
The route for scenario 1 runs between the AIST and 
Tsukuba Station in the Tsukuba center area. This route 
consisted of roads that are open to both pedestrians and 
cyclists. The route used for the experiment is shown in Figure 
3 and Figure 4. The blue line shows the route itself, and the 
blue dots show the locations of the two stations in Figure 4. 
The route is mostly flat, but includes some slopes and 
pedestrian crossings. The surface of the route is asphalt and 
stone pavement. The distance of this route is about 3.6 km. 
The subjects participating in the experiment were AIST staff 
members and licensed drivers. The subjects ranged in age 
from 31 to 56, with an average age of 46.6. All subjects are 
engineering researchers. Most of the subjects typically use 
free AIST buses to or from Tsukuba station. For this scenario, 
the subjects used a Winglets as substitute for an AIST bus. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 3. Experimental area for Scenario 1 (the blule line indicates the 
route for this scenario 1) 
 
 
Figure 4. Photographs of the experimental route for scenario 1 
2) Tsukuba City Government Office to Kenkyugakuen 
Station (Scenario 2) 
The route for scenario 2 runs between the Tsukuba City 
Government 
Office 
and 
Kenkyugakuen 
St 
in 
the 
Kenkyugakuen area. This route consists of roads that are open 
to both pedestrians and cyclists. The area used for the 
experiment is shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6. In Figure 5, the 
green line shows the specific route used, which is mostly flat 
with pedestrian crossings. The surface of the route is asphalt 
and stone-paved. The distance of this route is about 0.7km. 
The subjects participating in this experiment were Tsukuba 
City staff members. All subjects were licensed drivers. The 
average age of the subjects was 36.6, with an overall range in 
age of 26 to 57. All subjects were office workers. In this 
scenario, we asked the subjects to use a Winglets as substitute 
for walking or using their own vehicle, and some of the 
subjects tried to modal shift from a vehicle to train and 
Winglet. 
 
 
Figure 5. Experimental area for both scenario 2 and scenario 3 (the green 
lines indicates the route of scenario 2, and  the red lines shows the route of 
scenario 3) 
 
Figure 6. Photographs of the experimental course for scenario 2 
3) Shopping Mall to Kenkyugakuen Station (Scenario 3) 
The route for scenario 3 runs between the shopping mall 
and Kenkyugakuen St. tin he Kenkyugakuen area. This route 
consists of roads that are open to both pedestrians and cyclists. 
The route used for the experiment is shown in Figure 5 and 
Figure 7. The red line in Figure 5 shows the route used for 
scenario 3, which is also mostly flat with pedestrian crossings. 
The surface of the route is asphalt and stone pavement, and 
the distance is about 0.6 km. The subjects who participated in 
the experiment were staff members of the shopping mall. All 
subjects were licensed drivers. The average age of the subjects 
Shopping Mall
Tsukuba City 
Government 
Office
Small 
Intersection 
with a signal 
Large 
Intersection 
with a signal 
Kenkyugakuen St.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

was about 47.5 with a margin of error of plus or minus 5 owing 
to an issue of privacy. Their ages ranged from 25 to 75, also 
with a margin of error of plus or minus 5. All subjects were 
office workers. For this scenario, we asked the subjects to use 
a Winglet on during their break period. 
 
 
Figure 7. Photographs of the experimental route for scenario 3 
C. Common Experimental Condition for the three 
Scenarios 
All of the subjects participated in a seminar regarding the 
Winglet and received training on how to ride one. In addition, 
the seminar addressed the control mechanisms of the Winglet 
and the rules for operating a Winglet in an outdoor 
environment. The training included both physical skill and 
written tests, and every subject who participated in the 
experiment had to pass both tests. All testing was organized 
by staff members authorized by Toyota Motor Corporation. 
No testing was conducted under rainy or dark conditions. For 
safety reasons, one staff member follows behind the personal 
vehicle during travel. 
Each subject drove his or her Winglet from the start point 
to the end point. There are two pedestrian crossings on each 
course. The use of public areas was thought to be important 
in obtaining experimental results that would more closely 
reflect reality than results that would otherwise be obtained 
in restricted areas or laboratories. 
D. Questionnaire 
   Before participating in the experiment, each subject filled 
out a questionnaire to provide answers to the following 
questions. 
 
What are your relevant personal characteristics 
(gender, age)? 
 
Which transportation method do you usually use for 
this route? 
 
Have you ever used this type of personal mobility 
device before? 
 
Do you usually do some exercise? 
Also, a conjoint analysis of the subjects’ responses was 
conducted. 
   After the experiment, each subject filled out a questionnaire 
providing answers to the following questions. 
(I) 
Would you use a Winglet again under the same 
conditions? (If no, please describe the reason why?) 
(II) Do you think the distance of the course was too long? 
(If so, please state what you think an appropriate 
length would be.) 
(III) Was riding a Winglet more comfortable than walking? 
(IV) What was your opinion of the maximum velocity? 
(V) What 
do 
you 
consider 
the 
advantages 
and 
disadvantages of using a Winglet? 
(VI) Are there other conditions or locations under which 
you would like to use a Winglet again? 
(VII) If you have any comments regarding this experiments, 
please let us know. 
IV. 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
    The subjects covered a total distance of approximately 217 
km. All of the experiments were conducted without the 
occurrence of any accidents or near-accident situations that 
could have led to serious injury. In comparison with the data 
available for other mobility devices such as bicycles, the 
amount of experimental data obtained in this study is 
insufficient to assess the safety of the device. Nevertheless, 
this mobility device is believed to provide a significant 
measure of safety. We will continue to conduct experiments 
to prove its safety statistically in future studies. 
     The results and an analysis of each question are described 
in the following. 
Figure 8 shows the results for question I. We found that 
the subjects expressed favorable opinions regarding the 
Winglet, and many expressed a desire to use it again in the 
future. For those who answered “no” regarding their future 
use of a Winglet, their reasons are as follows: 
 
It took too long because of the low maximum velocity 
(6km/h). 
 
I want to use the Winglet without an accompanying 
staff member. 
 
The Winglet needs to be improved when traveling on 
uneven roads. 
 
I want to avoid muscle fatigue in my foot. 
These comments indicate that we need to improve the riding 
capability of the Winglet. In addition, privacy was found to 
be an important factor on using this type of mobility device. 
 
 
Figure 8. Results of wuestionnare I : Would you use a Winglet again under 
the same conditions 
      Figure 9 shows the results for question II. We found that 
the route distances of both scenarios  2 and 3 were appropriate. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Based on those subjects who answered “yes” to whether the 
distances were appropriate, it is assumed that the average 
appropriate distance for a Winglet is about 2.6 km. 
 
 
Figure 9. Results of questionnare II:Do you think the distance of the course 
was too long? 
      Figure 10 shows the results for question III. Most subjects 
answered that the Winglet is more comfortable than walking. 
It is assumed that a Winglet can contribute to a reduction in 
fatigue when traveling. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Results of questionnare III (“Even” indicates no difference 
between riding a Winglet and walking) 
     Figure 11 shows the results for question IV. None of the 
subjects answered that the maximum velocity (6km/h) was 
too fast. About 80% of the subjects who answered that it was 
too slow hoped for a maximum velocity of over 10 km/h, and 
the average maximum velocity desired was about 12 km/h. 
Depending on the user preference, it may be better for users 
to be able to change the maximum velocity. 
 
 
Figure 11. Results of questionnare IV: What was your opinion of the 
maximum velocity? 
   Positive comments in the result of question V are as 
follows: 
 
I was able to enjoy great view because of the higher 
vantage point when riding the Winglet than when 
walking. 
 
I could communicate well because I felt comfortable 
during the experiment. 
 
I can commute to my office without using my vehicle 
 
I can travel without sweating. 
 
I was comfortable without pitch movement compared 
to walking. 
 
I can avoid getting my shoes dirty. 
Most of the subjects provided comments related to the better 
vantage point while riding the device, which was unexpected, 
but may be a significant motivation for people to utilize a 
personal vehicle such as a Winglet. There were no negative 
comments in the results for question V. 
   Other possible uses for a Winglet found from the result of 
question VI include the followings: 
 
On sloping roads 
 
In a shopping mall 
 
For sightseeing 
 
For poor physical condition 
 
To go to a restaurant during lunch break 
 
On patrol 
   The results of question VII indicate that the subjects found 
it easy to avoid pedestrians when riding the Winglet because 
the footprint of the Winglet is close to that of a pedestrian and 
the device is easy to turn. Although the maximum speed of a 
Winglet is 6 km/h, which is close to walking speed, the rider 
of a Winglet tends to maneuver to avoid pedestrians before 
the pedestrians maneuver to avoid the rider. 
   Based on the results of all of the question, we determined 
the following evaluations regarding the use of a Winglet. 
 
The device should be utilized for short transportation 
distances owing to its size and velocity. 
 
It is useful for multiple purposes including commuting 
and sightseeing. 
 
It can be a great private transportation device. 
 
It assists the rider, especially when traveling on 
sloping roads. 
The results of this technological evaluation are similar to 
reports on experiments conducted using Segway [8]-[13]. In 
analyzing the questionnaire results, we found that those 
people who used this personal device expressed favorable 
opinions for all three different scenarios.  
The results obtained show that a Winglet personal mobility 
vehicle offers good social receptivity and safety on pedestrian 
roads, regardless of the age or gender of the rider. Therefore, 
riding a Winglet is presumed to be a feasible activity for all 
types of people, regardless of their age, gender, exercise 
habits or other factors. 
  To examine the various factors that can affect the experience 
of a Winglet, the relationships among the various factors 
identified from both the questionnaire and data analysis 
results will be analyzed in a future study. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

    In Japan, traffic regulations prohibit the use of standing-
type vehicles, such as Winglets and Segways, on public roads, 
and hence, it is difficult to conduct experiments with these 
devices frequently, as mentioned previously in the section on 
the Tsukuba Designated Zone. Thus, the relaxation of these 
regulations is key to encouraging the use of the Winglet. If 
this issue is resolved, this system can be more widely used 
and would be particularly useful in a country such as Japan, 
given its traffic jams, expensive parking fees, and limited 
availability of parking lots. The findings obtained concerning 
efficiency, protection of the ecosystem and traveling data are 
not presented in this paper. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we described an operational evaluation of a 
personal mobility vehicle as new type of transportation 
device. To evaluate the feasibility of the proposed 
transportation device, it was necessary to conduct an 
operational evaluation under real-world conditions by 
employing actual subjects in a pilot study. We used three 
experimental scenarios for our evaluation, each of which 
applied a different route and subjects. Travel data and 
questionnaire results related to the velocity, stability, safety, 
and comfort of the device were gathered. These results are 
valuable for evaluating the social receptivity, safety, and 
efficiency of a personal mobility device. In analyzing the 
questionnaire results, we found that the people who used this 
personal mobility expressed favorable opinions of the 
Winglet in three different scenarios. No accidents associated 
with the Winglet occurred during our experiments. Thus, the 
results of three experiment and questionnaire described in 
this paper show that Winglet personal mobility vehicle offers 
good social receptivity and safety on pedestrian roads for the 
multiple purposes. The Winglet riding assistance system for 
personal mobility are being developed [14][15]. A personal 
smartphone is used to determine percentage of closure of 
eyelid, eye blink time, eye-blinking rate, eye gaze, pupil 
movement, eyelid movement, postures, head pose using the 
front camera as well as Winglet speed and acceleration, 
vehicle headway (measurement of the distance or time 
between vehicles), lane position and road signs, Winglet 
turns using the back camera and other smartphone sensors. 
Rider Assistance Systems are the systems that assist the rider 
during the driving process. They are designed with a safe 
human-machine interface aiming to increase vehicle and road 
safety. It is common practice that such kind of systems are 
designed for car riders by the third party manufacturers that 
are specialized on them and can develop similar applications 
for the smartphones and tablets.   
For future work, we will perform the experiments with the 
riding assistance system in the real world. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 This work was supported by New Energy and Industrial 
Technology Development Organization in Japan, Japan 
Society for the Promotion of Science fellowship program and 
Government of Russian Federation, Grant 074-U01. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S.Tsugawa, “Promotion of Energy ITS”, 2008 EU-Japan 
Cooperation Forum on ICT Research, 2008. 
[2] S.Shladover, “Challenges to evaluation of CO2 impacts of 
intelligent transportation systems”, Proceedings of 2011 IEEE 
Integrated and Sustainable Transportation System, 2011, 
p.189-194. 
[3] Cabinet Office, “White Paper on Traffic Safety in Japan 2006,” 
p.11, 2006. 
[4] National Police Agency in Japan, “Statictics Repot 2012” , (in 
Japanese). 
[5] B.Balcik, B.M.Beamon and K.Smilowitz, “Last Mile 
Distribution in Humanitarian Relief,” Journal of Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, Vol. 12, No. 2, 2008, p.51–63. 
[6] Mineta Transportation Institute, “Using Bicycles for the First 
and Last Mile of a Commute,” Report No. S-09-02, 2009. 
[7] N.Hashimoto, S.Kato and S.Tsugawa, “A Cooperative 
Assistance System Between Vehicles for Elderly Drivers”, 
IATSS research, vol.33, No.1, 2009, p.35-41. 
[8] Segway Review Report -A Review of Segway Use in the 
Australian Capital Territory-, 2012. 
[9] N.Hashimoto, K.Tomita, A.Kamimura and O.Matsumoto, 
Development of Personal Shared Mobility System -Use of 
Segway as Personal Mobility Device-, Proceedings of 2014 
ITS World Congress, Detroit, USA, 2014. 
[10] S.Miller, J.Kennedy, J.Molino, A.Emo, G.Rousseau and C.Tan, 
A.Do, ”Operation Characteristics of the Segway Human 
Transporater”, Report No. FHWA-HRT-10-025, 2010. 
[11] K.Tomita, 
N.Hashimoto 
and 
O.Matsumoto, 
“Personal 
Mobility Sharing -A Simulation Study-“, Proceedings of 94th 
Transportation Research Board, 2015. 
[12] N. Hashimoto, Y. Takinami and O. Matsumoto, “An 
Experimental Study on Vehicle Behavior to Wheel Chairs and 
Standing-type Vehicles at Intersection”, Proceedings of 13th 
International Conference on ITS Telecommunications, 2013, 
p.350–355. 
[13] N.Hashimoto, Yoshihisa Sakurai, Yusuke Suzuki, Kohji 
Tomita, Eichi Horiuchi, Osamu Matsumoto and Masashi 
Yokozuka, “An experimental study on changes of muscle 
fatigue among traveling by standing-type mobile vehicles and 
walking”, Proceedings of 15th International IEEE Conference 
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2012, p.1888-1893. 
[14] A.Boyali and N.Hashimoto, “Block-Sparse Representation 
Classification based Gesture Recognition Approach for a 
Robotic Wheelchair”, Proceedings of IEEE Intelligent 
Vehicles Symposium, 2014, p.1133-1138. 
[15] A.Smirnov and A.Kashevnik, I.Lashkov, N.Hashimoto, 
A.Boyali, “Smartphone-Based Two-Wheeled Self-Balancing 
Vehicles Rider Assistant”, Proceedings of FRUCT17, 2015
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

