The Role of the Internet and Technology in the Well-being of People with Physical
Disabilities
Alexandra Young, Tom Dening, Chris Greenhalgh
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
Email: Alexandra.young@nottingham.ac.uk; tom.dening@nottingham.ac.uk; chris.greenhalgh@nottingham.ac.uk
Abstract— Online activity can play an important role in the
lifestyle
and
well-being
of
people
living
with
physical
disabilities.
This
mixed
methods
study
involving
45
participants from around Nottinghamshire serves to illustrate
the multiple roles Information Technology (IT) and the
Internet can play in supporting the mental and physical well-
being of people with lifetime disabilities. 44 of the 45
participants were active users of IT, to a greater or lesser
extent, with uses ranging from vital communication devices, to
hobbies and small business use.
Keywords-
Physical
Disability;
Internet;
Information
Communication Technologies; ICT; Information Technology;
IT; Well-being.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The
Internet
and
technology play an
increasingly
important role in the day to day lives of people across the
UK. This change certainly includes people living with
physical disabilities. The trend continues to increase with a
wider range of adaptive and assistive technologies becoming
available
and
affordable,
with
smartphones
becoming
almost
ubiquitous.
As
more
information
from
the
government and health services is nowadays located online,
this is a trend not just built from want, but also from
necessity.
The research presented is an exploratory study, looking
at how people with physical disabilities are using the
Internet on a day to day basis, and the role this has on well-
being, rather than focusing on interventions or specific
activities. Research in this area is sparse and inconclusive
[1][2], with the majority of the literature looking at a
specific aspect of Internet use or well-being, such as
improvements in the classroom [3], or promotion of
physical
activity and
peer
connection
through
online
resources [4], [5]. The literature also supports a similar
focus on information sharing and social support, with little
insight into how this fits into people’s daily Internet
activities [6][7][8][9].
The rest of the paper is structured as followed; in section
2 we describe the recruitment and analysis methods used in
this study. In section 3 we cover the results of data
collection, and discuss the findings of the study, and the
limitations of the methods utilized. In section 4 we
concluded what impact the Internet had on the physical and
mental well-being of participants in this study. Section 5
covers further work, and how the findings of this study have
been fed into a wider project on Internet use and well-being.
II.
METHODS
The data for this study were collected using a mix of face
to face interviews, and online questionnaires.
Participants for the interview study were contacted
through collaboration with Nottinghamshire County Council.
In order to protect the anonymity of potential participants,
the Council was supplied with the inclusion criteria (over 18,
receiving
assistance
from
the
adult
social
services
department for a physical disability, and living in their own
home rather than residential care), and asked to send out an
information letter inviting people to respond and participate
in the study. People receiving these letters were then free to
respond, or not, if they were interested in the study. In all, 18
participants were recruited from 150 total responses across
phone, email, text and post, with interested parties making
contact through email being directed to the questionnaire
after the interview study was filled. However, in the end, 16
interviews
were
completed
due
to
two
participants
withdrawing. The interviews were semi-structured and lasted
between 30 and 120 minutes. The interviews were audio
recorded and then transcribed for analysis in NVivo [10][11],
first using a grounded theory approach [12], and then
thematic analysis based on emergent themes from the first
coding, as well as those from the questionnaire data for
comparison.
Participants for the online questionnaire were recruited
through link sharing on social media (Twitter, Reddit, and
Facebook), an advertisement on a participant recruitment
website, and word of mouth. Some participants were also
directed to the questionnaire after expressing interest in the
interview study after it was filled. The questionnaire
followed the same outline as the interview script, with a mix
of open and closed questions, allowing participants to
elaborate on answers or leave comments where appropriate.
This allowed the answers to be more directly comparable to
those given in the face to face interviews, and create a more
useful
data
source.
In
total,
29
questionnaires
were
completed over a two month period. Free text entries in the
questionnaire were analysed in a similar way to the
questionnaire transcripts in order to create a level of
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

comparison in the emergent themes between the two data
sources.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In total, 45 people participated across the two streams,
with 16 participating in interviews and 29 completing the
online questionnaire. The participants were from a broad
age range, spanning from 18 to 85 across the two groups,
and had a variety of different physical disabilities; it is
significant to note here that people were not asked what
diagnosis or disability they had, and any data on this was
disclosed freely either in the interview or using a free text
option in the questionnaire. Significantly, the group of
participants was made up of a mix of people who had
experienced the disability their whole lives, and people who
had become disabled later in life, either through an accident
or the onset of a related condition. This allowed a greater
level of insight into the role the Internet had played during
the rehabilitation and adaptation process, and how the use
had changed over time. The comparison between people
who had always lived with a disability, and those who had
come disabled allowed a view into the use of technology
and the uptake of and acceptance of it between the two
groups.
The data from both groups showed clearly that the
Internet and technology play a significant role in the daily
activities of the people who took part in this study. This
included learning about how to adapt products to suit the
individuals’ specific needs, and reaching out and finding, or
forming
peer
support
groups;
of
29
questionnaire
participants, 18 used time on the Internet to find peer
support groups. Over three quarters of participants used at
least one form of social media every day, for a mix of
purposes, including peer support and charity information.
One participant cited the Internet as “a lifeline” that had
allowed them to adapt to their disability, moving from a tool
for occasional shopping and emails, to something which has
allowed them to adapt existing items in the house for
continued use. Another participant had a voice controlled
‘possum’ unit set up to operate their computer, as well as to
control the television, door locks, and phone from their
wheelchair in order to retain a greater level of independence
during the day between assistant visits. Apart from one
participant who did not have access to the Internet, all the
participants across the interviews and questionnaire group
used the Internet to connect with family and friends, and to
continue to access hobbies and support networks, for
example through writing, singing groups, online gaming,
and social media. Alongside information finding, the
accessing of support networks was found to be a key theme,
and thus should be considered in routine rehabilitation
practice.
As mentioned, only one participant did not use the
Internet or any technology, beyond television and radio, and
had no interest in doing so for either social or rehabilitation
purposes. Otherwise, all participants were active users of
different technologies, covering a range of devices from
smart phones to multiple desktop computers, or multiple
devices in use. However, there is likely to be considerable
bias arising from the recruitment of the participants.
Questionnaire participants were recruited through social
media and sharing in charity forums, and the survey itself
was hosted online, requiring a certain level of engagement
on the Internet in order to find, or receive, the survey link,
and interest in order to complete it. Although interview
participants did not need to have online access, the
recruitment letter for the interviews specifically asked about
Internet use for accessing social services and support, which
probably discouraged other people who had limited Internet
use. Of the people who received information letters about
the study from the County Council, about 100 replied saying
that they felt unable to participate in a face-to-face interview
because of lack of access to laptops, smartphones and/or the
Internet. A further 40 of the responses were from people
who used the Internet but felt that they did not use it
enough, or to access social services support, and would
therefore not be of any help in the study.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
Although the number of participants was small across
both the questionnaire and interview elements of the study,
the nature of the responses indicates that the Internet and
communication technologies play a significant role in the
ability to adapt existing resources to fit condition specific
needs, and in supporting mental well-being of people with
physical disabilities. For many of the participants, it allowed
a way to connect with peers and expand existing support
networks in ways which may not have been possible due to
travel accessibility, or indeed geographic distance from
peers with a similar condition. It is therefore important to
consider the potential positive influence of online sources of
support and information, and the roles they can play beyond
normal Internet usage for adults living with physical
disabilities.
V.
FURTHER WORK
Building on the findings in this study, further work is
planned to understand the impact of Internet use on the
well-being and information seeking practices of people
diagnosed with early onset dementia, and how this use
changes
as
the
condition
progresses
and
changes
interactions with technology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The lead author, Alexandra Young, is supported by the
Horizon Centre for Doctoral Training at the University of
Nottingham (RCUK Grant No. EP/L015463/1) and by
Nottinghamshire County Council, the external partner.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

REFERENCES
[1]
L. P. Cheatham, “Effects of Internet use on well-
being among adults with physical disabilities: A
review,” Disabil. Rehabil. Assist. Technol., vol. 7, no.
3, pp. 181–188, May 2012.
[2]
C. Grimaldi and T. Goette, “The Internet and the
independence
of
individuals
with
disabilities,”
Internet Res., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 272–280, Oct. 1999.
[3]
C. S. Englert, Y. Zhao, K. Dunsmore, N. Y. Collings,
and K. Wolbers, “Scaffolding the Writing of Students
with Disabilities through
Procedural Facilitation:
Using an Internet-Based Technology to Improve
Performance,” Learn. Disabil. Q., vol. 30, no. 1, pp.
9–29, Feb. 2007.
[4]
V. D. Berg et al., “Engagement and satisfaction with
an Internet-based physical activity intervention in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis,” Rheumatology,
vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 545–552, Mar. 2007.
[5]
S. L. Hopps, M. Pépin, and J.-M. Boisvert, “The
effectiveness of cognitive-behavioral group therapy
for loneliness via inter relaychat among people with
physical disabilities.,” Psychother. Theory Res. Pract.
Train., vol. 40, no. 1–2, pp. 136–147, 2003.
[6]
Finn J, “An exploration of helping processes in an
online
self-help
group
focusing
on
issues
of
disability,” Health Soc. Work, vol. 24, no. 3, p. 220–
231 12p, Aug. 1999.
[7]
D. O. Braithwaite, V. R. Waldron, and J. Finn,
“Communication of Social Support in Computer-
Mediated
Groups for People With Disabilities,”
Health Commun., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 123–151, Apr.
1999.
[8]
H. Liang and Y. Xue, “Online health information use
by
disabled
people:
The
moderating
role
of
disability,” presented at the International Conference
on Information Systems (ICIS 2013): Reshaping
Society Through Information Systems Design, 2013,
vol. 3, pp. 2798–2813.
[9]
M.-L. Drainoni et al., “Patterns of internet use by
persons with spinal cord injuries and relationship to
health-related quality of life,” Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil., vol. 85, no. 11, pp. 1872–1879, Nov. 2004.
[10]
P. Bazeley and K. Jackson, Qualitative Data Analysis
with NVivo. SAGE, 2013.
[11]
N. L. Leech and A. J. Onwuegbuzie, “Beyond
constant comparison qualitative data analysis: Using
NVivo.
School
Psychology
Quarterly,”
Am.
J.
Orthopsychiatry, pp. 70–84, 2011.
[12]
J. M. Corbin and A. Strauss, “Grounded theory
research: Procedures, canons, and evaluative criteria,”
Qual. Sociol., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3–21, Mar. 1990.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

