CITYOPT 
Holistic simulation and optimisation of energy systems in smart cities
Régis Decorme 
Information Technologies and Knowledge Dissemination 
CSTB 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
email:regis.decorme@cstb.fr  
 
Åsa Hedman  
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd 
Espoo, Finland 
email:asa.hedman@vtt.fi
Abstract — CITYOPT is a collaborative project supported by 
the European Commission through the Seventh Framework 
Programme (FP7). CITYOPT mission is to optimise energy 
systems in smart cities. The project will create a set of 
applications and related guidelines that support efficient 
planning, detailed design and operation of energy systems in 
urban districts. 
Keywords-energy efficiency; smart cities; urban planning; 
detailed design; demand-response; user awareness. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
68% of the European Union population lives in urban 
areas, this proportion is growing as the urbanization trend 
continues, raising the energy demand for private and public 
consumers and for economic activities with the subsequent 
increase in CO2 emissions [1].  
Furthermore, urban areas have high levels of air 
pollution, primarily from the burning of fossil fuels in energy 
production and road transport, resulting in enormous 
economic and social costs [2][3]. Additionally, energy 
security is also becoming increasingly important with 
declining European natural gas and oil reserves together with 
the current geo-strategy situation [4][5]. This highlights the 
importance of the development of more sustainable urban 
areas which are more energy and resource efficient, the use 
of renewable energy sources, reduction of the carbon 
footprint, infrastructure development, engagement of the 
stakeholders and users, removing administrative and 
regulatory barriers and new business models [6]. 
 
The CITYOPT project addresses energy system 
optimization in different lifecycle phases, supported by a 
user-centred design approach. Stakeholders, including city 
decision makers, city planners, energy utilities, facility 
managers, and citizens, are involved in all project phases. 
CITYOPT develops a set of applications and guidelines 
supporting efficient planning, detailed design and operation 
of energy systems in urban districts. Business models for the 
use cases have been developed and are shortly described in 
this paper. The project considers appropriate service business 
models, privacy and trust and involves users in all the project 
phases.  
This paper presents the overall context in Section II and 
project objectives in Section III. It then introduces the 3 pilot 
case studies in Austria, Finland, and France in Section IV. 
Finally, preliminary results and expected results of the 
approach are presented in Section V. 
II. 
URBAN ENERGY SYSTEMS 
A holistic view considers integrating the design of the 
urban areas, the built environment, infrastructure and the 
energy system creating opportunities to explore the 
possibility to optimize the use of resources and synergies in 
an efficient way. However, existing cities are captive to 
their history which constrains the implementation of new 
measure without high economic investments. Nevertheless, 
relatively short turnover times for many technologies 
provide opportunities to improve the efficiency and develop 
integrated design [7]. The following aspect should be 
considered during the design and use of the urban energy 
systems: 
• 
Energy efficiency of the built environment 
The primary focus of energy-efficiency in most cities is on 
the built environment (i.e., dwellings and commercial 
properties) which should be designed to optimize their 
sustainability. This situation implies a strong argument for 
definition and regulation of building standards. 
• 
Supply side 
The supply side is having an important progress in 
innovation to design efficient energy networks which allows 
integration of energy resources, such as solar energy, heat 
pumps, fuel cells etc. or the use of energy storage systems, 
allowing shifting the production to match with the demand. 
This integrated thinking has been highlighted in the design 
of the new eco-cities, avoiding strong dependence to fix 
solution as big power plants and giving to the city an 
integrated growth based on a higher flexibility from the 
energy supply side. 
• 
Holistic approach - Optimisation of the energy 
systems 
Energy systems are traditionally designed separately 
looking at demand and production as separate issues. There 
has been some progress in linking demand and transmission 
with for example demanding low temperature heating 
systems in buildings to enable low temperature levels in 
district heating systems. To analyse the whole energy 
system from demand to production with one design tool is a 
new approach. Also to include both heating, cooling and 
electricity into one holistic approach is a new aspect in 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

planning energy systems in districts. Systems and 
integration methods could have an important potential for 
reductions in direct primary-energy use, without other 
significant physical impacts, and significant advantages in 
terms of a reduction in externalities of energy use such as air 
pollution.  
• 
Role of real-time monitoring and steering systems 
For the new urban energy system design expertise should 
also focus on the operational phase. There are opportunities 
in the field of Information Control Technologies (ICT) 
applied to the urban energy sector which enables effective 
management of the real-time performances of the energy 
systems, allowing the interaction between them and citizens, 
which could be increased through real-time energy pricing, 
virtual energy markets, real-time displays for households, 
large building, neighbourhood, city resource-use profiles, 
and personalised decision-support services. 
III. 
OBJECTIVES 
CITYOPT addresses energy system optimisation in 
different lifecycle phases, considering potential and user & 
stakeholder involvement characteristics (Figure 1): 
• 
Planning tools - support analysing, simulating, 
optimizing 
and 
communicating 
different 
alternatives in the city planning. A holistic approach 
integrates energy dynamics of local grids and 
buildings, consumption behaviours, energy storage, 
and local energy production units. 
• 
Design tools - optimise design for energy efficiency 
of supplementary construction and renewable 
integration ensuring grid stability. Stakeholder and 
user research on design requirements specifies how 
new or retrofitted energy efficient buildings interact 
with nearby buildings through local energy 
networks, e.g., exchanging surplus renewable 
heating/cooling energy. 
• 
Operational 
tools 
- 
increase 
optimization 
opportunities related to user behaviour, like 
residential 
demand 
response 
schemes 
for 
inhabitants to participate in online-optimization, 
and visualizations to engage users. 
IV. 
PILOTS 
Three case studies in different climate zones will 
demonstrate the CITYOPT solutions: 
A. Helsinki, Finland 
The Helsinki case study evaluates electricity- and heat 
storage solutions and business models in the new residential 
districts of Kalasatama and Östersundom. In the planning 
phase of the new districts, CITYOPT applications will 
examine technologies, sizing, placement and steering of 
electric and heat storage solutions, to find the optimal storage 
solutions. 
In both study cases of Helsinki, the optimisation task is 
divided into two connected parts: 
• 
Design optimization (I) 
• 
Operational optimization (II) 
 
In part I, the optimisation will strive to choose the correct 
type and size of energy storage unit(s) and its connections to 
energy producers and consumers. This being done, the 
second part of the optimisation (II) will find the operational 
optimum. Thus the problem is a bi-level optimisation. The 
optimisation tasks are described below in terms of: 
• 
Process description 
• 
Performance metrics with constraints 
• 
Degrees of freedom 
• 
Scenarios 
The bi-level optimisation means that the operational 
optimisation (II) runs inside the design optimisation (I). In 
other words, for each design candidate from part I, a new 
solution of the operational optimisation (II) will be solved. 
This enables a more holistic analysis of the situation and can 
provide some new insights in what is the best combination of 
solutions for both design and operation strategies. 
B. Vienna, Austria 
In Vienna, at the Austrian Institute of Technology (AIT) 
premises, CITYOPT investigates the optimal design and 
possible implementation (including cost assessment and 
business model development) of integrating the AIT 
buildings, their existing energy supply and storage systems, 
and the cooling system of RTA’s climatic tunnel into a site-
wide energy system that uses the waste heat to heat office 
buildings. The expected impact will be to maximize the 
utilisation of waste heat to increase the energy performance 
and reduce CO2 emissions of the overall urban area 
modelled in the study case. 
The optimization process in the Vienna study case is 
based on the integration of a thermal energy network of the 
office buildings, current supply systems, energy storages 
together with the use of the waste heat from the RTA´s 
climatic wind tunnel.  
The performance metrics which will be taken into 
account in the objective function are: 
• 
Energy consumption (kWh) 
• 
CO2 emissions (tons) 
• 
Investment cost (€) 
• 
Running cost (€) 
Running cost makes reference to the operational and 
maintenance cost. The design optimisation should set the 
best option according to the objective function and 
constraints defined by the user. The objective function also 
will be able to combine all the listed metrics weighted 
properly by the user.  There are two main goals; first, to 
optimize the design of this thermal energy network by a 
suitable design of the water tank which is used as thermal 
energy storage and the number of boreholes of the ground 
heat exchanger and second, the optimisation of the operation 
of system taking into account the temperature levels and the 
mass flows.  
In this context, there are several type of constraints that 
should be considered to perform the optimization process: 
the maximum size of the water tank, the maximum area were 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

the boreholes of the heat exchanger can be allocated, the 
maximum temperature of the ground which can  produced by 
the rejected heat, the minimum and maximum temperature 
levels of the warm water needed to cover the heat demand of 
the office buildings, economical constraints based on the 
investment and operational cost of the system, oscillations on 
the production of the waste heat from RTA´s climatic tunnel 
due to its use and the influence of the weather conditions in 
the heat production from the solar thermal panels. 
To produce usable information, the optimizations are 
performed in different scenarios which comprise different 
options in terms of the design of the water tank, ground heat 
exchanger, the district heating networks together with 
operation of the system according to the variation on the 
defined constraints. These scenarios could include the best 
design of the district heating network: to maximize the 
rejected heat to the ground to maximize the energy efficiency 
of the chillers of the RTA´s climatic tunnel, to minimize the 
CO2 emissions of the overall system according to the 
technical and economic constraints, to minimize the 
importation of the energy (gas and electricity) to the system, 
to minimize the energy bill of the of the office buildings, etc. 
C. Nice Côte d’Azur, France 
Provence Alpes Côte d’Azur (PACA) is one of France’s 
most fragile regions for electricity supply. In Nice Côte 
d’Azur, CITYOPT will develop and demonstrate innovative 
demand-response services, to reinforce the continuity of 
service of the electricity supply network. 200 families will be 
recruited to participate in the experiment. CITYOPT will 
analyse the conditions for which the customers will agree to 
modify their behaviours, within a CITYOPT energy 
community. 
The CITYOPT NCA case study takes place amid 
restrictions of energy use at certain times of the day due to 
dated electricity infrastructure. Nice depends on a single high 
voltage transport line which supplies electricity to the south 
east of France (around 5 Million inhabitants), covering in 
particular the densely urbanized coast from Marseille to 
Menton. Due to the tourism attractiveness of the region, the 
population can be doubled in certain towns during summer 
holidays. As an answer to the recurrent problem of higher 
peaks in load demand, the French electric energy supplier 
EDF is forced to use thermal power plants which generate 
CO2 emissions and have a high cost in terms of 
maintenance. 
The Nice case study will develop and experiment an 
internet application called Community Network for Energy. 
Its objective is to encourage individual actions for promoting 
the reduction and/or shift of power consumption at homes 
during peaks of consumption in the PACA region. EDF 
consumers use electricity primarily for heating, cooking, dish 
and clothes washing, and consumables operation. As a 
reward, the dwellers earn bonuses that will be invested in 
useful projects in the community to which they belong to. 
Such projects are for example funding of new public 
buildings, such as schools, an academic project, cultural 
activities, or complimentary “Vélo Bleu” (electrical bicycles) 
memberships. Thus, instead of using additional and punctual 
energy production from thermal power plants, end-users of 
electricity will "learn" how to consume energy in a better, 
more optimized way and at the same time they will benefit 
from these economies of scale for their community. When 
joining the experiment, the 200 volunteers will have at their 
disposal a tablet pc to access the application. 
The community Network for Energy developed and 
tested in CITYOPT is a new mean: 
• 
to contribute to energy demand reduction of 
households through increased energy awareness; 
• 
to contribute to time-shifted energy usage, through 
timely demand-response notifications; 
• 
to enhance coherence between different energy 
projects/services and city planning alternatives. 
The project will offer a new insight on how citizens 
react to the utility’s request and how the community scale 
and crowd funding approach offered in the application act as 
incentives. A 12 months operational validation and test 
phase with the 200 volunteers will be conducted from 
October 2015 to September 2016.  
V. 
RESULTS 
The CITYOPT holistic solution is composed of two 
layers as represented in Figure 1: it includes both a planning 
application and an operational application. 
A. CITYOPT planning application 
The CITYOPT planning application is ready for 
demonstration use. The tool is designed to be used by city 
planners and energy systems planners in the early design 
phase of a district. The user first enters the basic information 
about the area. After this the user can create different 
scenarios regarding the energy solutions, the scenarios are 
then simulated by the CITYOPT Planning application using 
APROS simulation software. The next step is to choose the 
weighing factors for the optimisation. The user can choose 
for example that economic factors should be weighted with 
80% emphasis and CO2 emissions with 20%.The tool gives 
as result which of the scenarios is the most optimal 
according to the chosen weighing factors.  
A genetic algorithm based optimization can be 
performed where the application seeks the best solution by 
creating a number of scenarios by itself and seeking the 
most optimal scenario within the constraints set by the user, 
meaning that the optimal scenario can be different from one 
of the scenarios chosen by the user. If the genetic algorithm 
ends up with Pareto optimal scenarios, the user can then 
execute the weight based optimization to acquire the most 
optimal scenario.  
B. CITYOPT operational application 
The CITYOPT operational application is currently being 
implemented and will be tested in Nice Côte d’Azur. A 
typical user journey in the application is presented below in 
the following 6-steps tutorial: 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

1. 
Welcome to CITYOPT: a community committed to 
protect the environment, avoiding overconsumption and 
resources waste.   
2. 
CITYOPT engages citizens through the support to 
local projects. Projects will address issues at the 
neighbourhood scale, lowering 
the 
impact on the 
environment.  
3. 
Like in crowdsourcing, people can support their 
favourite projects. Support is given “investing” CITYOPT 
points in one project or more. CITYOPT points are the 
“currency” used to back projects up. Points are earned by 
CITYOPT members for their successful commitment during 
peak load alerts.  
4. 
CITYOPT calls its participants to rally to avoid 
severe peak loads. The entire community has a common 
mission: reduce energy waste and respect the environment.  
5. 
Participants set ready for an alert laying out a 
strategy. Choosing what will be off, decreased of shifted 
during an alert will allow people to gain points to be later 
invested in community projects. 
6. 
CITYOPT will succeed if people will engage with 
each-other. Participants will receive after each peak the 
result on their energy savings (at the individual scale and at 
the community scale) based on the load curve analysis 
(statistical models are implemented). Moreover participants 
can tap into social networks to show their commitment and 
get others to join for a healthier environment. 
Users will receive regular notifications and updates before 
and after every alert on their mobile phones and email. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
CITYOPT seeks to assist the challenges posed by ever 
increasing urbanization and the pressure placed on grid 
infrastructure in cities. It looks at how grid optimisation can 
help to improve the utilization of renewable energy 
generation and the impact on local energy markets. In 
addition to this, considerable user analysis is performed in 
an attempt to shed further light on the reactions and 
behaviour of people using the networks and the buildings 
involved and ensure solutions developed will be well 
received.  
A 
comprehensive 
technical 
and 
socio-economic 
evaluation of the 3 CITYOPT pilots will be conducted and 
publicly documented by the end of 2016. It will include an 
analysis of the replication potential of CITYOPT solutions 
from one country to another. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
CITYOPT is a collaborative project supported by the 
European Commission through the Seventh Framework 
Programme (FP7). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Eurostat estimates that 68% of the EU population lives in 
urban areas based on their revised urban-rural typology. See 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php
/European_cities_-_demographic_challenges. 
[2] IPCC, “Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability”, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
Switzerland, Mar. 2014. 
[3] EEA, “Every breath we take - Improving air quality in 
Europe,” European Environment Agency, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 2013. 
[4] M. van der Hoeven, “Urban energy policy design,” 2012. 
[5] UNEP, “Division of Technology, Industry and Economics Energy for 
Cities, IETC Project,” United Nations Environment Programme.  
[6] EC, “Strategic Energy Technologies Information System,” European 
Commission (EC), 2014. 
[7] IIASA, “Chapter 18: Urban Energy Systems,” International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), 2012.M. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 1.  CITYOPT holistic approach of energy systems optimisation in smart cities 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

