From Smart Metering to Smart City Infrastructure 
Could the AMI Become the Backbone of the Smart City? 
 
Roberto De Bonis 
Future Internet Trial 
Telecom Italia  
Torino, Italy 
 roberto.debonis@telecomitalia.it 
Enrico Vinciarelli 
Future Internet Trial 
Telecom Italia  
Torino, Italy 
enrico.vinciarelli@telecomitalia.it  
 
Abstract— The paper presents a study and preliminary field 
results concerning the use an Advanced Metering Infrastructure 
(AMI) based on the standard protocol Wireless Metering Bus 
(WMBus) mode “N” (169MHz), also for smart city services. The 
paper shows how such an infrastructure is suitable for metering 
services, but it has some limitations when dealing with services 
requiring 
either 
more 
bandwidth 
or 
more 
frequent 
communication. 
 
Keywords— metering; MBus; urban  infrastructure; short range; 
169MHz. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Smart City services could drive the boost of Internet of 
Things (IoT) since over 50% of world population lives in cities 
(>3.3bn), growing to 70% of total world population by 2050 
[1].  On the other hand, governments, through regulation [2], 
pushes for a new and strong sensitivity to sustainability, will 
ensure the creation of a mass market of IoT application in the 
“Green Economy” area. Smart Metering and Smart Grid are 
often mentioned as some of the applications integrated into the 
Smart City even if the two big worlds of “Smart City” and 
“Energy” seem to proceed in parallel without strong degree of 
synergy among them.  Even if a strong effort has been made by 
EU Government in order to encourage standardization for the 
IoT [3][4], still plenty of communication technologies are 
available on the market. The choice of the right wireless 
technology for a specific application service, is not easy since 
different constraint such as range, datarate, power, latency and 
cost should be taken into account and a satisfactory tradeoff  
shall be identified. If the same technology platform should be 
used for different application services, the choice becomes 
even more difficult to take. 
The paper presents the attempt to use a standard European 
wireless protocol (WMBus mode “N” [5]), that has been 
chosen for a smart gas metering massive roll-out  in Italy, for 
managing other typical services of the smart city framework. 
In 2008, the Italian Authority for Gas and Electricity 
prescribed the use of Smart Meters for the gas distribution 
network (about 21 million meters) [6]. The roll out plan states 
that 60% of «consumer» gas meters (about 18 million) shall be 
replaced by 2018 and 100% of «commercial» and «industrial» 
gas meters by 2024.  General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) 
solutions for «commercial» and «industrial» gas meters has 
been proposed and is being deployed on the field, while Point 
to Multipoint solutions based on a European standard short  
range protocol (WMBus 169 MHz) will be used for 
«consumer»  gas meters. Since the project implies a huge 
investment (around 4-5 billion Euros) and some studies 
[7][8][9] showed how  the business case is very uncertain, in 
2012 the Authority for Energy recommended [10] gas DSO to 
evaluate the possibility to extend the usage of the gas smart 
metering network to other services including other metering 
applications, such as water metering and other smart city 
applications. 
In Section II of the paper an introduction to the WMBus 
protocol is given. In section III the analysis and results on the 
protocol from different perspective are given. In section IV a 
Case Study where the results of the analysis are applied to a 
specific case, are shown. In section V conclusions and further 
steps to be taken are mentioned.  
II. 
WIRELESS MBUS MODE “N” 
MBus is a European communication protocol that has been 
specified for metering applications (the “M” of MBus stands 
for “metering”). Mode “N” has been specified in order to allow 
communication at higher range than the typical home area 
situations; in this case a lower frequency (the 75kHz band 
between 169.400 and 169.475 MHz has been identified). This  
frequency 
band 
has 
been 
reserved 
by 
European 
Telecommunication Standardisation Institute (ETSI) EN 300 
220-1 [11] for metering applications allowing a maximum 
Equivalent Isotropically Radiated Power (EIRP) of 500mW 
(27dBm) with a maximum duty-cycle of 10%. 
The standard is developed within the CEN (the European 
Committee for Standardization) also in response to the EU 
mandate 441 [2]; the “N” mode has been proposed by France 
and Italy since in both countries a wireless network based on 
169MHz frequency will be adopted for gas metering. The 
wireless protocol is narrowband and it uses a Gaussian 
Frequency Shift Keying (GFSK) modulation at different data-
rates according to 6 different channels; those channels are 
spaced by 12.5 kHz and have a bit-rate either of 4.8 kbps 
(channels 1a, 1b, 3a, 3b) or of 2.4 kbps (channels 2a, 2b).   
Mode N2g (different channels grouped together to get a higher 
data-rate) that uses a 4GFSK modulation, has been reserved for 
“relaying” type of communication nodes. Different service 
classes  are defined within the standard and in the higher class 
a minimum level of sensitivity -115dBm shall be guaranteed at 
a Packet Error Rate (PER) <     .  The protocol allows power 
saving and bidirectional communication, made possible by the 
implementation of two communication mechanisms: Access 
Timing and Synchronous Transmission. At application level, it 
is possible to use specific data objects but also tunneling of 
Device Language Specification (DLMS/COSEM) data objects. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
III. 
ANALYSIS OF A MULTISERVICE NETWORK BASED ON 
WIRELESS MBUS MODE “N” 
The analysis has been made breaking down the problem 
into many independent sub-problems,  which are easier to deal 
with; for each of the analyzed  aspects, a simulation model  was 
created, to provide preliminary and qualitative estimations of 
the performances achievable by the system (traditional and 
detailed network simulators such as Network Simulator (NS-2) 
were not used because of the poor maturity of the WMBus 
mode “N” specifications at the time the analysis was done). 
Each model was then merged into a simplified network-like 
simulator, that through a set of parameters, can be adapted to 
represent a replica of a real scenario. Feedbacks given by this 
tool may be useful to evaluate the feasibility of new projects. 
A. Channelisation aspects 
Since WMBus is a narrowband protocol (75kHz in total, 
12.5kHz each channel), it is likely that more channels will be 
used in parallel to increase the amount of data that can be 
transmitted in particular in a multiservice perspective; WMBus 
is a Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM) [5] protocol and 
hence is affected by Adjacent Channel Interference (ACI).  A 
Simulink model was created to assess the theoretical impact of 
ACI on the transmission; the effect was obtained introducing 
an interfere source and increasing the power of this interferer 
until a significant degradation on the channel adjacent to the 
interferer one, can be detected. In Fig. 1, the Bit Error Rate 
(BER) for different channels, at different interferer power is 
shown. The influence of the interferer depends on the used 
modulation and the 4.8kbps channels seems to be the most 
sensitive. 
In order to confirm the results of the analysis, some 
measurements were made using commercial transceivers 
implementing WMBus 169MHz; on average, the noise 
generated by an undesired GFSK 2.4 kbps signal source on the 
adjacent channel is 64 dB lower with respect to the power 
generated on the central frequency of the true transmitting 
channel. There is a 20dB difference when compared to the 
theoretical analysis; the difference is caused by the filters used 
in the commercial transceivers that mitigate the effect of ACI.  
Fig. 1. Simulink ACI analysis. 
ACI interference, when continuous, can be compared to a 
noise floor that limits the sensitivity of the devices; in order to 
understand what is the minimum power level of the desired 
signal to obtain a good transmission quality, some additional 
measures were made. The results showed how the desired 
signal should have a strength of at least 5-6 dB more than the 
noise floor caused by the interferer.  In summary, to obtain a 
satisfactory communication when different systems are 
transmitting in uncoordinated way on different channels, it is 
important that at the receiver, the difference between the 
received signal on the serving channel and the one received on 
an adjacent one is less than ~58 dB. 
B. Energy Consumption 
 
Energy saving is certainly among the primary objectives in 
the design of a metering network, since meters are usually not 
powered by the electricity grid. Therefore, in order to enable 
remote reading functionalities, it is necessary to install batteries 
in such devices. With the purpose of minimizing as much as 
possible the maintaining costs, WMBus has been designed to 
achieve high energy efficiency. The calculation of the power 
absorbed by a meter, is a prerequisite to estimate the battery 
lifespan. Many variables have to be considered in such a 
computation, coming both from the devices and battery 
physical characteristics. Considering the usage of real 
apparatus (already available in the market), some assumptions 
have to be taken. Let us suppose to equip meters with 19Ah 
batteries: we must also consider battery self discharge, that 
leads to decrease its nominal capacity year after year. 
Consumptions related to metrological functionalities in a meter 
is normally the smaller part and it depends on the hardware 
design of the meter; assuming an additional consumption equal 
to 5 uA (this hypothesis was shared with some meter 
manufacturers) and degradation equal to 5%/year, it is possible 
to obtain the graph presented in Fig. 2, which shows battery 
lifespan as a function of synchronous transmission frequency. 
Two different Tx-Rx boards differing only for different 
maximum output power (64mA @ 14 dBm for Device1 and 
320mA @ 27 dBm for Device2) are also compared.  
Fig. 2. Meter battery life estimation. 
Under the above assumptions, it was possible to estimate 
that a meter life span could be around 18 years, when the 
period between subsequent transmissions is 24h. This result is 
aligned with an assessments made on real devices in [12]. On 
the other side, comparing the two boards, it can be observed 
that differences in battery life tend to converge for increasing 
transmission periods. This kind of behaviour happens because 
when data sending events are very distant from each other, the 
only relevant factors that would affect battery duration, are 
metrological consumptions and capacity degradation. 
C. Radio coverage 
One of the main advantages of the WMBus mode N 
protocol is the use of a low transmission frequency, which 
should make it possible to achieve greater  Line of Sight (LOS)  
distances and less sensitivity to attenuation due to obstacles. In 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
a typical scenario, gas meters are installed in concrete niches 
protected by metal cabinets. The goal is to define some 
objective parameters that allow to perform, with good 
approximation, some large scale estimations taking into 
account those challenging radio propagation aspects. 
Although the majority of the meters are placed  at ground 
level, in some cases, devices such as water meters, are located 
in the basement.  
In case of a multiservice network, one data concentrator 
should be deployed to serve not only gas meters, but different 
services with their own radio propagation specific issues. In 
such a case, the radio coverage assured by the data concentrator 
(i.e., the maximum communication range) should be studied 
according to the most critical path that could be present 
between the concentrator and the meters. Some laboratory tests 
have been conducted in order to estimate the loss due to such 
obstacles in the LOS. 
It has to be noticed that the objective of this analysis, was 
not to define a new propagation model, but to have a flavor of 
the performance of this protocol, by tuning available 
propagation models with some experimental result, since most 
of the pre-existing models do not fit properly with this context 
either for the positioning of the “mobile station” or for the 
adopted bandwidth.  
The analysis has taken into account two different positions 
of the data concentrator, at street level (2m -microcellular) and 
at mobile station position (30m -macrocellular). Some 
preliminary and not massive on-field radio coverage test has 
been conducted, using the two boards already mentioned above 
(Device1 and Device2). Results coming from experimental test 
have been compared to some of the already available 
mathematical  models, such as Okumura [13] and Hata [14] 
(only applicable when transmitting data from an height higher 
than 30 m).   
Fig. 3. Measured vs Predicted received power as function of distance in 
suburban area when Concentrator is installed on a tower 
In Fig. 3, it can be noted that Hata does not predict, with an 
acceptable approximation, the measured radio field, in 
particular at growing distances. On the other side, Friis model 
[15], with a modified exponent, seems to model more 
effectively the real behaviour of the signal. In particular, a 
value of 3.2 for the exponent, seems to work properly for a 
Micro Cellular positioning of the concentrator in a Urban 
environment and a value of 2.9 for a Suburban environment; in 
case of Macro Cellular positioning of the concentrator, the 
value of the exponent in the Friis formulation to be considered 
for a Suburban environment is 3.0.  The analysis was made on 
data coming from test campaigns on a limited number of sites 
(no enough data points were collected to tune the exponent in 
case of Macro Cellular in Urban Environment), hence further 
massive test campaigns should be made to validate these 
preliminary results.  
D. Network capacity 
Aspects, such as maximum number of users and 
coexistence between different services, are way more important 
than data throughput or delays, when analyzing metering 
networks performance. Given the lack of media access control 
methods in WMBus, the standard just allows to prevent 
systematic collision through a cyclic access number that, 
randomly initialized on each device, allows to slightly vary the 
time between two subsequent transmissions. 
In the most typical scenario, meters have transmission 
period scattered throughout the day; by approximation, this 
phenomenon can be seen as a random variable uniformly 
distributed over 24 hours. A simple Matlab model has been 
built, capable of simulating the periodic data transmission 
coming from a set of meters. Communication takes place 
according to the following rules: first transmission of each 
meter  is made at random time within the day, the next, with 
periodicity T, are determined using the  de-synchronization 
system implemented by the standard. Sometimes, due to 
maintenance or control reasons, concentrator may need to 
transmit some information to meters, in this case a bidirectional 
exchange of data may occurs. The abbreviation CMD in the 
graph of Fig. 4 represents the probability that each day, a data 
exchange between the concentrator and the meter occurs (the 
hypothesis is that a sequence of 12 message are exchanged, 6 
from the meter to the concentrator and 6 is in the reverse path) . 
For 
sake 
of 
simplicity, 
collisions 
do 
not 
require 
retransmissions. 
 
Fig. 4. Percentage of collision in a WMBus network composed by gas 
(49%), water (23%), heat (7%) and monitoring (21%) meters 
Under the above listed hypothesis, the main aspect that 
influences collision probability is the number of meter in the 
coverage area of each concentrator. For example, if the 
maximum acceptable probability error is 5%, no more than 800 
devices should be active in the same collision domain. CMD 
parameter has just a little impact on performance, since 
collisions are mostly related to the presence of many 
synchronous messages (due to lack of media access methods). 
IV. 
A CASE STUDY 
In order to evaluate how the different network aspects 
influence each other and to understand what are the network 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

performances of this communication protocol in a multiservice 
scenario, a model simulating a real network deployment has 
been created. The model allows the user to configure a set of 
parameters for each of the drivers that influence the network 
performances, such as range (e.g., Rx and Tx power and related 
antenna gains, positioning of the data concentrator, attenuation 
of obstacles), energy consumption (e.g.,  type of battery, self-
discharging factor, non tx consumptions) and network capacity 
(e.g., length of data packets, duty cycle, bit-rate, etc.). The 
parameters can be set and customized for each of the services 
to be delivered. Due to those different characteristics of each 
service, the model estimates different “cell” size, according to 
each service; but when the number of total data concentrator to 
be deployed for a multiservice network is calculated, the range 
of the most “difficult” (in terms of radio propagation) service 
and hence the shortest, is used. On the basis of this range all the 
other parameters (e.g., collision probability, battery duration, 
etc.) are estimated. 
As an example, in the following list, the results of 
simulation of a multiservice network (gas, water, heat cost 
allocators and pollution monitoring) for a small city is shown; 
the hypothesis is that all the meters are distributed in the city in 
a uniform way; each of the service have been characterized in 
terms of propagation aspects, battery and network capacity and 
in order to reduce the collision probability, 2 different channels 
have been used. Here the simulation results are presented: 
 Area to be covered: 20.5     
 Data Concentrator (DC) range: 450m 
 Coverage area of each data concentrator:  0..64     
 Collision Domain: Ch 2a: 1.20   , Ch 2b: 3.05    
 # of DC to be deployed: 32 
 # of meters under each DC: Ch 2a: 254, Ch 2b: 2983  
 Collision Probability: Ch 2a: 2.9%, Ch 2b: 7% 
 Battery Duration (years): Gas: 16 ,Water: 17, Heat: 6, 
Monitoring: 5 
In the case of multiservice, the estimated number of data 
concentrator is bigger than in the case of gas only network, 
because heat cost allocator and water meters are even harder 
than gas to be reached by the radio signal. The probability of 
transmission errors is critical (up to 7%) even in the case of 
usage of two different channels. The first outcome of this 
simulation is that, in order to implement this scenario, either 
not all the 4 services should use the same network 
infrastructure, or a more efficient mechanism should be 
foreseen at physical and MAC layer of the protocol to manage 
access to the channel and to manage flexible allocation of 
channels and different data rates. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Wireless MBus mode «N» (169MHz) seems to guarantee 
adequate performance in terms of range when applied to a 
single metering service with low data rate requirements (e.g., 
gas, water). The usage of the same communication 
infrastructure, for additional services, is sustainable only if the 
additional service does not require high data-rates, if the  
number of additional sensors is not too big and the sensors do 
not communicate too frequently. When the number of sensors 
in the area of the same data concentrator increases from 
hundreds to thousands, the reliability of the communication 
decays rapidly. A more flexible management of the physical 
layer (e.g. carrier sense multiple access with collision 
avoidance and dynamic management of multiple channels) 
could limit transmission errors, due to the narrow band of the 
protocol, only very limited data rate services could co-exist in 
this network (in this perspective, in recent draft updates of the 
Italian gas metering standard companion for WMBus, LBT 
was introduced). In order to guarantee a minimal level of 
synergy among different services network without limiting too 
much the range of managed services, a multimode mode 
network (double frequency band e.g., data concentrators with 
868MHz and 169MHz radio) [16]  might be a more reasonable 
tradeoff. Further analysis and test should be done in order to 
confirm the preliminary results of the study and to evaluate if a 
scenario where the IoT communication platform can be based 
on 
clusters 
of 
technologies 
also 
exploiting 
different 
bandwidths. Those further investigation should also evaluate 
which bandwidths are the most appropriate for the different 
kind of services; each cluster of technologies could be based on 
a specific communication protocol and can provide a set of 
services (e.g., a cluster based on WMBus 169MHz could 
enable gas and water metering, insuring longer distance 
coverage, another cluster based on either 868MHz or 2,4GHz 
protocols such as ZigBee could enable services that requires 
more frequent communications, such as parking services) . The 
different clusters then, could share part of the communication 
infrastructure in order to reduce costs and to harmonize at least 
at management level, through a set of standard Application 
Programming Interface (API), the access to those network 
clusters. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Falconer and  S. Mitchell, “Smart City Framework: a 
systematic 
process 
for 
enabling 
Smart 
Connected 
Communities”,CISCO,09/2012.                                                                     
http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/ps/motm/Smart-
City-Framework.pdf  [retrieved: June, 2014] 
[2] EU M/441 EN 605, Standardisation Mandate in the field of 
measuring instruments for the development of an open 
architecture for utility meters involving communication 
protocols enabling interoperability                                        . 
http://www.etsi.org/images/files/ECMandates/m441%20EN.pdf 
[retrieved: June, 2014] 
[3] Smart Meters Coordination Group Final Report,  
Standardization mandate to CEN, CENELEC and ETSI in the 
field of measuring instruments for the development of an open 
architecture for utility meters involving communication 
protocols enabling interoperability.  
[4] EU Open Meter Project, Smart Metering Architecture -  
08/02/2010. 
http://www.openmeter.com/files/deliverables/Open%20Meter_D
3%201_Architecture_v6_.pdf [retrieved: June, 2014] 
[5] European Committee for Standardization, “EN 13757-4” 2011. 
[6] Italian Authority for Electricity, Gas and Water, “ARG/gas 
155/08”22/10/2008.               
http://www.autorita.energia.it/allegati/docs/08/del.ARG-gas155-08.pdf 
[retrieved: June, 2014]   
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

[7] G. Cervigni, M.Di Castelnuovo,C. Poletti and A.Sileo, “Cost 
Benefit Analysis for the introduction of a Smart Metering 
System in the Italian gas context”, Università Bocconi Research 
Report n.8 – September 2011. 
[8] Department of Energy & Climate Change, GOV UK, Impact 
Assessment 
for 
the 
smart 
meter 
rollout, 
May 
2012. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/impact-
assessment-for-the-smart-meter-rollout-for-the-domestic-sector 
[retrieved: June, 2014] 
[9] Poyri, Sopra Consulting, “Technical and economic study on 
smart metering system for the gas retail market in France and 
evaluation of the experiments carried out by GrDF”, 29 July 
2010. 
http://www.cre.fr/en/documents/deliberations/orientation/smart-
metering-systems-for-the-gas-retail-market-in-france/read-the-
technical-and-economic-study-on-smart-metering-system-for-
the-gas-retail-market-in-france [retrieved: June, 2014] 
[10]  Italian 
Authority 
for 
Electricity, 
Gas 
and 
Water  
“478/2012/R/GAS”2012.    
http://www.autorita.energia.it/allegati/docs/dc/12/478-12.pdf 
[retrieved: June, 2014] 
[11] European Telecommunications Standards Institute, “EN 300 
220-1 V2.4.1” 2012. 
[12] M. 
Reuning, 
“Battery 
research 
study” 
2012. 
http:// 
www.tadiranbatteries.de/pdf/netbeheer.pdf 
[retrieved: 
June, 
2014] 
[13] Y. Okumura, “Field strenght and its variability in VHF and UHF 
land-mobile service” 1968. 
[14] M. Hata, “Empirical formulae for propagtion loss in mobile land 
service” 1980. 
[15] H.T.Friis, Proc. IRE, vol. 34, p.254. 1946. 
[16] G. Barillaro, R. De Bonis, E. Vinciarelli, “From Smart Metering 
to Smart Urban Infrastructure” Notiziario Tecnico Telecom 
Italia, February 2014.
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

