Example of a New Smart Kitchen Model for Energy Efficiency and Usability 
Silvia Ceccacci, Roberto Menghi, Michele Germani 
Department of Industrial Engineering and Mathematical Sciences 
Università Politecnica delle Marche 
Ancona, Italy 
e-mail: s.ceccacci@univpm.it, r.menghi@univpm.it, m.germani@univpm.it 
 
 
Abstract — The paper presents the design, the implementation 
and the evaluation of an innovative smart kitchen called E-
Kitchen where the technology is intended to make everyday life 
easier increasing comfort, energy efficiency, usability and 
safety. E-Kitchen is a kitchen environment, completely 
redesigned according to User-Centered Design approach, 
which implements a home automation system based on ZigBee 
communication technology. It integrates several devices: smart 
household appliances, devices connected with smart plugs, 
sensors, lighting systems. A qualitative usability assessment, 
which involved final users, highlighted that adopted solution is 
able to enhance the accessibility and usability of the kitchen 
especially for the elderly. Moreover, it allows to increase the 
users' energy awareness and it contributes to increase energy 
saving.  
 
Keywords-Smart kitchen; user centered design; accessibility; 
context and energy awareness. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the kitchen is the main room of the house, a 
multifunctional space where people spend a lot of time to 
prepare and cook meals, to eat them and store the supplies. 
Moreover a kitchen can be regarded as a space for the family 
members to meet together and pass time during lunch and 
dinner preparation.  
In particular, it was estimated that the kitchen is the room 
where the family spends the majority of the time (35%) [1].  
The kitchen is also the space more "dangerous": more than 
half of the domestic accidents happen in the kitchen (55%) 
[1]. No other room of the house is so dangerous, because in 
any other room the frequency of accidents is always less than 
10% [2]. The main cause of trauma and incidents is due to 
the everyday use of devices and tools of kitchen, such as 
knives, oven, small appliances and cookware. Most of them 
occur for distraction and scarce prevention. The kitchen and 
in particular the worktop, have often insufficient lighting and 
this causes loss of visibility so increased risk of accident. 
Furthermore, the space above the worktop is often full of 
accessories and all kinds of objects, making everyday tasks 
more difficult and dangerous. 
The kitchen is also the space with the higher number of 
"machine elements" and the room that consumes more 
energy in the house. It estimated that kitchen appliances, 
including refrigerators, freezers, oven, and dishwashers, 
account for nearly 27% of household electricity use [3]. 
Therefore, the necessity of reduce the energy consumption of 
a kitchen becomes a priority. In most home automation 
systems, control is given by user that establishes manually all 
parameters. In this way, the behaviors and actions become 
central for energy saving. For this reason, awareness and 
feedback about electricity consumption is a key aspect to 
save energy. 
Our main focus has been to create a smart kitchen where 
user is central element of system design. In particular, it was 
attempted to make more comfortable and safe the kitchen 
environment through the inclusion of a series of 
technological interact smart and high usability solutions. 
Technology becomes a support and a tool by which to ensure 
a better livability of the kitchen in terms of safety, comfort 
and well-being. In particular, it has been developed a smart 
system that allows to coordinate the appliances and sub-
systems in order to optimize energy consumption, increase 
energy efficiency, and improve the usability of the kitchen. 
This system is managed through a web user interface, 
which gives information on the functioning and energy 
consumption of all devices in the kitchen, allows to set and 
control all household appliances in a simple and intuitive 
way and gives information and alerts in case of situations of 
warning. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes 
some of the approaches presented in literature about sensor 
in smart homes, smart appliances, energy management and 
intelligent control systems. Section 3 gives the description of 
system and highlights the innovations. Section 4 reports the 
results of the experimental assessment of e-kitchen 
environment. Finally, some final considerations are provided 
in Section 5. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Smart home can be defined as “a house which comprises 
a network communication between all devices of the house 
allowing the control, monitoring and remote access of all 
applications and services of the management system” [4]. 
There are a wide number of scientific works focused on 
smart home, but they investigate only one aspect such as 
smart object and sensors. Scientific research on kitchen 
environment is still at the beginning and it has often analyzed 
as part of the smart home [5]. 
Many studies of sensing systems have been developed 
for monitoring and controlling of environmental parameters 
of a house. Ding et al. [6] make a state of the art of sensor 
technology most commonly used in smart home. The work 
highlights the strengths and limitations of different sensor 
technologies and focuses on the opportunities from the 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

perspective of technical, clinical and ethical. It emphasizes 
that there is not a generic perfect mix of sensors: each case 
must be evaluated independently and designed for the 
specific needs. Muñoz et al. [7] present a system that allows 
to control the house through simple and unobtrusive sensors, 
and a multi-agent architecture. This system gives the 
possibility to supervise the state of the house and occupants, 
and gives instructions and guidelines through an alert 
assistant. Similar work is that of Stander et al. [8] in which a 
sensor system provides an overview of the whole kitchen. 
The system, through a sensors infrastructure, monitors the 
status of the room and obtains information about the various 
devices. 
On the other hand, many studies are focused only on 
smart appliances, in order to make them intelligent so as to 
make life more safety, convenient and comfortable. An 
example is the study on a smart fridge [9] which detects the 
amount of foods stored inside it (i.e., milk bottles, fruits, 
bread, drinks, water bottles, or the quantities of irregular 
shape, such as vegetables, meats, etc.). Moreover, if the 
amount of food is less than a set value, it can communicate 
automatically with the food supplier by web and order the 
needed food. In addition to detection capability, the 
refrigerator implements a control system of the gas oven 
installed in the kitchen. The system controls remotely the 
switching on and off of device.  
In the recent years, this kind of development is being 
taken up by the major commercial players. For instance, at 
the last Consumer Electronic Show (CES 2015) Bosch [10] 
presented a refrigerator with built-in camera that allows to 
look inside when the user is not at home, making meal 
choices and grocery shopping easier. Even Whirlpool [11] 
and LG [12] have introduced on the market the first smart 
appliances such as refrigerators and ovens that communicate 
with the internet and could be controlled remotely by mobile 
phone. 
The research focus is also on optimal energy load 
management strategy for household appliances. Arghira et al. 
[13] present a method that predicts the consumption of each 
appliance, to estimate how much energy can be saved. This 
research is based on dynamic demand-side management, and 
allows energy saving due to the different cost of energy and 
the maximization of renewable energy. Nistor et al. [14] 
propose a control system of household appliances to reduce 
energy loads. The system is made up of a central hub which 
communicates with the different devices and it is 
programmed according to user needs. The system can 
manage the functioning of the devices through various 
algorithms. According to user preferences, the shifting and 
interruption of appliance operation, permit save energy at the 
system level. Frederiks et al. [15] say that in order to save on 
domestic energy consumption, is necessary to act on user 
behavior. Only by understanding and managing the 
psychological motivations we can encourage a more 
responsible consumption of energy.  
All of these studies focused on the technical aspects and 
marginally 
consider 
the 
end 
user 
preferences 
and 
characteristics. For this reason, the introduction of new 
appliances not always leads to an increase in usability. In 
fact, the user often uses only a minimum percentage of 
functions. However, it is possible to find several works 
focused on human-machine interaction but for only one 
aspect. An example is provided by the development of help 
and user guides in food preparation. Ficocelli and Nejat [16] 
have developed an assistance system in kitchen’s daily 
activities as research of recipes, help during the preparation 
and guidelines to a healthier behavior. Chen et al. [17] 
presented a system that, once recognized the food, provides 
information about calories and nutritional values. 
 Almost all of the research is focused on one of the three 
aspects that characterize the smart kitchen: internal 
communication network, intelligent control systems, and 
home automation and do not consider the usability of the 
whole system. Our work has been focused in the 
development of a smart kitchen in terms of physical and 
cognitive ergonomics in which technology will be 
completely invisible to not limit the use of the environment. 
In this way, the kitchen itself will become an interface 
through which the system will communicate information and 
alerts (visual communication), and the user will be supported 
by an “artificial intelligence” in the management of 
household appliances. 
III. 
SYSTEM’S GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
E-Kitchen is a new concept of "innovative kitchen" 
(Figure 1) in which the technology is intended to make 
everyday life easier increasing comfort, efficiency, usability 
and safety. 
 
Figure 1.  E-Kitchen prototype. 
The system was designed through the study of three main 
interactions 
(Figure 
2): 
human-environment, 
human-
machines and machines-environment. The study of these 
three aspects has allowed to obtain a kitchen usable and 
accessible highly, that implement a smart home automation 
system.  
  In particular, the work on machines-environment 
interaction permitted to achieve:  
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
the control of devices to ensure the safety of the 
environment,  
 
the control of  operating parameters of devices,  
 
the possibility to manage the status and self-
diagnosis and auto repair,  
 
the 
monitoring 
and 
optimization 
of 
energy 
consumption.  
 
Figure 2.  E-Kitchen structural represantion. 
The second level of interaction (human-machines) is 
related to the usability of the "machines" and focused on the 
study of:  
 
an 
highly 
usable 
user 
interface 
to 
allow 
communication/visualization of information, 
 
system software based on User Centered Design.  
Finally, the human-environment interaction has been 
analyzed to improve: 
 
the functionality and ergonomic layout,  
 
the system integration,  
 
the possibility to monitor user behavior and activate 
alerts in case of need or assistance. 
In this way, it has been developed a kitchen environment 
in which there are multiple systems that contribute to 
transform a kitchen in “smart kitchen”. E-Kitchen is 
structured in three systems: kitchen system, the "smart" 
devices system and, finally, the home automation system. 
A. Kitchen  
An innovative kitchen layout has been developed to 
allow a perfect integration between technology, design and 
ergonomics. In accordance with ergonomic approach, an 
innovative layout has been designed, to prevent any risk to 
the user during daily operations. In particular, the depth of 
the working top has been increased according to the 
specification deduced from ergonomics (Figure 3) and the 
results of an ethnographic analysis, which involved 20 
people aged between 50 and 85. In fact with the current base 
cabinets, deep 60 cm, the wall units are too close to the user's 
face causing the narrowing of the visual field and increasing 
the risk of collision. Moreover, the results of the behavior 
analysis showed that connections of water and sanitary 
system greatly influence the layout of the kitchen and often 
lead to bad design. 
The worktop 80 cm deep has been then designed to 
obtain a more open space, a greater freedom of movement 
and a perfect view on the working plane. On the other hand, 
the additional space has been very useful to design the 
expansion of sanitary vacuum which can accommodate 
pipes. So, the layout of the kitchen can be separated from 
connections of water and sanitary system thanks to this 
added space.  
 
 
Figure 3.  New worktop improve usability and visibility. 
Ethnographic analysis also revealed many accessibility 
issues related to the interaction user-cabinets. To solve these 
problems the kitchen is also equipped with some 
electromechanical systems to improve its accessibility.  
Devices have been inserted on the back of the wall 
cabinets to obtain an extra storage space. It makes accessible 
an additional space, always handy and useful for storing 
everyday items (e.g., dishes, utensils and small appliances 
such as coffee machine). Similarly, facilitator systems are 
included in the lower drawer of base cabinets, to facilitate 
easy access to users with limited mobility (Figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Electromechanical systems: the wall unit device (on the left), 
the system for base cabinet (on the right).  
B. Smart devices system 
The kitchen is equipped with a lot of devices. Figure 5 
describes the architecture of E-Kitchen communication 
network and shows all the elements which constitute the 
intelligent system. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

The network is realized through ZigBee technology. It 
provides communication from/to any appliance or device and 
from/to the Gateway. The Smart Gateway is able to 
communicate with the outside through connection to the 
Modem-Router. A Power Meter ZigBee (SmartPlug) 
installed downstream of the energy meter provide to measure 
the global consumption of the house and to send data to the 
Gateway. 
 
Figure 5.  E-Kitchen communication network 
Household appliances which provide smart service (i.e., 
oven, 
dishwasher 
and 
hood) 
are 
equipped 
with 
communication interfaces based on ZigBee standard. Other 
devices (i.e., the fridge) are connected through Power Line 
Communication (PLC) and ZigBee standard. For the 
conventional appliances (i.e., the coffee machine), which are 
not capable to communicate with system by themselves, 
ZigBee smart plug have been used in order to monitor 
energy consumption and to turn devices on/off  remotely. 
In the E-Kitchen system, standard sensors (i.e., 
temperature and humidity) and non-standard sensors (i.e., air 
quality) have been implemented to identify emergency 
situations: for example, light sensors are used to detect when 
room becomes too dark, and temperature sensors are used to 
control kitchen hob. All the sensors use the ZigBee and 
Bluetooth standards. 
Led lights have been inserted under the wall cabinets and 
under the base cabinets of the kitchen. They permit to 
transform the kitchen into a real user interface able to 
communicate information and alerts. There are two kinds of 
led strips: white to illuminate the worktop and red for seeing 
information. The white lights can be automatically activated 
when the home automation system detects a low level of 
brightness in the environment. The red lights are exclusively 
remote controlled and are used to manage the information 
(e.g., warnings or alarms) that the system sends to the user. 
C. Home automation system 
The home automation system enhances the usability, 
intuitiveness and safety of the kitchen environment. The hub 
of such system is the Smart Gateway, which manages all the 
information. It connects smart devices of Home Area 
Network (HAN) to the modem/router Telecom Italia [18] to 
make them available outside the home automation network, 
through the internet (Figure 6).  
 
Figure 6.  Hardware architecture. 
The Smart Gateway is composed of Home Automation 
Gateway (HAG) and other local application bundles. HAG is 
constituted by a set of native components and some bundle 
included in OSGi framework (HAG OSGi Bundles). HAG 
permits local application bundles (Local Gateway Service 
Logics) and applications of devices of Home Network (E-
Kitchen application components) to interact with HAN 
devices and access to storage data of Home Automation 
Platform (HAP). HAP is a platform in a cloud service that 
gives network storage service of data collected by the 
devices of the HAN. The stored data can be accessed from 
the HAG or other logic network application (i.e., Local 
Cloud Service Logics that can process the raw data sent by 
the gateway and store new data).  
A web-based User Interface Controller has been 
developed that allows the user to manage and interact with 
the E-Kitchen environment. The controller software 
architecture is realized by two parts: Logic Unit (LU) and 
User Interface (UI) (Figure 7) 
 
Figure 7.  E-Kitchen software architecture. 
The LU manages the communication to/from the home 
gateway and it is involved to execute logic management 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

system based on events and store data. In particular, the LU 
processes all the information provided by system, it 
elaborates that information and operate events through a 
decision-making algorithm in order to support the user.  It is 
also managed by the user through the UI. 
 
 
Figure 8.  E-Kitchen User Interface. 
The UI is a web application developed in Cloud Services, 
which manages the interface visualization and user 
interaction with the system. The interface is visible and 
accessible at any time and can be displayed on PC, Smart-
TV, Smartphone or Tablet (Figure 8). 
The Graphical User Interface has been design according 
to User-Centered Approach. The design process consists of 
the following steps:  
- 
collection of project requirements and user needs;  
- 
definition of a concept design solution; 
- 
construction of a paper-prototype; 
- 
evaluation of the design solution with usability 
experts and identification of improvements; 
- 
construction of full functional high fidelity prototype 
(figure 8); 
- 
design evaluation with users, which is described in 
the following paragraph. 
 
IV. 
EVALUATION SYSTEM 
A preliminary usability evaluation have been carried out 
to assess E-Kitchen system in terms of usability and 
acceptability, with focus on the impact of additional features. 
It has been chosen to use the methodology well-known as 
thinking aloud [19] to understand in more detail the choices 
made by users during the course of the assessment. 
In order to carry out a qualitative assessment focused on 
global characteristics rather than on individual aspects, 
usability tests have been based on tasks scenario. Each 
scenario has been designed in order to allow evaluation 
through the observation of interaction between the user and 
the whole system. 
In the evaluation, there have been tested two different 
ways of interaction: direct (without the help of the user 
interface) and mediated by the user interface visualized 
through a tablet. At the end of the evaluations, user 
impressions were gathered through interviews conducted by 
evaluators and questionnaires. 
The following objective parameters have been collected 
during the test by using the form reported in the figure 9: 
- 
 (C) Completion of the task (S / N); 
- 
(E) Number of errors made by user during the 
interaction with household appliances; 
- 
 (I) Number of errors in the use of the interface; 
- 
(O) Capacity error correction (S / N); 
- 
(H) Reference to the instructions. 
 
User recruitment is based on three main aspects: 
familiarity with the kitchen, age and ability with technology. 
The users have to be able with the kitchen: they have to be 
skilled in performing operational tasks (e.g., food 
preparation) inside the kitchen.  The distinction based on the 
age has been defined according to the difference between 
adults and elders, where adults are intended between the ages 
of 30 and 50 years, and elders over 65 years. Intermediate 
characteristics (age between 51 and 64) were not considered 
because they are easily deducible from the behaviors 
detected in extreme groups. Users under the age of 30 were 
not considered in the test. According to the ability with 
technologies, the users are divided into two groups: high 
ability (HA) for users which use frequently computers, 
smartphones and tablets and scarce ability (SA) for who uses 
them less than once per week and with reduced functionality. 
According to these definitions users were divided into 
three groups (Table 1) according to the following 
characteristics: 
1. Adults (30 to 50 years) with HA; 
2. Elders (over 65 years) with HA; 
3. Elders (over 65 years) with SA. 
To improve the assessment, users with minor limitations 
in vision, hearing and fine motor, have been involved, 
because such limitations are widespread in a large portion of 
elderly people.  
Five subjects for each of the two categories of elders 
(with and without ability with technologies) and five users in 
the first group have been selected. 
Tests have been conducted by two researchers. 
Performance data have been collected through diary study 
and Video Interaction Analysis (VIA). 
TABLE I.  
USERS GROUPS 
Groups 
Criteria 
N° 
Principal 
Limitations 
G1 
Adults (30 to 50 years) with HA 
None 
5 
G2 
Elders (over 65 years) with HA 
View, Hearing, 
Fine motricity  
5 
G3 
Elders (over 65 years) with SA 
View, Hearing, 
Fine motricity 
5 
 
 
Total 
15 
 
 
  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 9.  Evaluation form. 
 Few examples of the scenarios used during testing are: 
o 
Preparing a meal: the user must prepare a meal using a 
recipe. Tasks: selection and consultation of a recipe, 
finding the ingredients, start and setting the oven, check 
the status of cooking, preparation, programming and 
starting the dishwasher, management of any warning. 
o 
Alarm management: the user manages unexpected 
alerts of system. Tasks: understanding the alarm, solve 
the problem. 
o 
Power 
Management: 
The 
user 
manages 
the 
consumption after an overload warning and checks 
energy consumption in a given period. Tasks: 
programming one or more appliances, choice between 
automatic or manual management of overload, manage 
an overload alarm, and check the consumption in a 
given period. 
A. Evaluation Discussion/Results 
Users have positively assessed the layout of the kitchen 
and the additional space of the worktop. During the 
preparation of the meals they have expressed positive 
opinion about the use of the kitchen. 
During the interaction with the User Interface through 
tablet positive impressions were collected from the users. 
Instead during the direct interaction with the devices, by 
the majority of subjects, it was reported some difficulties to 
find right information for programming dishwasher and 
oven. In particular, 11 of 15 subjects have required the 
support of the researchers more than once and repeated the 
task once before do it correctly. In this case, the task has 
been evaluated by users as difficult. As regards the ability to 
program the oven, 7 of 15 users have utilized researcher 
instructions, and evaluation of task difficulty was better than 
dishwasher. This can be due to the characteristics of 
household appliances interfaces: instead of UI system, the 
dishwasher in particular presents a really poor button-
interface, which is not able to suggest the correct sequence of 
action necessary to set up a program. 
In the management of alarms (i.e., overload warning, 
ambient alarm, error or alerts of appliances) users have 
reacted to system alert without difficulty. All users have used 
the interface to get information and instructions to resolve 
the problem. Data collected during observation of user 
performances and answers given by users to questionnaires 
showed that light signals and user interface allow to identify 
the problem immediately and to react properly. 
As regards the reading of energy consumption through 
the interface, users have completed the task without using the 
researchers’ instructions or making mistakes and they have 
supplied very positive feedback in the activities. Through the 
questionnaire, users have highlighted the importance of 
knowing energy consumption in real time or and historical 
ones. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents the design of an innovative smart 
kitchen. 
The results of a qualitative experimentation with final 
users has shown that it is accessible and highly usable for 
users with some limitations such the elderly. In general, it 
emerged that the new smart kitchen system is able to 
improve the usability of household appliances, such as oven 
and dishwasher, as regards the programming and controlling 
operations, compared with a “traditional” kitchen. At the 
same time, it shows how the introduction of smart 
technologies in the kitchen environment improves the 
usability also for users with scarce attitude to technology.  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

The main innovation of E-Kitchen is the ability to govern 
rationally and in an intuitive manner the functions of all the 
appliances that find place in the kitchen: it improves the use 
and the control of the devices, it reduces malfunctions and it 
makes them more easy to manage. 
The work is not definitive: the smart kitchen will be 
evaluated with a greater number of  users in order to verify 
this first qualitative evaluation. Moreover, a field study will 
be conducted to assess the ability of E-kitchen system to 
enhance the users' energy awareness and, in order to 
understand if it is able or not to contribute to increase energy 
saving and to demonstrate its benefits with respect to other 
proposals in the literature. Anyway, it is reasonable to 
assume that the system allows to save around 3% of money, 
in term of energy bill, because the system gives the 
possibility to shift the appliances program when the energy 
rate is low. 
An additional effort will be focused on the development 
of E-Kitchen to make it commercialized at a sustainable cost. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been funded by the Italian Ministry of 
Economic 
Development 
within 
the 
Industria 
2015 
Programme, “Made in Italy”. 
REFERENCES  
[1] Centre for industrial studies, “Process of kitchen furniture 
purchasing in Italy”, 2003 [Online] 
[2] ISPESL, “Accidents at home” Transl. “Case, persone, 
infortuni: conoscere per prevenire”, 2002 [Online] 
[3] IEA energy efficiency, “Report” 2011 [Online]. 
[4] F. Fernandesa, H. Morais, Z. Valea, and C. Ramos, “Dynamic 
load management in a smart home to participate in demand 
response events” Energy and Buildings 82, pp. 592–606, 
2014. 
[5] L. C. De Silva, C. Morikawa, and I. M. Petra, “State of the art 
of smart homes” Engineering Applications of Artificial 
Intelligence 25, pp. 1313–1321, 2012. 
[6] D. Ding, R. A. Cooper, P. F. Pasquina, and L. Fici-Pasquina, 
“Sensor technology for smart homes”, Maturitas, Volume 69, 
Issue 2, pp. 131–136, 2011. 
[7] A. Muñoz, E. Serrano, A. Villa, M. Valdés, and J. A. Botía,  
“An Approach for Representing Sensor Data to Validate 
Alerts in Ambient Assisted Living”, Sensors,  Volume 12, 
Issue 5, pp. 6282-6306, 2012. 
[8] M. Stander, A. Hadjakos, N. Lochschmidt, C. Klos, B. 
Renner, 
and 
M. 
Muhlhause, 
“A 
Smart 
Kitchen 
Infrastructure”, 
IEEE 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Multimedia, 
Dec. 
2012, 
pp. 
96 
– 
99, 
doi: 
10.1109/ISM.2012.27. 
[9] C. L. Hsu, S. Y. Yang, and W. B. Wu, “3C intelligent home 
appliance control system – Example with refrigerator”, Expert 
Systems with Applications Volume 37, Issue 6 pp 4337–4349, 
2010. 
[10] Bosch 
smart 
appliance: 
www.home-
connect.com/en/news/news.html  [retrieved: 05, 2015]. 
[11] Whirpool 
smart 
appliance: 
www.whirlpool.com/smart-
appliances [retrieved: 05, 2015]. 
[12] LG 
smart 
appliance: 
www.lg.com/us/discover/smartthinq/thinq.jsp [retrieved: 05, 
2015]. 
[13] N. Arghira, L. Hawarah, S. Ploix, and M. Jacomino, 
“Prediction of appliances energy usein smart homes” Energy 
Volume 48, Issue 1, pp. 128-134,  2012. 
[14] S. Nistor, J. Wu, M. Sooriyabandara, and J. Ekanayake, 
“Capability of smart appliances to provide reserve services”, 
Applied Energy  Volume 138, Issue 15, pp. 590–597, 2015. 
[15] E. R. Frederiks, K. Stenner, and E. V. Hobman, “Household 
energy use: Applying behavioural economics to understand 
consumer decision-making and behavior” Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews Volume 41, pp. 1385–1394, 
2015. 
[16] M. Ficocelli and G. Nejat, “The design of an interactive 
assistive kitchen system”,  Assistive Technology Volume 24, 
Issue 4, pp. 246-258, 2012. 
[17] J. H. Chen, P. P. Y. Chi, H. H. Chu, C. C. H. Chen, and P. 
Huang, “A smart kitchen for nutrition-aware cooking”, IEEE 
Pervasive Computing Volume 9, Issue 4, December 2010,  pp 
58-65, doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2010.75. 
[18] www.telecomitalia.it [retrieved: 05, 2015]. 
[19] M. W. Jaspers, T. Steen, C. van den Bos, and M. Geenen, 
“The think aloud method: a guide to user interface design”, 
International Journal of Medical Informatics Volume 73, 
Issues 11–12, 2004,  pp. 781–795. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

