 
 
Methodology for Studying the User Experience with New Mobility Systems:  
The Cases of Electric Cars and Dynamic Car-pooling Use 
 
Béatrice Cahour 
National Centre of Scientic Research 
and Télécom ParisTech Sup.School  
Paris, France 
beatrice.cahour@telecom-paristech.fr 
  
Claudine Nguyen 
Renault and 
Télécom ParisTech Sup.School  
Guyancourt, France 
claudine.nguyen@renault.com 
 
Lisa Créno 
VeDeCoM Institute and  
Télécom ParisTech Sup.School  
Paris, France  
lisa.creno@telecom-paristech.fr 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract – The use of emerging mobility systems in the city is a 
critical issue, and we propose in this paper a methodological 
framework, which is lived experience-centered, to study it. The 
methodology is illustrated with two studies: the first is about 
the way drivers deal with the limited autonomy of electric cars, 
and the second is about the use of dynamic car-pooling. We 
propose three steps: (1) studying a situation of reference, with 
interviews focused on the lived experience of specific situations 
of use, (2) studying the lived experience of a limited population 
in the emerging situation, with video recording and interviews 
based on the video and on diaries (3) generalizing some of the 
processes observed with quantitative data. We then discuss the 
pros and cons of this methodological approach, and we explain 
the resources it provides for designing technologies and 
services adapted to the users’ activities and feelings in natural 
settings. 
Key words : methodology; natural use; lived experience; electric 
cars; dynamic car-pooling; interviews; reference situation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION: STUDIYING THE EMERGING USES 
Mobility in the future cities is a crucial social issue 
because of the ecological, economical and traffic congestion 
impacts of the design of multi-modality systems. New 
modalities of mobility must be experimented to be adapted to 
the 
users’ 
expectations, 
reluctances, 
and 
practical 
organization of their daily life.  
We can find mostly global and statistical approaches 
looking at the flow of travels, at the profiles of the persons 
using new modalities of transport and macro description of 
the users’ behaviour and motivations [1]; [2]; [3]; [4]; [5]; 
[6]. 
The approach that we present here is focused on 
analyzing how people deal effectively with the use of new 
mobility systems in their daily life (and not only on what 
they say about what they generally do or will do). It is 
focused on the situated activity [7] and on the lived 
experience of the users in specific contexts [8], [9]. We adopt 
a psycho-ergonomic perspective: 
 
A psychological perspective : exploring precisely the 
user experience with the new technology and service 
: their actions but also what they think during the use 
and how they feel [10]; 
 
And 
an 
ergonomic 
perspective: 
proposing 
orientations for designing tools and services adapted 
to the user’s situated activity. 
The difficulty is that these new services and technologies 
are not developed yet in the city and we cannot really 
experiment them in the real context of the future city. It is 
then a matter of “prospective ergonomics” [11], of 
anticipating the future situation and the activities deployed in 
this context. We could base our study on the projective 
imagination of the future users, like it is often done in 
creativity sessions. But there is a potential gap between the 
intentions and the actions actually developed. We then prefer 
to study how people behave in a real situation. If this 
situation does not exist so far, maybe we can find an existing 
one, which is a reference (also for the users), and then 
develop a situation, which is similar to the future one, but on 
a smaller scale. 
Our conception of User Experience is based on an in-
depth analysis of the situated activity and lived experience, 
i.e., on what happens during the contextual use and how the 
user lives it: what are their actions and focus of attention; 
their mental activities for evaluating, reasoning, taking 
decisions; their sensorial perceptions and their affective 
feelings [8]. 
As examples of this methodological process, we will 
present two studies:  
 
The first study is about the initial use of an electric 
car and the specific issue of its limited autonomy 
[12], [13]; how do users deal with this new situation 
where the risk of breaking down is more important? 
(about 150 km of autonomy). Are they taking some 
risk with unpredictable routes or are they limiting 
their travels? How do they feel with the risk of 
running out of car energy, and how do they manage 
it when driving or before driving? 
 
The second study, which began recently, is about the 
use of dynamic car-pooling with service applications 
on smartphones. How do the users find another user 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
to share a personal car during a travel? Is the 
application satisfying? What is the relevant 
information about the other? Are they trusting the 
others or not, especially when they are strangers: 
their way of driving, their punctuality, their social 
behaviour? What type of social relation do they 
build during the travel? 
We proceed in three steps: 
 
Studying a situation of reference; 
 
Studying the lived experience of a limited population 
in the emerging situation (with the new service or 
technology); 
 
Generalising some of the processes observed with 
quantitative data. 
II. 
EXPERIENCE-CENTERED METHODOLOGY AND 
RESULTS 
Our methodological framework is inscribed in the 
disciplines of psychology and ergonomics. It allows us to 
study the human lived experience and activity with its 
cognitive, emotional and sensorial aspects, with the 
ergonomic 
objective 
to 
design 
instruments 
and 
environments, which are adapted to the human needs. 
A. Step 1: studying a situation of reference 
In a first phase we study an existing situation of 
reference. This situation must be the most similar to the 
future situation that we aim at. 
1) Situation of reference for the EV autonomy 
management 
For studying the issue of how people act and feel 
regarding the limited range of the electric vehicle (EV), we 
first studied how people act and feel regarding the autonomy 
of their traditional thermal vehicle; we had no idea about 
this specific activity, which is adjacent to the driving activity 
but becomes very important with the EV.  
14 in-depth interviews (half men/women, 23 to 63 years 
old) have been performed. After a general description of how 
they tend to manage the autonomy, we asked them to try to 
remember and describe the lived experiences of specific 
situations.  
We then analyzed the interviews, and from this analysis 
we constructed a short questionnaire of 7 items to get 
quantitative data on specific points, which appeared to be 
relevant, filled by 344 drivers (21 to 65 years old).  
We will not develop here all the results but only the main 
ones. 
First of all, concerning the way people deal with the 
autonomy of their traditional thermal vehicle, the interviews 
and questionnaires allowed us to highlight different styles 
[12]: some drivers are more or less worried about running 
out of gasoline and consequently they anticipate and 
calculate more their refilling. The styles (anticipators, 
moderate anticipators, reactive to the signal, late refillers), 
which are a global tendency to act in a certain way, depend 
on personal determinant, but this global tendency can also be 
transformed by contextual determinants: 
 
Personal determinants are: (1) the affective relation 
to the risk of breaking down, some being anxious of 
breaking down and others being rather indifferent to 
this possibility; (2) the affective relation to the 
stations, some delaying the refilling because they 
feel the stations as disgusting and unpleasant places 
that they avoid. 
 
Contextual determinants are (1) the temporal 
priorities of the driver at that moment (refilling may 
be considered as less important as being on time at a 
meeting); (2) the trust in the reflexive instruments of 
their own cars indicate the remaining autonomy 
(such as the gauge); (3) the familiarity with the 
journey and station sites (for long and unknown 
trips, there is more anticipation); (4) the collective 
influence (when sharing a car with someone else, the 
refilling can be more systematic). 
The more surprising results are the variety of reactions 
towards the uncertainty of the autonomy, and the diversity in 
terms of tolerance to uncertainty [14]. Also the emotional 
relation to the risk of running out of gasoline appears to be 
clearly linked to the proactive/reactive conduct, but models 
of risks surprisingly ignore this emotional dimension [15].  
We also observed that, for dealing with the autonomy, 
drivers use instruments [13] of two types : (a) to anticipate 
and calculate in advance the risk, such as websites, and it is 
mainly done by those of the “anticipator” or “moderate 
anticipator” style (b) they also use reflexive instruments, 
which give them a dynamic feedback on their situation state 
(the gauge, the remaining kilometers, the econometer); some 
“late refillers”, who are used to breakdown, can even have a 
can in the trunk and a pipe in order to cope with (and not 
anymore to avoid) the breakdown. 
2) Situation of reference for the dynamic car-pooling 
Car-pooling is defined as the sharing of a private vehicle 
between persons who may or may not know each other in 
advance, and who can meet by using a service on the web 
allowing them to find other persons to share a ride. 
Nowadays in France, this mapping is always performed in 
advance (we call it “planned” car-pooling); the planned car-
pooling is mostly used for long trips (in Europe, the average 
is 200 km, [16]. The “dynamic” car-pooling implies that a 
system 
geolocates 
the 
potential 
users, 
identifying 
dynamically where they are. The matching between users is 
based on this geolocation. Consequently a person can go out 
of a meeting at anytime for instance, look on his smartphone 
at who is in the neighborhood and going in the same 
direction as himself. The mapping is then dynamic and users 
do not need any more to plan their ride in advance. Dynamic 
car-pooling services are not already functional in France, but 
some applications are used elsewhere, such as Avego Driver 
in Ireland. 
We first studied the present services of car-pooling to 
have a clearer idea of why people do not use this type of 
service and if they do, how do they do. Some studies have 
already been conducted on this issue but with a more global 
perspective [17]; [18]; [5]; [19]; [20]. They indicate that, in 
France, car-pooling is occasionally used for holidays or for a 
special event, mainly by young users (60% are under 30 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
years) living in urban environment. The drivers are a 
majority of men (69%) and 34% of them are more than 40 
years old; the passengers are rather women and 26% of them 
are less than 23 years old. Users say that the positive points 
are economic (low price of their travel), ecologic (reduction 
of greenhouse gas emissions) and social (meeting new 
people and creation of a social link). The negative points are 
the lack of flexibility in scheduling and journey [21], but 
dynamic car-pooling should respond to this problem. 
 
 
Figure 1 : Searching a travel and a driver/passenger on BlaBlaCar! 
(application of “planned” car-pooling available on App Store and Google 
play : [22]) 
 
Firstly, 25 interviews have been conducted with people 
who never used any car-pooling systems to know their 
motivations for not using it. 
Then 25 in-depth interviews have been conducted (with 
descriptions of real uses cases) with people using planned 
car-pooling. The objective was to specify the sources of 
reticence and appreciation but also the difficult or positive 
experiences they have had with this mode of mobility. The 
issue of trust/mistrust is particularly important: how do users 
construct a trust or mistrust in this service? Do they choose 
the persons with whom they share a car and how? What type 
of interactions do they have once in the car? What is the 
nature of the social interactions built in these circumstances? 
Do they feel a risk or not and which type of risk? This study 
is then questioning and completing the theories of risk-taking 
and trust [23]; [24]; [15]; [25]. The analyses of these data are 
in progress. 
3) Interviews focused on the lived experience of specific 
situations 
The in-depth interviews that we conduct for studying the 
situation of reference are based on a specific technique, 
called “explicitation” (or “elicitation”) interviews, which has 
been developed by Vermersch [26]; [9]; [27]; [28].  First of 
all, the interview is focused on the description of real use 
cases, of effectively lived experiences. 
The typical risks when getting verbalizations from 
subjects describing their activity are the rationalizations and 
re-construction. The more we take care of the recall process 
of the subjects, the more we limit this risk. The 
“explicitation/elicitation” 
interview 
aims 
at 
the 
phenomenological experience of the subject [29], and is very 
cautious on the recall process. One principle is to help the 
subject to get a vivid memory of the activity by asking 
questions about the sensorial context. Then, we ask questions 
always linked to the situation to avoid generalizations, and 
taking care of their non-indicative format for not influencing 
the response of the subject. These techniques keep the 
subject in a position of talk which is focused on what he was 
living cognitively, perceptively and affectively during the 
past experience. It does not orient the subject to provide 
rational comments and explanations about it. The interviewer 
follows the temporal course of experience described by the 
subject and helps him to give more information about what 
happened in a specific situational context. With this 
interview technique, the subject has a vivid recall of the 
situation he describes (if not, he is invited to tell it) and can 
give more details about it and limit the rationalizations.  
4) Transfer from the reference situation to the future 
situation 
The situation of reference is a first basis to think about 
the emerging situation and to have indications and intuitions 
about how this future situation will probably be lived and 
acted by the users. 
For instance, we observed different styles for dealing 
with the autonomy of the vehicle: some drivers being more 
worried and anticipating more than others who wait for the 
signal of energy stock or even far after it. These styles are 
tendencies to act in a certain way, more or less anticipative 
or reactive, more or less worried about a certain risk or 
indifferent to this risk. They could not totally change because 
the vehicle becomes electric, except if the infrastructure 
totally transforms the activity and the nature of the risk (if 
there is for instance plenty of electric charging points 
everywhere, or if we could exchange the battery 
everywhere). But it is not the case yet, and even then, the 
user will need to wait for the service (the charge will take 
some time) and will plan it (or not) in the course of his/her 
activity. Then these profiles will remain relevant for 
anticipating the lived experience in the future. 
For the case of the ‘planned’ car-pooling, we intend to 
extract a lot of relevant information for the emerging 
‘dynamic’ car-pooling; the situation is very similar except 
that the activity becomes more opportunistic and reactive 
than with the planned car-pooling, and may unable the users 
to get as much information about the car-pooler to build trust 
through his profile and the opinions posted. 
B. Step 2: studying the lived experience of a limited 
population in the new situation  
The second step is, according to us, the most important 
one; it is the core of the user experience research, the phase 
of analysis of the users’ actions, perceptions, cognitive 
activities and feelings when using the new technology or 
mobility service. 
1) Studying the lived experience with electric vehicles  
For studying how people dealt with the limited autonomy 
of electric vehicles, electric cars have been lend to 9 subjects 
(7 men, 2 women, 24 to 55 years old, of the four styles). The 
lend cars are of three different types and trends, their official 
electric range is from 150 km to 160 km and the time needed 
to fully charge the battery is 7-8 hours. They used them 
during two weeks as they wished, without any constraint. 
The activity and user experience were studied by: 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
 
Observing via video recording (3 cameras) the 
emerging use with the new technology in ecological 
settings (cf. fig.1); 
 
Asking the 9 users to fill a diary every day about (1) 
The journeys: destination, planification, unexpected 
events, renunciations and motivations; (2) The 
recharge: mode, place, impressions and others remarks 
(3) Others impressions or specific events with the EV; 
 
Interviewing the users, with explicitation interviews 
(after days 1, 8 and 14) based also on the video 
recordings and on the diaries (self-confrontation 
interviews) in order to know the subjective experience 
when using the new mode of mobility.  
 
 
 
  
Figure 2 .Illustration of the use of the video recordings 
The main results are: 
Most of the subjects limit the risky journeys and use the 
electric vehicle (EV) for well-known journeys such as from 
home to work. Only two subjects with the profile “late 
refillers” have taken the risk of driving the EV with very 
limited autonomy. This indicates that the styles of reactions 
with traditional cars are similar with EV and that we find 
again this differentiated styles of dealing with the autonomy 
issue. 
The study indicates how the EV driving experience is 
situated and anchored in the context, and how it is 
emotionally embodied [12]. We showed how the activity and 
feelings of the driver depend on: 
 
The reflexive instruments available and their 
interpretation (gauge, econometer, other signals) ; 
the construction of their meaning depends on the 
style of anticipation and worry; 
 
The geographic context (hills, proximity of the 
arrival); the driver constructs a representation of it to 
anticipate the evolution of his autonomy, since some 
electric energy can be gained when going down hills 
and using the motor brake; 
 
It also depends on the co-drivers’ reactions. When 
the car is shared by a couple for instance, the actions 
taking place are negotiated. 
The use of the different “reflexive” instruments (gauge, 
econometer, remaining kilometers) have been studied in 
details, including the evolution of the use during the two 
weeks. For instance the econometer is often ignored at the 
beginning but finally used when critical situations arise.  
Finally, we proposed two prototypes of instruments 
(developed by Renault) to the 9 subjects who had used the 
EV during two weeks. The prototypes proposed innovative 
applications for geolocating the places for charging, the 
distance and time to these places (from the present place of 
the driver), but also visualizations of their remaining charge 
and other information, which is relevant for the autonomy. 
We asked them about what would fit them and which other 
expectations they would have, projecting them in the future 
possibilities. 
2) Studying the lived experience of the dynamic car-
pooling 
For studying how people act and feel with the dynamic 
car-pooling, we will soon disseminate an application with 
geolocation, which is not used in France but is developed in 
Ireland (Avego Driver) and a very new application, which is 
developed by a French start-up. We disseminate it in a zone 
of the south suburb of Paris, in several companies and 
engineer schools.  
When a sufficient number of persons will use the service, 
we will ask some volunteers to videotape (using small 
wearable cameras like “glasses-camera”) some moments of 
their natural activity, like the search of an adequate partner 
for the car-pooling, the arrangement of the meeting and the 
encounter. We will also put a video camera in the cars of 
some car-poolers to analyze the social interactions taking 
place with strangers.   
Users will also fill in diaries and some volunteers will be 
interviewed 
with 
the 
techniques 
described 
above 
(explicitation interviews and interviews based on the video 
records and on the diaries). 
 
Figure 3: Searching and matching on Avego Driver (application of 
dynamic car-pooling available on App Store and Google play : [30]) 
C. Step 3: generalising some of the processes observed with 
quantitative data 
Our approach of the user’s activity and experience is 
globally qualitative. Nevertheless it is interesting to quantify 
on a larger scale of population some of the processes put into 
light during the first two steps.  
That was the case for the EV autonomy study. With a 
short questionnaire and 344 participants we could for 
instance specify the quantitative repartition of the styles 
Camera 
(driving 
scene) 
 
Camera 
(dashboard) 
Camera 
(face) 
Three shots during the 
driving 
 
A video-based 
interview  
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
found in the qualitative interviews, and looked more 
precisely at the link between the anticipation tendency and 
the worry concerning the limited range of the vehicle. 
The “anticipators” represented 17,4% of our population. 
To the question of the questionnaire “In general, in your 
daily life, you go and take some gasoline...”, they responds 
“far before the signal of energy stock”. 48,3% of them are 
“rather worried” or “very worried” “when the stock signal 
comes on”. They are pro-active to avoid the stress of the 
failure risk. 
The “moderate anticipators” represented 36,6% of the 
population; they tend to re-supply the vehicle “just before the 
stock signal”. The autonomy management is more serene 
since 22,2% of them are “rather worried” or “very worried” 
when the stock signal lights on. 
The drivers who are “reactive to the signal” represented 
29,9% of the population; they generally wait “right after the 
stock signal (1 to 15 km)” for re-supplying. Only 6,9 % 
declare to be “rather worried” or “very worried” when it 
lights on. 
The “late refillers” (16,3%) who get some energy “far 
after the signal (more than 15 km)” are also only 7,1% 
feeling “rather worried” or “very worried” when the signal 
lights on. They run out of gasoline sometimes. 
It was actually interesting to know how these profiles are 
distributed in a larger population and to confirm the co-
variation between the anticipative-reactive behavior and the 
affective relation to the risk of running out of energy. 
The quantitative analysis is following the qualitative 
studies and completes the information on some specific 
processes. The in-depth qualitative analysis of the processes 
is a resource to build a relevant questionnaire. 
III. 
DISCUSSION 
Innovative modes of mobility such as the use of electric 
cars and car-pooling can be very efficient ways to build 
ecologic cities with less traffic and a better quality of life. 
Sharing cars is also a way of improving the economy of the 
households and of developing social conviviality. It is 
necessary to know how users deal with these new services 
and technologies, and our psycho-ergonomic approach is 
complementary to more macroscopic economical or 
sociological studies.  
The perspective that we propose is focused on the real 
activity of the user during situations of use and their lived 
experience. Taking into account their lived experience of 
these new situations means that we are interested not only in 
their rational and strategic conduct but also in their 
emotional reactions and in their affective motivations to act. 
For instance the users’ affective relation to a specific risk, 
their emotional tolerance to uncertainty, or their feeling of 
trust/mistrust built towards the instruments, services, and co-
actors of the use, are very important phenomena, which 
impact their decisions and actions during the use, but they 
are not enough taken into account.  
The methodology is mainly based on specific techniques 
of interviews (also based on video recordings and diaries) 
and may be completed by some questionnaires focused on 
the most interesting processes. There is a limit to these 
interview methodologies which are the core of our research: 
they are time-consuming (because of in-depth analysis of the 
psychological processes of use) and focused on a limited 
number of subjects. Nevertheless they are very useful for 
orienting the design; for instance the in-depth analysis of 
how drivers react to the various instruments helping them to 
control the car autonomy during the driving situations allows 
us to re-orient the design adequately. It is not the case 
through questionnaires for instance; we could not ask 
precisely how people react in such or such situation. With 
diaries we can ask people to describe specific use cases but 
generally they do it quickly and without many details. It is 
much more complete when an interviewer helps the subject 
to describe a specific situation of use. The global objective is 
actually to understand better the user lived experience in 
order to develop adapted services and technologies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Jean-François Forzy (Renault) and Christian 
Licoppe (Telecom ParisTech) for their constructive 
comments on this methodological framework. We also thank 
Renault, the IMD (Sustainable Mobility Institute), and the 
French VeDeCoM Institute for financing and promoting the 
two PhD studies on innovative modes of mobility. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Caroll, “The Smart Move Trail: Description and 
Initial Results”, Technical Report: Cenex, 2010, 
available 
at: 
http://www.cenex.co.uk/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=yUK
AcRDJtWg%3D&tabid=60. [retrieved: march, 2013] 
[2] P. Cocron et al., “Methods of Evaluating Electric 
Vehicles From a User's Perspective - The MINI EV 
Field Trial in Berlin”, IET Intelligent Transport 
Systems, vol.5, issue 2, 2011, pp. 127-133, doi: 
10.1049/iet-its.2010.0126.  
[3] N. Pearre, W. Kempton, R. L. Guensler, and V. V. 
Elango, “Electric Vehicles: How Much Range is 
Required for a Day’s Driving?”, Transportation 
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 19, issue 
6, 
December 
2011, 
pp. 
1171-1184, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.trc.2010.12.010. 
[4] A. Barthès, “Première approche quantitative des  
processus de covoiturage dans les territoires”, CITC, 
CERTU, Ministère du développement durable, 2009, 
available 
at : 
http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-
00391218/. [retrieved : march, 2013] 
[5] R. Clavel and P. Legrand, Le Covoiturage Dynamique : 
Etude préalable avant expérimentation, Rapport d’étude, 
Centre d’Etude sur les Réseaux, les Transports, 
l'Urbanisme et les constructions publiques, 2009, 
available 
at : 
http://lara.inist.fr/bitstream/handle/2332/1463/CERTU-
RE_09-03.pdf?sequence=1. [retrieved : march, 2013] 
[6] T. Wang and C. Chen, “Attitudes, Mode Switching 
Behavior, and the Built Environment: A Longitudinal 
Study in the Puget Sound Region”, Transportation 
Research Part A: Policy and Practice, vol. 46, iss. 10, 
December 2012, pp. 1594–1607. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
[7] L. A. Suchman, Plans and Situated Actions – The 
Problem of Human-Machine Communication. New-
York: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
[8] B. 
Cahour 
and 
P. 
Salembier, 
“The 
user 
phenomenological experience ; evoking the lived 
activity with « resituating interviews »”, CHI 2012 
Conference, May 2012, Austin, USA. 
[9] A. Light, “Adding Method to Meaning. A Technique 
for Exploring People’s Experience With Technology”,  
Behaviour and Information Technology, vol. 25, iss. 2, 
2006, pp.175-187. 
[10] J. McCarthy and P. Wright, Technology as experience. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004. 
[11] J.M. Robert and E. Brangier, “What is prospective 
ergonomics? A reflection and a position on the future of 
ergonomics”, in Ergonomics and Health Aspects, HCII 
2009, B.-T. Karssh, Eds.  Springer-Varlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 162-169.  
[12] B. Cahour, C. Nguyen, J.-F. Forzy, and C. Licoppe, 
“Using an electric car: a situated, instrumented and 
emotional activity”, Proc. European Conference on 
Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE 12), August 2012, pp. 
22-28, doi : 10.1145/2448136.2448142.  
[13] C. Nguyen, B. Cahour, J.-F. Forzy, and C. Licoppe, 
“L’inquiétant risque de panne : des instruments pour 
anticiper et des instruments pour réagir”, Proc. 46è 
Congrès de la Société d’Ergonomie de Langue 
Française (Self 11), Sept. 2011. 
[14] J. Birrell, K. Meares, A. Wilkinson, and M. Freeston, 
“Toward a Definition of Intolerance of Uncertainty: A 
Review of Factor Analytical Studies of the Intolerance 
of Uncertainty Scale”, Clinical Psychology review, vol. 
31, 
iss. 
7, 
Nov. 
2011, 
pp. 
1198-1208, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.cpr.2011.07.009 
[15] K.L. Mosier and U. Fisher, “The Role of Affect in 
Naturalistic Decision Making”, Journal of Cognitive 
Engineering and Decision Making, vol. 4, iss. 3, 2010, 
pp. 
240-255, 
doi: 
10.1518/155534310X12844000801122. 
[16] http://www.carpooling.com/press/companypressmedia-
kit/carpooling-without-borders/ [retrieved : march 2013] 
[17] COVIVO SAS., Rapport d’étude, Expérimentation du 
Covoiturage dynamique, Entre le plateau du Vercors et 
l’agglomération 
grenobloise, 2011, 
available 
at : 
http://itinisere.fr/ftp/documents_FR/rapport-final-
public_ecovoiturage.pdf, [retrieved : march 2013] 
[18] JC. Ballet and R. Clavel, Le Covoiturage en France et 
en Europe : Etat des Lieux et Perspectives, Rapport de 
recherche, Centre d’Etude sur les Réseaux, les 
Transports, l'Urbanisme et les constructions publiques, 
2007, 
available 
at : 
http://lara.inist.fr/bitstream/handle/2332/1453/CERTU-
RE_08-01.pdf?sequence=1. [retrieved : march, 2013] 
[19] S. Vincent, Les Altermobilités : Analyse Sociologique 
d'Usages de Déplacements Alternatifs à la Voiture 
Individuelle. Des pratiques en émergence?, Thèse 
Université 
de 
Paris 
5, 
2008, 
available 
at : 
http://tel.archives-
ouvertes.fr/docs/00/33/16/59/PDF/theseSVINCENT.pdf
. [retrieved : march, 2013] 
[20] I. Richard, Facteurs et processus psychosociaux du 
changement pour l’adoption de comportements pro-
environnementaux : le cas du covoiturage. Thèse de 
doctorat en Psychologie, Laboratoire de psychologie 
sociale (EA 849). Université de Provence – Université 
de Nîmes, 2011. 
[21] D. M. Dorinson, D. Gay, P. Minett, and S. Shaheen,. 
“Flexible carpooling : exploratory study”, Institute of 
Transportation Studies, Research Report UCD-ITS-RR-
09-37, 2009. 
[22] http://www.covoiturage.fr/ 
[23] B. Rajaonah, F. Anceaux, and F. Vienne, “Study of 
Driver Trust During Cooperation with Adaptive Cruise 
Control”, Le Travail Humain, vol. 69, iss.2, 2006, p. 99-
127, doi : 10.3917/th.692.0099. 
[24] B. Cahour and J.-F. Forzy, “Does Projection into Use 
Improve Trust and Exploration ?”, Safety Science, vol. 
47, 
iss. 
9, 
nov. 
2009, 
pp. 
1260-1270, 
doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2009.03.015. 
[25] Groupe 
Chronos 
& 
BlaBlaCar, 
Trusted 
Online 
Communities: 
signs 
of 
a 
brighter 
future, 
Communication at Le web, Dec. 2012, available at: 
http://www.betrustman.com/. [retrieved : march, 2013] 
[26] P. Vermersch, L’Entretien d’Explicitation. Paris : ESF, 
1994. 
[27] M. Maurel, “The Explicitation Interview: Examples and 
Applications”, Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol. 
16, iss. 10-12, Oct-Nov. 2009, pp. 58-89 
[28] B. Cahour, “Discomfort, Affects and Coping Strategies 
in Driving Activity”, Proc. European Conference on 
Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE 08),  Sept. 2008, pp. 91-
98, doi: 10.1145/1473018.1473046. 
[29] N. Depraz, F. Varela, and P. Vermersch, On Becoming 
Aware. A Pragmatics of Experiencing. Amsterdam: 
Benjamin. 2003. 
[30] http://www.avego.com/
 
 
 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

