Impact of Incentive Mechanism in Participatory Sensing Environment
Niwat Thepvilojanapong∗, Tomoya Tsujimori∗, Hao Wang†, Yoshikatsu Ohta∗, Yunlong Zhao†, and Yoshito Tobe‡
∗ Department of Information Engineering, Mie University
1577 Kurimamachiya-cho, Tsu city, Mie, Japan
E-mail: {wat, tujimori, ohta}@net.info.mie-u.ac.jp
† School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University
Nantong Street No. 145, 21#320, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, China
E-mail: {halinw, zhaoyunlong}@hrbeu.edu.cn
‡ Department of Integrated Information Technology, Aoyama Gakuin University
5–10–1 Fuchinobe, Chuo-ku, Sagamihara city, Kanagawa, Japan
E-mail: yoshito-tobe@rcl-aoyama.jp
Abstract—Nowadays, the number of smartphone users is
growing rapidly. Recent smartphones equipped with several
sensors are convenient apps for collecting information in par-
ticipatory sensing environment. However, contributing sensing
data requires time and monetary cost, which hinder many
people from participation. To realize active and efﬁcient sensing
activities, incentive mechanism is indispensable. This paper
proposes SenseUtil, utility-based incentive for participatory
sensing. SenseUtil applies the concept of micro economics,
where demand and supply decide the value of sensed data.
The incentive dynamically changes along the time according
to several factors such as sensing frequency, nearby sensing
points and users’ preference. To study the impact of incentive
mechanism, we conducted simulation study. The results show
that people actively participate in sensing tasks while keeping
additional cost fewer than three percent in comparison with
non-incentive scenarios.
Keywords-participatory sensing; incentive; utility functions;
phone sensing; SenseUtil; simulation.
I. INTRODUCTION
The number of smartphone users is growing rapidly [1]–
[3]. It has been reported that the smartphone penetration
in ﬁve leading European markets (France, Germany, Italy,
Spain and the United Kingdom) is 54.6% of mobile phone
users by the end of October 2012 [3]. In addition to
cellular communication standards (2G/3G/4G), smartphones
support several communication technologies including Wi-
Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n, Bluetooth and near ﬁeld communication
(NFC). It also comes with high-performance processor and
various kinds of sensors such as accelerometer, gyroscope,
magnetometer, compass, GPS, barometer, microphone, am-
bient light, camera and so on. These features of current
smartphones are useful for many apps which attract new
users.
Recently, participatory sensing using such smartphones
has been received much attention from researchers [4].
Smartphone
sensing
platforms,
recruitment
framework,
energy-efﬁcient techniques and several context-aware apps
have been proposed in the literature [5]–[9]. However, many
smartphone users are not likely to participate in sensing
activities because it takes time and monetary cost for data
communication. Therefore, incentive mechanism is indis-
pensable to realize active participatory sensing by urging
people to report sensed data [10], [11].
This paper proposes SenseUtil, a utility-based incentive
framework for participatory sensing. In this model, con-
sumers who need data pay reward to producers who carry
out sensing tasks and report the data. SenseUtil applies the
concept of micro economics, where demand and supply
decide the value of sensed data. The demand and supply
depend on many factors including location, data types and
users’ preference, and they also change along the time
dynamically. In particular, SenseUtil determines the value of
sensing activities by deﬁning utility functions which are used
to calculate economical reward. SenseUtil aims to maximize
sensing activities while maintaining reasonable sensing cost.
To study the impact of SenseUtil, we conducted simulation
study. The results show that people actively participate in
sensing tasks while keeping additional cost fewer than three
percent in comparison with non-incentive scenarios.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
SenseUtil framework. Section III evaluates the beneﬁt of
SenseUtil through simulation study. Related work is dis-
cussed in Section IV, and we conclude our study in Sec-
tion V.
II. SENSEUTIL FRAMEWORK
SenseUtil consists of three main players: consumers,
producers and a server. A consumer would like to have data
being sensed at a remote area, while a producer is willing
to carry out such sensing tasks. A person can serve as both
the consumer and producer. A central server is responsible
to manage interactions between consumers and producers.
Interactions of three players are summarized in Figure 1 and
the details of SenseUtil are described in this section.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Consumer
1. Request data
2. Notify sensing tasks
3. Report sensed data
4. Forward sensed data
Producer
Server
5. Pay reward
6. Forward reward
Figure 1.
Interactions of a consumer, a server and a producer.
A. Consumers
A Consumer deﬁnes a Point of Interest (POI) where data
should be sensed. In addition to location information, POI
also includes starting time, expiry time and data type (i.e.,
which kind of data need to be sensed). The consumer sends
POI information to the server on demand. When receiving
corresponding data, the consumer pays reward determined
by the utility functions (see Section II-D).
B. A Server
A server is a middleman between consumers and produc-
ers (Figure 1). It maintains POIs’ information or the sensing
tasks requested by consumers and updates corresponding re-
ward of each POI periodically or on demand. The producers
acquire detailed information of sensing tasks by exploiting
pull and/or push services.
By adopting the pull or on-demand services, the server
dispatches POI information upon receiving a request from
a consumer. The producers may use the pull service to
avoid being overwhelmed by too frequent update of POI
information. In addition, the producers can use the pull
service to update current reward of POI. On the other hand,
the push service provides two methods for dispatching the
information to producers, i.e., instant and periodic push. The
instant push allows the server to dispatch the POI infor-
mation immediately upon receiving new POI information
from a consumer. The service is beneﬁcial for producers
who would like to have the information of new POI in real-
time manner; thus, they can act fast to receive rewards. The
producers subscribe to periodic push will receive the POI
information periodically.
The server is also responsible to collect sensing data from
producers and forward the data to consumers. In addition,
the process of collecting payment and rewarding are handled
by the server.
C. Producers
As described above, a producer receives the information
of sensing tasks including current reward from the server
Table I
NOTATIONS.
Dk
th
Distance threshold of a producer k
Uk
th
Utility threshold of a producer k
T k
th
Elapsed time threshold of a producer k
U
Independent utility
Umin
Minimum utility
Umax
Maximum utility
V
Correlated utility
Pi
A point of interest (POI) i
t
Current time
ti
Latest sensing time at Pi
a, α, b
Constants
wij
Weight for calculating correlated utility
dij
Distance between Pi and Pj
through pull and/or push services. The producer can also
determines her preferences including area of interest (e.g., a
limited area based on current position or any speciﬁc area),
maximum number of tasks, minimum reward, frequency of
push-based notiﬁcation, and so on.
The behavior of a producer depends on current position
and reward of sensing task. A producer k will carry out a
sensing task if all the following conditions satisfy: (1) her
position is not far from a POI, i.e., the distance between the
producer and the POI is shorter than or equal to Dk
th, (2)
the reward is higher than a threshold U k
th, and (3) the time
elapsed from previous sensing at the same POI is longer
than T k
th. The underlying reason of the third condition is to
avoid too frequent sensing at the same POI.
If the above conditions satisfy, the producer changes the
route by moving towards the POI, carries out the sensing
task and moves towards the original destination. By default,
the producer uses the maximum speed in order to minimize
moving time. However, the producer may move with the
current speed if she is not in a hurry. After the task has
been done, the producer receives reward via the server.
Note that the producers may calculate utility by using
(1) or (2) introduced in Sect. II-D. However, the producers
may have incorrect value of utility because they do not
know when other producers carry out the sensing tasks. The
producers need to use the pull service to ask for current
utility maintained by the server.
D. Utility Functions
This section introduces utility functions which are used to
calculate the value of sensing data POI i (i.e., Pi) at a given
time t. The consumers have to pay reward according to the
utility functions. We consider two cases when calculating
utility, that is, independent and correlated POIs. Table I
summarizes notations used in the paper.
Independent POI means sensing data of Pi are indepen-
dent of other POIs. Basically, the utility is initialized to the
minimum value (Umin) and increases along the time until
reaching the maximum value (Umax). Equation (1) deﬁnes
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

the utility of POI i at time t.
U(Pi, t) = max (Umin, min (Umax, a(t − ti))) ,
(1)
where ti is the latest sensing time at Pi and is initialized
to the starting time of Pi. While sensing task is not done,
the utility increases along the time due to higher demand of
consumers. A coefﬁcient a (a > 0), which is determined by
the consumer, determines how fast the utility increases. The
consumer also decides Umin and Umax because the value
of data sensed at each POI may be unequal.
When a sensing task has been done, the utility is reset
to the minimum value and starts to increase again. The un-
derlying reason of (1) is straightforward. Consumers would
like to urge producers to carry out sensing tasks but they
would like to avoid too frequent sensing which is not likely
to give meaningful information for most of applications.
Because some kinds of sensing data do not change abruptly,
it would be better to have an interval between each sensing.
By applying the above equation, consumers pay less for each
sensing if sensing interval is short while they pay more if
the interval is long.
Next, we consider correlated POI, V (Pi, t), where the
utility of Pi correlates to nearby j POIs ((2)).
V (Pi, t) =





αU(Pi, t)+
(1 − α)
P
∀j wijU(Pj,t)
P
∀j wij
if Pj ̸= ∅,
U(Pi, t)
if Pj = ∅.
(2)
Equation (2) includes the utilities of nearby j POIs, i.e.,
U(Pj, t) which is calculated by (1) and weighted by wij.
The weight wij is inversely proportional to the distance dij
between Pi and Pj. In particular, wij =
b
dij , where b (b > 0)
is a constant. In addition, a constant α (0 ≤ α ≤ 1) is a ratio
to determine the weight of Pi and all nearby POIs’ utility.
If nearby POI does not exist, we use (1), i.e., if Pj = ∅,
α = 1.
The nearby j POIs to be considered in (2) are determined
by the area centered at Pi and/or the number of nearest POIs
centered at Pi. It is explicit from (2) that if the utilities of
nearby POIs are high, V (Pi, t) will be high because Pi and
nearby j POIs are not sensed for a while. If any nearby j
POIs has been sensed recently, V (Pi, t) will be low because
nearby POIs are likely to give similar sensing data.
E. Economical Point System
Any kinds of currency including monetary currency, vir-
tual currency and a point system can be applied to SenseUtil
for payments and rewards. Point system is widely adopted
by real-world stores and electronic commerce for long time
and has been proved to be a successful strategy to urge
purchasing and maintain loyalty of customers.
III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We conducted simulations to study the impact of incentive
mechanism. The simulation program is written in Java
language.
Table II
SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Simulation area (m2)
500 × 500
Sensing area
%80 of simulation area
Number of POIs
10
Number of producers
10
Minimum speed (m/s2)
3
Maximum speed (m/s2)
7
Maximum pause time (s)
9
Simulation duration (s)
1,000
Dk
th (m)
24
Uk
th
13
T k
th (s)
10
Umin
10
Umax
50
a
1
α
0.5
b
1
A. Simulation Setup
Mobile users or producers move according to the random
waypoint model [12]. Each mobile user is initially placed
at a random position within the simulation area. As the
simulation progresses, each mobile user pauses at its current
location for a random period, which we call the pause time,
and then randomly chooses a new location to move to and
a velocity between the minimum and maximum speeds at
which to move there. The pause time is randomly chosen
between zero and maximum pause time. Each mobile user
continues this behavior, alternately pausing and moving to
a new location, for the duration of the simulation.
Consumers pick random POIs within a sensing area which
is deﬁned as a percentage of the entire simulation area.
The center and aspect ratio of both sensing and simulation
areas are the same, i.e., the sensing area is a subset of the
simulation area. All POIs last from the beginning until the
end of simulations.
The parameters of simulation including those of the ran-
dom waypoint model and utility functions are summarized in
Table II. We run simulation 10 times with different patterns
of node movement.
B. Simulation Scenarios
We consider the following scenarios in our simulation.
• Non-incentive scenario. Since incentive is not avail-
able in this scenario, each node moves according to
the mobility model and carry out sensing tasks if they
happen to pass through a POI. Based on preliminary
experiments, nodes rarely pass through POIs. Thus
a sensing task is supposed to be done if a node
stays within ﬁve meters from a POI in our evaluation
(Section III-D).
• Incentive-aware scenario. Both of utility models ((1)
and (2)) are adopted in this scenario. The nearby j POIs
are determined by the circle centered at Pi with the
radius of 50 meters. The server uses the push-based
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

service to announce POIs and corresponding rewards
at the beginning of the simulations. When the distance
between a producer and a POI is shorter than or equal
to the threshold Dk
th, the producer queries the server
about current reward by using the pull service.
C. Evaluation Metrics
The following metrics are useful to study the impact of
incentive.
• Number of sensings. We count the number of sensing
tasks done by all producers in a simulation. The number
of sensings is a straightforward metric to evaluate the
beneﬁt of incentive. Higher number of sensings means
more people help collect sensing data.
• Paid reward per sensing. We calculate average reward
per sensing in each simulation. Then the percentage of
decreased reward when applying incentive is calculated
as follows.
%Decrease = Unone − Uincentive
Unone
× 100,
(3)
where Unone and Uincentive are average reward per
sensing in non-incentive and incentive-aware scenarios,
respectively. Note that, we assume incentive is available
in non-incentive scenarios for comparison purpose. In
particular, we use the same utility models ((1) and (2))
to calculate rewards when nodes are supposed to do
sensing tasks. The incentive does not actually exist and
nodes move according to the mobility model.
• Traveled distance. There is cost to do sensing tasks
because producers have to change their routes and take
additional time to visit POIs. Thus we compare traveled
distance between non-incentive and incentive-aware
scenarios. We calculate the percentage of increased
distance when applying incentive as follows.
%Increase = Dincentive − Dnone
Dnone
× 100,
(4)
where Dincentive and Dnone are average traveled dis-
tance per node in incentive-aware and non-incentive
scenarios, respectively.
D. Simulation Results
The average results of 10 runs are summarized in Table III
which shows both absolute results and relative results in
percentage. The detailed results of each run for all three
metrics are shown in Figures 2 (the number of sensings), 3
(average reward per sensing) and 4 (traveled distance per
node).
The results in Table III show that the number of sensings
increases 391% and 375% when adopting independent and
correlated incentives, respectively. Figure 2 shows the results
of each individual run. As one would expect, incentive urges
more people to carry out sensing tasks.
Table III
SIMULATION RESULTS OF 10 RUNS.
Non-incentive
U
V
Total number of sensings
24.9
122.2
118.3
Increased number of sensings (%)
N/A
391%
375%
Average reward per sensing
46.0
37.6
36.6
Decreased reward per sensing (%)
N/A
18%
21%
Average distance per node (m)
4,638
4,744
4,745
Increased distance per node (%)
N/A
2.28%
2.31%
0%
100%
200%
300%
400%
500%
600%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Increased #sensing (%)
Scenario#
U
V
Figure 2.
Percentage of increased number of sensing.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Decreased reward (%)
Scenario#
U
V
Figure 3.
Percentage of decreased reward.
Next we consider the percentages of decreased reward
when applying incentives (Figure 3). The paid rewards per
sensing decrease 18% and 22% in average when applying in-
dependent and correlated incentives, respectively (Table III).
The rewards decrease because sensing tasks are done more
frequent. We note here that the reward is reset to the
minimum value when a sensing task has been done. In other
words, it means sensing interval is shorter and sensing data
of each POI are updated more frequent. This is a beneﬁt for
consumers who pay attention on the freshness of data. In
addition, the consumers pay less for each sensing task. When
comparing two utility models, the rewards of the correlated
model (V ) are slightly lower than those of the independent
model (U) because the weighted factor α of V is set to 0.5.
As a result, the rewards of the correlated model increase
slower than the independent model.
The last metric we consider is the percentages of increased
distance when applying incentive (Figure 4). The impact of
both independent and correlated models is similar in which
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

0%
1%
1%
2%
2%
3%
3%
4%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Increased distance (%)
Scenario#
U
V
Figure 4.
Percentage of increased distance.
the traveled distance increases merely two percent. We can
infer from the results that the producers do not need to
move much farther than their originally planned routes. In
other words, it takes a moment to visit POIs before moving
towards the original destinations.
We conclude that incentive is a good motivation to in-
crease sensing frequency. Producers get rewards for their
jobs, while consumers pay less for each sensing task in
comparison with non-incentive scenarios. Additional cost in
terms of traveled distance is also very low.
IV. RELATED WORK
Participatory sensing using mobile phones is an active
and growing research area with a number of open issues
and challenges [4]. The Internet of Things (IoT), several
smartphone sensing platforms, information dissemination
algorithms, energy-efﬁcient techniques and context-aware
apps, which are the complement of SenseUtil framework,
have been proposed in the literature [5]–[9], [13]–[15]. Guo
et al. present hybrid social networking, which highlights the
interweaving and cooperation of heterogeneous communities
[13]. Guo et al. extract the embedded intelligence about in-
dividual, environment, and society by exploring the various
interactions between humans and the IoT [14]. Askus [15]
is a mobile social platform which allows users to send a
request to a group of potential people in a remote area to do
a task. Similar to Askus, other existing sensing platforms are
voluntary systems, i.e., sensing data are contribution from
cooperative users. SenseUtil can be applied directly to such
previous works.
To realize active and efﬁcient sensing activities, incentive
mechanism has been introduced recently. Most of previ-
ous works adopt auction algorithms to decide the value
of sensing data [10], [11], [16], [17]. Unlike previous
works, SenseUtil’s consumers indirectly determine their bids
through some factors such as minimum price, maximum
price, changing rate of price. In addition, the bid price of
SenseUtil dynamically changes according to nearby POIs
and sensing frequency without any further intervention of
consumers.
V. CONCLUSION
To urge people participate in sensing activities, we have
proposed SenseUtil, a utility-based incentive mechanism for
mobile phone sensing. SenseUtil introduces utility functions
which are used to determine the value of sensing data. When
producers ﬁnish sensing tasks, they get rewards from con-
sumers according to the utility functions. A salient feature
of SenseUtil is dynamic incentive which changes along the
time depending on sensing activities of all participants. In
comparison with non-incentive environment, the simulation
study shows that more people participate in sensing tasks
while additional traveled distance of participants is less than
three percent.
One of future works is to study the beneﬁt of incentive
mechanism by adopting other mobility models. We also plan
to include other factors in the proposed utility models and
evaluate their impact. Another interesting issue is to let each
producer use different conditions to determine whether to do
a sensing task.
REFERENCES
[1] R. T. Llamas and W. Stofega, “Worldwide smartphone 2012–
2016 forecast and analysis,” IDC Corporate USA, Tech.
Rep., Mar. 2012, http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=
233553 (Accessed: January 29, 2013).
[2] M. Meeker and L. Wu, “2012 Internet trends,” Kleiner Perkins
Cauﬁeld & Byers, May 2012, http://www.kpcb.com/insights/
2012-internet-trends (Accessed: January 29, 2013).
[3] A.
Mohamud,
“EU5
smartphone
penetration
reaches
55 percent in October 2012,” comScore Press Release,
Dec.
2012,
http://www.comscore.com/Insights/Press
Releases/2012/12/EU5 Smartphone Penetration Reaches
55 Percent in October 2012 (Accessed: January 29, 2013).
[4] N. D. Lane et al., “A survey of mobile phone sensing,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 48, no. 9, Sep. 2010, pp.
140–150.
[5] E. Miluzzo et al., “Sensing meets mobile social networks:
the design, implementation and evaluation of the CenceMe
application,” in Proceedings of the 6th International Con-
ference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys
2008), Raleigh, North Carolina, USA, Nov. 2008, pp. 337–
350.
[6] S. Reddy, D. Estrin, and M. Srivastava, “Recruitment frame-
work for participatory sensing data collections,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Conference on Pervasive
Computing (Pervasive 2010), Helsinki, Finland, May 2010,
pp. 138–155.
[7] M. Musolesi, M. Piraccini, K. Fodor, A. Corradi, and A. T.
Campbell, “Supporting energy-efﬁcient uploading strategies
for continuous sensing applications on mobile phones,” in
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Pervasive
Computing (Pervasive 2010), Helsinki, Finland, May 2010,
pp. 355–372.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

[8] T. Choudhury et al., “The mobile sensing platform: An
embedded activity recognition system,” IEEE Pervasive Com-
puting, vol. 7, no. 2, April–June 2008, pp. 32–41.
[9] S. Consolvo et al., “Activity sensing in the wild: a ﬁeld trial
of ubiﬁt garden,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2008), 2008,
pp. 1797–1806.
[10] D. Yang, G. Xue, X. Fang, and J. Tang, “Crowdsourcing to
smartphones: incentive mechanism design for mobile phone
sensing,” in Proceedings of the 18th annual international
conference on Mobile computing and networking (Mobicom
2012), Aug. 2012, pp. 173–184.
[11] L. Jaimes, I. Vergara-Laurens, and M. A. Labrador, “A
location-based incentive mechanism for participatory sensing
systems with budget constraints,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Com-
munications (PerCom 2012), Mar. 2012, pp. 103–108.
[12] D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, “Dynamic source routing in
ad hoc wireless networks,” in Mobile Computing, T. Imielin-
ski and H. Korth, Eds.Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996,
ch. 5, pp. 153–181.
[13] B.
Guo,
Z.
Yu,
X.
Zhou,
and
D.
Zhang,
“Hybrid
SN: Interlinking opportunistic and online communities to
augment information dissemination,” in Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on Ubiquitous Intelligence and
Computing and 9th International Conference on Autonomic
and Trusted Computing (UIC–ATC 2012), Washington, DC,
USA, Sep., 2012, pp. 188–195.
[14] B. Guo et al., “From the internet of things to embedded
intelligence,” World Wide Web Journal, Sep. 2012, pp. 1–22.
[15] S. Konomi et al., “Askus: Amplifying mobile actions,” in
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Pervasive
Computing (Pervasive 2009), Nara Japan, May 2009, pp.
202–219.
[16] J.-S. Lee and B. Hoh, “Dynamic pricing incentive for
participatory sensing,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing,
vol. 6, no. 6, Dec. 2010, pp. 693–708.
[17] ——, “Sell your experiences: a market mechanism based
incentive for participatory sensing,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications (PerCom 2010), Mar. 2010, pp. 60–68.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

