Structuring Air Logistics Networks in the Urban Space 
 
Felix MORA-CAMINO 
Durban University of Technology, DUT 
South Africa, Universidade Federal Fluminense, UFF 
Brazil and NMS Lab, Neometsys, France 
email: moracamino@hotmail.fr  
Bruno LAMISCARRE 
NMS Lab, NeoMetSys 
Toulouse, France 
email: bruno.lamiscarre@neometsys.fr 
 
 
 
Georges MYKONIATIS 
Ecole Nationale de l’Aviation Civile 
Université Fédérale de Toulouse / ENAC 
Toulouse, France 
email: georges.mykoniatis@enac.fr 
 
Abstract— The paper considers the rather unexplored problem of 
designing a network that can be associated with an urban airspace 
so that Unmanned Air Vehicle (UAV) based logistics can be 
performed efficiently. This problem is important to guarantee 
mobility and accessibility for all operators.  First, a structure for 
the lower layers of the urban airspace is proposed, then an optimal 
network design problem is formulated, and a heuristic solution 
approach is developed. The paper is related to the subjects of the 
Smart Cities and the Smart Mobility of the SMART2021 
Conference. 
Keywords: UAV; Urban Air Mobility (UAM); Logistics; Graph 
theory; Optimization and Heuristics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
UAV networks have been considered in the recent literature and 
are mainly related to either mobile communication networks, 
based on fleets of  UAVs or with route generation for delivery 
services with UAVs. Important perspectives for the 
development of urban logistics based on the operation of UAVs 
are consolidating according to recent publications [1], [2], [3], 
[4] and [5]. They will be able to take profit of the until now 
unused urban airspace and so to alleviate ground traffic by 
diminishing the needs for ground-based logistic transportation 
which is one of the main contributors to ground urban traffic 
congestion and pollution.  
Previously, many studies have been devoted to the design of 
efficient UAVs based urban logistics systems, see for example 
[6], [7] and [8], where in general, traffic volumes and capacities 
are not taken as issues. However, other studies [9] expect, in 
few decades, high traffic densities of drones operating in the 
common urban airspace, making imperative and urgent its 
effective design and organization.  
In this study, the development of a design method for the 
definition of a network of air links to operate traffic flows of 
UAVs devoted to urban logistics is considered. While designing 
this network, the main considered design objectives are: to 
ensure mobility, accessibility and safety, to master traffic safety, 
network capacity and environmental impacts.  The considered 
problem presents specific characteristics with respect to 
traditional urban ground transportation network design 
problems or with respect to air transportation network design 
problems, so new solution approaches should be developed. 
Then, the network structure can be optimized so that equipment 
and operational costs for end-users are minimized in an efficient 
way.  
This paper is organized as follows: First, an overview of recent 
UAV systems technology of interest in urban logistics 
operations is displayed, then assumptions about operational 
objectives for UAV based logistics in the urban airspace are 
proposed, leading to a structuring proposal for the whole urban 
airspace. Then the optimization problem of the operated 
network inside the urban airspace is formulated and a solution 
approach is developed and illustrated.   
 
 
II. OVERVIEW OF UAVS SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY  
The fast technological development (electrical engines, 
navigation systems and communication devices) and increased 
availability of commercial UAVs have boosted the use of UAVs 
to perform many tasks which were until recently, either 
impossible, or difficult or too costly [10].  Today, commercial 
UAVs which can be acquired at low cost, when comparing with 
manned rotorcraft, are used in many different fields, such as 
surveillance of ground traffic, inspection of buildings and works, 
agriculture monitoring and resource preservation, search and 
rescue, meteorology, mapping and photography. Recent UAV 
technology is offering a large range of fully autonomous 
rotorcraft, admitting payloads from 1.5kg to 350kg, and mission 
endurance from half an hour to up to a full working day [11].  
Autonomous navigation is available through data fusion which 
combines information from different sensors for use on board 
the aircraft. Now on-board computer vision provides on-line 
localization and mapping, allowing autonomous navigation even 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

when Global Positioning System (GPS) signals are hidden or 
jammed [12].  
On-board task scheduling (defining the sequence and timing 
of assigned tasks), path planning (defining the optimal segments 
of flight satisfying some constraints such as obstacles and no-
flight zones), flight parameters trajectory generation (built from 
the selected path), autonomous control (actions to control UAV 
angular attitude, including stabilization and robustness with 
respect to wind perturbations) and autonomous guidance 
(actions to control center of gravity motion) are already 
available. Communication with the ground allows trajectory 
monitoring while communication with other UAVs allows 
coordination and collision avoidance [13].  
The Civil Aviation Authorities around the world are editing 
regulations to integrate UAVs traffic into the civil airspace (see 
[14], [15], [16] and [17]).  Each authority develops its own 
regulations but general rules (EASA or FAA) are already 
established with respect to maximum flight level (flights below 
400 feet above ground level), daytime operation or visual flight 
rules, minimum distance to airports (5 miles). According to the 
type of activity, specific restrictions will be in use (authorized 
paths and locations, time of day, operational conditions and in 
general safety parameters).  
There have been some reports concerning UAV crashes on 
populated areas resulting in property damages as well as in 
human or animal injuries.  Moreover, a significant number of 
proximities of UAVs with commercial airplanes have happened, 
even if until today no collision has been reported (see [18] and 
[19]). Also, there are some concerns by population about the 
possible loss of privacy which can result from surveillance 
applications of UAVs. Hence, there is a pressure on 
governments from media and civil associations to better regulate 
the use of UAVs in public airspace.  Today, different urban 
logistics applications are under study: general purchase delivery, 
general mail, pharmaceutical and medical equipment delivery, 
urban equipment inspection, ground traffic control; it is worth to 
mention that today, many private and public companies have 
considered using UAVs as delivery and collection vehicles in 
the urban airspace.  This solution may appear cheaper, faster and 
more reliable alternative solution than ground-based delivery: 
- It is exempt of ground traffic accidents and congestion hazards; 
- It does not contribute to the ground traffic congestion as it is 
the case, significantly, with the ground delivery/collection 
vehicles.  
Pioneer in this sector is the Amazon company that started 
using rotorcraft UAVs to deliver small packages (up to five 
pounds) from its logistics centers (up to ten miles to the delivery 
point). Other applications consider the use of UAVs taxiing to 
deliver packages directly between particulars. The current 
regulations do not permit such use, but the increased public 
acceptance of this new technology and the strong interest and 
pressure of economic sectors should lead to new regulations 
enabling urban use of UAVs as it is already the case for traffic 
surveillance applications. More recently, the Unmanned Aircraft 
System (UAS) Traffic Management (UTM), a concept 
developed 
by 
the 
National 
Aeronautics 
and 
Space 
Administration 
(NASA) 
and 
the 
Federal 
Aviation 
Administration (FAA), and the U-space, a concept developed by 
the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), 
Eurocontrol and the Single European Sky ATM Research 
(SESAR) Consortium (ATM standing for Air Traffic 
Management), aims to enable the operation of drones both in the 
airspace already controlled by Air Traffic Control (ATC) and in 
uncontrolled airspace today (airspace G), see [20], [21] and [22]. 
This sector of the airspace that goes outside airport areas and 
other restricted areas, from the ground level up to 1200 feet in 
height, generally includes the urban airspace that is the target of 
this research. 
After the COVID19 crisis, a rapid resumption and sustained 
growth in air transport are expected, and the component relating 
to urban air transport, which is practically nonexistent today, is 
foreseen to grow enormously. Eurocontrol's air traffic 
expectations (total hours flown and total kilometers traveled) for 
the situation in 2050 in the urban space of Europe, is of about 
250 million flights and 15 billion kilometers traveled [23]. 
III. ADOPTED ASSUMPTIONS AND OBJECTIVES 
In this section, we will detail our assumptions, the logistics 
demand characteristics and the main objectives and constraints 
of our study. 
A. UAVs assumed characteristics for logistics operations 
The main predictable operational characteristics of UAVs to be 
used in urban areas should be: 
 
- Medium to low flying speed (less than 50 m/s) 
according to propulsion and flying technology (in general 
rotorcraft); 
 
- Adoption of a common speed VL inside the movement 
slice; 
 
- High maneuverability allowing to perform tight turns 
and vertical flight level changes; 
 
- Full navigation coverage of urban area through 
onboard integration of vision, ground references and GPS 
segments; 
- Autonomy in guidance along planned trajectories 
with centimeter accuracy; 
 
- Autonomous collision avoidance capability; 
 
- Small/medium payload capability; 
 
- On board loading/offloading interfaces; 
 
- Soft landing capability in case of failure or damage. 
B. Demand characteristics  
It corresponds to a mix of point-to-point deliveries and hub 
and spoke system of deliveries. The point-to-point deliveries 
correspond mainly to the deliveries between two entities and 
their volume is expected to be much smaller than the one 
relative to the hub and spoke system of deliveries which 
correspond to collective urban services, either public or private. 
It is supposed that the goods delivered by air from a hub are 
either produced there or brought by ground bulk transportation 
to the hubs. It is also considered that with the currently existing 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

technology, the ground bulk transportation to large distribution 
centers will remain attractive from the economic and 
environmental points of view. The demand has a stochastic 
nature and is distributed spatially and temporally. For planning 
purposes, it will be considered origin-destination matrices 
representative of the demand over a given period of time, 
typically one hour.  
C. Main objectives and constraints 
When designing the urban air logistic traffic network (L-
network), the main constraints to be taken into consideration are 
the following: 
 
- The designed L-network should provide reachability 
for any origin-destination pair associated with a demand for 
logistic UAVs services. In the case of compact urban areas this 
will imply connectivity of the graph underlying the traffic 
network.  
 
- The designed L-network is a capacitated network 
where each link capacity is supposed to be able to cope with its 
planned traffic. 
The two main objectives are: 
 
- 
The 
designed 
L-network 
should 
minimize 
investment, this can be assessed by its total weighted length, 
where the weight is related to the installed capacity.  
 
- The designed L-network should also propose for 
each demand a minimum “length” connection as a path of the 
underlying graph. Length here is a generalized length which can 
consider either distance, delay or a mix of them. The links 
constituting this network should be published, dimensioned, 
delimited and secured with respect to aircraft failures and 
landing sites and equipped with docking facilities, navigation 
guides and electrical charge stations. To minimize the costs 
related to the equipment of the network a set of corridors, fed 
by secondary links, will be defined.  
These two objectives are antagonists, since the second 
objective should lead to a multiplication of the links of the 
network and then to an increased investment. Other objectives 
are relative to safety and environmental impacts which should 
be minimized. Safety will be the result of the required 
functional characteristics of the UAVs and of protections 
installed along with the network (for example when a link 
crosses a street).  
IV. STRUCTURING THE URBAN AIRSPACE 
The decision problem considered here is relative to the 
design of the traffic management system for UAVs devoted to 
logistics in urban areas. A basic assumption of this study is that 
urban logistic air traffic is organized along with the 
communication links of the urban area (avenues and streets) 
while the urban passenger traffic is organized between the top 
of buildings (public and private) and open areas such as parks, 
cemeteries, outdoor parking areas.  
Some reasons in pro of this organization are the following: 
 
- The demand of the end users for urban logistics 
services is distributed along with the streets network of the 
cities. 
 
- The introduction of UAVs for logistics should reduce 
the 
pollution 
level 
in 
the 
streets 
due 
to 
ground 
delivery/collecting vehicles and it can be expected that they will 
be able to accommodate this new source of disturbance. 
 
- The physical interface of many buildings is through 
their front, right in the street, and it is doubtful that any 
historical city may accept to modify notably its architecture.  
 
- The main objectives of passenger air transportation 
services are to offer a faster and safer means of transportation 
between origins and destinations inside and outside towns, so it 
will take place in the open airspace with few obstacles (only the 
highest buildings). 
 
- The urban passenger air traffic flows will be 
completely segregated from other means of transportation and 
from logistics traffic flows, avoiding collision risks with other 
aircraft. 
 
- The integration of urban passenger air traffic inside 
the UTM or the U-space will appear to be natural and will be 
performed more easily. 
       When the logistic air traffic occupies the lower levels of 
traffic, two slices can be considered: one for movement along 
the streets and one for local loading/unloading maneuvers. Here 
it is supposed that urban passenger traffic occupies the upper 
levels of the urban airspace with exceptions in open areas which 
are forbidden for the logistic air traffic.  Figure 1 gives a view 
of the possible organization of a section of the vertical space of 
a two ways street where air logistics and air passenger traffic 
are completely segregated. It is supposed that this design 
remains constant all along a street section. There the two ways 
are distinguished by the + and – signs. Areas NL+/- represent 
the two spaces assigned to normal movement at speed VL, they 
can contain one or more lanes. Areas UL+/- represent the two 
spaces assigned to upper crossing maneuvers while LL+/- 
represent the two spaces assigned to lower crossing maneuvers. 
These spaces are only present at the proximity of a crossing 
where conflicts are planned to be avoided by level change 
maneuvers (Figure 2 displays such a situation). These areas also 
allow to adapt the flight levels when two successive street 
sections have different dimensions in their vertical sections. 
Narrow lateral spaces along the previous areas allow changes 
of levels without interacting with the level traffic. The areas 
LUML+/- are dedicated to UAVs maneuvers towards and from 
logistics terminals or UAVs refueling/maintenance stations. 
Some areas, in general at the tops of the buildings, are dedicated 
to Passenger UAVs take-off and landing (PTOL). 
 
In Figure 1, HLOPmin and HLOPmax are the minimum and 
maximum AGL levels (AGL: Above Ground Level) for logistics 
UAVs manoeuvers for docking/undocking, HLMVmin and 
HLMVmax are the minimum and maximum AGL levels for 
logistics UAVs flight progression, HPMVmin and HPMVmax are 
the minimum and maximum AGL levels for Passengers UAVs 
flight progression. 
Let Hmax be the maximum height of the buildings adjacent to 
a given street section and let h = min {Hmax, 150ft}, possible 
values for the different levels can be such as: 
HPMVmax= 400ft, if h=150ft then: HLMVmax= HPMVmin= 
150ft, if   90ft< h ≤ 150𝑓𝑡  then: HLMVmax= HPMVmin= h , if 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

h≤ 90𝑓𝑡  then: HLMVmax= HPMVmin= 90ft, HLOPmax= 
HLMVmin = 30ft, HLOPmin =  10ft. 
 
 
Figure 1: Proposed organization of the street airspace. 
 
In the case of ground traffic, crossings and connections 
between different street segments create hard crossing conflicts 
and the adopted solution for nearly a century has been to install 
traffic lights systems which are costly to install, maintain and 
operate and which generate traffic queues and waiting times, 
increasing the direct cost of travel.  To avoid this situation in 
highways with large volumes of traffic operated at high speed, 
costly civil constructions must be built to avoid cross conflicts. 
In the case of UAVs traffic, a simple solution is to pre-assign a 
different flight level to some movements to allow them to cross 
without any conflict. For example, as shown in Figure 2, any 
cross conflicts can be avoided by performing no level change for 
the blue movements, a climb to an upper level for the red 
movements and a descent to a lower level for the green 
movements. Note that four convergence conflicts remain, but 
they can be solved easily by implementing some priority or 
metering rule. 
 
Figure 2: A 3D zero crossing conflict solution at a two ways streets 
intersection (blue: fly level, red: fly over, green: fly below). 
A. Modelling and structuring urban airspace 
The map of the streets with their intersections with other as well 
as the position of every building and its connections with the 
street system are basic data for this study. From the street 
network is generated a non-oriented graph (it is supposed that 
every UAV link is two ways) where the set of nodes X0 
corresponds to the street intersections and the set of edges U0 is 
associated with the set of sections of streets between two 
intersections.  
From this graph are removed the nodes and edges associated 
with areas where logistic air traffic is not allowed for any reason 
such as those related with safety or environment issues, giving 
way to the graph [X1, U1] which is representative of the air street 
network. The borders of these forbidden areas could be 
protected by geofencing if necessary. 
Considering each building in the urban area, most of them will 
be connected to the air links of the air logistic network. Each 
possible connection of the buildings to the air logistic network 
will represent a user’s point connected at both ends of each 
adjacent edge as shown in Figure 3.a and Figure 3.b. There, the 
polyhedrons represent the buildings (origin and destination of 
logistics trips) and the double arrows represent the connection 
points for logistics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3a: Graphical representation of connection of end-users with several 
street sections. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3b: Graphical representation of connection of end-users with a 
crossing. 
When a distribution or collecting center is located outside the 
limits of the urban area under consideration, this center and its 
connections with the urban street systems must be considered 
too. Then, adding the connection points and the connecting 
edges as new nodes and edges we get the graph [X2, U2]. Let 
also, XOD = X2 – X1 be the set of origin and destination nodes 
associated with providers and end-users of the air logistic 
system.  
To each edge (i, j) of [X1,U1] can be attached an instant 
capacity capij which is equal to the maximum number of  UAVs 
which can be present in each direction of the street link at a given 
time. Then the total capacity of link (i, j), CTij, during a period 
of time T is given by: 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

CTij = capij ∙ VL∙T/ Lij                                (1) 
where Lij is the length of the link (i, j). The cost Cij associated 
with an edge (i, j) of [X1, U1] is taken proportional to its length 
Lij, while the cost of connection of end-users to [X1,U1] is 
proportional to their position in the street section (see Figure 3a). 
B. Modelling demand 
The considered demand for logistic transportation is 
represented by a set of origin-destination matrices giving the 
volumes of trips for different periods of the day between nodes 
of XOD. Origins and destination of trips can be logistic centers, 
public offices, shops and restaurants, client positions (for return 
trips or transfer trips within a distribution tour or a dial-a-ride 
delivery service). Round trips are broken down into several trips.  
These origin-destination matrices, written MT, when covering a 
short period of time T are asymmetric, but for longer time 
periods, they tend to symmetrize. Then, they can be written as 
the sum of  symmetric and asymmetric matrices MT= MST+MAT.                        
V. UAVS NETWORK OPTIMIZATION 
To further reduce the number of air links which have to be 
equipped, it appears necessary to foresee how the air logistic 
network will be used, then the air links who are not origin or 
destination of demand as well as not used by any path between 
an origin and a destination, can be removed. Also, the flows of 
air links with very low traffic can be reassigned to other paths so 
that these air links can be deleted, however, global connectivity 
of the air logistic network must remain. 
A. Formulation of the Optimal Design Problem 
First here is considered the optimization problem for users from 
a central point of view: 
 
- Let Pij be the set of elementary paths linking the 
origin i and the destination j in the air logistic network of graph 
[X2, U2]. 
 
- Let 𝑈𝑖𝑗
𝑘 be the set of edges composing the kth path 
between i and j. 
 
- Let 𝐶𝑃𝑖𝑗
𝑘 be the cost of the kth path between i and j in 
𝑋𝑂𝐷:  
𝐶𝑃𝑖𝑗
𝑘 = ∑
𝐶ℎ𝑙
(ℎ,𝑙)∈𝑈𝑖𝑗
𝑘
                        (2) 
- Let [𝑎𝑖𝑗
𝑘ℎ𝑙] be the incidence matrix between the kth 
path between pair (i, j) and air link  (h,l): 𝑎𝑖𝑗
𝑘ℎ𝑙 = 1 if 
(h,l) belongs to the kth path between i and j, otherwise, 
𝑎𝑖𝑗
𝑘ℎ𝑙=0. 
Here, no saturation effect is considered and the total cost to be 
minimized is given by: 
 
∑
∑
∑
𝐶𝑃𝑖𝑗
𝑘
𝑘∈𝑃𝑖𝑗
𝑗∈𝑋𝑂𝐷,𝑗≠𝑖
𝑖∈𝑋𝑂𝐷
∙ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘             (3)                               
 
under the constraints of capacity of the edges of U1: 
 
∑
∑
𝑎𝑖𝑗
𝑘ℎ𝑙
𝑗∈𝑋𝑂𝐷,𝑗≠𝑖
𝑖∈𝑋𝑂𝐷
∙ 𝑀𝑇𝑖𝑗 ∙ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘 ≤ 𝐶𝑇ℎ,𝑙  (ℎ, 𝑙) ∈ 𝑈1, ℎ ≠ 𝑙                      
(4) 
and  
∑
𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘
𝑘∈𝑃𝑖𝑗
 =1   𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑋𝑂𝐷, 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗                    (5) 
with 
             𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘 ∈ {0, 1}   𝑘 ∈ 𝑃𝑖𝑗,   𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑋𝑂𝐷, 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗                (6)               
 
Here constraints (4) are capacity constraints for all the edges of 
the air logistic network, constraint (5) assumes that all the 
demands between the pairs i, j of XOD use only one path and 
constraints (6) recall the binary nature of the considered 
decision variables.  
Then if a solution is obtained, those links composing a used path 
(path k* between i and j when 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘∗ = 1) will be retained for 
proper equipment in the air logistic network.  
However serious difficulties appear: 
 
- The above optimization problem may not have a 
feasible solution when considering the capacity constraints and 
the demand levels. A necessary condition to ensure the 
satisfaction of the capacity constraints (4) is the following: 
 
∃𝑘 ∈ 𝑃𝑖𝑗: max 𝑀𝑇𝑖𝑗 ≤ min 𝐶𝑇𝑘𝑙, (𝑘, 𝑙) ∈ 𝑃𝑖𝑗
𝑘 , 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑋𝑂𝐷  (7) 
               
 
- Problem (3)-(4)-(5)-(6) will be, even for a rather 
medium size town, a very large  Boolean linear program with 
hundreds of thousands of variables whose numerical 
application will be extremely expensive in terms of computing 
time, and this is bad news when different scenarios of demand 
may have to be tested. So, another approach must be found to 
efficiently design the air logistic network.  
B. Heuristic Solution Approach 
Here a greedy heuristic is considered (see [24]) where the larger 
logistics demands are treated first and assigned to their 
minimum cost paths taking into account their capacity. So, the 
steps are the following: 
 
- a) Compute the minimum cost paths between the 
pairs (i, j) of XOD, the Floyd algorithm can be used here even if 
its complexity is in O(n3) where n is the cardinal of X1, the 
computational burden can be also diminished by considering 
some peculiarities of the structure of the considered graph (for 
instance the presence of sub-trees). 
 
- b) Rank by decreasing logistics demand levels the 
pairs (i, j) of XOD. 
 
- c) Assign according to this ranking demand MTij to 
the minimum cost path between i and j. If there is a capacity 
overflow at some edges of the minimum path, reallocate on this 
path a portion of demand equal to the minimum capacity of the 
edges of this path, then reassign the rest of demand between i 
and j on the air logistics network without the already saturated 
edges, repeat the process until all pairs i, j have been treated.  
 
- d) Compute for each edge in the air logistics network 
its resulting flow Fkl, (k, l) ∈ 𝑈1 by adding up the flows in the 
paths which contain that edge. In this case it can be easily 
shown that this procedure has a polynomial complexity which 
is compatible with the computation of real size problems.  
 
- e) A threshold 𝐹𝑚𝑖𝑛can be considered so that the 
edges such as 𝐹𝑘𝑙 <  𝐹𝑚𝑖𝑛  are deleted from the air logistic 
network unless they insure connectivity. An algorithm which 
detects if an edge is a bridge in a graph can be used to point out 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

which edges, satisfying the above condition, will not be deleted. 
Then deletion must be done edge by edge while checking 
current connectivity.  
 
If no edge is removed, the process ends, otherwise, update U1 
and restart the steps from a to e but only for the pairs (i, j) which 
made use of the deleted edges. 
Then, once this structure is established, when a new demand for  
a logistics flight is requested with the urban air traffic 
management system, a time window and  minimum cost path 
computed within this air logistics network whose loading state 
should have been updated, will be assigned to the UAV.  
C. Illustration of the Heuristic on a Small Scale Case 
Here a small size street network represented by a graph of 
22 nodes (circles in blue) and 34 edges (blue segments), is 
considered as given in Figure 4. Table 1 provides the length of 
the different street sections in meters and the air trips demand 
matrix MT, between 8 origin-destination nodes (the green 
squares), is given in Table 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: The considered street network. 
TABLE I.  
LENGTHS OF THE STREET NETWORK EDGES. 
 
 
TABLE II.  
DEMAND MATRIX. 
                 
 
After assignment of air trips to their shorter connection path, 
it appears (see Table 3) that edges 4, 7, 15, 21, 22, 28, 29, 30, 
32, 33 and 34 are not used, so they are retrieved from the air 
logistics network. The reduced graph is displayed in Figure 5. 
TABLE III.  
DISTRIBUTION OF FLOWS IN THE AIR LOGISTICS NETWORK 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: First reduction of the air logistics network. 
Then, a minimum flow level Fmin is chosen, leading to the 
suppression of low traffic edges. For instance, when Fmin is 
taken equal to 9, this leads to the suppression of edges 10, 11, 
25, 26 and 27 and the reassignment of their flows along new 
paths, giving the new flow distribution displayed in Table 4 and 
Figure 6. 
 
TABLE IV.  
FINAL DISTRIBUTION OF FLOWS IN THE AIR LOGISTICS 
NETWORK. 
 
 
 
 
So, with this heuristic process the number of street sections in 
the air logistics network is reduced by 44% while less than 5% 
of total traffic is submitted to an increase of the travel time 
inferior to 30%. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Final air logistics network generated by Heuristic. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study has considered the design of a network of urban 
airways allowing mobility and ensuring accessibility to operate 
traffic flows of UAVs devoted to general logistics over an urban 
 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

area. The proposed method makes use of classical concepts and 
algorithms of graph theory and since the exact optimization 
problem is in practice intractable for real size problems; a 
heuristic solution approach that is more computer friendly is 
developed. 
The proposed approach remains preliminary since detailed 
regulations with respect to the use of UAVs in urban areas are 
still to be issued. It appears already that a systematic approach 
such as the one described in this communication leads to a 
feasible modeling and optimization, it should be completed by 
custom made rules to make the design more effective and more 
efficient; also a validation by simulation at the scale of a whole 
city would be useful to complete this feasibility study. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was partially funded by the National Council for 
Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq)-Brazil, 
Process306663/2020-1. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Bhawesh S., Rohit Gupta R. and Bani-Hani D., « Analysis of barriers to 
implement drone logistics », International Journal of Logistics Research and 
Applications, DOI: 10.1080/13675567.2020.1782862, Published online: 23 Jun 
2020. 
[2] Eun J., Song B. D., Lee S. and Lim D. E., “Mathematical Investigation on 
the Sustainability of UAV Logistics,” Published: 25 October 2019, 
Sustainability — Open Access Journal , ISSN 2071-1050. 
[3] Goodchild, J. A. and Toy, A., “Delivery by drone: an evaluation of 
unmanned aerial vehicle technology in reducing CO2 emissions in the delivery 
service industry,” Transp. Res. Part D: Transp. Environ., 61 (2018), pp. 58-67. 
[4] Park, J., Kim, S., and Suh, K., “A Comparative Analysis of the 
Environmental Benefits of Drone-Based Delivery Services in Urban and Rural 
Areas,” Sustainability 2018, 10, 888. 
[5] Koiwanit, J., “Analysis of environmental impacts of drone delivery on an  
online shopping system,” Advances in Climate Change Research, 9(3), 201- 
207, 2018. 
[6] Roca-Riu M. and Menedez M., « Logistic deliveries with Drones. State of 
the art of practice and research », STRC-19th Swiss Transport Research 
Conference, Ascona, May 15 – 17, 2019. 
[7] Iranmanesh S.,  Raad R., Raheel M. S., Tubbal F., and Jan T., « Novel DTN 
Mobility-Driven Routing in Autonomous Drone Logistics Networks », DOI 
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2959275, published December 2019. 
[8] Zubin I., Van Arem B., Wiegmans B. and Van Duin R., « Using Drones in 
the Last-Mile Logistics Processes of Medical Product Delivery : A Feasible 
Case in Rotterdam », https://www.researchgate.net/ publication /338838869 , 
January 2020. 
[9] Doole M., Ellerbroek J., Hoekstra J., « Drone Delivery: Urban airspace 
traffic density estimation », https://www.researchgate.net/publication/ 
329444426, December 2018. 
[10] DHL, “Unmanned aerial vehicle in logistics, a DHL perspective on  
implications and use cases for the logistics industry”, http://www.dhl.com/en/ 
about_us/logistics_insights/dhl_trend_research/lshc2020.html, 2014. 
[11] Atkins E., “Autonomy as an enabler of economically-viable, beyond-line- 
of-sight, low-altitude UAS applications with acceptable risk. In AUVSI   
unmanned Systems, 2014. 
[12] Máthé K. and Busoniu L., “Vision and Control for UAVs: A Survey of  
General Methods and of Inexpensive Platforms for Infrastructure Inspection  
Sensors,” vol. 15, pp.14887-14916, 2015. 
[13] Gageik N., Benz P., and Montenegr S., “Obstacle Detection and Collision  
Avoidance for a UAV With Complementary Low-Cost Sensors,” IEEE  
ACESS.2015.2432455. 
[14] Bart E., “Unmanned Aircraft Operations in Domestic Airspace: U.S.  
Policy Perspectives and the Regulatory Landscape,” Congressional Research  
Service 7-5700, https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs /misc/R44352.pdf, 2016. 
[15] EASA, “Proposal to create common rules for operating drones in Europe,”  
http://easa.Europa.eu/drones, 2015. 
[16] Barrado C., Boyero M., Brucculer L.i, Ferrara G., Hately A., Hullah P.,  
Martin-Marrero D., Pastor E., Rushton A. P., and Volkert A., “U-Space  
Concept of Operations: A Key Enabler for Opening Airspace to Emerging Low- 
Altitude Operations,”Aerospace2020,7, 24;doi:10.3390/aerospace7030024. 
[17] Civil Aviation Department of Hong Kong, “Guidelines on Operations of  
Unmanned 
Aircraft 
Systems 
(UAS)”, 
http://www.cad.gov.hk/english 
model_aircraft.html, 2017.  
[18] Belcastro, C.M., Newman, R.L., Evans, J.K., Klyde, D.H., Barr,L.C., and  
Ancel, E., “Hazards Identification and Analysis for Unmanned Aircraft System  
Operations,” In Air Transportation Integration & Operations (ATIO)– 
Aerospace Traffic Management (ATM) Conference, 2017. 
[19] Barr, L.C., Newman,R.L., Ancel,E., Belcastro, C. M., Foster, J.V., Evans,  
J.K., and Klyde, D.H., “Preliminary Risk Assessment for Small Unmanned  
Aircraft Systems,” In Air Transportation Integration &Operations(ATIO)– 
Aerospace Traffic Management(ATM) Conference, 2017. 
[20] ICAO, https://www.icao.int/safety/UA/Documents/UTM-
Framework%20Edition%202.pdf 
[21] FAA, June 4 2020, https://utm.arc.nasa.gov/index.shtml 
[22] NASA, “Unmanned Aircraft Systems Traffic Management, Concepts of  
Operation, V2.0,”  March 2020,  https://utm.arc.nasa.gov/docs/ 2020-03-FAA-
NextGen-UTM_ConOps_v2.pdf 
[23] Eurocontrol, https://www.eurocontrol.int/unmanned-aircraft-systems 
[24] Mora-Camino F., Modélisation, Optimisation, Complexité et Algorithmes, 
in French, Centre National des Arts et Metiers, 2010, Toulouse. 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-863-1
SMART 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

