1
The Tension Field of Digital Teaching From the Perspective of
Higher Education Teachers
Alexander Tillmann, Sarah Voß-Nakkour, Michael Eichhorn, Frank Kühn
studiumdigitale
Goethe University Frankfurt
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
e-mail: {tillmann, voss, eichhorn, fkuehn}@studiumdigitale.uni-frankfurt.de
Abstract—The
recent
COVID
Pandemic
forced
higher
education teachers to come into contact with digital teaching
and both positive and negative experiences have been made.
Now, it is time to reflect on the advantages and disadvantages
that have arisen as a result of digital teaching and what
benefits the independence of location and time as well as the
possibilities of digitization have yielded for teachers and students.
An exploratory study was conducted to analyze perceptions of
and opinions on digital teaching as well as statements about
future teaching. For this purpose, 13 semi-structured interviews
with higher education teachers and deans of studies at a large
German university were conducted and analyzed using inductive
categorization. As a result, four positions could be identified
that describe the different perspectives of higher education
teachers on the possibilities of digital teaching and the value
of face-to-face teaching. When assuming a certain degree of
heterogeneity among students, this results in a tension field of
advantages and disadvantages for students, depending on the
chosen teaching formats and preferences of the teachers. In
this article, reasons behind these four different perspectives are
given as well as recommendations for the future design of post-
pandemic teaching.
Keywords-digital learning and teaching; higher education;
digital accessibility.
I. INTRODUCTION
A German proverb (1829) reads:
“Allen Menschen recht getan, ist eine Kunst, die
niemand kann.” ("To do right by all people is an
art that no one can do.")
What this means is that it is impossible to satisfy everybody
involved or all affected parties equally. In the context of higher
education, this dilemma is evident in the redesign of teaching
following the pandemic-related university closures that were
accompanied by a complete transition to online teaching. Both
negative and positive experiences were made by teachers and
students. So which path does one choose as a teacher after the
pandemic?
The first reaction of many universities after the end
of the full lockdown was to return entirely to on-site
teaching. However, as experience reports show, this also
has many disadvantages for students and teachers, and
especially the aspect of (digital) accessibility [1] [2] [3].
The (forced) experiences with digital teaching, without the
possibility to meet in presence, were perceived assessed
very differently on several levels. With regard to study
organization, flexibilization, study performance and learning
success,
communication
and
interaction,
motivation
and
competencies, both positive and negative experiences were
made by students and higher education teachers [1]. During
the pandemic, it also became clear that what is a relief for
some can be a complication for others [4]. It can be seen that
educators must operate in an area of tension with respect to
post-pandemic digital teaching. Considering their own needs
and the needs of a heterogeneous student body is a particular
challenge. Although higher education recognizes the diversity
of students as a given in its mission statements, in reality
heterogeneous learning situations are rarely taken into account
in the conception of teaching scenarios, or are only taken into
account by teachers when students articulate individual needs
and request support [2].
This
paper
analyzes
in
more
detail
the
patterns
of
argumentation regarding the choice and design of teaching
formats and scenarios that can be found among teachers
and how they justify their decisions for and against digital
teaching. Section 2 describes the conducted qualitative study,
we asked about experiences during the pandemic related online
semesters, about changing attitudes and possible reservations
about digital teaching, and the advantages teachers see in
digital teaching, in order to illuminate a possible area of
tension caused by different needs and teaching requirements.
This results in the following two research questions for
analysis. In Section 3, the findings from the interviews
conducted are presented in detail:
• RQ 1: What reservations do higher education teachers
express about digital teaching and how does this impact
the future conception of their courses?
• RQ 2: What advantages do teachers see in digital teaching
and what should be retained after the pandemic induced
online semesters?
II. METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH
In order to answer the research questions, a total of 13
individual interviews were conducted with teachers from
a large German university. Eight interview partners were
from faculties of the natural sciences and medicine, three
from social sciences, and two from the humanities. Among
the 13 interview partners, 10 were simultaneously acting
deans of studies of their respective faculties. The guiding
questions were slightly modified for this group of persons.
The individual interviews were conducted between 07/01/2022
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

2
and 08/02/2022 via videocall using Zoom videoconferencing
software. To ensure the anonymity of the interviewees, no
further personal data was collected.
The interview procedure chosen was the problem-centered
interview according to [5]. This method tries to let interview
partners speak as freely as possible to come as close as
possible to an open conversation. At the same time, however,
the interview is oriented toward a previously determined
problem, the details of which are compiled in advance in
an interview guide. For the conducted study, two guides for
research questions were developed (deans of studies and higher
education teachers). To avoid the interviewees formulating
their assessments of reservations and advantages of digital
teaching too broadly or too abstractly, they were asked to
describe their experiences and impressions from different
phases of the COVID-19 pandemic in each case. This is
reflected in the wording of the questions in the interview
guides, which respectively refer to the lockdown phase of
the pandemic with Emergency Remote Teaching [6] and the
post-pandemic phase, in which teaching returned to a "New
Normal" [7]. The two interview guides included the following
questions:
Interview guiding questions for deans of studies
• How did faculty members perceive virtual teaching
during the past three online semesters? Are the teaching
experiences from this time viewed more positively or
negatively? To what extent? / What do you think are the
reasons for this?
• In your estimation, inasmuch did the Corona pandemic
change attitudes toward digital teaching among faculty
members, if at all?
• What were the reactions of faculty members this semester
when the "back to on-site teaching" tendency emerged?
• What reservations about digital teaching do you currently
perceive on behalf of the faculty? (technical problems,
social problems, didactic limitations, etc.). In your
estimation, to what extent are these reservations related
to the experiences from the Corona semesters?
Interview questions for teachers
• How do you assess your experiences with digital teaching
during the past Corona semesters? What are the reasons
for your assessment?
• What negative effects of digitalization processes in
teaching do you see? What kinds of downsides emerge
from them?
• Has your attitude towards digital teaching changed as a
result of the pandemic? In what way?
• Have you used digital teaching practices, methods and
tools from the Corona semesters in this semester? - If
not, what are the reasons for this?
The recorded interviews were automatically transcribed
with the software Amberscript and completely anonymized
so that no more conclusions can be drawn about persons or
subject discipline. Subsequently, the material was analyzed
in a Qualitative Content Analysis (QCA) according to
Mayring (2015) with the software QCAMap [8]. An inductive
evaluation method was chosen, in which the category system
is developed from the material concurrently with the analysis
and evaluation process, guided by the research questions. The
coding of the interviews was done in an inter-coder procedure
with two coders each. The reliability of the overall result was
ensured by checking all codes during an evaluation conference
with all four coders. In this session, major categories were also
formed from the individual categories, which are described in
the following section.
III. RESULTS OF THE QUALITATIVE CONTENT ANALYSIS
The qualitative content analysis of the transcripts was
conducted along the two research questions RQ1 and RQ2
(see Section 1) and the results are presented separately below.
A. Reservations about digital teaching (RQ1)
The reservations about digital teaching expressed by
the teachers in the interviews address social, didactic,
organizational and technical aspects. The statements of the
teachers were assigned to a total of 56 different subcategories,
which in turn can be summarized in 10 main categories [9].
A selection of the most relevant categories will be discussed
in more detail in the next section.
1) Social aspects: Lack of contact and absence: Frequent
concerns expressed by teachers about digital teaching relate
to social aspects of the teaching-learning process, such as a
lack of social contact, insufficient contact with the subject
and also (physical) absence from the learning location. The
interviewees complain that there is no direct contact in online
scenarios (RQ1-1) and thus no real discourse and dialogue as
well as no sufficient interaction (RQ1-2). Interview partner 3
(IP03) describes it like this:
“Even in the lectures we try to include as many
practical elements as possible. And even if it’s just
a matter of discussing problems and getting the
students involved in the dialogue, so to speak, so
that they have to think about it and follow the train
of thought and not just sit there and let it wash over
them. Of course, that doesn’t work in the digital
world.” (IP03)
Digital teaching would also lack the spontaneous small talk
before and after the lecture (RQ1-23). As online lectures end
abruptly, student communication is assumed to suffer (RQ1-
39) due to a lack of opportunities for exchange, discussion and
reflection (RQ1-24, RQ1-25). This is regretted by interview
partner 5:
“On the way to the seminar, they talk about the
content of the seminar, as well as about the lecturer.
But they reflect in the process. This reflection is
lost.” (IP05)
2) Pedagogical-didactical reservations and motivational
aspects: Some of the reservations expressed in the interviews
relate to the didactic design possibilities of digital teaching.
In the eyes of some interview partners, these are less
effective than those available in face-to-face teaching (RQ1-
36). Likewise, the willingness and ability of students to
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

3
perform presumably decreases in online teaching (RQ1-12).
Several of the interviewees also point out that digital teaching-
learning formats are didactically flawed and generally do
not correspond to their ideas of "good" teaching (RQ1-11).
Interview partner 6 says, for example, videos would tend to
prevent engagement with texts (RQ1-38):
“To understand the digitisation of teaching as a bit
of an alternative to text-based teaching, so to speak,
in the direction of, let’s say, video or audio content,
that would also be a problem from our specialist
point of view" (IP06)
Teachers are also dissatisfied with the didactic possibilities
of the existing systems. In their opinion, the systems and
tools are not very appealing in design and could be more
playful (RQ1-31). Teachers also perceive the “digital divide”
associated with online teaching as problematic, i.e. the effect
that high-achieving students benefit more from digital teaching
than lower-achieving students, who tend to be disadvantaged
by the use of online teaching (RQ1-53). Interview partner 8
describes their experience as follows:
“I think that to those who are good didn’t matter that
much because they dealt with it well. But those who
are not so good, you lost them to a certain extent
because you couldn’t nudge them directly." (IP08)
The respondents attributed this effect to the fact that lower-
performing students in particular were less motivated in
online teaching (RQ1-10). Due to the lack of scheduled
learning opportunities in presence as well as the lack of social
exchange, students partly lose the structure for their daily study
routine (RQ1-47) and learn less as well as less independently
(RQ1-42).
3) Organizational and legal barriers:
In addition to
concerns about the didactic reservations of digital teaching,
the interview partners also mention organizational and legal
reservations about the increased use of virtual and hybrid
teaching formats. Digital teaching is above all time-consuming
(RQ1-5) and expensive (RQ1-32), as teachers sometimes
have to familiarize themselves with new tools first (RQ1-45),
must first create or prepare additional materials or provide
additional online support. According to the interviewees, the
additional workload then leads to work intensification and
deadline pressure (RQ1-27). Teachers see it as particularly
problematic that the amount of work they invest in producing
and supporting additional digital courses is not remunerated
(RQ1-37). Interview partner 6 said:
“Well, I’m basically doing face-to-face teaching, but
I’m also doing a lot of nice digital stuff on top of it,
a bit of personal commitment that you do because
it’s close to your heart. But the effort is somehow
not compensated in a certain way." (IP06)
In addition to the extra effort, respondents also raise legal
concerns about the use of digital teaching. For example,
Interview partner 3 argues that online is rarely compatible with
legal regulations such as the licensing regulations for medical
professions (RQ1-18):
“If we do not return to real practical content, we
are not educating future doctors properly. That is a
very clear fact. So we are in breach of the licensing
regulations, so to speak, if we continue to keep them
away from the hospital bed." (IP03)
Last but not least, respondents also fear that their digital course
material will be distributed uncontrolled and illegally on the
web (RQ1-13).
4) Technical
barriers:
The
implementation
of
digital
teaching is inextricably linked to the use of different digital
tools, systems and technologies. Thus, various reservations are
also mentioned in the interviews that are closely related to the
use of technology as well as the specific characteristics of
the respective technologies used. In addition to infrastructural
problems such as an inadequate WLAN connection (RQ1-54),
the usability of the available digital systems is criticized as
being inadequate, especially for "beginners" and digitally less
inclined teachers (RQ1-9). Interview partner 10:
“Where the eLectures are recorded and where you
can also upload things yourself as a user. [...] I also
used that once, I have to say at the beginning, and
then found it complicated after all." (IP10)
It is often the university’s own systems that do not work
well (RQ1-46). Another reservation is the fact that some
technological solutions (such as AR or VR applications) offer
didactic advantages, but cannot be used properly on a broader
scale at present (RQ1-19) as interview partner 3 argues:
“VR is indeed quite nice, but as I said, it is still a
long way from being usable for all students. There
are not enough devices." (IP03)
In addition to these points, which relate more to the teachers
themselves, the interviewees also bring up technical barriers
on the part of the students that limit or even prevent
their participation in digital teaching. First and foremost, an
insufficient internet connection of the students is mentioned
(RQ1-17) as well as a general uncertainty of the teachers due
to the technical challenges on the part of the students (RQ1-
41).
5) Personal reservations and lack of teaching skills:
While the reservations about digital teaching described so
far tended to be of an external nature, the respondents also
mentioned internal reasons. These include, on the one hand,
personal sensitivities and preferences of the teachers, but, on
the other hand, also their own teaching competence levels,
which are perceived as insufficient. The personal reservations
mentioned include fear of the unknown (RQ1-49) or the
uncomfortable feeling of communicating with students via
camera and microphone (RQ1-40). For example, interview
partner 12 reports that
“the tiles were black, and speaking to a black screen,
especially in the first semester, for example, was
considered by many to be very unusual or difficult
to get used to and not very advantageous." (IP12)
Furthermore, some teachers have the opinion that a majority
of their colleagues would prefer face-to-face teaching to
online teaching (RQ1-34) or they themselves could not
imagine teaching online (RQ1-48). However, there were also
complaints about the lack of support from the university,
especially with technical problems (RQ1-51), which prevented
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

4
them from incorporating more digital elements into teaching.
Interview partner 11 is disillusioned, given that
“the technical support was rather poor and we had
to work out a lot on our own." (IP11)
Last but not least, the teachers also surveyed a lack of
competences as a reason for not offering more digital teaching.
The main reason cited here is the lack of digital skills among
teachers (RQ1-4), which made it difficult to deal with the tools
needed, as interview partner 5 explains:
“Of course, there were enormous difficulties in
dealing with a digital format, for example. So how
do I actually do an online session or something?"
(IP05)
Similar problems in the use of technologies for digital teaching
are described by interview partner 2:
“But I have no idea how to create these videos
in a visually different way and maybe put them
on another page. [...] Or what is a Scorm learning
content. These are all things that you normally have
no idea about" (IP02),
and interview partner 13
“How does zooming work? What is the best way
to do it? [...] There was a lot of uncertainty on all
sides." (IP13)
A lack of didactic skills is also cited as a further obstacle to
the more extensive use of digital teaching (RQ1-20). Interview
partner 5 recognises the greater deficit here.
“For me, it was relatively clear that the know-how
was still lacking on the part of the teachers, both
from a didactic and a technical point of view. Above
all from a didactic point of view." (IP05)
In addition to the competence deficit, the interviewees also
mention the problems caused by the introduction of new
technologies (RQ1-6) and insufficient guidance and instruction
on new digital systems as further barriers to the use of digital
teaching (RQ1-52).
B. Advantages of digital teaching (RQ2)
In addition to the reservations, the teachers were also asked
in the interviews about the advantages of digital teaching. In
their experiences, teachers report on the pedagogical-didactical
and technical-organizational advantages of digital teaching as
well as positively perceived effects on students’ motivation
and learning success. In addition, they talk about advantages
that compensate for individual disadvantages, as well as about
increasing their own digital skills. The statements of the
teachers were assigned to a total of 26 different categories,
which in turn can be summarized in six main categories [10].
1) Pedagogical-didactical, motivational and performance-
related advantages:
The temporal and spatial flexibility
of digital, asynchronous teaching (RQ2-7) in connection
with the possibilities of uncomplicated repetition of the
learning materials at one’s own learning pace (RQ2-8), also
for the preparation and follow-up of synchronous phases,
are repeatedly mentioned in the interviews as advantages
and a way to self-determined learning. The following two
statements are representative of several statements about these
advantages:
“So some like it, appreciate it very much, that they
can schedule things themselves, that they can work
independently at home, when they want to." (IP11)
and
“Asynchronous
elements,
especially
now,
when
students are supposed to work on their own, alone
or in stucy groups or so, you can design that well
or even better with virtual tools." (IP12)
Teachers also perceive that digital teaching is popular
with students (RQ2-4), motivates students (RQ2-22), and
contributes to learning success (RQ2-3). Students’ desire to
have digital teaching as a choice is reported several times.
Representative of this apparently frequently expressed wish
are the following two statements:
“Can’t we also have the material virtually as well?"
(IP01)
and
“With students you also hear more often that they
really want to have a choice, face-to-face or digital.
For different reasons, personal reasons." (IP09)
In addition, the high motivational effect of digital teaching was
also reported during the pandemic:
“They all turned on their cameras and they had a
very intense exchange that 30 minutes were usually
not enough for because everyone was so engaged in
it." (IP05)
And they also perceived an increase in performance among
some students, as interview partner 4, among others, states:
“We’ve made the observation that high-performing
students actually show performance improvement
from online teaching." (IP04)
For the future design of teaching, teachers take with them
the insight from pandemic times that the mixture of digital
and face-to-face offers is important, (RQ2-23) as the following
quote of interview partner 9 illustrates:
“We cannot replace face-to-face teaching with digital
offers, but only expand and supplement it. That’s
something that was a clear takeaway." (IP09)
In this context, the development of one’s own competencies
(RQ2-14) and the further development of one’s own teaching
(RQ2-1) were also perceived as positive effects of the
pandemic, as described by interview partner 10 and 2 as
representative of several statements in this direction:
“But I have now become acquainted with many more
opportunities and possibilities. In this respect, the
attitude has changed a little. I think so, because now
I will also use blended learning formats more readily.
And in this respect, it has changed somewhat,
because I now take the opportunity more easily or
more frequently, even in a seminar that does not take
place virtually, but to incorporate real work phases
that use virtual tools." (IP10)
and
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

5
“So the bottom line after the three semesters, I would
say, among the colleagues the vast majority or a
great majority have found this to be an enrichment.
And as yes [...] now looking back at the possibility
to develop one’s teaching further." (IP02)
With regard to the further development of their own teaching,
teachers also emphasize that the analysis of data generated
by digital teaching could be used for a more precise didactic
evaluation (RQ2-16).
2) Organizational advantages: In the interviews, a whole
series of arguments for digital teaching came up, which
concern advantages for the organization of teaching. Emphasis
is placed on the easier and increased provision of learning
content (RQ2-18) and recordings (RQ2-6), temporal and
spatial independence (RQ2-13), and the reusability of digital
materials (RQ2-2). For some programs, such as teacher
education, these organizational advantages are of particular
importance, as interviewee 05 makes clear:
“I have a lot of teacher trainees who have a lot of
problems with overlap in their curriculum. For them,
of course, it was a blessing that now in the lecture,
that they can also participate asynchronously."
(IP05)
In addition to making it easier for students to organize their
studies, teachers also see advantages of digital asynchronous
teaching for their own work (RQ2-24):
“Yes, because of course it gives teachers the
opportunity to create new freedom for themselves
through the asynchronous offers." (IP09)
The initially high effort to produce digital materials is now,
after the creation seen as an advantage for students and as a
relief for themselves, as interviewee 08 states:
“And I now have digital materials for all three
semesters. If I teach this course again, then in
principle I could profit from it or I would profit
from it, then I could make all the digital things that
I already have, I could then make them accessible
again. And then, of course, that’s very luxurious for
the students." (IP08)
3) Advantages of digital teaching that compensate for
individual disadvantages:
Two interviewees also describe
aspects
of
digital
teaching
that
can
reduce
individual
disadvantages for both students and teachers. With the help of
digital teaching, teachers with health risks due to the pandemic
were still able to offer and conduct courses (RQ2-25). In
addition, one interviewee also perceives benefits for students
whose personality traits allow them to overcome disadvantages
of face-to-face formats through digital teaching (RQ2-26):
“And yes, there are students who find it convenient
when they can turn off their camera and then speak
quasi-anonymously." (IP12)
IV. DISCUSSION
The results show that, after the experience of the pandemic,
some teachers emphasize the desire for on-site teaching and
the associated direct contact with students and colleagues. This
Fig. 1.
The Tension field of digital and face-to-face teaching. The four
positions of a teacher’s view on the benefits and disadvantages regarding
both settings.
goes hand in hand with teachers’ concerns and reservations
about digital teaching. Besides the pedagogical and didactic
difficulties of digital teaching, they also see motivational
and performance-related problems. In addition, there are
personal reservations in connection with their own lack of
competence and perceived organizational, technical or legal
hurdles. On the other hand, however, some advantages of
digital teaching are also perceived, for example with regard to
motivation, pedagogical-didactical possibilities and potentials,
and organizational facilitation. These different perceptions are
not necessarily contradictory, but rather reflect the individual
situation and perspective of teachers and students. There is
a tension between the advantages and disadvantages of face-
to-face and digital teaching, which poses a dilemma for the
design of teaching (which is shown in Figure 1). Advantages
of a format for some may represent disadvantages for others.
A. The Tension field of digital and face-to-face teaching
In addition to aspects of isolation and loneliness or
difficulties
for
lower-performing
students,
the
perceived
disadvantages of digital teaching relate primarily to the
lack of direct exchange and dialog with students. This
perception leads to a strong desire on the part of some
teachers to return to the former face-to-face teaching formats
rather than to maintain digital ones. This reaction risks
overlooking the fact that "back to face-to-face" may well be
associated with disadvantages for some students and teachers.
Assuming a broad understanding of heterogeneity, respectively
diversity [11], in which heterogeneous (learning) starting
points are acknowledged, with different prior knowledge,
interests, cognitive abilities, motivations as well as social and
cultural backgrounds of students, digital elements play an
eminently important role with regard to diversity-sensitive,
inclusive teaching. Disadvantages of a purely verbal and fluid
face-to-face teaching offer arise, for example, for students
who have difficulties following due to auditory perception
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

6
disorders,
physical
hearing
impairments,
reading/spelling
difficulties, grief or ADHD/ADS [2] or have problems
actively participating in presence due to shyness or anxiety.
Advantages of digital teaching can provide significant support.
A continuous asynchronous learning offer or the possibility
to make use of it in addition to face-to-face teaching would
be very helpful for these students. For example, students with
reading and spelling difficulties have enough time to read texts,
use reading programs and apps for written assignments, and
enter their own written submissions, e.g., via Readspeaker, and
have them automatically checked for spelling and grammar.
In the case of concentration difficulties or simply different
discussion and learning speeds, an asynchronous learning
offer can provide relief by allowing contributions and tasks
or asynchronously conducted discussions to be worked on
autonomously at one’s own pace or in smaller units, so that
the working memory is less burdened. In addition, for some
students in special life situations, e.g. when they are prevented
from attending due to illness, parenthood or other care work,
a continuous asynchronous learning offer makes it possible to
maintain their studies in the first place.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The qualitative study identified four positions that can be
used to describe the tension between the perspectives of
which teachers view the specific opportunities and threats of
digital teaching and face-to-face teaching (see Figure 1). In
the future, these different perspectives must be considered on
two levels when designing contemporary teaching. For one,
on the institutional level, in strategic decisions about the goals
and orientation of academic teaching at the university. For
another, on the individual level of the single teachers, in the
planning and realization of their own teaching, but also in
the reflection of their own teaching activities. In this context,
it will be crucial to always have different possible solutions
in mind in a multiperspective sense and to choose solutions
that take several of these positions into account and lead to
a synthesis through dialogue [12]. Interview partner 9 also
argues in favor of such an approach by speaking out against
thinking in either/or categories:
“So
it’s
neither
a
demonization
of
digital
possibilities, but also not a clear prioritization
of face-to-face presence. Yes, perhaps not just
prioritization, but really the mix, it’s the mix that
makes it. Both have their place, digital teaching,
face-to-face teaching, and you can’t replace one
with the other."
In the future more research is needed to further explore
this tension field of digital teaching. On the one hand, the
perspective of the students is important, whose needs and
wishes must be taken into account when designing digital
teaching. On the other hand, the group of persons with
special needs due to e.g. visual, hearing or motor impairments
or with care work is interesting. Even if all students (and
teachers) benefit from digital accessibility in principle, it is this
group whose needs should be given special attention. Further
work will focus on the question of how university teaching
can become more inclusive by incorporating the possibilities
of digitization [2] and in what form the multi-perspective
approach described can support this process. One approach
could be the creation, systematic preparation, and distribution
of learning designs for inclusive, digital teaching. These
patterns, which require both individual teachers (individual
level) and institutes for academic development (institutional
level) to create, would provide teachers with a valuable source
of inspiration for designing contemporary teaching.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Arndt, T. Ladwig, and S. Knutzen, “Zwischen Neugier und
Verunsicherung : interne Hochschulbefragungen von Studierenden
und Lehrenden im virtuellen Sommersemester 2020 : Ergebnisse
einer qualitativen Inhaltsanalyse (translated: Between curiosity and
uncertainty : internal university surveys of students and lecturers
in the virtual summer semester 2020 : results of a qualitative
content analysis),” Nov. 2020, publisher: TUHH Universitätsbibliothek.
[Online]. Available: https://tore.tuhh.de/handle/11420/7892
[2] F. A. Rüscher, E. Buchminskaia, S. Chilla, and C. Filk, “Digitale
Barrierefreiheit und die Hochschule: STUDYasU – ein proaktiver
Ansatz für barriere-sensible digitale Hochschullehre (translated: Digital
accessibility and higher education: Studyasu - a proactive approach
to barrier-sensitive digital higher education teaching.),” in Digitale
Barrierefreiheit in der Bildung weiter denken. Innovative Impulse aus
Praxis, Technik und Didaktik, S. Voß-Nakkour, L. Rustemeier, M. M.
Möhring, A. Deitmer, and S. Grimminger, Eds.
Frankfurt am Main:
Universitätsbibliothek Johann Christian Senckenberg, 2023, pp. 90–100.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.21248/gups.62773
[3] G. Marinoni, H. van´t Land, and T. Jensen, “The Impact of COVID-19
on Higher Education around the World,” IAU, Paris, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iau-aiu.net/IMG/pdf/iau_covid19_and_
he_survey_report_final_may_2020.pdf
[4] D. Frohwieser, S. Gaaw, S. Hartmann, K. Lenz, and J. Möller.
(2020) Zwischen "was am meisten fehlt, ist zeit." und "danke,
dass ein studium möglich gemacht wird." befragung von lehrenden
und studierenden zur coronabedingten umstellung auf virtuelle lehre
im sommersemester 2020. ergebnisse der ersten befragungswelle
im
april
2020
(translated:
Between
"what’s
missing
most
is
time." and "thank you for making studying possible." survey of
lecturers and students on the corona-induced conversion to virtual
teaching in the summer semester 2020. results of the first survey
wave in april 2020.). Last visited: 26.02.2023. [Online]. Available:
https://tudresden.de/zqa/die-einrichtung/publikationen/Digitalisierung
[5] A. Witzel, “Das problemzentrierte Interview (translated: The problem-
centered interview),” in Qualitative Forschung in der Psychologie :
Grundfragen, Verfahrensweisen, Anwendungsfelder, G. Jüttemann, Ed.
Weinheim: Beltz, 1985, pp. 227–255.
[6] C.
B.
Hodges,
S.
Moore,
B.
B.
Lockee,
T.
Trust,
and
M. A. Bond. (2020) The difference between emergency remote
teaching
and
online
learning.
educause
review.
Last
visited:
27.03.2023. [Online]. Available: https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/3/
the-difference-between-emergency-remote-teaching-and-online-learning
[7] P. Jandri´c, “Teaching in the Age of Covid-19—The New Normal,”
Postdigital Science and Education, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 877–1015, Oct.
2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s42438-022-00332-1
[8] P. Mayring, Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse: Grundlagen und Techniken
(translated: Qualitative Content Analysis: Basics and Techniques),
12th ed.
Weinheim u.a.: Beltz, Jan. 2015.
[9] A. Tillmann, S. Voß-Nakkour, M. Eichhorn, and F. Kühn. (2023)
Results of the qualitative content analysis: Category system of
the reservations. Last visited: 09.03.2023. [Online]. Available: http:
//publication.studiumdigitale.uni-frankfurt.de/TFDT/Reservations.xlsx
[10] A. Tillmann, S. Voß-Nakkour, M. Eichhorn and F. Kühn. (2023)
Results of the qualitative content analysis: Category system of
the advantages. Last visited: 09.03.2023. [Online]. Available: http:
//publication.studiumdigitale.uni-frankfurt.de/TFDT/Advantages.xlsx
[11] F. Greiner and B. Kracke, “Heterogenitätssensible hochschullehre-
einsatz einer differenzierungsmatrix (translated: Heterogeneity-sensitive
higher education teaching-use of a differentiation matrix.),” Journal for
Higher Education Development, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 69–83, 2018.
[12] D. Bohm, Das offene Gespräch am Ende der Diskussion (translated:
The open conversation at the end of the discussion).
Klett-Cotta, 1998.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

