Smart Sustainable Cities: A New Perspective on Transformation,  
Roadmap and Framework Concepts 
 
Maysoun Ibrahim 
Department of Mathematics and 
Computer Science 
Beirut Arab University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
e-mail: maisonib@hotmail.com  
Carl Adams 
School of Computing 
University of Portsmouth 
Portsmouth, United Kingdom 
e-mail: carl.adams@port.ac.uk 
Ali El-Zaart 
Department of Mathematics and 
Computer Science 
Beirut Arab University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
e-mail: elzaart@bau.edu.lb
 
 
Abstract—The unprecedented rapid urbanization will affect 
the sustainability of cities around the globe. City leaders are 
currently seeking to transform their cities into Smart 
Sustainable Cities to face this global urbanization trend and its 
related challenges. To ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of 
a transformation process, current city needs, future trends, 
readiness of a city for the change, quality of life of citizens, and 
the set of smart and sustainable initiatives and solutions should 
be considered.  The latter could be achieved through a 
comprehensive roadmap and framework to guide the 
transformation process. Developing such a roadmap and 
framework require a deep understanding of the concepts of 
transformation, roadmap, and framework in the context of 
Smart Sustainable Cities. Definitions that currently exist in the 
literature do not take into consideration the different 
objectives of a Smart Sustainable City. This constitutes a gap 
in knowledge. This research paper bridges this gap by 
highlighting the weaknesses and deficiencies in existing 
definitions and introduce new definitions for the three 
concepts, taking into account the specificity of a Smart 
Sustainable City as a solution for the rapid urbanization while 
maintaining the sustainability of a city and ensuring a high 
quality of life for its citizens. The proposed comprehensive 
definitions of these three concepts namely transformation, 
roadmap, and framework aim at  guiding city planners, policy 
makers, and key stakeholders in developing and designing 
Smart Sustainable City initiatives and programs. 
Keywords-Smart 
Sustainable 
Cities; 
Transformation; 
Roadmap; Framework; Innovative Solutions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The world is experiencing the largest wave of urban 
growth in the history. Over half of the world’s population is 
now living in cities. According to the United Nations 
estimates, by 2050, 66% of the total world’s population is 
expected to be urban. With this rapid urbanization, cities will 
face sustainability challenges especially in the lower-middle-
income countries where the urbanization speed is fast [1]. 
The challenges include (but not limited to) the social stress, 
poverty expansion, spatial dynamics, natural resources 
shortage, and urban pollution with its effects on the climate 
change [2].  
Given this unprecedented global urbanization growth and 
the need for sustainability at all aspects of a city, the concept 
of “Smart Sustainable Cities” (SSCs) emerged as a desired 
goal for future urban development and attracted the attention 
of many researchers and practitioners in the field [3]. Their 
challenge is to ensure that cities are offering improved living 
conditions for their citizens by solving a set of sustainability 
challenges at the economic, environmental, and social levels. 
The Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) 
offer high potential for solutions to many of these challenges 
while ensuring that they are environmentally friendly and 
viable [4]. 
The International Telecommunication Union Focus 
Group on Smart Sustainable Cities (ITU-T FG-SSC) 
analyzed nearly one hundred definitions of smart cities, 
sustainable cities, and SSCs to introduce a new definition for 
a SSC. This new definition refers to a SSC as “an innovative 
city that uses ICTs and other means to improve quality of 
life, efficiency of urban operation and services, and 
competitiveness, while ensuring that it meets the needs of 
present and future generations with respect to economic, 
social, environmental as well as cultural aspects”.  
Additionally, as illustrated in Fig. 1, a SSC is defined 
along 
six 
dimensions 
named: 
Smart 
Economy 
(competitiveness), Smart Environment (natural resources), 
Smart Governance (participation), Smart Living (quality of 
life), Smart Mobility (transport and ICT), and Smart People 
(social and human capital). Each dimension is described by a 
set of factors, used to identify where the smart and 
sustainable initiatives are needed under that dimension. 
Table 1 [6] lists these factors. 
 
 
Figure 1.  A SSC, its six dimensions, and the role of ICTs  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

TABLE I.  
DIMENSIONS AND FACTORS OF A SSC 
 
The main objectives of a SSC are to improve the quality 
of life of citizens, urban efficiency, and competitiveness, 
while taking into account the sustainability aspects of a city 
at all levels. The latter could be achieved through the use of 
ICTs and other means (e.g., policies) across various and 
interrelated systems, such as the provision and access to 
energy, education, transportation and mobility, water 
resources, waste management, housing and livelihoods (e.g., 
jobs), environment, local economic, and others [7]. 
To face the rapid urbanization and its related challenges, 
city leaders are currently seeking to transform their cities 
into SSCs. To ensure effective and efficient transformation 
process, the current city needs, future trends, readiness of a 
city for the change, quality of life of citizens, and the set of 
smart and sustainable initiatives and solutions should be 
considered [8] [9].  
A transformation process, as illustrated in Fig. 2, consists 
of a high-level view roadmap that is used to identify the 
transformation process activities [30] (e.g., outline the need 
for defining a transformation plan). The roadmap, in turn, 
provides a framework(s) for strategic creation and turning 
strategy into actions [31] [32]. A framework often has a 
layered structure indicating what kind of initiatives can or 
should be developed and how they would interrelate. It 
provides the needed solutions to achieve the transformation 
activities (e.g., a recommendation to hospitals to develop 
online applications that allow patients to track their illness at 
any time). Developing such a roadmap and framework 
requires a comprehensive definition of a SSC transformation 
and a full understanding of the concepts of roadmaps and 
frameworks in the context of SSCs. 
Different 
definitions 
of 
the 
concepts 
of 
SSC 
transformation, SSC roadmap, and SSC framework exist in 
the literature. The majority of these definitions do not take 
into consideration the specificity of a SSC as a solution that 
ensures the sustainability of a city at all levels while 
providing a high quality of life for its citizens through the 
use of ICTs and other means.  
Using definitions that do not take into account all aspects 
of a SSC leads to an incomplete city transformation from one 
state to another.  Without clear definitions of a SSC 
transformation, SSC roadmap, and SSC framework, city 
planners, policy makers, and key stakeholders will not have a 
concrete base to follow in designing their transformation 
roadmaps and frameworks. Consequently, the possibility of 
neglecting essential aspects while transforming a city into a 
SSC becomes high. Therefore a comprehensive definition for 
each of these three concepts is needed. 
The aim of this research paper is to study and analyze 
existing definitions of SSC transformation, SSC roadmap, 
and SSC framework in the literature, highlight their 
weaknesses 
and 
deficiencies, 
and 
introduce 
new 
comprehensive definitions for these concepts. The proposed 
definitions could assist city policy makers and key 
stakeholders in developing and designing smart and 
sustainable initiatives that meet the objectives of a SSC. The 
research follows the literature based research methodology 
through which a gap in knowledge in relation to defining the 
concepts of transformation, roadmap, and framework in the 
contexts of SSCs is identified.  
In what follows, a literature review on existing 
definitions of SSC transformation, SSC roadmap and SSC 
framework concepts is highlighted in Section 2. Section 3 
provides a discussion on existing definitions of the three 
concepts and introduces new ones. The paper concludes with 
Section 4. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Concepts of a SSC Transformation, Roadmap, and Framework 
Dimension 
Related Factors 
Smart  
Economy  
Innovative spirit  
Entrepreneurship  
Economic image and trademarks  
Productivity  
Flexibility of labour market  
International embeddings 
Ability to transform  
Smart 
Environment 
Attractive natural conditions  
Pollution  
Environmental protection  
Sustainable resource management 
Smart 
Governance 
Participation in decision-making  
Public and social services  
Transport governance  
Political strategies and perspective 
Smart  
Living 
Cultural facilities  
Health conditions  
Individual safety  
Housing quality  
Education facilities  
Touristic attractivity  
Social cohesion 
Smart  
Mobility 
Local accessibility  
(Inter)-national accessibility 
Availability of ICT infrastructure  
Sustainable, innovative, and safe transport systems 
Smart  
People 
Level of qualification  
Affinity for life-long learning  
Social and ethic plurality  
Creativity  
Flexibility  
Cosmopolitanism/open-mindedness 
Participation in public life 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Understanding the concepts of transformation, roadmap, 
and framework in the context of SSC is essential and 
dependent on their definitions. More clear definitions are 
used; more comprehensive transformation roadmap and 
framework could be developed and designed. However, the 
existing definitions of these concepts in the literature do not 
consider all objectives of a SSC. 
The aim of this Section is to highlight the existing 
literature on a SSC transformation, SSC roadmap and SSC 
framework definitions. 
A. Transformation Concept in SSCs 
The rapid urbanization is a significant challenge facing 
cities around the globe. City leaders need to address this 
phenomenon by increasing the efficiency of existing city’s 
systems, services and infrastructures to a level that have 
never been achieved before. The latter would be realized 
through a holistic transformation process to enhance the 
sustainability of a city at all levels and improve the high 
quality of life of citizens, such as the case of the 
transformation towards SSCs. For this transformation to be 
consistent with the objectives of a SSC, a comprehensive 
definition of a transformation concept is needed.   
Generally, various definitions of the transformational 
change exit in the literature with no agreement yet about 
what could be and what could not be considered as a 
transformation [28]. The “Transformation Theory”, proposed 
by Daszko and Sheinberg [18], defines a transformation as a 
“change” to create something new that has never been 
existed before. This change could not be predicted from the 
past and it leads to a change in the whole system structure, 
function and/ or form. Geels and Kemp [10] define a 
transformation as a continuous process (i.e., it is difficult to 
tell when a transformation process will end) that leads to 
changes in a direction of trajectories. During this process, a 
new system may be created from the old one, through 
changes that are being taken in a new direction.  
For Satterthwaite and Dodman [25], a transformation is 
used to represent both the substantial activities and 
fundamental changes that affect economic, political, and 
social systems. The latter requires adaptation of policies and 
investments and integrates them with the development 
process of a city to meet its needs and to address the massive 
ecological footprint. A transformation in Harrington et al. 
[12] helps to divide the scope of change into manageable 
segments. It assists in identifying the key behaviors that are 
necessary to sustain the change and modifying and 
reinforcing positive behaviors through changing the structure 
of the system while measuring progress toward the 
previously identified goals. 
Last but not least, a transformational change from the 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) perspective 
[29] is a process by which positive development results are 
achieved and sustained over time through institutionalizing 
projects, policies, and programs within national strategies. It 
ensures the consistency of achievements over time, and does 
not include short-term transitory impacts.  
In the context of SSCs, a transformation occurs at every 
level of a city, ranging from economic, social and 
environmental structures to the ways that form citizens’ 
everyday lives. It is a long term process that cannot be 
achieved overnight. The Department of Business, Innovation 
and Skills (BIS) [24] does not provide a clear definition for a 
SSC transformation process; however, it shows a lack of 
absolute definition for a SSC that could be seen as a series of 
steps through which cities will be able to become more 
resilient and livable, hence, being able to respond quicker to 
new challenges.  
A SSC Transformation in De Santis et al. [14] is a 
complex multidimensional process that changes over time as 
all involved stakeholders will work to achieve more and 
better results. The transformation will affect many aspects of 
city operations including government, mobility, energy, 
services, buildings, and environment. The ITU-T FG-SSC 
[19] defines a SSC transformation as a long-term process 
that consists of a series of generic steps. These steps are 
defined to allow compatibility and promote sustainability of 
a city as time passes.  
Finally, Smart Dubai [23] defines a transformation as a 
process that focuses on four main issues: (1) efficiency 
through optimizing the use of city resources; (2) safety 
through protection of information and people and 
anticipating risks; (3) seamlessness through integrating daily 
services of life; and (4) impact through enriching business 
and life experiences.  
B. Roadmap Concept in SSCs 
Generally, a transformation roadmap is a high-level view 
of key activities that are required to change a situation from 
one state to another through defining a set of milestones that 
are needed to close a gap between the current and desired 
future situation [30]. A transformation roadmap in SSCs has 
almost the same meaning; with some specificity related to 
the nature and complexity of a transformation process in the 
context of SSCs.  
In Schaffers [27], a transformation roadmap is required to 
realize the aspiration of SSCs as innovation ecosystems. It 
presents the state of the art, trends, and developments, as 
well as identifies challenges, obstacles, and gaps related to 
the transformation towards SSC. It reflects the vision of a 
SSC’s socio-economic and cultural development.  
Komninos et al. [21], define a SSC transformation 
roadmap as a blueprint that provides recommendations for 
urban development by using of future technologies. It allows 
formulating of some policy recommendations to city 
authorities for mastering the new interdisciplinary planning 
for SSCs. A transformation roadmap main purpose is to 
show how to control the interlinked city layers of 
infrastructure, digital technology, people-driven innovations 
ecosystems, and urban activities.  
For the European Platform for Intelligent Cities [15], a 
transformation 
roadmap 
supports 
cities 
in 
their 
transformation towards SSCs operating environments. It 
includes various aspects of the transformation process 
including strategy development, program management, 
business case creation, and implementing and operating SSC 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

services. The British Standards Institution [13] does not 
provide a specific definition for a transformation roadmap.  It 
indicates that a SSC roadmap could be seen as a realistic 
framework that aims to deliver clearly identified results in 
achievable stages. From their point of view, each city in the 
United 
Kingdom 
(UK) 
should 
develop 
its 
own 
transformation roadmap based on its vision and goals. A 
roadmap is not a master plan and it should be deliverable. To 
be effective, a roadmap should take a phased and incremental 
approach and there is no need to over-plan at the beginning 
but instead provides a framework to support the 
transformation process to deliver the city vision over time.  
For the ITU-T FG-SSC [20], a SSC roadmap is a process 
that can be followed by city leaders and managers to 
transform their city into a SSC. It provides a framework to 
guide the transformation process, identify a set of SSC 
services, and focus on different ICT infrastructures. It also 
consists of a security framework to protect citizens, and 
provides monitoring techniques and ways to include citizens 
in the transformation process.  
Finally, the Smart Cities Council [26] defines a 
transformation roadmap as a bridge between ideas and 
actions. It is linked directly to the city vision document 
and/or development plan; therefore; it is neither a vision 
document nor a master plan. A transformation roadmap is a 
simplified outline that shows the major steps of how to 
become a SSC and could overcome the obstacles to a SSC 
transformation. The benefits of a SSC transformation 
roadmap include identifying the best place to start from, 
enabling cities to build in stages, maximizing synergies and 
minimizing cost, increasing public support, and attracting 
talent and businesses. 
C. Framework Concept in SSCs 
Transforming a city into a SSC requires a comprehensive 
framework to guide the transformation process. While a 
transformation roadmap provides a high-level view of 
changes that are needed to shift a situation from one state to 
another, a framework provides a set of tools that can be used 
to get there [30]. A transformation framework, in general, is 
a structure that can be used as a guide to build systems from 
scratch or modify existing ones into something useful.  
Although there is frequent use of the term “Smart 
Sustainable City” in the literature recently, there are still few 
attempts to provide a definition for its framework concept. 
To start with, a SSC framework has been defined by CISCO 
[11] as a process that helps city key stakeholders and 
participants to understand how cities operate, define city 
objectives, understand the role of ICTs within the city 
physical assets, and define the role of stakeholders within a 
city. It is a step-by-step process of how to implement SSC 
initiatives. It allows cities to create a standard index system 
to record, collect, and measure city data that could be used to 
manage and implement SSC solutions for the purpose of 
economic, social, and environmental gains.  
Chourabi et al. [17], define a SSC framework as an 
integrative framework that can be used to assist government 
professionals on how to establish SSC initiatives. From their 
point of view, a SSC framework should be based on eight 
critical factors that are: economy, governance, policy 
context, technology, built infrastructure, management and 
organization, 
natural 
environment, 
and 
people 
and 
communities. A SSC framework should clarify the 
influences and relationships between any suggested SSC 
initiative and these eight factors. Lee and Hancock [22], 
define a SSC framework as a conceptual framework that 
provides a holistic view of a SSC development. It is a tool 
that can be used to classify different initiatives and 
implementation practices. 
The British Standards Institute [13] defines a SSC 
framework as a guide used by UK city leaders of SSC 
programs, at all levels and from all sectors. The focus of a 
SSC framework is to enable processes by which new smart 
technologies could be coupled with organizational change to 
help deliver the different visions of UK future cities 
efficiently, effectively, and sustainably. The framework 
captures the current good practices and provides “how-to” 
advices to help city leaders in developing and delivering 
their own SSC strategies.   
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 
indicates that a SSC framework could be seen as a layered 
structure that captures different cross-city governance 
processes aiming to deliver benefits based on core guiding 
principles while taking into account the critical success 
factors. It provides a valuable set of tools for scenario-
building to guide the transformation process through 
participative decision making [16].  
Last but not least, the Smart Cities Council [26] defines a 
SSC framework as a guide through which cities can plan and 
implement their SSCs. It captures the relationship between 
city responsibilities (i.e., what should be accomplished for 
citizens) and its enablers (i.e., the use of smart technologies 
to make these tasks easier). A SSC framework could 
transform a city into a SSC while ensuring that individual 
projects are compatible with each other even if they have 
been developed separately and at different times.  
III. 
DESCUSSION AND NEWLY INRODUCED DEFINITIONS 
The objectives of a SSC are to improve the quality of life 
of citizens, urban efficiency, and competitiveness, while 
ensuring the sustainability aspects of a city at the economic, 
social (i.e., including cultural aspects), and environmental 
levels [5]. This could be achieved through providing 
innovative solutions, using ICTs and other means, on the 
dimensions of Smart Economy, Smart Environment, Smart, 
Governance, Smart Living, Smart Mobility, and Smart 
People [6], as illustrated in Fig. 3.  
Any attempt to design and develop a transformation 
process towards SSCs should take into consideration the 
objectives of a SSC and explicitly reflected in the definitions 
of a SSC transformation, SSC roadmap, and SSC framework 
concepts.  In the following sub-section, new comprehensive 
definitions for these concepts capturing the objectives of 
SSC are introduced. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
Figure 3.  Overview of relationship between a SSC and City’s 
Sustainability  
A. SSC Transformation Definition 
The analysis of existing definitions of a SSC 
transformation concept in the literature shows that there is no 
standardized, commonly accepted set of terminologies to 
describe and define a SSC transformation. Depending upon 
the lens with which it is viewed, there are different 
definitions of the concept in the literature. None of the 
studied definitions take into account all aspects of a SSC. For 
example, some of the listed definitions consider the quality 
of life as important objective of a SSC while others do not. 
Some definitions indicate the significance of improving the 
sustainability of a city while others neglect this issue. Also, 
as shown through the analysis of the listed definitions and 
keywords used, the use of ICTs as an enabler to reach the 
SSC objectives is not highlighted.  
The list of extracted keywords used to define or describe 
a SSC transformation in the studied definitions is as below: 
 Process 
 Sustainability 
 Series of steps 
 Resilient 
 Series of generic steps 
 Livable 
 Complex 
 Efficiency 
 Multidimensional 
 City resources 
 Change over time 
 Safety 
 Compatibility 
 Seamlessness 
 
Analyzing the above listed definitions shows that the 
objectives of a SSC are not properly considered. The role of 
ICTs, as an enabler to SSC, is also not highlighted. 
Therefore, believing in the need to highlight these elements, 
this research defines transformation towards a SSC as “a 
complex multidimensional process through which changes 
are applied at all city levels; aiming to enhance the 
sustainability of a city and provide a high quality of life for 
its citizens through the use of ICTs and other means”. 
B. SSC Roadmap Definition 
The existing definitions available in the literature of a 
SSC roadmap have been studied and analyzed. As in the case 
of a SSC transformation, the results show that there are no 
common set of terminologies to describe and define a SSC 
roadmap. Each definition defines the concept from its point 
of view. None of the studied definitions take into account the 
objectives of a SSC. For instance, the sustainability of a city, 
which is one of the important objectives of the 
transformation towards SSCs, is not considered in any of the 
studied definitions.  
The list of keywords used to define or describe a SSC 
roadmap in the studied definitions is as below: 
 Outline 
 Technology 
 Process 
 Not a vision 
 Blueprint 
 Not a master plan 
 Phased and incremental 
 City layers 
 Realistic framework 
 Urban development 
 Show how 
 Cultural development 
 Support transformation 
 Socio-economic 
development 
 Provide recommendations 
 
Given the analysis mentioned above, this research paper 
introduces a new definition for the concept of a SSC 
roadmap in line with its main objective, which reads as 
follows: “A SSC roadmap provides a high-level view of the 
objectives and goals of the transformation process and 
identifies the transformation activities and milestones in 
order to realize the city’s vision for being smart and 
sustainable”. 
C. SSC Framework Definition 
The studied definitions of a SSC framework concept in 
the literature do not follow a standardized, commonly 
accepted set of terminologies to define and describe the 
concept. Each study defines a SSC framework from its 
perspective or depending on the needs of a city over which a 
framework will be applied.  None of the listed definition 
takes into account all aspects of the objectives of a SSC. For 
example, the quality of life of citizens is not highlighted in 
any of the listed definitions.  
The list of extracted keywords used to define or describe 
a SSC framework in the studied definitions is as below: 
 Process  
 Stakeholders 
 Integrated  
 Change 
 Conceptual  
 Services 
 Layered structure 
 Deliver vision 
 Provide tools 
 Strategies 
 How-to 
 Initiatives 
 Plan and implement 
 Sustainability 
 Government professionals 
 ICTs  
 
Examining the readiness of a city for a change is 
essential before starting a transformation process. Any 
change programs or initiatives are likely to lead to only 
failure if they start before ensuring the readiness of a city for 
a change [33]. According to the Community Tool Box of the 
University of Kansas, the readiness for change differs from 
one city to another depending on its context and varies across 
city levels as well [34]. Some cities may be more than ready 
for the desired change while others being at a very earliest 
stages of readiness for that change. Therefore, any 
transformation process should take into consideration the 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

city capabilities and adapt the transformation framework 
accordingly. 
The analysis of studied definitions of a SSC framework 
shows that the readiness of a city for a transformation 
process, which is assessed using tools identified by a 
transformation framework, is not taken into account in any of 
the listed definitions.  
Accordingly, a new comprehensive definition of a SSC 
framework that takes into account all aspects of a SSC and 
the need for assessing the readiness of a city for a 
transformation process is introduced. This research considers 
a SSC framework as “a layered structure that leads city 
planners 
and 
relevant 
stakeholders 
throughout 
a 
transformation process by providing guidance on city 
readiness for change and the innovative solutions needed to 
grant urban sustainability and high quality of life for 
citizens”. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To face the rapid urbanization and its related challenges, 
city leaders are currently seeking to transform their cities 
into SSCs. The latter could be achieved through a 
comprehensive transformation process and its related 
transformation roadmap and framework. Developing such a 
roadmap and framework requires complete definitions of the 
concepts of transformation, roadmap, and framework in the 
context of SSCs. The main objectives of a SSC should be 
explicitly reflected in these definitions to avoid neglecting 
any essential aspects while transforming a city into a SSC. 
Studying and analyzing existing definitions of these three 
concepts in the literature shows that some of the important 
objectives of a SSC are not considered which constitutes a 
knowledge gap. This research bridges this gap by 
introducing new comprehensive definitions for the concepts 
of SSC transformation, SSC roadmap, and SSC framework, 
while ensuring that they are consistent with the main 
objectives of a SSC. The proposed definitions of these three 
concepts aim at guiding city planners, policy makers, and 
key stakeholders in developing and designing SSC 
initiatives. In the future, this work will be used as a base for 
developing and designing a conceptual framework that assist 
in the transformation towards SSCs.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] UN, Report of the World Urbanization Prospects: the 2014 
Revision Highlights, NY: United Nations, 2014. 
[2] N. Choucri, et al., “Mapping Sustainability: Knowledge e-
Networking and the Value Chain,” In Alliance for Global 
Sustainability Bookseries. SPRINGER, 2007, pp. 428-429. 
[3] T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Conceptualizing Smart City with 
Dimensions of Technology, People, and Institutions,” Proc. of 
the 12th Annual International Digital Government Research 
Conference, 2011, pp. 282-291. 
[4] M. Ibrahim, S. Al-Nasrawi, C. Adams, and A. El-Zaart, 
“Challenges Facing E-Government and Smart Sustainable 
Cities: An Arab Region Perspective,” Proc. of the 15th 
European Conference on eGovernment (ECEG2015), Jun. 
2015, pp. 396-402. 
[5] ITU, Shaping Smarter and more Sustainable Cities: Streving 
for Sustainable Development Goals, Geneva: International 
Telecommunication Union, Jan. 2016. 
[6] R. Giffinger, et al., Smart Cities: Ranking of European 
Medium-sized 
Cities, 
Vienna: 
Vienna 
University 
of 
Technology, Oct. 2007. 
[7] ITU-T FG-SSC, An Overview of Smart Sustainable Cities 
and 
the 
Role 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies, Geneva: International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU-T) Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities (FG-
SSC), Oct. 2014. 
[8] M. Ibrahim, C. Adams, and A. El-Zaart, “Paving the Way to 
Smart Sustainable Cities: Transformation Models and 
Challenges,” Journal of Information Systems and Technology 
Management (JISTEM), vol. 12, no. 3, Sept/Dec. 2015, pp. 
559-576, doi: 10.4301/S1807-17752015000300004. 
[9] M. Ibrahim, C. Adams, and A. El-Zaart, “Transformation 
Towards 
Smart 
Sustainable 
Cities,” 
23rd 
European 
Conference on Information Systems - Resilience and 
Information Systems, Muenster: Germany, May. 2015, 
unpublished. 
[10] F. W. Geels and R. Kemp, “Dynamics in socio-technical 
systems: Typology of change processes and contrasting case 
studies,” Technology in Society, ELSEVIER, vol. 29, issue 4, 
Nov. 2007, pp. 441- 455, doi:10.1016/j.techsoc.2007.08.009. 
[11] CISCO, Smart City Framework - A Systematic Process for 
Enabling Smart+Connected Communities, CA: Cisco Internet 
Business Solutions Group (IBSG), 2012. 
[12] H. J. Harrington, F. Voehl, and C. F. Voehl, Model for 
Sustainable Change, PA: Project Management Institute (PMI), 
Global Operations Center. Pennsylvania, 2014. 
[13] BSI, Smart City Framework – Guide to establishing Strategies 
for Smart Cities and Communities, London: British Standards 
Institute (BSI), BSI Standards Publication, 2014, PAS 
180:2014.  
[14] R. De Santis, A. Fasano, N. Mignolli, and A., Villa, “Smart 
City: Fact and Fiction,” Munich Personal RePEc Archive, 
MPRA, no. 54536. Mar. 2014. 
[15] EPIC, EPIC Roadmap for Smart Cities, European Union, 
European Platform for Intelligent Cities (EPIC), version 1,  
no. 270895, May. 2013. 
[16] ISO/IEC, Smart Cities – Preliminary Report (2014), Geneva: 
International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization 
and 
International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC), 2015. 
[17] H. Chourabi, et al., “Understanding Smart Cities: An 
Integrative Framework,” System Science (HICSS), the 45th 
Hawaii International Conference on , IEEE, Jan. 2012, pp. 
2289-2297, doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2012.615. 
[18] M. Daszko and S. Sheinberg, Survival is Optional: only 
leaders with new knowledge can lead the transformation 
(Theory 
of 
Transformation), 
available 
from: 
http://www.mdaszko.com/theoryoftransformation_final_to_sh
ort_article_apr05.pdf, Apr. 2005. [retrieved: Dec., 2015]. 
[19] ITU-T FG-SSC, Smart Sustainable Cities: a guide for city 
leaders, Geneva: International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU-T) Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities (FG-SSC), 
May. 2015. 
[20] ITU-T FG-SSC, Standardization Roadmap for Smart 
Sustainable Cities, Geneva: International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU-T) Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities (FG-
SSC), Mar. 2015. 
[21] N. Komninos, H. Schaffers, and M. Pallot, “Developing a 
Policy Roadmap for Smart Cities and the Future Internet,” In 
P. Cunningham & M. Cunningham (eds), Proc. on 
eChallenges e-2011 Conference , 2011, pp. 1-8.  
[22] J. H. Lee and M. G. Hancock, Toward a Framework for Smart 
Cities: a Comparison of Seoul, San Francisco & Amsterdam, 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

available 
from: 
http://iis-db.stanford.edu/evnts/7239/Jung 
_Hoon_Lee_final.pdf, 2012. [retrieved: Dec., 2015]. 
[23] Monitor Deloitte, Smart Cities, not just the uum of its parts, 
Beirut: Deloitte & Touch (M.E.), 2015. 
[24] BIS, Smart Cities: Background Paper,  London: Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS), BIS Publications, 
BIS/13//1209, Oct. 2013. 
[25] D. Satterthwaite and D. Dodman, “Towards resilience and 
transformation for cities within a finite planet,” Environment 
and Urbanization, vol. 25, no. 2, 2013, pp. 291-298. 
[26] SCC, Smart Cities Readiness Guide: The Planning Manual for 
Building Tomorrow’s cities Today, WA: Smart Cities Council 
(SCC), 2015. 
[27] H. Schaffers, Future Internet and Open Innovation for 
Connected Smart Cities, Brussels: FIREBALL, Sep. 2010. 
[28] A. Asefeso, S. B. Lund, and H. Parry, “The Emperor’s New 
Clothes: A Contemporary Business Life Edition,” AA Global 
Sourcing Ltd, Oct. 2013, asin: B00FNA4ZQM. 
[29] UNDP, Supporting Transformational Change: Case Studies of 
Sustained and Successful Development Cooperation, NY: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 2011. 
[30] M. Withers, M. Williams, and M. Reddington, Transforming 
HR: Creating Value through People, 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier, 
2010, pp. 132-139.  
[31] S. A. Di Biase, Applied Innovation – A Handbook, Chicago: 
Premier Lnsights, LLC. 2014, pp. 191.  
[32] L. C. Gordon and Z. Chaczko, W. Jacak, and T. Luba, 
Computational Intelligence and Effeciency in Engineering 
Systems, Studies in Computational Intelligent, vol. 595.  
Cham: Springer International Publishing AG, March 2015, 
pp. 49-59. 
[33] R. W. Edwards, P.  Jumper-Thurman, B. A. Plesterd, E. R.  
Oetting, and L. Swanson, “Community Readiness: Research 
to Practice,” Community Psychology, vol. 28, no. 3, May. 
2000, pp. 281-207. 
[34] KU, 
Community 
Readiness, 
Community 
Tool 
Box, 
University 
of 
Kansas 
(KU), 
avainable 
from: 
http://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/overview/models-for-
community-health-and-development/community-readiness 
/main, 2005. [retrieved: Jan., 2016]. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

