Beyond Efficiency: How to Use Geolocation
Applications to Improve Citizens Well-being
Renata Souza, Izautino P. Oliveira , Frank Junior, Lanna Sales, Felipe Ferraz*
CESAR - Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems, Recife, Brazil
*CIN - Informatics Center, Federal University of Pernambuco, Brazil
{renata.sdsouza}@gmail.com, {izautino.oliveira, fcbj, lannallimas}@gmail.com
*{fsf3}@cin.ufpe.br
Abstract - This paper presents a work in progress that exposes
how the growing problem of urban mobility in large cities has
contributed to the level of unhappiness of its inhabitants and
tries to examine if
the hypothesis of
using
geolocation
applications to increase the well-being of the citizens might be
a starting point for future works. A previous research
concluded that people with the longest commutes are the least
satisfied with life. Although some technological initiatives, such
as Waze and Google Maps, tries to reduce the time wasted in
traffic, the information here demonstrates that such efforts are
not enough to reverse this everyday negative experience.
Exploring theoretical concepts of emotional design and an
experiment of Yahoo Labs, this paper argues that it is possible
to
work
with
the
emotional
responses
of
geolocation
application users. Based on what was observed and collected,
we argue that the use of these applications can create
opportunities for positive emotions and encourage a change of
attitude towards traffic problems, enabling more significant
and delightful moments that potentially contribute to an
increase in the feeling of well-being. We present the need of
this new approach as it goes beyond current methods in its
potential to make citizens smart when the city environment
cannot be modified.
Keywords-urban mobility; navigation applications; emotional
design.
I. INTRODUCTION
The concept of smart cities is usually linked to efficiency
in the use of natural resources. Discussions about this
concept have been happening between citizens and experts.
The use of the latest technology is promoted to transform
large urban centers into a less aggressive place to live in, yet
some problems faced by citizens come from government
policies and economy. Urban mobility is one of the most
impacted issues.
In Brazil, a survey conducted by the National Association
of Public Transportation [1] found that the vehicle fleet in
major cities in the country grew more than the road structure
in recent years. From 2003 to 2012, while the fleet increased
92%, the street extension grew 16%. The study compared
data from 438 cities with over 60,000 inhabitants.
The Brazilian case illustrates a current scenario in large
urban centers. These survey data illustrate the significant
increase of the fleet, being 70% for cars and 209% for
motorcycles. An increase of 5% of the fleet does not have
an impact on the course of time in the same proportion, but
larger, as the relationship between flow and travel time is
not linear.
A contributing factor in this scenario is the facility to
buy vehicles and, in some cases, the cost is equivalent to
public transportation. It is a scenario where political leaders
encourage the production and car sales in the country and
the institutions need a large volume of government funds to
accompany the changes.
Another scenario that exacerbates those problems is the
concentration of the population in large cities and in
metropolitan surroundings, creating the need for daily
mobility to places where there is a concentration of jobs and
facilities through some means of transportation, whether
public or private.
The vehicles in cities are a troubling issue in the short
term. Usually, they are the result of structural problems of
the
cities
and
the
necessary public
policies
for
the
alleviation of these problems compete with tax benefits
granted to the establishment of the major automakers to
generate direct and indirect jobs.
The experience of other countries shows that building
more
streets
and
avenues,
which
will
inevitably
be
congested, is not a good solution. One example is the city of
Los Angeles, in the US, where there are lots of freeways and
still has slow traffic [1], leaving the discussion open on how
to minimize the inconvenience caused to daily lives of
citizens.
Citizens have to seek their own alternatives to live with
problems derived from urban mobility caused by the
economic situation and governmental choices.
In this scenario, this article begins the exploration of the
subject in Section I, about the emotional consequence
suffered by the people due to the excessive time wasted in
traffic. Then, in Section II, we expose the rise and
popularization of geolocation mobile applications, with the
direct goal of reducing time wasted in traffic. In Section III,
the concepts of Donald Norman about Emotional Design are
introduced to allow the analysis of Waze, one of the
geolocation applications analyzed in Section IV. Finally,
Section V presents the case of Happy Maps by Yahoo Labs,
which tested the implementation of features that aim to
generate positive and emotional responses in users, such as
the app to guide people displacement.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

II. TIME WASTED IN TRAFFIC VERSUS HUMAN EMOTIONS
Brazilian Demographic Census of 2010 presents on the
traffic travel time that only 14.8% of workers in urban areas
of the country spend up to five minutes to go to work. It
means 6.6 million of the 55.1 million citizens working out
of home. Furthermore, 28.5 million people spend from six
to thirty minutes in the displacement and more than 1
million people spend over two hours.
A survey pointed out that people living in São Paulo, the
largest city of Brazil, waste about one month per year in
traffic jams, with an average time of 2.4 hour/trip per day.
Another striking statistic is the number of people
studying or working in different cities from the ones that
they live in. From 2000 to 2010, this number grew 93.9%.
The explanations for the increase are related to population
growth, increase in the number of formal jobs, acceleration
of the metropolization and urban development process of
inner cities as well.
In a study conducted in Canada [2], it has been
discovered that traffic jams are in the top of the list of
reasons why commuters experience increased stress. People
who spend most of their time on the road experience higher
levels of stress because they constantly feel hurried. The
study discovered a direct link between commute team and
welfare [3]. The findings concluded that people with the
longest commutes have the lowest overall satisfaction with
life. The commute lengths are usually linked to a sense of
time pressure, people experience higher levels of stress
because they constantly feel hurried and worried about all
the activities they are missing.
Although there are a lot of evidences linking commutes
to negative feelings, some researchers found out that a
longer commute may benefit people. Reports of studies [3]
found out that the key to an enjoyable commute is using the
time as an opportunity to create a mental shift between
home and work. If the time is used as a break from other
appointments and responsibilities, the driver may become
more relaxed. When reducing the driving time is not an
option, some activities as using the journey to listen to
music, enjoy the landscape, or simply being alone with the
thoughts can change the commute to leisure time.
III.
RISE OF NAVIGATION APPLICATIONS
Focusing on reducing time in the traffic, navigation
applications are increasing their participation on the daily
life of citizens in large urban centers. As a way to help
reducing the inconvenience caused by urban mobility
problems, mobile applications, such as Waze and Google
Maps, intend to help people avoid the frustration of being
stuck in traffic jams by offering alternative routes to their
destination and much more information. Some of those are
warnings about accidents, hazards, roadblocks, police and
other events.
Even though a few minutes could be saved in some
cases, such efforts are not enough to sufficiently improve
this mobility experience in large cities. Many times it is
simply impossible to avoid the traffic jam and information
that would help drivers like ETA (Estimated Time of
Arrival) ends up working backwards, increasing their levels
of stress.
Currently, these applications do not propose motion to
its users [8]. Routes are created to show only shorter or
faster paths, but it does not provide and stimulate emotional
pleasure to users. However, the application based on
geolocation can use the data generated to propose a more
randomly
improvement
in
the
relationship
between
individuals and cities, without a formal request [7].
A Canadian study reported that [2] commute lengths are
linked to a sense of time pressure. Many people spend much
of their time on the road worrying about all the activities
they
are
missing,
further
enhancing
the
feeling
of
unhappiness.
IV.
EMOTIONAL DESIGN
According to Norman [4], humans are the most complex
of all animals; he suggests that emotions are related to three
levels of brain processing: first, the "automatic layer", as a
visceral level of call; second, the part that contains the brain
processes that control everyday behavior, called behavioral
level; and third, the contemplative part of the brain, the
reflective level.
Figure 1. Three levels of processing: Visceral, Behavioral and
Reflective [4].
Each level has a different role in the functioning of
people
and
requires
different
design
strategies.
An
explanatory figure about the three levels is shown in Figure
1. Each of the three processing levels will be discussed
separately, with their respective design strategy.
A. Visceral
The strategy to design at this level is the appearance.
Although this level corresponds to the earliest part of the
human brain, it is sensitive to a variety of conditions.
People are programmed to react positively, for example,
to the smell of flowers and fruits, as they represent food. In
most cases, the cultural differences are important because
conventions about what is desired are usually defined by
society.
Working with visceral design is to understand the
automatic emotional responses like shape, feeling and
texture.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

B. Behavioral
The design is totally linked to the use itself. Appearance
and
rationality are
not
important
in
this
case,
only
performance. Perhaps this is the most widespread approach
in the current mobile applications.
Professionals who focus on usability are used to this
kind of reasoning. While making the product work may
seem obvious, the needs of people are not as obvious as they
may seem.
Norman [4] points out that many products fail because
designers and engineers are often self-centered and believe
to dominate the answers to usage issues. The behavioral
design, on the other hand, should be people-centered, i.e., on
users, when designing a project.
C. Reflective
It is a quite broad design; it covers message, culture and
meaning. It works primarily with self-image and memory
[4], which is why the task of designing must be based on the
understanding that users have over all elements related to
the artifact. There is nothing practical, biological or
automatic in buying, for example, an expensive car or a
famous brand; answers to these questions would be cultural.
Usually,
the
results
of
blind
tests
show
much
"confusion" among consumers who cannot distinguish,
when blindfolded, between products of common brands and
their "famous" preferred.
V. EVALUATING WAZE THROUGH EMOTIONAL DESIGN
The
functionality
and
appearance
of
navigation
applications are very similar and are usually composed by
the map of the area where the user will travel, a suggested
main route, and alternative routes to the destination point of
the user. Currently, Waze app includes all the standard
features of navigation that most of the popular applications
contains, and it provides additional functionality as well;
therefore, it will be used such in a way that the features can
be analyzed at the behavioral level of the theory of Norman
[4] about Emotional Design.
There are some features available for the user associated
to the display or control of the distance to be traveled and
time efficiency, and for each of them we can analyze the
possible emotional stimulus.
The first feature is the set up of the route; it is possible to
view the estimated time of arrival at the final destination.
During the trip the user receives updates of the prediction
that shows the worsening or improvement of the traffic. We
can deduce some of the emotions or feelings that can be
stimulated by this information:
•
Security, which is a positive feeling, for being
able to view the amplitude of information that
would not be available without the application
aid;
•
Integration with the community, due to its
characteristics of a social network, Waze can
stimulate the culture of sharing and a sense of
belonging through the exchange of information
between users;
•
Anxiety, a negative reflection of anticipating
information about events along the way that
cannot be avoided and may cause delay on the
journey;
•
Insecurity, in cases where the fastest route
contemplates a deviation through a dangerous
area.
Throughout this paper, it could be perceived that each
feature can generate a number of both positive and negative
emotional stimuli, although there is no data survey to
consider whether there is a greater tendency for people to
have (or not) feelings that favor their well-being while using
the application functionalities. Still, it was not possible to
consistently realize the existence of a strategy to reach the
reflective level of emotional design and intentionally
generate positive emotions.
Taking studies about emotions generated by problematic
situations of urban mobility as a database, we can only infer
that these applications are not reducing or acting to
sufficiently reduce feelings of discomfort, as mentioned
above, caused by the traffic context.
VI.
THE DRIFT THEORY AND THE HAPPY ROUTES
EXPERIMENT
Psychogeography
is
the
science
that
analyzes
and
deciphers
the
relationship
between
humans
and
environmental contexts and evaluates the effects of the
environment on the affective behavior of individuals [8].
Through the relations of the inhabitants with the place
and elimination of the censorship imposed by conditioning,
proposed by the optimization of time, the cognitive system
and the appropriation of urban spaces are analyzed.
Based on the knowledge of individuals about cities,
psychogeography and the theory of drift proposes that the
individual should walk without a set destination letting the
urban environment create the suggested path and then for
each path created, the motivation needs to be pointed out.
[7].
Using this theory as one of the working basis, in August,
2014 researchers from Yahoo Labs developed a GPS
algorithm that allowed users to choose a route between two
points based on beauty, for example, rather than time or
distance [5].
The Shortest Path to Happiness [6] sought to offer
"emotionally
pleasant"
routes
using
data
from
a
crowdsourcing platform. The goal is a mapping application
that presents the most enjoyable routes, taking into account
not only what looks appealing, but also what sounds, or
smells appealing and even the memories people attach to a
place.
Researchers used a website that asks users to choose
between photos of areas in London and Boston they found
to be most aesthetically pleasing in order to determine the
most "beautiful, quiet, and happy" journeys.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 2. Route suggestions based on the “Shortest Path to Happiness”
study [5].
"Based on a quantitative validation, we find that,
compared to the shortest routes, the recommended ones add
just a few extra walking minutes and are indeed perceived to
be more beautiful, quiet, and happy," the study reads. "Web
and mobile mapping services currently fail to offer that
experience as they are able to recommend only shortest
routes." Yahoo researchers hope to apply this feature to
other cities without crowdsourced ratings by using Flickr
metadata [5].
It may seem controversial that applications typically
focused on the efficiency of time and distance can be used
to generate emotional experiences as happiness. Considering
all negative experiences reported previously, caused usually
by daily commutes, the Happy Maps experiment serves as a
counterpoint to open a new range of features that can
enhance the experience with the traffic. The beginning of
the discussion of how the location-based applications, that
are so present in the lives of citizens nowadays, can be a
powerful tool to enhance well-being.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of this initial investigation was to identify the
potential of navigation applications to improve the well-
being of people when commuting, especially in situations
where there is no way to reduce their time of driving in the
traffic jam, and use it as a valid starting point for further
work.
In situations like this, the key to effectively improve
well-being is not by changing the environment, such as
increasing the number of large roads, but in the attitude of
the citizens. It is directly related to the way they perceive
and experience the moment, so it is necessary to create
opportunities for a change of attitude towards the traffic
problems. The citizen can use this shift range as a break
from other commitments and responsibilities, engaging in
pleasurable
activities
such
as
enjoying
the
cityscape.
According to the Canadian study [2], enjoying the cityscape,
listening to music or just staying with your own thoughts is
the most suitable way to experience time in traffic as
something beneficial.
Given the popularity of geolocation applications in
commuting between home-work-home, a especially critical
moment of the day, they can be used nt only as important
tools to reduce the time in the traffic, but also as channels to
stimulate positive emotional responses associated to the
displacement experience, creating opportunities for this new
perception.
By questioning current approaches and studying new
ones for the situation, such as Happy Maps - the experiment
developed by Yahoo Labs, we confirmed that it is possible
to offer features via a GPS application with the clear
intention of generating a change of perception, promoting
positive emotional responses. This new approach also shows
that there are many hidden opportunities to offer pleasurable
activities through these applications, stimulating emotional
responses through leisure and sense of productivity. The
case of Happy Maps is a clear use of the reflective level of
emotional design, which results directly in the improvement
of the well-being of citizens and their relationship with the
city.
Since our focus is to help citizens change their attitude
and transform the city environment into a less aggressive
place to live, we intend to develop a long-term research
project by expanding the use of emotional design in the
development process of geolocation applications. The key to
the next stage is the identification of other activities that can
be done in commutes in order to develop some further
features. We also intend to use the results to enable the use
of technology to help people with their personal attitude
and, consequently, the meaning of moments.
REFERENCES
1.
A. Monteiro, “Vehicle fleet grows faster than the road structure in the
country (Frota de veículos cresce mais rápido que a estrutura viária
no
país)”,
in
Folha
de
São
Paulo,
Aug.
2014,
<http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/cotidiano/2014/08/1503030-frota-de-
veiculos-cresce-mais-rapido-que-a-estrutura-viaria-no-pais.shtml>
Last access; May 11, 2015.
2.
M. Hilbrecht, B. Smale, and S. E. Mock, "Highway to health?
Commute time and well-being among Canadian adults" in World
Leisure
Journal,
April
2014,
56(2),
pp.
151-163,
doi:
10.1080/16078055.2014.903723.
3.
A. Morin, “Want to be happier? Change your commute or change
your
attitude”,
in
Forbes,
July
2014,
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/amymorin/2014/12/07/want-to-be-
happier-change-your-commute-or-change-your-attitude/>
Last
access; May 11, 2015.
4.
D. Norman, “Emotional design. Why we love (or hate) everyday
things”, Basic Books, 2004, pp. 63-98.
5.
D. Quercia, “Shortest paths to happiness in cities”, in Yahoo Labs,
Aug. 2014, <http://labs.yahoo.com/news/scientists-research-shortest-
paths-to-happiness-in-cities/> Last access; May 11, 2015.
6.
D. Quercia, R. Schifanella, and L. M. Aiello, “The shortest path to
hapiness: Recommending beautiful, quiet, and happy routes in the
city”, in 25th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media, NY,
USA, 2014, pp 116-125, doi: 10.1145/2631775.2631799.
7.
G. Debord. Introduction to a Critique of Urban Geography, 1955
8.
M. Coverley. Psychogeography. Pocket Essentials, 2006
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

