Experimenting with Instant Services
Using NFC Technology
Anders Andersen and Randi Karlsen
Department of Computer Science
Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Tromsø
9037 Tromsø, Norway
Email: {Anders.Andersen,Randi.Karlsen}@uit.no
Abstract—In the NFC City project Near Field Communication
(NFC) technology is used to demonstrate instant services. NFC
makes it possible to connect electronic devices and initiate
services with simply touching a tag (or a device) with a phone.
In the NFC City project this is utilized in several experimental
applications. A presenter application use this to set up a pre-
sentation (on a projector or screen) without having to connect
cables or transfer ﬁles manually using USB memory sticks or
similar. A chat application sets up a chat simply but touching
two NFC enabled mobile phones. A party application transfers
images and modiﬁes the music play list by touching an NFC tag
with the phone. A guide application provides information and
suggest next sightseeing spot in the same way. The usage of NFC
in these and a few other applications is presented and discussed,
and shows how NFC can be used to provide instant services.
Keywords-Mobile computing, Pervasive computing, Context-
aware services, RFID tags
I. INTRODUCTION
NFC (Near Field Communication) is a short-range wireless
technology that tries to harmonize today’s diverse contact-
less technologies, enabling current and future solutions like
access control, ticketing, payment, loyalty programs, discount
coupons, information collection and exchange. NFC is an ex-
tension of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) technology.
One way it differs from RFID is that it limits the range of
communication to within 4 centimeters.
The use of NFC makes it possible to connect electronic
devices and initiate services with a simple touch. It is believed
that NFC will make people’s lives easier and more convenient
by enabling more intuitive access to new media and content
services. It will for example be easier to pay for things; easier
to discover, synchronize and share information; and easier to
use transport and other public services.
This paper reports on the development and testing of a
number of NFC-based applications [1]. In a previous short
papert and poster we focused on social networking and context
sensitivity [2]. In this paper we examine how various services
can be made instantly available, in a simple manner, through
the use of NFC-technology. We evaluate both the experience
of implementing the NFC-based applications, and the experi-
enced simplicity of using these applications.
The NFC City project is supported by the Norwegian research council,
VERDIKT project number 201377.
Our applications vary widely, from “NfcPresenter”, which
uses NFC to simplify the process of starting presentations
from your mobile device, to “NfcSafari”, which uses the user’s
location to identify the closest sightseeing spot, and from there
on takes him on a city safari. The applications “PartyShare”,
“Game Collector” and “Are You the One?” explores how
powerful NFC can be in social settings. All applications,
including “BluetoothChat”, demonstrates how instant service
can be achieved with NFC.
This work is part of an NFC City project, where the
objective is to promote the development and use of NFC-
based services. This objective will be achieved through the
establishment of an NFC ecosystem including network infras-
tructure, trusted service manager (TSM) functionality, NFC
services and user handsets. The project is also developing a
tool set for the development of NFC services.
In the next two sections, related work and NFC technology
is discussed. In Section IV, the tool set and the application
experiments will be presented. In Section V, the presented
work is discussed and evaluated, and ﬁnally, in Section VI,
the paper is summarized and future work is discussed.
II. RELATED WORK
Many related projects developing and disseminating NFC-
based applications exists. A multitude of NFC activities are
reported in the NFC Forum [3]. Field trials with NFC based
systems have been conducted in a number of cities over
the world [4], including Nice (France), Madrid (Spain) and
London (UK), and are spreading to more cities. In these
cities different types of NFC applications are tested. Examples
include ticketing, payment and information delivery applica-
tions.
NFC Forum has deﬁned three different NFC operation
modes; Card Emulation, Reader/Writer and Peer-to-Peer. In
card emulation mode, the NFC device acts as (and eliminates
the needs for) a physical object, such as a credit card, key,
ticket or coupon. In reader/writer mode, NFC devices can read
and write data from/to NFC tags, while in peer-to-peer mode,
data can be transferred between two NFC devices. In [5],
a number of applications have been examined and classiﬁed
according to the three operation modes.
The card emulation applications include payment [6], ticket-
ing [7], mobile coupons [8], and loyalty applications [9]. Some
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

typical reader/writer applications are designed for delivering
information about tourist attractions [10], [11], providing users
with location-based information and helping them ﬁnding
points of interest. In [12], NFC technology supports personal-
ized advertising that combines user proﬁles on mobil devices
and direct interaction displays, and in [13] NFC is used for
exchanging pictures between mobile device and computer.
Applications supporting social networking are described in
[14], [15]. In [14], NFC technology is used to ease the update
of presence information on social networks, while in [15] a
peer-to-peer mode application allows users to make friends by
exchanging personal information between devices. The peer-
to-peer mode is also used in [16], where NFC is used to build
ubiquitous games.
III. NFC TECHNOLOGY
NFC-Forum deﬁnes the technology as follows: Near Field
Communication (NFC) technology makes life easier and more
convenient for consumers around the world by making it
simpler to make transactions, exchange digital content, and
connect electronic devices with a touch.
NFC can be implemented in all types of devices, including
your smart phone, your tablet, your computer and your car.
However, the number of NFC-enabled devices today are quite
limited. There has been a deadlock situation where handset
vendors, service providers and users are waiting for the others
to make a move. The lack of NFC handsets has hindered
service development and lack of services has not been good
incitement for developing new handsets. However, in current
releases of mobile handset models we see a signiﬁcant increase
in NFC enabled devices.
In short, NFC is a set of short-range wireless technologies.
Where Bluetooth and RFID may work within a range of up
to 100 meters, NFC is limited to only work within distances
as short as 4 cm. Also, where Bluetooth has a maximum
bandwidth of 2.1 Mbit/s, NFC uses a bandwidth ranging from
106 kbit/s to 424 kbit/s. NFC operates at 13.56 MHz on the
ISO/IEC 18000-3 air interface.
NFC always involves an initiator and a target; the initiator
actively generates an RF ﬁeld that can power a passive target.
This enables NFC targets to take very simple form factors such
as tags, stickers, key fobs, or cards that do not require batteries.
NFC peer-to-peer communication, where both devices are
powered, is also possible. However, the limited bandwidth
makes it inferior to Bluetooth for big data transfers.
NFC tags contain data, and may be conﬁgured to be both
read-only and rewritable. They can be custom-encoded by their
manufacturers or use the speciﬁcations provided by the NFC
Forum, including the Type 2 Tag format [17] for the tag header
and the NDEF data format [18] for the payload. The tags
can securely store personal data [19] such as debit and credit
card information, loyalty program data, PINs and networking
contacts, among other information. The NFC Forum deﬁnes
four types of tags, which provide different communication
speeds and capabilities in terms of conﬁgurability, memory,
security, data retention and write endurance.
The NFC Data Exchange Format (NDEF) speciﬁcation
[18] deﬁnes a message encapsulation format to exchange
information between NFC Forum Devices and NFC Forum
Tags. In the speciﬁcation it is described as follows: NDEF
is a lightweight, binary message format that can be used
to encapsulate one or more application-deﬁned payloads of
arbitrary type and size into a single message construct. Each
payload is described by a type, a length, and an optional
identiﬁer. The type identiﬁers may be URIs, MIME media
types, or NFC-speciﬁc types.
IV. THE EXPERIMENTS
All Android applications have been developed using An-
droid SDK Tools, Revision 11, which includes the Android
SDK and the Android Development Tools (ADT). NFC func-
tionality is implemented using the Android API package an-
droid.nfc. All applications developed on the Android platform
have been tested on a Samsung Nexus S with Android version
2.3.4.
The NFC cards and stickers used are 64 bytes MiFare Ultra-
light tags. These fulﬁll the NFC Forum type 2 tag speciﬁcation
with a total payload size of 48 bytes. The desktop NFC devel-
opment has been on a SCM Microsystems SCL3711. This is
a USB device with a PN532 chip, which supports emulation
of all NFC Forum type tags and many other non-standard
tags. It also supports read/write communication with the most
common tag types. We have used Libnfc [20] development
branch Revision 1120 for this development. Libnfc is an open
source SDK and programmers API for working with NFC on
traditional desktop computers.
A. EasyNfc Tool Set
As Libnfc is a low level API, our focus has been on
developing higher level APIs for use in future application
development processes. We have developed EasyNfc, which
is a library that simpliﬁes the process of developing NFC
applications on the Android platform. The library contains
extendible Activity classes for reading and writing to tags,
P2P, and Bluetooth pairing of Android devices. It elegantly
reduces the code required when creating NFC applications
by hiding much of the boiler plate code from the application
developer. This is done by creating EasyNfc as an extension
of the original Activity-class. The application developer can
simply extend one of the EasyNfc classes to gain access to a
powerful set of NFC tools.
Our APIs include functionality for emulating and reading
Type 2 Mifare Ultralight tags. It also simpliﬁes the process of
creating and parsing NDEF messages. The implementation of
these APIs are done in C, but we have implemented a Python
wrapper to make it even easier to integrate with our services in
future projects. The advantage of emulating an NFC tag with
a USB device compared to using a static tag is the possibility
for varying responses. As the tag is emulated in software the
application can give different responses dependent on context.
The tag data may vary over several parameters, like what time
of the day it is or what user is reading it. This may prove
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

useful in many areas, including context sensitive functionality,
permission control and security.
We have also included an Android application, called “Tag-
ger”, in the tool set. Tagger is a standard NFC tag reader and
writer. The application utilizes the NFC capabilities of the
mobile device to read Type 2 NDEF tags and display them in
plain text to the user. The reader is capable of reading tags
with Plain Text [21] and URI [22] payload records. Tagger can
also write to tags, but this is limited to Plain Text records. As
Tagger is implemented complying to the Type 2 and NDEF
standards, the tags written with the application can be read
by all standard compliant readers. The work done on Tagger
provides the foundation for the other Android applications that
have been build.
B. NfcPresenter
NfcPresenter is an Android application that simpliﬁes the
user-computer interaction by creating a more intuitive way
to present slide-show presentations. Traditionally, starting a
presentation is a cumbersome process. The person doing the
presentation usually has two alternatives; either connecting his
own laptop to the projector, or transfer the presentation with
a USB memory stick to a local computer, which is already
connected. Both routines are unnecessary tedious.
In the ﬁrst case, inability to establish connection between
laptop and projector and not being able to display the presen-
tation correctly, are two common and often time-consuming
problems. The alternative, transferring the presentation to a
USB memory stick, connecting the USB device to the local
computer, navigating to the relevant ﬁle, opening it, and
starting the presentation, is not any more tempting.
With NfcPresenter we aim to create a smooth and painless
presentation experience by utilizing NFC technology. Starting
a presentation can be done by selecting the appropriate presen-
tation ﬁle on the mobile device and touching it to an NFC tag
present at the presentation location. Simple as that. When the
presentation has started, the Android device serves as a remote
control. With a swipe you can show the next or previous slide.
In addition each slide is shown on the screen of the mobile
device for better control.
NfcPresenter also lets a user download the currently active
presentation to a mobile device. In other words, a spectator
of the presentation can use the application to download the
presentation to his own device by scanning a tag. This is a
useful feature for distributing presentation material.
As explained, NfcPresenter utilizes NFC to collect the URL
from a tag present at presentation location. The URL directs
to a server running on the local presentation computer, which
is already connected to the projector. The application uses the
recently acquired URL to upload the presentation ﬁle to the
server. The server starts the presentation and can now answer
to other commands to control it remotely.
We predict that the way presenting is handled in NfcP-
resenter is the future for a presentation setup. To include
NfcPresenter-like server functionality into popular end-user
products like Microsoft Powerpoint or Apple Keynote would
(a) NfcPresenter
(b) PartyShare
Fig. 1.
NFC-based applications
be a simple and efﬁcient way to distribute this kind of features.
It could be a great enhancement to the current presenting
experience.
C. BluetoothChat
BluetoothChat demonstrates instant setup with NFC. It is
a simple chat client where the user use the NFC features of
their mobile phone to set up a bluetooth chat between the
handsets. No other conﬁguration is needed. The users open
the chat program and then touch the other user’s phone. NFC
is then used to exchange the information needed to set up
the bluetooth communication between the two phones. The
communication is the set up without any user involvement, and
the chat can start immediately. The advantage of this approach
is not only a simpliﬁed setup, but also that the two users can
be sure that they are actually communicating with the right
person. The physical presence (at setup) and the short range
of NFC ensure this.
This application can be easily extended to set up chat or
other forms of communication using other network technology
than the relative short range bluetooth network. In such a
context the setup can be done once (when the users meet
physically) and used later again and again remotely.
D. PartyShare
The goal of PartyShare is to bring multimedia from hand-
held devices to stationary devices in a seamless manner. It
consists of a client running on an NFC enabled Android
device, and a server running on a computer. The application
allows you to share music or images from the Android device
to the computer in real-time. The transfer is done simply
by touching the Android device to the stationary device. As
a result, the images are viewed and the music is played
immediately.
In principle, PartyShare uses the HTTP protocol to transfer
the multimedia from the Android device to the computer. This
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

implies that the application could have been built without NFC
technology. However, conﬁguring such an application would
be tedious. For instance, moving from one location to another
would require the user to enter a new IP-address in order to
interact with the current stationary device.
Entering a URL on a handheld device is both time consum-
ing and cumbersome. By taking advantage of NFC technology
we can remove the conﬁguration step completely, and as a
result get a smart and intuitive sharing application. The trick
is to store the relevant URL in the NFC tag. This way the
Android application can read the required information directly
from the relevant device, and get immediate feedback as his
image is viewed, or the track is played.
The server is implemented in Python, using a share of open
source python modules. The ImageViewer, which displays the
latest image is created using Pygame, and the music sharing is
implemented using a self made libspotify-wrapper (spotipy).
The web server responds to HTTP post requests on the URIs
/upload/image and /upload/track.
On the client side we use internal Android activities to
handle the camera and the gallery to choose image, and the
Spotify meta data API to choose music. The music sharing
works by transferring a Spotify URI, which is then used by
spotipy to play the song.
E. NfcSafari
NfcSafari is a tour guide application that aims to help people
discover, experience and remember interesting locations and
spots. The general application area is giving tourists visiting
cities and locations for the ﬁrst time a helping hand by guiding
them to interesting sightseeing spots. The overall goal of
creating the application is to explore how NFC can be utilized
in pervasive applications.
(a) NfcSafari
(b) Are You The One?
Fig. 2.
NFC-based applications
The application initiates the tour by using the current
location of the user to ﬁnd nearby spots. The user is given a
choice between the three closest spots, and the user will start
the Safari by choosing one of them. The next screen shows a
map, guiding the user from his current location to the spot he
chose.
When the user ﬁnds a spot, he needs to touch the nearby
NFC tag to register his presence. By reading the ID of the
spot, the application knows what web service to contact to
download a description of the spot. If the user is logged in,
we can now choose to share information about the spot through
Facebook. It is also possible to give the spot a rating from 1
to 5 stars. When the user is happy with the experience he can
continue the tour. The next spot is shown on the map, and the
process starts from the top. All visited spots are stored in a
local database.
In NfcSafari all sightseeing spots are predeﬁned and
grouped on the server. The idea is to let spots in close vicinity
to each other, or spots with the same theme, to be placed in
the same tour. All tours are deﬁned in XML ﬁles, where each
ﬁle describes a single Safari.
Each Safari has an ID and a name, in addition to having a
list of spots with names, IDs and location. When the server
starts, it parses all the Safari XMLs for spots and locations,
which in turn is used when the Android application requests
the closest spot. When this happens, the server computes the
distance from the user to all active spots (from all Safaris)
and returns a list of the three closest of them. When the user
chooses one of them, the Safari it belongs to is chosen as the
active tour and the corresponding XML is downloaded. When
the user is done with the current spot, the next spot in the
current Safari is chosen. Communication between the server
and the Android client is done over HTTP, and the server is
implemented using web.py.
F. GameCollector
Game collector is a prototype of a concept that can increase
social interaction between mobile gamers. The idea is to make
games, that are generally not made for social interaction,
social.
In the prototyped example, the setting is a Pokemon like
game, where the goal is to collect many collectables and use
them in you game. With NFC, these collectables can be shared
among friends giving a social experience to an otherwise not
social game.
G. Are You The One?
“Are You The One?” is a quirky “love tester” that calcu-
lates the compatibility between two persons. The goal of the
application is to illustrate how NFC can be used in social
scenarios. The application works by having the user enters his
or her name, and then touch another handset with the same
application. As a result their “love match”, or compatibility,
is visualized on screen as a percentage.
The compatibility is calculated deterministically using their
names, and obviously has no basis in reality. Nevertheless, it
is a fun example of a small application that delivers something
new by incorporating NFC as a vital component.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

V. DISCUSSION
NFC is a relatively new technology, and does not have
the infrastructure of other older technologies. Because of this,
there is less support available for development of NFC services
and applications.
Developing NFC application on Android is not complex, but
current Android NFC implementations can be unstable during
testing. This is both due to the immature NFC support in An-
droid and the existing tool set. This is continuously improving
and a thorough implementation and documentation of both
new and legacy NFC standards has been made available.
Developing with Libnfc is challenging. Not only because its
a low level API, but also because the documentation is a bit
weak, and unforgiving to newcomers. To be able to use Libnfc,
and to fully understand it, you will have to do a lot of research
and understand a range of technical speciﬁcations. With few
other alternatives, this is a challenge for NFC development on
desktop/server computers.
The MiFare Ultralight tags used in this project had some
limitations worth noting. The mobile device was unable to
read the tags if they were too close to metal. This is deﬁnitely
worth remembering when placing tag stickers.
A. Evaluation
NFC is useful in many areas, such as payment, information
sharing [12], [23], security [19], [24], conﬁguration, and social
interaction [14]. It acts as a link between the physical and
virtual world, giving us a simpler and more intuitive way
of sharing information [25]. One of the properties of NFC
is that context is implicit deﬁned. This stems from the very
short range of the tags. This can simplify many aspects of
development, including security and conﬁguration. Context
wise NFC provides both location (location of tag), interest
(selection of tag), time (when NFC device is used), and
identity (owner/user of NFC device).
Apart from payment and ticketing, we believe that NFC for
mobile devices are most useful where it can simplify the user-
interactions of services or applications. The best example is
setting up connections for WI-FI or Bluetooth, as exempliﬁed
in BluetoothChat. A task that can be tedious is replaced by
an intuitive gesture that connects touching devices. We think
that NFC is not introducing something entirely new in this
context, but it can certainly create more convenience to already
established applications and services. In some cases it can also
improve the accuracy, for instance in the case of many points-
of-interest at geographical location an NFC tag can be used
to clarify where the current focus is.
A good example of this is NfcSafari, which does not ac-
complish something we could not have done using GPS more
extensively. However, the GPS would limit us to outdoor spots
and might not provide the necessary accuracy. QR codes are
also an alternative to NFC in this setting, however, scanning
QR codes is slightly less convenient as it takes more time and
can be hard in the dark. If this application was to be launched
in todays market it would have been wise to incorporate both
QR codes and NFC. This is due to the still limited use of NFC
enabled devices.
NfcPresenter underlines the convenience of NFC enabled
applications. To conﬁgure the upload and download URL by a
physical touch instead of entering it manually makes a mobile
presentation application go from something a few people will
use to something everyone will want to have.
BluetoothChat both removes the inconvenience of the setup
process and ensures that the chat is with the person you have
met physically (and have touched phones with). It is easy
to see this used in many other applications where interaction
between people is included. If the initial NFC connection is
used to agree upon encryption keys it can be used to set up a
secure channel between the devices.
PartyShare illustrates how NFC can enhance a social event
by giving everyone the ability to participate. This type of
crowd sourcing has been possible before NFC, but the thresh-
old to join the fun can now be signiﬁcantly lowered by making
the act of sharing something come down to a simple touch.
Applications like “Are You The One?” illustrates how an
apparently exhausted concept gets a fresh feel by incorporating
NFC. The act of touching two devices to get a love match
(instead of typing in the names on one device) give a greater
connection between the two participants. The application illus-
trates the easy exchange of information between two mobile
devices, and the concept obviously opens up for exchanging
personal information already available on the devices.
VI. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
These initial NFC experiments of the NFC City project
have explored NFC technology both in design of new services
and in the development of actual applications. Our experience
with implementation and use of these applications indicate that
NFC has a role to play in a wide range of future applications.
In these experiments we have demonstrated NFC used to
establish instant services.
In general, there is a lot more to explore regarding NFC
technology. While we have investigated possible application
and service areas, traditional NFC research areas, such as
mobile payment, security and authentication, has been left
untouched. This was done consciously, as other NFC City
partners are currently exploring these ﬁelds to great extent.
The result of this ongoing work will later be incorporated into
our NFC activities.
While we have implemented a number of prototype appli-
cations utilizing NFC technology on mobile platforms, we
have not developed any desktop prototypes using the USB
devices. An advantage of the USB device is the possibility to
create tags dependent on context. Although this is achievable
by utilizing static tags combined with URLs and web access,
USB may be a better option as it delivers the same context
dependent experience without relying on a WI-FI or 3G/EDGE
connection for the mobile device.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Øyvind Holmstad and Tor Kreutzer have provided the main
contribution to the implementation of the NFC experiments.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

This includes the Android applications and the server side
application support. These experiments would have been im-
possible without support from our project partners in the
NFC city project. Especially the support from project leader
Sigmund Akselsen and project member Peter Dahle (both at
Telenor) has been important. The support from the technical
staff at the Department of Computer Science at University of
Tromsø has also been important during these experiments.
REFERENCES
[1] Ø. Holmstad and T. Kreutzer, “NFC prototype bonanza,” Department
of Computer Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of
Tromsø, Norway, Tech. Rep., Jul. 2011.
[2] A. Andersen, Ø. Holmstad, R. Karlsen, and T. Kreutzer, “NFC city
context sensitive and social networking experiments,” in PDT’11, Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Posters and Demos Track at Middleware
2011.
Lisbon, Portugal: ACM, Dec. 2011.
[3] “The near ﬁeld communication forum,” [retrieved: March, 2012].
[Online]. Available: http://www.nfc-forum.org/
[4] “The contactless & NFC city league,” [retrieved: March, 2012].
[Online]. Available: http://contactlesscities.wordpress.com/
[5] K. Ok, V. Coskun, M. Aydin, and B. Ozdenizci, “Current beneﬁts
and future directions of NFC services,” in Education and Management
Technology (ICEMT), 2010 International Conference on, Nov. 2010, pp.
334–338.
[6] M. Pasquet, J. Reynaud, and C. Rosenberger, “Secure payment with NFC
mobile phone in the SmartTouch project,” in International Symposium
on Collaborative Technologies and Systems (CTS 2008), May 2008, pp.
121–126.
[7] S. Ghiron, S. Sposato, C. Medaglia, and A. Moroni, “NFC ticket-
ing: A prototype and usability test of an NFC-based virtual ticketing
application,” in NFC’09, First International Workshop on Near Field
Communication, Feb. 2009, pp. 45–50.
[8] S. Dominikus and M. Aigner, “mCoupons: An application for near ﬁeld
communication (NFC),” in 21st International Conference on Advanced
Information Networking and Applications Workshops (AINAW’07),
vol. 2, May 2007, pp. 421–428.
[9] B. Ozdenizci, V. Coskun, M. Aydin, and O. Kerem, “NFC loyal: A
beneﬁcial model to promote loyalty on smart cards of mobile devices,”
in International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Trans-
actions (ICITST), Nov. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[10] E. Siira, T. Tuikka, and V. T¨orm¨anen, “Location-based mobile wiki using
NFC tag infrastructure,” in First International Workshop on Near Field
Communication (NFC’09), Feb. 2009, pp. 56–60.
[11] F. Borrego-Jaraba, I. Luque Ruiz, and M. ´A. G´omez-Nieto, “A NFC-
based pervasive solution for city touristic surﬁng,” Personal and Ubiq-
uitous Computing, vol. 15, pp. 731–742, Oct. 2011.
[12] S. B. Paul Holleis, Gregor Broll, “Advertising with NFC,” in Workshop
on Pervasive Advertising and Shopping, in conjunction with the 8th
International Conference on Pervasive Computing (Pervasive 2010),
Helsinki, Finland, May 2010.
[13] K. Seewoonauth, E. Rukzio, R. Hardy, and P. Holleis, “Two NFC interac-
tion techniques for quickly exchanging pictures between a mobile phone
and a computer,” in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, ser.
MobileHCI’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 39:1–39:4.
[14] A. Fressancourt, C. H´erault, and E. Ptak, “NFCSocial: social networking
in mobility through IMS and NFC,” in First International Workshop on
Near Field Communication, Feb. 2009, pp. 24–29.
[15] E. Siira and V. T¨orm¨anen, “The impact of NFC on multimodal social
media application,” in Second International Workshop on Near Field
Communication (NFC’10), Apr. 2010, pp. 51–56.
[16] P. Garrido, G. Miraz, I. Ruiz, and M. Gomez-Nieto, “Near ﬁeld com-
munication in the development of ubiquitous games,” in International
Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions (ICITST
2010), Nov. 2010, pp. 1–7.
[17] NFC Forum, “NFC type 2 tag operation speciﬁcation,” NFC Forum,
Technical Speciﬁcation T2TOP 1.1, May 2006, [retrieved: March,
2012]. [Online]. Available: http://www.nfc-forum.org/
[18] ——, “NFC data exchange format (NDEF),” NFC Forum, Technical
Speciﬁcation NDEF 1.0, Jul. 2006, [retrieved: March, 2012]. [Online].
Available: http://www.nfc-forum.org/
[19] E. Haselsteiner and K. Breitfuß, “Security in near ﬁeld communication
(NFC),” in Workshop on RFID Security, Malaga, Spain, Jul. 2006.
[20] “Public platform independent near ﬁeld communication (NFC) library,”
[retrieved: March, 2012]. [Online]. Available: http://www.libnfc.org/
[21] NFC Forum, “NFC text record type deﬁnition,” NFC Forum, Technical
Speciﬁcation RTD-Text 1.0, Jul. 2006, [retrieved: March, 2012].
[Online]. Available: http://www.nfc-forum.org/
[22] ——, “NFC URI record type deﬁnition,” NFC Forum, Technical
Speciﬁcation RTD-URI 1.0, Jul. 2006, [retrieved: March, 2012].
[Online]. Available: http://www.nfc-forum.org/
[23] M. Isomursu, P. Isomursu, and M. Komulainen-Horneman, “Touch to
access the mobile internet,” in OZCHI 2008 Proceedings, Cairns, QLD,
Australia., Dec. 2008, pp. 17–24.
[24] M. Hutter and R. Togl, “Touch’n trust: An NFC-enabled trusted platform
module,” IARIA International Journal On Advances in Security, vol. 4,
no. 1 & 2, pp. 131–141, 2011.
[25] G. Broll, W. Reithmeier, P. Holleis, and M. Wagner, “Design and
evaluation of techniques for mobile interaction with dynamic NFC-
displays,” in TEI’11 Proceedings, ACM.
Funchal, Portugal: ACM,
Jan. 2011, pp. 205–212.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

