Smart Learning Extended Environment: Connecting Anywhere People And 
Organizations  
 
Piergiuseppe Ellerani 
University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy 
email: piergiuseppe.ellerani@unisalento.it 
Carlo Alberto Tenchini 
Sharp Electronic Italia 
Milano, Italy 
email: carlo.tenchini@sharp.eu 
Daniele Barca 
Middle School “IC3 Mattarella” 
Modena, Italy 
email: daniele.barca@alice.it
 
 
Abstract— The paper presents a case study aimed to realize a 
Smart Learning Environment, using an integration of 
technologies (digital environment, 
videoconference, 
new 
generation of interactive whiteboard) to sustain a Smart 
School. Data were collected with quantitative and qualitative 
method. Teachers and students are realizing a digital course 
for data base library school content. 
Keywords-smart 
school; 
whiteboard 
device; 
personal 
learning devices; videoconference. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION. SMART LEARNING AND 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
The outcomes of international research on student 
learning [1][2] and teachers' practices and beliefs [3]-[5], 
have supported the debate on the need to raise the quality of 
schools.  Nations policies have introduced reforms to better 
prepare students for the changed conditions of the 21st 
century [6].  
The outcomes on the use of technologies show how the 
fundamental variable to increase the potential of learning is 
strictly related to transfer the student control over the 
learning 
process. 
Consequently, 
“how” 
people 
use 
technologies in learning contexts, becomes much more 
important than the technologies themselves. As Hattie 
demonstrated [3][7][8], the processes based on peer 
tutoring, the use of technologies to construct complex 
artifacts, or even the interaction organized by teaching 
methods, are those which better produce evidence learning.  
Research on students' learning processes has led to 
highlight how: 
 
the principle that learning is not effectively a pure 
solitary activity, but it is a social action distributed 
in the context [7]; that the individual construction of 
knowledge takes place through processes of 
interaction, 
negotiation 
of 
meanings 
and 
cooperation with others [9]-[14]. Consequently, this 
perspective requires coherent methods of organizing 
and conducting the class [7]; 
 
the principle of cognitive modification [15][16] is 
the result of a process of continuous interaction with 
artifacts, people and problems placed in the context, 
where the imitative processes [17][18] and 
“embodied” simulation [19][20] make evident new 
frontiers for 
more effective procedural and 
developmental 
learning 
(both 
cognitive 
and 
emotional) [21]; 
 
the principle of inference of the environment/ 
context on learning allows to form “classes” 
competencies [10] such as creativity and innovation, 
problem solving and learning to learn [22]-[24]. The 
new media (and perhaps more significantly the web-
based "social media") have a huge impact on the 
worldviews of individuals and groups; they also 
constitute forms of social belonging independent of 
geographic proximity [25].  
Learning contexts are defined as inclusive of digital 
technologies 
[26]-[28] 
and 
are 
composed 
of 
a 
physical/spatial and digital dimension in which students 
realize their activities, even their tools, documents and other 
artifacts. In this sense technology can support deep learning 
in many ways, developing extensive learning contexts in 
which technologies are part of the process development. In 
particular it is shown how the interactive use of video is one 
of 
the 
forms 
that 
most 
involve 
deep 
learning. 
TALIS-OECD 
[3][4] 
contrarily 
shows 
a 
moderate 
percentage of teachers who orientate their practices in 
coherence with the research, through paths of exchange and 
cooperation with colleagues and the world of pedagogical 
reflection.  
One aspect is therefore that teachers are involved in 
skills training: organizing learning and skills development, 
leading classes with more effective and innovative 
methodologies [10][29] in increasingly active learning 
environments; and engaging is therefore a perspective that 
requires the extension and dissemination of good practices 
widely spread. 
The continuous training of teachers should therefore 
become a dynamic and transformative process of 
professional action, also modifying both the organization of 
schools - understood as a set of interdependent systems - 
and the forms of participation in the improvement of 
institutions, capable of modifying the adaptation matured, 
with a new update culture.  
Scaffolding systems for continuous training thought as 
transformation and progress highlighted and sustained by 
research [30]-[34] can be an effective reference for 
innovation and quality of schools. It is therefore necessary 
to change the convictions rooted in teachers, expanding their 
repertoire of thought, perspectives, teaching methodologies; 
on the other hand to constantly develop and update a 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

professional knowledge base on teaching and learning, 
starting from the research evidence, on the provisions of the 
adult mind, on the “in-action” connected research [29].  
Hattie meta-analysis [7] also highlights some features of 
today's professional learning communities, increasingly 
considered an essential tool for establishing collaborative 
relationships and building capacity for change within the 
educational institution [35]-[38]. At the same time, 
professional learning communities become a way for 
schools to reduce isolation and learn together how to create 
sustainable change, while also measuring the achievement 
of improvement goals [35][37][39][40]. A professional 
learning community can be therefore defined as the set 
consisting of teachers, managers, administrative staff, staff, 
facilitators, researchers who share work to improve and 
progressively develop student learning [41]-[43]. It creates 
innovative, effective and powerful learning environments 
for the training of everyone's operations, to train 
empowerment and agency, to pursue personal, social and 
community goals.  
The structure of the paper is following: in section 2 is 
described the concept of Smart School and the technology 
as devices. In section 3 we present the hypothesis,  the 
research design and the people involved. In section 4 the 
activities designed and realized using devices to evaluate the 
case study. In section 5 we present some, and work-in 
progress, conclusions.  
II. 
SMART LEARNING AND SCHOOLS 
In order to ensure that learners are provided a relevant 
and engaging learning experience, it is becoming 
increasingly vital for such Smart Learning Environments 
(SLE) to be implemented in secondary and tertiary learning 
institutions. A SLE is one that features the use of innovative 
technologies and elements that allow greater flexibility, 
adaptation, engagement, and feedback for the learner [44]. 
All in all, these technological advancements are potentially 
revolutionary for the way teachers and learners interact, 
paving the way for more learner-centered learning 
environments. The Smart School is a school that is designed 
for providing a standard virtual teaching learning 
environment and as well as improving school management 
system [45]. The Smart School opens out opportunities and 
helps all pupils to develop digital skills, creativity and 
learning to learn. The Smart Schools principles are based on 
the two guiding beliefs: 
 
learning is a consequence of thinking, and good 
thinking is learnable by all students; 
 
learning should include deep understanding, which 
involves the flexible, active use of knowledge. 
These principles provide a structure for schools with a 
vision of a learning community that is steeped in thinking 
and deep understanding, that engenders respect for all its 
members, and that produces students ready to face the world 
as responsible, thinking members of a diverse society.  
Jen [46] declared five main goals as (1) to provide all-
round development of the individual, (2) to provide 
opportunities to enhance individual strengths and abilities, 
(3) to produce a thinking and technology-literate workforce, 
(4) to democratize education, and (5) to increase 
participation of stakeholders. An appropriate mix of 
learning strategies is allowed for students to achieve basic 
competencies and to promote a holistic development. Thus, 
student-centered learning turns out to be the basis for 
designing learning activities. High-technology media, such 
as computer-based teaching-learning materials, the internet, 
and the World Wide Web, are integrated into conventional 
media. In order to guarantee the success of the conceptual 
model of teaching and learning, the Smart Schools require 
effective and efficient management of the resources and 
processes to support teaching and learning. 
III. 
HYPOTHESIS AND RESEARCH DESIGN 
The case study was investigated in an Italian Middle School 
(IC3) placed in the City of Modena, composed of 4 different 
sites distant from each other up to 10 miles (from the central 
site). Through the Sharp Anywhere. Sharp Anywhere 
integrates video conferencing with the flexibility of video 
calling, eliminates the need for meeting rooms and 
dedicated audio video equipment. It works with a cloud 
technology. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. System design: Schools connections and devices. 
 
Sharp has provided 5 BigPad. Sharp BigPad enables the 
following 
interactive 
functions 
and 
mobile 
devices 
connected via wireless LAN: - sharing of onscreen content; 
- transfer of files; - interactive onscreen writing and 
drawing; - remote control from mobile devices. 
 placed in the classes of different school sites. Mobile 
BigPad are used in multiple classes Figure 1).  
Curricular teachers (n=12) were involved in the disciplinary 
areas of L1 (Italian Language), Science and Mathematics, 
Technology and Art. The wireless technology of the BigPad 
allowed the connection of student devices (smartphone and 
IPad) with simultaneous sending of photos and digital 
artifacts of the student’s group work. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

The Smart School system based on the integration of the 
tools of GoogleSuite, Sharp Anywhere and Sharp Bigpad 
was investigated to verify:  
 
the development of curriculum in soft skills 
(creativity, teamwork, sense of initiative);  
 
the 
methods 
of 
conducting 
the 
learning 
environment;  
 
the development of the idea of professional 
community and new organizational models of 
School. 
TABLE I. RESEARCH AND METHODOLOGY DESIGN. 
People 
Age 
Meth. 
Area 
Quant. 
Tools 
Quali. 
Tools 
Pre 
Post 
Post 
Stud. 
9-12 
Exp.  
n. 96 
Creativity 
Teamwork 
Self-
Direction 
Questionnaire 
(before/after 
lessons 
with 
Sharp 
BigPad 
and 
Sharp 
Anywhere) 
Focus 
Group 
Stud. 
9 -12 
Trad. 
n. 85 
Creativity 
Teamwork 
Self-
Direction 
Questionnaire 
(before/after 
traditional 
lessons) 
- 
Teach. 
26-58 
Exp.  
n.12 
Science 
Mathematic 
Italian 
language 
Art 
and 
Technology 
Questionnaire 
(before/after 
lessons 
with 
Sharp 
BigPad 
and design with 
Sharp 
Anywhere) 
Focus 
Group 
Res. 
Team 
 
n. 3 
Pedagogy 
Statistic 
 
 
 
The classes involved were five in the experimentation 
method, and five in control. Mixed method instruments by 
teachers and students were used: quantitative data were 
collected through the initial and final questionnaire at the 
experimental phase (pre-post test) (Table I). For teachers, 
based on Talis survey, for students, based on European 
Entrepreneurship 
Competence 
Framework 
(creativity, 
teamwork, self-direction). Qualitative data were collected 
through focus groups and in-depth interviews with teachers 
and students. A research blog for teachers is used as well. 
IV. 
ACTIVITIES  
The activities carried out are divided into sex phases: 
 
phase I: teacher training on Sharp Anywhere and 
Sharp BigPad (September / October 2017),  
 
phase II: planning of teaching activities to be 
carried out in class and planning of teacher support 
activities (November 2017 / January 2018),  
 
phase III: initial data collection in the involved 
classes (experimental and control) and teachers 
(February 2018),  
 
phase IV: implementation of teaching activities in 
classes with Sharp Anywhere and Sharp BigPad 
and the start of supervision activities for teachers ( 
February / May 2018), 
 
phase V: final data collection in the involved 
classes (experimental and control) and teachers 
(June 2018), phase  
 
phase VI: dissemination of good practice outcomes, 
blueprints 
for 
the 
policies, 
generalization 
hypothesis (Table II; Table III). 
TABLE II. PHASES OF ACTIVITIES. 
Phase 
N. 
Sept. 
2017 
Oct. 
2017 
Nov. 
2017 
Dec. 
2017 
Gen. 
2018 
Feb. - May 
2018 
1 
Teacher 
training 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Planning teacher 
activities 
Planning teacher 
supervision 
 
3 
 
 
Pre test 
4 
 
 
Experimental 
activities with 
classes Sharp 
Bigpad + Anywhere 
TABLE III. PHASES OF ACTIVITIES. 
Phase 
N. 
Feb. – May 
2018 
June 
2018 
July 
2018 
Aug. 
2018 
4 
Teacher 
supervision Sharp 
Anywhere 
 
 
 
5 
 
Post 
test 
 
 
6 
 
 
Dissemination 
 
In Phase II and IV, Sharp Anywhere and Sharp BigPad 
have been used for:  
A. Teachers 
 
Connection between different sites to didactic 
design;  
 
Connection between teachers and experts outside 
the school;  
 
Connection for focus groups and supervision of 
experimental activities. 
 
Focus Group (FG) is a quality research methodology. The 
FG is a group interview (with max 10-12 students or 
teachers) which the researcher asks questions to verify a 
hypothesis 
studied 
with 
quantitative 
methods 
(questionnaires. Usually the FG is played in face-to-face. 
The Sharp Anywhwere technology has allowed to 
experiment the FG effectiveness in digital setting. 
 
 
Registration 
and 
repository 
the 
video 
conferencing in Sharp Anywhere cloud; 
 
Creation of videoproducts for the continuous 
training of school teachers and the development 
of professional communities.  
B. Students 
 
Connection between different classes of sites to 
present learning products; 
 
Connection between different classes of sites 
for peer tutoring;  
 
Connection with classes from other schools for 
peer tutoring;  
 
Registration and repository video conferencing 
of Sharp Anywhere cloud. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Students – as result of cooperative learning work – realized 
videos to present a topic of lesson at peer students in other 
site schools (involved into the experimentation). The 
presentation by BigPad was the opportunity to save the 
videos into the Anywhere cloud. In this way every school – 
students and teachers – can “re-use” the videos for learning 
any time and any where.     
  
 
Realization of videoproducts of subjects studied 
for school database;  
 
Evaluation of skills based on authentic 
products.  
C. Schools organization 
 
Connection 
between 
different 
sites 
for 
organizational meetings;  
 
Connection for formal and informal training 
and information groups;  
 
Connection for widespread laboratories; 
 
Connection for parallel classes;  
 
Connection for staff meetings, team; 
 
Connection with experts for training and 
consulting;  
 
Connection with schools in the training district; 
Connection for academic lessons. 
 
Some interesting activities were realized with integration of 
devices. The students working in small groups to produce 
some artifacts – conceptual maps, new words, concept 
definition, problem solution – to demonstrate their 
understanding. With their personal devices, students send 
the artifacts via wireless on the BigPad and teacher can 
simultaneously compare the works, debate with classroom, 
improving deep understanding. The BigPad connected with 
Sharp Anywhere, saves the students works into “Anywhere 
cloud” and, in this way, teachers (and schools) build a data 
base of artifacts (categorized by topic or area of learning). 
Comparing understanding “just-in-time” and simultaneously 
– using personal and school devices – improve student’s 
competencies, motivation and engagement (this is teacher 
observation and consideration during the focus group).    
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Through the Sharp Anywhere connection monitoring 
system, a first partial data shows that the Smart School used 
60 hours of teacher-time involved in organizational and 
training activities. Considering that the time for each teacher 
dedicated from the work contract to the didactic planning is 
30 hours, a first result in the Smart School shows how there 
has been an extension of the planning time with a reduction 
of the movement time from site to site (Figure 2).  
As a consequence, the School technological devices 
increases the availability of teachers, an optimization of 
work-time and a possible higher quality of school time.  
A 
second 
consideration 
shows 
how 
on-demand 
supervision activities were possible - anywhere and anytime 
with 
personal 
devices 
(smartphones 
and 
IPads) 
- 
strengthening the idea of the professional learning 
community, and outlining the figure of the in-service 
educational supervisor. This aspect answers the questions 
emerging in modern teacher education related at the quality 
of teaching and learning [47][48].  
 
Figure 2. Using devices: effects on teacher into 
experimental design. 
A third consideration concerns the extension of the 
possibilities for the qualitative research methodology: it is 
now possible in the Smart School the realization of quality 
focus groups through the integration of tools, such as Sharp 
Anywhere and Sharp BigPad, with digital environments for 
research and continuing education. 
A fourth consideration is emerging from focus groups 
(Table IV): teachers refer the engagement in new didactic 
methodology and peer collaboration to sustain a professional 
learning community. The education video production during 
video supervision – with Sharp Anywhere and Sharp BigPad 
– is a “cloud resource” to enhance competencies and lifelong 
learner profile. Cooperative Learning method is used to 
engage students into project work and to delivery with 
wireless line, by smartphones, products and learning objects 
into BigPad.  
TABLE IV. RESULTS OF TEACHER FOCUS GROUP. 
Strengths  
Weaknesses  
To use personal devices for learning 
Student motivation 
Student engagement 
Student cooperation 
Student deep understanding  
Student creativity 
Teacher support (supervision) 
Improving quality of pedagogy  
Improving school climate and 
quality of teacher work 
Short time of experience 
Few colleagues involved 
 
Opportunities  
Threats  
To realize video for learning 
To realize school cloud for learning 
To realize opportunity to share 
knowledge 
To build Smart School  
No continuity of experience 
Opposition to change school 
organization 
Opposition to culture of innovation  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] OECD-PISA, “The PISA 2012 Technical Report”, Paris, 
OECD Publishing, 2014.  
[2] IEA, “TIMSS and PIRLS 2011: Relationships Among 
Reading, Mathematics, and Science Achievement at the 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Fourth Grade - Implications for Early Learning”, Chestnut 
Hill, MA, TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center, 
Boston College, 2013. 
[3] OECD-TALIS, “TALIS 2103 Results. An International 
Perspective on Teaching and Learning”, Paris, OECD, 2013. 
[4] OECD-TALIS, “Creating Effective Teaching and Learning 
Environments: First Results from TALIS”, Paris, OECD 
Publishing, 2009. 
[5] Eurydice, “The Teaching Profession in Europe: Practices, 
Perceptions, and Policies”, Eurydice Report, Luxembourg, 
European Union Publications, 2015. 
[6] OECD, “Education at a Glance 2014”, Paris, OECD 
Publishing, 2014. 
[7] J. A. C. Hattie, “Visible learning. A synthesis of over 800 
meta analyses relating to achievement”, New York, 
Routledge, 2009. 
[8] J. A. C. Hattie, “Visible learning for teachers”, New York, 
Routledge, 2012.  
[9] J. D. Bransford, A. L. Brown and R. R. Cocking, “How 
people learn: brain, mind, experience, and school”, 
Washington, DC, National Academy Press, 2000. 
[10] F. Benavides, H. Dumont, and D. Instance, “Innovative 
learning environment”. In CERI-OCSE, Innovating to Learn. 
Learning to Innovate. Bologna: Il Mulino, 2011. 
[11] Y. Engeström, “Expansive learning at work: Toward an 
activity theoretical reconceptualization”, Journal of Education 
and Work, vol. 14, pp. 133-156, 2001. 
[12] L. S. Vygotskij, “Thought and language”, Cambridge, MIT, 
1962. 
[13] J. Bruner, “The culture of education”, New York, Norton, 
1966. 
[14] A. L. Brown, “The Advancement of Learning”, Educational 
Researcher, vol. 23, n.8, pp. 4-12, 1994. 
[15] U. Margiotta, “The structure of cognitive modificability: a 
new deal for education in the XXI Age”, in (Ed.) U. 
Margiotta, “The changing mind. From Neural plasticity to 
cognitive modifiability”, Lecce, Pensa Multimedia, 2011. 
[16] R. Feuerstein, “The Theory of Structural Cognitive 
Modifiability”, in (Ed.) B. Presseisen, “Learning and thinking 
styles: 
classroom 
instruction”, 
Washington, 
National 
Education Association Rsearch for Better Schools, 1990. 
[17] G. Rizzolatti and C. Sinigaglia, “I know what you do. The 
brain 
that 
acts 
and 
the 
mirror 
neurons”, 
Milano, 
RaffaelloCortina, 2006. 
[18] L. Craighero, “The mirrors neurons”, Bologna: Il Mulino, 
2010. 
[19] V. Gallese, “At the origin of the interaction with others. 
Society and individuals”, vol. 35, n. 2, pp. 115-124, 2009. 
[20] G. Lakoff and R. E. Nunez, “Where does math come from? 
How the embodied mind originates the mathematics”, Torino, 
Bollati Boringhieri, 2005. 
[21] L. Cozolino, “The social brain. Neurosciences of human 
relationships”, Milano, Raffaello Cortina, 2008. 
[22] OECD-CERI, “The nature of learning: Using research to 
inspire practice”, p. 69-90, Paris, OECD Publishing, 2010.  
[23] Europe Union, “Efficiency and equity in European education 
and 
training 
systems”, 
Bruxelles, 
Comunicazione 
commissione, 2006. 
[24] DeSeCo-OECD, “DeSeCo: theoretical and comceptual 
foundations. Strategy paper”, Neushatel, OECD Publishing, 
2002. 
[25] J. Huber and P. Mompoint-Guillard, “Teacher education for 
change”, Strasburgo, Consiglio d’Europa, 2011. 
[26] I. Zitter and A. Hoeve, “Hybrid Learning Environments: 
Merging Learning and Work Processes to Facilitate 
Knowledge Integration and Transitions”, OECD Education 
Working Papers, No. 81, OECD Publishing, 2012. 
[27] J. Manninen et al., “Environments that Support Learning: An 
Introduction to the Learning Environments Approach”, 
Finnish National Board of Education, Helsinki, 2007. 
[28] P. Goodyear, “Effective Networked Learning in Higher 
Education: Notes and Guidelines”, Lancaster University, 
2001. 
[29] A. Schleicher, (Ed.) “Preparing Teachers and Developing 
School Leaders for the 21st Century”, Brussels,  OECD 
Publishing, 2012. 
[30] J. Mezirow, “Transformative dimensions of adult learning”, 
San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, 1991. 
[31] D. A. Kolb, “Experiential Learning: experience as the source 
of learning and development”, New J, Prentice-Hall, 1984. 
[32] M. Knowles, “Andragogy in Action”, San Francisco, Jossey-
Bass, 1994 
[33] D. Schön, “The reflective practitioner”, NY, Basic Books, 
1993. 
[34] L. Darling-Hammond, R. Chung Wei, A. Andree, R. 
Richardson and S. Orphanos, “Professional Learning in the 
learning profession”, Dallas, TX, NSDC, 2009. 
[35] R. DuFour and R. Eaker, “Professional learning communities 
at work: Best practices for enhancing student achievement”, 
Bloomington, IA, National Education Service, 1998. 
[36] M. A. Fullen and J. A. Catt, J.A., “Soil Management: 
Problems and Solutions”, London, Arnold, 2004. 
[37] S. M. Hord, “Professional learning communities: An 
overview”, In (Ed.) S. Hord “Learning together, leading 
together: Changing schools through professional learning 
communities”, New York, Teachers College Press, 2004.  
[38] P. M. Senge, et al. “Schools that learn: A fifth discipline 
fieldbook for educators, parents and everyone who cares 
about education”, New York, Currency-Doubleday, 2000. 
[39] M. Morrisey, “Professional learning communities: An 
ongoing exploration”, Austin, TX, Southwest Educational 
Development Laboratory, 2000. 
[40] C. Murphy and D. Lick, “Whole-faculty study groups: 
Creating professional learning communities that target student 
learning”, Thousand Oaks, CA, Corwin Press, 2004.  
[41] S. M. Hord and W. A. Sommers, Leading Professional 
Learning Community, Thousands Oaks, CA, CorvinPress, 
2008. 
[42] R. DuFour, “Schools as Learning Communities”, Educational 
Leadership, vol.61, n.8, pp. 6-11, 2004. 
[43] S. 
Zepeda, 
“Professional 
development: 
what 
works, 
Larchmont, NY, Eye on Education, 2008. 
[44] J. M. Spector, “Conceptualizing the emerging field of smart 
learning environments”, Smart Learning Environments, vol. 
1, 
n.2, 
2014, 
http://slejournal.springeropen.com/articles/ 
10.1186/s40561-014-0002-7 (retrieved: may, 2018). 
[45] UNESCO, “In Pursuit of Smart Learning Environments for 
the 21st Century”, In-Progress Reflection, n.12, July, 2017.  
[46] I. Chin and J.  Chia-Sen “Application of the Concepts of the 
Smart Schools of Malaysia to Taiwan’s Technology 
Education” https://www.iteea.org/File.aspx?id=80246&v=ba 
6064fd (retrieved: may, 2018). 
[47] L. Darling-Hammond, “Strengthening Clinical Preparation: 
The Holy Grail of Teacher Education”, Peabody Journal of 
Education, vol. 89, n. 4, pp. 547-561, 2014. 
[48] COM, “Supporting the Teaching Professions for Better 
Learning Outcomes”, Brussels, European Commission, 2013.
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

