Smart Grid Services Framework for Building Management Systems
Anna Medve, Attila Magyar, Katalin Tömördi
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems
University of Pannonia
Veszprém, Hungary
e-mails: {medve.anna, attila.magyar, tomordi.katalin}@virt.uni-pannon.hu
Abstract— We present a research position for mapping use
cases of smart grid services from their textual descriptions
based on reference models in order to obtain a reusable
modeling framework as a basis to analyze and evaluate
alternative implementations of a smart grid service. We start
from use cases’ textual descriptions based on smart grid
architecture from International Telecommunication Union
Focus Group on Smart Grid, and goal descriptions based on
European Conceptual Model for the Smart Grid. We apply our
previous results on goals and scenarios modeling methodology.
A case study of building energy management systems services
from the Customer domain is given. We work to complete the
proposed framework with all detailed use cases for the
Customer domain’s functions, and to present scenarios on
reusing this framework for transition of information system
from an existing legacy architecture to a new smart grid-
driven architecture.
Keywords-smart grid reference models; smart grid services;
BEMS; use case models; goals and scenarios; BUSITEV; URN.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Smart Grid is a complex system of systems, as well a
network of information networks, for which a common
understanding of its major building blocks and how they
interrelate are broadly shared. Smart Grid [1] services are
related
to
energy
bulk
and
distribution
enabled
by
information technologies, whose objectives are the consump-
tion-oriented
generation
and
the
generation-oriented
consumption. Smart grids evolve by collaborative work of
many organizations among financial options of distributed
energy generation and consumption, in order to promote
energy efficiency with quality and security of supply and
safety.
Our focus is on goals and strategies of smart grid
services, and on functional modeling them for effectiveness
of their management at the customer side. We follow goal
and scenario modeling technologies for use case modeling to
obtain
functional
description
of
strategies,
processes,
environment properties which needed to support integrated
change with simulation of goal satisfaction and risks
reduction analysis.
To develop or to
understand smart grid
services,
developers need to model and analyze interactions between
those systems, which are involved in exchanges of goods and
services.
The
International
Telecommunication
Union
Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) Focus
Group on Smart Grid (FG Smart Grid) published the smart
grids architecture and services use cases [3] based on smart
grid standards issued by collaboration of international
companies and institutes [1], [2].
The goals and strategies in order to promote energy
efficiency, we find in the European Community’s Smart Grid
Energy Efficiency Directives (2006/32/EC, 2009/72-73 EC)
[1],
which
regulates
the
dynamical
interoperation
for
decentralized energy distribution networks cooperation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the smart grids viewpoints, Section III describes
our research position for goal and functional modeling of
smart grid’ uses cases. Section IV addresses the related
works. The acknowledgement and conclusions close the
article.
II.
SMART GRIDS VIEWPOINTS AND APPLICATIONS
The Smart Grid is a complex system of systems. At
present, there are many activities running in parallel which
are related to the field of smart grid standardization, with
some
overlapping
and
duplication
of
activity
and
opportunities for learning from the work of others. The main
initiatives are presented in [1] from which we follow the
Smart Grids European Technology Platform [1] and ITU-T
FG
Smart
Grid
[2]
reference
models.
The
key
of
standardization is interoperability, which can be achieved
through standardization of communications in terms of
interfaces, signals, messages and workflows.
A.
Smart Grids European Technology Platform
(2006/32/EC, 2009/72-73 EC)
The European Technology Platform (ETP) Smart Grids
[1] was set up in 2005 to create a joint vision for the
European networks of 2020 and beyond. It has identified
clear objectives and proposes strategy for the Smart Grids
vision about Europe’s electricity networks that must be
flexible, accessible, reliable, and economic.
ETP identified the services that Smart Grids are expected
to offer to all electrical network users in Europe over time.
The
implementation
of
the
services
allowed
by
functionalities must be deployed and assessed at National
level, taking also into account the initial status of networks
and their “smartness”.
ETP for SGs starting from Community objectives for
SGs has introduced 6 groups for high-level services of SG
with 33 functionalities, which are detailed for their intra
actions with SG infrastructure and actors. An important tool
is the ETP M/441 mandate for smart metering [1] to improve
information and services to customers and enable customers
to better manage their consumption.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Smart grids deployment will be a continuous learning
process. The acceptability of new services by the customers
is a main concern. ETP recommends encouraging member
states to address communication and education of citizens
involving all types of customers: industrial, commercial and
residential consumers. To include residential customers in
the energy efficiency improvement process, smart metering
systems are a key factor with the functionalities as defined in
mandate M/441.
B.
NIST Smart Grid Conceptual Reference Model
The National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) coordinates the development of a framework of
standards for Smart Grid [2] to propose use cases and
architectures for the SG information networks and identified
industry. The NIST Smart Grid Conceptual Reference Model
identifies
seven
domains
to
analyze
use
cases:
bulk
generation, transmission, distribution, markets, operations,
service provider, and customer. Main stakeholders are
Consumers (residential, commercial, and industrial), Electric
transportation
and
utility
stakeholders,
Electricity
and
financial market traders, Information and communication
technology
(ICT)
Service
Providers
and
Application
developers, and others.
C.
ITU-T Reference Models for Smart Grid
ITU-T Focus Group on Smart Grid (ITU-T FGSG) works
for defining clear the common objectives of a Smart Grid,
and to analyze the ICT perspective and identify requirements
and architectural considerations.
The ITU-T FGSG architectural view [2] highlights the
fact that Smart Grids are formations through ICT, and
expands the NIST framework with communication domain,
defining the SG architecture as formed from Energy and
Service/Application planes according to their functionalities,
and controlled and connected by Communication plane
functionalities. ITU-T FGSG introduced more than 90
power-related and communication–related definitions and
more than 60 abbreviations, for defining a smart grid
architecturally,
starting
from
the
NIST
Conceptual
Reference Model [3]. FGSG defined 12 high level and 82
detailed level use cases [2].
III.
SMART GRID SERVICES AND APPLICATIONS
MODELLING FRAMEWORK BASED ON SG
REFERENCE MODELS
We present our research position on a reusable modeling
framework
for
Smart
Grid
Services and
Applications
(SGSAMF). We implemented the framework for Smart Grid
(SG) customer services use cases to provide benefits for the
configuration management of SG systems. The underlying
MDE methodology applied it pushes people to think about
the actual energy usage state, and to concentrate on outcomes
and results before an eventually implementation of changes
of management and infrastructure. This helps decision
makers to invest accordingly in information systems and
other aspects of changes. In this paper we provide case study
for building energy management services use cases.
The
BUsinesS
and
IT
EVolution
(BUSITEV)
methodology [4][6] we applied to provide tools and concepts
[7-10] for stakeholders to construct and maintain their proper
Smart Grid Services and Applications Modeling Framework
(SGSAMF) to serve as a basis:
•
to analyze and evaluate alternative implementations
of an SG architecture;
•
to support planning for transition from an existing
legacy architecture to a new smart grid architecture.
A.
Generic goal models for EC TFGS high-level services
and functionalities
Conforming to the European Conceptual Model for the
Smart Grid, each stakeholder today has a different view on
smart grids. Our work is related to customers’ view.
Our focus is on functionalities from E and F groups
defined for consumer related services numbered from 20 to
33 [1]. Fig. 1 shows a Goal-oriented Requirements Language
(GRL) [7] partial model of goal-oriented requirements
specification
for
EC
TFSG
high-level
services
and
functionalities. The detailed services for F group of high-
level services are modeled as actors, goals, soft goals
decomposed on their realizations by tasks and resources.
Relationships
used
are
contributions,
logical
operators
(And/Or). For modeling intents the content of this goal graph
is captured from EC TFSG Studies Group 1 report at pages
6-19 in [1], which are textual description of objectives and
high-level functionalities, and detailed services for SGs.
B.
Generic models for Building Energy Management
System (BEMS)
Our focus is on the 16 detailed use cases of Customer
domain
defined
by
ITU-T
FGSG,
which
cover
the
functionalities of Building Energy Management System
(BEMS).
BEMS is a system technology for managing the building
facility and component operation focused specially on
energy improved by sensing, metering and controlling
devices based on ICT hardware and software technology [2].
The Customer system is technically formed by in‐home
displays (IHD), programmable communicating thermostats
(PCT), direct load control devices (DLC), and web portals.
Information
technologies
provide
customers
with
the
opportunity to manage their electricity consumption by
providing them with data about, their electricity consumption
and costs through mobile devices, IHDs, and web portals.
Control technologies provide customers with the opportunity
to manage their electricity consumption through load control
devices, such as PCTs. Smart meters are fundamental
components
which
allow
electricity
consumption
information to be captured, stored, and reported in intervals
of 60 minutes or less to both utilities and their customers.
Smart energy services in building domain are supported
by introducing the smart grid infrastructure technology into
building domain and it configuring for communication with
the
BEMS
system
technology.
The
in-building
SG
infrastructure includes detailed metering, detailed electricity
control, Energy Service Interface (ESI), Distributed Energy
Resource (DER) and electric vehicle (EV).
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

C.
BEMS functionalities
BEMS manages electric usage for building operation and
maintenance by dynamic pricing information transfer to
BEMS through ESI. When external public grid needs to
reduce demand by consumer with reaching to peak demand
is realized a DR (demand signal) message transfer to BEMS
through ESI, and BEMS controls the usage conform BEMS
energy management algorithm and policy. Based on the DR
message and/or dynamic pricing information from utility
BEMS is able to control any energy consuming component
intra building area through ESI. Based on some information
including dynamic pricing message and/or DR message from
utility, BEMS is able to control charge/discharge of EV’s.
Fig. 2 shows the BEMS processes supported by SG
services modelled into Use Case Maps (UCM) [7] scenario-
based functional model. The model elements are expressed
with usual basic workflow signs and the elements required to
structure the business process model with regards to
information passing and modularity in root-map and sub-
map diagrams. The process flow takes place along directed
path. Loops and circles are allowed in the path direction. We
can provide their consistency with structure division by stubs
(diamond), and with conditions during validation.
The textual requirements which cannot be built in
functions, activities or conditions are collected by categories
and
are
shown
as
notes
with
reference
to
stubs.
Organizational
cross-cutting
events
are
highlighted
by
bounded path with components (rectangle), which model
actors and divisions. For quality expectations we can give
idioms
for
timing,
pairing,
constraints,
limits
and
asynchrony-synchronic
functions
suported
by
User
Requirements Notation (URN) tools [8].
The checking of the wellness of processes and concrete
use cases take place with simulations in the form of scenarios
supported by URN technologies [7-9].
Textual description of use cases is from the pages 53-57
in Appendix III. Use Cases for Building Management in
“Use Cases for Smart Grids” from Smart-O-31Rev.7, ITU-T
FGSG, Geneva, 18-21 December 2011, published at [2].
IV.
RELATED WORK
Smart
Grid-enabled
applications
present
several
examples of use cases to include real-time consumer control
over energy usage; controls for large-scale energy storage;
mobile billing for charging electric vehicles. Görbe et al.
[11] propose user related services to apply EV batteries.
Wang et al. [14] propose energy management modeling
based on interpreted Petri Nets formalism for smart grid
communication between buildings and public grid. Peruzzini
et al. [13] propose an information management model to
make an extended virtual enterprise to provide energy-
control services. Kato et al. [12] provide a Home EMS for
integrating of information and energy which aims to analyze
user behavior to provide life-support services appliances.
Those and other publications not provide help and reusable
models for assessing services from SG reference models.
We applied the BUSITEV Framework [4], [6] based on
MDE technologies and URN [7] mapping techniques that
assure quality and
improve
testability. This
way the
modeling
of
the
business
processes
results
in
the
optimization of the processes and the changes of the
organization at the same time as well as the required
software maintenance for the problem generating change
management. Applying this framework to design of SG
services framework [6] provides to control and assess the
conformance to the standards and reference models.
V.
CONCLUSION
This position paper proposes a Smart Grid Services and
Applications Modeling Framework (SGSAMF). Goals and
scenarios models built following smart grids’ reference
models support valid domain-specific architectural decisions,
and form a traceable library for business process models with
reusable repositories of use cases for SG Customer Domain.
This help decision makers and developers to apply European
Reference
Models
for
SG
and
ITU-T
SG
reference
Architecture [1], [3].
As is shown in Section 3 the smart grids deployment will
be a continuous learning process, when supporting standards
and their appliances are crucial.
Our previous work on BUSITEV Framework [4] offers a
good basis for modeling SG strategies and use cases to
manage services strategies for smart grid developments and
support the stakeholder’s communication
Future work needs to complete the SGSAMF Framework
with all detailed use cases for Customer domain’s functions
to
support
services
management
development.
This
framework
support
end-users
trainings
for
customer
acceptance of smart grids in order to make self-configuration
of their usage strategies in home energy management
systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the financial support of this work by
the Hungarian State and the European Union under the
TÁMOP-4.2.2.A-11/1/ KONV-2012-0072 project.
REFERENCES
[1]
European Commission – European Smart Grids Technology
Platform [retrieved: 05, 2014] http://ec.europa.eu/energy/
gas_electricity/smartgrids/taskforce_en.htm - Deliverables -
ExpertGroup1.
[2]
ITU-T Focus Group on Smart Grids [retrieved: 05, 2014].
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
T/focusgroups/smart/Pages/Default.aspx
[3]
NIST Smart Grid Interoperability Panel (SGIP (2007, 2010)
[retrieved:
05,
2014].
Available
from:
http://www.nist.gov/smartgrid/
[4]
A. Medve, “Model-based Framework for Integrated Evolution
of Business and IT Changes. In S. Hammoudi, M.van
Sinderen, J. Cordeiro (Eds.): ICSOFT 2012 - Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference on Software Paradigm
Trends, Rome, Italy, SciTePress, July 2012, pp. 255-260.
[5]
A.
Medve,
“Model-based
Framework
for
Change
Management and Integrated Development of Information
Security”,
International
Journal
of
Management
&
Information Technology, vol.5/3, Aug. 2013, pp. 586-597.
[6]
A. Medve, A. Magyar, A. Göllei, and K. Tömördi, “Goal-
oriented Modeling of Business Processes for Design of Smart
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Grids Services” Invited OGIK’2013 conference paper for
publishing in SEFBIS 2014/1, in press.
[7]
ITU-T Recommendation “ Z.151 User requirements notation
(URN). Language definition” Geneva, 2011.
[8]
JUCMNav 5.4 URN tool, [retrieved: 05, 2014]. http://j
ucmnav.softwareengineering.ca/ucm/bin/view/UCM/UcmNav
[9]
URN
Virtual
Library,
[retrieved:
05,
2014].
http://www.UseCaseMaps.org/
[10] M. Weiss and D. Amyot, “Business Process Modeling with
URN” International Journal of E-Business Research, vol. 1(3)
Mar. 2005, pp. 63-90.
[11] P. Görbe, A. Magyar, and K. Hangos, “Reduction of power
losses with smart grids fuelled with renewable sources and
applying EV batteries”, J. of Cleaner Production, in press.
[12] T. Kato, H.S.Cho, D. Lee, T. Toyomura, and T. Yamazaki,
“Appliance Recognition from Electric Current Signals for
Information-Energy
Integrated
Network
in
Home
Environments “ Ambient Assistive Health and Wellness
Management, LNCS 5597, pp 150-157, 2009.
[13] M.Peruzzini, M. Germani, A. Papetti, and A. Capitanelli,
“Smart Home Information Management System for Energy-
Efficient
Networks”
Collaborative
Systems
for
Reindustrialization IFIP AICT 408, Oct. 2013, pp 393-401.
[14] B.C.Wang, M. Sechilariu, and F. Locment, “Power flow Petri
Net modelling for building integrated multi-source power
system with smart grid interaction” Elsevier Mathematics and
Computers in Simulation, vol. 91, May 2013, pp. 119–133.
Figure 1.
GRL goal-oriented requirements specification of TFSG high level services and functionalities (F group of ECTF for Smart Grids)
Figure 2.
UCM functional model for BEMS processes supported by SG services defined at ITU-T FGSG
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

