Booth: Digital Audio- and Voice-Based Tools for Inclusion in Education and 
Everyday Life 
 
Zeki Öztürk and David Smida 
THM - University of Applied Sciences 
BliZ - Study Centre for Blind and Visually Impaired Students 
Gießen, Germany 
e-mail: consulting@bliz.thm.de 
 
Abstract—Visually impaired persons encounter considerable 
hurdles in reading text and operating computer programmes. 
Whereas able-sighted people rely on screen output and mouse 
or touchpad navigation, blind and heavily ill-sighted users can 
not. Particularly those who lose eyesight later in life, in many 
countries constituting the majority of visually impaired people, 
find it impossible to learn Braille. These persons therefore have 
to resort to low-threshold, high performance digital aides. The 
Centre for Blind and Disabled Students at Technical University 
Mittelhessen, BliZ, have almost 25 years of experience in 
advising blind students and staff and interested organizations in 
using or providing such aids. This counseling is manufacturer-
independent and based on best-of-breed experience of BliZ staff. 
In a booth at IARIA conference, camera systems, visual screen 
readers, smartphones with a variety of additional software and 
voice output, among others, will be on display for 
demonstration, the participants‘ personal experience, and 
subject-oriented discussion. 
Keywords—Inclusion in Education; Inclusion in Everyday 
Life; Overhead Camera System; Assistive Technologies; blind and 
visually impaired students. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Assistive technologies of students, such as screen 
magnification devices and (mobile) workstations with speech 
output and Braille display, shown in Figure 1 and digital 
accessibility in higher education build an important 
fundament for equal opportunity and inclusive education at 
Universities and University of Applied Sciences [1] [2]. 
Visual impairments are categorized in the following 
three stages: 
• 
mild visual impairment: < 30% vision, 
• 
severe visual impairment < 5% vision and 
• 
blindness < 2% vision. 
The eye with the stronger vision is decisive [3]. The 
showcased auxiliary tools for magnification are utilized by 
severely visually impaired people. No optic corrective 
actions, such as glasses or magnifiers, suffice.  
The electronic magnification aids are also utilized by 
blind people, who still possess a small remaining percentage 
of sight, e.g., Macular Degeneration. However, blind people 
primarily work with refreshable braille display or use audio 
output. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Braille display shows, the content of the source device in 
Braille. 
The 
following 
article 
describes 
how 
Assistive 
Technologies for blind and visually impaired students may be 
used in higher education.  
II. 
DIGITAL AUDIO- AND VOICE-BASED TOOLS 
Among others, the following technologies and devices 
will be shown. In Figure 2, a device for reading text from 
print material and regarding printed pictures and objects can 
be seen. Steering of the camera is achieved by functional 
buttons. Via Bluetooth, the captured picture is displayed on 
the computer screen. Magnification can be up to a hundred 
times using a special software.  
For users with a rest vision, this technology enables to 
read text and see pictures that would otherwise be 
inaccessible in portions and put them together in their 
imagination. With the same technology, also presentations 
and speeches can be recorded and magnified on a spectator’s 
screen. As the technology is intuitive, newly-affected 
visually disabled persons can easily access print and IT 
contents. An advantage over the screen reader is that also 
print materials are made accessible on the one hand and the 
user remains approachable for discussion on the other. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
Figure 2.  Overhead Camera System in Combination with Multitudinal 
Magnification. 
A mobile solution for all everyday situation is provided 
by smartphone apps as seen in Figure 3. Inversion of colours 
does not only allow better conception of shapes and letters, 
but enables also users with color blindness, which with 10% 
of the population is one of the most frequent, albeit slight, 
visual impairments.  
Reading signs, identifying signals of traffic signs, and 
navigation by map augmentation are among the most 
important capabilities for independent life. But also 
sightseeing is possible by considering snapshots on-site and 
deciding which detail will be worth to explore further. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Smartphone with Magnification and Color Inversion 
Technology. 
As pictures can be shared by virtual drives and bluetooth, 
this method is highly inclusive and fosters communication 
with sighted people.  
Moreover, it is more affordable than many other options. 
The devices shown in Figures 2 and 3 are also capable of 
reading text aload with integrated screen readers and voice-
guided commands as already known e.g., from Google 
Assistant or Apple Siri.  
In self-study and non-interactive situations, voice-based 
„reading and writing“ may be one of the most accessible and 
quickest options. It is left to training and personal 
preferences, to which extent the audio channels are used. All 
options have in common, that they are particularly valuable 
to persons for whom magnifying glasses or eyeglasses 
constitute too weak aids. 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper shows that devices, together with a number of 
special software, will be on display on the booth. A visually 
disabled counsellor of the BliZ - Centre for Blind and 
Disabled Students at Technische Hochschule Mittelhessen 
will navigate through various possibilities for addressing ill-
sightedness. Moreover, a specialist for digital accessibility 
will narrate about the implications of training and job 
integration of visually impaired students and personnel. 
Though the pictures in this exposé may at first sight look 
trivial, exploring low-threshold offerings in-depth will enable 
participants of the Special Track to further understand the 
needs and possibilities of digital accessibility for near-blind 
users. On-site counselling for special projects is available on 
request.   
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Voß-Nakkour, L. Rustemeier, M. M. Möhring, A. Deitmer, 
and S. Grimminger, Digitale Barrierefreiheit in der Bildung 
weiter denken: Innovative Impulse aus Praxis, Technik und 
Didaktik, Translation: Thinking ahead to digital accessibility 
in education: Innovative impulses from practice, technology 
and didactics, 1st ed., Universitätsbibliothek Johann Christian 
Senckenberg, Frankfurt, 2023. DOI: https://doi.org/10.21248/ 
gups.62773. 
[2] F. R. Sharma and S. G. Wasson, Speech recognition and 
synthesis tools : Assistive Technology for Physically Disabled 
Persons; International Journal of Computer Science and 
Telecommunications, vol. 3, issue 4, pp. 86-91, April 2012. 
[3] WHO. 
Blindness 
and 
vision 
impairment. 
[Online].  
Available 
from: 
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/blindness-and-visual-impairment 2023.04.06
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

