A Smart Waste Management with Self-Describing
objects
Yann Glouche
Paul Couderc
INRIA, Unit´e de Recherche Rennes-Bretagne-Atlantique
Campus de Beaulieu, Rennes, France
email: {yann.glouche,paul.couderc}@inria.fr
Abstract—Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) is a perva-
sive computing technology that can be used to improve waste
management by providing early automatic identiﬁcation of waste
at bin level. In this paper, we propose a smart bin application
based on information self-contained in tags associated to each
waste item. The wastes are tracked by smart bins using a
RFID-based system without requiring the support of an external
information system. Two crucial features of the selective sorting
process can be improved using this approach. First, the user is
helped in the application of selective sorting. Second, the smart
bin knows its content and can report back to the rest of the
recycling chain.
Keywords-green IT; waste management; recycling chain; RFID;
NFC; QR code.
I. INTRODUCTION
Waste management is an important requirement for eco-
logically sustainable development in many countries. Efﬁcient
sorting of waste is a major issue in today’s society. In Europe,
the consumer society has led to an ever increasing production
of waste [1]. This is a consequence of the consumer’s behavior,
and worsened by packaging. In [2], it is shown, that the
production of waste reaches almost 1.2 kg/day/inhabitant in
western Europe. Paradoxically, the same consumers who are
very sensitive to environmental protection are often reluctant
when it comes to have more land-ﬁling or more incinerators.
Therefore, waste should be disposed and treated properly to
reduce environmental impact.
Waste management services are becoming an important
market, for which the waste collection process is a critical
aspect for the service providers [3], [4]. The main goals are
the following :
1) Reducing waste production
2) Ensuring that wastes are properly disposed
3) Recycling and re-using disposed products
To achieve these goals, regulations and taxes are being im-
plemented to favor virtuous behaviors. In particular, to reduce
the production of waste, there is an increasing trend towards
individual billing, where people are charged depending on
waste quantity disposed.
Selective sorting is another approach, which is often im-
plemented to improve recycling and reduce the environment
impact. The importance of resources and energy saving is
another argument to manufacture recyclable materials.
The sorting of wastes must be implemented as early as pos-
sible in the chain to increase the quantity of valuable recyclable
materials. The use of pervasive computing technology such as
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), and sensor networks
offer a new way to optimize the waste management systems.
In recent years, we have seen increasing adoption of the
radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) technology in many
application domains, such as logistic, inventory, public trans-
portation and security. Essentially, RFID makes it possible to
read digital information from one or several objects using a
reader at proximity of the objects, enabling automatic identi-
ﬁcation, tracking, checking of properties, etc. It is predicated
that RFID could replace barcode and attached to most products
by manufacturers and/or retailers. In this perspective, RFID
would be an important opportunity for waste management, as
RFID tags could be used to improve current waste manage-
ment processes.
This paper proposes a method to improve the quality of
selective sorting. This approach is based on local interactions
to track the waste ﬂow of a city. Each waste is detected by
information properties stored in a RFID tag associated to it. At
each step where wastes are to be processed the RFID tags are
read in order to provide the relevant information. This process
improves the sorting quality of recyclable products. We assume
organic wastes products are not recycled and hence RFID tags
are not attached to it.
Without using an external information system, RFID can
improve the selective sorting quality. The information stored
in each tag associated to a waste can be used to help the user
in the sorting process, and to analyze the content of a bin.
This article is organized as follows. The next section
outlines the architecture used to process the waste ﬂow in
our waste management system. The third section presents
a tagged (or self “describing”) waste approach. The fourth
section details our RFID system to help the individual sorting
of the wastes, while the ﬁfth section discusses some related
works. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
II. WASTE FLOW AND GLOBAL ARCHITECTURE OF THE
WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The waste management architecture we consider is built
around several elements: waste items, domestic bin, trash bags,
collective containers and collecting vehicules. The waste ﬂow
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

starts from the waste items and the domestic bin to end in
the collecting vehicules. We now describe each of step in the
waste ﬂow and how elements interact.
A. Wastes description
The presented management system is based on a self-
describing approach of each waste. We propose to associate
digital information to each waste to ensure an appropriate
treatment of each item. This is a key point of this approach.
In the selective sorting process, the type of a waste item
is identiﬁed by its main component. For example, a plastic
bottle is identiﬁed as a plastic waste, and a cardboard box
is identiﬁed as a cardboard waste. In the presented approach,
each self-describing waste carried digital information about
its type. Other properties of the waste are interesting for the
collection process of the wastes. For example, the weight of
each wastes can be used to estimate if a bin is full, or empty.
Without using measurement sensors, the weight data of a waste
item can be stored in digital information attached to it, making
itself describing.
B. Wastes identiﬁcation
The user is the principal element of the selective sorting
process. Based on this observation, our waste management
system proposes some pervasive assistance for the selective
sorting process. Then, the waste ﬂow presented in Figure 1,
begins at the user level where the trash is generated. As it is
shown on the top of Figure 1, we propose to favor a behavior
of the users: by indicating the appropriate bin for a waste, or
more directly, by opening the lid of the bin corresponding to
the type of the waste.
C. Trash bag
To ensure an appropiate treatment, the knowledge of the
type of wastes contained in a trash bag is crucial. As for the
wastes, it is also possible to associate several properties of
each trash bag: for example, the owner of the trash bag, and
the number of items in the trash bag can also be considered.
In the prototype presented in the next sections, some digital
information about the total weight of the trash bag, its content
and the number of items contained in the trash bag are
physically associated to each trash bag. In this prototype, some
digital information is also associated to identify the owner of
a trash bag: the interest is to identify the waste production
of each consumer. This information deﬁnes an analysis report
associated to each trash bag.
The analysis report stores some important information for
the selective sorting process. The information stored in the
analysis report is to determine whether the trash bag could be
accepted. In Figure 1, this analysis report is transmitted to the
collective container, when a user brings a new trash bag.
D. Collective container
In our waste management system, each collective container
is associated to an embedded computing system which pro-
cesses the data of the analysis report of each trash bag, making
it a smart bin. When a new trash bag is added in a collective
container, the analysis report is read.
Considering the type of wastes contained in a trash bag,
a collective container determines whether it could accept a
trash bag or not. For example, a collective container collecting
only plastic wastes can stay closed when a user brings a
trash bag containing the cardboard objects: it would only be
opened for a bag of plastic wastes. If the trash bag is accepted,
the smart bin stores some information about the content and
about the owner of each trash bag. Then, the content of a
collective container is iteratively updated as a new trash bag
is added. The information stored by the collective container is
transmitted to the truck during the collection by using a local
connection, as it is presented on the bottom of Figure 1. At
this step, the errors of the selective process can get transmitted.
Among the collection of wastes, the highly polluting wastes
which are not placed in the appropriate container, are detected:
for example, it becomes possible to detect a battery placed in
the container dedicated to plastic waste.
Figure 1.
Waste ﬂow and global architecture of the system.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Considering this waste ﬂow, we now present a system based
on RFID technology to implement this waste sorting process.
III. A SMART WASTE APPROACH
The smart waste approach consists of associating a physical
waste with digital information. In our approach, information
associated to a waste can be stored in a QR code or in a
RFID tag memory. Using QR codes does not introduce an
additional cost. However, QR code requires the object to be
in line of sight. Unlike this technology, the RFID tags can
be read without requiring a precise position relative to the
reader during the reading operation. The UHF tags, are used
increasingly in the supply chain management and can be easily
read at a distance of ﬁve meters from the reader antenna. In
this context it is easy to envisage a widespread deployement
of the RFID tags on each manufactured product. This is an
important advantage for using RFID technology in the waste
management domain.
The tagged waste concept uses the data banks memory of
a tag to store information about each waste associated to the
tag. The tag memory is not used to store an identifer of the
waste in an external database, but the information describing
the associated waste is directly stored in the associated tag. A
connection to an external database is not required to have some
information about the smarte wastes. Only a RFID reader is
required to read the information of a smart waste. Figure 2
presents a smart waste composed of a plastic bottle associated
to a RFID tag which stores the data describing the bottle as a
plastic object.
Figure 2.
An example of a smart waste.
A RFID tag contains data banks for the users applications.
The memory size of data banks is limited. For example, an
UHF tag ALIEN ALN-9640 Squiggle shown in Figure 3 can
store 512 bits of information.
Figure 3.
The ALN-9640 Squiggle Alien tag.
In [5], the classiﬁcation of type of wastes is proposed.
In this classiﬁcation, each type of waste is associated to an
identiﬁcation number. Taking examples from everyday life:
• the cardboard is associated to the reference 200101,
• the glass is associated to the reference 200102,
• the plastic is associated to the reference 200139.
The smart waste concept proposes to use the classiﬁcation [5],
to store the reference number representing the type of the
waste in memory blocks of each tag associated to a waste.
As it is shown in Figure 4, our prototype also saves in the
tag memory of each smart waste, the weight (represented by
a measure in grams, encoded in hexadecimal) of the waste
associated to the tag.
Figure 4.
Representation of the information in the tag memory.
The weight encryption presented in Figure 4 is a way to
store directly the description of each waste directly in the
associated tag.
IV. A RFID WASTE SORTING SYSTEM
In this section, we describe the step of the domestic col-
lection of the wastes. The presented approach proposed a
smart bin which produces smart trash bags. At the end of
this waste ﬂow, the collective smart bin is presented.
A. Individual smart bins
At the ﬁrst step of our waste sorting system, the information
contained in the RFID tag associated to each smart waste is
used to help the people discarding an object in the appropriate
container. Here, the main goal is to reduce the sorting errors
when someone does not know which is the right container, or
mistakenly discards the object in the wrong one. It is also help
people to learn the selective sorting rules applied locally. The
smart bin system uses the self-describing approach of smart
wastes to improve the selective sorting quality.
The description of smart wastes is stored in a RFID tag
physically associated to each smart waste. Using a RFID
reader, the smart bin reads the RFID tag attached to each smart
waste to determine the appropiate treatment. Let’s consider the
example of someone who wants to discard a plastic bottle in
a bin. He puts the bottle near a smart bin as it is shown on
Figure 5. When the plastic bottle is in the antenna area, the
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

tag associated to the bottle is detected. The data stored in the
tag is read to determine the appropriate procedure to discard
the bottle. If the bin accepts plastic objects, then the system
opens the lid of the bin. Otherwise, the system keeps closed
the lid of the bin.
Note that it is also possible to control the opening of several
containers using a single RFID reader. Figure 5 presents a
prototype of a selective bin. In this approach, a management
system connected to a RFID reader uses the data stored on
waste tags to open the correct containers. In this example,
when someone want to discard a pastic bottle, the container
for the plastic wastes is opened by the management system.
On Figure 5, only the lid of plastic container will be opened,
all other lids will remain closed.
Figure 5.
A RFID based selective bin.
This approach assumes that the management system tracks
the information of the wastes that are discarded in each
container of a selective bin. When a waste is discarded in
the container, the management system updates the memory
inventory for this type of waste. In this way, undesirable wastes
for a given container are either rejected or tracked, depending
on the choosen policy for handling undesirable wastes.
The scanning of products is done itemwise to ensure a
complete reliable reading process.
Figure 6 presents a prototype of a smart bin based on UHF
RFID tags and a UHF RFID reader which implements this
approach.
Figure 6.
An individual bin using the RFID technology.
UHF RFID technology is already used in the supply chain
management systems. In this context, a UHF tag is placed on
the packaging of each product at the begining of its lifecycle.
Since the UHF tag is already attached on the packaging of
each product for the supply chain management process, we
are interested to reuse the tag and its technology in our smart
bin approach.
B. Use of QR codes technology for a cheaper approach
The passive UHF RFID tags are very cheap, ranging from
$0.25 to $0.40 per tag. However, the price of a UHF RFID
reader is still expensive (around $2000). The current cost of
the RFID reader can be a important issue for widespread
deployment of the RFID technology in the smart bins of
the households. We introduce here a cheaper solution using
QR codes technology that would allow an early adoption of
some of the concepts and applications presented previously.
This approach is based on the NFC sensor embedded in the
smartphone of the users.
This alternative approach assumes that every waste is asso-
ciated to a QR code describing its type. The mobile application
maintains in its memory the current inventory for each type
of collected wastes (for example, 3 inventories if there are 3
types of collected waste). Waste disposal would require users
to scan each item, allowing the mobile application to update
the current inventory for this type of waste in phone’s memory.
Some other waste properties, such as weight, could also be
collected at this step.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

A smartphone is a small, low-cost, mobile computer. More-
over, most smartphones now embedd a camera enabling them
to read bar codes or 2-dimensional QR codes (also known as
“ﬂash codes”). A ﬁrst step in the solution would consist to
scan a QR code (or bar code) associated to a product, and
to use this information for giving a sorting instruction to the
smartphone of the user. As in the approach of the individual
RFID bin presented in section IV-A, it is also important to
report the actions of the user to the waste collecting chain.
On ﬁgure 7, a user wants to drop a plastic bottle. He scans
the QR code associated to bottle. The properties associated to
the bottle are added to the inventory of the plastic container
that is stored in the smartphone’s memory.
Figure 7.
Reading of a QR code associated to a waste.
Obviously, reading QR code is less convenient than RFID
reading. In addition, in this approach the opening of the lid
is also not controlled by an automatic system. However, this
approach allows the deployment of the rest of the chain with-
out requiring the smart bins presented in secion IV-A inside
each home. Beside being cheaper, the mobile application also
provides helpful support to the user regarding the selective
sorting rules in application.
Like the individual bin presented in section IV-A, the man-
agement system of the collective bin tracks wastes properties
as they are disposed. When a smart trash bag associated
to a RFID tag is dropped in the collective container, the
management system updates the collective inventory according
to the new bag’s content. Prevention of sorting errors is also
possible, provided that the user actually ﬁlls his trash bags
according to what he scans.
We don’t rely a network connection on the bin instead it is
the waste bag itself which will store the waste inventory. As
we will see in next section.
C. Smart trash bag
In the individual selective sorting point like a smart bin in
the kitchen of a user, the wastes are not directly deposited in
the container of the bin. Every user uses a trash bag, which
will be dropped to a collective container, or put at the entry of
every households for being collected by the service provider.
The smart trash bag concept is smart in the sense that the
waste management infrastructure (bin, truck) will be able to
check its contents. A smart trash bag is a trash bag associated
to a RFID tag, as it is shown in Figure 8. The tag associated
to a smart trash bag, offers a memory space to store some
information about the contents of the trash bag: type of wastes,
number of items. The RFID tag associated to the smart trash
bag also stores some information about its owner: name,
adress, etc.
Figure 8.
A smart trash bag.
Writing data in the tag associated to the smart trash bag
about its content is very simple: for each new waste added,
it is identiﬁed by reading the waste tag; then, the trash bag
content is updated by writing in the trash bag’s tag with the
updated information about its content. This approach enables
the tracking of trash bag content. Various information can be
reported: the type and quantity of wastes contained in the bag,
total weight of the content, and the interactions between the
wastes. In this approach, it is assumed that the management
system ensures that all the wastes of a container belong to
the same type. Then, it is just necessary to store the expected
type of wastes in the analysis report. The weight of the smart
bag is estimated by considering the weight of each smart waste
contained in it. When a smart waste is added, its weight is read
in the tag memory of the smart waste. The weight of the smart
trash bag is refreshed by adding the weight of this smart waste
to its current weight. The weight is computed when a smart
waste is added. This iterative process uses the information
stored in the tag associated to each smart waste. This approach
is totally autonomous and based on the information stored
in the tags associated to each smart waste. A connection to
an external information system is not required to obtain the
information associated to each waste.
As it is illustred in Figure 9, the information stored in
the tag associated to the smart trash bag, are encoded by a
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

sequence of bytes. The storage of the identiﬁer of the owner
uses three bytes. Using the classiﬁcation of wastes [5], the type
of wastes is stored on six hexadecimal digit: three bytes. The
number of waste items is stored on one byte. The weight (in
gram) of the content is stored on two bytes. Without require
to an external database, the description of trash bags content
is direcly carried by the tag associated to the trash bag.
Figure 9.
Data memory structuration of a smart trash bag.
The individual smart bin approach presented in Sec-
tion IV-A assumes that the management system tracks the
information of the wastes that are discarded in each container
of a selective bin. To this end, the management system updates
the analysis report of a container when a smart waste is added
in the container. The whole report is stored locally in the
memory of a tag associated to the smart trash bags. In the
prototype in Figure 6, the analysis report stores the information
about the owner of the smart trash bag, the type of the content,
the number of wastes, and the weight of the content, using the
data representations shown in Figure 9.
We have also developed an application to store the analysis
report of the content of a trash bag for the cheaper solution
using QR codes technology presented in Section IV-B. In our
prototype, the NFC technology provides this second step of
the solution: NFC-enabled smartphones can interact in close
proximity: in particular, they can read some RFID tags and
also emulate the response of some tags. It is in the former
functionality that we are interested, as it allows a user to write
the required information in a trash bag’s tag using only an NFC
smartphone.
Figure 10.
Writing analysis report operation with a smartphone.
When the bag for a given type is full, the mobile application
is used to write the inventory in the RFID tag attached
to the trash bag (ﬁgure 10). The smartphone uses its NFC
reader/writer for this operation. Then the user closes his
trash bag of plastic wastes. Now, he uses his smartphones
application to write the inventory of the trash bag, in an NFC
tag associated to the bag.
D. Collective smart bins
The collective smart bin collects the smart trash bags
produces by the users. Here, we consider a scenario for the
collective smart bins, which can be placed in a condominium
of several apartments or in a street. Using the self-describing
approach of the smart trash bag, the collective smart bin mon-
itors the ﬂow of wastes, and it detects the alerts: ﬁre, mistake
of sorting, detection of undesirable objects. The information
about its content is transmitted by an ambient network or local
Bluetooth connection during the collection, according to the
type of information. As for the individual bin approach for
helping the sorting process, it is possible to open a container
only when objects of the correct type is brought by a user. The
RFID inventories cannot ensure that all the tags have been
detected in antenna area of a reader, meaning that missing
tags are unnoticed. Considering this limitation, we propose
an “incremental” approach, where the global content of the
collective container is updated each time a bag is disposed.
The analysis report of the content of a trash bag presented
in Section IV-A is used to update content of the collective bin.
This approach is based on the self-describing concept of the
content of a container. As the same way that the individual
container stores knowledge about the wastes, the collective
container stores knowledge about the smart trash bags. It is a
new way to measure the state of a container without require to
the classical use of several sensors. For example, the weight
of content, the size, or the type can be measured by using
the information store in the tag of each waste of a container,
without use one speciﬁc type of sensor for a speciﬁc property.
For example, the total weight of the wastes of a collective
container can be estimated by incrementally adding the weigth
of each smart trash bag brought to the collective container. The
information stored in the tag of the smart trash bag is only
needed. This autonomous approach facilitates a large scale
deployment of the smart bins.
Figure 11 shows a user in a garbage room. He presents his
trash in reading area, where the trash bag’s tag is read.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 11.
An individual bin using the RFID technology.
The analysis report of the content of the trash bag is
transmitted by the reader to the container’s controller. The
controller can then determine the appropriate action, depend-
ing on the bag’s content and the local policy. For example,
it could reject the bag if it contains an inappropriate item
(container remains closed), explaining the cause of rejection
to the user (such as “glass is not accepted in this container”).
Implementing this policy is a way to avoid that a sorted
container is contamined by undesirable material. For example,
it becomes impossible to polluted a container for the plastic
wastes with the metal cap of a plastic bottle.
V. RELATED WORKS
Some other approaches using the RFID technology for
waste management systems have already been proposed.
In [6], the author discusses about several applications of the
RFID in the process of collecting wastes. The identiﬁcation
of each bin associated to a RFID tag is principally mentioned.
The storage in a tag associated to each product some informa-
tion about the end-of-life management process of the product,
is also evoked in the paper.
These approaches propose to identify each bin using an
identiﬁer stored in a RFID tag associated to the container.
In [7], [8], using this identiﬁer, the author proposes to associate
in an external database each container with the address of
the household owning the container. The volume of wastes
estimate the quantity of waste produced by each household.
It is not an information based approach but a physical mea-
surement approach using sensor. The estimation of the volume
of waste is computed using an image analysis from a picture
of the content of the bin (when the lid of the container is
opened). The data are transferred using a GPRS connection to
an external database.
The idea developped in [9] is also very close to this
approach. In [9], a sensor measures the weight of the bin
placed on the truck which collects the bins. It differs to our
approach which proposes to use a self-describing approach of
wastes to compute the weight of a container. At each collection
operation, the truck saves the weight of each bin. The RFID
tags are used to store an identiﬁer in a external database of
the owner of each container. This approach is not autonous,
but using a Wiﬁ connection, the external database of waste
production is updated for each household. It becomes easy
to track the waste production of each household. In [10],
the author presents a real deployment of a system using an
approach similar to the approach proposed in [9].
The concept developed in [11] rewards consumers for
recycling empty packaging. The consumers are identiﬁed by
a RFID tag associated to their bin. Also based on a weight
measurement of their recycling packaging, the consumer can
log into his personal account to view how much they have
recycled, as well as statistics such as the number of trees saved
by their effort. Every month, the consumers are also rewarded
ﬁnancially.
Actually, selective sorting is not the priority of these appli-
cations. RFID is used by the container to identify its owner. To
ensure the selective sorting, it is track waste at the item level.
This is why item level RFID tagging can have an important
role to play in the selective sorting, provided that the tag
contain information about the components of the waste.
In [12], the presented approach also considers that each
product is associated to an RFID tags from the begining of
its cycle of life. The information stored in the RFID tags is
not used to help the user in the selecting selective process.
The authors use the RFID technology at another level of
the selective sorting process. The RFID tags associated to
each product is used to help the service provider of recycling
to decide of the appropriate treatment of a product. In this
approach, the data stored in the RFID tags are used to access to
the information of products in several databases from a single
identifer of each product. This approach of the usability of the
RFID technology in the recycling process is not autonomous.
A major difﬁculty is then to shared some conformable infor-
mation about a product accross several databases, and during
all the life cycle of the product.
The main goal developed in [13] is to bring out the
environmental impact of RFID used in everyday life. The
author discusses RFID for the waste management: a system of
discounts and fees to stimulate responsible behavior of users
in the selective sorting process, is also discussed. The idea
of a bin which collects some information about the wastes
is mentioned, although its implementation is not discussed.
More generally, in [14], the author predicts an important
development of RFID applications in the product recycling
chains.
The approach that we propose is innovative in its infor-
mation processing architecture: the properties are directly at-
tached to physical objects (waste, bags) and data are ”moved”
and processed along with the physical ﬂow of wastes. Several
systems for encoding the waste description are discussed. The
most simple way is to encode the component of each waste in
plain text. A more advanced approach is described inn [15],
where an ontology for waste is used. Class deﬁnitions enable
ﬁne sorting decision to be taken, based on the waste composi-
tion. For example, a bin may accept only items containing at
least 90% of plastic. The interest of this method is to select the
best bin considering all the components of a waste bring by
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

a user. For example, all the wastes which contains more than
80% of glass, can be bring to a bin for recycling the glass.
This idea could be combined with the approach proposed in
this paper to provide a smarter sorting solution.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a new solution to enhance waste
collection efﬁciency using the RFID technology. Fully relying
on digital information attached to waste items, this approach
does not require any sensor, nor external information system
support, enabling high scalability and availability. The pre-
sented system helps the user in correctly sorting and disposing
wastes.
Regarding the waste sorting support, the user is oriented to
the correct container to dispose the waste, and is helped in
case of errors. Another contribution of this system is to be
able to report the content of a bin. This information is useful
to waste processing operators, for example to optimize waste
collection scheduling, or to set up a special handling when an
undesirable product is detected somewhere.
The reported information about the content of each bin is
also a way to compute statistics of each type of waste in the
recycling process. The smart bins can precisely determine the
quantity of each type of waste produces by a household. It
should help people to contribute to a more efﬁcient sorting of
waste, and reuse valuable materials. By considering the value
of wastes produced by each household, it becomes possible to
make a retributive incentive system to encourage each user to
make the selective sorting of its wastes.
This approach can also help to better plan waste collection
and special intervention by operators in case of anormal
conditions. The latter feature is based on an ambient com-
munication infrastructure, which we do not describe here. An
energy efﬁcient protocol for long life operation such as waste
containers is presented in [16].
REFERENCES
[1] “The EUs approach to waste management,” April 2012. [Online].
Available: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/index.htm
[2] H. Boileau and H. Bj¨ork, “Comparing household waste treatment
policies
between
two
medium
size
cities:
Bor˚as
(sweden)
and
chamb´ery (france),” in Proceedings of the 7th World Congress on
Recovery, Recycling and Re-integration, June 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://csp.eworlding.com/3r/congress/manu pdf/420.pdf
[3] “Veolia:
Research
and
Development.”
[Online].
Available:
http:
//environmentalpassion.com/Research and development
[4] “Better Sorting for Better Recycling.” [Online]. Available: http:
//environmentalpassion.com/resource.php?id=2239
[5] Assembl´ee des Chambres Franc¸aises de Commerce et d’Industrie,
“Classiﬁcation des d´echets,” November 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://www.enviroveille.com/public/documents/nomenclaturedechets.pdf
[6] S. Abdoli, “Rﬁd application in municipal solid waste management
system,” in IJER International Journal of Envionment Research, vol. 3,
no. 3, July 2009, pp. 447–454.
[7] M. Arebey, M. Hannan, H. Basri, R. Begum, and H. Abdullah, “Inte-
grated technologies for solid waste bin monitoring system,” in Environ-
mental Monitoring and Assessment, vol. 177.
Springer Netherlands,
2011, pp. 399–408.
[8] M. Hannan, M. Arebey, H. Basri, and R. Begum, “Rﬁd application in
municipal solid waste management system,” Australian Journal of Basic
and Applied Sciences, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 5314–5319, October 2010.
[9] B. Chowdhury and M. Chowdhury, “Rﬁd-based real-time smart waste
management system,” in Proceedings of the Australasian Telecommuni-
cation Networks and Applications (ATNAC 2007), December 2007, pp.
175–180.
[10] J. Wyatt, “Maximizing waste efﬁciency through the use of rﬁd,”
April 2008, Texas Instruments Incorporated. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ti.com/rﬁd/docs/manuals/whtPapers/wp lf hdx.pdf
[11] C. Swedberg, “Rﬁd Helps Reward Consumers for Recycling,” in RFID
Journal, February 2008. [Online]. Available: http://www.rﬁdjournal.
com/article/view/3936
[12] A. Parlikad and D. McFarlane, “Rﬁd-based product information
in end-of-life decision making,” in Control Engineering Practice,
vol. 15, no. 11, 2007, pp. 1348–1363. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967066106001535
[13] V. Thomas, “Environmental implications of rﬁd,” in Proceedings of the
2008 IEEE International Symposium on Electronics and the Environ-
ment, ser. ISEE ’08.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society,
2008, pp. 1–5.
[14] D. C. Wyld, “Taking out the trash (and the recyclables): Rﬁd and the
handling of municipal solid waste,” in International Journal Of software
Engineering & Applications (IJSEA), vol. 1, no. 1, January 2010, pp.
1–13.
[15] A. Sinha and P. Couderc, “Using owl ontologies for selective waste
sorting and recycling.” in OWLED, ser. CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
vol. 849.
CEUR-WS.org, 2012.
[16] N. Mitton, D. Simplot-Ryl, M.-E. Voge, and L. Zhang, “Energy efﬁcient
k-anycast routing in multi-sink wireless networks with guaranteed de-
livery,” in Proceedings of the11th International Conference on Ad-Hoc
Networks and Wireless, ser. ADHOC-NOW’12, Belgrade, Serbia, July
2012, pp. 385–398.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

