Development of an Intelligent Drinking System for the Prevention of Dehydration in 
Old Age  
 
Elisabeth Haslinger-Baumann, Anneliese Lilgenau, Katharina Gugenberger 
Department Nursing Science, FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: elisabeth.haslinger-baumann@fh-campuswien.ac.at, anneliese.lilgenau@fh-campuswien.ac.at, 
katharina.gugenberger@fh-campuswien.ac.at   
 
Gernot Korak, Sebastian Geyer, Udo Unterweger, Stefan Tiefenbacher  
Department Engineering, FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: gernot.korak@fh-campuswien.ac.at, udo.unterweger@fh-campuswien.ac.at, sebastian.geyer@fh-campuswien.ac.at, 
stefan.tiefenbacher@fh-campuswien.ac.at  
 
Franz Werner 
Department Health Sciences, FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: franz.werner@fh-campuswien.ac.at  
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes the user needs analysis for a 
system that supports the professional management of fluid 
balance in older people to prevent dehydration. Dehydration is 
a frequent age related issue that typically leads to a steep 
decrease in physical and / or mental performance. Severe cases 
are life threatening due to risks of circulatory collapse or loss 
of consciousness. Hence, the prevention of dehydration is of 
particular importance. For data gathering, social-scientific 
methods (individual interview, focus group interview, cultural 
probes and documentary research) were implemented. The 
survey involved primary end users (elderly, dependent people), 
secondary end users (informal and formal caregivers), experts 
from ethics and the analysis of care documentation from older 
users. The main results were derived from the data by using a 
thematic analysis and subsequent data fusion as well as 
consolidation concepts on result level. As a conclusion, aside of 
valuable system-specific recommendations, a concept for 
reminding and motivating could be designed and will be 
implemented. 
 
Keywords: Active and Assisting Living; health care and 
nursing; dehydration prevention; interdisciplinary research 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ensuring a sufficient supply of fluids to the body is a 
major challenge for the elderly, or the caregiving family 
members or nursing staff in a mobile care setting. With 
increasing age, the water content of the body, as well as the 
feeling of thirst decreases significantly [1-3]. This makes 
elderly people particularly vulnerable to dehydration. The 
effects of dehydration are extremely serious. Impairment of 
consciousness, fatigue and weakness, dizziness, muscle 
cramps and headaches are possible symptoms. With old 
people even a minor water deficiency leads not only to a 
drop in salvia production with mouth dryness, but also to 
reduced urine production and dry skin, which, in turn, can 
easily break up or develop pressure sores. In case of an even 
greater water deficiency, an accelerated pulse, an increase in 
body temperature, dizziness, weakness, impairment of 
consciousness and a decrease in physical and mental 
performance occurs. The onset of disorientation, states of 
confusion, apathy and a life-threatening circulatory collapse 
with loss of consciousness are possible consequences [1]. In 
elderly people, other causes such as heart disease or 
dementia are erroneously suspected without considering an 
insufficient supply of fluid as a possible cause. The 
consequences can also be life-threatening in the case of 
unconsciousness, circulatory or renal failure. Frequently, 
hospital admission is required. According to a study 
conducted in two English hospitals, 6.5 and 22.5 of 1,000 
hospitalizations are based on dehydration. The mortality rate 
of hospitalized elderly people with dehydration symptoms is 
45-46% [2]. 
The prevention of dehydration is therefore particularly 
important in mobile as well as in stationary care. Particularly 
in mobile care, the estimation of the quantity of liquid intake 
can only be carried out inaccurately, as the often very 
dependent clients live alone at home and are not supervised 
continuously. This means that elderly people cannot be cared 
for adequately in mobile care.  
The presented research was conducted within the 
experimental research project “DrinkSmart” (2016-2018), 
which has the main aim to support the autonomy of elderly 
people with and without chronic diseases in order to 
facilitate their living in their own environment. The project 
led by the University of Applied Sciences “FH Campus 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Wien” was funded by the Austrian research promotion 
agency 
(FFG) 
and 
carried 
out 
in 
interdisciplinary 
cooperation with the software company "akquinet ristec", the 
plastic mug manufacturer "Schorm" and the home care 
provider “MIK-OG”.  
 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Technical solutions for adequate hydration are already 
being developed in this field. They are mainly advertised as 
lifestyle products and are aimed at a young IT-savvy user 
group. These include the “Pryme Vessyl
1 ” and 
“hidratespark2” systems. Apart from the pure analysis of the 
drinking quantity, these systems also offer the analysis of the 
liquid inside the drinking cup. Further they provide an 
optical warning function when too little liquid was drunk. In 
addition, a connection with a smartphone app for iOS or 
Android is to be made via "Bluetooth low energy", which 
should enable the future entry of individual data of 
consumed fluid quantities and body data like weight and size 
combined with GPS function. Alternatively, a lid cap has 
been designed for a cup, which measures the amount of fluid 
drunk with different sensors. This information should be 
transferred to a PC. 
All described products focus on the needs of a young 
target group, not on older, dependent people and care 
contexts. Specifically those systems were not designed to 
transfer data to an electronic care documentation system. 
Such systems are important to assure the quality of care and 
are typically used to document the health status of the patient 
and the activity of nurses. Both aspects are core concepts of 
the here presented approach. 
III. 
METHOD 
For the survey of user needs and the development of the 
intelligent drinking system with appropriate sensors in the 
drinking vessel, which is used to measure the daily liquid 
consumption, qualitative scientific methods were used. The 
needs assessment in the primary and secondary target group 
was conducted using different socio-scientific survey and 
evaluation methods: guideline-specific individual [4] and 
focus group interviews [4][5]. For all interviews and focus 
group interviews guides including the structure, timing and 
detailed open and closed questions were developed. The data 
was analysed according to Mayring [5]. Furthermore, the 
ethnographic method of "Cultural Probes" [6] was used to 
obtain detailed insight into the existing drinking habits of the 
target group. A documentation analysis [7] of the existing 
care documentation completed the survey. The methods were 
chosen based on the individual research questions. Focus 
groups and individual interviews were chosen based on the 
individual timing possibilities of the recruited participants. A 
wide mix of methods was chosen to become able to conduct 
cross-method triangulation [12] of results. Researcher 
triangulation was undertaken for further quality assurance. 
                                                           
1 https://myvessyl.com/prymevessyl, last checked on 2017.5.10 
2 https://hidratespark.com, last checked on 2017.5.10 
The data gathered showed clear signs of saturation, which 
was to be expected considering the large user base.  
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW ON DATA COLLECTION METHODS 
Data collection methods implemented 
Data collection method 
User group 
Number of users 
involved 
Literature research 
- 
- 
Discussion and interviews 
with experts from ethics [4] 
Ethics experts 
2 
Cultural probe studies [6] 
Primary users 
6 
Single-user, semi-structured 
interviews [4] 
All user groups 
40 
Focus-group 
interviews 
[4][5] 
Secondary 
users 
22 (in 4 groups) 
Analysis 
of 
care 
documentation [7] 
Older 
dependent 
users and 
formal 
caregivers 
5 
documentations  
 
The development of the intelligent drinking system, 
which is based on the summarized user requirements and 
follows the product specifications, adheres to the user-
centered design approach [8] combined with the phase model 
on product development according to Glende [9]. The 
implementation of the user studies with selected participants 
was accompanied by a process- and result-oriented 
evaluation approach [10][11] with regard to the technical and 
social-scientific aspect.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The summary from interviews and cultural probes shows 
the following common aspects despite the heterogeneous 
user groups involved. 
The material should be comfortable to touch and not 
breakable. A modular design is desirable, that is, the drinking 
cup should be adaptable to different end user requirements. 
Care dependency may be a fluctuating phenomenon, which 
means that in the case of an acute disease, independent 
drinking might only be ensured with devices on the cup 
itself, such as the handle, or the spout, which might not be 
necessary in the further course of the disease.  
An important additional component is the design of 
reporting functions. With the help of acoustic and optical 
signals, reminder functions should be realized, which remind 
the user of drinking. At the same time, the cups should 
facilitate a motivating design or component for motivation as 
users often knowingly object drinking. 
The system should provide an overview of the quantity of 
liquid that has been drunk. It is important that the signals 
issued by the system (e.g. to remind or motivate drinking) 
should not be irritating and the optical and functional design 
of the system should appeal to different senses. This was 
considered in particular regarding used colours, materials 
and the design of the user-system interaction. 
The results of the cultural probes studies with a duration 
of one week each and involving a subset of the primary user 
group (n = 6), underline the complexity of existing drinking 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

habits. For example, drinks were consumed in parallel from 
several vessels; several differently shaped vessels were 
preferred in the course of the day or "favourite cups" were 
used which cannot easily be replaced by a single new 
system. As a consequence, the planned drinking system is 
limited in practice regarding the accuracy of the 
measurement of the total amount of liquid intake during a 
day, due to the users’ habits. Further due to ethical concerns 
we found a need for a system that does not force users to 
change previous habits through alarms. 
The analysis of nursing documentation shows that with 
many clients the focus is on the description of the risk of 
dehydration in terms of symptoms and causes. On this basis 
nursing measures and resources are formulated for the nurses 
to carry out. The objective of this standardized approach is to 
mitigate the symptoms of dehydration, to eliminate the 
causes, if possible, and to strengthen the resources of the 
clients by direct and indirect measures.  
Based on the results of the conducted user need analysis 
a non-functional mock-up was created within a rapid 
prototyping process using the generative production method 
of Selective Laser Sintering (SLS). Due to the consistent 
consideration of the user needs, a simple and handy mug 
with clearly visible and intuitive visual and acoustic signals 
could be developed and is depicted in figure 1.  
 
  
 
Figure 1.   Mock-up of the modular system based on the user needs 
analysis. Comprised of a cup (inside), a plastic cup holder with electronics 
compartment and a grip. Acoustic and optical motivational and reminder 
functions are not yet visible. (left design-study showing the motivational 
component, right 3D printed system). 
The optical components were realized as a dynamically 
growing seedling with seven leaves. Depending on the daily 
volume drunk, the leafs light up simulating a growing plant. 
This gives users a definitive feedback on the drinking 
volume reached up to the time X. By holding the system, the 
current drinking quantity status is displayed; otherwise the 
cup does not produce any acoustic or optical output to 
minimize potential irritations during night-time. The liquid 
within the cup forms a second optical component. It can be 
illuminated with an LED and in this way acts as a reminder 
for the users. This visual reminder is displayed when, within 
a predetermined interval, no liquids have been consumed. 
At the end of the research project in 2018, the crucial 
result will be a market-oriented prototype (hardware and 
server / application software) for a smart drinking system. 
For the design of the corresponding sensors in the drinking 
cup, the liquid intake is measured via the Drink Smart Mug 
and controlled by means of reminder signals (visual and 
acoustic) and notification functions (e.g. SMS / E-mail). By 
connecting to a computer-aided care documentation already 
used in nursing care companies, the collected data can be 
recorded and documented. The caregivers are thus informed 
promptly and can react accordingly in acute cases. 
The system is going to be evaluated within a home care 
setting including around 20 users for the duration of 4 weeks. 
Data gathering will be undertaken by implementing 
questionnaires, 
diaries, 
individual 
interviews 
and 
participatory observation. This qualitative research approach 
is important taking the complexity of the system and early 
prototype phase into account. The used social-scientific 
methods focus on the users’ perspective and the nursing 
result quality, including also a risk-assessment for 
technology aversion. Technical evaluation methods test the 
efficiency, ease of use and technical practicability.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The consistent user-oriented approach ensures that the 
needs of the users and their relatives, as well as their 
caregivers, are largely covered in the development of the 
intelligent drinking system. The use of the documentation 
analysis method, as well as several different survey methods 
for the primary and secondary target groups, and the Cultural 
Probes method form a comprehensive data material, which 
clearly identifies the needs of the user groups by data fusion 
and structuring and greatly facilitated the design of the 
drinking system. 
In the current technical implementation phase, the 
requirements generated from the results have been 
implemented as far as technically possible, and the resulting 
first prototypes (mock ups) have been subjected to further 
testing by the clients. 
Thus the drinking system can be used as a supplementary 
aid in the future to prevent dehydration in old age and 
thereby it can be used in a low-threshold manner as a 
contribution to the management of chronic diseases. 
Consequently, elderly people are supported to live 
autonomously in their own homes, and help by caregivers 
can be targeted. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is sponsored by the Austrian research 
promotion agency (FFG) under grant number 856166. 
Projectpartners are: MIK-OG (Austria), Schorm (Austria) 
and acquinet ristec (Germany). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Bigorio, “Hydration in der palliativen Betreuung“. Consent on 
best practices for palliative care in Swizerland, 2009. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.palliative.ch/de/fachbereich/arbeitsgruppen-
standards/best-practice 2017.05.10. 
[2] B. Hodgkinson, D. Evans, and J. Wood, “Maintaining oral 
hydration in older adults: A systematic review.” International 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Journal 
of 
Nursing 
Practice, 
pp.19–28, 
2003, 
doi: 
10.1046/j.1440-172X.2003.00425.x. 
[3] D. Bunn, F. Jimoh, S. H. Wilsher, and L. Hooper, “Increasing 
Fluid Intake and Reducing Dehydration Risk in Older People 
Living in Long-Term Care: A Systematic Review.”, Journal 
of the American Medical Directors Association, vol.16, pp. 
101–113, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2014.10.016. 
[4] R. Bohnsack, “Gruppendiskussion.“ in Qualitative Forschung, 
U. Flick, from E. Kardorff, and I. Steinke, Eds. Reinbek bei 
Hamburg: Rowohlt, pp. 369–384, 2009. 
[5] P. Mayring, Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse, Beltz Verlag, 
Weinheim and Basel, 2010. 
[6] W. Gaver, A. Boucher, S. Pennington, and B. Walker, 
“Cultural probes and the value of uncertainty.” Interactions 
vol.11, 5, pp. 53-56, 2004, doi: 10.1145/1015530.1015555. 
[7] A. 
Salheiser, 
“Natürliche 
Daten: 
Dokumente,“ 
from 
Methoden der empirischen Sozialforschung, N. Baur and J. 
Blasius, Eds. Wiesbaden: Springer VS, pp. 813–829, 2014. 
[8] D. A. Norman, Emotional Design: Why we love (or hate) 
everyday things. New York: Basic Books, 2004. 
[9] S. Glende, Entwicklung eines Konzepts zur nutzergerechten 
Produktentwicklung - mit Fokus auf die „Generation Plus“. 
Genehmigte Dissertation, TU Berlin, Fakultät V – Verkehrs- 
und 
Maschinensysteme, 
Berlin, 
2010. 
doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-2367 
[10] G. 
Vitt, 
Pflegequalität 
ist 
messbar. 
Schlütersche 
Verlagsdatenbank, Hannover, 2002. 
[11] A. Donabedian “The Definition of Quality and Approaches to 
Its Assessment, Explorations in Quality Assessment and 
Monitoring.” vol.1, Health Administration Press, pp. 166ff, 
1980. 
[12] V. A. Thurmond, "The point of triangulation." Journal of 
nursing scholarship” pp. 253-258, 2001. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

