Utility of a Mobile Route Planning App for People Aging with Disability 
 
Jon A. Sanford, Sarah Melgen 
Center for Assistive Technology and Environmental 
Access (CATEA) 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA 
e-mails: jon.sanford@design.gatech.edu, 
sarah.melgen@design.gatech.edu 
 
 
Subhrajit Guhathakurta, Ge Zhang   
Center for Graphic Information Systems 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA 
emails: subhro.guha@design.gatech.edu, 
gezhang@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract - Mobility is a key contributor to an individual’s 
community living and participation.  As a result, outdoor 
environmental barriers, such as uneven sidewalks and no curb 
cuts, play a crucial role in the development of disability and 
loss of independence among individuals aging with mobility 
and vision limitations. To compensate, people with disabilities 
typically plan routes before going out.  However, they often 
lack the appropriate street-level information about the 
environment to plan routes that meet their abilities and needs 
for safety and accessibility (e.g., the location of curb cuts and 
crosswalks).  As a result, the real impediment to outdoor 
mobility is not the actual barriers, but the lack of information 
about those barriers for route planning. To provide the street-
level information about barriers that would maximize the 
independent living and community participation of people with 
mobility disabilities, the project team developed a working 
prototype of the Application for Locational Intelligence and 
Geospatial Navigation (ALIGN) based on static graphical 
information systems (GIS) data (e.g., physical infrastructure, 
slope, crime rates and land uses).  This study details the utility 
testing of the application with individuals aging with mobility 
and vision limitations by using direct observation, think-aloud 
and 
open-ended 
questionnaires. 
Findings 
indicate that 
participants found the application to be potentially useful, 
especially in unfamiliar locations. However, testing also 
indicated a number of refinements, including multimodal input 
and outputs that would enhance the utility of the initial 
prototype. Additional design criteria will inform the next 
prototype, including use of consistent audio/visual feedback, 
and simpler directions. These criteria will be applied to create 
a more usable application for the target population.  
 
Keywords-mobile wayfinding; assistive technology; aging in 
place. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
From the need for basic exercise, to more complex 
participatory behaviors, such as grocery shopping, going to 
the doctor and visiting friends, mobility is a key contributor 
to an individual’s community living and participation. For 
older adults and individuals with disabilities, outdoor 
mobility is especially important to successfully to maintain 
independence, physical and mental health, and quality of 
life [1][2]. Not surprisingly, outdoor environmental barriers, 
such as uneven sidewalks and no curb cuts, play a crucial 
role in the development of mobility disability among 
individuals with a range of functional limitations [3].  
Whereas removing physical barriers in the U.S. has been 
ongoing for more than a quarter century since the passage of 
the Americans with Disabilities Act in 1990, it is an 
expensive and long-term process that will likely continue 
for many years to come.   
To compensate for environmental barriers, people with 
disabilities typically plan routes before going out [4]. 
Community activities are organized in advance to formulate 
strategies that address, for example, the inaccessibility of 
routes, distances travelled and terrain.  However, the 
appropriate street-level information about the environmental 
attributes (e.g., the location of curb cuts and crosswalks) 
that are needed to plan routes that meet an individual’s own 
abilities and needs is often lacking.  As a result, the real 
barrier to outdoor mobility may not be the actual 
environment itself, but the lack of information that would 
empower individuals with mobility impairments to plan 
safe, accessible and situationally-appropriate routes based 
on their own abilities, needs and preferences.   
Whereas creating totally barrier-free environments is an 
ideal goal, providing environmental information for 
individualized 
route 
planning 
is 
a 
comparatively 
inexpensive and short-term process that could immediately 
impact community mobility for seniors with a mobility 
disability. To provide the type of street-level information 
about barriers that would maximize the community mobility 
for these individuals, the project team developed a working 
prototype of the Application for Locational Intelligence and 
Geospatial Navigation (ALIGN) based on static graphical 
information 
systems 
(GIS) 
data 
(e.g., 
physical 
infrastructure, slope, crime rates and land uses).  This paper 
reports on the usefulness of the application in providing 
mobility assistance to people aging with vision and 
ambulatory limitations.  
The second section of this paper details the current 
practices of and barriers to pedestrian mobility, as well as 
the available resources to help with travel route decision-
making. Section 3 describes the prototype design, and the 
research methods used to test the application’s utility.  The 
results outlined in Section 4 give insight to the errors made 
in observation of route navigation, in addition to the post-
trial questionnaire responses. Finally, Section 5 discusses 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

the implications of these results and recommendations for 
the application’s next iteration.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Community mobility is both a means and an end.  As a 
means, it is a way to get from one place to another.  As an 
end, it is an activity that is the most commonly reported 
form of physical activity that has demonstrated a variety of 
health benefits [5]-[7].  
Despite the positive impact of environmental facilitators, 
such as curb cuts, tactile warnings and audible pedestrian 
signals, people with disabilities routinely encounter 
difficulties while either “walking” or “wheeling” in their 
communities, even on routes that are “accessible” under the 
2010 Americans with Disabilities Act Standards for 
Accessible Design [8].  Barriers not covered in the standards 
(e.g., long distances, steep slopes, high curbs, wide streets 
and short traffic lights), can deter traveling in the 
community, thus compromising health, independence and 
overall quality of life.   
Numerous studies have linked restricted community 
mobility among people with disabilities to the wide range of 
barriers and hazards, many that compromise safety (e.g., 
crossing a busy intersection) and increase fatigue due to 
maneuvering around obstacles (e.g., a pole in the middle of 
a sidewalk).  Specific barriers identified in the literature 
include: curbs, lack of curb ramps, sidewalk availability, 
poor drainage, narrow pathways; hilly or steep topography; 
ramp availability, presence of crosswalks, availability of 
resting places and shelters, lack of accessible parking, 
presence of water fountains, bathrooms, and rest areas; 
unsafe neighborhoods, and inclement weather [2][3][9]-
[13].   
Individuals with disabilities generally use familiar 
outdoor routes that fit their functional abilities and assistive 
technologies.  However, for those who are experiencing the 
additive effects of age-related declines, environmental 
barriers continually pose new sets of challenges that can 
further limit mobility even on long-used routes [14][15] 
leading to mobility restricted participation in multiple 
activities outside the home [16].  In fact, limitations in 
walking for exercise is secondary to restricted access to a 
variety of community destinations, including grocery stores, 
senior centers, drug stores and places of worship [17].  Most 
importantly, these restrictions not only lead to further 
decline in function, but also have broader implications for 
nutrition, medical care, and other community services that 
are crucial to independence, social connectedness, health 
and well-being of seniors with disabilities.  
To aid pedestrian route planning, many navigation apps, 
such as Google Maps, Co-Pilot, Mapquest and Waze, have 
walking functions that provide voice-guided turn-by-turn 
directions similar to their driving functions. In addition, 
there are a growing number of mobile applications that are 
intended to promote walking by assessing the pedestrian 
friendliness of an area and translating this information into a 
walking 
score. 
 
Most 
(e.g., 
Walkscore.com, 
Walkonomics.com and Walkshed.org) provide information 
about environmental factors, such as access to amenities, 
residential density, street connectivity, land use diversity, 
traffic safety and crime safety that influence walking 
behavior and route decision-making [18][19]. Whereas 
many of the attributes included in these applications are 
relevant to people with mobility disabilities, few, if any, of 
the applications include the environmental characteristics 
that would address the specific needs of people with aging 
with mobility disability.  
Similarly, there are a growing number of mobility 
applications for individuals with disabilities. Among these, 
Rollstuhlrouting (wheelchair routing) is the only online 
application that includes environmental factors to inform 
route planning for wheelchair users.  However, this portal 
uses only 3 infrastructure parameters: slope (4% – 12% in 
2% increments and any slope), surface material (4 types) 
and curb heights (3cm – 11cm in 2cm increments and any 
height) that are deemed necessary for wheelchair accessible 
routes.  Two newer applications, IBM Accessible Way and 
PathVu, use crowd-sourcing approaches to gather street-
level accessibility information, such as mobility barriers, 
poor sidewalk conditions and absence of lighting, tactile 
paving, curb ramps, and crosswalks.  However, these 
applications are not only dependent on volunteer data, 
which has implications for the reliability of the data, but are 
also focused solely on wheelchair accessibility, which limits 
their generalizability to people aging with various 
disabilities. Environmental features that are perceived as 
safe and accessible by one individual may be viewed very 
differently by individuals with different functional abilities, 
preferences, motivations, support systems and tolerance for 
risk.   
Most importantly, decision-making about travel routes 
tends to be situational and idiosyncratic, unique to 
individuals and to a particular point in time, and often 
dependent upon an individual’s ability to make an accurate 
assessment of the accessibility, safety and desirability of a 
route.  To do so, the main challenge is to obtain 
environmental information that individuals do not have in 
order to identify and potentially avoid routes that include 
environmental barriers, as well as to factor in other 
situational variables, such as time, distance and safety.  
Without such information, the most expedient solution is to 
avoid traveling in the community altogether, which partly 
explains reduced levels of activity and exercise among 
seniors and people with disabilities.   
To overcome limitations in the existing walkability and 
accessibility applications, the project team developed 
ALIGN, a mobile route planning application that not only 
considers the salient physical environmental factors that 
impact accessibility and safe mobility, but also an 
individual’s personal and social motivations and preferences 
that influence route planning. Most importantly, based on an 
array of essential and secondary user preferences, ALIGN 
not only prioritizes alternative routes, but also identifies the 
location of potential barriers where routes do not meet user 
requirements.  This paper reports on the initial prototype 
testing to evaluate its usefulness by people aging with 
disability prior to full-scale deployment and testing.  
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

III. 
METHODS 
A. Research Design  
The study used a mixed methods approach in an outdoor 
setting to determine the usefulness of the application.  This 
included direct observation of the application in use, 
thinking out loud to record participant feedback during app 
use and post-test questionnaire to obtain user feedback 
about the application.  Direct observation of participant 
behavior while completing a series of routine tasks (e.g., 
select parameters, input a destination, choose a route, follow 
the route) enabled the study team to record objective data 
about errors made including difficulty finding the correct 
buttons and avoidance of the ‘problem area’ icons in the 
laboratory usability study, veering off course outdoors, 
backtracking, pausing/confusion, and wrong turns on the 
outdoor route. Thinking out loud provided opportunities to 
obtain subjective participant experience about underlying 
problems that were not evident or had to be inferred from 
direct observation (e.g., confusion, how often they would 
like 
audio/visual 
feedback). 
 
Similarly, 
post-test 
questionnaires, provided an opportunity for participant 
feedback through a series of questions with Likert scale 
levels of agreement (where 1=strongly disagree to 5=strong 
agree) and open-ended questions about the usability of 
specific features of the application, as well as their overall 
impression of the application. Questions were used to gauge 
how participants felt about the application’s potential, and 
where there were subjective errors and room for 
improvement.  
B.  
Prototype Test Application (ALIGN 1.0) 
ALIGN is built on: 1) environmental factors based on 
existing walkability and accessibility literature that are 
applicable to route planning decisions by individuals with 
mobility disabilities; 2) a database structure and data 
acquisition processes to import the validated factors; 3) a 
weighting system applied to each factor based on an 
Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) that generates mobility 
scores for route segments; 4) implementation of a routing 
algorithm; and 5) a simple and intuitive user interface based 
on universal design principles.  
The prototype application (Fig. 1) enables users to select 
from a number of mobility factors, including accessibility 
factors (e.g., slope, presence of curb ramps) and other static 
infrastructure factors (e.g., land uses, vegetation, street 
connectivity) based on their own needs and desires.  A 
variety of readily available GIS sources were used to 
automatically capture much of the environmental data. As a 
result, ALIGN databases and algorithms are updated at the 
same time as the original sources.  We used the street 
network data from 2007 Georgia Dept. of Transportation 
and the Atlanta Regional Commission street file. Block 
boundary data were obtained from 2010 U.S. Census 
Bureau TIGER/Line shape files. A measure of intersection 
density was calculated using the ArcGIS network analysis 
tool based on the street network data. The variables in the 
residential density group were calculated using the ArcGIS 
operator tool based on the 2010 U.S. census block data. 
Similarly, the variables in the business density, land use mix 
diversity and land use mix accessibility categories were 
calculated using the ArcGIS operator tool, zonal analysis 
tool and Euclidean distance tool, based on the 2012 
reference USA business database. Crime data were obtained 
from the Atlanta Police. Slope was calculated using the 
ArcGIS 3D analysis tool, based on the 1999 digital 
elevation model data (30 meters pixel resolution) provided 
by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). ERDAS 9.3 Indices 
tool was used to quantify vegetation coverage based on the 
2011 Landsat image data provided by the USGS. Traffic 
volume was obtained from the 2009 average annual daily 
traffic 
data 
provided 
by 
the 
GA 
Department 
of 
Transportation (GDOT). Public transit data were collected 
from the 2010 GA Regional Transportation Authority. 
Finally, sidewalk data were obtained from the GDOT. 
A number of key environmental factors were not 
available in any systematic GIS dataset, including the 
presence of curb cuts, crosswalks, traffic signals and 
intersection type.  To capture these types of data, a data 
collection protocol was developed to capture and record 
environmental features of interest directly from Google 
Streetview.  
Ideally, the ALIGN mobile application would be able to 
create routes that cater to all possible combinations of 
essential environmental factors (referred to henceforth as 
parameters). However, in most cases, it is unrealistic that 
any nearby route would be able to fit all criteria. Thus, a 
maximum of five essential parameters (and unlimited 
secondary parameters) can be selected in order to create a 
useful tool that allows users to be able to choose the 
parameters that are essential for their walking routes, for 
their flexibility, as well as their safety.  
C. Test Environment   
Three routes were laid out at the eastern edge of Georgia 
Tech’s campus and extending into the adjacent neighboring 
community of Midtown, Atlanta. All three routes (Fig. 2) 
had the same starting point.  However, each route had a 
different destination and the numbers and types of potential 
mobility barriers. The destinations varied in length and 
complexity. The simplest (to Starbucks 1 on the map) was 
one block and included crossing a street with a missing walk 
signal. The second route was two blocks (to Starbucks 2) 
without any potential mobility barriers. The third route was 
Figure 1. Prototype screenshots of the parameter selection page, the map 
landing page, and a sample route showing parameter errors 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

three blocks (to the Center for the Visually Impaired) and 
included an intersection with no crosswalk or traffic signal. 
 
 
D. Procedures   
After consenting to participate in a test protocol 
approved by the Georgia Tech Institutional Review Board, 
participants were given the ALIGN application on a mobile 
device. All participants were given the same minimal 
description of how to use the application so as not to bias its 
use. Participants were instructed to complete two of three 
test routes, selected at random.  A researcher walking along 
with the participant recorded errors made including: veering 
off course, backtracking, pause/confusion, and wrong turns. 
Each error was noted as ‘self-corrected’ by the participant or 
‘team-corrected’ by the researcher. It was also noted where 
participants asked for help and when it was provided. 
Following each trial, participants were asked to provide 
their level of agreement (on a 1-5 Likert scale where 1= 
strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree) with items regarding 
the usefulness of the app.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Sample   
Thirteen (13) individuals 50+ years of age with a self-
reported ambulatory and/or vision limitation for at least 5 
years that affected their mobility in outdoor environments 
were recruited for the study.  Participants were recruited 
from local retirement communities, as well as three GA 
Tech participant registries: HomeLab, a registry of over 500 
seniors who have agreed to participate in in-home and 
community studies;  the CATEA Consumer Network, a 
registry of  adults with disabilities; and the TechSAge 
Registry, a registry of older adults with disabilities.   
Of the 13 participants included, three were men and ten 
were women. Seven participants had some degree of vision 
loss and eight had some degree of mobility impairment with 
two participants reporting having both vision and mobility 
limitations. Subjects ranged in age from 50 to 76 years of 
age, with a mean age of 63.8 years. Education levels varied 
amongst the participants – two had vocational training, four 
had some college or associate’s degree, two had received 
bachelor’s degrees, one had a master’s degree, and two 
participants had received PhDs.  
B. Observation Data   
Table I shows the observed and stated errors during the 
outdoor observation route. Some participants made repeated 
errors, which are noted accordingly in the overall number of 
instances (i.e., 10 participants paused on their route 17 times 
total on their collective routes). The results are spread more 
or less evenly across demographics, with the exception of 
the two low vision participants who veered off-course.  
Of note, 9 participants missed or did not recognize their 
destination, which can be attributed to the lack of a visual or 
audio notification that they had arrived at their destination. 
Similarly, 9 participants who had warnings that the route 
had missing walk signals did not see or hear the warning. 
Finally, half (n=5) of the participants paused at 
intersections to look at the application. Nonetheless, of the 
17 times the 10 participants paused or were confused, all 
were self-corrected.   In contrast, there were only 2 
instances of wrong turns and 2 instances of veering off 
course and 3 of the 4 were self corrected.  
 
TABLE I. OBSERVED ERRORS ON OUTDOOR ROUTE 
 
Pause/Confusion 
Wrong turn 
Veering off-course 
Help 
 
Self 
-
corrected 
Team 
-
corrected 
Self 
-
corrected 
Team 
-
corrected 
Self 
-
corrected 
Team 
-
corrected 
Asked 
Provided 
Asked 
and 
provided 
Overall # of 
instances 
17 
0 
1 
1 
2 
0 
2 
2 
8 
Overall # of 
participants 
10 
0 
1 
1 
2 
0 
2 
2 
5 
Participants 
w/ low vision 
6 
0 
0 
1 
2 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Participants 
w/ 
low 
mobility 
4 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
2 
Participants<
65 years 
5 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
2 
2 
2 
Participants≥
65 years 
5 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
3 
Figure 2.   Map of observation routes 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

C. Post-Trial Questionnaire   
Most notably, participants strongly agreed (mean = 4.58) 
that the mobility factors met their needs for route planning.  
In fact, when queried about the need for additional factors 
11 of 13 participants did not see room for any additional 
parameters, while two suggested adding factors that are not 
necessary for safe mobility (i.e., accessibility of doors in 
buildings and nearby places to eat).  
In response to the statement that the app would be 
helpful for navigating as a pedestrian, the mean response of 
3.38, or slightly above neutral.  In contrast, the mean 
response to the statement that it would be easier to navigate 
as a pedestrian with the application than without it was 4.0 
or agree.  However, when asked if they would use the app, 
six of the participants responded that they would use it, if it 
worked perfectly.   In addition, 4 participants stated that the 
app would be easier to use once they were able to 
familiarize themselves with it.   
Finally, when asked if there were any unexpected 
barriers in using the application, 10 participants provided 
recommendations for refinement, including: the ability to 
input location names (i.e., Publix) instead of only addresses; 
providing notification upon arrival at a destination and more 
feedback from the application as a whole; providing 
cardinal directions; user-friendly terminology; and reducing 
the learning curve when first using the app. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Participants reported that, overall, the application was 
more beneficial than not. Moreover, it is likely to be used, if 
it is working properly and more user friendly.  However, 
this will require refinements before the application is ready 
for prime time. Clearly, consistent participant feedback 
about the lack of auditory input and output, as well as 
noticeable route errors, such as missing the destination, 
suggest that there is need for consistent feedback to the user.  
While the prototype was tested prior to the implementation 
of these interfaces, the planned addition of voice control 
(e.g., voice command option on the map screen) and audio, 
visual and tactile feedback in v. 1.1 (e.g., audio feedback at 
turns and barriers) should increase usefulness and usability 
of the application.  In addition, utility will be enhanced in 
v.1.1 by the inclusion of other participant recommendations 
including a tutorial when first opening the app, inputting 
location names, use of more user friendly terminology and 
option for cardinal directions. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by the National Institute on 
Disability, Independent Living, and Rehabilitation Research 
(NIDILRR) under the Rehabilitation Engineering Research 
Center (RERC) TechSAge [grant number 90RE5016-01-
00]. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Hjorthol, “Transport resources, mobility and unmet 
transport needs in old age.” Ageing and Society, vol. 33, no. 
7, pp. 1190-1211, 2013. 
[2] C. Kochtitzky, A.L. Freeland, and I. H. Yen, “Ensuring 
Mobility-Supporting Environments for an Aging Population: 
Critical Actors and Collaborations,” Journal of Aging 
Research doi:10.4061/2011/138931, vol. 2011(2011), 10 pgs, 
2011. 
[3] J. J. Keysor, A.M Jette, M.P La Valley, C. E. Lewis, J. C. 
Tomer, and M.C. Nevitt, “Community environmental factors 
are associated with disability in older adults with functional 
limitations: the MOST study,” The Journal of Gerontology. 
Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, vol. 65, 
pp. 393-399, 2010. 
[4] C. Kirchner, E. G. Gerber, and B. C.  Smith, “Designed to 
deter: Community barriers to physical activity for people with 
visual or motor impairments,” American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 349-352, 2008. 
[5] L. D. Frank and P. O. Engelke, “The built environment and 
human activity patterns: Exploring the impacts of urban form 
on public health.” J Plan Lit vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 202-218, 2001. 
[6] B. E. Saelens, J. F. Sallis, and L. D. Frank, “Environmental 
correlates of walking and cycling: Findings from the 
transportation, urban design, and planning literatures.” Ann 
Behav Med vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 80-91. 2003. 
[7] V. Lathey, S. Guhathakurta, and R. M. Aggarwal, “The 
Impact of Subregional Variations in Urban Sprawl on the 
Prevalence of Obesity and Related Morbidity.” J Plan Educ 
Res vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 127-141, 2009. 
[8] Department of Justice. “2010 ADA Standards for Accessible 
Design,” 
Retrieved 
December 
2017 
from 
http://www.asa.gov/regs2010/2010ADAStandards/2010ADAs
tandards.htm, 2010.  
[9] H. Becker and A. Stuifbergen, “Barriers to health promotion 
experienced by people with multiple sclerosis and polio.” 
Fam & Community Health, vol. 27, pp. 75-85, 2004. 
[10] Chaudhury, A. Mahmood, Y. L. Michael, M. Campo, and K. 
Hay, “The influence of neighborhood residential density, 
physical and social environments.on older adults’ physical 
activity: an exploratory study in two metropolitan areas.” 
Journal of Aging Studies, vol. 26, pp. 35–43, 2012. 
[11] N. Humpel, N. Owen, and E. Leslie, “Environmental factors 
associated with adults’ participation in physical activity: A 
review,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, vol. 22, 
no. 3, pp. 188-199, 2002.  
[12] A. R. Meyers, J. J. Anderson, D. R. Miller, K. Shipp, and H. 
Hoenig, “Barriers, facilitators, and access for wheelchair 
users: sbstantive and methodologic lessons from a pilot study 
of environmental effects.” Social Science & Medicine, vol. 
55, no. 8, pp. 1435-1446, 2002. 
[13] J. H. Rimmer, B. Riley, E. Wang, A. Rauworth, J. Jurkowski, 
“Physical 
activity 
participation 
among 
persons 
with 
disabilities: barriers and facilitators.” Am J Prev Med, vol. 26, 
pp. 419-425, 2004. 
[14] M. Rantakokko, S. Iwarsson, M. Mänty, R. Leinonen, and T. 
Rantanen, “Perceived barriers in the outdoor environment and 
development of walking difficulties in older people.” Age and 
Ageing, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 118-121, 2012. 
[15] A. L. Rosso, A. H. Auchincloss, and Y. L. Michael, “The 
Urban Built Environment and Mobility in Older Adults: A 
Comprehensive Review.” Journal of Aging Research, Article 
ID 816106, 10 pages doi:10.4061/2011/816106, 2011. 
[16] H. Hoenig, L. R. Landerman, K. M. Shipp, and L. George, 
“Activity restriction among wheelchair users.” Journal of the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

American Geriatrics Society, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1244-1251, 
2003. 
[17] D. E. Rosenberg, D. L. Huang, S. D. Simonovch, and B. 
Belza, “Outdoor built environment barriers and facilitators to 
activity among midlife and older adults with mobility 
disabilities,” The Gerontologist, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 268-279, 
2013. 
[18] E. Leslie et al., “Residents' perceptions of walkability 
attributes in objectively different neighbourhoods: a pilot 
study,” Health and Place vol. 11, pp. 227-236, 2007.  
[19] E. Cerin, B. E. Saelens, J. F. Sallis, and L. D. Frank, 
“Neighborhood environment walkability scale: Validity and 
development of a short form.” Med Sci Sport Exer vol. 38, 
no. 9, pp. 1682-1691, 2006. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

