A Qualitative Approach to Understanding User Needs for Aging with Disability 
 
Elena T. Remillard &  
Tracy L. Mitzner 
Center for Assistive Technology 
and Environmental Access  
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA, USA 
email: tracy@gatech.edu 
elena.remillard@design.gatech.edu  
Jenny L. Singleton 
School of Psychology 
Gerogia Institute of Technology,  
Atlanta, GA, USA 
email: jenny.singleton@gatech.edu 
   
Wendy A. Rogers 
College of Applied Health Sciences 
University of Illinois 
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA 
email: wendyr@illinois.edu
 
 
Abstract— There is a growing population of adults with long-
term sensory and mobility impairments who are aging into 
older adulthood. Little is known about the everyday challenges 
and accessibility issues experienced by these individuals as they 
age and acquire age-related declines in addition to a pre-
existing impairment. The present paper provides an overview 
of a large-scale interview study, currently in progress, 
exploring user needs of older adults with long-term vision, 
hearing, and mobility impairments. The structured interview is 
designed to elicit detailed information on task performance 
challenges across a wide range of daily activities, as well as 
strategies to manage those challenges. In this paper we provide 
case-study examples from each of the three impairment groups 
to convey the potential depth and breadth of insights about 
user needs among individuals aging with impairments that can 
be realized through this novel qualitative approach.  
Keywords-aging; 
disability; 
technology; 
impairment; 
Deaf/hard of hearing; vision impairment; mobility impairment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Worldwide, advances in healthcare, rehabilitation, and 
technology are enabling individuals with impairments to live 
longer lives than ever before. In the U.S., nearly 40% of 
older adults (over age 65) reported having one or more 
disabilities, including vision (19% of those with disabilities), 
hearing (40%), and ambulatory (67%) impairments [1]. 
Despite the prevalence of older adults with sensory and 
mobility impairments, very little is known about the segment 
of this population who acquired their impairments in early or 
mid-life, said to be “aging with disability” [2][3]. An 
estimated 12 – 15 million adults in the U.S are aging with 
impairments that began prior to age 40 [4]. For these 
individuals, the addition of normative age-related changes, 
such as declines in vision, cognition, and motor functioning, 
can create new barriers in carrying out everyday activities 
and increase the likelihood of disability. 
Technology holds great potential to support older adults 
with long-term impairments in maintaining daily activities 
and living as independently as possible [5]. To effectively 
design technologies that meet the needs of these individuals, 
it is necessary to understand more about the experiences of 
people aging with impairment. How do their support needs 
change across the lifespan? Are the same assistive 
technologies that someone used as a child, or as younger 
adult, still effective for them as an older adult? How do new 
impairments and chronic conditions impact routines for 
everyday activities? To begin answering these questions, 
researchers 
must 
engage 
the 
individuals 
who 
are 
experiencing aging with impairment first-hand.  
Currently in progress, the Aging Concerns, Challenges, 
and Everyday Solution Strategies (ACCESS) study is a 
large-scale, mixed method study investigating user needs of 
individuals aging with impairment. This project is part of the 
Technologies to Support Successful Aging with Disability 
Center (TechSAge). The goal of the ACCESS study is to 
understand the nature and distribution of task performance 
problems with everyday activities for older adults with long-
term vision, hearing, or mobility impairment. In addition to 
activity challenges, the study explores the various strategies 
individuals in these three distinct populations employ to 
manage them. The ACCESS study utilizes both quantitative 
(questionnaires) and qualitative (structured interview) 
methods to assess perceptions of task difficulty and the 
nature of participants’ challenges and solutions.  
The current paper provides a brief overview of the 
interview component of the study and presents case study 
examples that convey the potential value of this novel 
approach in understanding user needs for this understudied 
population. In section 2, the study methods are described 
with 
regard 
to 
participant 
characteristics, 
materials 
(interview 
guide 
and 
questionnaires), 
procedures, 
accommodations for participants with sensory impairments, 
and analysis. Section 3 is comprised of case study examples 
from a participant in each of the three target populations 
(n=3). This section includes a table with descriptive 
characteristics about the participant sample as well as 
examples of challenges mentioned in the interview. Finally, 
Section 4 features a discussion of the emerging findings from 
the analysis of case study examples and implications for the 
qualitative component of the broader study in progress.  
II. 
METHOD 
A. Participants 
The goal of the ACCESS study is to enroll 60 
participants in each of the three target populations (vision, 
hearing, mobility; total n = 180). To be eligible for this 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

study, participants must be between the ages of 60 and 79 
and have a vision, hearing, or mobility impairment that 
began prior to age 50. There are additional inclusion criteria 
specific to each impairment group. Vision participants must 
self-identify as Blind or Low Vision, operationally defined 
as “unable to see” or “having serious difficulty seeing even 
when wearing glasses or contact lenses.” Participants in the 
Hearing impairment group must self-identify as Deaf or hard 
of hearing and use American Sign Language (ASL) as their 
primary language for communication. Mobility participants 
must self-identify as having a mobility impairment and either 
use a mobility aid or have serious difficulty walking or 
climbing stairs. All participants must live in the Unites States 
and be able to complete the interview in English or ASL. 
Participants to date were primarily recruited through 
outreach 
to 
local 
and 
national 
disability 
resource 
organizations and conferences as well as from the Georgia 
Institute of Technology Human Factors and Aging 
Participant Registry and the University of Illinois Disability 
Resources and Education Services Research Registry. 
Participants receive $30 USD compensation for completing 
the questionnaires (1 hour) and interview (1-1.5 hours).  
B. Materials 
1) Interview guide: A structured interview guide was 
developed to elicit participants’ challenges with everyday 
activities as well as the strategies they employ to overcome 
those challenges. The scope of activities covered in the 
interview guide was selected based on findings from an 
earlier study wherein subject matter experts with personal 
and/or professional experiences with older adults with 
sensory and mobility impairments (e.g., caregivers, medical 
professionals) gave their perspectives on the challenges 
experienced by these populations [6].  
For each activity category, there is a rating activity 
followed by open-ended interview questions. The purpose 
of the rating activity is to identify which specific types of 
activities are the most difficult for participants to do. 
Participants rate topics within the activity category based on 
how difficult it is for them to do using a 3-point scale (1 = 
not at all difficult, 2 = a little difficult, 3 = very difficult, or 
N/A = not applicable). The interviewer uses a worksheet to 
document the difficulty ratings for each topic. Participants 
are instructed to give ratings based on the way they 
currently do the activity now, including any help or support 
they receive. Once all ratings have been provided, the 
interviewer reviews the worksheet to identify the topic with 
the highest difficulty rating which will be the subject of 
follow-up, open-ended questions. Following the rating 
activity, there are open-ended questions that focus on 
overall activity category, and how activities may have 
changed as they have gotten older. These questions were 
designed to capture how participants are adapting their 
activity routines and managing challenges in relation to the 
Selection, 
Optimization, 
and 
Compensation 
(SOC) 
framework. Stemming for the aging literature, the SOC 
framework is used to describe how individuals adapt to 
developmental challenges across the life span via the 
processes of selection, optimization, and compensation [7]. 
Interview questions ask participants how they are handling 
their challenge in distinct ways by probing for different 
types of solutions they might be employing, such as using a 
technology or getting help from someone.  
2) Questionnaires: The current paper focuses on the 
qualitative component of the study. However, participants 
also  complete self-report questionnaires to assess 
demographic and individual charactistics (e.g., functional 
abilities, information about the nature and degree of 
participants’ impairment).  
C. Procedures 
Eligible participants are scheduled for an interview 
appointment, which takes approximately 1-1.5 hours to 
complete. Interviews and are either conducted in-person or 
remotely via telephone or Video Phone, which is a common 
technology in most households with a Deaf resident. 
Participants located in Metro Atlanta GA or Champaign-
Urbana IL have the option to complete the interview with a 
researcher or in-person. 
Once the study is complete, audio recordings of the 
interview are transcribed into text files. For ASL video 
interviews, screen recording software is used to record the 
entire interview, onto which voice-over translation for both 
the interviewer and participant is later recorded. To ensure 
accuracy, 
ASL-to-English 
translations 
of 
completed 
interviews are conducted by hearing native ASL signers 
who are highly familiar with the project and the questions 
being asked. The voice-over English translations are then 
transcribed into text. 
D. Accomodations 
The study was designed with flexible administration 
options 
to 
accommodate 
participants 
with 
sensory 
impairments. In addition to the standard paper consent form, 
participants were provided with an audio recording of the 
content. Recognizing that some Deaf participants may have 
challenges reading English, the research team developed a 
summary of the consent form in ASL. Interviews with Deaf 
older adult participants are being conducted in ASL by 
interviewers who are also Deaf to ensure authenticity and 
cultural/linguistic appropriateness. One of the project 
investigators, who is fluent in ASL, worked with a native-
signing sign language interpreter to develop a parallel ASL 
translation of the ACCESS Interview script. The Deaf 
interviewers were trained on all study procedures and 
completed necessary human subjects research certifications.  
E. Analysis 
As data collection continues, researchers are beginning to 
review interview transcripts and develop the coding scheme 
for qualitative analysis. The present paper presents 
examples of activity challenges as three case studies, one 
from each of the three impairment groups. Descriptive 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

information regarding participant characteristics were 
compiled from responses to questionnaires. 
III. 
CASE STUDY EXAMPLES 
The current paper presents initial insights from a 
participant in each of the three impairment groups (n = 3).  
Table 1 features descriptive characteristics about the 
participant sample as well as examples of challenges 
mentioned in the interview. For the purpose of this paper, 
the three participants are identified as V1, D1, & M1, with 
the letter signifying their respective impairment group 
(vision, hearing, and mobility). Participants represent 
distinct impairment characteristics with regard to type, onset 
age, underlying cause, nature (limitations/abilities), and use 
of supportive aids. Each participant reported having at least 
two chronic conditions, such as arthritis and diabetes. 
Interviews with participants revealed a wide range of 
challenges across the different domains of activities, as 
depicted in Table 1. Quotation marks indicate a verbatim 
quote from the participant, whereas examples without 
quotations indicates that the researcher paraphrased the 
participant’s comments. The topic that participants rated as 
the most difficult in each category is listed in parentheses 
alongside examples. Participants mentioned at least one 
challenge for each of the six categories, with the exception 
of Shopping and Finances category for which V1 did not 
report any challenges. In many cases, the topic participants 
identified as the most difficult in each category was 
different than that of their counterparts. 
Most of the activity challenges mentioned were unique to 
each impairment group. In one instance, two participants, 
V1 and D1, shared the same most difficult topic (working, 
volunteering or other civic activities), but described distinct 
challenges relating to fatigue and communication barriers 
respectively. There were some activity challenges, however, 
that were shared among participants. For example, D1 and 
V1 both described challenges keeping track of medications 
due to forgetfulness. Similarly, D1 and M1 discussed 
changes in their physical abilities that have made 
housekeeping tasks more difficult overtime. 
Participants 
generally 
attributed 
task 
performance 
problems to their primary impairment. For example, M1 
discussed the extensive planning she has to do to ensure that 
group activities in the community are wheelchair accessible. 
One interesting finding is that each participant discussed a 
challenge that they did not attribute to their primary 
impairment, but rather to other conditions or aging. For 
example, V1 expressed that his challenge with grooming 
tasks, such as shaving and brushing his teeth, was 
remembering to do them; he attributed these memory issues 
to a recent brain tumor. Similarly, D1 discussed that she 
periodically gets vertigo and loses her balance, which can 
make it hard to move around at home.  
All participants described needs that could potentially be 
addressed through technology innovations. Having multiple 
co-morbid conditions, V1 has a complicated medication 
regimen and could benefit from some kind of reminder 
system to help him take his medications as prescribed. D1 
highlighted 
connectivity 
issues 
with 
Video 
Relay 
Interpreting (VRI) which could be improved in future 
development and refinement of the system. M1’s trouble 
identifying whether or not a building is wheelchair 
accessible might be addressed through a website or mobile 
application that utilizes crowdsourced information on the 
presence or absence of accessible features within 
community venues. Regardless of what potential technology 
solutions might be appropriate, and whether such a solution 
currently exists, the interviews honed in on participants’ user 
needs that are not currently being met.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Older adults with long-term sensory and mobility 
impairments are likely to experience challenges beyond 
those that accompany the normative aging process. There is 
a need for in-depth research that explores not only the 
activity challenges experienced by this population, but also 
the specific components of the task that create problems and 
could ultimately result in disability [8]. The ACCESS study 
is the first large-scale interview study exploring user needs 
among older adults with long-term vision, hearing, and 
mobility impairments. The interview was strategically 
designed to explore difficulty across a broad range of 
activities, while also probing for each participant’s insights 
on activities that are particularly challenging for them. By 
incorporating a number of accommodations, including the 
training of Deaf interviewers to conduct interviews with 
Deaf older adult participants, the ACCESS study serves as a 
novel method to capture the perspectives of older adults with 
sensory and mobility impairments.   
These case study examples (n = 3) convey the potential 
depth and breadth of insights on technology user needs of 
older 
adults 
with 
long-term 
sensory 
and 
mobility 
impairments that can be realized through this study. 
Interviews suggest that challenges experienced by these 
individuals are complex, and are subject to a variety of 
factors related to the person (e.g., capabilities and 
limitations, 
financial 
resources, 
support) 
and 
their 
environment (e.g., housing, community infrastructure, 
transportation). Moreover, it is clear that age-related declines 
and other co-morbid conditions are contributing to activity 
challenges among this population. This finding leads to the 
hypothesis that older adults with long-term impairments are 
not only likely to experience more challenges than non-
impaired older adults, but also more than younger cohorts of 
people with the same types of impairments. The complexity 
of challenges revealed among just 3 individuals confirms the 
need to extend this research with a larger, more diverse 
group of individuals. Researchers continue data collection 
and analysis for the ACCESS study with the goal of 
developing a taxonomy of everyday support needs for 
individuals aging with impairment. Detailed user needs 
insights can ultimately guide the development of supportive 
and accessible technology solutions for individuals with 
impairments 
across 
the 
lifespan.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

TABLE I.  
PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS AND EXAMPLES OF ACTIVITY CHALLENGES MENTIONED IN THE INTERVIEW 
 
Vision - V1 
Deaf - D1 
Mobility - M1 
Participant  
characteristics 
Gender: male 
Age: 60 
Age of impairment onset: birth 
Cause of impairment: Right eye not fully 
developed at birth 
Nature of impairment: No vision in right 
eye; able to read large print with left eye 
Use of visual supportive aids: Reading 
magnifier, scanners, optical character 
recognition (OCR) 
Chronic conditions: Arthritis, cancer, 
cardiac arrhythmia, depression, heart 
failure, hypertension, high cholesterol, 
overweight 
Gender: female 
Age: 69 
Age of impairment onset: 1 
Cause of impairment: unknown 
Nature of impairment: impairment in 
both ears; even with use of hearing aid, 
cannot hear well enough to have a spoken 
conversation 
Use of hearing supportive aids: hearing 
aid, interpreter services, TTY, video 
phone 
Chronic conditions: High cholesterol, 
overweight 
Gender: female 
Age: 70 
Age of impairment onset: 6 
Cause of impairment: multiple sclerosis 
and post-polio syndrome 
Nature of impairment: able to walk short 
distances with cane 
Use of supportive mobility aids: cane, 
manual wheelchair, scooter, knee brace, 
orthotic device 
Chronic conditions: asthma, arthritis, 
diabetes, hypertension, high cholesterol, 
overweight 
Categories 
Examples of challenges from interview 
Activities 
Outside the 
Home 
It is challenging for him to participate 
with without getting short of breath or 
dizzy. (Working, volunteering or 
participating in other civic activities) 
“If it is a group of all deaf people, it is 
fine. If there was some kind of activity 
with hearing people, then that would be 
difficult...I have to write with them and I 
hope they are patient writing with me." 
(Working volunteering or participating in 
other civic activities) 
"I have to do a lot of pre-planning. I 
contact whoever is in charge to find out 
where it is, and if that place is upstairs, 
that is has an elevator. If getting there is a 
problem, I might have to use my 
wheelchair instead of my scooter, and 
then I have to find somebody to push it.” 
(Doing things with a group or 
organization) 
Things You Do 
Around the 
Home 
He relies on his high-powered magnifier 
and sense of touch for fixing things 
around the home. It is hard because he 
can't see where a leak is coming from or 
what type of screw is needed. (Repairing 
and maintaining the home) 
"When I scrub the floor, I notice now I 
find that my knee hurts. Maybe this is 
getting older" (Housekeeping) 
She is no longer able to climb on a chair 
or get down on the floor so many home 
cleaning tasks have become difficult. 
(Housekeeping) 
Shopping and 
Finances 
He is unable to read most printed store 
receipts, so he always asks someone to 
read it aloud and keeps a copy to review 
at home with his magnifier (Paying and 
signing for things) 
No challenges mentioned. 
She often has to wait to use the handicap 
dressing room because "everyone wants 
it." (Going shopping in-person) 
Transportation 
"I leave that up to the drivers. I don’t try 
to plan a trip and decide what roads I 
want to be on”. He is no longer able to 
drive due to progressive vision loss and 
the number of medications he is taking. 
(Wayfinding) 
She nearly missed a flight because they 
she was unaware of a gate change 
announcement made over the intercom. "I 
just wish that they would make those 
announcements on some kind of visual 
display, but you never see that.” (Travel) 
"There are times were I just can’t go 
where I want to because the vehicle we 
are using isn’t really accessible. (Getting 
a ride from others) 
Managing Your 
Health 
He is unable to read prescription labels, 
so relies on wife to set up containers. 
“After having brain surgery last year, my 
medication went from 6 or 8 pills a day to 
over 25 pills a day... the hardest part is 
remembering to do it in the proper time 
period" (Managing medications) 
Her doctor’s office provides Video Relay 
Interpreting (VRI), but sometimes there 
are connection issues and it is hard to see 
the interpreter if the screen is blurry. One 
visit, she stopped using the VRI and 
instead tried to communicate with the 
doctor by writing and doing a thumbs-up 
or thumbs-down. (Going to healthcare 
provider appointments) 
“I would like some help in managing the 
pills. Sometimes I forget. Even though 
I’m using a checklist and all that, I’m just 
not sure of myself. I have to check my 
blood sugar eight or ten times a day.” 
(Managing medications) 
Basic Daily 
Living Activities 
“I’m able to shave. I’m able to brush my 
teeth. I’m able to do those things but with 
my memory, sometimes I forget that I 
didn’t do it. (Grooming) 
Sometimes she gets vertigo and loses her 
balance. (Moving around the home) 
"I injured one of my legs worse, and had 
to use the scooter to get into the bedroom 
and that took planning. I had to get a 
longer ramp installed. (Movement around 
the home). 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by a grant from the 
National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and 
Rehabilitation Research (Department of Health & Human 
Services, Administration for Community Living) Grant 
90RE5016-01-00 under the auspices of the Rehabilitation 
and Engineering Research Center on Technologies to 
Support Successful Aging with Disability (RERC 
TechSAge; www.techsage.gatech.edu).   
REFERENCES 
[1] W. He, and L. Larsen, U.S. Census Bureau, "Older 
Americans With a Disability: 2008–2012”. American 
Community Survey Reports, ACS-29, U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC, 2014. 
[2] M. Putnam, I. R. Molton, A. R. Truitt, A. E. Smith, and M. 
P. Jensen, “Measures of aging with disability in U.S. 
secondary datasets: Results of a scoping review,” Disability 
and 
Health 
Journal, 
9, 
pp. 
5–10, 
2016. 
doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2015.07.002 
[3] L. M. Verbrugge, and L. Yang, “Aging with disability and 
disability with aging,” Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 
12, pp. 253–267, 2002. doi:10.1177/104420730201200405
 
[4] M. P. LePlante, “Key goals and indicators for successful 
ageing of adults with early onset disability,” Disability and 
Health 
Journal, 
7, 
pp. 
44–50, 
2014. 
doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2013.08.005 
[5] E. M. Agree, “The potential for technology to enhance 
independence for those aging with a disability,” Disability 
and Health Journal, 7(1 Suppl), pp. 33–39, 2014. 
doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2013.09.004 
[6] K. C. Preusse, E. T. Gonzalez, J. L. Singleton, T. L. 
Mitzner, and W. A. Rogers, “Understanding the needs of 
individuals ageing with impairment,”  Int. J. Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 144-168, 2016. 
[7] P. B. Baltes, “On the incomplete architecture of human 
ontogeny. Selection, optimization, and compensation as 
foundation of developmental theory,” The American 
Psychologist, 52, pp. 366–380, 1997. doi:10.1037//0003-
066x.52.4.366 
[8] C. N. Harrington, T. L. Mitzner, and W. A. Rogers, 
“Understanding the role of technology for meeting the 
support needs of older adults in the USA with functional 
limitations,” Gerontechnology, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 21–31, 
2015. 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

