A Novel Authentication Framework Based on Biometric and Radio Fingerprinting 
for the IoT in eHealth 
Kashif Habib, Arild Torjusen, Wolfgang Leister 
Norwegian Computing Center 
Oslo, Norway 
Kashif.Sheikh@nr.no, Arild.Torjusen@nr.no, wolfgang.Leister@nr.no  
 
 
Abstract—Patient monitoring outside the hospital environment 
is one case for Internet of Things (IoT) in healthcare. While 
remote patient monitoring may improve healthcare, patient 
authentication is a challenge in this scenario. Authentication 
mechanisms that require the user to present credentials only 
initially do not verify the claimed identity of the patient after 
the initial authentication. We propose a novel authentication 
framework based on biometric modalities and wireless device 
radio fingerprinting. The framework is capable of verifying 
that the monitored data belongs to the correct patient during 
the entire session, it also ensures the integrity and trust of the 
received data. We analyse our framework in view of some is-
sues for the IoT in eHealth such as context and location aware-
ness, resource constraints, and dynamic environment. 
 
Keywords—Internet 
of 
Things; 
eHealth; 
biometric 
authentication; radio fingerprinting. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The current Internet is rapidly evolving towards the In-
ternet of Things (IoT) environment where different objects 
communicate and exchange information with each other for 
improved functionalities and performance. While monitoring 
patient’s health parameters with on-body sensors, the IoT 
may allow the patient to be at different locations such as 
home, office, public place, or in a vehicle but medical sen-
sors still connected and transmitting information to the doc-
tor’s office. 
The healthcare system can get many benefits by using 
flexible Remote Patient Monitoring (RPM) in the IoT for 
eHealth such as patient monitoring with chronic disease, 
monitoring of elderly people, and monitoring of athletes fit-
ness [1]. The main objective of the RPM system is to assist 
the existing healthcare system by monitoring the vital signs 
of patient’s health data in real time.  
A. Research questions 
With a RPM scenario as a basis, we address the estab-
lishment of trust in the received data in two parts: 1) how do 
we know that the data monitored during the entire session in 
the RPM system belongs to the correct patient, i.e., data 
origin authentication; 2) how do we ensure the integrity of 
the received data.   
More specific for a health scenario, we address two parts: 
1) how can we know if the patient is suffering from a heart 
attack or other acute conditions; 2) how can we locate a pa-
tient that is suffering from some acute incident. 
B. Security challenges for the IoT in eHealth 
Transferring a patient’s health data to a remote medical 
server opens for security threats such as interception, inter-
ruption, modification, and fabrication [2]. These threats may 
impact on a patient’s privacy, confidentiality of data trans-
mission, integrity of received data, and data availability.  
Authentication is a key aspect in terms of establishing 
trust in the system. Although, trust can be defined for differ-
ent purposes and application areas in several disciplines [39], 
our criteria to determine trust in the RPM system is simple. If 
we establish a mechanism capable of ensuring that the re-
ceived data is coming from a correct device and patient, then 
it can serve the purpose of trust establishment. If the sensors 
are used by someone else except the actual patient, the au-
thentication mechanism should be capable of detecting the 
imposter at any time during the monitoring session. The ca-
pability to detect an imposter not only increases the effec-
tiveness of system security but also maintains the trust level 
in the system. 
C. Biometric and radio fingerprinting 
The continuous RPM requires continuous verification of 
monitored data to establish trust. In order to ensure that the 
received data is coming from the correct patient and is cor-
rect, verification of data origin and integrity are important 
elements in the RPM system. For this purpose, one can use 
authentication mechanism to ensure the correctness of data 
origin before the data is used for medical diagnosis. Authen-
tication mechanisms based on credentials such as secret 
keys, password, and tokens possess vulnerabilities for the 
RPM system. One of the reasons is that if a third party gets 
access to the credentials, then he can impersonate the actual 
patient causing data fabrication and data integrity issues. 
Also, after initial authentication using these credentials, there 
is no guarantee that the data is still coming from the authen-
ticated patient throughout the session. The RPM system de-
mands continuous monitoring of the patient which also im-
plies that the monitored data should be validated on a contin-
uous basis until the session ends [3] [4]. The RPM system 
should ensure not only that the monitored data belongs to the 
actual patient during the whole monitoring period but also 
that it is sent using the correct device. This may be achieved 
using biometric and radio fingerprinting since they have di-
rect association with the user and the device. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

D. Contribution 
The goal of our work is to develop a more reliable au-
thentication system that can prevent the misuse of the RPM 
for the IoT in eHealth. Our main contribution in this paper is 
to propose a novel authentication framework for the IoT in 
eHealth. More specifically, a patient is authenticated by the 
following tuple:  
(P, B, F), where P is patient’s physiological biometric, B 
is patient’s behavioral biometric, and F is patient’s smart 
phone radio fingerprint. 
 In contrast to existing techniques that use only biometric 
modalities, our approach binds together the biometric modal-
ities and radio fingerprinting technique as a unique identifier 
to not only authenticate the patient but also the device trans-
mitting health parameters. However, biometric and radio 
fingerprinting used separately for authentication in the RPM   
pose some shortcomings. For example, using radio finger-
printing only, the device can be authenticated but not the 
patient. Using biometric only, the patient can be authenticat-
ed but the authenticity of the transferring device may be 
questioned. We therefore propose a novel authentication 
framework that binds them together for the said purpose. The 
authentication method comprised of biometric modalities 
and radio fingerprinting has not been investigated to date.  
In order to incorporate the issues and concepts discussed 
earlier, Section II discusses authentication techniques using 
biometric and radio fingerprinting. Section III presents the 
proposed authentication framework. Related work is high-
lighted in section IV. Section V analyses our authentication 
framework. Section VI concludes the paper and addresses 
future work. 
II. 
AUTHENTICATION TYPES 
A. Biometric Techniques 
Authentication is a necessary requirement in any infor-
mation system to ensure the availability of information to 
authorized users only. The authentication mechanisms are 
developed using passwords, secret keys, tokens, and bio-
metric features. The verification is performed based on cre-
dentials such as something we know (password, passphrase, 
personal identification number), something we have (tokens, 
cryptographic keys), something we are (physiological and 
behavioral characteristics such as fingerprints, face, iris, 
palm prints, voice, hand geometry, Deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA), Electrocardiography (ECG), keystroke dynamics, 
gait, and signature).  
Authentication systems may require use of one of these 
factors (knowledge, possession, and inherence) when an enti-
ty presents evidence for its identity. A common solution to 
reduce the risk of an entity presenting false evidence is to use 
different factors in combination, yielding multi-factor au-
thentication. Biometric authentication is considered much 
stronger when compared to password or token based authen-
tication [5] because the biometric characteristics of every 
human are uniquely identifiable, non-transferable, and non-
reproducible. Multi-factor authentication is considered 
stronger than single factor authentication. Authentication 
mechanisms can be divided into two categories: static and 
continuous authentication methods [6]. Static authentication 
mechanisms authenticate the user initially but do not monitor 
post authentication session to detect if it is the same user 
accessing the system [7]. However, some systems can use 
periodic static authentication as well for re-authentication 
using same static credentials. Continuous authentication 
methods monitor a system during the lifetime of a session to 
detect if it is the same user accessing the system [8]. 
Continuous authentication mechanisms are an obvious 
choice for the RPM scenario because they have the potential 
to answer the fundamental question of patient verification 
during the entire session of remote monitoring. We can also 
use more than one biometric trait or use static and continuous 
simultaneously to verify the patient and increase the trust 
level on the received data.  
B. Radio Fingerprinting Technique 
The radio fingerprinting technique uses the hardware 
properties of the wireless devices and their signal character-
istics for the purpose of unique identification. The radio fin-
gerprints are generated by analysing the properties of radio 
signal and are determined by extracting device specific fea-
tures that are caused by hardware impairments. The radio 
fingerprints are extracted by analysing the received radio 
signal for specific properties such as frequency, amplitude, 
and phase [14] [15] [16]. Radio fingerprinting is comprised 
of pre-processing, detection, feature extraction, and classifi-
cation processes phases [9]. The purpose of radio fingerprint-
ing is to uniquely identify the transmitter independently of 
any identifier in the data payload that can be forged easily. 
Radio fingerprinting can be used to identify cellular phones 
or other wireless devices, and to prevent fraud and cell phone 
cloning [10] [11]. The successful identification of wireless 
devices can potentially allow other applications such as in-
trusion detection system and forensic data collection to use 
radio fingerprinting [12] [13]. 
Radio fingerprints allow us to compare and distinguish 
different wireless devices with each other [17] and can be 
used in an authentication mechanism similarly to human 
biometric authentication. The radio fingerprinting method is 
composed of enrolment and verification operations [18] [19] 
[20]. Radio fingerprinting can be used in message authenti-
cation because it helps against message replay attacks [16].  
III. 
PROPOSED AUTHENTICATION FRAMEWORK 
We assume a mobility scenario where the patient does 
not need to stay at static locations. Hence, the patient can be 
at various locations including (i) at home, nursing home, or 
office; (ii) at public places such as library, café, playing 
sports; (iii) in transport such as car, ambulance, bus, and 
train; (iv) hospital that includes waiting room, intensive care 
unit, and surgery room. The RPM scenario for the IoT in 
eHealth is depicted in Fig. 1. We base the mobility scenario 
on previous work [40].  
We propose an authentication framework composed of 
three phases to ensure the correctness of patient’s physiolog-
ical characteristics, patient’s device, and patient’s behaviour 
on continuous basis. Note that medical sensor to smartphone 
authentication is an important issue that is not treated here.  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

We assume that the medical sensors are paired with the pa-
tient’s smartphone earlier during an issuing procedure. 
Hence, the patient uses only such medical sensors that have 
already been paired with the smartphone. The pairing proce-
dure can ensure that the smartphone only connects with pre-
approved medical sensors. Beyond this, the three phases of 
authentication are: 
 
Patient to smartphone authentication 
 
Smartphone to network authentication  
 
Patient to remote medical server authentication 
 
Figure1. Remote Patient Monitoring (RPM) Scenario 
 
A. Patient to smartphone authentication 
This phase ensures that the smartphone collects the data 
from a correct patient or the patient uses correct device to 
transfer medical data. We propose to use built-in sensors in 
the smartphone to authenticate the patient, e.g., smartphone 
biometric fingerprint identification sensors, face recognition 
using camera, voice recognition using microphone, and gait 
recognition using accelerometer.  The authentication process 
for this step is depicted in Fig. 2.  
 
Figure 2. Patient to smartphone authentication process  
 
The patient to smartphone authentication phase based on 
static biometric is composed of enrolment and verification 
processes. During the enrolment process patient’s finger-
prints, voice, face, or gait features are extracted to create a 
biometric template that is stored in smartphone for future 
comparison. Later on, the template is used for authentica-
tion. During the verification process, the patient’s biometric 
characteristics are captured and verified against the stored 
template. A distance d indicates the tolerance of variation 
for the matching. The predefined trust threshold t indicates 
the limit for accepting or rejecting the authentication. If (d ≤ 
t) the patient is authenticated and trust is established. Oth-
erwise (d > t) the user will be required to try again. Repeat-
ed failures will be treated as a possible threat. In an adaptive 
security setting [41], the trust threshold t might be varied 
dynamically depending on the current user environment and 
risk level.   
B. Smartphone to network authentication 
We propose this authentication phase to incorporate the 
idea of using an authenticated device. The process is depict-
ed in Fig. 3.  
 
Figure 3. Smartphone to network authentication process 
 
The device to network authentication phase based on ra-
dio fingerprints is comprised of enrolment and verification. 
The device specific features are extracted in the enrolment 
process to create the radio fingerprint of smartphone. The 
signatures are stored at wireless access point and mobile 
operator end for future comparison. Later on, when 
smartphone wants to access the medical server, first the radio 
fingerprint is checked at the access point or at the mobile 
operator end. A match will allow the connection but the re-
quest will be blocked on a mismatch. Our solution assumes 
that the access point and mobile operator network are con-
figured to only let through traffic from matching devices. 
Note that the mobile network operators do not provide such 
service to date.  
C. Patient to remote medical server authentication 
 
Figure 4. Patient to medical server authentication process 
 
The process for continuous biometric authentication 
consists of enrolment and verification as depicted in Fig. 4. 
During the enrolment process the patient’s ECG, or 
blood pressure features are extracted to create a biometric 
template that is stored at medical server for future compari-
son. Later on, the template is used for authentication. Dur-
ing the authentication process, the patient’s biometric char-
Patient
Motion Sensor
Glucose Sensor
ECG Sensor
Control Unit/ 
Gateway
Blood Pressure Sensor
Body Temprature Sensor
Health Enterprise/
Research
Hospital
Internet
Wireless body area & sensor network
Communication network
Healthcare services
Capturing 
fingerprint, 
voice, face, &  
gait features
Capturing 
fingerprint, 
voice, face, &  
gait features
Static 
biometric 
template 
generation
Matching
Static 
biometric 
template 
generation
Smartphon
e storage
Enrolment
Verification
d≤t (Trust)
d>t (Threat)
Patient
Motion 
Glucose 
ECG 
Temprature
Wireless 
device 
feature 
extraction
Wireless 
device 
feature 
extraction
Radio 
fingerprint 
signature 
Matching
Radio 
fingerprint 
signature 
Storage
Enrolment
Verification
d≤t (Trust)
d>t (Threat)
Capture ECG 
EEG, or 
blood 
pressure 
features
Capture ECG 
EEG, or 
blood 
pressure 
features
Continuous 
biometric 
template 
generation
Matching
Continuous 
biometric 
template 
generation
Medical 
server  
storage
Enrolment
Verification
Patient
Motion 
Glucose 
ECG 
Temprature
Challange/response
Initiate
d≤t (Trust)
d>t (Threat)
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

acteristics are captured and verified against the stored tem-
plate. If the comparison verifies the patient based on match-
ing score, then the patient is authenticated and trust is estab-
lished. Otherwise in case of a non-match, the server will 
keep receiving data marked with reduced trust level. 
 
 
Figure 5. Authentication framework 
 
As mentioned earlier, the overall authentication frame-
work is composed of three phases depicted in Fig. 5. The 
three phases are combined to provide the required level of 
authentication. At first, the preprocessing of the static bio-
metric template is performed and the signature is stored in 
the smartphone. The patient to device authentication phase 
ensures that the correct patient access the smartphone. The 
process is repeated when non-match occurs, otherwise pa-
tient is verified as a genuine user when match occurs and the 
next phase—device to network authentication—starts. Once 
the patient has been authenticated, the smartphone starts to 
collect data. Based on the patient’s current location, either a 
wireless access point or the mobile network operator first 
verifies smartphone fingerprint signature against prepro-
cessed stored template. The patient’s data is forwarded to the 
medical server when the template is matched, otherwise the 
phase is repeated. During the next phase—patient to medical 
server authentication—apart from medical diagnosis the re-
ceived data is used for feature extraction to create template 
that is matched against a preprocessed stored template. If the 
templates match the patient’s data it is used for medical di-
agnosis, otherwise either the overall process is repeated or an 
alert is generated to initiate a response mechanism from 
medical staff. Table 1 summarises the phases of the authenti-
cation framework. The marks indicate the locations involved 
in the corresponding phases.  
TABLE 1.  AUTHENTICATION FRAMEWORK PHASES 
 
Locations 
Authentication 
type 
Patient 
Smartphone 
Network 
Medical 
server 
Static biometric 
 
 
 
 
Radio fingerprint 
 
 
 
 
Cont.  biometric 
 
 
 
 
IV. 
RELATED WORK 
The proposed authentication framework integrates static 
biometric, wireless device fingerprinting, and continuous 
biometric to provide an overall authentication solution. In 
this section, we briefly present related work to show that 
research in these domains is promising and that it is viable 
to these mechanisms for identification and verification in 
our scenario. 
Biometric modalities such as voice, face, and finger-
printing recognition are emerging as an alternative authenti-
cation choice for smartphone users [21]. Also, some re-
searchers have developed algorithms for voice and face 
recognition on mobile phones [22] [23]. Mobile phones with 
biometric fingerprint identification capability are already 
available in the commercial market.  
The viability of authentication using wireless device fin-
gerprinting has been proposed and demonstrated by some 
authors in different settings such as distributed ad hoc net-
works [24], infrastructure type networks [12] [25], and sen-
sor networks [16]. A recent Internet draft [26] discusses the 
scope of radio fingerprinting for wireless device authentica-
tion. The identification for source of transmission by cellu-
lar operators has been addressed in the literature [16] [27]. 
Ureten et al. [9] demonstrated the use of radio fingerprinting 
to enhance the security of the 802.11 standard communica-
tions. Moreover, identifying wireless devices through fin-
gerprinting technique has been published by various authors 
such as identifying unique devices through wireless finger-
printing [28], using radio device fingerprinting for the detec-
tion of impersonation and Sybil attacks in wireless networks 
[29], secure authentication in wireless networks using RF 
fingerprints [30], forensic identification of GSM mobile 
phones [14], practical RF fingerprints for wireless sensor 
network authentication [31], and AGC-based RF finger-
prints in wireless sensor networks for authentication [32]. 
Patient authentication using ECG in biometric recogni-
tion has been presented in many recent studies [33] [34] [1]. 
The authors not only demonstrated the ECG data collection 
while the patient is at rest but also during the different activ-
ities phases. The RPM system utilizing sensors such as 
ECG, Electroencephalography (EEG), and Electromyogra-
Start
Patient
Smartphone
Pre-pocessing of 
static biometric
Medical 
sensors
Remote medical sever
Match 
radio fingerprint  
Match 
radio fingerprint  
Match continuous
 bio. temp. 
Match static
 bio. templ.
Cellular 
network
Broadband 
network
Smartphone
Pre-pocessing 
of radio 
fingerprinting
Prepocessing of 
radio 
fingerprinting
Pre-pocessing of 
continuous 
biometric 
d≤t (Trust)
d≤t (Trust)
d > t (no)
d > t (no)
d≤t (Trust)
d≤t (Trust)
Patient to device 
authentication
d > t
(no)
  d > t
 (no)
d > t
 (no)
Alert
Establish trust & perform medical 
diagnosis for the recieved data
Device to
Network
authentication
Patient to RPM server 
authentication
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

phy (EMG) attached to a patient’s body, aiming to collect 
signals and then transferring them to a remote medical serv-
er is also explained in the literature [35] [2]. The use of a 
patient’s physiological or behavioural characteristics in 
body area sensors network to solve identification and verifi-
cation problem [4], physiological biometric for continuous 
authentication in ubiquitous environment [36] [5], and phys-
iological characteristics of the patient for identity recogni-
tion have also been published in the literature [37] [38]. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Some characteristics of the devices in the IoT environ-
ment are resource constraints, heterogeneity, distributed 
environment, uncertainty, context and location awareness, 
and ubiquity. In this section, we analyse our proposed 
mechanism in the context of these characteristics. 
A. Resource constraints 
Resource constraints such as limited power in sensor 
nodes are an important factor in the RPM system. Increased 
activity beyond the necessary collection and transmission of 
patient’s data may drain the power of sensor nodes. An au-
thentication mechanism for such environment should not 
consume significantly more resources than what is already 
the case.  The proposed mechanism impose only minor extra 
processing burden on devices during different phases of 
authentication. For instance, patient to device authentication 
using static biometric requires only the patient’s physical 
characteristics template to be locally stored at smartphone 
consuming little storage. Similarly, device to network au-
thentication requires the wireless device fingerprint template 
to be stored either at the wireless access point or at the mo-
bile network operator consuming no storage at the device. 
Patient to remote medical server authentication utilise the 
continuous biometric technique where the matching tem-
plate is stored at the server end. The received data is used at 
the hospital site to authenticate the patient without requiring 
sensors to do any extra processing. Thus, devices with lim-
ited energy are not required to perform any extra processing. 
The framework does not impose any extra burden in terms 
of storage, processing, and power. In fact, the patient’s own 
physiological and behavioural characteristics, the device 
specific characteristics, and the monitored data that is to be 
collected anyhow serve the authentication purpose. 
B. Distributed/heterogeneous/dynamic environment 
The devices in the IoT imply a distributed environment. 
As discussed in the scenario, the patient may be present at 
various locations but medical sensors can still send data to 
the medical server. We propose to use wireless device fin-
gerprinting for broadband and cellular network infrastruc-
tures. Therefore, our framework is usable in such environ-
ments.  
C. Context and location awareness 
The proposed framework uses patient’s behavioural 
characteristics for continuous biometric authentication. The 
patient behaviour can change when he is suffering from a 
heart attack. While authenticating a patient during a heart 
attack, the biometrically received data will not match the 
stored template.  The non-match will trigger an alarm at the 
medical server requiring a response. For example, the re-
sponse may include calling the patient on the smartphone, 
where in case of no answer an ambulance will be dis-
patched. In this case, radio device fingerprinting can serve 
another useful purpose. Since there can be uncertainty about 
the patient’s current location, the device fingerprints and 
location service at that point of time can help in locating the 
patient. 
D. Security 
We analyse the security of our proposed framework from 
availability, integrity, and confidentiality aspects. The bio-
metric and radio fingerprints templates are vulnerable to 
theft. At first, the patient can always report immediately for 
such an instance. However, if the imposter uses the stolen 
device for sending data to the medical server, while the pa-
tient to device authentication and device to network authenti-
cation may succeed, the continuous biometric authentication 
template will not match. The non-match will trigger an alarm 
at the medical server implicating that either it is an imposter 
or the patient is suffering from an attack. The authentication 
mechanism triggers an alarm that requires response by medi-
cal staff. Also, if someone gets access to the biometric tem-
plates and tries to use them for sending fabricated data to the 
medical server, then the imposter will not be able to com-
promise the system because biometric features of every hu-
man are unique and non-transferable.  During the transfer of 
data to the medical server there is a risk of data interception 
which may impact the patient’s privacy and confidentiality. 
We recommend using lightweight cryptography to prevent 
clear text data transmission to the medical server. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
Our proposed authentication framework comprised of 
three phases ensures that the received data at remote medi-
cal server belongs to correct patient and identifies the fabri-
cated data. The framework is resource and energy efficient 
requiring no extra processing for authentication purpose 
except the initial pre-processing of biometric and radio fin-
gerprinting  templates. While suffering from a heart attack 
or other extraordinary medical condition during the remote 
monitoring session, the patient’s location can be determined 
using smartphone radio fingerprints.  
In future, we want to evolve our framework towards 
adaptive and context aware authentication mechanism. The 
framework will be validated using simulation scenarios 
[40]. Incorporating context awareness and adaptive security 
in our framework are challenges because a non-match be-
tween stored and given templates always can not be treated 
as a threat to the system, rather there can be situations where 
environmental or system’s context can assist us in decision 
making. Adaptive security can make template matching 
more flexible and we can adjust security level instead of 
blocking transmission during no-match due to the changed 
context. Thus, we will develop models of context awareness 
and adaptive security for our proposed authentication 
framework.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented here has been carried out in the research 
project ASSET – Adaptive Security for Smart Internet of 
Things in eHealth (2012–2015) funded by The Research 
Council of Norway.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. C. Sriram, M. Shin, T. Choudhury, and D. Kotz, “Activity-
aware ECG-based patient authentication for remote health moni-
toring,” ICMI-MLMI '09, ACM, 2009, pp. 297-304. 
[2] Y. Ren, R. W. N. Pazzi, and A. Boukerche, "Monitoring pa-
tients via a secure and mobile healthcare system," Wireless Com-
munications, IEEE vol. 17, no.1, February. 2010, pp. 59-65. 
[3] S. Bao, Y. Zhang, and L. Shen, "Physiological signal based 
entity authentication for body area sensor networks and mobile 
healthcare systems," IEEE-EMBS’05, 2005, pp. 2455-2458. 
[4] M. A. Chowdhury, J. Light, and W. McIver, "A framework for 
continuous authentication in ubiquitous environments," WCSN’10, 
2010, pp. 15-19. 
[5] H. Saevanee, N. Clarke, and S. Furnell, “Multi-modal behav-
ioural biometric authentication for mobile devices,” Springer Ber-
lin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 465-474. 
[6] E. Alsolami, “An examination of keystroke dynamic for 
continuous authentication”, PhD thesis, Queensland Univer-
sity of Technology, 2012. 
[7] J. Liu, F. R. Yu, C. Lung, and H. Tang, “Optimal combined 
intrusion detection and biometric based continuous authentication 
in high security mobile ad hoc networks,” IEEE Transactions 8(2), 
February. 2009, pp. 806-815. 
[8] R. H. C. Yap, T. Sim, G. X. Y. Kwang, and R. Ramnath, 
“Physical access protection using continuous authentication,” In 
technologies for homeland security, IEEE conference, 2008, 
pp.510-512. 
[9] O. Ureten, and N. Serinken,"Wireless security through RF fin-
gerprinting," Can.J. of el. & com. eng., vol.32(1), 2007, pp.27-33. 
[10] M. B. Frederick, "Cellular telephone anti-fraud system," 
google patent, 1995. 
[11] K. D. Hawkes, "Transient analysis system for characterizing 
RF transmitters by analysing transmitted RF signals," google pa-
tent, 1998. 
[12] I. O. Kennedy et al., "Radio transmitter fingerprinting: A 
Steady State Frequency Domain Approach,” VTC, 2008, pp.21-24. 
[13] R. Gerdes, T. Daniels, M. Mina, and S. Russell, “Device iden-
tification via analog signal fingerprinting,” A matched filter ap-
proach, NDSS’06, 2006, pp. 1-11. 
[14] J. Hasse, T. Gloe, and M. Beck, “Forensic identification of 
GSM mobile phones,” IH&MMSec '13, 2013, pp.131-140. 
[15] K. B. Rasmussen, and S. Capkun, “Implications of radio fin-
gerprinting on the security of sensor networks,” SecureComm'07, 
2007, pp. 331-340. 
[16] V. Brik, S. Banerjee, and M. Gruteser, “Wireless device iden-
tification with radiometric signatures,” MobiCom, 2008, pp. 14-19. 
[17] D. A. Knox, and T. Kunz, "RF fingerprints for secure authen-
tication in single-hop WSN," WIMOB '08, 2008, pp. 567-573. 
[18] S. Banerjee, and V. Brik (Ed.), “Wireless device fingerprint-
ing,” Encyclopedia of Cryptography and Security, Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011. 
[19] K. L. Talbot, P. R. Duley, and M. H. Hyatt, “Specific emitter 
identification and verification,” Technology review journal, 2003, 
pp. 113-133. 
[20] P. Tuyls, and J. Goseling, “Capacity and examples of tem-
plate-protecting biometric authentication systems,” Lecture notes 
in computer science, Springer, Berlin, 2004, pp 158-170. 
[21] S. Trewin et al., “Biometric authentication on a mobile de-
vice: a study of user effort, error and task disruption,” ACSAC '12, 
2012, pp. 159-168. 
[22] Y. Ijiri, M. Sakuragi, and S. Lao, “Security management for 
mobile devices by face recognition,” MDM’06, 2006, pp.49-49. 
[23] S. Kurkovsky, T. Carpenter, and C. MacDonald, “Experi-
ments with simple iris recognition for mobile phones,” ITNG’10, 
2010, pp, 1293-1294. 
[24] K. Hoeper, and G. Gong, “Pre-authentication and authentica-
tion models in ad hoc networks”, Wireless Network Security, Part 
II, Springer Verlag,  December. 2006, pp. 65-82. 
[25] J. Hall, M. Barbeau, and E. Kranakis, “Detecting impersona-
tion attacks in future wireless and mobile networks,” MADNES, 
Springer-Verlag LNCS, Vol. 4074, 2006, pp. 80-95. 
[26] J. Yu, and H. Jie, “RF fingerprint authentication of wireless 
device,” Internet Draft, December 19, 2013. 
[27] H. Mustafa, M. Doroslovacki, and H. Deng, “Automatic radio 
station detection by clustering power spectrum components”, 
ICASSP’02, volume 4, IEEE, May 2002, pp.4168-4168. 
[28] L. Chin, C. Desmond, C. C. Yuan, T. C. Pheng, and R. S. Lee, 
“Identifying unique devices through wireless fingerprinting”, 
WiSec '08, 2008, pp.46-55. 
[29] B. Sieka, “Using radio device fingerprinting for the detection 
of impersonation and Sybil attacks in wireless networks,” security 
and privacy in ad-hoc and sensor networks, Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, Vol. 4357, 2006, pp. 179-192. 
[30] D. A. Knox, and T. Kunz, "Secure authentication in wireless 
sensor networks using RFfingerprints,"EUC’08, 2008, pp.230-237. 
[31] D. A. Knox and T. Kunz, "Practical RF fingerprints for Wire-
less Sensor Network authentication," IWCMC, 2012, pp.531-536. 
[32] D. A. Knox, and T. Kunz, "AGC-based RF fingerprints in 
wireless sensor networks for authentication," WoWMoM’10, 2010, 
pp.1- 6. 
[33] Y. Wang, F. Agraﬁoti, D. Hatzinakos, and K. N. Plataniotis, 
“Analysis of human electrocardiogram for biometric recognition,” 
EURASIP’08, 2008, pp. 1–6. 
[34] C. Chiu, C. Chuang, and C. Hsu, “A novel personal identity 
veriﬁcation approach using a discrete wavelet transform of the 
ECG signals,” MUE’08, 2008, pp.201–206. 
[35] E. Monton et al., “Body area network for wireless patient 
monitoring,” Communication, IET, vol.2, no.2, February. 2008, 
pp. 215–22. 
[36] T. G. Roosta, “Attacks and defenses of ubiquitous sensor 
networks,” PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley, 2008. 
[37] S. A. Israel, J. M. Irvine, A. Cheng, M. D. Wiederhold, and B. 
K. Wiederhold, “ECG to identify individuals,” Pattern Recogni-
tion, science direct, Vol. 38 (1), 2005, pp. 133-142. 
[38] M. Guennoun, N. Abbad, J. Talom, M. Rahman, and K. El-
Khatib, "Continuous authentication by electrocardiogram data," 
TIC-STH’09, 2009, pp. 40-42. 
[39] W. Leister, and T. Schulz, “Ideas for a trust indicator in the 
Internet of Things”, SMART’ 12, 2012, pp. 31-34. 
[40] W. Leister, M. Hamdi, H. Abie, and S. Polsad, “An evaluation 
scenario for adaptive security in eHealth”, PESARO’14, 2014, pp. 
6-11. 
[41] H. Abie, and I. Balasingham. “Risk-based adaptive security 
for smart IoT in eHealth,” BodyNets '12, 2012, pp 269-275. 
[42] Y. Berhanu, H.Abie, and M. Hamdi “A testbed for adaptive 
security for IoT in eHealth”, ASPI '13, 2013, pp. 1-8.  
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

