Mental Health Engagement Network (MHEN)
Connecting Clients With Their Health Team 
Dr. Cheryl Forchuk, Associate Director
Nursing Research
Lawson Health Research Institute
London, Canada
Dr. Abraham Rudnick, Associate Professor
Departments of Psychiatry and Philosophy
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario
Dr. Jeffrey Hoch, Health Economist and 
Research Scientist,
St. Michael’s Hospital
Toronto, Canada
Mike Godin, Team Leader
Housing Program
Canadian Mental Health Association
London, Canada
Dr. Lori Donelle, Assistant Professor
Faulty of Health Sciences
University of Western Ontario
London, Canada
Dr. Diane Neal, Assistant Professor
Faculty of Information & Media Studies
University of Western Ontario
London, Canada
Dr. Robbie Campbell, Associate Professor
Department of Psychiatry and Physician Lead
Regional Mental Health Care
London, Canada
Walter Osaka, Peer Specialist
CanVoice
London, Canada
Betty Edwards, Peer Specialist
CanVoice
London, Canada
Dr. Elizabeth Osuch, Associate Professor
University of Western Ontario
London, Canada
Dr. Ross Norman, Professor
Department of Psychiatry
University of Western Ontario
London, Canada
Dr. Evelyn Vingillis, Professor
Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry
University of Western Ontario
London, Canada
Dr. Beth Mitchell, Director
Mental Health Program
London Health Sciences Program
London, Canada
Dr. Jeffrey Reiss, Professor & Chair
Department of Psychiatry, University of Western Ontario, 
Site Chief, Mental Health Program, LHSC
London, Canada
Mike Petrenko, Executive Director
Canadian Mental Health Association
London, Canada
Dr. Deb Corring, Administrative Psychiatric Lead
Mental Health Transformation
Regional Mental Health Care
London, Canada
Abstract— This research study introduces, delivers, and 
evaluates the benefits of using web and mobile 
technology to provide consistent supportive health care 
to individuals living within the community who have 
been diagnosed with a mental illness. This longitudinal, 
mixed method study will consist of 400 individuals who 
have been diagnosed with either a mood or a psychotic 
disorder who are currently working with mental health 
care professionals in the community. The participants 
will have access to a personalized health record and 
applications related to their care plan on a smart phone.  
It is hypothesized that the use of smart technologies in 
the treatment of mood and psychotic disorders will 
improve quality of life while reducing health care costs 
through a reduction in hospitalizations and hospital 
room visits. Baseline findings will be available in May 
2012.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Keywords- Smart technology; Mental Health Care; Personal 
Health Records; Quality of Life; Health Care Costs
I.
INTRODUCTION
The economic cost of mental illness to Canada was 
recently estimated at $51 billion annually, and still the 
current “system” of care is fragmented and without 
sufficient resources (financial, human, and technological), 
per “The Healthcare Interview” Canadian Healthcare 
Network, December 2009 [1].  The 2009 estimations 
showed a dramatic increase from 2003, when it was 
estimated that the Canadian economic burden due to mental 
illness was ~ $34 billion ($1,056 per capita), which was a 3-
fold increase from 1998 estimations of $12.3 billion.  
Twenty percent of Canadians will personally experience a 
mental illness in their lifetime and most others will 
experience mental illness indirectly through a family 
member, friend, or colleague.  Mental illness affects people 
of all ages, regardless of education, income level, or culture
[2]. With mental health services being at a crisis point, even 
though billions of dollars are being invested to help, most 
people in need of care will not receive the care they need 
[3].  
Commonly, mental health care is prioritized for 
individuals with the most severe symptoms, due to the lack 
of available services.  This runs counter to the general health 
care system where prevention and intervention at less 
serious levels is the norm. The current way of treating 
psychiatric illness is unsustainable and only through 
developing new service models that provide support and 
early intervention, will the mental health care system be 
sustainable. A new and potentially more sustainable method 
of providing mental health care would be that of employing 
smart technologies to enhance the treatment of mental 
health clients.  
Several applications, both mobile and web based, have 
been developed employing smart technology to support 
health care. Examples include: My Mood Monitor [4] and 
MedHelp’s Mood Tracker [5], which are both applications 
designed to monitor a user’s mood; medication adherence 
assistance applications such as RxReminder [6]; the Mobile 
Assessment and Treatment for Schizophrenia (MATS) [7] 
which is an interactive text-messaging intervention; and the 
use of Personal Health Records/Electronic Health Records.
However, the effectiveness of these applications has not 
been extensively researched, particularly within mental 
health care, nor have these applications ever been utilized in 
conjunction with each other to provide a holistic care 
package.  This study will be the first of its kind to employ 
all of these applications in one complete platform while also 
including the use of personalized care plans which have 
previously not been utilized in this fashion. 
The Mental Health Engagement Network (MHEN) is 
focused on putting technology in the hands of clients of the 
mental health system and their clinical team to demonstrate 
how to more effectively and efficiently deliver health care 
services. This project will deploy TELUS health space™ 
consumer health platform along with a customized personal 
health record application and interactive tools that support a
novel way to provide patients with standardized health 
services, ongoing monitoring and regular communication 
with their care team.  This innovative solution will help 
coordinate care across the continuum; ensuring that services 
are more accessible, patient-centered, and promote the 
empowerment of individuals so they can better manage their 
own health. From a population perspective, this proposed 
system re-design will have the capability to reduce or 
prevent acute episodes of mental illness and reduce the 
severe pressures on an already over burden health care 
system.
This document proceeds as follows. Section II describes 
the methods employed by the MHEN project. The expected 
outcomes are outlined in Section III and the conclusion is 
presented in Section IV.
II.
METHODS
The following subsections describe the methods of 
theMHEN project .
A.
Study Design
This delayed implementation research study launched in 
September 2011 and will conclude in November 2013.  It 
includes 50 community mental health providers and 400 
research community clients who have been diagnosed with a 
mood disorder or a psychotic disorder.  Clients will be 
randomized into Group 1 (early intervention) or Group 2 
(later intervention). Group 1 (200 participants) will receive a 
handheld device, a TELUS health space™ account, and 
version 1.0 of the Lawson SMART record during Phase I. 
The remaining 200 clients, Group 2, will initially act as a 
control group, and at Phase II (6 months later) will receive a 
handheld device, a TELUS health space™ account, and 
version 2.0 of the Lawson SMART record. Version 2.0 of 
the Lawson SMART record will be based on the feedback 
acquired from the care providers and clients in Group 1 who 
have participated in focus groups.  Subjects will be recruited 
from local community programs and will be randomly 
assigned to the early or delayed adoption groups.  
The specific electronic tools proposed in this project will 
leverage the use of web and mobile devices to provide cues 
to support daily structure to individuals.  The tools will 
include self-assessment applications such as mood and 
medication monitoring.  These tools will be linked in real-
time to action plans designed by the consumer to be used 
when assistance is required in relation to their mental health.  
It is proposed that the action plans be linked with an 
individual’s crisis plan, so prompts (i.e. SMS texts sent 
directly to the individual’s mobile device) can be sent 
automatically to the individual based on their recovery plan 
activities. Through the use of communication tools, self-care 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

will be encouraged and supported, allowing for a sense of 
empowerment in the consumer. These activities will be 
managed through the individual’s personalized care plan, 
deployed through TELUS health space™, along with a 
Lawson SMART record to empower the consumer with 
their own health care information. This application will 
provide the consumer with the ability to share their own 
health care data, securely with their multiple care providers.  
Care providers will then have the ability to provide 
treatment based on prior care, so the consumer receives 
continuity of care. This will allow care providers to avoid 
costly duplications of tests and interventions that have 
already been determined unsuitable.  
In summary, the present project will introduce, deliver, 
and evaluate the benefits of empowering consumers with 
their personal health information, while using leading-edge 
communication technologies to deliver a more consistent 
type of supportive care to individuals who most urgently 
need it.   
B.
Sample
The 400 client subjects and 50 care provider subjects
will be recruited through community programs at London 
Health Sciences Centre and St. Joseph’s Health Care, 
London as well as through the Canadian Mental Health 
Association (London-Middlesex
Branch) and WOTCH 
Community Mental Health Services.
C.
Data Collection
Individual interviews with client participants will be 
held during the baseline period and then every 6 months for 
18 months. Data collected will include use of mobile 
devices, perception of usefulness, quality of life, general 
health, and use of health and social services (including 
hospitalizations and emergency room visits as well as other 
services). The knowledge learned through Group 1, over the 
initial 6 months, will provide baseline and comparative data 
to understand the client’s perceptions for designs and 
outcome 
purposes 
of 
the 
technology 
intervention. 
Improvements in the technology approaches made during 
the initial 6 month period will enhance the tools for Group 
2. We are expecting different feedback from groups, one to 
guide development and one to improve what is developed. 
Focus groups will take place at multiple points during 
the study. Group 1 will participate in three focus groups: (1) 
approximately one month after receiving the handheld 
device and a TELUS Health Space account to discuss 
usability and adoption; (2) follow up focus groups will be 
held two months thereafter to discuss the benefits and 
pitfalls associated with the technology and to form base 
recommendations for the next phase of study (Group 2); and 
(3) 6 months later to discuss future recommendations. 
Group 2 will also participate in 3 focus groups.  They will 
meet in a similar timeframe: (1) approximately one month 
after receiving the handheld device and a TELUS Health 
Space account to discuss usability and adoption; (2) follow 
up focus groups will be held two months thereafter to 
discuss the benefits and pitfalls associated with the 
technology; and (3) 6 months later to discuss future 
recommendations. Focus groups with staff/health care 
providers will also be held so that issues can be identified 
and addressed quickly. 
III.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Preliminary quantitative data analysis of 123 client 
subjects (61 men and 62 women) indicates that the mean 
age of the population is 40.88 (SD = 12.814).  The most 
common psychiatric diagnosis in this sample population are 
mood disorders (69.1%), psychotic disorders (54.5%), 
anxiety disorders (41.5%), substance-related disorders 
(10.6%), personality disorders 
(8.9%), 
disorders 
of 
childhood/adolescence (7.3%) and developmental handicaps 
(0.8%).  Most client subjects indicated that they have been 
admitted to the psychiatric hospital at least once (87%) and 
of those individuals, most have been admitted a mean of 
8.83 times (SD = 13.772).
Initial quantitative analysis shows that most client 
subjects are generally comfortable with the use of 
technology.  Most indicated that they were either extremely 
comfortable (22.0%) or slightly comfortable (25.2%) with 
technology generally, while only a minority said that they 
were either slightly uncomfortable (4.9%) or extremely 
uncomfortable (5.7%) with technology generally.  Despite 
this general level of comfort, only a minority of participants 
had regular access to a computer at home (38.2%) and only 
a slightly larger population (41.5%) owned a cell phone.  
These findings suggest that client subjects will be receptive 
to training on the use of smart technologies, but also that 
they often do not have regular access to smart technologies.
IV.
EXPECTED RESULTS
Baseline data will be completed by April 2012 and the 
training and implementation of the first 200 participants will 
be conducted in May 2012.. For the conference we will be 
able to describe the sample and their initial perceptions of 
technology as well as describing the elements of the 
programs and training.
The overall hypothesis is smart health information 
technology (HIT) will improve quality of life and reduce 
health care system costs. To test this hypothesis we will use 
an evaluation framework that includes four levels of 
analysis: effectiveness, economic, ethical and policy. 
Development and testing of a more cost-effective means of 
addressing mental health issues will increase the ability to 
provide the best practice at an affordable cost which benefits 
consumers and taxpayers.
The current study will be done in a geographical setting 
that represents a microcosm of environments found across 
Canada, making research done within this region easily 
translational throughout Canada.  It includes a large 
integrated mental health focus to evaluate smart technology 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

within the continuum of care from early intervention 
(Primary Care; Emergency and Acute Care; Community 
Integration; Tertiary Care to Rehabilitation).  The study will 
provide an enterprise system solution to support health 
technology innovations, using mobile technologies and tools 
that will provide personalized, preventative consumer health 
care. The system re-design includes privacy security 
solutions developed by academic health researchers 
embedding knowledge into novel community based health 
tools, making tools directly translational for use in health 
care settings.  This will also give researchers and health care 
providers an understanding of mental health client 
acceptability to receive personalized care through smart 
devices which has not been previously explored. 
V.
CONCLUSION
Preliminary results, including baseline data and initial 
focus groups, will be available in May 2012. It is expected 
that the use of smart technologies in the treatment of mood 
and psychotic disorders will improve quality of life while 
reducing health care costs through a reduction in 
hospitalizations and hospital room visits.   
REFERENCES
[1]
McAllister, J. (2009).  The healthcare interview: Micheal 
Kirby breaks down barriers to better mental health care.  
Canadian Health Care Network. 
[2]
Canadian Mental Health Association. (2012). Understanding 
mental illness. Retrieved
December 16, 2011,
from 
http://www.cmha.ca/bins/content_page.asp ?cid =3&lang=1
[3]
StatsCanada.(2004).Canadian 
community 
health 
survey 
mental health and well-being. Retrieved December 15, 2011,
from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-617-x/index.html
[4]
M3 Information. (December 20, 2011.). My mood monitor –
Monitor 
my 
mood. 
 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.mymoodmonitor.com/
[5]
MedHelp.(December 21, 2011). Track your mood: Get your 
own 
personal 
mood 
tracker.Retrieved 
from 
http://www.medhelp.org/land/mood-tracker
[6]
Sterns, A. and Collins, S. (2007).  Transforming the personal 
digital assistant into a useful health-enhancing technology for 
adults and older adults. Generations, 28(4).
[7]
Granholm, E., Ben-Zeev, D., Link, P., Bradshaw, K., and
Holden, J. (2011). Mobile assessment and treatment for 
schizophrenia (MATS). Schizophrenia Bulletin.  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

