Wireless Database Searching Scheme Using GSM Modems 
 
 
 
Subrata Chatterjee 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
National Institute of Technical Teachers’ Training & 
Research, Kolkata 
E - mail: subrata0507@sify.com 
 
 
 
Sumit Kumar Das 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
National Institute of Technical Teachers’ Training & 
Research, Kolkata 
E - mail: sumit.rick@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—With 
the 
development 
of 
mobile 
communication technologies and the popularity of 
relating devices, GSM network based intelligent systems 
are being used more and more widely. Most of existing 
intelligent systems have been built on mobile platforms, 
but these systems don’t provide any facility that can 
save our energy. Again, the work is not time efficient. 
But, today, this work needs to be performed from any 
corner of the world, since people can’t afford to visit the 
field of action every time they want something to be 
done. In view of this, a wireless database searching 
scheme has been developed. With a GSM modem as 
hardware carrier, the system receives information from 
outsiders, searches in database and sends the result 
through short messages independently. Basically, it 
helps to transfer information between the organization 
(where the system has been implemented) and the 
external world. Furthermore, receiving any information 
from an authorized number can also update the 
database remotely using this system. 
 
 
Keywords-Intelligent system; Wireless; Database searching; 
Authorized number. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Wireless data services and systems represent a rapidly 
growing and advancing segment of the communication 
industry. While the wireless data industry is becoming 
increasingly diverse and fragmented, one can identify a few 
mainstreams, which relate directly to users' requirement for 
data services [2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10]. With the widespread 
deployment of wireless networks and the fast growing 
popularity of smart mobile devices, there has been an 
increasing interest in wireless data services from both 
industrial and academic communities in recent years. Point-
to-point access employs a basic client-server model, where 
the server is responsible for processing a query and 
returning the result to the client via a dedicated point-to-
point channel [3, 9]. For instance, in search of a book, 
people must go to the library. But, lack of time makes it 
pretty difficult for a person to go to a library searching for a 
book, unaware of the fact if it is available or not, and also, 
if available, how many. It is time consuming because there 
may be a large queue at the counter. Even though, they can 
get the conformation via email or phone calls. But, this is 
not an independent process; it is dependent on the staff and 
also, it is not instantaneous, they must wait for reply. 
Therefore, how to improve the mobile information services’ 
efficiency at low cost has become a research hotspot. 
The advancement of mobile computing technologies in 
recent years has contributed to the growth of smart cities. 
Some thing is to be highlighted here: internet may be 
indispensable today, but still it is not that friendly for many 
of the users. On the other hand, nowadays, most of the users 
know to operate the mobile phones and write messages. For 
this 
simplicity, 
the 
Global 
System 
for 
Mobile 
communication (GSM) digital wireless network has been 
developed. It may be used to transmit data at rates of 9600 
bits/s [11]. We can also use a symbian smart phone and 
install the wireless database viewer plus, but it is costly. 
In order to overcome this problem, a wireless database 
searching scheme has been developed. From anywhere 
people can get the valuable information about any book in a 
library. SMS can be sent between users or to and from an 
application, which gives service development an extra 
flexibility and encourages innovation [1, 8]. Basically, it 
interacts between library and external world. It is low cost, 
user-friendly and convenient for secondary development. 
This paper is organized as follows: In Section II, 
detailed design of the scheme has been presented. This is 
followed by its experimental results explained in Section 
III. Discussion is also given in Section IV. Conclusion and 
future work are given in Section V.  
II. DETAILED DESIGN 
A. 
Functional Module Designs 
The main goal of this scheme is to get useful 
information about any book wirelessly from a server in the 
library. A block diagram of this scheme is given in Fig. 1. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

The scheme is divided into seven functional modules, and 
each can provide a different interface and feature 
implementation. 
A GSM module provides a standard serial interface, 
which has AT commands interface to communicate between 
a mobile platform and a Data Terminal Equipment (DTE). 
Therefore, we can use AT commands through serial port to 
control GSM modem and achieve its receiving and sending 
short messages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The switching circuit provides different role to maintain 
the 
communication 
between 
GSM 
module 
and 
Microcontroller unit (MCU) or MCU and server. Two 
control pins from MCU are connected to the switching 
circuit to control the switching functionalities. 
MCU (basically ATMEGA32A [12]) is mainly 
responsible for coding, which controls the total flow of 
different modules to make other modules manage their own 
processes. It also maintains two control pins, which are 
responsible for communication between GSM module and 
computer. This module extracts the message content and 
sends to the computer via the switching circuit. Then the 
module receives result from computer and sends it back to 
the user through GSM module. 
A Computer is used as a search engine, which includes 
database server and a java application. Database contains 
specifications of the items (here, books) and its current 
stock. The application receives query from MCU through 
RS232 serial port using DB9 female connector, searches in 
database and sends back the result to the MCU. MAX232 is 
used to communicate between MCU and RS232 serial port 
to convert from/to TTL voltage level to/from RS232 
voltage levels. 
LCD display unit is connected with MCU and shows the 
status of different data transferring stages. 
B.  System Software Architecture Design 
The System software architecture design includes 
mainly MCU functions and computer functions. 
1) MCU Functions 
MCU functional diagram is shown in Fig. 2. MCU 
functions include message content, mobile no. and data & 
time extraction, check whether the message is received 
from an authorized mobile number. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Block diagram of the system. 
GSM 
MODULE 
SWITCHING 
CIRCUIT 
MAX232 
RS232 
COMPUTER 
MCU 
LCD 
DISPLAY 
UNIT 
MCU connect 
to GSM module 
through 
switching ckt. 
Msg rcvd from 
users 
Extract “mobile 
no.”, “msg 
content” and 
“date & time” 
Is mobile no. 
Authorized? 
MCU connect 
to the computer 
through 
switching ckt. 
Go for update 
the database 
Read msg 
content from 
serial port and 
go for search 
Write result to 
the serial port 
Result rcvd from 
search engine 
Waiting for result 
yes 
no 
Sending result to 
the users’ mobile 
Figure 2. MCU functional diagram 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

If yes, then go for database updating; otherwise, go for 
database searching. In case of database searching, at first 
connects MCU to the computer through switching circuit, 
then sends the message content to the computer and waiting 
for the searching result. After receiving the result from the 
computer, system connects MCU to the GSM module and 
sends the result to the users’ mobile through the GSM 
module. These functions have been implemented using C 
programming. 
For debugging AVR software the AVR Studio 4 have 
been used as an Integrated Development Environment. The 
AVR Studio allows chip simulation and in-circuit emulation 
for the AVR family of microcontrollers. The AVR Studio 
uses a COF object file for simulation. This file is created 
with through the C compiler by selecting COF as the output 
file type. 
2) Computer Functions 
 
Computer functions include mainly database searching 
and updating. Making a database connection has been done 
already. After reading data through a serial port, searching 
is to be done and the results to be written to the serial port. 
These functions have been developed using Java 
programming. 
Basically the JAVA application of the system is always 
in running condition, when data comes through the serial 
port, searching will be done by the application and send the 
result through serial port to the microcontroller. To run 
JAVA application some system requirements (like JDK 6 
from Sun/Oracle and Eclipse IDE for Java Developers) 
have been installed. We have used RXTX Serial port 
Library to access serial port with Java. In our Java program 
we have implemented Serial-Port-Event-Listener and 
overrode the serial-Event method. Whenever data is coming 
in serial port, this method is automatically called. For 
designing the system, we have used Microsoft office access 
2007. 
 
C. 
Operation Process 
Using wireless database searching scheme any external 
user can search for a particular book automatically within a 
short time period from anywhere. They have to send a 
message containing the book description from their mobile 
phone and after some time, they will get information 
regarding status of that particular book. 
Normally, GSM module is connected to the MCU 
through switching circuit. After receiving any message, 
MCU extracts mobile number, message content and date & 
time, and then displays all the data through LCD display 
unit. Then MCU is connected to the computer through 
switching circuit. A Java application is always in running 
condition in the computer system. After reading the 
message content from the serial port, Java application will 
search in database and write the result to the serial port. 
After getting result, MCU will be connected to the GSM 
module and send back the result to the users’ mobile. Using 
this scheme, authorized person can also update the database 
remotely. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
 
A. 
Experimental setup 
The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
We have designed a Microsoft Access database as 
shown in Fig. 5. The book-Details is the Table name and 
there are some fields (such as title, author, accession-no, 
copyright, edition and volume). For testing the system, we 
have included two same title of aa, single title of bb and 
none title of cc. 
After powered on the PC, we have to open Eclipse 
environment [13] and run that application as Java 
application as shown in Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 3. Front view of experimental setup 
 
Figure 4. Back view of experimental setup 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. 
Steps for Results 
After switching the system on, LCD initialization, baud rate 
and input-output pins are set up, that are a part of the 
primary settings. During this time, LCD module displays 
the message “INITIALIZING…” which is shown in Fig. 7. 
After completing these tasks, “READY……” is exhibited, 
this is shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 9 shows the message content, 
which will be sent to the system. After receiving the 
message through GSM, the number from which the message 
has come, message content and message details (like date 
and time) will be shown in LCD module in Figs. 10 – 12. 
Then the content is sent to the computer and the status will 
be shown in Fig. 13. After that, the computer sends the 
response to the user mobile. The status and useful 
information received by mobile are shown in Figs. 14 – 15. 
Similarly, for different status, the computer sends different 
messages to the user mobile, which are shown in Figs. 16 
and 17. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Microsoft Access database 
 
Figure 6. Running Java application 
 
Figure 7. Display after powered on 
 
Figure 8. Display after initializing 
 
Figure 9. Searching for “aa” 
 
Figure 11. Display the msg content 
 
Figure 10. Display the mobile no. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Similarly searching for T:bb, we have received 
“AVAILABLE ONLY ONE COPY”. 
 
 
 
Searching for T:cc, we have received “CURRENTLY 
NOT AVAILABLE”. 
 
 
 
IV. DISCUSSION 
 
The experimental flow chart is found to have quite good 
response with the library users’ queries from anywhere. The 
experimental results are found to have good repeatability. 
The GSM module of the receiver side finds the transmitter 
output and the useful information is sent back to the users 
according to their queries quite satisfactorily. The designed 
circuit saves energy and valuable time. Another advantage 
of this system is its individuality. It works automatically 
after receiving message without any involvement. The 
material cost of this system is not a big deal for a library 
and its design is very simple. 
When the system is powered on, it should be properly 
started. Otherwise problem will occur. Character missing 
out may be occurred. Another thing is to be noticed that 
after every time powered-on the PC, the software 
application should be run manually. After that, no need to 
be taken care about the system. 
Figure 14. Data received from PC 
 
Figure 13. Data sending to the PC 
 
Figure 12. Display date & time 
 
Figure 15. Msg received from the system 
 
Figure 16. Msg received for “bb” 
 
Figure 17. Msg received for “cc” 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

The design has a good flexibility and can be 
implemented in different organizations regarding part-
searching facility, medical stores, banking sectors and even 
government sectors. So, people can easily avoid the queue 
at the counters and save their valuable time and energy. 
Hence the developed automation system may be treated as 
low cost reliable and user friendly system. 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
Nowadays, the database is more and more widely used, 
but the research combining it with message system is still 
limited. This Database system (DBS) is connected with 
mobile phone; hence the library user can get useful 
information rapidly. On the average, it only takes 1-2 
minutes (depending upon size of the database and length of 
the title) to send a message, that is, the DBS has a higher 
efficiency of delivering the information. From the 
experimental study, a good reputability has been observed 
in the proposed system designing. Moreover, the 
experimental results remain unchanged. The GSM module 
finds the transmitter (users’ mobile) output and the useful 
information is returned back to the users according to their 
queries quite satisfactorily. The designed circuit saves 
energy and valuable time. It works automatically without 
any involvement. The system can not only strengthen the 
independency and individuality of people, but also promote 
people’s learning. 
There are several scopes for improving on the work 
presented here. During searching functionality (from 
receiving message to transmitting message), if the GSM 
module is receiving any new message, the message will be 
wasted because at that time microcontroller is being 
connected to the computer. In future work, a queue can be 
implemented in the system which stores the new messages 
and after completion of the current cycle the next message 
will come from the queue. For “available only one copy” 
the book cannot be issued. In future work, a system can be 
implemented, using that we can get a soft-copy of required 
rare document like journal papers, reference book, etc. 
(after deposition of required amount of money in bank) 
through email independently within a short time period. We 
will study these in the near future. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Younis, “Analysis of Wireless Data Transmission over 
GSM 
Short 
Message 
Service 
(GSM-SMS)”, 
http://crystal.uta.edu/~kumar/cse6345/Shehzad_Younis.pdf. 
[2] K. Pahlavan, and A. H. Levesque, “Wireless Data 
Communications”, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 82, no. 9, 
September 1994, pp. 1398-1430.   
[3] B. Zheng, W. C. Lee, and D. L. Lee, “On Searching 
Continuous k Nearest Neighbours in Wireless Data 
Broadcast 
Systems”, 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Mobile 
Computing, vol. 6, no. 7, July 2007, pp. 748-761. 
[4] N. Wang, “Material Information Management System Design 
in Enterprise”, Proceedings of 2nd International Conference 
on Computer and Automation Engineering [ICCAE 2010], 
Feb. 2010, pp. 521-525. 
[5] S. Cao, “GSM Modem-based Mobile Auxiliary Learning 
System” 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computational 
Intelligence and Software Engineering [CISE 2009], Dec. 
2009, pp. 1-4.  
[6] T. Jamil, “Design and Implementation of a Wireless 
Automatic Meter Reading System” Proceedings of the World 
Congress on Engineering [WCE 2008], vol. I, July 2008, 
UK.  
[7] R. C. Figueiredo, A. M. O. Riberio, R. Arthur, and E. 
Conforti, “Remote SMS Instrumentation Supervision and 
Control 
Using 
LabVIEW”, 
pp. 
317-342. 
www.intechopen.com. 
[8] A. N. Ansari, A. Navada, S. Agarwal, S. Patil, and B. A. 
Sonkamble, “Automation of Attendance System using RFID, 
Biometrics, 
GSM 
Modem 
with 
.Net 
Framework”, 
International Conference on Multimedia Technology [ICMT 
2011], July 2011, pp. 2976-2979 
[9] Q. Hu, D. L. Lee, and W. C. Lee, “Performance Evaluation 
of a Wireless Hierarchical Data Dissemination System”,  
IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
Networking, USA,  pp. 163-173. 
[10] C. Haifeng, “SQL-based Educational Management System 
Design”, 
2nd 
International 
Conference 
on Computer 
Engineering and Technology [ICCET 2010], April 2010, pp. 
v3 (441-445). 
[11] M. S. Hansen, “Wireless access to a pharmaceutical 
database: A demonstrator for data driven Wireless 
Application Protocol applications in medical information 
processing”, J Med Internet Res 2001;3(1):e4. 
[12] http://www.alldatasheet.com/datasheet-
pdf/pdf/255661/ATMEL/ATMEGA32A.html. 
[13] http:/www.eclipse.org/
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

