Smart City as an Integrated Enterprise: A Business Process Centric Framework 
Addressing Challenges in Systems Integration 
Vahid Javidroozi, Hanifa Shah, Ardavan Amini, Adrian Cole 
Technology, Engineering, and the Environment (TEE) Faculty 
Birmingham City University (BCU) 
Birmingham, UK 
{Vahid.Javidroozi, Hanifa.Shah, Ardavan.Amini, Adrian.Cole}@bcu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— Smart city is emerging as a response to mitigate the 
problems of fast urbanization and unpredictability of 
standards, policies, and citizens’ needs in urban areas. For a 
city to be smart, integration of city systems is essential in order 
to provide flexibility and access to real-time information for 
creation and delivery of efficient services. Business Process 
Change (BPC) is essential for systems integration in smart city 
development. 
Similar 
to 
BPC 
in 
Enterprise 
Systems 
Integration (ESI) for the private sector, changing business 
processes for smart cities encompasses a number of challenges 
and opportunities. This research-in-progress considers a city as 
an enterprise and attempts to develop a framework to address 
the 
business 
process-centric 
challenges 
in 
smart 
city 
development. ESI approaches, techniques, and tools will be 
utilized in this context. Thus, the proposed framework will 
identify and address BPC challenges in all steps of BPC for 
smart cities, using BPC tools, techniques, and approaches in 
ESI.  
Keywords-Enterprise systems integration; ESI; Smart city; 
Business process change; BPC; Smart city challenges.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
More than half of the world’s population now lives in 
cities [1]. Around 70 per cent of the world’s populations is 
likely to live in cities by 2050 [2]. Livability of these fast 
growing cities depends upon our ability to address the 
challenges 
that 
include 
human 
health, 
transport, 
infrastructures, waste management, and air pollution [1]. In 
order to address these challenges and respond to changing 
citizens’ needs, all systems of a city should communicate 
with each other accurately and use each other’s resources 
timely and speedily [3]. 
Similarly, 
today’s 
unpredictable 
and 
competitive 
business environment needs real-time information to make 
timely decisions by enterprises. This is achieved by 
integration of all systems, applications, and information, 
normally referred as Enterprise Systems Integration (ESI), 
which includes a massive change within the enterprise [4]. 
ESI is the most important and useful change within the 
organization to provide real-time information, make timely 
decisions, and provide cheaper, quicker, and high quality 
services [5]. One of the most imperative actions for ESI is 
Business Process Change (BPC) that is defined as analyze, 
redesign, and improve existing business processes to achieve 
a competitive advantage in performance [6].  
Hence, ESI and smart city development have very similar 
characteristics especially in their aim and objectives. This 
research-in-progress considers a city as a large-scale 
enterprise and focuses on challenges and approaches in 
changing business processes within city systems. Therefore, 
similar to enterprise systems, integrating all city systems is 
necessary, and this will be accomplished during the 
development of a so-called smart city [7][8].  
This section describes the research gap, contribution to 
knowledge, and the aim and objectives of the proposed 
research. The next section provides an overview of the 
context in both areas of ESI and smart city. Then the 
methodology for undertaking the research will be explained.   
A. Research gap 
By considering a city as an enterprise and the necessity 
of systems integration in this large-scale enterprise, BPC will 
be the main meta-process in smart city development. Similar 
to BPC in ESI, developing a smart city by integrating city 
systems and processes/services comprises a number of 
challenges and opportunities that have been discussed by 
some researchers. For instance, Vojdani [8] argued that 
flexibility and agility of BPC for smart city, are two 
challenges in dealing with the unpredictability of the urban 
environment. These challenges also strengthen the necessity 
of systems integration for smart city. Moreover, Nam and 
Pardo [9] have discussed the business process related 
challenges for smart city by analyzing service delivery in 
two cities. They have explained the challenges like 
interoperability of technology, budgetary constraints, and 
interdepartmental collaboration in the three categories of 
technology, organization, and cross-organization.  
Nevertheless, there is insufficient academic research, 
which particularly and comprehensively describes the 
challenges of BPC in smart city development. In addition, no 
research has discussed the usefulness of ESI solutions for 
smart city. Likewise, no academic literature has specifically 
prioritized the BPC challenges and their solutions in ESI and 
smart city development. The limited research that has been 
conducted [10][11], has emphasized major BPC challenges 
in ESI without addressing the priority issue. Many 
researchers like Chourabi et al. [1] and Nam and Pardo [11] 
still talk about the lack of academic literature in the smart 
city subject. Yet, research on the concept, challenges, and 
BPC for smart city has commenced. Liu and Peng [7] believe 
that smart city development still blindly persists on the 
technological layer, and further studies are required 
specifying policies and standards in order to reduce process 
integration issues. As stated by Chourabi et al. [1], they have 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

started filling the knowledge gap regarding the challenges of 
smart city development by providing a framework for the 
principles and success factors of smart city initiatives, but 
they have focused more on the technology perspective. This 
study will continue the previous attempts and will take a step 
forward closing the gap in the literature regarding BPC for 
smart city. Thus, more findings especially from primary 
research are required. This research will also benefit from 
exploring the BPC challenges and potential solutions in ESI, 
in order to address the BPC issues for smart city.  
B. Aim and objectives of the research 
The aim is to explore and address the BPC challenges in 
smart city development using tools, techniques, and 
approaches of BPC in ESI.  
The proposed objectives are as follows:  
• 
Identify the challenges of BPC in ESI  
• 
Identify the challenges of BPC for smart city 
• 
Compare and prioritize identified challenges in 
ESI and smart city development 
• 
Examine process change solutions, tools, and 
techniques for ESI and assessing (qualitatively) 
their usefulness and effectiveness for smart city 
in order to address the challenges 
• 
Develop a framework to address BPC challenges 
in smart city development  
II. 
CONTEXT 
This section demonstrates the empirical foundation of the 
research-in-progress including the two main fields of ESI 
and smart city, as well as the relationships between them, by 
critically analyzing the previous investigations leading up to 
our proposed aim and objectives.  
A. Enterprise Systems Integration (ESI) 
ESI represents a progressive and repetitive unification of 
technologies, 
human 
performance, 
operations, 
and 
knowledge of the enterprise as a whole [12]. Thus, it is 
critical to improve all aspects of the business key drivers, 
which are processes, people, technology, and flow of 
information amongst them. Technology is only an enabler 
and allows people to manage BPC [13]. The flow of 
information through all of these elements is also necessary 
especially when technology is inserted for BPC [14]. 
Therefore, BPC is the main area of activities in ESI, and 
enterprises should shift from functional-oriented integration 
to process-oriented integration [22][23]. In addition, BPC 
addresses some issues in other areas of ESI. 
BPC is a complex task and includes many challenges, 
such as inter-dependencies between processes, departments, 
stakeholders, 
their 
attributes, 
and 
applications 
[16]. 
Moreover, redesigned and new business processes should 
deal with continuous change. Therefore, flexibility and 
complexity are two imperative issues of BPC that can be 
addressed by effective Business Process Management (BPM) 
[13]. Additionally, BPM as a systematic approach can 
address inter-relationship issues in BPC [18]. Furthermore, 
choosing an accessible Business Process Modeling (BPMo) 
tool, such as Event driven Process chain Mark-up Language 
(EPML) addresses the issues of interoperability in BPC [19]. 
In addition, BPC challenges are involved with “people” and 
“technology” aspects of business change. For instance, 
“ability of employees to learn” and “cultural readiness” are 
major factors in BPC that are directly related to People. 
Moreover, “IT influence in BPC” is a technology related 
challenge that needs to be tackled by an appropriate systems 
integrator [17]. 
B. Smart city 
Liu and Peng [7] signify that two factors of 
“Urbanization” and “Industrialization” cause today’s so-
called “city disease”. Birmingham city council [20] has 
classified urbanization related issues into six categories of 
economic, well-being, mobility, environmental, digital 
inclusion, and the need for an integrated approach (“Joined-
Up approach”). Unpredictability of a city’s environment and 
continuous change in city policies, standards, and residents’ 
needs are the main urbanization related challenges for local 
governments. Thus, access to real-time data and flexibility in 
city systems is required in order to create and deliver 
services [8]. To promote sustainable living, it is necessary to 
change the traditional urban activities and functions. In other 
words, the managers and authorities have to manage their 
cities in a smarter way [1]. In addition, local governments 
face issues related to different sectors, such as multiple 
stakeholders, 
high 
interdependency, 
cross-sectoral 
cooperation, 
and 
inter-departmental 
coordination 
[9]. 
Moreover, Liu and Peng [7] present interconnectivity 
through various sectors of a city as a significant issue for city 
leaders. As a result, full integration of city systems is 
required in order to enable access to real-time data by all 
sectors [9]. 
Table I provides some definitions for smart city in 
various aspects: 
TABLE I.  
SMART CITY DEFINITIONS. 
Smart city definition 
Significant 
focus 
Study 
A place for utilizing technology to process large 
amount of data to produce real time information, 
knowledge, and intelligence  
Technology 
[2] 
An integration of technology & strategies to 
improve quality of life, economy & sustainability 
Technology 
[21] 
“A city well-performing in a forward-looking way 
in various characteristics, built on the smart 
combination of endowments and activities of self-
decisive, independent and aware citizens” 
Visions of 
well-being in 
the future 
(People) 
[22] 
A place in which there is enough communication 
between people and city’s systems, enough 
mobility, and no excess of consumption 
- People 
- Systems 
integration 
[23] 
“A city that monitors and integrates conditions of 
all of its critical infrastructures” 
Technology 
[24] 
A larger system that integrates elements of 
physical & technological infrastructures enabling 
ubiquitous use of mobile and virtual technologies, 
and human infrastructures. 
- Technology 
- People 
[25] 
The use of smart technologies to build and 
integrate critical infrastructures and services to 
increases 
in 
efficiency, 
effectiveness, 
transparency, convenience, and sustainability 
- Technology 
- Process 
[26] 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

These explanations emphasize some principles, such as 
“systems integration”, “efficiency of services”, and “access 
to real time information”, but they mostly concentrate on 
technology perspectives. This research, adapts these 
principles by focusing on the business process viewpoint 
and defines “smart city” as an integration of the systems 
within a city and change their business processes in order to 
provide access to real time information and knowledge by 
all sectors and enhance communication between them. In 
this environment, agile and efficient services are delivered 
at real time and with a lower cost. This is a process-centric 
definition and indicates that the integration of city systems 
and their services is a necessity for a city to be smart.   
C. City as an enterprise 
In order to address the challenges for local government in 
creation and delivery of smart services, this research-in-
progress considers a city as a large-scale enterprise, which 
includes all of its elements (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1.  City as an enterprise. 
As shown in this figure, service providers are considered 
as 
suppliers, 
citizens 
are 
customers, 
and 
local 
government/authorities are the managers and leaders of the 
enterprise. Moreover, any enterprise consists of systems such 
as finance, human resources, and sales. Likewise, a city 
encompasses a number of sectors/systems such as transport, 
health care, energy, and education. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The methodology to undertake the proposed research is 
based on a mixture of gathering data from literature, 
questionnaire, and interview; discussion and comparison of 
gathered data; as well as development and evaluation of the 
main research outcome, which is a framework to address 
BPC challenges for smart city.  
Firstly, following datasets (combination of secondary and 
primary data), must be collected for this research:  
• 
Dataset-1: Challenges of BPC in ESI and 
prioritization 
• 
Dataset-2: BPC tools and techniques to address 
BPC challenges in ESI 
• 
Dataset-3: Challenges of BPC in smart city 
development and prioritization  
The first two datasets will be gathered through a 
comprehensive literature review to identify the challenges 
related to changing business processes for ESI. These data 
collection phases will be supported by some theories such as 
system thinking theory [27] and systems theory [28] to 
underpin the concepts of system, enterprise systems, and 
ESI; business process change management theory [29], 
which identifies and categorizes some BPC challenges in 
various ways; and contingency theory, which emphasizes 
that a variety of challenges need to be addressed for a 
successful change [30].  
Then, primary research through questionnaire is carried 
out to prioritize the BPC challenges in ESI. The 
questionnaire will be responded by enterprises that have 
already implemented an ESI solution (e.g. government 
agencies and commercial organizations), as well as ESI 
implementers and solution providers for enterprises. These 
data groups will help to generate information and knowledge 
to address BPC challenges in smart city development.  
Dataset-3 will be predominantly gathered through primary 
research by undertaking interviews as a way to properly 
understand the specific issues, which are faced by smart city 
developers in real-life. City authorities, which are initializing 
smart city projects, as well as, solution providers for Smart 
Cities will be interviewed for this data collection phase. The 
prioritization part will be performed during interview and by 
utilizing prioritization results from dataset-1.  
By considering smart city as an integrated enterprise, the 
results from dataset-3 will be compared with dataset-1, in 
order to apply tools, techniques, and approaches for 
addressing BPC challenges in smart city development. This 
is also underpinned and upheld by complexity theory [31] 
and organization as system theory [32]. At the end of this 
phase, a preliminary framework for service transformation in 
smart city development will be formulated and will be 
incrementally adjusted to achieve the research outcome. All 
theories outlined above as well as the BPC model that has 
been theorized by Kettinger et al. [32] and the business 
process improvement model developed by Lodhi et al. [16], 
will be utilized in order to design and develop the 
framework, which demonstrates tools, techniques, and 
approaches for addressing the challenges in every BPC step.  
The final updated framework will be evaluated and 
possibly modified through an expert discussion in three areas 
as follows:  
• 
Contents and structure of the framework 
• 
Identified solution(s), tools, and techniques to 
address the BPC challenges in smart city 
development 
• 
Implementability of the framework  
This will be accomplished by analyzing and discussing the 
framework with smart city experts from academia, 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

authorities (smart city developers), and industry (smart city 
solution providers). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
From the literature, it has been demonstrated that very 
few researchers have discussed the concept and the 
challenges of smart city development, especially in BPC 
perspective. In addition, there is no academic research 
regarding usability of ESI approaches, tools, and techniques 
to address the BPC issues for smart city. Likewise, no 
academic literature has set priorities for all BPC challenges 
in ESI and smart city development. Hence, comprehensive 
research including gathering data from secondary and 
primary sources is necessary to close the gap in the literature 
and in response to the increasing demand with respect to the 
above subjects.  
This research proposes that BPC is essential in the 
integration of city systems for smart city development. 
Similar to ESI, there are many challenges in BPC for smart 
city. The proposed research considers a city as an enterprise 
and attempts to develop a framework to explore and address 
BPC challenges in smart city development, using BPC tools, 
techniques, and approaches in ESI.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
H. Chourabi et al., “Understanding Smart Cities: An 
Integrative Framework,” in 2012 45th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2012, pp. 2289–2297. 
[2] 
H. Schaffers, N. Komninos, and M. Pallot, “Smart Cities as 
Innovation Ecosystems  Sustained by the Future Internet,” 
2012. 
[3] 
T. M. McCarthy-Byrne and J. T. Mentzer, “Integrating 
supply chain infrastructure and process to create joint value,” 
Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag., vol. 41, no. 2, Mar. 
2011, pp. 135–161. 
[4] 
J. Motwani, D. Mirchandani, M. Madan, and A. 
Gunasekaran, “Successful implementation of ERP projects: 
Evidence from two case studies,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 75, 
2002, pp. 83 – 96. 
[5] 
M. Hobday, “Systems integration: a core capability of the 
modern corporation,” Ind. Corp. Chang., vol. 14, no. 6, Aug. 
2005, pp. 1109–1143. 
[6] 
P. Harmon, Business Process Change: A Manager’s Guide to 
Improving, Redesigning and Automating Processes. San 
Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2003. 
[7] 
P. Liu and Z. Peng, “Smart Cities in China,” Computer 
(Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. PP, no. 99, 2013, pp. 1–1. 
[8] 
A. Vojdani, “Smart Integration,” IEEE Power Energy Mag., 
vol. 6, no. 6, 2008, pp. 71–79. 
[9] 
T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Building Understanding of 
Municipal Service Integration: A Comparative Case Study of 
NYC311 and Philly311,” in 2013 46th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2013, pp. 1953–1962. 
[10] M. Al-Mashari, “Business process management – major 
challenges,” Bus. Process Manag. J., vol. 8, no. 5, Jan. 2002, 
pp. 411–412. 
[11] T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Smart city as urban innovation,” in 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Theory 
and Practice of Electronic Governance - ICEGOV ’11, 2011, 
p. 185. 
[12] J. M. Myerson, Enterprise Systems Integration, Second 
Edition (Best Practices). Auerbach Publications, 2001. 
[13] D. R. Shaw, C. P. Holland, P. Kawalek, B. Snowdon, and B. 
Warboys, “Elements of a business process management 
system: theory and practice,” Bus. Process Manag. J., vol. 
13, no. 1, Feb. 2007, pp. 91–107. 
[14] N. Berente, B. Vandenbosch, and B. Aubert, “Information 
flows and business process integration,” Bus. Process 
Manag. J., vol. 15, no. 1, Jun. 2009, pp. 119–141. 
[15] H.-H. Hvolby and J. H. Trienekens, “Challenges in business 
systems integration,” Comput. Ind., vol. 61, no. 9, Dec. 
2010, pp. 808–812. 
[16] A. Lodhi, V. Köppen, and G. Saake, “Business Process 
Improvement Framework and Representational Support,” in 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on 
Intelligent Human Computer Interaction, 2013, vol. 179, pp. 
155–167. 
[17] J. Motwani, “A business process change framework for 
examining lean manufacturing: a case study,” Ind. Manag. 
Data Syst., vol. 103, no. 5, Jan. 2003, pp. 339–346. 
[18] M. Segatto, “Business process management: a systemic 
approach?,” Bus. Process Manag. J., vol. 19, no. 4, Jul. 2013, 
pp. 698–714. 
[19] D. D. Vaziri and D. DeOliveira, “Accessible Business 
Process Modelling,” Int. J. Soc. Hum. Sci., vol. 6, 2012, pp. 
205–216. 
[20] Birmingham City Council, “Birmingham Smart City,” 
Birmingham, 2012. 
[21] Steria.com, “Smart Cities will be enabled by Smart IT,” 
2011. [Online]. Available: http://goo.gl/RaFhuK. [Accessed: 
25-May-2014]. 
[22] R. Giffinger and G. Haindlmaier, “Smart cities ranking: an 
effective instrument for the positioning of the cities?,” ACE 
Archit. City Environ., vol. 4, no. 12, Feb. 2010, pp. 7–26. 
[23] J. Mortensen, F. J. Rohde, K. R. Kristiansen, M. Kanstrup-
Clausen, and M. Lubanski, “Danish smart Cities: sustainable 
living in an urban world,” Copenhagen, 2012. 
[24] R. E. Hall, B. Bowerman, J. Braverman, J. Taylor, H. 
Todosow, and U. von Wimmersperg, “The vision of a smart 
city,” Sep. 2000. 
[25] T. Nam et al., “Smart cities and service integration,” in 
Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Digital 
Government Research Conference on Digital Government 
Innovation in Challenging Times - dg.o ’11, 2011, p. 333. 
[26] A. Aldama-Nalda et al., “Smart cities and service integration 
initiatives in North American cities: Astatus report,” in 
Proceedings of the 13th Annual International Conference on 
Digital Government Research - dg.o ’12, 2012, p. 289. 
[27] P. Checkland, Systems Thinking, Systems Practice: Includes 
a 30-Year Retrospective. {John Wiley & Sons}, 1999. 
[28] M. Rhydderch, “Organisational change theory and the use of 
indicators in general practice,” Qual. Saf. Heal. Care, vol. 13, 
no. 3, Jun. 2004, pp. 213–217. 
[29] W. J. Kettinger and V. Grover, “Toward a theory of business 
process change management - ProQuest,” J. Manag. Inf. 
Syst., vol. 12, no. 1, 1995, p. 9. 
[30] D. Schniederjans and S. Yadav, “Successful ERP 
implementation: an integrative model,” Bus. Process Manag. 
J., vol. 19, no. 2, Dec. 2013, pp. 364–398. 
[31] P. Anderson, “Perspective: Complexity Theory and 
Organization Science,” Organ. Sci., vol. 10, no. 3, Jun. 1999, 
pp. 216–232. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

[32] P. Harmon and B. P. Trends, Business Process Change: A 
Guide for Business Managers and BPM and Six Sigma 
Professionals. Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann, 2010.  
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

