Smart Mobility for Reducing School Gate Congestion in Europe  
Innovating Smartphone Walking School Buses for Children of Primary Age
Norgate, S.H., Street, N. & Smith, L. 
Psychology, University of Salford 
Greater Manchester, U.K. 
S.H.Norgate@salford.ac.uk 
N.Jones@salford.ac.uk 
e.smith1@salford.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Winstanley, C., Davies, N., & Harding, M 
InfoLab21, Lancaster University 
Lancaster, U.K. 
c.winstanley@lancaster.ac.uk 
nigel@comp.lancs.ac.uk 
m.harding@lancaster.ac.uk
 
Cherrett, T., 
University of Southampton 
Southampton, U.K. 
T.J.Cherrett@soton.ac.uk 
 
Dickenson, J. 
Bournemouth University 
Bournemouth, U.K. 
J.Dickenson@bournemouth.ac.uk 
 
Speed, C. 
University of Edinburgh 
Scotland 
C.Speed@ed.ac.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract - In this paper, we report research on the impact of 
a Smartphone enabled 'Walking School Bus' Application 
(WSB App) on parental waiting experience, with a view to 
influencing a reduction in school gate traffic congestion in 
European cities. The core concept of the WSB App is to 
enable parents to track - real-time - the arrival of their 
child’s WSB. This is through use of a moving icon 
representing the WSB as it sets off from the start and 
progresses along designated stops towards school, guided by 
an adult WSB coordinator. Our research aim was to 
understand how the cognitive appraisal of the waiting 
experience of the parents differed with and without the 
intervention of the WSB App. A sample of 46 parents were 
recruited from 6 primary schools in North West England, 
and baseline data were collected on their waiting experience 
either in the experimental (n=24) or control (n=22) group. 
Preliminary analyses involving a comparison between 
conditions showed no significant difference on perception of 
duration of wait or perception of punctuality. In addition, 
using ‘thematic’ analyses, three-quarters of respondents 
reported benefits; in particular, the timing and child use of 
the WSB were identified as beneficial. The wider 
implications of application of real-time information systems 
to modes of active transportation are discussed.  
Keywords-Smart 
Mobility; 
Walking 
School 
Bus; 
Application; Mobile Technology; Children 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In 2013, the most congested European cities were 
Brussels, 
London, 
Antwerp, 
Rotterdam, 
Stuttgart, 
Cologne, Milan, Paris, Ghent and Karlsruhe [1]. In 
Brussels – the worst affected - drivers can expect to spend 
as much as 83 hours per year waiting in their cars [1].  
Increasingly problematic to most European urban centres 
in peak travel time is the increase in car use in the 
morning school run, resulting in congestion around school 
drop-off zones. Evidence suggests that in the UK around 
43% of primary school children travel to school by car 
compared with 37% a decade ago [2]. This increase in 
traffic, combined with decreases in ‘active transport’ 
(cycling and walking) to school in primary school 
children  has raised associated concerns about impact of 
air quality, child health-related fitness and independent 
mobility.  
Children of primary school age are on the cusp of 
becoming independently mobile, and soon to be making 
decisions about modes for future commutes. Significantly, 
we know that from a life course perspective that habit 
uptake in early life, in the area of active transportation is 
likely to inform children’s future mobility behaviors [3], 
and there is a call for sustainable and convenient transport 
experience to influence future choice decisions. Today’s 
primary children are the commuters of the future. And 
with projected birth rate trends in some European 
countries – for example, the population of UK pupils in 
state funded schools is projected to rise 18% by 2020  [4]  
there is a need to provide convenient alternatives to car 
travel in the future. 
Collectively, these trends make it timely to consider 
alternatives in transport, such as walking school buses 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

(WSB) to be promoted as a sustainable and convenient 
choice to shape future travel behavior [5].  
The concept of a WSB was innovated in Australia [6] to 
enable children to get to school walking as a group, 
supervised by young people or adults. Traditionally, 
WSBs have involved leaders or coordinators using an 
informal timetable where there is some indication of a 
clock-time when a bus is expected to arrive at a particular 
stop. Whilst the innovative idea has been recognized by 
those who have adopted it - particularly in New Zealand, 
USA and Australia [5] -  there is still scope to understand 
the barriers to choosing the WSB over other (less 
sustainable) modes of transport.  
One potential barrier to uptake is the extent of visual 
access to the WSB’s progress and arrival at stops on the 
way to the destination, particularly the case where the 
local highways are non-linear or when the WSB route 
changes orientation. The uncertainty in waiting times or 
confidence in arrival may influence parents/guardians 
uptake of a WSB use.  It could be argued that if  children 
and parents had a method to visually track the WSB as it 
leaves the start and travels along scheduled stops until it 
reaches the school, as with a smartphone enabled WSB, 
this may help break down these barriers. 
In this paper, we report on the innovation of the 
Smartphone enabled WSB which exploits a real-time 
information system, to make travel to school a potentially 
more convenient initiative for parents and children.  
 
A. Real Time Information System for Promoting Smart 
Mobility 
 
In the domain of public transport, real time 
information systems have long been used with the 
intention to encourage commuter confidence in the 
reliability of services. Previous research of the impact of 
real-time information systems on public transport systems 
found increased information about accurate arrival time 
results in a more cognitively satisfying wait [7]. In 
addition, the more confidence that a user has in the 
reliability of a service, the more likely a mode of transport 
is to be perceived as convenient and usable, particularly in 
adverse weather conditions.     
By understanding the influence of waiting experience and 
confidence in service, we hope to unpick the barriers to 
choosing sustainable transport in travelling to school and 
overcome the potential worsening of congestion and non-
sustainable travel choices in Europe and further afield.  
The WSB application involves using the tracking ability 
available in Smartphones to give the WSB new temporal 
visibility to users and potential users (parents, children, 
and walking bus coordinators) to optimize fluidity across 
scheduling boundaries between the morning school run 
and morning work start times, reducing some potential 
barriers to WSB use such as waiting time information and 
confidence in WSB arrival and punctuality. 
This quest is timely in the context that between 2012 and 
2013 the proportion of the global population using smart 
phones increased from 16% to 20.2%, with a further 
projected rise to 24.4% in 2014 [8]. In the UK, the 
ownership of Smartphones increased from 30% to 45% of 
the population within 2011 alone [9]. On the basis of this 
rising ownership, any issue around digital inclusion did 
not seem a barrier to the access to the innovation.  
In the current study, we investigate the extent to which 
real-time information systems can be utilized to promote 
perception of a quality waiting experience, thereby 
facilitating parents to uptake this service. Specifically, 
this 
research 
explores 
the 
potential 
impact 
that 
Smartphone enabled WSB intervention as a smart 
mobility choice, and focuses on the extent to which this 
real-time information is effective in making a difference 
to user’s waiting experience.  
In this paper, we examine the extent to which this 
innovative smart mobility impacts on the perceived 
waiting experiences of parents using the WSB App. 
Specifically, we investigate the extent to which perceived 
waiting time  - as measured by duration -  is altered as a 
result of the use of the App. Second, we look at any 
differences in perceived punctuality. Finally, we elicit 
comments from the parents on their experiences of using 
the WSB App. 
 
B. Features and Architecture of the Smartphone Enabled 
Walking School Bus Application 
  
A ‘parent’ view of the WSB interface, showing the 
WSB icon and the pick-up points is show in Figure 1 
below. Parents are able to track the movement of the 
WSB along the route displayed. They are able to add their 
children to their chosen WSB stop to allow coordinators 
to expect/know not to expect their child. Once the WSB 
coordinator has pressed ‘start tracking’ – see Figure 2 
below - real time movement alerts and predicted arrival 
times are provided for each stop. 
The WSB application is compatible for all iOS devices 
version 5.0+. Lancaster University hosts the centralised 
web service on a virtual machine cluster. The application 
downloads the pre-established pickup points and displays 
it to the user. It then used the Google Maps Directions 
Service 
to 
create 
a 
route 
for 
the 
user. 
The WSB coordinator uses their application to push their 
location to a central web service every 5 seconds. The 
web service then queries the Google Maps Directions 
service to retrieve real-time prediction information for the 
user. This web service then disseminates this geo-location 
and prediction information to all other parent devices.  
The architecture components in Figure 3 shows the 
publish-subscribe architecture designed for the system. 
The native iPhone application is connected to the WSB 
server back-end through a REST-ful web service. The 
coordinator device publishes its location in a web request 
to the centralised service. When it receives a request it 
interprets the call and stores the pushed information into 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

the database. The parent side of the application then sends 
requests to the centralised web service to retrieve the 
location of the coordinator. The back-end database stores 
the consistent state of the WSB system. 
The devices cache local copies of all the data they receive 
as objects in a SQLLite database.  When the system 
makes a change to this data a sync flag is checked and 
periodically objects are sent back to the server. This 
allows the devices to function and provide useful 
information to the user without having to hear from the 
server for substantive periods. 
The application can also be used by parents to add their 
children to the Walking School Bus. The child's 
information is anonymised, encrypted and sent to the web 
service. This can then be downloaded by the coordinator 
to view the children they need to pick-up at each stop. 
The WSB application developed is an open and secure 
platform which has been created based around the 
smartphone that will enable people to better visualize the 
activity of other people and things relative to their own 
immediate and future movements. 
 
 
Figure 1. Parent view of WSB app user interface 
 
 
Figure 2. WSB coordinator view of WSB app user interface 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Architecture components of WSB App 
 
II. 
STUDY METHOD 
A. Design 
Between May 2013 and July 2014, an experimental 
cross-sectional ‘between groups’ design was adopted to 
compare the perceived waiting experience of parents 
either assigned to the intervention of a smartphone WSB 
Application, or those in a ‘control’ condition who used 
the WSB as they would normally. A between groups 
design was adopted to reduce practice effects. Further, the 
intervention was a one-day intervention trial, due to the 
focus on assessing the impact of  technology on ‘time 
perception’. Two sets of measures were taken, pre- and 
post-test of the perceived waiting time duration and 
perceived confidence of the arrival of the WSB. In 
addition, participants were asked brief question about 
their experience of waiting for the WSB.  
 
B. Sample 
A total of six established WSB’s from primary schools 
in the North West of England were recruited which 
involved 46 parents (24=experimental; 22=control group) 
from a range of low-mid socio-economic demographics. 
Institutional ethical approval was obtained. 
 
 
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
 
 
C. Procedure 
Following the ethical process of informed consent, 
parents completed ‘baseline’ questionnaires about their 
perceptions of waiting experiences using the ‘traditional’ 
WSB. Following this,  their waiting experiences were 
compared before and after using the intervention.  The 
intervention alsted one day. All parents in the intervention 
group received a demo of the WSB Application. 
III. 
OUTCOMES 
 
The quality of the parental waiting experience was 
assessed according to three approaches. The first measure 
was according to perceived waiting time duration.  Our 
preliminary data analyses of the sample collected until 
November 2013 shows that  on a ‘traditional’ WSB, the 
perception of ‘typical’ waiting time is mean of 4 minutes 
(s.d. = 2.82, n=32). On the basis of a comparison between 
conditions, there was no significant difference on this 
measure.  
Second, the same trend occurred for perception of 
punctuality. In the rating of ‘typical’ punctuality, the 
mean score was 4.4 on a Likert scale where ‘5’ is very 
punctual.    
Finally, according to participant perceptions of the 
waiting experience, three-quarters of respondents reported 
benefits, in particular around the timing and/or visibility 
of the WSB. Table I shows representative quotes. Three 
quarters of participants valued the use of the WSB App,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whereas three participants reported issues with the 
functionality of the WSB App.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Overall, the findings showed that there was no adverse 
impact on either the perception of duration of either 
waiting experience or punctuality based on adoption of a 
‘quantitative’ analysis of perception of waiting times. 
This is important because it shows that there was no 
disadvantage of using this real-time information smart 
technology, which clearly matters in the context of getting 
children to school punctually. 
In contrast, the adoption of a thematic analysis showed - 
even on one day trials - explicit evidence of positive 
attitudes by three quarters of parents towards the 
experience of using the WSB Application. In particular, 
both ‘time’ and ‘child use’ were cited by participants as 
reasons for the perceived benefits of use. These outcomes 
are relevant to the planning of the future uptake of the 
WSB App.  
It is also relevant to note that in an earlier phase of the 
research, user attitudes to privacy around future use of the 
WSB App were examined through interviews with 
Headteachers, WSB coordinators and parents/guardians. 
Only a minority of those interviewed from a range of 
socio-demographic groups had concerns, and it has not 
limited longer trials. 
One limitation is that these were outcomes from the basis 
of a one day trial and it remains to be seen whether 
perceptions remain stable across five week trials. 
 
 
 
Theme: 
n 
Representative Comment: 
Positive 
‘Time’ 
6 
“Being able to track the WSB meant we were able to leave the house just before it reached us, cutting down the 
waiting time.” 
Child use 
4 
“The children enjoyed following the bus (on App) learning about where the signal came from.” 
“It was an interesting experience for both my child (name removed) and myself." 
Visibility of WSB 
2 
“Felt App useful as I was able to see where WSB was. Also I was able to see when they arrived at school.” 
Generic 
2 
“The Application was great.” 
Negative 
Usability on the day 
2 
“Bus app did not work so we left early to make sure we did not miss it” 
 
‘Time’ 
1 
"The bus arrived later at 8:17hrs when its latest time is 8:17hrs, I was anxious." 
Other 
2 
“I don’t really wait when my children are ready as they just knock the door ..” 
 
Total 
19 
 
TABLE I- THEMATIC ANALYSIS FROM EXPERIMENTAL GROUP (N=19)  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
On the basis of preliminary analyses from one day trials, 
these findings show that although smart mobility devices 
can consciously be perceived as convenient and enjoyable 
by users this is not necessarily associated with any 
reduction in perceived waiting time as assessed by 
duration. However, this may be because one day trial is 
not sufficient for altering human cognitive processes. In 
future research we propose to explore the extent to which 
perception of waiting time is reduced on the basis of a 
longer trial. The study of the interrelationships between 
real time information systems of smart mobility and 
human cognitive processes – specifically perception of 
waiting time – will be inform the design of future smart 
mobility systems, particularly those that are user centered.  
 
V. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Transport Network (2013)  [online], available: 
http://www.transport-network.co.uk/, accessed June 2014 
[2] DfT, 2010. National Travel Survey. [online], available:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-
transport/series/national-travel-survey-statistics, 
accessed 
June 
2014 
[3] McDonald, N. (2008) Children’s mode choice for the school trip: 
the role of distance and school location in walking to school. 
Transportation, 35;pp. 23-35 
[4] DfE. 2012. National pupil projections: Future trends in pupil 
numbers – July 2012, [online], available:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-pupil-
projections-future-trends-in-pupil-numbers-july-2012  
[5] Smith, L., Norgate, S.H., Cherrett, T., Davies, N., Winstanley, C., 
Harding, M., (in press) Walking School Buses as a from of Active 
Transportation for Children – a Review of the Evidence, Journal of 
School Health. 
[6] Engwicht, D. 1993. Reclaiming our Cities and Towns. New 
Society Publishing. 
[7] Edison Watkins, K., Ferris, B., Borning, A., Rutherford, G.S., & 
Layton, D. (2011) Where is My Bus? Impact of mobile real-time 
information on the perceived and actual wait time of transit riders.  
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice. 45(8);pp. 
839-848 
[8] emarketers Dec 2013 Smartphone Users Worldwide Will Total 
1.75 
Billion 
in 
2014.[online], 
availablehttp://www.emarketer.com/Article/Smartphone-Users-
Worldwide-Will-Total-175-Billion-2014/1010536 
accessed 
on: 
20/03/2014 
[9] Google, Jan 2011. Mobile Internet & Smartphone Adoption.          
[online], 
availablehttp://googlemobileads.blogspot.co.uk/2012/01/new- 
research-global-surge-in-smartphone.html 
Accessed 
on: 
20/03/2014 
 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

