Building Pathways for Empowering User Toward Prosumer Behaviour 
The Design for Experience with the Prosumer Empowerment Concentric Model 
Marion Real, Quentin Tabart, Audrey Abi Akle 
ESTIA 
F-64210 Bidart, France 
e-mails: m.real@estia.fr, q.tabart@estia.fr, a.abiakle@estia.fr  
 
 
Abstract— Acting as prosumers can help the transition toward 
low carbon and circular economies. This paper discusses what 
can be defined as “prosumer behaviours” and proposes an 
innovative approach that fosters users in adopting daily 
virtuous 
experiences 
about 
energy 
production 
and 
consumption. Such experiences are based on smart interfaces 
as they emerge from complex socio-technical systems that 
combined ICT devices, smart grids and user-centred tools 
created to empower users and facilitate the emergence of a 
positive intelligence. The Prosumer Empowerment Concentric 
(PEC) Model is presented here as an integrative vision to 
support 
the 
emergence 
of 
prosumer 
behaviours 
and 
perspectives are outlined via an interregional project that 
proposes to experiment the PEC model in households and 
citizen energy cooperatives. 
Keywords - smart interface; smart grid; energy consumption; 
user-centred approach.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
At individual and community level, low carbon 
economies rely on decreasing the energy consumption of 
households and improving the local production of renewable 
energy. Empowering consumers and encouraging them to act 
and become prosumers remains a key challenge to provoke 
effective impacts on sustainability. The term “prosumer” has 
different meanings in academic works [1] [2] and recent 
reports from European Parliament [3] [4]. It is used here in 
line with Greenpeace [5] definition of active customer: "a 
customer who performs any of the functions of generation, 
storage and/or supply of energy from renewable sources, or 
energy 
efficiency/demand-side 
management, 
either 
individually or through a community energy”. Acting as a 
prosumer is adopting virtuous behaviours that create energy 
savings, reinforce the good understanding of energy bills and 
participate, in a direct or indirect way, in the production of 
local and renewable energy.    
For designers, new systems, environments, experiences, 
products or/and solutions need to be imagined and 
developed so as to facilitate the adoption of prosumer 
behaviours.  
In a technological viewpoint, different types of solutions 
are developed: 
 
Information and communication technology (ICT) 
solutions are the most widespread, mainly composed 
by sensors and connected objects. Visualization 
interfaces and serious games are also created for 
improving the awareness on energy bills and 
encouraging energy savings.  
 
Small renewable energy like solar and wind turbines 
and home energy storage can be interfaced to the 
main grid through a local scale grid. The microgrid 
concept allows a local grid to operate independently 
from the national grid and thus enable a 
decentralized and cooperative energy distribution 
system.  
Recent works underline new business models who 
involve changes in the relation between consumers and 
energy Service Company and communities [6]. In this line, 
citizen energy cooperatives are emerging models that 
participate to the production of renewable energy in 
territories through the involvement of consumers/citizens by 
financing new installations and diffusing awareness. Besides, 
small renewable producers and energy storage holders along 
with consumers can be aggregated using the Virtual Power 
Plants 
(VPP) 
framework 
[7]. 
It 
allows 
local 
producer/consumers to exchange their production (renewable 
energy, heat, etc.) locally and buy/sell from other VPPs. The 
European FENIX project [8] currently investigates the 
practical implementation of such concept. 
However, there are some barriers and limits in the 
adoption of such solutions that prevent behavioural changes. 
Indeed, currently there are solutions that do not have long-
term benefits. It is pointed out in [9] that the gamified 
solutions offer only a gain of 0.2% of long-term energy 
saving. Moreover, a key determinant of energy performance 
is the behaviour of occupants. Occupants use energy to 
perform various activities of daily life and most of the 
complex processes that occur in dwellings energy 
consumption result from human behaviour. The activities 
they undertake are stochastic in nature and difficult to predict 
[10].  
We think that the new solutions have to be in line with 
the needs and habits of consumers while proposing 
feedbacks and stimulations that help them to pursue their 
paths toward the adoption of new eco-efficient and sufficient 
behaviours.   
This is why in our work, we propose a holistic human-
centred approach that goes beyond classic product/service 
design, and give a particular focus on designing experiences 
for consumers, users and prosumers. User experience (UX) 
design consist in (i) exploring the real personal motivations, 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

needs and representations of consumers [11], (ii) involving 
them in all stages of the design of future systems [12], (iii) 
monitoring the evolution of their environment through 
responsive interfaces [13] [14]. In our approach, UX tools 
and methodologies will be integrated in a systemic view 
combining both social, technical and user aspects.  
Theoretical background on change and transition 
management is also investigated in this work to reach the 
design of coherent and adaptive experiences. Ethically, 
behavioural changes could not be managed externally 
without the consent and the intent of users. It exists a 
challenge for designers, and intermediary organisations, in 
persuading consumers through interfaces with the objective 
to inspire emergence of prosumers behaviours while 
reducing the diffusion of constraint feelings. Supports need 
to integrate the evolution of consumers and to guarantee 
solutions which will gradually influence the adoption of 
prosumer behaviours.  
This 
paper 
proposes 
to 
describe 
a 
Prosumer 
Empowerment Concentric (PEC) model that fits the 
necessity to build pathways toward prosumer behaviours 
(presented in Section 2) and explain how it will be used, 
integrated and experimented in households through a further 
European projects (see Section 3). 
II. 
PROSUMER EMPOWERMENT CONCENTRIC MODEL   
The model represents a set of user-experiences containing 
socio-technological solutions to move from standard 
consumer toward prosumer behaviour. Each individual can 
build his/her own paths to become a prosumer by releasing 
different actions which includes different types of solutions. 
Structures and institutions like cooperatives or change 
managers can also use the model as an interface to fit 
consumers’ needs with solutions providers and stimulating 
changes.  
A. Structures of the PEC model 
The model is built through concentric layers representing 
levels of empowerment toward prosumer behaviours. Based 
on Carvallo and Cooper’s work [15], four layers have been 
identified. They represent different levels in which 
consumers can move: from "standard consumer", “consumer 
awareness”, “active consumer” to "prosumer" (see Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Concentric layers: going deeper in the engagement. 
On each circle/layer of the model, we position 
"states" and in connection with these states we relate 
existing solutions (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Model with statutes connected to existing solutions. 
On the first circle so called "consumer awareness" there 
are two statutes possible: (i) "Consumer understanding of 
energy 
bills" 
where 
the 
objective 
is 
to 
facilitate 
understanding 
of 
energy 
bills 
and 
encourage 
the 
identification of equipment in the household that consumes a 
lot and possible energy losses within the home and (ii) 
"Community energy undertaking” which correspond to the 
involvement of consumers in citizen organisations, like 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

cooperative. They can participate in financing parts of 
renewable infrastructures. 
On the second circle "active consumer", three states are 
possible: (i) "Energy saving", people will be encouraged to 
reduce their energy consumption within their homes; (ii) 
"Energy demand-response" where the objective is to 
encourage consumers to consume differently i.e. change / 
move consumption behaviours to avoid periods of significant 
demand in energy. One of the first actions (for example) is to 
inform consumers about energy cost and efficiency; and (iii) 
"Using renewable energy", here, we have the ambition to 
motivate people (according to their location) to consume 
only when their region / territory produces renewable energy. 
This state is close to the previous one but it is much more 
stochastic in the behaviour because directly related to the 
production of “green” energy. 
On the third circle, only "prosumer" status is possible, this is 
the last status available in this model. It consists in the 
production of energy directly produced by the consumer. It 
is encouraged on the one hand by all other states but also 
supported by existing solutions. 
B. Pathways and evolution in the PEC Model 
The model is built in order to adapt the path toward the 
consumer profile. Indeed, with this approach, the consumer 
chooses his/her own path towards “Prosumer” typology. In 
this way, the consumer chooses the «gateway» according to 
his/her profile (and his/her motivation) and defines step by 
step the objectives. In order to illustrate this adaptive 
pathway, the Figure 1, 2 and 3 present scenarios of various 
possible paths towards the status "prosumer". 
 
Figure 3.  Example of path 1. 
In the first scenario (Figure 3), the consumer initiates 
consciously his/her path toward prosumer typology by 
improving the awareness of his/her energy consumption. To 
do so, s/he starts to use an appropriate smart-meter and a 
visualisation tool to read its own energy bill and after one 
month choose to become a member of an energy 
cooperative. After an important reduction of consumption, 
s/he decides to test new ICT devices which help him/her to 
better know when s/he has to consume (e.g.,when to use a  
washing machine) to be in line with the energy production 
peaks. Finally, s/he decides to adopt renewable energy 
systems at home so as to gain in autonomy and participate in 
local electricity production. The scenario 2, depicted in 
Figure 4, insists on the role of energy communities as 
catalysers that motivate and advise consumers in adopting 
new habits and eco-efficient devices while the scenario 3 
illustrates, in Figure 5, the case where people have already 
environmental awareness and start by actions that have a 
higher level of engagement (situated in both active consumer 
and prosumer).  
 
 
Figure 4.   Example of path 2. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of path 3. 
C. The PEC Model integrated in Smart Interface 
"Smart and empowering interfaces" is coined as “the 
design and implementation of human-human interaction, 
human-system and system-system that may foster the 
emergence of a positive intelligence for users”. For several 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

reasons, we are convinced that the PEC model is part of this 
area. First, it includes the study of behavioral changes and 
the interaction between solution kits and consumers in order 
to identify the potentials of deconsumption within each status 
(human-system interface). Then, it proposes the study of the 
interactions between the consumers within cooperatives to 
extract vectors of motivations towards a more virtuous 
behavior (human-human interface). Moreover, this work 
focuses on the exchange of energy between the VPPs 
(system-system interface). These interactions are also 
embedded in a systemic conceptual interface that connects 
different layers of environmental awareness within society. 
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The PEC model has already gained the confidence of two 
cooperatives (from Spain and France) and will be 
implemented and tested through a future European project, in 
three different regions of France, Spain and Portugal. In each 
region, cooperatives, energy service providers, intermediary 
organisations and households will be involved. The project 
will pursue the state-of-art of existing solutions helping in 
completing the PEC model. Then, the project will consist in 
defining the experiences offered to consumers whatever their 
profiles are. Each experience will be materialized by solution 
kits composed by a mix of ICT, renewable energy products, 
energy storage devices and pedagogical or gamified 
solutions. The first kit will be the installation box (i.e., the 
smart meters) and the other kits will be boxes sent monthly. 
The content of these boxes will obviously be adapted to the 
profiles and desires of consumers. A recruitment phase will 
select a panel of two types of consumers: members of 
cooperatives and aleatory households. A pre-analysis of 
consumers’ needs and motivations will be realized. Once the 
solution kits and consumers will ready, the experimentation 
will begin. It will consist in four series of solution kits 
implemented in each household. The 4 phases of planned 
tests correspond to 3 states (on the "awareness" and "active 
consumer" layers) and a final test phase for the status 
"prosumer". For each series, different tasks will be reached: 
installation, learning stage, use phase with stimulations, 
feedbacks, behaviour changes and energy saving and 
production assessments. An approach to analyse human 
behaviour, behaviour change and their barriers will be 
deployed. The objective is to understand on the one hand the 
transition from one layer to the other (of the model) and on 
the other hand the transition from one status to another. 
Testing these experiences in real households will lead us to 
have direct feedbacks, to define new strategies of business 
models, especially for cooperatives and to draw conclusions 
for consumer empowerment. The experimentation will end 
by a capitalization and realization of a deep analysis on 
effective behavioural changes. Actions will also be engaged 
to transform citizen cooperatives in an interface organization 
for energy behavioural changes supported by the PEC 
model: a practical tool will be developed to help them in 
supporting the involvement and engagement of their 
members toward pro-active behaviours.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the INTERREG EUROPE 
RETRACE 
[16] 
the 
French 
national 
FUI 
project 
INSULGRID and the GreenPlay [17] project that has 
received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 
research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 
649621 for supporting this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. 
Kotler, 
“Prosumers-A 
New 
Type 
of 
Consumer”. Futurist, 20(5), 24-25. 1986, 
[2] A. Toffler and T. Alvin, The third wave, New York: Bantam 
books, pp. 32-33, 1981, 
[3] N. Sajn, “Electricity ‘Prosumers”, In Briefing November 
2016.European Parliamentary Research Service.  PE 593.518, 
[4] Practical Law Competition, “CEER Position paper on well-
functioning retail energy markets”, In Legal update archive 
from European Union Jurisdiction. C15-SC-36-03, 14 
October 2015, 
[5] J. Roberts, “Prosumer Rights: Options for a legal framework 
post-2020”. Greenpeace European Unit (TR 9832909575-41), 
May 2016, 
[6] M. Hamwi, I. Lizarralde and J. Legardeur, “Energy Product 
Service Systems as core element of energy transition in the 
household sector: The Greenplay project”. Conference 
Paper · May 2016. ISDRS, Lisbonne. (RG.2.2.30854.37448), 
[7] C. Kieny, B. Berseneff, N. Hadjsaid, Y. Besanger, and J. 
Maire, “On the concept and the interest of virtual power plant: 
Some results from the European project Fenix,” IEEE Power 
Energy Soc. Gen. Meet., pp. 1–6, Jul. 2009, 
[8] http://www.fenix-project.org/  [accesses June 2017] 
[9] A. Abi Akle and I. Lizarralde, “Helping inhabitants in energy 
saving and getting inputs from usage for eco-design: cooking 
case study”. In DS Proceedings of the 21th International 
Conference on Engineering Design (ICED 17). August 2017, 
Vancouver, Canada, in press, 
[10] T. Zaraket, "Stochastic activity-based approach of occupant-
related energy consumption in residential buildings". Doctoral 
dissertation, Châtenay-Malabry, Ecole centrale de Paris, 2014, 
[11] A. Retegi, Inclusive experience design: una metodología de 
diseño de experiencias basada en las capacidades de las 
personas. Tesis Doctoral de Mondragon Unibertsitatea. 
Arrasate-Mondragón, España. 2016, 
[12] S. Sharma and K. Patil, "Past, Present and Future of 
Collaborative Design: From User Centric to User Driven 
Design". In: Chakrabarti A., Chakrabarti D., Research into 
Design for Communities, Volume 1. ICoRD 2017. Smart 
Innovation, Systems and Technologies, vol. 65,  Singapore, 
pp. 1025-1036, Springer 2017, 
[13] B.J. Fogg, "Persuasive technology: using computers to change 
what we think and do. Ubiquity, 2002 (December), 5, 2002, 
10.1145/764008.763957, 
[14] M. Daniel, G. Rivière, N. Couture and S. Kreckelbergh, "Une 
Analyse des Systèmes Interactifs et Persuasifs pour la 
Maîtrise de l’Énergie". In Actes de la 28ième conférence 
francophone sur l’Interaction Homme-Machine, pp. 197-210, 
2016, 
[15] A. Carvallo and J. Cooper, "The advanced smart grid: Edge 
power driving sustainability", Artech House, 2015. 
[16] www.interregeurope.eu/retrace/,  [accesses June 2017] 
[17] http://www.greenplay-project.eu/,   [accesses June 2017] 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

