Management Approach for Microgrid Operation Using Multi Agent System (MAS) 
Technique 
 
Zina Boussaada 
Ecole Nationale d’Ingénieurs de Tunis 
Université de Tunis El Manar 
Tunis, Tunisia 
University of the Basque Country 
San Sebastián-Spain 
e-mail: zina.b.88@hotmail.fr 
Ahmed Remaci 
ESTIA, F-64210 Bidart, France 
e-mail: a.remaci@estia.fr 
 
Octavian Curea 
ESTIA, F-64210 Bidart, France 
e-mail: o.curea@estia.fr 
 
 
 
 
Olfa Belkahla Driss 
École Supérieure de commerce de Tunis 
Université de la Manouba 
Tunis, Tunisie 
e-mail: Olfa.Belkahla@isg.rnu.tn 
 
Haritza Camblong 
University of the Basque Country 
San Sebastián-Spain 
ESTIA, F-64210 Bidart, France 
e-mail: aritza.camblong@ehu.eus 
 
Najiba Mrabet Bellaaj 
Institut Supérieur d’Informatique 
Université de Tunis El Manar 
Ariana-Tunisia 
e-mail: najiba_bm@yahoo.fr
Abstract— The integration of renewable energies in the 
electrical grid and the shift to a distributed structure of the 
grid had made the control operation extremely complicated. 
This complexity has prompted researchers to take an interest 
in the conception of smart interfaces in order to manage the 
operation of microgrids. This paper proposes an approach of 
microgrid management using the Multi Agent System (MAS) 
technique. Based on the distributed nature of MAS and their 
ability to communicate heterogeneous entities with each 
other’s, the studied approach consists in ensuring the adequate 
interactions between the concerned agents in order to perform 
two microgrid operation modes: the first one is the operation 
of the microgrid without connection with the main grid. In this 
case, the balance between supply and demand of energy must 
be achieved. The second operation mode consists on the sale 
and the purchase of electricity to/from the neighbors’ 
microgrids and the main grid. 
Keywords-Smart Interface; management; Multi Agent 
System (MAS;  microgrid; operation mode. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Because of the increase of environmental conscience, 
renewable energy has invaded electrical grid. As a result the 
concept of smart grid was created. With the implantation of 
renewable generators in dispersed locations, the electrical 
production passed from centralized to a distributed 
structure. In fact, the grid has been converted into an array 
of “smaller” grids, which can work in a connected or 
islanded operation mode. It is the concept of microgrid. This 
concept increased the complexity of electricity management 
and control. In fact, when the microgrid works in connected 
mode, the direct connection with the main grid doesn’t 
ensure the energy optimization for the system. When the 
microgrid works in islanded mode, the electric interface is 
not sufficient to stabilize the microgrid operation. Hence the 
requirement for a software smart management interfaces, 
which must ensure the microgrid operation in islanded and 
connected mode, as well as in the moment of switch between 
these two operation modes. In the literature, the management 
of the microgrid operation had been performed using 
different Energy management frameworks [1][2], but, 
artificial 
intelligence 
techniques 
have 
proven 
their 
performances in the management of complex systems 
particularly the systems with behaviors similar to those of 
microgrids (Network management, intelligent platform 
management interface, database management, etc.) [3]. 
Assuming that the microgrid consists of a set of 
heterogeneous entities, which interact with each other’s in a 
distributed way, these characteristics match with the MAS 
working. In fact, the MAS is a software level based on a 
distributed operation. Therefore, it was used in several 
microgrid applications, such as spot market mechanism and 
economic dispatch [4], smart grid control [5], demand 
response [6], service restoration mechanism [7], and Virtual 
Power Plant (VPP) control [8].  
The disadvantage of the most of previous researches is 
that, they considered the agent as all the element of the 
microgrid. Then, they turned the physical aspect of the 
microgrid into a purely software aspect, based on the 
communication between agents, in the same computer or in 
a different computers by a TCP-IP protocols [9]. However, 
it is not the case of real systems. Therefore, in our research, 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

it is assumed that each agent is implemented in a computing 
system, associated to each microgrid element. The exchange 
of 
information 
between 
agents 
is 
ensured 
by 
a 
communication system. Besides this system, each agent 
exchanges 
information 
with 
its 
associated 
physical 
microgrid element. The aim of our research is to ensure the 
microgrid operation using the above described MAS. The 
proposed approach is to build a smart management system, 
which must ensure the balance between supply and demand 
of energy in the two operation modes (connected and 
islanded). In islanded mode, the MAS predicts the energy to 
be produced and that to be consumed in real time in order to 
supply all local loads. However, in connected mode the 
mission of MAS is to ensure two tasks: the sale and the 
purchase of electricity to/from the neighbors’ microgrids 
and the main grid using an optimization algorithm.  
The paper was organized as follows. In Section 2, the 
microgrid will be defined. In Section 3, the MAS will be 
presented by defining Agent and its classification. Then, 
Section 4 will present the reasons of the MAS choice. 
Section 5 will focus on the proposed approach and the 
description of the different scenarios. Finally, Section 6 will 
conclud the paper. 
II. 
MICROGRIDS 
A. Definition and structure of microgrid 
With the integration of renewable energy sources in the 
electrical grid, the electricity production has become 
intermittent. This situation requires the integration of storage 
facilities and units of computing and control to supply the 
demand of consumers in energy. At this level, the electrical 
grid passed to a smart grid. In order to maintain the 
consumption – production balance in all circumstances, and 
to enable the final consumer to better control his demand, the 
production of electricity has become decentralized.  For 
example, a consumer can instal his own Photovoltaic panel 
and wind turbine on the roof of his house. This is the concept 
of microgrid. 
 
Figure 1.  Example of Microgrid structure 
The structure of microgid varies from one microgrid to 
another. But, as shown in Figure 1, three necessary elements 
must exist to obtain the microgrid: generators (photovoltaic 
panel, wind turbine, micro turbine), storage systems (battery, 
electric vehicle) and loads (house load, electric vehicle). The 
distributed generators are the producers of energy. The 
distributed storage systems are the components which store 
the energy and provide it depending on the situation of 
microgrid. However, the loads are the consumers of energy. 
B. Operation modes of microgrid 
Microgrids have two operations modes: the connected 
and the islanded mode. In connected mode, the microgrid is 
connected to the main grid, which is the superimposed grid. 
Therefore, in the connected mode the energy balance 
between supply and demand is ensured through the exchange 
of energy with the main grid or the microgrids neighbors, 
which are connected to the main grid. In islanded mode the 
microgrid is electrically isolated from the main grid. There 
are no energy exchange between grids. As a result, 
maintaining the energy balance in islanded mode becomes a 
challenging task. 
III. 
MULTI AGENT SYSTEMS (MAS) 
A Multi Agent System is a system consisting of several 
interacting agents with each other’s and with the elements of 
their environment.  
A. Agent definition 
An agent is an autonomous entity (software or hardware), 
which acts on itself and on its environment. In the Multi 
Agent context, an agent is able to communicate with the 
other agents. Its behavior is the result of its observations, its 
knowledge, and its interactions with the other agents and the 
entities of its environment. 
B. Properties of Agents 
In MAS, agents are characterized by several properties, 
where the most importants are: 
 
Autonomy: An agent is able to act without the direct 
intervention of another entity (agent or human). It 
can also control its actions and its state. 
 
Reactivity: An agent perceives its environment and 
responds to the changes occurring there. 
 
Communication: An agent can communicate with 
another agents and entities (Software, Hardware or 
human). 
 
Sociability: An agent can interact with the other 
agents in a collaborative or a competitive way in 
order to achieve its objectives. 
 
Pro-activity: An agent is able, on its own initiative, 
to set goals to reach its objectives [10]. 
C. Classification of Agents 
Based on the evocated properties, researchers proposed 
several classifications of agents. According to Grislin et al. 
[3], agents can be classified according to the degree of 
autonomy, of cooperation and adaptation. These properties 
are generally seen as main characteristics in distributed 
artificial intelligence [11].  Three types of agents were 
distinguished in the MAS [12]: 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
Reactive agent: This agent has limited ability for 
communication, has little or not a model on itself, on 
other agents or on the environment. Its behavior is of 
type “stimulus-response”, then it operates based on 
receiving messages. 
 
Cognitive agent: This agent has a more “thoughtful” 
behavior, resulting from a choice among a set of 
possible actions. This choice is a result of reasoning. 
 
Hybrid agent: The hybrid agent is neither reactive 
nor cognitive. In fact, it has some level of every 
agent property. Therefore hybrid agent behavior can 
be placed between reactive agent and cognitive 
agent. 
IV. 
MAS IN MICROGRIDS  
Based on their size, their heterogeneity and their 
evolving nature, microgrids are considered complex 
systems.  The choice of MAS technique for the microgrid 
control is justified by several reasons. In fact, microgrids are 
characterized by their distributed nature and the interaction 
of heterogeneous elements between each other’s and with 
their environment.  Microgrid elements have only a local 
view of the grid and do not have access to the global 
behavior of the system. Only the operators of the grid have a 
global view of the system macroscopic behavior. In 
addition, the microgrid has a history; its size and its 
structure vary over time, so its past is at least partially 
responsible for its current situation. Besides, in connected 
mode, the microgrid accomplishes interactions based on the 
market mechanism, which is one of the basic tasks of MAS. 
In fact, to supply local load, the microgrid performs a 
negotiation phase with main grid and neighbors’ microgrids 
to purchase energy. In the same way, to supply external 
load, the microgrid negotiates to sell its production of 
energy.  
V. 
PROPOSED APPROACH  
Several propositions 
were performed to control 
microgrids using MAS [3]-[10][13]. The main principle is 
to develop a representative agent for each element of the 
microgrid, and one additional agent, which controls and 
represents the microgrid in its external environment (Main 
grid and neighbors’ microgrids). The proposed approach of 
this paper is based on the capacity of information exchange 
between each agent and its associated microgrid element. 
This exchange is bidirectional. In fact, the agent is able to 
perform two functions: it recovers measures (current, 
voltage, temperature, etc.) and it acts on the physical part of 
the microgrid, in order to perform different operations as 
connection/de-connection, and change of operation point. 
Thus, the MAS presents the smart interface of the 
microgrid, when each agent is embedded in a system set up 
with the associated microgrid element.  
As described in Figure 2, our first microgrid prototype 
consists of photovoltaic (PV) panels, batteries, and loads. 
The main grid is represented by a “global supervisor agent” 
and the microgrid by a “local supervisor agent”. Each 
element of the microgrid is represented by a local agent: 
load agent, battery agent and PV agent. “Interface agent” 
was added in order to detect the connection and 
disconnection of microgrid elements and to ensure the 
interaction with the user platform. The interaction between 
agents is presented in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 2.  MAS for  the proposed Microgrid management approach  
 
Figure 3.  Interaction between agents in the proposed approach 
The principle of the proposed management approach is 
based on sending and receiving of messages between agents 
in order to exchange information and to take decisions. 
Local agents communicate with their local supervisor agent 
and if the operation mode is connected, the local supervisor 
agent communicates with the global supervisor and the local 
supervisor agents of the neighbors’ microgrids. 
The proposed algorithm for the operation management is 
presented in Figure 4. It is important to note that drawn 
diagram describes both the progress of management 
program and the interaction between agents.  
The used variables in the following paragraph and 
Figure 4 are as follows:  
Pc: The power quantity to be consumed. 
Pp: The power quantity to be produced. 
Pbat:  The available power of the battery.  
SOC:  The battery state of charge.  
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 4.  Proposed management algorithm for microgrid operation 
It is supposed that in the starting state the demand and 
the supply are balanced. The MAS must be able to manage 
events, such as power demand in Figure 4.  As a result of 
this event, three cases are possible:  
1/ If the amount of produced power Pp is greater than or 
equal to the requested power Pc, loads are supplied and the 
local supervisor agent proposes to supply battery by Pp- Pc. 
If the SOC is less than 100% the battery is supplied. And 
after this, if there is an excess of power and the operation 
mode is connected, the local supervisor agent initiates a 
communication phase with the global supervisor agent and 
the neighbors’ supervisor agents in order to perform a power 
sales phase. 
2/ If the produced power summed with the available 
battery power is greater than or equal to the requested power 
Pc, loads are supplied by PV and battery. 
3/ If the produced power summed with the available 
battery power is not enough to supply all loads, the 
management of this event depends on the operation mode. 
In connected mode, the local supervisor agent starts a power 
purchase phase with the global supervisor agent and the 
neighbors’ supervisor agents, and it takes decisions based 
on an optimization algorithm identifying the minimal cost of 
the energy. Therefore, in islanded mode, the microgrid is no 
more able to supply all loads, so some loads can be 
disconnected. As a result, the local supervisor agent must 
distribute a priority order to all loads. The loads with the 
highest priority order are the critic loads. They must be 
supplied before other loads. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposed a management approach of 
microgrid using MAS technique. Based on the distributed 
nature of microgrid and the heterogeneity of its elements, 
the MAS presents an adequate smart management interface 
for the microgrid. This interface had the mission of ensuring 
energy balance between demand and supply in the 
connected and the islanded mode. The next step of this work 
is the implementation of agents in order to validate results. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Shi et al., “Evaluating microgrid management and control 
with an implementable energy management system”, the 5th 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Smart 
Grid 
Communications, 3-6 Nov. 2014, Venice, Italy. 
[2] A. Vaccaro, M. Popov, D. Villacci, and V. V. Terzija, “An 
integrated framework for smart microgrids modeling, 
monitoring, control, communication, and verification,” Proc. 
IEEE, vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 119–132, 2011. 
[3] E. Grislin, E. Adame, and C. Kolski, “Agents intelligents en 
interaction hommemachine dans les systèmes d'information”, 
Environnements évolués et évaluation de l’IHM, pp. 207-248, 
2011. 
[4] H. F Wang, “Multi-agent co-ordination for the secondary 
voltage control in power system contingencis”, In Proc. IEE 
Generation, Transmission and Distribution, vol. 148, pp. 61-
66, Jan 2001. 
[5] L. Phillips, M. Link, R. Smith, and L. Weiland, “Agent-based 
control of distributed infrastructure resources”, Sandia 
National Laboratories, SAND 2005-7937, Jan 2006 [Online]. 
Available: 
www.sandia.gov/scada/documents/sand_2005_7937.pdf. 
(May 2017) 
[6] I. Chung, W. Liu, D. Cartes, E. Collins, and S. Moon, 
“Control methods for multiple distributed generators in a 
microgrid 
system,” 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Industry 
Applications,vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 1078-1088, May/June 2010. 
[7] S. D. J. McArthur, E. M. Davidson, J. A. Hossack, and R.  
McDonald, “Automating power system fault diagnosis 
through multi-agent system technology”, the 37th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, HI, 
USA, 2004. 
[8] L. Cristaldi, A. Monti, R. Ottoboni, and F. Ponci, “Multiagent 
based power systems monitoring platform: a prototype”, IEEE 
Power Tech Conference, Bologna, Italy, 23-26 June 2003. 
[9] H. S. V. S. Kumar Nunna and D. Srinivasan, “An agent based 
energy market model for microgrids with distributed energy 
storage systems”, IEEE International Conference on Power 
Electronics, 
Drives 
and 
Energy 
Systems 
(PEDES), 
Trivandrum, India, Dec 14-17, 2016. 
[10] Z.  Boussaada, O. Curea, H. Camblong, N. Mrabet Bellaj, and 
A. Hacala, “Multi-agent systems for the dependability and 
safety of microgrids”, Int. J. Interact. Des. Manuf. (IJIDEM), 
1-13, 2014. 
[11]  E. Adam, « Modèle d'organisation multi-agent pour l'aide au 
travail coopératif dans les processus d'entreprise : application 
aux systèmes administratifs complexes », Doctoral thesis, 
Université de Valenciennes et du Hainaut-Cambrésis, Sep. 
2000. 
[12] B. Chaib-draa, "Interaction between agents in routine, 
familiar and unfamiliar situations", International Journal of 
Intelligent and Cooperative Information Systems, vol. 1, n° 5, 
pp. 7-20, 1996. 
[13] O. Curea, Z. Boussaada, N. Mrabet Bellaaj, A. Hacala-Perret, 
and 
H. 
Camblong, 
“Multi-Agent 
Systems 
for 
the 
Dependability of Microgrids”, Virtual Concept Workshop 
2014, Innovation in product design and manufacture, 
Medellin, Colombia, March26 - 28, 2014. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

