Hotspot Prediction of Severe Traffic Accidents in the Federal District of Brazil  
Vinicius Lima 
Computer Graphics Technology/Criminalistics Institute 
Purdue University/Federal District Civil Police 
West Lafayette, IN, USA/Brasilia, DF, Brazil 
Email: vlima@purdue.edu 
Vetria Byrd 
Computer Graphics Technology 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN, USA 
Email: vbyrd@purdue.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Traffic accidents are one of the biggest challenges in 
a society where commuting is so important. What triggers an 
accident can be dependent on several subjective parameters and 
varies within each region, city, or country. In the same way, it is 
important to understand those parameters in order to provide a 
knowledge basis to support decisions regarding future cases 
prevention. The literature presents several works where 
machine learning algorithms are used for prediction of 
accidents or severity of accidents, in which city-level datasets 
were used as evaluation studies. This work attempts to add to 
the diversity of research, by focusing mainly on concentration of 
accidents and how machine learning can be used to predict 
hotspots. This approach demonstrated to be a useful technique 
for authorities to understand nuances of accident concentration 
behavior. For the first time, data from the Federal District of 
Brazil collected from forensic traffic accident analysts were used 
and combined with data from local weather conditions to 
predict hotspots of collisions. Out of the five algorithms we 
considered, two had good performance: Multi-layer Perceptron 
and Random Forest, with the latter being the best one at 98% 
accuracy. As a result, we identify that weather parameters are 
not as important as the accident location, demonstrating that 
local intervention is important to reduce the number of 
accidents. 
Keywords-traffic accident; machine learning; forensic 
sciences; accident reconstruction; hotspots. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traffic accidents are a pervasive problem in modern cities 
worldwide. In response, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) has created an ambitious agenda to reduce accidents 
by 2030 [1]. In Brazil, traffic accidents are a major public 
health concern, with the government spending significant 
amounts of money on addressing their consequences [2].  
However, instead of reacting to accidents after they happen, 
prevention is key. Machine Learning (ML) [3] is a rapidly 
advancing technology that can predict outcomes based on 
features and provide valuable insights into their causes. These 
methods can be useful tools for accident analysis and align 
with the concepts of Safe Smart Cities [4].  
The increasing number of traffic accidents creates an 
opportunity to study them and get a better perspective on their 
causes. The knowledge derived from the reason behind traffic 
accidents can help authorities make better decisions regarding 
public policies or infrastructure to prevent future cases. 
This paper focuses on data collected by crash 
reconstructionists from the Brazilian Federal District Civil 
Police. In Brazil, every accident with injuries requires a 
forensic team to collect evidence and analyze the scene, 
providing a forensic report to police investigators and justice 
authorities [5, p. 9]. Since 2019, the forensic team has been 
collecting data in a digital format, creating an archive of 
accident data and information. In practice, accidents that 
resulted in minor injuries or the ones that could not be isolated 
by the police (for safety reasons, or to relieve traffic 
congestion, for instance) are not examined on-site, but instead, 
they have the vehicles removed for analysis at a police station. 
Here, we define severe accidents as the ones where at least 
one person was taken to the hospital or died.  
The motivation for this research came from a previous 
visualization tool that identified three hotspots and analyzed 
their causes based on forensic reports [6]. This work 
demonstrated the importance of studying crash concentrations 
and their causes. Forensic analysts typically focus on 
individual cases, but this paper aligns with the concept of 
"Forensic Intelligence" by exploring the broader law 
enforcement knowledge that can be gained from analyzing the 
rich database collected from many accidents [7]. Therefore, 
we demonstrate the opportunity forensic analysts have to 
provide intelligent data by studying the general behavior of 
accidents, abstracting hidden patterns, and consequently 
creating supportive knowledge to prevent new cases. 
A prediction analysis was conducted based on the data 
collected on-site in conjunction with weather parameters in 
the Federal District of Brazil, where the capital of the country 
sits. ML algorithms such as Random Forest and Multi-layer 
Perceptron, demonstrated to have good performance to predict 
the number of accidents in different regions, therefore, 
identifying hotspots of accidents. Furthermore, a feature 
importance analysis based on the evaluated parameters was 
conducted and described. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section II provides an overview of similar and related work. 
Section III summarizes the primary objectives of our research, 
outlining the research questions we aim to address. In Section 
IV, we present the dataset used for this study and detail the 
preprocessing steps undertaken to ensure its suitability for our 
objectives. Section V explains the methodology employed in 
this project, while Section VI provides a comprehensive 
discussion of the main findings. Additionally, in Section VI, 
we acknowledge the limitations of this work and outline our 
plans for future research. Finally, the article concludes with 
Section VII, where we present our conclusions, followed by 
an acknowledgement section. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

II. 
RELATED WORK 
The study of traffic accident causes is not new, as well as 
the prediction of accident hotspots. Nevertheless, the literature 
is diverse in the way the analysis is conducted. Authors 
usually use case studies to state their points of conclusion [8]. 
Identifying the main reasons behind an accident is hard, 
subjective, and likely to be dependent on several features. The 
heterogeneity of the results is corroborated by the research of 
many authors exploring the subject in different datasets from 
different angles. We will focus on related literature that uses 
ML in traffic accident datasets on a city level. Also, we are 
interested in previous work that aimed to detect hotspots of 
accidents. It was not part of our review literature scope, papers 
that address accident prediction for autonomous vehicles 
purposes. 
Regarding the related literature that uses machine learning 
as a supporting technique to predict future accidents, they 
mainly follow two approaches [9-10]. The first one is the 
prediction of the accident itself. They mainly follow a simple 
supervised approach of using a dataset to be trained, where the 
output is binary classification into accident or not-accident. 
However, the data used only have information about when the 
accident happened (positive samples). Therefore, a common 
technique required is to generate negative random samples in 
order to have information on non-accident cases [11-15]. This 
is not a trivial task, and its foundation is somewhat 
controversial. Most of the studies generate negative samples 
in an arbitrary way, which can be questioned. They usually 
have labeled non-accident data as an expansion of the real 
accident information. For instance, Hébert, et al. [12] present 
that for each accident, there are three non-accidents, based on 
the combinations of time and day for non-positive cases. 
Although there is a reasonable explanation for the generation 
of negative samples, it is unsure if this technique can be 
expanded for every city and any dataset. To avoid this issue, 
other works focus not on the prediction, but on the level of 
severity of an event [16-18]. These are multiclass 
classification problems, where the output goal is a scale of 
how severe an accident can be. Nevertheless, the results of this 
approach are important for public policies, someone can argue 
that severity can be quite subjective, as the definition of 
severity may vary within regions. In contrast, this research 
provided an analysis using only objective data, without 
creating fictional information, by targeting the number of 
accidents in an area.  
As for the prediction of hotspots, we have less research. 
Here, the outcomes are treated as a regression problem, 
instead of a classification. Lu et al. used Linear Regression to 
check whether certain regions of Beijing were considered 
hotspots of accidents based on data from the road, 
environment, 
vehicle, 
and 
driver 
information 
[19]. 
Mansourkhaki et al. presented a hybrid model of accident 
prediction combining a prediction analysis with statistics 
functions and previous knowledge to filter out outliers in big 
sets of accident data [20]. Ren et al. used the deep learning 
technique of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to predict 
traffic accident risk by analyzing the Spatio-temporal 
characteristics of accidents in Beijing [21]. Yuan et al. created 
a similar analysis, but predicted the number of accidents in 
real-time by training the past seven days of data from Iowa, 
using ConvLSTM (Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory) 
[22]. Fawcett et al. presented the prediction of the number of 
accidents in the city of Halle (Germany) using the Bayesian 
approach [23]. Al-Omari et al. used GIS and Fuzzy Logic to 
identify hotspots in Irbid City, Jordan [24]. Lin et al. proposed 
the prediction of real-time accidents based on the Frequent 
Pattern tree (FP-tree) on Virginia's I-64 highway [25]. Here 
again, we see how diverse the research in the field is, with 
different algorithms providing solutions tailored to the studied 
city and dataset. 
As for a similar work regarding data from Brazil, only one 
case was found using machine learning to study the causes of 
road accidents on a highway south of the country [26]. To the 
best of our knowledge, this is the first time a prediction 
analysis is conducted from Brazilian data at a city level with 
data from traffic reconstruction analysis.  
Our goal is to use ML to predict the number of accidents, 
based on data from crash scenes and weather data. We aim to 
contribute to the diverse literature, with a novel dataset and 
location, adding more knowledge to the study of causes 
behind vehicle accidents. More importantly, we want to 
provide local authorities with supporting information on how 
ML can be used to help decisions to prevent new collisions in 
future intelligent cities. Finally, it is also our goal to 
demonstrate how crash forensics teams can use their data to 
extract important high-level information, expanding their 
work to a collective perspective, instead of just individual 
investigations. 
III. 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
To achieve high steps of insights it is interesting to study 
the intersection between distinct domains or datasets [27]. In 
our research, we do this, by connecting our accident data with 
weather information and trying to check possible correlations. 
We are mostly interested in the following research 
questions: 
1. 
Is it possible to the predict number of accidents in 
defined regions (i.e., hotspots) with traffic accidents and 
weather information? 
2. 
If yes, what are the main features involved in the 
prediction outcomes? 
We will first present our datasets, give an overview of the 
preprocessing phase, and a brief analysis of heatmap 
visualizations that are more useful for our purposes. Then we 
will proceed to the ML algorithms, with the resulting 
performances. Then, we will provide an analysis of the 
correlation between the predictions and the features involved. 
Finally, we will discuss the results and how the current work 
can aid government authorities in strategies to prevent future 
accidents. 
IV. 
DATASET AND PREPROCESSING 
Two datasets were used for this research. The first one was 
the severe accident data originating from the Federal District 
Civil Police (Polícia Civil do Distrito Federal), regional 
police situated in Brasilia, the capital of Brazil. The data was 
provided by a non-profit organization that fosters research in 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

forensic sciences, Fundação de Peritos em Criminalística 
Ilaraine Acácio Arce, which is formed by forensic scientist 
officers. It contained information from the accident scene, 
such as the topography of the street, road conditions, vehicle 
information, and damages, collected in the years 2020 and 
2021. The total number of severe accidents presented was 
3,846, with almost half each year. For the purpose of this 
work, we focused on objective data only, i.e., numbered 
information such as GPS coordinates (latitude, longitude), 
date, time, and road speed limit. The second dataset is the 
weather information, which came from the National 
Meteorology Institute (Instituto Nacional de Meteorologia). It 
contained instant values of temperature, humidity, pressure, 
wind, solar radiation, and rain precipitation from five different 
stations in the Federal District. 
The first step was to preprocess the data in order to filter 
out null information and mistaken outliers (when the 
coordinates were situated outside the limits of the Federal 
District, for instance). Then, we needed to merge the accident 
dataset with the weather into one. The weather information 
came from five stations spread out in the district. To this 
objective, it was necessary to match each accident with 
information from the closest meteorologic station, according 
to the time it happened. For each accident location, we 
measure the distance from each of the five stations and merge 
the weather information with the closest one. Our weather 
dataset provided hourly measurements, so we matched the 
hour of the accident with the hour of the collected 
meteorology 
information 
(this 
generalization 
is 
understandable, since in a tropical country like Brazil, the 
temperature has low variance within the hour). One important 
consideration is that our accident data does not provide the 
time when the accident actually happened, but only when the 
forensic team got to the scene. However, in previous research, 
it was possible to generalize that on average the forensic team 
gets to the scene about one hour after the accident really 
happened [6]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Scatter plot of accidents in 2020 and 2021. It can be seen that 
there is a contraction of accidents in urban areas. Python and Matplotlib were 
used to generate this map and the axes represent latitude and longitude 
coordinates.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Density map of accidents in 2020 and 2021. The darker color 
represents hotspot areas of crashes. Tableau was used to generate this map. 
 
Figure 3.  Density gridded map of accidents in 2020 and 2021. Colors close 
to yellow correspond to higher numbers of accidents. Python and Geopandas 
were used to generate this map. 
Figures 1 and 2 represent the location of accidents as a 
scatter plot and density map, respectively. We want to predict 
the number of accidents in defined regions; therefore, it is 
important to divide our map into grids and count the number 
of accidents in each grid. Figure 3 shows this representation, 
using a colormap to visualize “hotcells” based on the number 
of accidents in each grid. The map was divided into 80 
regions, which gives us a grid with dimensions of 4.6 miles by 
6.0 miles. This representation is more likely to be used by the 
police or authorities to identify problematic regions since it 
provides exact boundaries of these regions. While scatter plots 
and density maps also provide some insights into the 
concentration of events, it is hard to accurately identify the 
limits of each hotspot location. Moreover, the width and 
length of the grids can be set accordingly to how authorities 
want to look at the problem. For instance, they can set the cells 
at a road intersection level or a neighborhood level.  
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

V. 
METHODOLOGY 
Machine Learning algorithms are mostly used to solve 
regression or classification problems. Since we are trying to 
predict the number of accidents, we are dealing more with a 
regression situation, but we tested both approaches with the 
main algorithms. As it will be detailed later, Random Forest, 
Multi-layer Perceptron demonstrated to be an efficient model 
for the task in question. Other algorithms, such as Support 
Vector Machine [28], Linear Regression [29], and Neural 
Networks [30] were also tested, but performed poorly or took 
too long to provide the prediction. To keep it short, we will 
not describe their details. 
As mentioned, we combined information from traffic 
accident data and climate data, having the following inputs: 
Longitude, Latitude, Street Speed limit, Year, Month, 
Workday, Hour of the day, Temperature, Humidity, Pressure, 
Wind, Solar Radiation, Rain Precipitation. The output of the 
model was the number of accidents in boundary regions. We 
set these regions, divided our map into grids, and counted the 
number of accidents in each cell. For each accident, we added 
this value as a target prediction. We trained our model with 
data from 2020 and tested it on the 2021 dataset, in order to 
check the correlations between consequent years. We used 
Python along with the Scikit-learn library to implement the 
models. 
After preprocessing the data, it is time to build the 
algorithm to be trained. Basically, what these techniques are 
trying to do is solve an optimum way to classify (or reduce) 
the output based on the given input information. Random 
Forest achieves the solution by creating several decision trees 
and averaging the results of each ramification. Multi-layer 
Perceptron Classification does the same task by having an 
artificial network of neurons that sets different weights to the 
nodes that closely fit the output. For this technique, we used 3 
hidden layers, with 21 neurons each, and the ReLu (Rectified 
Linear Unit) default as the activation function.  Performance 
and results are discussed in the next section. 
VI. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Table I provides the accuracy of the tested algorithms, 
both treating the problem as regression or classification. 
TABLE I.  
ALGORITHMS COMPARISON 
Model 
Type 
Accuracy 
Random Forest 
Regression 
98.8 % 
Multilayer 
Perceptron 
Regression 
79.6 % 
Random Forest 
Classification 
94.1 % 
Multilayer 
Perceptron 
Classification 
88.2 % 
 
As can be observed, Random Forest performed really well 
in both situations, achieving almost 99% of the right 
predictions. This can be explained by looking more deeply 
into the data and observing that the locations of accidents do 
not differ much from one year to another. This information 
already reveals that from 2020 to 2021 not much was done to 
change the traffic scenario. 
The good performance of both models can be explained by 
their capability to reveal a pattern behavior with non-linear 
features. However, as we increase the number of grids, the 
accuracy decreases. This makes sense since with more regions 
on the map, it would be harder for the model to correctly 
predict the number of accidents. Moreover, we saw a greater 
decrease in the accuracy of the classification models when the 
number of grids raises. This is somewhat expected since the 
classification model treats the number of accidents as 
categories, making it hard to predict for a wider range of 
labels. The classification would be suitable for authorities to 
predict levels of accident concentration (for instance, on a 
scale of low to high). The developed model has been 
demonstrated to be efficient for a certain number of grids in 
the map and thus could be easily adapted to fit the prediction 
into hotspot categories. The regression approach treats the 
values as a continuum parameter, and it is suitable in case 
authorities want to predict the actual number of accidents in a 
given area. This technique has demonstrated good results even 
with a different set of grids. However, more data is important 
to give stronger support to decision-makers.  
Figure 4 shows the features extracted from the Random 
Forest technique in terms of importance to the model's output. 
It can be seen that the location attributes (latitude and 
longitude) are the main features contributing to the prediction. 
We can deduct from the figure that weather conditions do not 
influence severe accidents in a significant way. When taking 
out latitude and longitude from our model, Random Forest 
returns a poor accuracy of only 0.04%. Even the pressure 
attribute, a weather parameter, can be said to be related to 
location since this value changes according to the altitude 
level. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Density Histogram of ranked features used in the Random Forest 
algorithm. To each feature, it is assigned the proportion of which each 
contributes to the outputs. 
The non-correlation with weather conditions actually 
aligns with related research [31-32]. This may be explained 
because the weather in tropical places is almost the same 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

throughout the year and the same result may not apply to 
regions where the seasons are more well-defined. Another 
interesting result is that the hour and month of the accident are 
also less important features when predicting the number of 
accidents. This infers that rush hours may be an important 
factor to predict hotspots, but not as much as the location of 
the accident itself. 
Based on our findings, we can conclude that if we want to 
understand more about the causes of the accidents, we need to 
study deeper the characteristics of the location of the accident 
rather than looking at other variables, such as the climate 
conditions. In the end, hotspots’ identification and 
understanding are key factors to act in the direction of traffic 
accident prevention. 
VII. LIMITATIONS 
For the purposes of this research, we used all the data 
available from traffic reconstructionists. However, it is 
important to state that our dataset is considered small for 
prediction purposes. Only about 1,600 points were used to 
train the models. This also explains the high accuracy result. 
More data means more information, consequently providing 
more realistic outputs, and possibly a lower performance is 
expected. This research worked as a proof of concept to the 
claim of automatically predicting hotspots of accidents, 
providing a powerful tool to support knowledge regarding 
accident prevention. Moreover, as mentioned before, the 
number of grids can be set, according to how big the 
authorities need the region to be. Naturally, the accuracy of 
the results tends to decrease as the number of grids rises 
(another issue that can be resolved by having a bigger dataset). 
Also, as mentioned in the Introduction, data used to feed 
the algorithms were from severe accident cases that had an on-
scene examination. Thus, it does not contemplate the overall 
traffic accident cases. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The present work is a case study of a real-world dataset 
about severe traffic accidents collected from the Federal 
District Police in Brazil. The data were analyzed along with 
weather information such as temperature and rain 
precipitation. After prepossessing the data, we first visualized 
some of its content to get a sense of the accident panorama. 
We were particularly interested in predicting the number of 
accidents in defined regions and, thus, identifying intelligent 
hotspots based on past evidence. For this work, we tested 
traditional machine learning algorithms, analyzing the 
performance as regression and classification problems. 
Random Forest and Multilayer Perceptron outputted high 
accuracies, with the former outperforming the latter. 
Random Forest model also revealed that location 
attributes, such as longitude and latitude, were considered 
more important features to predict the number of accidents 
than the meteorology parameters, such as rain and 
temperature, and time parameters, such as hour and day. In 
other words, the place where the accident happened is a key 
factor contributing to the identification of hotspots. Public 
authorities and researchers need thus to focus their studies 
primarily on the site characteristics, for example, suggesting 
road infrastructure interventions. Overall, we demonstrate 
how density maps and machine learning are powerful tools to 
generate insights for high-level decisions in the direction of 
accident prevention. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work with 
machine learning in traffic accidents in the Federal District of 
Brazil. Thus, we add new insights to this diverse research area, 
which attempts to understand the root causes of vehicle 
collisions. Moreover, we demonstrated that data from forensic 
teams can be used not only for traditional one-by-one 
investigations but also to understand patterns and associations 
in the big picture, delivering useful information for public 
policies. This work aligns with the new era of Forensic 
Intelligence, where data science plays a key role. 
For future research, beyond more points, we will add to the 
model’s discrete variables collected from the traffic 
reconstruction forensic team. As a result of this work, it will 
be interesting to observe the performance considering location 
attributes, such as topography, cross intersections, junctions, 
street lighting, and road conditions. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We appreciate the support of the non-profit organization 
Ilaraine Acácio Arce and the Federal District Civil Police, in 
Brasilia, Brazil, for providing data and investing in research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] “UNECE and partners release Global Plan for the Decade of 
Action 
for 
Road 
Safety 
2021-2030 
| 
UNECE.” 
https://unece.org/general-unece/press/unece-and-partners-
release-global-plan-decade-action-road-safety-2021-2030 
[retrieved: May, 2022]. 
[2] F. R. de Andrade and J. L. F. Antunes, “Trends in the number 
of traffic accident victims on Brazil’s federal highways before 
and after the start of the Decade of Action for Road Safety,” 
Cad. Saude Publica, vol. 35, no. 8, p. e00250218, Aug. 2019, 
doi: 10.1590/0102-311X00250218. 
[3] A. L. Samuel, “Some studies in machine learning using the 
game of checkers,” IBM Journal of research and development, 
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 210–229, 1959. 
[4] M. Lacinák and J. Ristvej, “Smart City, Safety and Security,” 
Procedia Engineering, vol. 192, pp. 522–527, Jan. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.proeng.2017.06.090. 
[5] “Del3689.” 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/decreto-
lei/del3689.htm [Retrieved: October, 2022]. 
[6] V. Lima and J. M. V. A. Gois, “Forensic Intelligence Approach 
On Traffic Accidents In The Brazilian Federal District.,” 26th 
Int. Conf. Urban Transp. Environ., WIT Press, 2020. 
[7] O. Ribaux, S. J. Walsh, and P. Margot, “The contribution of 
forensic science to crime analysis and investigation: Forensic 
intelligence,” Forensic Sci. Int., vol. 156, no. 2, pp. 171–181, 
Jan. 2006, doi: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2004.12.028. 
[8] A. Venkat, M. Gokulnath, K.P. Guru Vijey, I. S. Thomas and 
D. Ranjani, “Machine Learning Based Analysis for Road 
Accident Prediction” Rochester, NY, Mar. 07, 2020. 
[Retrieved: 
July, 
2022]. 
Available: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3550462 
[9] C. Gutierrez-Osorio and C. Pedraza, “Modern data sources and 
techniques for analysis and forecast of road accidents: A 
review,” J. Traffic Transp. Eng. Engl. Ed., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 
432–446, Aug. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.jtte.2020.05.002. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

[10] P. B. Silva, M. Andrade, and S. Ferreira, “Machine learning 
applied to road safety modeling: A systematic literature 
review,” J. Traffic Transp. Eng. Engl. Ed., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 
775–790, Dec. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.jtte.2020.07.004. 
[11] D. Santos, J. Saias, P. Quaresma, and V. B. Nogueira, 
“Machine Learning Approaches to Traffic Accident Analysis 
and Hotspot Prediction,” Computers, vol. 10, no. 12, Art. no. 
12, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.3390/computers10120157. 
[12] A. Hébert, T. Guédon, T. Glatard, and B. Jaumard, “High-
Resolution Road Vehicle Collision Prediction for the City of 
Montreal,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data 
(Big 
Data), 
Dec. 
2019, 
pp. 
1804–1813. 
doi: 
10.1109/BigData47090.2019.9006009. 
[13] Z. Yuan, X. Zhou, T. Yang, J. Tamerius, and R. Mantilla, 
“Predicting traffic accidents through heterogeneous urban data: 
A case study,” in Proceedings of the 6th international workshop 
on urban computing (UrbComp 2017), Halifax, NS, Canada, 
2017, vol. 14, p. 10. 
[14] A. Theofilatos, “Incorporating real-time traffic and weather 
data to explore road accident likelihood and severity in urban 
arterials,” J. Safety Res., vol. 61, pp. 9–21, Jun. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.jsr.2017.02.003. 
[15] D. Al-Dogom, N. Aburaed, M. Al-Saad, and S. Almansoori, 
“Spatio-temporal Analysis and Machine Learning for Traffic 
Accidents Prediction,” in 2019 2nd International Conference 
on Signal Processing and Information Security (ICSPIS), Oct. 
2019, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/ICSPIS48135.2019.9045892. 
[16] Z. S. Siam et al., “Study of Machine Learning Techniques on 
Accident Data,” in Advances in Computational Collective 
Intelligence, Cham, 2020, pp. 25–37. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-
63119-2_3. 
[17] A. Iranitalab and A. Khattak, “Comparison of four statistical 
and machine learning methods for crash severity prediction,” 
Accid. Anal. Prev., vol. 108, pp. 27–36, Nov. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.aap.2017.08.008. 
[18] A. Theofilatos, C. Chen, and C. Antoniou, “Comparing 
Machine Learning and Deep Learning Methods for Real-Time 
Crash Prediction,” Transp. Res. Rec., vol. 2673, no. 8, pp. 169–
178, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1177/0361198119841571. 
[19] T. Lu, Z. Dunyao, Y. Lixin, and Z. Pan, “The traffic accident 
hotspot prediction: Based on the logistic regression method,” 
in 
2015 
International 
Conference 
on 
Transportation 
Information and Safety (ICTIS), Jun. 2015, pp. 107–110. doi: 
10.1109/ICTIS.2015.7232194. 
[20] A. Mansourkhaki, A. Karimpour, and H. S. Yazdi, 
“Introducing prior knowledge for a hybrid accident prediction 
model,” KSCE J. Civ. Eng., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1912–1918, 
2017. 
[21] H. Ren, Y. Song, J. Wang, Y. Hu, and J. Lei, “A Deep Learning 
Approach to the Citywide Traffic Accident Risk Prediction,” 
in 2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems (ITSC), Nov. 2018, pp. 3346–3351. 
doi: 10.1109/ITSC.2018.8569437. 
[22] Z. Yuan, X. Zhou, and T. Yang, “Hetero-ConvLSTM: A Deep 
Learning Approach to Traffic Accident Prediction on 
Heterogeneous Spatio-Temporal Data,” in Proceedings of the 
24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery & Data Mining, London United Kingdom, Jul. 2018, 
pp. 984–992. doi: 10.1145/3219819.3219922. 
[23] L. Fawcett, N. Thorpe, J. Matthews, and K. Kremer, “A novel 
Bayesian hierarchical model for road safety hotspot 
prediction,” Accid. Anal. Prev., vol. 99, pp. 262–271, Feb. 
2017, doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2016.11.021. 
[24] A. Al-Omari, N. Shatnawi, T. Khedaywi, and T. Miqdady, 
“Prediction of traffic accidents hot spots using fuzzy logic and 
GIS,” Appl. Geomat., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 149–161, Jun. 2020, 
doi: 10.1007/s12518-019-00290-7. 
[25] L. Lin, Q. Wang, and A. W. Sadek, “A novel variable selection 
method based on frequent pattern tree for real-time traffic 
accident risk prediction,” Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol., 
vol. 
55, 
pp. 
444–459, 
Jun. 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.trc.2015.03.015. 
[26] K. Luz, J. E. da R. Tavares, J. L. V. Barbosa, D. H. de la Iglesia, 
and V. R. Q. Leithardt, “RoadLytics: Road Accidents Analytics 
Using Artificial Intelligence to Support Deaths’ Prevention on 
Highways,” 
May 
2021, 
doi: 
10.20944/preprints202105.0698.v1. 
[27] I. Samoylenko, T.-C. Chao, W.-C. Liu, and C.-M. Chen, 
“Visualizing the scientific world and its evolution,” J. Am. Soc. 
Inf. Sci. Technol., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 1461–1469, 2006, doi: 
10.1002/asi.20450. 
[28] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Machine 
learning, vol. 20, pp. 273–297, 1995. 
[29] “Linear regression,” Wikipedia. May 08, 2023. [Retrieved: 
May, 
2023.]. 
Available: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Linear_regression 
[30] “Artificial neural network,” Wikipedia. May 17, 2023. 
[Retrieved: 
May, 
2023]. 
Available: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artificial_neural_n
etwork&oldid=1155178993 
[31] W. X. Camargo Filho et al., “Forensic intelligence as a useful 
tool for reducing traffic fatalities: the Brazilian Federal District 
case,” Rev. Bras. Crim., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 7–13, 2016. 
[32] A. Theofilatos and G. Yannis, “A review of the effect of traffic 
and weather characteristics on road safety,” Accid. Anal. Prev., 
vol. 
72, 
pp. 
244–256, 
Nov. 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.aap.2014.06.017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

