Precision Livestock Farming: A Multidisciplinary Paradigm 
 
Guillaume Terrasson, Eric Villeneuve, Véronique Pilnière, Alvaro Llaria 
ESTIA, F-64210 Bidart, France 
e-mail: {g.terrasson, e.villeneuve, v.pilniere, a.llaria}@estia.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Since several years, Precision Livestock Farming 
(PLF) has experienced a significant progress mainly due to the 
electronics and embedded systems miniaturization, along with 
the Internet of Things expansion. Geolocation and animal 
behavior identification are common research subjects in PLF, 
and several solutions have been proposed in this frame. 
Nevertheless, the development and generalization of this kind 
of tools must still face up several technical and societal 
challenges and, in order to overcome these difficulties, a 
multidisciplinary work is necessary. In this context, this paper 
presents the e-Pasto experimental platform, which employs 
different smart interfaces, as a case-study to analyze the main 
issues related to the implementation of PLF solutions. Along 
with this analysis, some relevant aspects of current systems are 
studied and discussed from different points of view, from 
technological to human ones, with the aim of offering a new 
vision, which tries to take into account, as far as possible, the 
final user needs. 
Keywords-Smart 
Interfaces 
for 
Engineering; 
Data 
Processing; Decision-making; Systemic Approach; Precision 
Livestock Farming. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The evolution of electronic devices, the improvement of 
wireless communication networks and the Internet access 
availability during the last years are the main reasons of the 
Internet of Things (IoT) expansion. Nowadays, IoT based 
solutions are considered a promising way to collect data that 
can be processed and analyzed by final users in order, for 
example, to supervise a manufacturing process or to monitor 
the health of home-based patient.  
In this frame, solutions based on aggregation of 
technologies, such as interconnected ubiquitous objects, 
represent an interesting option to offer new tools that may 
improve livestock productivity and product quality, reducing 
at the same time the work hardness. Moreover, other 
information about animals and the whole cattle, such as 
physiological conditions combined with environmental data, 
is necessary to correctly monitor the livestock: survey of 
animal activity and location in large pastures and small areas, 
diseases prediction or detection, improvement of livestock 
nutrition effectiveness, productivity and quality optimization, 
ensuring at the same time the animal well-being. However, 
nowadays, the development of this kind of tools stays in a 
research phase because of a number of challenges that must 
be still faced up, from both technical and societal points of 
view without forgetting final user needs. In this context, the 
aim of this paper is to identify and analyze, using the e-Pasto 
platform as case-study, the different difficulties to be 
overcome. The need for a multidisciplinary approach to 
provide useful smart interfaces that allows the interaction 
among livestock, farmers and also the environment, based on 
suitable technical solutions, is also proved. 
This document is structured as follows. In Section II, 
after a brief review of the existing research work concerning 
Precision Livestock Farming (PLF), the e-Pasto platform is 
presented together with the obtained results. Section III 
illustrates, considering the e-Pasto case-study, that a 
multidisciplinary 
approach, 
covering 
from 
technical 
knowledge to human sciences, is needed to face up the 
different found problematics. Finally, Section V concludes 
this paper. 
II. 
CASE-STUDY: THE E-PASTO PLATFORM 
A. State of the Art of Precision Livestock Farming 
PLF consists essentially in acquisition, collection and 
analysis of data from each animal and its environment 
employing, as illustrated by Figure 1, different Information 
and Communications Technologies (ICTs) such as sensors, 
communication networks, decision-making algorithms and 
human-to-machine interfaces (HMIs) [1]. PLF allows 
farmers to access new services such as individual feeding, 
health monitoring, animal localization and, consequently, to 
conduct in a more effective way their livestock ensuring at 
the same time productivity, animal well-being and economic 
benefits. 
 
 
Figure 1.  General architecture of a PLF solution [1]. 
There is a number of research works and solutions 
concerning PLF that can be found in the scientific literature 
[2]. A frequently employed solution is Radio Frequency 
Identification Technology (RFID), which is used to identify 
animals. From a regulatory point of view, RFID animal 
identification guarantees the traceability through the feed-
animal-food chain. However, some current works and 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

commercial solutions use also this technology in order to 
manage and automatize animal feeding regime or to allow 
the heat detection [1]. 
Moreover, ICT for domotics applications can be also 
applied to monitor the animal and to control cattle 
environment [3]. In barns, this kind of technology is useful to 
guarantee the animal well-being and health by regulating 
temperature, humidity and concentration of ammonia, among 
others. In the case of extensive farming exploitations, 
meteorological sensors help to predict the displacement of 
the cattle and, consequently, to improve their management. 
In 
addition, 
accelerometer 
and 
other 
sensors 
(temperature, geolocation) are commonly used for animal’s 
health and behavior monitoring. In the scientific literature, 
accelerometers and dataloggers have been largely applied to 
identify the animal behavior and principal activities [4]: 
grazing, resting, walking. This information, provided by 
accelerometers and coupled with a decision-making 
software, allows farmers to determine the welfare and health 
of their animals, optimizing the veterinary intervention. 
Virtual fencing technologies are also a classical example 
of PLF solutions [5]. In extensive farming, virtual fencing 
combining 
Global 
Positioning 
System 
(GPS) 
and 
Geographic Information System (GIS) contributes to 
understand the cattle’s displacements and also to enhance 
herd and grazing resources management. This capacity of 
remote monitoring allows farmers to optimize the time 
needed to accomplish their daily tasks, resulting in a better 
productivity, with a positive impact on the environment too. 
B. e-Pasto Platform: Description and Main Results 
In order to better illustrate what a PLF solution is, the    
e-Pasto platform [6] will be thereafter presented as a case-
study. This solution, developed in the context of a European 
research project and dedicated to cattle supervision in 
extensive farming environments, is composed of four main 
parts: the motion devices, a communication infrastructure, an 
information system and a human-machine interface, as it can 
be seen in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Global architecture of the e-Pasto platform. 
The motion devices, which are directly embedded onto 
the animal collar, include a GPS and an accelerometer, and 
collect position and behavior data from animals. These data 
are transmitted to a remote server through the wireless 
communication network provided by SIGFOX©. The 
aggregated data can be remotely exploited by the farmer in 
two different ways: 
 
To locate animals in mountain pastures during the 
summer period, allowing at the same time a better 
management of the cattle and the grazing resources 
using a virtual fencing solution. 
 
To measure and supervise animal behavior with the 
aim to warn the farmer in case of eventual disease or 
predation activity against their cattle. 
 
 
Figure 3.  e-Pasto virtual fencing principle. 
Real field tests were conducted in two experimental 
zones, one located in Ariège (France) and the other one 
located in Gipuzkoa (Spain), to validate the architecture of 
the platform and their global performances. During these 
field tests, the correct performance of the motion devices in 
terms of size, weight and autonomy was validated. More 
precisely, the motion devices employed in the e-Pasto 
platform offered a size and weight adapted to different 
animal species such as bovines, ovine and horses, along with 
an autonomy in energy generally equal or higher to 7 
months, which was assured taking one location position per 
hour. These position data were sent afterwards through the 
long-range low-power consumption network developed by 
SIGFOX©. 
As it has been said before, motion devices include an 
accelerometer. It has been proved that the data issued from 
the accelerometer can be processed in order to detect several 
behavior 
patterns 
(resting, 
walking 
and 
running), 
functionality which ameliorates the animal geolocation 
precision [7]. By the moment, this behavior identification has 
been only tested on humans. 
To conclude, it is important to highlight that one of the 
most remarkable results of the e-Pasto platform was the 
validation of an innovative virtual fencing solution, whose 
principle of operation is depicted in Figure 3. This solution 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

allows the farmer to draw and define the size and shape of 
their virtual fences, using the point-in-polygon geometric 
computation principle, by means of the HMI developed for 
the platform. If an animal equipped with the motion device 
goes out of the limits of its authorized virtual fence, an alert 
message is generated at the server level and transmitted to 
the farmer by SMS or e-mail. Consequently, contrary to 
other solutions proposed in the scientific literature [5], the   
e-Pasto virtual fencing solution is not based on a remotely 
application 
of 
negative 
cues 
(vibration, 
electrical 
stimulation) to induce a movement when the animal is 
detected out of the limits of a virtual fence. Instead, once the 
farmer is warned, he has the liberty to take a decision about 
how to solve the problem with the concerned animal. 
III. 
DISCUSSION OF MAIN ISSUES 
As it has been seen in previous sections, the application 
of PLF solutions based on ICTs seems to be an attractive 
way to motivate people to work in agriculture and livestock 
domains, by offering tools that improve productivity and 
product quality, reducing at the same time the work hardness 
and ensuring the animal well-being. In addition, the current 
changing context about intensive farming methods, implying 
a constant evolution of legislation, ethical issues and 
economic challenges, together with global warming, makes 
PLF solutions an interesting support to assist farmers in their 
decision-making process.  
This section, always with the e-Pasto platform case-
study, the state of the art and the current context in 
perspective, will highlight the main challenges and issues 
that PLF solution providers have to face up to generalize 
these solutions, applying a multidisciplinary approach. 
A. Technical Challenges 
From a technical point of view, several issues at different 
levels of a PLF solution can be identified. 
1) Data collection and transmission 
As illustrated by Figure 1, PLF solutions are based on the 
automation of data aggregation and transmission, not only at 
the animal level but also at the environment level [1] [3]. 
This way, technologies involving embedded electronics and 
sensors are very often used to capture the information needed 
for PLF applications. 
First of all, accuracy and reliability of the collected data 
are major issues that directly impact the design of embedded 
electronics devices. In the frame of the e-Pasto platform, 
where animals have to be located in an outdoor wide area of 
2000 hectares, it can be acceptable for end users a precision 
around 10 meter using GPS technology. On the other hand, 
when animals are located in an indoor environment such as 
barns, the employ of GPS is not reliable and, in addition, the 
technology to be used for animal geolocation should assure a 
more accurate position measurement, in the order of 
centimeters. Consequently, as shown by these simple 
examples, the election of the location measurement 
technology depends on several parameters like the 
environment, the sort of animal or even the application.  
Data transmission in outdoor or indoor real environments 
is also a complex task due to eventual multipath propagation, 
shadowing, or signal attenuation [2]. Therefore, the choice 
among current communication technologies, such as Wifi, 
cellular telephony or ZigBee, in example, must take into 
account many aspects like data range, quantity of data to be 
transmitted, indoor or outdoor environment, always with the 
goal of minimizing any loss of data, which could perturb the 
overall reliability of the PLF solution. 
Finally, it must be pointed up that the main challenge 
concerning data collection and transmission is to achieve an 
optimal trade-off among different aspects: accuracy, 
reliability of data collection and transmission, together with 
acceptable size and weight of embedded devices carried by 
animals in harsh environments, offering at the same time 
enough energetic autonomy to assure the correct operation 
during long periods of time [6]. 
2) Processing and exploitation of the data 
The processing and the exploitation of the collected data 
within the framework of the e-Pasto platform are intended to 
help breeders in their decision-making process in order to 
improve their management of livestock placed in mountain 
pastures.  
In addition to data issued from sensors placed on animals 
(geolocation, accelerometer, physiology, etc.) and mapping 
of the pastures area, the decision support mechanisms can 
use numerous additional data such as: 
 
Topographic data to qualify areas suitable for 
feeding livestock but also risky areas (cliffs, rocks, 
etc.). 
 
Data derived from the expert knowledge (breeders, 
scientists, mountain guides, etc.) to identify 
hazardous or accident-proning areas, protected areas 
for environmental reasons, as well as information 
about 
predators 
(attack 
locations, 
predator 
identification...). It is also possible to integrate 
collaborative aspects into the e-Pasto platform to 
allow an exchange of information between breeders 
and thus have expert knowledge updated more 
regularly and about wider areas. 
Consequently, the data capitalized by this kind of PLF 
platform are diverse and can represent a large volume of 
information. The heterogeneity and the amount of data 
collected highlight several challenges that will need to be 
addressed to develop a powerful decision support tool. 
Firstly, the diversity of capitalized data and their 
potentially random reliability [3] (failure of sensors, human 
errors, etc.) implies to choose a formalism adapted to the 
modeling of uncertain and heterogeneous knowledge. There 
are many tools relevant to this problem. For example, Case-
Based Reasoning (CBR) [8], Constraint Satisfaction 
Problems (CSP) [9] or Bayesian networks [10] allow to 
cover part of the needs. Many methodologies linking several 
of these approaches to address the problem in its entirety are 
available in the literature [11]. 
Secondly, capitalized data can be used in several ways. 
The first possibility is to visualize the raw information on 
the map, such as the location of the last predator attacks, the 
protected areas or the current position of the livestock. 
These data alone help the user to decide. For example, when 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

positioning a virtual fence, it may be useful to know if there 
has been a predator attack in the area. Another use may be 
to pre-process the data to obtain additional information [3]. 
For example, it would be possible, with time-based 
geolocation data, to identify overexploited areas to allow the 
farmer to act accordingly. A last way of using this data 
could be a virtual assistant, which, depending on the choices 
made by the breeder when using the platform, would offer 
additional information enabling him to refine his decision. 
For example, if the user defines a virtual fence too close to a 
risk area, the software would suggest an alternative 
positioning. 
Finally, a major issue in decision-making is the level of 
autonomy of the tool. It is possible to propose a solution 
which, based on the capitalized data, calculates and decides 
alone the procedure to be followed (for example, define 
automatically virtual fences). An alternative to this kind of 
tool lies in the suggestion by the tool of possible choices for 
the user (based on the capitalized data) but leaving him the 
final decision. This major design choice is a very important 
criterion for the acceptance and therefore the use of the tool 
by the breeders [12]. 
B. Challenges for Users 
If a closer look at the challenges induced by technological 
innovations in the agricultural sector is token, the e-Pasto 
platform finds its place. Indeed, looking at the evolution of 
the agricultural sector since the 1950s, there is little in 
common with practices applied today. The agricultural 
sector is constantly evolving (decrease of agricultural 
occupation for 50 years, evolution of agricultural policy, 
etc.). Being a breeder 50 years ago is no longer the same 
thing today. The evolution of farmers’ practices is 
accompanied by a change in their needs. This aspect refers 
to a broader issue: what are the users’ needs? Identifying the 
needs of users is inherent to technological developments. 
One of the reasons for this importance is that if the system 
does not satisfy a need, it will not be used by the user [2]. 
In addition, behind all these elements, for the farmer the 
question is: what is the impact of the technology on his 
daily tasks? In order to define the daily tasks, researchers 
and designers must precisely list different work situations of 
farmer and see with the farmer which of them are easy or 
difficult to do. Researchers must also understand what the 
work of the farmer is. A farmer cannot be forced to use a 
system that involves more constraints in his work than 
facilities. It is the system that must be adapted to the user, 
not the opposite. 
Furthermore, many other important aspects should be 
considered: to be farmer in a country A is not the same thing 
that be farmer in a country B, and the needs of young 
farmers are different from those of very experienced ones. 
In addition, the farmer is not the only one user: animals 
must be also taken into account. For example, behaviors of 
cows in a cattle are different from one animal to another. All 
these aspects lead to define plenty of different work 
situations [13] [14]. Once these work situations defined, 
researchers and farmers will be able to dialogue and find 
solutions adapted both to the farmer and the animal. The 
found solutions must be always a trade-off between 
possibilities, constraints of daily work and technology. 
Finally, it should not be forgotten that the agricultural 
sector is in continuous evolution. Thus, it is necessary to 
think about changes and the technological system could take 
into account these changes, creating a virtuous circle. To 
make a change, it is crucial to identify users in the earliest 
phases of the project and also integrate them into the 
development process. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
The work presented in this paper has presented some 
basic characteristics of PLF systems, showing at the same 
time the main contributions of the e-Pasto platform to these 
area, but not only: this article tries to initiate an exhaustive 
reflection 
concerning 
smart 
interfaces 
and 
their 
empowerment capacity, described in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Smart Interfaces in a transdisciplinary project. 
Contrary to classical thinking and as it has been said 
before, users (Label 1 in Figure 4) must be integrated the 
earliest as possible in the innovation project (Label 2 in 
Figure 4). This is the starting point. 
Smart interfaces can be defined from two complementary 
and inseparable points of view. Firstly, the interface 
considered as the main contribution of the project: 
technological product or system (Label 3 in the Figure 4). 
Secondly, the interface considered as the transdisciplinary 
innovating process (Labels 4 and 5 in the Figure 4) [15]. In 
other words, to overcome the different issues analyzed in this 
paper, it is necessary that researchers and designers work 
together along with an integration of users in their 
reflections. Working together is not easy for people who are 
specialists in a precise field because everyone has his own 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

logic. To work together, a decompartmentalization of 
scientific disciplines is mandatory, as well as an open-
mindedness of researchers and the respect for different 
thinking. Consequently, it is imperative to exchange 
throughout the project to better understand each other. The 
result of this work is a trade-off between the expectations of 
the different stakeholders [16]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented in this paper has been developed in 
the frame of the e-Pasto project (pilot project of AGRIPIR), 
which has been financially supported by the European 
Commission in the frame of the Spain-France-Andorra 
Territorial Cooperation Operational Program (POCTEFA 
2007-2013) and the FEDER funds. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Bocquier et al., “Elevage de précision en systèmes 
d’élevage peu intensifiés [Precision farming in extensive 
livestock systems],” INRA Productions Animales, pp. 101-
112, vol. 27, 2014. 
[2] T-M. Banhazi et al., “Precision Livestock Farming: an 
international review of scientific and commercial aspects,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Agricultural 
and 
Biological 
Engineering (IJABE), pp. 1-7, vol. 5, no. 3, 2012. 
[3] L. Ruiz-Garcia, L. Lunadei, P. Barreiro, and J-I. Robla, “A 
Review of Wireless Sensor Technologies and Applications in 
Agriculture and Food Industry: State of the Art and Current 
Trends,” Sensors, pp. 4728-4750, vol. 9, 2009. 
[4] D-D. Brown, R. Kays, M. Wikelski, R. Wilson, and A-P. 
Klimley, “Observing the unwatchable through acceleration 
logging of animal behavior,” Animal Biotelemetry, pp. 1-20, 
2013. 
[5] D. M. Anderson, “Virtual fencing-past, present and future,” 
The Rangeland Journal, pp. 65-78, vol. 26, 2007. 
[6] A. Llaria, G. Terrasson, H. Arregui, and A. Hacala, 
“Geolocation and monitoring platform for extensive farming 
in mountain pastures,” Proc. IEEE International Conference 
on Industrial Technology (ICIT 15), March 2015, pp. 2420-
2425. 
[7] G. Terrasson, A. Llaria, A. Marra, and S. Voaden, 
“Accelerometer based solution for precision livestock 
farming: geolocation enhancement and animal activity 
identification,” IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and 
Engineering, pp. 1-5, vol. 138, no. 1, 2016. 
[8] A. Aamodt and E. Plaza, “Case-based reasoning: foundational 
issues, methodological variations, and system approaches,” 
Artificial Intelligence Communications, IOS Press, pp. 39-59, 
vol. 7, no. 1, 1994. 
[9] R. Dechter, “Constraint processing,” Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, Inc., 2003, ISBN 1-55860-890-7. 
[10] F. Jensen and T. Nielsen, “Bayesian Networks and Decision 
Graphs,” Information Science and Statistics, Springer, 2007. 
[11] E. Villeneuve, C. Béler, F. Pérès, L. Geneste, and E. Reubrez, 
“Decision-Support Methodology to Assess Risk in End-of-
Life Management of Complex Systems,”. (In Press: 2016) 
IEEE Systems Journal. pp. 1-10, ISSN: 1932-8184. 
[12] D.J. Panell, “Social and economic challenges in the 
development of complex farming systems,” Agroforestry 
Systems, pp. 393-409, vol. 45, 1999. 
[13] V. Pilnière and C. Merlo, “Une approche transdisciplinaire et 
systémique pour favoriser le changement dans l'entreprise [A 
transdisciplinary and systemic approach to promote changes 
in the enterprises],” International Journal of Projectics, pp. 
63-73, vol. 7, no. 1, 2011, ISSN: 2031-9703, ISBN: 
9782804165222. 
[14] C. Merlo and V. Pilnière, “Analyse des situations de travail 
dans une démarche de prévention des risques professionnels: 
proposition d’une méthodologie d’apprentissage à destination 
des acteurs [Analysis of work situations for the prevention of 
occupational risks: proposal of a learning methodology 
oriented to the involved actors],” 84th ACFAS Conference, 
May 2016. 
[15] E. Morin, “Quelle Université pour demain ? Vers une 
évolution transdisciplinaire de l'Université [What University 
for tomorow? Towards a transdisciplinary evolution of the 
University],” Motivation, no. 24, 1997. 
[16] C. Merlo and V. Pilnière, “Intervention conjointe SPI-SHS au 
service de la performance d’une organisation de soins à 
domicile [Combined application of Engineering Sciences and 
Social and Human Sciences for the performance of a home 
care organization],” ProjecticSanté, Oct. 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

