Analysis and Proposed Improvements in the Support for the Visually Impaired in the Use of 
Public Transportation 
Patricio Mourato, Haidee Lima, Ciro Luna, Telma Rocha, Felipe Ferraz 
CESAR - Center of Study and Advanced Systems of Recife 
Recife, Brazil 
E-mail: {lpm, hccl, fsf}@cesar.org.br 
E-mail: {ciro.luna, telmarocha3}@gmail.com
Abstract - This paper proposes an improvement in an already 
existing service in Recife, Brazil that notifies the visually 
impaired of the time a bus arrives at a bus stop and the time 
they should get off a bus. Statistics on the number of visually 
impaired people around the world as well as some information 
about the main challenges they face in urban areas will be 
presented. This paper will also present the concept of 
SmartCity and some solutions designed around it. Finally, a 
solution is proposed in order to mitigate problems visually 
impaired people face when using public transportation. It is 
expected that this application will benefit not only blind 
people, but also any person who has a mobility impairment.  
Keywords-Blind 
person; 
visual 
impairment; 
physical 
disabilities; cittamobi; smart city; smartphone. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, moving around in Brazilian big city is not a 
smooth task. The streets are always overcrowded by cars and 
pedestrians are rarely prioritized. Sidewalks are commonly 
broken, and lack both good places to sit and shelter from the 
weather. Given the fact that the obstacles are big for 
common people, it is not difficult to understand how these 
problems may affect a person with a mobility impairment. 
Among the various physical disabilities, blindness or 
visual impairment is the concern of this paper. It is estimated 
that an amount of 285 million people worldwide are visually 
impaired: 39 million are blind and 246 million have low 
vision [1]. In Brazil, more than 35 million (18.8% of the 
population) claims to have visual impairment. Part of this 
total, 29 million have some permanent difficulty, more than 
6 million have great permanent difficulty for seeing and 
528,624 are unable to see, according to an IBGE research 
[2]. 
According to Castro [3], one of the great difficulties for 
the visually impaired is moving around urban areas, from 
walking to a particular bus stop to knowing the right place to 
get off a bus when reaching the final destination. In recent 
years, accessibility has improved, but it is still hard for many 
people with disabilities to use public transportation. In many 
situations, passengers need to ask people for help at bus 
stops to know what bus is passing by. When there is no one 
else at the bus stop, a passenger needs to stop all buses in 
order to be able to identify which one they need to take.  
The development of new technologies has increased the 
accessibility on smartphones. Both iOS (iPhone Operating 
System) and Android have features focused specifically for 
the visually impaired. 
As a result, it is believed that smartphones have a big 
potential to help people with several kinds of impairment and 
can make this group more confident and independent in their 
daily activities. This paper proposes an improvement for an 
already existing application which help visually impaired to 
take buses. 
This paper is presented as follows: Introduction, 
describes the problem; Section II depicts about smart cities, 
their concepts and visually impaired people; Section III is 
presenting the methodology of the our work; Section IV 
describes two good existing solutions; Section V explains the 
proposed solution; Section VI provides a conclusion and 
next steps.  
II. 
ABOUT SMART CITIES AND VISUALLY IMPAIRED 
PEOPLE 
This section presents a study about smart cities and people 
with visual impairment. 
 
       A. Smart Cities 
The interest in Smart Cities is motivated by great 
challenges, such as climate change, economy, mobility, 
among other problems. The European Union (EU) has 
committed to constantly developing strategies that enable the 
"smart" urban growth in their cities. Arup (Arup Group 
Limited) estimates that the global market for smart urban 
services will be 400 million dollars a year by 2020. 
According to Su et al. [7], the concept of Smart City is 
defined as the use of communication and information 
technology to measure, analyze and integrate key data from 
small systems to a centralized system. Thereby, smart cities 
bring intelligent responses to different types of needs, 
including everyday needs, environmental concerns, public 
safety, trade activities and city services. In smart cities, 
buildings and smart buildings are highlighted with sensors, 
actuators, controllers, central programming units, several 
kinds of interfaces, communication networks and smart 
meters are installed to ensure better energy performance of 
the building [8]. 
Smart Cities tend to evolve, creating an integration of the 
"intelligences" within a city. Some of these intelligences 
stand out like Baloon et al. [4] and Deakin [5] defines: 
• 
Creativity and inventiveness some citizens from a 
certain practice, such as scientists, artists, and 
entrepreneurs, which impact greatly on how work is 
organized; 
• 
The collective intelligence of a population, which 
results in the human capacity to evolve based on the 
institutions of the city related to cooperation, 
integration and collaboration; 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

• 
Artificial intelligence that is integrated into the 
physical environment and is available to the public, 
such as communication infrastructure, digital spaces 
or online problem solving tools. 
The intelligent cities can create more efficient urban 
systems and are able to face contemporary challenges and 
urban problems. More innovative and competitive cities are 
created where mobility is improved, public spaces are more 
secure, and there is a better management of environmental 
resources. 
 
       B. Visually Impaired People 
 
Blindness is understood as the lack of visual perception. 
The International Council of Ophthalmology [9] 
describes total blindness as the complete lack of visual 
perception of light and form. The World Health Organization 
[10] defines blindness and visual acuity to 20/400 less than 
(6/120) or a visual field loss to less than 10 degrees. 
According to the World Blind Union (WBU) [11], the 
lack in proper training in mobility and the lack of access to 
public transportation are some of the major obstacles for the 
blind or partially sighted when they need access to education, 
employment, services in general, and full participation in 
their communities. Transportation itself presents different 
challenges within the local, regional, national and 
international levels.  
A survey conducted by a group of students from Paraíba 
Valley University points out the main problems of the 
visually impaired in urban mobility [6]:  
• 
Obstacles on sidewalks 
• 
Few or non-existent proper signaling 
• 
Very short time for the sound signal of traffic light 
• 
Absence of technology in the public transportation 
• 
Lack of maintenance and standardization of 
sidewalks 
• 
Large flow of people in public places 
   According to this survey done by Fornaziero and Zulian 
[6], most visually impaired memorize the paths, either by 
walking or by bus. The survey also found out that one of the 
major difficulties this group has is to know the right time to 
get off a bus. Some have set up "checkpoints" to know the 
right time to leave it.  Examples of "checkpoints" cited by 
respondents were amount of "sharp curves" and "speed 
bumps". 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
First of all, we discussed some of the problems that the 
people with disabilities experience  in the context of public 
transport. In some bus stations, more than one bus line can 
stop at the same time, forming a big queue of buses and 
making it difficult to get on the bus, if this one has stopped 
far away. We observed a few problems at the bus stop. For 
example, some buses stops far away from where people are, 
and for blind people this is a serious problem. Finally, the 
data were analyzed with focus on people with visual 
impairments. 
Once the problem was identified, bibliographic research 
was performed in order to find previous works related to the 
issue. 
A benchmarking was performed and it was aimed at 
finding other existing applications that help the visually 
impaired to move around cities with public transportation. 
Finally, brainstorming sessions and user research showed 
that the best solution is to improve an already existing 
application, CittaMobi [13]. It already benefits users and 
they are happy with it.  
IV. 
EXISTING SOLUTIONS 
Two good solutions will be presented in this paper. The 
first one is from the UK, and the latter is from Brazil: 
 
A. GeorgiePhone (UK) 
 
    "Much more than phoning, texting and keeping in touch, 
GeorgiePhone is like a friend who helps with everyday tasks 
and takes the stress out of travelling alone. GeorgiePhone 
confirms where you are and what is around, bus journey 
information, your ability to keep up with the web and 
YouTube, reading print and diary dates."[12] 
    According to its site, GeorgiePhone is a family of apps 
designed mainly for blind or low vision people and it has a 
variety of functions like camera, color detection, user finder, 
bus track, among other very useful options. 
   The most interesting function for this paper is the bus 
tracking system. It locates the nearest bus stop for the user 
and tells how to get there. Once the user is on the bus, the 
app says the names of the bus stops. This way, a user knows 
when they need to drop, reducing the stress of a bus journey. 
Internet connection and GPS (Global Positioning Satellite) 
are needed, and it works only on the Android platform. 
 
B. CittaMobi Accessibility (Brazil) 
 
The CittaMobi accessibility is an app designer 
specifically for users with visual impairment and provides a 
bus arrival schedule. The interaction design is simpler and all 
queries are made by VoiceOver, with the application 
automatically notifying the user of the desired bus proximity. 
A user does not need to be at the bus stop to know what 
time the bus will pass by, and it is possible to verify in real 
time the bus RTA. In addition, it also presents the closest bus 
stops of the current user location. This app is only available 
for iOS. 
V. 
PROPOSAL 
      The CittaMobi already has some features which improve 
the user experience of bus users. The main feature is the 
estimated time left for buses to arrive at a particular bus stop. 
Before and after taking the bus, a user can look bus routes 
up. Users can also mark on the map where they want to get 
off a bus.  It is possible to bookmark bus lines and bus stops.   
     As noted by Fornaziero and Zulian [6], one of the greatest 
difficulties the visually impaired face is knowing whether 
their bus arrived. In Recife, there are stops for multiple bus 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

lines, making it even harder for these users. CittaMobi’s 
current service is presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. CittaMobi application  
 
CittaMobi’s current service uses a Web Service module to 
get information about the buses and also to provide the 
information to application’s users. Figure 2 presents the 
adjustments proposed for the CittaMobi application service. 
 
 
Figure 2. Enhancement proposed to CittaMobi application service 
 
     The enhancement proposed will be composed by Web 
Services to feed the mobile and web platforms. Based on 
CittaMobi, this paper proposes an enhancement to current 
service that includes an additional module to notify the 
presence of someone with mobility impairment at a bus stop. 
This module will provide to buses important information 
about passengers and other feedback like accidents, delays, 
etc. This will be useful to inform bus drivers of people with 
special needs at bus stops. 
     Currently the buses do not have a channel of 
communication with their passengers, especially those that 
require more attention, such as the visually impaired. The 
new proposal presented in Figure 3 presents the 
enhancement proposed to service, which comprises the 
interaction between users, services and applications. The 
new CittaMobi version will advise the bus driver that there is 
someone who needs special attention to get on the bus. The 
user that has a smartphone Android or iOS will select the bus 
line and then will press a button to send a message to the bus 
that has a smartphone fixed on the panel, connected to the 
service through the Internet aiming to show to bus driver that 
has someone at the specific bus stop who needs more 
attention to get on the bus.  
 
 
Figure 3. Interaction of actors 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
    The new service module will be useful for many people 
who have certain disabilities. Users will be able to choose 
bus lines through the mobile service and inform bus drivers 
when they need special attention when using public 
transportation services. 
    Many blind people live normal lives in their cities, but 
many cities do not invest the financial resources needed to 
make improve the well-being and quality of life of this 
group, especially in developing countries. Taking a bus 
should a simple routine task for everyone,  not a challenging 
task. Thus, it is expected that the visually impaired have no 
great difficulty to take buses. 
  To the future work, we will create the actors map of the 
service to understand the actors involved in the whole 
process of mobility, from the application user to the other 
passengers of the bus. 
    Digital ethnography to finding out how the visually 
impaired people use smartphones. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Eletronic publication: World Health Organizarion. [Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs282/en/  
2015.02.08 
[2] IBGE - Brazilian Institute of Gerography and Statistics. 
[Online]. Available from: www.ibge.gov.br 2015.01.22 
[3] J. C. Castro.  COME and GO: Accessibility: commitment to 
each one. Campo Grande MS: Publising house GIBIM, 2013. 
[4] Ballon, P, Glidden, J., Kranas, P., Menychtas A., Ruston S., 
and Van Der Graaf S. (2011). “Is there a Need for a Cloud 
Platform for European Smart Cities?”. eChallenges e-2011. 
Florence, Italy. 
[5]  M. Deakin, (2007). “From city of bits to e-topia: taking the 
thesis on digitally-inclusive regeneration full circle”. Journal 
of Urban Technology 14 (3): 131–143. 
[6] S. M. Fornaziero and M. A. R. Zulian. “Study of the 
difficulties encountered by people with visual impairment in 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

the use of public transport”. X Latin American Meeting of 
Graduate Studies. São José dos Campos, SP, p. 3.  
[7] K. Su, J. Li, and H. Fu. “Smart City and the Applications”. In: 
Proceedings of 2011 International Conference on Electronics, 
Communications and Control (ICECC), 2011, pp. 1028-1031. 
[8] Smart City – Implemented in Búzios - RJ, Magazine 
SODEBRAS, Vol. 9, no. 98, 2014/Feb.  
[9] International Council of Ophthalmology. “International 
Standards: Visual Standards — Aspects and Ranges of Vision 
Loss with Emphasis on Population Surveys”. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.icoph.org/pdf/visualstandardsreport.pdf 
2015.01.29 
[10] World Health Organization. Visual impairment and blindness 
Fact 
Sheet 
N°282 
- 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs282/en/index.ht
ml 2015.02.08 
[11] World 
Blind 
Union. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.worldblindunion.org/ 2015.02.18 
[12] Georgie 
Phone. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.georgiephone.com 2015.02.03 
[13] CittaMobi. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cittamobi.com.br 2015.05.15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

