eTelematik: ICT-System for Optimial Usage of Municipal Electric Vehicles 
Outline of System Requirements, Implementation Design and Field Test Results  
 
Steffen Späthe, Wilhelm Rossak 
Department of Computer Science 
Friedrich Schiller University Jena 
Jena, Germany 
{steffen.spaethe, wilhelm.rossak}@uni-jena.de 
 
Abstract—Electrical vehicles are not only passenger cars but 
also commercial vehicles and, in special, municipal vehicles. 
Their acceptance and usage depends primarily on everyday 
usability, aiming for a smart vehicle with intelligent energy and 
range supervision and driver support. In our funded research 
project eTelematik, we conceptualized, implemented and 
proved an Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
System with directly connected vehicle components, driver 
interface and backend applications. In order to expand the 
usage of electric vehicles, we predict energy consumption of 
complex work task sets and guide vehicle drivers while driving. 
Keywords-Municipal vehicles; ICT-support for fully electric 
vehicles and electric vehicles with range extender; range 
prediction; mobile client; in-car module. 
I.INTRODUCTION 
Worldwide electrical vehicles are seen as mobility’s 
future. Primary focus in this vision is mainly on private cars 
[1]. Commercially used vehicles however, have a much 
better starting point for electrification. Based on pre-
scheduled tasks and daily high usage work the capability of 
commercial vehicles can be predicted. At the current state of 
development commercially used, fully electrical vehicles are 
not able to fulfill a full day’s work without recharging. 
Therefore, hybrid vehicle concepts are developed and 
currently in advanced prototype state. A special class of 
commercial vehicles are municipal vehicles. These universal 
vehicles can be used with different setups and add-on 
structural parts in various scenarios. 
In our research project eTelematik, we developed an 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) based 
system, which supports daily commercial usage of electrical 
municipal vehicles and enables new usage scenarios with 
hybrid vehicles. 
The project eTelematik was a federal funded research 
project between 2012 and 2014. The consortium included 
four main partners [2]: 
1. EPSa GmbH: industry, electronics and 
communication devices 
2. Navimatix GmbH: mobile and server applications 
3. Friedrich Schiller University Jena: research, 
distributed software systems, range estimation´ 
4. HAKO GmbH Werk Walterhausen: electrical 
municipal vehicles 
The paper presented here focuses on the overall 
perspective on project results. While funding elapsed many 
questions are left open and are subject to further research and 
development work. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In 
Section 2 we will provide an overview of the project´s 
overall ICT architecture including the main challenges of our 
distributed system. From there we will highlight the usage of 
collected data inside the vehicle and on backend systems. In 
section 3 we will present some information about our field 
test. We close with a short review of goal reaching in section 
4. 
II. 
THE ETELEMATIK PROJECT 
Main focus of the project was the creation of a complete 
ICT infrastructure to enable an improved usage of electrical 
municipal vehicles. 
Our main requirements to this system were 
a) to gather data from mobile electrical vehicles and 
store them in a central universal database, 
b) to interpret gathered data to evaluate the influence 
of various parameters on energy consumption 
during the fulfillment of certain work tasks with 
required work equipment, 
c) to adjust the internal energy consumption and 
range prediction model with computed factors of 
influence and 
d) to support the driver with information about 
estimated and real energy consumption of current 
and scheduled work tasks irrespective of the status 
of the connection to the central server. 
Excluded from the project focus was the development of 
a new work force management or fleet management/ 
optimization system. Thus, all required business data had to 
be provided from an external fleet management system via 
designated service interfaces. 
Basing on these requirements we developed our system 
as schematically shown in figure 1. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
The eTelematik solution consists of a communication 
hardware (named “in-car module”), a mobile application 
(named “mobile client”) and a central server (named “central 
instance”) with a prediction model (named “flexProgno”). 
Externally computed work task sets are evaluated 
concerning their practicability in our central instance 
eTelematik Server. We use our energy consumption and 
range prediction model flexProgno to estimate the power 
consumption for every single part of the given working set. 
While power consumption depends on various parameters 
like vehicle model, payload, environmental temperature as 
already shown in [3], we need to know more about the work 
task, required add-on structural parts and settings of them. 
Also we require knowledge about the concrete routing and 
whose elevation profile between different work task places. 
We use the commercial available route calculation service 
and map height services of project partner Navimatix GmbH 
to gather this data. 
If a working set is estimated as accomplishable, the 
assigned driver gets this set shown on his mobile client. 
Inside the vehicle the communication hardware, 
developed by EPSa GmbH, collects vehicle specific data in 
real-time, aggregates and sends them to the mobile client. 
Communication between the communication hardware and 
the vehicle is realized by Controller Area Network (CAN) 
connections. The mobile client, developed by Navimatix 
GmbH, is an android application running on established 
consumer devices. The mobile client informs the driver 
about the actual operating status of the vehicle, the current 
status prediction based on the assigned working task set and 
the probability of fulfillment of this set. All collected vehicle 
data combined with sensor data from the mobile phone are 
transferred to and stored at the central instance. 
Figure 2 shows the internal conceptual system design of 
the mobile client application. The mobile client is subdivided 
into a user interface related part and some background 
services. While the data storing modules are responsible to 
realize business logic which is used by the UI module, the 
ICM Communicator Service takes care of establishing and 
keeping alive connection to the in-car module. We use plain 
TCP socket connections at this communication channel to 
minimize transport size and delay overhead. The eTele App 
Communicator Service realizes the reliable communication 
to the central instance. All other services, background as well 
as UI-related, use this service to communicate to and receive 
data from the central instance. At this channel, we use HTTP 
as transport layer. As our JBoss Application Server based 
central instance is realized using Java Servlets and Enterprise 
Java Beans, HTTP is a natural choice. As payload we used 
data objects with an own implemented key-value based 
object serialization which represents our business data. 
To summarize our system has to handle following data 
from central instance to vehicle: 
- 
master data of vehicles and drivers 
- 
general and vehicle specific configuration setting 
for communication between in-car module and 
mobile client 
- 
current work task sets depending on logged in 
driver  
From vehicles to central instance we send: 
- 
updates of work task status 
- 
vehicle’s positions and velocity 
- 
electrical vehicle specific measurements 
The electrical vehicle specific measurements and 
especially their representation on in-car communication 
buses vary between vehicle manufacturers and even between 
vehicle types of one manufacturer. Within our project 
consortium we are able to gather and transfer following 
electrical vehicle specific measurements: 
- 
state of charge 
- 
primary battery voltage 
- 
current in high voltage circuit 
- 
connection state, settings and power of battery 
recharger 
- 
state and settings of range extender (if applicable) 
 
Figure 1. eTelematik system architectur overview (adapted figure, based on original by Johannes Kretzschmar, University Jena)  
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
These data are used in different situations. Inside the 
vehicle the data support the driver in driving between work 
task places of action and while task fulfillment. On server 
side, we use recorded data in different analyses. 
Inside the vehicle we are able to realize “enhanced 
foresighted driving”. Because we know basing on the 
scheduled work task sets, which route has to be to driven and 
what kind of working task has to be accomplished, we are 
able to predict if this planning is still valid. Usually, only 
average statistics about energy consumption per kilometer 
are available to the vehicle and the driver. We know the 
concrete route to drive as well as the required settings of 
add-on components. Thus, we are able to predict the required 
energy consumption on a much more detailed basis. This 
advanced, detailed knowledge allows us to warn the driver 
that he will not reach his destination, even if the average 
statistics would tell him so. Alternatively, we can relax him 
in situations where average statistics would show a much to 
low range, for example when the planned route has many 
downhill sections. Furthermore, we can delay in hybrid cars 
the usage of the range extender when it would be triggered 
by the vehicle’s management system because we know when 
the user’s preferred charging stations are in reach. 
By doing so, we are able to optimize the battery usage 
and to extend the usability of electrical vehicles. 
In vehicles with range extender we can optimize the point 
in time for recharging. In certain situations, work tasks have 
to be fulfilled without any avoidable emission, e.g. noise or 
exhaust. If recharging is only controlled by battery state of 
charge it could happen, that the driving to the workplace is 
realized fully out of battery and that the recharging has to be 
started at working place. With our knowledge about the 
complete work task set and desired or required restrictions in 
work task fulfillment we can foresee and avoid such 
situations. 
On server side, we use recorded data of the vehicle in 
different scenarios. 
A long-term use case which is very important to vehicle 
manufactures as well as to the vehicle owner, is predictive 
maintenance. With data mining technics, we are able to 
detect deviations in characteristic gradients long before the 
vehicle breaks down. This is of particular interest to our 
project partners due to the lack of long-term experience with 
the completely new designed power train and the used 
battery system. 
In addition, this process enables for the first time insight 
into exhaustive detailed real world usage records for these 
vehicles. This information is very helpful to vehicle 
manufactures 
for 
further 
improvements 
and 
new 
developments. 
A short-term use case is monitoring of overall resource 
consumption for certain work tasks. To date the direct 
assignment of fuel consumption to single work tasks is not 
possible. Since we record work task state changes as well as 
energy consumption parameters continuously we are able to 
match them. 
Inside our project’s system we also process recorded data 
for intrasystem usage. Main task is to adjust and improve our 
energy consumption and range prediction model flexProgno. 
Our model is based on assumptions like required energy 
stays equal if all influencing parameters do not change or 
stay very close to situations before. Initially we did not have 
many vehicle specific data. By processing recorded data the 
vehicle specific parameter set gets more accurate over time. 
The basic approach of our model is shown in [4].  
Energy consumption does not only depend on vehicle or 
work task parameters, but also on driver characteristics. 
Hence, it is important to include the driver’s start-up and 
stop behavior in energy consumption prediction. Since these 
parameters cannot be measured beforehand they need to be 
determined from the recorded data.   
 As we developed our system from scratch we designed a 
long running field test. We built up a complete system 
installation to validate the system’s long term stability, data 
transfer reliability especially in areas with unreliable mobile 
network connection and to validate and harden our 
prediction model. 
Figure 2. eTelematik mobile client´s internal module overview  
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

In our build up test, we installed our system components 
in five electrical vehicles. These vehicles were used on a 
regular daily basis. 
The field test is a still ongoing process but we like to 
emphasize some preliminary results.  
A) Our system setup is running very stable over all 
components. During the development there was 
some doubt about wireless local area network 
(WLAN) communication between in-car module 
and mobile client. However, we do not register any 
significant disturbance in this communication 
channel. All relevant data provided by the 
electrical vehicles in the field test were recorded by 
the in-car module and were transferred properly to 
mobile client. 
B) We 
succeeded 
in 
establishing 
a 
robust 
communication between mobile client and central 
instance. Even in our test region where mobile 
network coverage is very patchy, we had no data 
loss. 
C) Synchronization of master data as well as 
measurement data between mobile client and 
central instance is working very solid even if 
network connection gets lost while transfer. Thus, 
required offline capability of the mobile client is 
achieved. 
Our field test is still in progress and we are still collecting 
data. The respective data evaluation with primary focus on 
our range prediction model will be published separately. 
III. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on the evaluation of our long-term field test we 
can state that we achieved our primary goals. Quantity and 
quality of recorded and transferred data are satisfying, data 
transfer reliability is sufficient and offline capability for 
mobile client is achieved. 
Therefore, we can determine that our selected system 
design and implementation are adequate to meet our overall 
requirements. Though, we have to rerate our selection of 
mobile phone as primary communication channel. We 
deployed mass market mobile phones in the field test. To 
date we did not have substantial failures. However, based on 
other tests we expect thermal problems in very cold and 
warm to hot situations. These problems will become more 
seriously when running more applications and parallel tasks 
on the mobile phone’s hardware. 
Therefore the partitioning between in-car module and 
mobile client has to be reviewed very carefully. An 
alternative approach could be to transfer all permanent 
running processes of data collection and aggregation to the 
fixed-powered in-car module. This could as well include data 
transfer from and to the central instance. This process should 
be realized in a proxy-like way to keep this functionality 
transparent to the mobile client. The main function of the 
mobile phone still has to be the communication to the driver 
of the vehicle. This includes the exchange of information 
about working sets, as well as electrical vehicle state of 
charge, and driving instructions, to reach optimal range and 
energy usage. 
A disadvantage within this alternative approach is the 
limited updatability and extensibility of the in-car module. 
The software for the in-car module has to be written system-
specific and very closely fitted to the underlying hardware. 
One option to overcome this drawback would be to 
implement a scripting language like lua  to encapsulate high 
level logic from lower hardware-near level.  
Still many questions and tasks are left open. Our work 
will be continued, partly in cooperation with the federal 
funded project call “Smart City Logistik Erfurt” (SCL) [5].  
In SCL, we address aspects of inner city freight logistic 
processes with full electric vehicles. The logistic partners of 
SCL intend to deploy available medium sized electrical 
vehicles into their business as freight transporters for the last 
mile, from the city’s perimeter to the final destination. The 
project’s focus is on ICT support to optimize vehicle’s 
utilization and integration in existing fleets and processes.  
Therefore we have to adapt our in-car module to the 
selected vehicle models. The driver assistance mobile 
application needs adjustments to meet the specific needs in 
delivery logistic applications. Our range prediction has to be 
adjusted to the new domain as we have differing influence 
factors like weight or specific vehicles accessories. In SCL 
we 
will 
not only 
validate 
existing 
working 
sets. 
Implementation of route calculation and tour optimization 
with electrical vehicle´s additional restrictions will be an 
important task. Overall we have to improve usability and 
user experience in our driver assistance application as well as 
in backend systems user interface, which was not in focus of 
eTelematik but is undoubtedly important to bring our 
research and development into real world applications. 
IV. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank all members and partners of 
eTelematik research project, especially S. Gebhardt from 
HAKO GmbH for long lessons on battery chemistry and 
vehicle driving dynamics.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Lukic, Z. Pantic, “Cutting the cord: Static and dynamic 
inductive 
wireless 
charging 
of 
electric 
vehicles.”, 
Electrification Magazine, IEEE 2013, vol. 1, no. 1. pp. 57-64. 
[2] eTelematik: Project website. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.etelematik.de/ 2015.02.23 
[3] V. Schau et al., “SmartCityLogistik (SCL) Erfurt: Deriving 
the main factors that influence vehicle range during short-
distance freight transport when using fully electric vehicles”, 
LBAS – Conference on Location Based Applications and 
Services, Jena, Germany, 2013, pp. 101-108, ISBN: 978-3-
8325-3813-2 
[4] J. Kretzschmar, F. Geyer, S. Späthe, W. Rossak, “eTelematik: 
Prognose 
und 
Ausführungsüberwachung 
elektrifizierter 
kommunaler Nutzfahrzeuge”, LBAS – Conference on 
Location Based Applications and Services, Jena, Germany, 
2013, pp. 119-125, ISBN: 978-3-8325-3813-2 
[5] Smart City Logistik Project website. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.smartcitylogistik.de/ 2015.02.23 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

