Making Smart Phones Accessible to Braille Users
Andrew Wells
Undergraduate Researcher
Fowler School of Engineering
Chapman University
1 University Dr,
Orange, CA, United States
Email:awells@chapman.edu
Robert Alexander
Undergraduate Researcher
Fowler School of Engineering
Chapman University
1 University Dr,
Orange, CA, United States
Email:roalexander@chapman.edu
Maryam Etezad
Faculty Mentor
Fowler School of Engineering
Chapman University
1 University Dr,
Orange, CA, United States
Email:etezadbrojerdi@chapman.edu
Abstract — Smartphones are an important tool in modern life,
but they are primarily a visual medium. This poses an
accessibility problem for the blind and vision-impaired in
interacting with the internet-connected world. The ultimate
goal of this research is to create a small, lower-cost braille-type
screen reader and display for use with smartphones. The
device would use a 6x6 grid of piezoelectrically actuated pins
being controlled by an application on the phone. Not just text,
but images from the phone can be represented on the device.
By producing an affordable touch-based screen reader that can
also display images from the screen, smartphone accessibility
could be improved for those with vision impairments, which
ties into the conference theme of smart accessibility.
Keywords-braille; haptic; smartphone; accessibility.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Smartphones have become ubiquitous tools in everyday
life. These devices, however, are primarily a visual medium,
presenting
a
challenge
for
those
who
are
blind or
sight-impaired.
While
electronic
braille
screen-reading
devices exist on the market, they are designed to display text
and can be cost-prohibitive at over $500 [1]. The goal of
this research is to develop such a device for smartphone use
that would be more affordable and display images as well.
The device will consist of a smartphone app that connects to
a microcontroller to actuate a 6x6 grid of piezoelectrically
actuated pins.
Braille and haptic displays have shown themselves to
provide great benefit to blind people. Many devices have
been developed and tested to help visually impaired people
navigate the world independently, such as in the case of
Amemiya [4] where the research demonstrates its use within
the deaf and blind communities of Japan as a portable
wayfinding
device.
In
this
case
the
importance
of
portability is demonstrated as it pertains to the usability of
braille devices in everyday life. Beyond portability it
demonstrates the ability for those without sight to use touch
as a viable way to interpret the world around them. It is with
the understanding of other contributions within the haptics
realm that we intend to focus on the user within our
research.
Work on this research was started as part of an
unpublished master’s thesis by Jason Blood at Weber State
University and continued by Professor Dhanya Nair [2].
This research was eventually passed on to our team. At the
time we received the project, an Android app had been
developed which connects to a USB development board
(Microchip Technology dsPIC33E); this app would take a
screenshot of a portion of the phone’s screen, convert it to a
bitmap, and send it to the dev board over a USB connection.
This setup is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Initial electronics design
This dev board would display the image on a mono-color
LED array (Adafruit IS31FL3731) controlled through an
I2C (Inter-Integrated Circuit) connection to stand in for the
pin array for initial testing. This setup had two problems.
First, the dsPIC33E was an older design, and, for its feature
set, was more costly and cumbersome than more recent
microcontrollers. Second, the board’s I2C connection was
unreliable, leading to only portions of the LED array being
updated at times.
In Section 2, we will describe our current progress
on improving and updating the electronic hardware for the
device and its accompanying application. In Section 3, we
will describe the progress on designing the pin grid to
eventually replace the LED array. In Section 4, we will
conclude and describe our next future steps on this work.
II.
ELECTRONICS AND ANDROID APPLICATION PROGRESS
In
order
to
solve
the
problems
involving
the
microcontroller with the design we received, we have been
working to replace the dsPIC33E with an ESP32. The
ESP32 is a more recent microcontroller with extensive
support available and a much lower cost (approximately
1/12 the cost to us). In addition, the ESP32 supports a
Bluetooth connection. This would allow the device not to
need to be physically tethered to the phone. Further,
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Bluetooth connections are easier to develop on the app side
due to the API and smartphone support being geared more
toward Bluetooth peripherals than USB peripherals. This
new design is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
New electronics design
At this time, the app has not been updated to the new
design, but using a basic Bluetooth terminal emulator, we
are able to send images over Bluetooth to the device to
display an image now reliably. Our immediate next step for
this would be to update the application to communicate with
the new microcontroller.
III.
PIN GRID DESIGN PROGRESS AND METHODOLOGY
To ensure this design's viability in the real world, we are
looking to conduct tests using samples and interview
schools for the blind to ensure that the implementation of
our haptic system fulfills the needs of the blind. The first
question we need to answer for this is whether the spacing
of the pins is comfortable to read. To test this, we have
3D-printed example 6x6 matrices with different designs and
different
spacings
using
measurements
from
braille
standards to stay within the usual parameters followed in
everyday braille characters [3]. For these measurements
specifically,
we
are
investigating
the
maximum
and
minimum values presented in the given ranges, as the
difference in millimeters is already small. By 3D printing
the models, we can accurately present braille, as seen in
Figure 3, and present a final outline of a design without
having the design completely present.
Figure 3.
Models of braille matrix designs for testing in the PrusaSlicer
software.
This allows a proof of concept and an opportunity for
revision before the design is created to ensure minimal
problems. Second, it is important to take into account the
user in such a design, as without understanding its flaws, we
can not offer the best solution. To solve this problem, we
plan to gather suggestions on how to make this haptic
system work most to their benefit. This will make sure that
our design fits the best with the lives of those it is looking to
help.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Given the progress outlined above, our next steps are
developing the haptic board that will have actuated pins and
be 3D printed to the specifications determined through the
discussion with the blind. This will replace the LED matrix
itself but utilize its driver board, which should provide the
control signals for actuating the pins in the new matrix.
Further testing would also be necessary to ensure its
functionality and reliability. Testing with this finished
device by blind or visually impaired people will be
necessary to test if the device provides greater accessibility
to smartphones through displaying images on a portable pin
grid.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the National Science Foundation
for funding.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. E. Adnan, N. M. Dastagir, J. Jabin, A. M. Chowdhury, M.
R. Islam, "A cost effective electronic braille for visually
impaired individuals," 2017 IEEE Region 10 Humanitarian
Technology
Conference,
pp.
175-178,
2017,
doi:
10.1109/R10-HTC.2017.8288932.
[2]
S. Naik and D. Nair, “Coupled piezoelectric actuators for the
tactile
display,”
in
2017
International
Symposium
on
Nonlinear Theory and Its Applications, pp. 112-115, 2017.
[3]
“Size and spacing of braille characters,” Braille Authority of
North America.
[4]
T. Amemiya “Handheld Haptic Display with Braille I/O,” in
Universal
Access
in
Human-Computer
Interaction,
pp
730-739, 2007, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-73281-5_80.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

