Experimental Study on Riding Skill for Using Standing Type Vehicles 
Differences between Unskilled and Skilled Subjects to Complete Task 
Naohisa Hashimoto,                                                 
Kohji Tomita, Simon Thompson, Yusuke Takinami 
Osamu Matsumoto 
Robot Innovation Research Center,  
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology (AIST) 
Tsukuba, Japan. 
e-mail: {naohisa-hashimoto, k.tomita, simon.thompson, y-
takinami, o.matsumoto}@aist.go.jp 
 
 
Jyeon Kim 
The Department of Control and Information Systems 
Engineering 
National Institute of Technology, Tsuruoka College  
Tsuruoka, Japan. 
e-mail: jykim@tsuruoka-nct.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Many researchers have attempted to solve existing 
traffic problems. One potential solution to these problems is to 
reduce traffic volumes in urban areas. In order for this to 
happen, a modal shift from conventional passenger vehicles to 
public transportation and eco-vehicles, including personal 
vehicles, should be considered. There are several types of 
personal vehicles; in this study, we focus on standing type 
personal vehicles for solving last mile/first mile problem. As 
opposed to bicycles, few people have experience in using 
standing type vehicles; the skill of riding these vehicles depends 
on the individual. By understanding the differences between 
skilled riders and unskilled riders, we would like to study for 
educational programs or assistant system for riding standing 
type vehicles. The objective of this study was to analyze the 
differences between skilled and unskilled subjects riding 
standing type vehicles. The experiment was performed to 
gather riding data for comparing the difference. We employed 
two standing type vehicles for the experiments. One is small, 
and the other is large. In the experiments, two types of subjects 
traveled the same course, and yaw, pitch, and roll data, and x-, 
y-, and z-acceleration data of each subject was gathered as 
riding data. In addition, time duration to finish the goal was 
evaluated. From the gathered results, the time duration was 
considered in this paper. In particular, by using the t-value, it 
was found that there was a significant difference in the time 
duration between skilled subjects and unskilled subjects when 
using a large type standing type vehicle. Thus, if we analyze the 
skill level for using standing type vehicles, we should consider 
the time duration to complete a slalom course. 
Keywords - Personal mobility vehicles; Experimental 
analysis; Standing type vehicles. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Increasing urban traffic leads an increase in traffic jams, 
traffic accidents, and air pollution, all of which have a 
negative impact on the quality of life [1]-[8]. One possible 
solution to these problems is to reduce traffic volumes in 
urban areas. Modal shifts from conventional vehicles to 
public transportation and eco-vehicles, including personal 
mobility vehicles, should be considered to reduce urban 
traffic volumes [9]-[15]. In this study, we focused on 
personal mobility vehicles to reduce traffic volumes. 
Automobiles are the traditional optimal means of 
transportation as they permit door-to-door transportation. 
However, in order to address the traffic problems mentioned 
above, we have to shift at least some movement of people 
from individual automobiles to public transportation. To 
resolve this problem, useful and eco-friendly alternative 
transportation must be provided. Considering the use of 
public transportation, the first and last mile problem remains, 
especially for elderly people [9]-[12].  
With respect to the key solution of the first and last mile 
problem, not only personal mobility but also automated 
vehicles and electric commuter vehicles were proposed by 
several researchers and projects [11]. It is difficult to solve 
the problem by only one transportation method as every 
place has different conditions, laws, users and environment, 
and user’s preferences are different.  
In this paper, personal mobility vehicles (vehicles for 
individual use), are investigated as one of the most effective 
options for solving the first and last mile problem 
[12][13][15]. Several other types of individual vehicles are 
also expected to be used as personal mobility vehicles, such 
as electric scooters, new one-seater vehicles, and wheelchair-
type mobility devices. Standing type personal mobility is the 
target of this study. In Japan, the use of standing type 
vehicles on public road is prohibited. As to the acceptance, 
Pham studied the occupied spaces for standing type personal 
mobility [16]. As for safety, Lavallee reported an analysis of 
existing safety regulations for Segways, the legal framework 
for using these vehicles, and traffic rules [17]. The 
Australian Capital Territory reported experimental results of 
acceptance, safety, and effect on the community and the pros 
and cons of using Segways in community areas [18]. In 
addition, research on an assistance system for standing type 
vehicles has been conducted by several researchers [19]-[26], 
but the statistical data on riding new types of self-balancing 
vehicles with real subjects and on public roads is insufficient.  
As opposed to bicycles, few people have experience in 
using standing type vehicles; thus, the skill of riding these 
vehicles depends on the individual. By understanding the 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

differences between skilled riders and unskilled riders, we 
would like to study for educational programs or assistant 
system for riding standing type vehicles. 
The objective of this study is to analyze the differences 
between skilled and unskilled subjects riding a standing type 
vehicle in a preliminary experiment. Before this study, we 
performed preliminary experiments with only a few subjects 
under simple conditions [27]. Hence, it was difficult to 
analyze that data in order to evaluating standing type 
vehicles. In this study, more experiments were performed to 
obtain riding data. In the experiment, both skilled and 
unskilled subjects traveled on the same course, and the yaw, 
pitch, and roll data, and x-, y-, and z-acceleration data of 
each subject were obtained as riding data. By comparing the 
data from two kinds of subjects, the statistical differences 
were found. These differences are useful for evaluation of 
the skill of riding standing type vehicles. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, 
we present test vehicles. In Section 3, the performed 
experiments are described. Finally, we conclude the work in 
Section 4. 
 
II. 
TEST VEHICLES 
Two types of personal mobility vehicles were used in the 
evaluation, and they are discussed in detail in this section. 
A. Segway 
The Segway [15], developed by the Segway Corporation, 
was employed as a personal mobility vehicle (as shown in 
Fig. 1). The “Segway® PT i2” model, produced by the 
Segway Japan Corporation, was employed in this experiment. 
Segways are currently used in Japan in national parks for 
conducting tours, on golf courses for player assistance, and 
zoos, stations, airports, to name but a few of the places, by 
information service staff and security staff. The security staff 
at the Tsukuba Designated Zone use Segways in order to 
improve the efficiency of their patrolling. In addition, some 
cities and universities in Japan have introduced pilot 
programs using Segways for multiple purposes. Thus, the 
Segway is attracting attention as a new type of transportation, 
enabling personal mobility. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Segway. 
B. AIST -Personal Mobility (AIST-PM) 
The AIST-PM, which was developed by AIST, is a 
human-riding wheeled inverted pendulum vehicle [24][27], 
as shown in Fig. 2.  
The features of the AIST-PM are as follows: 
1. 
Smaller and lighter than a Segway  
2. 
Has a suspension system  
3. 
Easily lifted  
4. 
The occupied space is almost equal to the space that 
one person occupies while walking 
5. 
Maximum velocity is low, and kilometers-per-
charge is low, but the total efficiency is good as one-person 
transportation. 
The AIST-PM has two individual controllable wheels in 
the body, and the stick-shaped handles are attached vertically 
on each side of the body. Two motors and a computer are 
installed in the body, and the upper face of the vehicle is the 
platform on which the subject stands.  
The left and right wheels are each driven by direct-
current motors (DC-motors), which are controlled by an on-
board computer installed in the vehicle. The angles of the 
wheels are measured by counting the number of encoder 
pulses, and the angle and angular velocity of the pitch 
direction of the vehicle are measured using gyro-sensors and 
an accelerometer. A force sensor attached to the platform of 
the vehicle detects whether the subject is on or off. Table 1 
shows the specification of AIST-PM. 
 
TABLE I.  
SPECIFICATION OF AIST-PM[24] 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  AIST-PM 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
This section discusses the mobile-sensor system used in 
the experiments, experimental conditions, routes and the 
results obtained. 
 
A. Mobile Sensor System for Obtaining Riding Data 
It was difficult to obtain data from a Segway, so it was 
therefore easier to use an add-on system which could be used 
on all of the standing type vehicles tested. An add-on 
mobile-sensor system was thus manufactured. This system 
consisted of a laptop computer, a gyro-sensor, a G-sensor, a 
Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver, and a lithium-ion 
battery. The configuration of the mobile system is shown in 
Fig. 3. Figure 4 shows the coordinate system used. By using 
this system, the following riding data was gathered: 
1. 
Velocity 
2. 
Trajectory 
3. 
Roll, Yaw and Pitch rates 
4. 
x-, y- and z-accelerations 
5.  Time duration to complete the course, which is 
estimated by using X, Y, Z and Roll, Yaw, and Pitch rate. 
All data were saved at 10 Hz on the laptop computer.  
 
GPS
Antenna
GPSdata
Gyro
and 
accelaration
data
Antenna
 
Figure 3.  System Configuration 
 
Figure 4.  Coordinate system of the sensor 
B. Experimental Conditions 
We used two kinds of subjects for this experiment, one 
skilled and the other unskilled. A skilled person is defined in 
this study as a person who has ridden a standing type vehicle 
more than 50 times. 28 subjects (15 men and 13 women) 
were employed for the experiments. The average age of 
subjects was 41.3. We employed between- subjects approach. 
For safety reasons, test subjects wore helmets. The routes 
were clear of people, and the experiments were conducted 
only in no rain conditions. In addition, two staff members 
accompanied the subjects in case of accidents. 
 
C. Experimental Routes 
Experimental routes, prepared for this study by AIST, are 
shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. These routes were designed by 
AIST by referring the standard course for wheelchair. These 
routes were planned for only this study and were not 
associate with any company. The reason why we used two 
different routes was to consider the size of each vehicle. The 
subjects were tasked to traverse the experimental routes. The 
experimental routes included the following tasks: 
1). 
Slalom 
2). 
Going up and down a slope 
3). 
Traveling on a step 
The numbers in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 identify each of the 
above tasks. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Experimental routes for Segway 
 
 
Figure 6.  Experimental routes for AIST-PM 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

D. Experimental Result 
The experiments were performed. Figure 7 shows the 
scenes of experiments by using Segway for each task. Figure 
8 shows the scenes of experiments by using AIST-PM for 
each task. By using X, Y, Z accelerations and Yaw, Pitch 
and Roll rate information, the time was estimated with high 
accuracy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Experimental scens by using Segway (From the top: the subject 
is traveling on slalom, on Slope and on Step) 
Table 2 shows the average time duration to complete 
slalom course by using Segway and AIST-PM. The number 
of skilled subjects was 3 and of unskilled subjects 25 was 
respectively. The statistical differences between data sets 
were evaluated by employing Welch’s t-test [28]-[30]. It was 
found that there was a 5 % statistical difference between the 
skilled subjects and the unskilled subjects by using Segway 
on Slalom, shown in Table 3. It is presumed that the skilled 
subjects could control Segway smoothly and correctly. In 
addition, they could avoid wasting time by using the ideal 
trajectory. Hence, skilled subjects followed the unideal 
trajectory by doing overturning and short turning. By 
analyzing the trajectory from GPS, the unskilled subjects did 
not choose the short distance course, but the longer course. 
Table 4 shows the average time duration to complete slope 
course by using Segway and AIST-PM. This result has same 
tendency as the slalom. 
On the other hand, it was not found that there was a 5 % 
statistical difference between the skilled subjects and the 
unskilled subjects by using AIST-PM on Slalom, shown in 
Table 3. And it was not found that there was a 5 % statistical 
difference between the skilled subjects and the unskilled 
subjects by using AIST-PM on Slope, shown in Table 5. It 
means that there was less statistical difference between by 
using the experimental results. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Experimental scens by using AIST-PM (From the top: the 
subject is traveling on Slalom, on Slope and on Step) 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

It is presumed that to use AIST-PM is easier than 
Segway and subjects could get accustomed to the AIST-PM 
during the lecture period. In addition, the averages between 
skilled subjects and unskilled subjects are different, but the 
variance by using AIST-PM is large. Thus, calculated t-value 
is not enough, and we cannot conclude its difference only 
from the results. We need to do the experiments more. 
As to the step, it was not found that statistical differences 
between skilled subjects and unskilled subjects about the 
time to complete. 
 
TABLE II.  
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR TIME DURATION ON SLALOM 
COURSE ON EACH VEHICLE TYPE 
Skilled
Subjects
Unskilled
Subjects
Segway
13.0 [s]
29.9 [s]
AIST-PM 24.0 [s]
35.5 [s]
 
 
TABLE III.  
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR T-VALUE OF TIME DURATION 
ON SLALOM COURSE ON EACH VEHICLE TYPE 
t-value
Degree of
Freedom
Between Skilled Subjects
and Unskilled Subjects on
Using AIST-PM
1.6
25
Between Skilled Subjects
and Unskilled Subjects on
Using Segway
1.39
26
 
 
TABLE IV.  
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR TIME DURATION ON SLOPE 
COURSE ON EACH VEHICLE TYPE 
Skilled
Subjects
Unskilled
Subjects
Segway
35.2 [s]
49.6 [s]
AIST-PM 21.2 [s]
33.5 [s]
 
 
TABLE V.  
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS FOR T-VALUE OF TIME DURATION 
ON SLOPE COURSE ON EACH VEHICLE TYPE 
t-value
Degrees of
Freedom
Between Skilled Subjects
and Unskilled Subjects on
Using AIST-PM
2.067
24
Between Skilled Subjects
and Unskilled Subjects on
Using Segway
1.39
25
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, the differences in riding between skilled 
and unskilled subjects were analyzed for standing type 
personal vehicles. The standing type vehicles used, and the 
experiments including the experimental conditions, routes, 
mobile sensor system, and results were explained in detail. 
The experiments were performed to gather riding data from 
skilled and unskilled subjects. In the experiments, both 
skilled and unskilled subjects traveled the same routes, and 
the yaw, pitch and roll data, and X-, Y- and Z-acceleration 
data of each subject was gathered.  
By comparing the data from the two kinds of subjects, 
the time duration was considered in this paper. In particular, 
by using the t-value, it was found that there was a significant 
difference in the time duration between skilled subjects and 
unskilled subjects when using a large type standing type 
vehicle. Thus, if we analyze the skill level for using standing 
type vehicles, we should consider the time duration to 
complete a slalom course. In addition, the importance of the 
design for standing type vehicles is to consider the friendly  
or functional interface for traveling on slalom course easily. 
We have a plan to analyze the experimental results in 
different views, including features of subjects and do the 
experiments with more subjects. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 16K18057 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] U.S. Department of Transportation, “Beyond Traffic –trends 
and choices-“, 2015. 
[2] European 
Commission 
website, 
“https://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes_en”, accessed at March 
5th, 2018. 
[3] K. Doi, T. Hasegawa, S. Kobyashi, I. Sugiyama, and 
M.Mizohata, “A Study on Quality of Mobility Demanded in 
Super-aged Cities”, IATSS Review, Vol.35, No.3, 2011, 
pp.182-193. 
[4] European 
Commission 
website, 
“http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3217494/6856423/K
S-05-14-073-EN-N/, accessed at March 5th, 2018. 
[5] M. Li, J. Hallam, L. Pryor, S. Chan, and K. Chong, “A 
cooperative intelligent system for urban traffic problems”, 
Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE International Symposium on 
Intelligent Control, 1996. 
[6] M. Seredynski, and F. Viti, “A survey of cooperative ITS for 
next generation public transport systems”, Proceedings of 
19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation 
Systems, 2016, pp.1229-1234. 
[7] S. Tsugawa, “Promotion of Energy ITS”, 2008 EU-Japan 
Cooperation Forum on ICT Research, 2008. 
[8] S. Shladover, “Challenges to evaluation of CO2 impacts of 
intelligent transportation systems”, Proceedings of 2011 IEEE 
Integrated and Sustainable Transportation System, 2011, 
pp.189-194. 
[9] B. Balcik, B. M.Beamon, and K. Smilowitz, “Last Mile 
Distribution in Humanitarian Relief,” Journal of Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, Vol. 12, No.2, 2008, pp.51–63. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

[10] Mineta Transportation Institute, “Using Bicycles for the First 
and Last Mile of a Commute”, Report No.S-09-02, 2009. 
[11] European Commission Report, “Design features for support 
programs for investments in last-mile infrastructure”, 2016 
[12] B. Polina, G. Gabriela, and M. J.Luis, “From the Last Mile to 
the Last 800-ft: Key Factors in Urban Pick-up/Delivery of 
Goods”, Proceedings of 96rd Transportation Research Board, 
2017. 
[13] Je-Dok Kim, Ho-Jin Lee, and In-Soo Suh, “Strategic Planning 
on Electric PMV for Sustainable Mobility”, Proceedings of 
93rd Transportation Research Board, 2014. 
[14] V. Renaudin, A. Dommes, and M. GuilbotEngineering, 
“Human, and Legal Challenges of Navigation Systems for 
Personal Mobility”, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, Vol.18, No.1, 2017, pp.171-194. 
[15] A. Kornhauser, S. Vin, S. McDonald, N. Serulle, and S. 
Young, “Deliberations Public Transportation and Shared 
Mobility”, Proceedings of 93rd Transportation Research 
Board, 2014 
[16] T. Pham, C. Nakagawa, A. Shintani, and T. Ito, “Evaluation 
of the Effects of a Personal Mobility Vehicle on Multiple 
Pedestrians Using Personal Space”, IEEE Transaction of 
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2015. 
[17] P. Lavallee, “Pilot project for evaluating motorized personal 
transportation devices: Segways and electric scooters,” 
Technical 
report 
on 
Centre 
for 
Electric 
Vehicle 
Experimentation in Quebec, 2004. 
[18] “Segway review report: A review of Segway use in the 
Australian Capital Territory” ACT Government, Justice and 
Community Safety Tech. Rep., 2012. 
[19] M. Ciężkowski, and E. Pawłuszewicz, “Determination of 
interactions between two-wheeled self-balancing vehicle and 
its rider”, Proceedings of 20th International Conference on 
Methods and Models in Automation and Robotics, 2015, 
pp.851-855. 
[20] A. Smirnov, A. Kashevnik, I. Lashkov, N. Hashimoto, and A. 
Boyali, “Smartphone-Based Two-Wheeled Self-Balancing 
Vehicles Rider Assistant”, Proceedings of FRUCT 17, 2015 
[21] M. Alqudah, M. Abdelfattah, I. Boiko, and K. Alhammadi, 
“Dynamic modeling and control design for a self-balancing 
two-wheel chair”, 2016 5th International Conference on 
Electronic Devices, Systems and Applications, 2016, pp.1-4. 
[22] Winglet, 
http://www.toyota.co.jp/jpn/tech/personal_mobility/winglet.ht
ml, accessed at March 5th, 2018.(in Japanese) 
[23] R. Ando, and A. Li, “An Analysis on Users’ Evaluation for 
Self-balancing Two-wheeled Personal Mobility Vehicles”, 
Proceedings of 15th International Conference on Intelligent 
Transpiration Systems, 2012, pp.1525-1530. 
[24] N. Hashimoto, Y. Takinami, and O. Matsumoto, ”An 
Experimental Study on Vehicle Behavior to Wheel Chairs and 
Standing-type Vehicles at Intersection”, 13th International 
Conference on ITS telecommunications, Tampere, Finland, 
Dec 2013. 
[25] Tsukuba 
Designated 
Zone 
Council, 
http://www.rt-
tsukuba.jp/council/ (in Japanese), accessed at March 5th, 2018 
[26] ITF Research Reports, “Cycling, Health and Safety”, 2013. 
[27] N. Hashimoto, J. Kim, K. Tomita, S. Thompson, Y. Takinami, 
and O.Matsumoto, “Preliminary experiments for evaluation of 
standing-type personal vehicles”, Proceedings of ITS World 
Congress 2017, Montreal, Canada, Oct 2017. 
[28] SPSS 
Amos, 
https://www.ibm.com/us-
en/marketplace/structural-equation-modeling-sem, accessed at 
March 5th, 2018. 
[29] B. L.Welch, "The generalization of "Student's" problem when 
several 
different 
population 
variances 
are 
involved". 
Biometrika 34 (1–2): 28–35. doi:10.1093/biomet/34.1-2.28. 
MR 19277, (1947). 
[30] L. Zhiying, and Y. Le, “A segmentation method for crossing 
ambiguity string based on mutual information and t-test 
difference”, Proceedings of Information, Computing and 
Telecommunication, 2009.   
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

