Trusted Mobile Zone Solution Based on Virtualization Technology
GeonLyang Kim, JeongNyeo Kim
Information Security Research Division
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
e-mail: glkim@etri.re.kr, jnkim@etri.re.kr
Abstract—We
developed
a
Trusted
Mobile
Zone
(TMZ)
solution based on virtualization technology for smart mobile
devices. This solution offers users a trusted execution area to
preserve significant files, and execute security services in a
secure manner. In addition, it is able to block attackers from
leaking significant files. We simulated a Smishing attack to
obtain significant data from a Secure Zone (SZ) of the TMZ
solution, the results of which are described herein.
Keywords-BYOD; Mobile Security; TEE; Virtualization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As the use of mobile devices rapidly increases, personal
smart mobile devices are being used for business purposes.
Solutions for blocking the outflow of enterprise files, such as
Knox [1] and Cellrox [2], are urgently needed. We
developed the Trusted Mobile Zone (TMZ) solution to offer
better data leakage prevention services to users. Unlike Knox
and Cellrox, the security functions of the TMZ solution
operate on a secure OS different from a normal OS, and the
proposed solution therefore has the advantage of being less
vulnerable to malicious codes or attacks aiming at obtaining
significant files by exploiting the vulnerabilities of a normal
OS. The TMZ solution was designed with reference to the
Global Platform’s Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)
system [3]. It offers a trusted execution area to preserve
significant files and provide trusted services securely through
secure components.
II.
TMZ SOLUTION ARCHITECTURE
The TMZ solution supplies a higher level of security
without paying additional costs through the addition of
hardware [4]. The hypervisor as a virtualization technology
has two types: a type 1 hypervisor as a native or bare-metal
hypervisor, and a type 2 hypervisor as a hosted hypervisor
[5]. A type 1 hypervisor offers a higher level of security than
a type 2 hypervisor.
The TMZ solution can be built on a mobile device
regardless of the hypervisor type applied. KNOX runs on
Android OS, and provides kernel-level access control
through SE Android. Most products including Horizon
Mobile of VMWare offer the only separation of an Open OS
and a Secure OS. However, the TMZ solution separates the
General Zone (GZ) and SZ using a hypervisor. It also
provides trusted security services for users through the use of
security
components
including
the
SZ.
The
security
components of the TMZ solution provide users with
functions to store significant data, create signature data,
deposit encryption and decryption keys, and preserve private
keys for signature data, all in a secure manner. It also offers
an
encrypted
communication
channel
for
transmitting
significant data securely between a GZ and an SZ. The
architecture of the TMZ solution is shown in Figure 1.
The only GZ-Security API in a GZ is able to access an
SZ through an encrypted communication channel. We
defined the GZ-Security API of five groups and developed
security applications that can offer trusted security services
using an SZ through the GZ-Security API.
Figure 1.
TMZ solution architecture
III.
DATA LEAKAGE PREVENTION SERVICES USING THE
TMZ SOLUTION
We implemented
data leakage prevention
services,
including a Trusted Certificate Store Service, Trusted
Contact Service, Trusted Camera Service, and Trusted
Gallery Service, using the TMZ solution. When hacking
tools are used, general files in a GZ are spilled out, whereas
significant files managed in an SZ are not spilled into a GZ
or to the outside.
Figure 2.
Screen shots of Trusted Certificate Service
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Certificate files, including the private key file, are saved
and managed in general storage that attackers are able to
easily enter or release to the outside. Therefore, they are
threatened by leaks and misuse by malicious users. If they
are leaked to the outside, their owners can suffer damage
through illegal authentication.
With a Trusted Certificate Service, the certificate files in
a GZ are saved and managed in an SZ of the TMZ solution.
This blocks the outflow of significant files for illegal
authentication. The files are securely encrypted and managed
in the SZ. Significant files, such as encryption key files,
sensitive image files, and important contact files cannot be
spilled out of the SZ into a GZ, and are secure.
IV.
SMISHING ATTACK SIMULATION ON TMZ SOLUTION
We proposed the TMZ solution for blocking the illegal
outflow of significant files. The TMZ solution supplies a
trusted execution area isolated from the GZ, where a large
number of threats can occur and many vulnerabilities exist.
The SZ operates on a different secure OS through Android
OS of the NZ. This is more secure because the weaknesses
of Android OS are not applicable to a secure OS. Therefore,
the TMZ solution supplies trusted security services to users.
Figure 3.
Files spilled out of GZ and into a hacking server
We simulated a Smishing attack to obtain significant data
from an SZ of the TMZ solution. When a user applying the
TMZ solution receives a Short Message Service (SMS)
message and connects to a URL link in the message, a
hacking application is installed and run.
After the hacking application is installed and executed
through the message used in the Smishing attack, the
general files in the GZ of the TMZ solution are transmitted
to the hacking server. The user using the TMZ solution
should manage their significant files in an SZ to block their
outflow,
including
certificate
files,
contact
files,
and
important image files.
Figure 3 shows files leaked from the hacking application
of the GZ to the hacking server. The files transmitted from
the TMZ solution to the hacking server through the hacking
application are general files in the GZ of the TMZ solution.
Figure 2 shows the certificate files in the GZ and SZ of the
TMZ solution. We are able to know that the files spilled out
from the TMZ solution and into the hacking server were the
certificate files stored in the GZ of the TMZ solution.
V.
EXPERIMENT RESULTS
We calculated the time required to insert the certificate
files securely from a GZ to an SZ. We built ETRI’s VIMO
type 2 hypervisor on Galaxy S3, and built µC/OS-II as a
secure OS in the SZ for the TMZ solution. We calculated the
required time 20 times in both the SZ and the GZ, the results
of which are shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4.
Performance measurement results
The calculated average value of insertion of certificate
files in the GZ is 205 µsec, and in the SZ is 93 µsec.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a TMZ solution for blocking
the illegal outflow of significant files. We simulated a
Smishing attack to obtain significant files from the TMZ
solution, and the files of SZ in the TMZ solution are not
leaked. The TMZ solution can supply several security
services by blocking the outflow of significant files in an SZ
isolated from a GZ.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by an Institute for Information
& Communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant
funded by the Korea government (MSIT) [No. 2015-0-
00508, Development of Operating System Security Core
Technology for the Smart Lightweight IoT Devices].
REFERENCES
[1]
https://www.samsungknox.com/docs/SamsungKnoxSecurityS
olution.pdf, Samsung Knox White Paper: Samsung KNOX
Security Solution Version 2.2, May 2017.
[2]
Cellrox Homepage, http://cellrox.com, March 2018.
[3]
https://www.globalplatform.org/specificationsdevice.asp,
“TEE System Architecture v1.1,” Global Platform, January
2017.
[4]
D. Jaramillo, B. Furht, and A. Agarwal, “Virtualization
Techniques for Mobile Systems,” Multimedia Systems and
Applications, Springer International Publishing, 2014.
[5]
G. J. Popek, R. P. Goldberg, “Formal Requirements for
Virtualizable
Third
Generation
Architectures,”
Communications of the ACM, 17(7):412-421, 1974.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

