Trustful Interaction Between Intelligent Building Control and Energy Suppliers of 
the Smart Power Grid
Michael Massoth and Torsten Wiens 
Department of Computer Science 
Hochschule Darmstadt — University of Applied Sciences 
{michael.massoth | torsten.wiens}@h-da.de 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes an approach to balance loads 
in smart power grids using a solution based on Next 
Generation Network (NGN) components, Smart Home 
appliances based on the KNX bus, and a secure and trustful 
interaction between intelligent home control managers and the 
energy suppliers of the smart power grid. The NGN 
components are applied as a communication and integration 
platform between the  smartphone of the facility managers, the 
home automation and building control system, as well as the 
energy suppliers of the smart power grid. The Session 
Initiation Protocol (SIP) and the Presence Service are used to 
build a well performing and scalable system based on open 
source software. The idea is to publish data of actual power 
consumption and power reserves of selected Smart Home 
appliances by use of the Presence Service to the outside world. 
In a second step, the corresponding energy supplier could 
subscribe to this data of actual energy consumption and 
reserves. Based on this data, the energy supplier is enabled to 
send specialized offers towards the Smart Home owners 
reflecting possible benefits to the power grid. This solution 
respects the right to property and the right to self-
determination of the Smart Home and facility control 
managers, because they have to agree to the energy 
management offer made by the energy supplier. It is a trustful 
solution 
because 
the 
relevant 
data 
could 
by 
easily 
pseudonymized before being published by the Presence 
Service. An approach to ensure secure communication against 
attackers from outside is presented and evaluated as well.  
Keywords—Home Automation; Smart Power Grid; Load 
Balancing, NGN, Presence Service. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The current trend is to make the human environment 
smarter, using ubiquitous IT-technologies. This leads to 
smart cities, buildings, energy management, cars and phones. 
Every part of our environment will be connected to each 
other and can be controlled, with the given rights, from 
central points.  
In such a world, security and trust are of essential 
importance. Confidentiality, integrity, availability and 
authenticity have to be given. In this paper, we describe the 
security of a remotely controllable KNX-based home and 
building control solution. The owner or facility manager of 
such a home can remotely monitor and control his house or 
facility wherever and whenever they like. A Smart Home 
shall enable interaction with its users, including the ability to 
monitor the status and control of building appliances and 
devices remotely from anywhere in the world. Such devices 
may consist of alarm systems, keyless access control, smoke 
detectors, light and heat control, medical devices, and all 
types of sensors (e.g., room, door, window or security 
surveillance, monitoring and control, statistics and remote 
metering).  
A. Purpose and Relevance 
The purpose of this paper is to present a new approach 
for a well performing, scalable, secure and trustful 
interaction between intelligent home control managers and 
the energy suppliers of the smart power grid. The novelty of 
the presented approach is to make use of an NGN Presence 
Service for the interaction between the smart home control 
and the energy supplier, and not only between the smart 
home and the house owner, as already described in [2,3,4]. 
The mobile ubiquitous home and facility control solution is 
based on SIP and the Presence Service. The described 
solution uses the advantages of a NGN to remotely monitor 
and control home automation systems via a mobile device 
using open source software.  
The global carrier VoIP and IP Multimedia Subsystem 
(IMS) market for NGN-based services and infrastructures 
has reached US$ 658 million in the second quarter of 2012, 
according to Infonetics Research. Furthermore, the market 
drivers are intact and the numbers of VoIP and IMS 
subscribers are growing [1]. This forecast shows the business 
opportunity and relevance of the proposed solution for 
ubiquitous home control services. 
B. Structure of the Paper 
Following the introduction, Section II shows related 
work and other projects comparable to our solution. In 
Section III, the general concept is outlined and important use 
cases are presented. The overall system design is described 
in Section IV, differentiating three levels of interaction. The 
components used to build the system are presented in Section 
V. The security approach is discussed and evaluated in 
Section VI. Section VII describes the status of our prototype. 
Section VII concludes the paper and gives an outlook of 
future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Smart Home is not a new topic. Many companies and 
institutions are working on solutions for Smart Homes. But 
only a few are working on a complete solution that relies 
solely on open standards. Most systems focus on the inside 
(e.g., KNX) or outside (e.g., IP) system of the building only. 
This means that their goal is to build a solution either for the 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

management of actors and sensors, or to develop a 
communication solution for existing bus systems.  
In our previous work [2, 3, 4, 5], we created a signaling 
gateway between the KNX home automation and building 
control system [6] and SIP, allowing communication of 
mobile devices with KNX sensors/actors using existing SIP 
infrastructure. The idea of our solution was to connect the 
technology of NGNs to Smart Home Control Systems. 
The HomeSIP project is a similar approach, allowing 
home control only using SIP [7, 8, 9]. The important parts of 
the system are the SIP proxy and the SIP sensor network 
gateways. The SIP proxy is the central component for 
communication. The sensor network gateways are embedded 
Linux systems, which are used to control the sensor 
networks and connect them to the SIP proxy. So, SIP is used 
for communication between the sensor networks, the SIP 
proxy and the mobile controlling devices, like smartphones. 
All information from and to the sensor networks is 
transported via SIP. The paper “Security for KNXnet/IP” 
[10] evaluates different approaches to grant security in an IP 
network, which is coupled to KNX. In contrast, we are using 
SIP as a bridge to the NGN world.  
III. 
USE CASES OF SMART ENERGY MANAGEMENT 
In this section, two typical business cases respectively 
use cases of smart energy management and electric load 
balancing and regulating are discussed. 
A. Use case (UC1): Surplus or excess of renewable energy 
Let us assume for use case (UC1) that the power 
consumption and load in the city reaches its lowest level. 
During the same time frame, the renewable energy is fed into 
the power grid at maximum because of strong winds or 
strong sun radiation. This surplus or excess of electric power 
shall be used by the intelligent buildings of the city. In order 
to do that, the surplus of energy is signaled by the energy 
suppliers towards the owners of intelligent buildings in the 
city by means of usual communication technologies. In our 
case, a smartphone app is used. The house owners can then 
react by turning on additional power loads such as domestic 
appliances (e.g., white goods, air conditioning units or heat 
pumps), as well as electric cars and vehicles. By that, the 
energy supply within the city could be balanced in a better 
way by the swarm behavior of the intelligent consumers by 
activating additional power loads.  
B. Use case (UC2): Insufficient or lack of renewable 
energy 
Let us assume for use case (UC2) that the power 
consumption and load in the city reaches its maximum level. 
During the same time frame, the feed-in of renewable energy 
is diminishing at minimum because of wind calm  or the lack 
of sun radiation (e.g., at night). This lack of electric power 
shall be balanced, at least partly, by the intelligent buildings 
of the city. In order to do that, the lack of energy is signaled 
by the power providers towards the owners of intelligent 
buildings in the city by means of usual communication 
technologies. The house owners can then react by switching 
off domestic appliances (e.g., white goods), set air 
conditioning units, or heat pumps into eco-mode and 
deactivate charging stations for electric cars and vehicles. 
Therefore, the energy supply within the city could be 
balanced in a better way by the swarm behavior of the 
intelligent consumers by de-activating power loads. 
IV. 
CONCEPT AND OVERALL SYSTEM DESIGN 
The core concept is to balance loads in power grids by 
using KNX-enabled Smart Homes and a communication 
infrastructure based on NGN technologies and the Presence 
Service. The essential idea of this approach is to publish data 
of actual power consumption and power reserves of selected 
Smart Home appliances by use of the NGN Presence Service 
to the outside world. In a second step, the corresponding 
energy supplier could subscribe to this data of actual energy 
consumption and reserves. Based on this data, the energy 
supplier is enabled to send specialized offers towards the 
Smart Home owners in order to manage a surplus or lack of 
renewable energy, enabling a feedback control and power 
regulation within the smart grid. 
NGN technologies are used to build an integration 
platform between mobile devices and intelligent buildings 
with a home automation solution. As depicted in Fig. 1, a 
Signaling Gateway interconnects the NGN core network and 
the Smart Home.  
To interconnect the two architectures, a special gateway 
is needed. The gateway manages connections between the 
SIP-based NGN and the single appliances of the Smart 
Home solution. In this system, the NGN infrastructure 
consists of an IMS [11]. 
The IMS is a control architecture based on the 
standardized SIP [12] designed by the wireless standards 
body 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). It aims to 
standardize access to different networks. Therefore, all 
communication is based on the Internet Protocol (IP).  
An important functionality of the IMS is the Presence 
Service, which enables to represent different home 
automation appliances as users to the outside world. Each 
appliance can set its own current status. Thus it is possible to 
register a mobile device at the SIP network, and in this way 
at the Presence Server. Hence, the status information of the 
different home automation appliances can be viewed on a 
mobile device. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  System overview. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 2.  Basic system functionality and interaction between customer, 
energy supplier and Presence Server. 
The Signaling Gateway is responsible for updating the 
status information at the Presence Server. For example, any 
time a sensor in the home automation system changes its 
status, an update has to be sent by the gateway. 
At the energy supplier, the software component 
Communication Manager is the core component that 
contains all business logic to assess load data from the power 
grid, organized by the Power Grid Data Manager, and data 
collected from the Presence Service. A Message Gateway is 
used to send messages to the Smart Home owner's 
smartphone. 
V. 
COMPONENTS 
In the following section, we describe the components that  
are used to build our system. The description is divided into 
three subsections, each presenting different levels of 
interaction within the whole system.  
Basically, this approach extends the core technology 
mentioned 
in 
our 
previously 
published 
work 
by 
implementing a push service [2, 3, 4, 5]. Additional 
components have been integrated to accomplish the task 
defined in this paper. Subsections A and B describe these 
new components. Subsection C provides an overview of the 
core system that has been continually refined. 
A. Interaction between  Energy Supplier and Smart Home 
The corresponding Energy Supplier system registers 
itself at the Presence Server (see Fig. 2). In a second step, the 
energy supplier subscribes to the data sets of actual energy 
consumption and reserves. Status data from all Smart Homes 
connected to the Presence Server is continuously monitored 
by the Communication Manager component (see Fig. 1). 
Status data from the power grid is collected through the 
Power Grid Data Manager component. Comparing these two 
data sources, the system is able to detect situations in the 
power grid as described in use cases UC1 or UC2 (see 
Section III). Then, offers are calculated that match the 
specific capabilities of the relevant Smart Homes in a given 
area and sent out via the Message Gateway component. 
B. Interaction between Energy Supplier and Smart Home 
Manager 
At the Energy Supplier, a core component encapsulates 
the system’s business logic (Communication Manager, see 
Fig. 1). Communication to the Smart Home Customer's 
smartphone is set up and controlled by the Message Gateway 
component. At the mobile device, the EnergySaver App is 
implemented as an extension of our Android SIP client 
described in Subsection C. A web service is implemented at 
the Message Gateway that interacts with the smartphone 
communication component by means of push notification 
[21].  
The EnergySaver App receives and displays messages 
from the Energy Supplier containing offers to the Smart 
Home customer as described above. The customer then is 
able to accept or decline a specific offer. If the offer is 
accepted, the customer's Smart Home appliances are set up 
accordingly, communication being done through the 
infrastructure described in Subsection C. For example, power 
reserves of specific appliances can be released into the public 
network after accepting a suitable offer.  
C. Interaction between House Manager and Smart Home 
In this subsection, the core system that provides 
interaction between the House Manager and the Smart Home 
is described. 
 
1) Next Generation Network Core 
To set up the NGN Core networks, we evaluated two 
solutions to guarantee that the signaling gateway is able to 
work with different NGN platforms. 
As a lightweight solution to realize the NGN Core, a SIP 
server with a Registrar and a Presence Service is used. This 
common SIP server also provides all the functionality that is 
needed to set up a SIP-based communication and integration 
platform.  SIP is a signaling protocol for controlling 
multimedia communication. It can be used to create, modify 
or terminate a multimedia session, which can exist between 
two parties or multiple parties. 
The Session Description Protocol (SDP) [13] describes 
properties of multimedia sessions. SDP is used by SIP for 
negotiation regarding media codecs, transport protocols and 
transport addresses. SIP for Instant Messaging and Presence 
Leveraging Extensions (SIMPLE) [14] describes a presence 
and instant messaging protocol suite based on SIP.   
Instant messaging enables users to communicate by text. 
For the Presence Service, a User Agent (UA) has to register 
at a Presence Server. The server acts as a Presence Agent. It 
stores the status of the UA. Other users (subscribers) can 
subscribe to the UA’s presence information. Every time the 
UA changes its status, the subscribers will be notified by the 
Presence Agent.  
 
2) Mobile Device 
We chose Android 2.2 [15] as the development platform 
for the mobile device prototype. After we evaluated different 
SIP APIs for Android, we chose CSipSimple [16], because 
only CSipSimple is able to send SIP messages conforming to 
the RFC3428 standard. CSipSimple is an open source VoIP 
application for Android using SIP. Based on CSipSimple, we 
built our own Android SIP client prototype including our 
own GUI and the functionality to display and change 
presence states.  
 
3) KNX  
The KNX system [17] is the only worldwide standard for 
home automation and intelligent building control. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

KNX was invented in response to the following 
shortcomings: In conventional home installations, the control 
line and the power line are not independent from each other. 
For example, lights are controlled by turning their power on 
or off. Complex control mechanisms are hard to implement, 
and to change a wire-bound energy-controlled system after 
its installation is very complex. Therefore, power and control 
lines in the KNX standard are independent from each other. 
The 
KNX 
standard 
supports 
the 
following 
communication media: Twisted pair (TP) wiring, power line 
(PL) networking, radio frequency (RF) and Internet Protocol 
over Ethernet (KNX/IP or KNXnet/IP). 
 
4)   Signaling Gateway 
The signaling gateway, depicted in Fig. 3, is the central 
component of this concept. This software service connects 
the KNX bus to the NGN components. 
Every sensor and actor that is connected to the KNX bus 
gets its own address (SIP URI) to log on to the service. 
Registering each KNX device in the Presence Service, 
allows storing the current status of the device, like “on” or 
“off”. Each device update received from KNX is converted 
to a SIP request and sent to the Presence Server. Now the 
user of the mobile device can monitor and even change the 
current status for each KNX device. Every change is then 
transmitted back to the KNX bus.  
With a KNXnet/IP (interface between KNX and 
Ethernet) device, KNX telegrams can be transferred to the IP 
network. The whole telegram is transmitted over the network 
as payload of an IP packet. Thus, one functionality of the 
signaling gateway is to receive these IP packets sent by the 
KNXnet/IP device. Furthermore, the information in the 
telegram has to be extracted. This could consist of sensor 
values or other status messages of different home automation 
appliances. 
The KNXnet/IP device is also able to receive IP packets 
sent via the IMS from the IP network and forward the 
containing telegram to the KNX bus. Thus, in order to 
control appliances that are associated with the bus 
installation, the signaling gateway has to have the ability to 
generate KNX telegrams.  
The framework Calimero 2.0 is a collection of Java APIs 
that form a high level framework for communication with a 
KNX installation with the use of KNXnet/IP [18]. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Connection interfaces of the Signaling Gateway 
 
Figure 4.  Complete message flow, ranging from registration of the KNX 
devices to the control of the KNX devices. 
The framework aids in building high level applications 
that need to communicate with the KNX bus system for 
remote access and control. It can receive and decode KNX 
messages as well as send and encode its own KNX 
messages. This framework is used in the signaling gateway 
to handle communication with the KNX bus.  
Once the information of the telegram has been filtered, 
the status change must be transmitted to the Presence Server 
located in the IMS. This leads to the second main 
functionality of the signaling gateway: The connection to the 
IMS. To accomplish this, the Jain-SIP (JSIP) framework [19] 
for Java is being used. The signaling gateway registers every 
appliance of the KNX bus installation as a "user" at the 
Presence Server. To set the status of a user, a SIP message 
must be sent through the IMS network. This message flow is 
depicted in Fig. 3. To view the current status of a part of the 
home automation system, the mobile device only has to 
subscribe to the Presence Server.   
If a user wants to control an appliance of the home 
automation system, a SIP message is sent from the mobile 
device to the signaling gateway. Furthermore, the 
information in the SIP message body must be converted to a 
KNX telegram. This body is optional and can include 
messages written in SDP, SOAP, XML or ASCII.  
Furthermore, status data of energy-related appliances in 
the Smart Home are published to the Presence service. This 
includes type of appliance (see use case description in 
Section III), power source/power sink, load characteristics 
and capacity as well as other parameters. Not every 
appliance in the Smart Home is reflected in this data set, but 
only the most important ones with the largest impact on load 
balancing, e.g., powerful car batteries or freezers. 
This data is pseudonymized by means of a hash function, 
meaning that regular customer identifiers are replaced by 
other identifiers that only allow the energy supplier to 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

reconstruct the customer's identity. Therefore, no personal 
data is transmitted via the Presence Service. Because of this, 
the proposed system is in accordance to national legal 
regulations, 
for 
example 
the 
German 
“Bundesdatenschutzgesetz” (Federal Data Protection Act) 
[20]. 
VI. 
SYSTEM SECURITY 
Without an implementation of suitable security measures, 
the system could be compromised by attackers. Therefore, it 
is necessary to ensure a secure connection to the mobile 
device and a secure authentication for the user. In this 
section, a security approach is introduced that will be used to 
secure the end-to-end network communication of the system 
as shown in Fig. 1. At the current development stage of the 
system, only a basic security model is assumed that primarily 
considers attackers from outside.  
A. SIPS Introduction 
SIP Security (SIPS) is using Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) and the Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol (SRTP). 
SRTP are used for secure Voice- and Video-Data 
connections, TLS is used for exchanging signaling messages 
(e.g., authentication and registration). 
TLS is a hybrid encryption protocol for secure data 
connections over the internet. In the OSI reference model 
(Fig. 4), TLS is acting at the transport layer. In SIPS, TLS 
takes care of the following security tasks:  
• 
Bidirectional authentication of communication 
 
endpoints 
• 
Exchanging a shared secret 
• 
Cryptographic encoding of data to be transferred 
• 
Securing integrity of transferred SIP messages 
To prevent possible man in the middle attacks, TLS can 
be extended with digital certificate authentication [22].  
B. Evaluation of system security 
We measure the security of the selected approach 
according to the four pillars of information security [23]: 
 
• 
Confidentiality 
• 
Integrity 
• 
Availability 
• 
Authenticity 
 
As described above, SIPS is using the protocols TLS and 
SRTP for secure communication. TLS uses a high security 
encoding and grants therefore high confidentiality. The 
TCP/IP protocol ensures integrity by adding a checksum to 
each message. Authenticity is granted by authentication with 
credentials. The SIPS availability is given as long as the SIP 
server is connected to the internet. 
Furthermore, 
software 
aspects 
like 
performance, 
scalability, manageability and cost have been evaluated. 
Compared to an unsecured and connectionless UDP 
connection, a TLS connection is less performant. The reason 
for this is that SIPS is based on connection oriented TCP, 
which needs significantly more resources. Encryption is also 
costly. This fact also reduces the scalability of such a system. 
Because of the wide-spread use of SIPS, there are many 
frameworks and libraries, which make SIPS easily 
manageable and implementable. 
If a certificate is used to ensure the identity of the 
communication partners, a disadvantage of TLS are the costs 
to buy trusted certificates from a Certificate Authority [24].  
Other security models have also been considered for the 
system. A Virtual Private Network (VPN) is a possible 
approach, but would not be feasible [25]. The VPN needs to 
be set up before using the mobile client and to be closed after 
using the mobile client. Closing it in between will disconnect 
the mobile client from the SIP server. An active VPN 
connection uses additional internet bandwidth and battery 
power, because it needs to stay active as long as the 
application is running. 
We also don’t recommend the use of an ID Token [26], 
because of the implementation effort, the low performance 
and the extra cost for an ID Token reader/writer. 
We choose SIPS for this system, as it is easy to 
implement (because TLS is supported by all software used 
for the prototype) and ensures a high level of security. Still, 
loss of the mobile device is a security risk to be prevented. 
This could be done in combination with a password for 
authentication with the system, or even an ID Token could 
be used (as a password). Now, after the loss of the device, 
only the password needs to be changed or disabled, to 
prevent unauthorized access. 
VII. ACTUAL STATUS OF THE PROTOTYPE 
The prototype consists of a fully addressed and 
configured KNX TP bus system with different kinds of 
sensors and actors like weather station, dimmers and 
digital/analog switches for lighting and power outlets. The 
signaling gateway is implemented as a Java application using 
the Calimero 2.0 framework and the JSIP framework. The 
Calimero framework is used for communication with the 
KNX bus via the KNXnet/IP interface. Every KNX device 
gets translated as a SIP UA and therefore can be accessed 
individually.  
The Presence server is implemented as a servlet using the 
Sailfin framework for SIP on a GlassFish-Server. Sailfin 
offers a full featured Presence service and SIP call control 
functions. 
The mobile client is implemented as an Android 
application based on a modification of the open source 
software called CSipSimple for Android. The mobile client 
can get a list of all UAs for the KNX devices by sending a 
message to a specialized UA in the signaling gateway, which 
sends back the SIP URIs for the devices. With this list, the 
mobile client can subscribe to each device at the Presence 
server. Direct messages to the KNX devices can change the 
status of the device. The devices themselves can publish their 
status to each subscribed user. 
The communication between each party is secured by 
using the TLS protocol. The Sailfin, JSIP and the 
CSipSimple framework all support TLS and authentication, 
no own implementation of TLS is needed.  
The EnergySaver App has been implemented as a 
prototype. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The presented solution enables a secure and trustful 
interaction between intelligent home control managers and 
the energy suppliers of the smart power grid.  
The interaction between house manager and smart home 
is implemented as mobile, ubiquitous, two-way home control 
solution based on SIP and the Presence Service. Hereby, the 
house manager could control all smart home appliances (e.g., 
actors and sensors) in real-time via his Android-based 
smartphone. It is realized as secure TLS connection based on 
SIP Security from the smartphone towards the signaling 
gateway, which is typically located inside the smart home.  
The interaction between energy supplier and smart home 
is mainly effected by the Presence Service, which publishes 
the data of actual power consumption and power reserves of 
selected smart home appliances to the outside world. The 
Presence Service is a well performing, scalable, field-proven, 
near-real-time push-solution of the energy data sets towards 
the corresponding energy supplier. The described solution is 
trustful, because data privacy protection could be fulfilled 
easily by pseudonymization or anonymization of the energy 
data sets on the presence server side. By that, our solution 
respects the right to data privacy protection of the smart 
home owners.  
The interaction between energy supplier and smart home 
manager is characterized by a half-automated energy load 
management solution. Our solution respects the rights of 
property and self-determination (autonomy) of the smart 
home owners, because they have to agree to the energy 
management offer made by the energy supplier.  
It has to be noted that this kind of interaction is limited to 
day-time use only. Appropriate automatisms should be 
applied for the time users are sleeping or are “off-line”. This 
will be addressed in future work. Furthermore, another point 
is to make the mobile client platform independent and to 
introduce a security model that exceeds the basic 
considerations described herein. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been performed within the project “Smart 
Home Control” at Hochschule Darmstadt (University of 
Applied Sciences). The authors would like to acknowledge 
the support of Albrecht JUNG GmbH & Co. KG for their 
contribution of KNX actors, sensors and other KNX home 
automation devices and kind support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Infonetics Research, “IMS equipment and subscribers report”, 
10/17/2012.  
[2] R. Acker, S. Brandt, N. Buchmann, T. Fugmann, and M. 
Massoth, “Ubiquitous Home Control based on SIP and 
Presence Service”. In: Proceedings of the 12th International 
Conference on Information Integration and Web Based 
Applications & Services (iiWAS 2010), ACM, 2010, pp. 757–
760. 
[3] M. Massoth et al., “Ubiquitous Smart Grid Control Solution 
based on a Next Generation Network as Integration 
Platform”. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference 
on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware 
Technologies (ENERGY 2011), IARIA, 2011. 
[4] R. Acker and M. Massoth, “Secure Ubiquitous House and 
Facility Control Solution”. In: Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Internet and Web Applications 
and Services (ICIW 2010), IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 
262–267. 
[5] M. Massoth et al., “Security Assessment of an Ubiquitous 
KNX based Home Control Solution using SIP and the 
Presence Service”. KNX Scientific Conference 2012, 
University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 2012. 
[6] KNX 
Association, 
http://www.knx.org/knx-
standard/standardisation, [retrieved: April, 2012]. 
[7] HomeSIP Project, http://www.enseirb.fr/cosynux/HomeSIP/, 
[retrieved: May, 2013]. 
[8] B. Bertran, C. Consel, P. Kadionik, and B. Lamer, “A sip-
based Home Automation platform: an experimental study”, 
Proc. 13th International Conference on Intelligence in Next 
Generation Networks, 2009 (ICIN 2009), IEEE Press, Oct. 
2009, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICIN.2009.5357075.  
[9] C. Bertran, C. Consel, W. Jouve, H. Guan, and P. Kadionik, 
“SIP as a universal communication bus: a methodology and 
an experimental study”, Proc. 2010 IEEE International 
Conference on In Communications (ICC 10), IEEE Press, 
July 2010, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2010.5502591. 
[10] D. Lechner, W. Granzer, and W. Kastner, „Security for 
KNXnet/IP“. In: Proc. KNX Scientific Conference Nov. 
2008. 
[11] J. Soininen (Ed.), “Transition scenarios for 3gpp networks”, 
IETF, RFC 3574, Aug. 2003. 
[12] H. Schulzrinne et al., “SIP: session initiation protocol”, IETF, 
RFC 3261, Jun. 2002. 
[13] M. Handley, V. Jacobson, and C. Perkins: “SDP: session 
description protocol”, IETF, RFC 4566, Jul. 2006. 
[14] SIP for Instant Messaging and Presence Leveraging 
Extensions (SIMPLE). IETF Working Group 
[15] Android, http://www.android.com,   [retrieved: May, 2013]. 
[16] CSipSimple, http://code.google.com/p/csipsimple, [retrieved: 
May, 2013]. 
[17] KNX Association, “KNX logical topology faq”, 2005, 
[retrieved: May, 2013]. 
[18] Calimero 2.0, http://calimero.sourceforge.net/, [retrieved: 
May, 2013]. 
[19] Jain SIP Framework, http://jsip.java.net/, [retrieved: May, 
2013]. 
[20] Bundesministerium der Justiz, „Bundesdatenschutzgesetz in 
der Fassung vom 14. Januar 2003, zuletzt geändert am 14. 
August 2009“, Berlin, 2009. 
[21] W3C, “Web Services Description Requirements. W3C 
Working Draft 28 October 2002”. http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-
desc-reqs/, [retrieved: May, 2013]. 
[22] BSI, „VoIPSEC Studie zur Sicherheit von Voice over Internet 
Protocol“, 
https://www.bsi.bund.de/ContentBSI/Publikationen/Studien/V
oIP/index_htm.html, [retrieved: May, 2013]. 
[23] A. Menezes, P. van Oorschot, and S. Vanstone: "Handbook of 
Applied Cryptography (Discrete Mathematics and Its 
Applications)”, CRC Press, 1996. 
[24] Microsoft, “Digital Certificates”. 
http://support.microsoft.com/kb/195724, [retrieved: May, 
2013]. 
[25] M. Lewis, "Comparing, Designing, and Deploying VPNs", 
Chapter 1, Cisco Press, 22.04.2006. 
[26] RFC 
2808: 
The 
SecurID(r) 
SASL 
Mechanism. 
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2808.txt, [retrieved: May, 2013]. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

