Online Geodatabases as a Source of Data for a Smart City World Model Building 
 
Diamantino Ferreira, Fátima Fazenda 
Madeira-ITI 
University of Madeira 
Campus da Penteada, 9020-105 Funchal, Portugal 
diamantinorgf@gmail.com, fatima912@gmail.com 
Karolina Baras 
Centro Algoritmi 
University of Minho 
Campus de Azurém, 4800-058 Guimarães, Portugal 
karolina.baras@algoritmi.uminho.pt 
 
 
Abstract 
— 
Online 
geodatabases 
have 
been 
growing 
increasingly as they have become a crucial source of 
information, with increasing social networks providing 
location-related features to their users. The aim of this study is 
twofold. On one hand, as our main contribution, we make an 
overview of the most significant online geodatabases which 
aims at understanding what data they contain, how they are 
managed and updated and who are the major consumers of 
their data. On the other hand, we shortly describe our 
previously developed world model and propose a new type of 
data feeds coming from place-based social networks and online 
geodatabases. So far, this symbolic world model has been fed 
with data coming from manual editing and automatic sensor-
based updating. We believe that the aggregation of these 
additional sources of data will provide a more rich description 
of places of interest in a city and will enable an automatic 
creation of topological and other types of relations between 
those places.  
Keywords-online geodatabases; place-based social networks;  
symbolic world model. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The ever more increasing use of social networking 
applications where the users may add location data to their 
posts, comments and pictures, created the need for 
geographic data repositories providing complete and correct 
data freely, with points of interest, monuments, companies, 
bars, stores, hotels and restaurants, among others. Currently, 
there are several online databases providing data about 
millions of places all over the world. Some of the examples 
are GeoNames [1], LinkedGeoData [2] and Factual [3]. 
Social networking applications, such as Facebook, Google+ 
and Foursquare use their own repositories in addition to the 
above mentioned; they also provide tools for creating new 
places, for editing the existing ones [4], adding more details, 
ranking and so on, all aiming at the construction of the most 
complete, the most correct, the supreme database of places in 
the world. 
We have been working on a symbolic world model that 
acts as a repository of data about places people visit or know 
[5]. This model is built similarly to the human mental model 
of space in which places are represented by nodes of a graph 
and there are topological relations among them [6]. Each 
place is further described by a set of attributes. Each relation 
also owns a set of attributes if adequate and necessary. Our 
model not only allows topological relations; it also allows 
custom types of relations.  
In our previous work [7], we showed how this model can 
be constructed manually by the user through a web 
application and also how it can be updated automatically by 
a set of processing modules connected to a WiFi network. 
Now, we are interested in developing applications that 
interact with Foursquare and/or directly with one or more 
online geodatabases to help user to construct and update their 
symbolic world model. The final step in our project will be 
the integration of all the three data sources, manual, 
automatic from sensor networks and semi-automatic from 
online geodatabases, with our system architecture and further 
study of the most appropriate implementation for the data 
repository for which we have identified already a set of 
challenges. 
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents an overview of the most significant online 
geodatabases and discusses some of their aspects. Section III 
introduces the symbolic world model and describes two 
developed modules to act as new sources of data for the 
world model. Section IV concludes and makes an outlook. 
II. 
ONLINE GEODATABASES  
Geography has always been important to the human race. 
Stone-age hunters anticipated the location of their target, 
early explorers lived or died by their knowledge of 
geography, and current societies work and play based on 
their understanding of who and what belongs where. Applied 
geography, in the form of maps and spatial information, has 
served discovery, planning, cooperation, and conflict for at 
least the past 3000 years of our history [8]. 
Web mapping systems have gained substantial popularity 
in the last 15 years, and have been rapidly expanding since 
the release of OpenStreetMap [9] back in 2004, followed by 
Google Maps in 2005, Wikimapia in 2006 and Microsoft 
Silverlight in 2007. Latest releases include improved 
navigation, Google Fusion Tables, Google Maps Mobile and 
Wikitude Drive (2010) [10].  
It is important to note that map coverage did not only 
become more widespread in recent years; it has also become 
significantly more accessible to the average user. Early maps 
that were restrained to commercial and data providers via 
satellite images rapidly expanded to the combination of road 
networks, panoramic street-level imagery such as Google 
Street View and massive collaborative systems such as 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

OpenStreetMap. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
represent a jump from paper maps like the computer from 
the abacus [11]. Within the last thirty years, GIS technology 
has evolved from single purpose, project-based applications 
to massive enterprise systems [12]. Such systems are 
currently being used by businesses, institutions, industry, 
local governments and the private sector to provide services 
to clients, manage resources, and to address multiple issues 
concerning to health and human resources, transportation, 
public safety, utilities and communications, natural resource, 
defense and intelligence, retail and many more. 
With such a development, new concepts and technologies 
have arisen over the years. 3D Desktop applications, detailed 
and interchangeable layers, public data, map makers, map 
integration with social networks and mobile mapping have 
also appeared. The existing services have attracted several 
millions of users, both desktop and mobile. The scope of 
web mapping applications has widened from purely easy to 
use 
consumer-oriented 
tools 
to 
highly 
specialized 
applications with GIS functionalities that help solving and 
optimizing problems in several domains. Despite the 
advances of web mapping within the last few years, there is 
still a lot of potential to collaborate, to elaborate, to tell 
stories with creative new methods and to use the data in 
useful and interesting new ways [10]. 
Presently, vast quantities of geospatial data and 
information at local, regional and global scales are being 
continuously collected, created, managed and used by 
academic research, for spatial decision support and location 
based services. A key aspect to any geospatial solution is to 
support efficient data maintenance and analysis in a 
heterogeneous operating environment. This requires highly 
scalable, highly available and secure database management 
systems. One of the biggest challenges is integrating time 
into 
database 
representations, 
another 
is 
integrating 
geospatial data sets from multiple sources (often with varied 
formats, semantics, precision and coordinate systems) [13]. 
Current GIS applications, which are optimized to store 
and query data that represent objects defined in a geometric 
space, often utilize online geospatial databases as sources of 
their data. Most spatial databases allow representing simple 
geometric objects such as points, lines and polygons and can 
operate with varied data structures, queries, indexes and 
algorithms. These can support several operations such as 
spatial measurements (computing line length and distances 
between 
geometries), 
spatial 
functions, 
geometry 
constructors and observer functions (queries which return 
specific information regarding features such as the location 
of the center of a circle). They also allow remote querying of 
results via an Application Programming Interface (API) or 
even integration with other existing geo databases (such as 
the LinkedGeoData initiative). 
Some 
examples 
of 
online 
geodatabases 
include 
OpenStreetMap (OSM) project [9], the GeoNames project 
[1], and Factual [3]. The main difference between these is 
that OSM and GeoNames are both open-source projects, 
accepting data from thousands of users, while Factual, 
usually, only maps out missing attributes or adds new ones. 
OSM features the largest collection of data (over 1 billion 
nodes), which surpasses other services in this regard. 
A. Factual 
Factual, launched in October 2009, is an open data 
platform 
developed 
to 
maximize 
data 
accuracy, 
transparency, and accessibility. It provides access through 
web service APIs and reusable, customizable web 
applications. Factual features data sets about local place 
information, entertainment and information derived from 
government sources. At the current date, and according to 
their website, Factual contains data of over 65 million places, 
which are updated and improved in real-time by Factual’s 
data stack. Factual’s API allows for remote access to stored 
data, through the use of queries. Access to the API server 
must be requested first with an OAuth authorization standard 
API key and secret, and has existing frameworks for several 
programming languages such as C#, Java, PHP, Python and 
Ruby. Results can also be obtained through HTTP GET 
requests. According to the factual developer site, it is 
possible to make different types of queries, based on text or 
points of interest, direct and reverse geocoding, geo filters, 
data submission and matching queries with provided 
information. It can also clean and resolve data as results are 
submitted into the database, and afterwards connect it to 
other sources of factual data, or external sites (such as 
Facebook or Twitter) relating to the same coordinates, and 
further enhance this by delivering contextually relevant 
content, experiences and ads based on where mobile users 
are located. 
B. GeoNames 
GeoNames is another global geodatabase initiative. 
According to their website, the GeoNames database contains 
over ten million geographical names corresponding to over 
7.5 million unique features. All features are categorized into 
one out of nine feature classes and further subcategorized 
into one out of 645 feature codes. Beyond names of places in 
various languages, data stored includes latitude, longitude, 
elevation, population, administrative subdivision and postal 
codes. However, implementing its own semantics schema 
can be a barrier to future interoperability with other 
geospatial databases and sources of information [14]. It 
operates on a low level, semantic schema with no set of 
constraints on the domain and range of attributes, which can 
be a barrier to the consistency of the data set. GeoNames also 
features a functional API call server, which allows for 
querying of information on a programming level in several 
programming languages (such as C# or PHP). Results can be 
returned via XML or JSON objects. As described on their 
website, GeoNames API allows for full-text based searches, 
postal code search, place name lookup, nearby postal codes, 
reverse geocoding, nearby populated places as well as 
providing other services such as recent earthquakes or 
weather status lookup. 
C.  OpenStreetMap 
OpenStreetMap is a collaborative geospatial project that 
aims at creating a free editable map of the world created by 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Steve Coast in the United Kingdom in 2004. Since then, it 
has experienced a growth of up to 1 million users (in 2013) 
who collect all kinds of high quality data from various 
sources, such as Global Positioning (GPS) devices, aerial 
photos, sea travels, and government files. Like most Internet 
projects, most users are casual or inactive, with a small 
dedicated minority contributing the majority of additions and 
corrections to the map. The database now contains over 1 
billion nodes, 21 million miles of road data and 78 million 
buildings [15]. OSM features a dynamic map where every 
urban or natural feature is built by the community, resulting 
in accurate, high quality data representations [16].  
The OSM project facilitates complete, regularly updated 
copies of its database, which can be exported and converted 
to several GIS application formats through various 
frameworks. The data is stored in a relational database (Post-
greSQL backend) which can be accessed, queried and edited 
by using a REpresentational State Transfer (REST) API, 
which uses HTTP GET, PUT and DELETE requests with 
XML payload. Data collection is acquired by GPS traces or 
by manual map modeling. 
OSM uses a topological data structure with four data 
primitives: 
nodes 
(geographical 
positions 
stored 
as 
coordinates), ways (ordered lists of nodes which can 
represent a polygon), relations (multipurpose data structure 
that defines arbitrary relationships between 2 or more data 
elements which may be used to represent turn restrictions on 
roads), and tags (arbitrary metadata strings, which are mainly 
used to describe map objects). Each of these entities has a 
numeric identifier (called OSM ID) and a set of generic 
attributes defined by tags. For example, the natural tag 
describes geographical features which occur in Nature and 
has a wide set of values {bay, beach, … , wetland, wood} 
[16]. Further tags are used to specify time zones, currencies 
[17] and alike.  
According to previous studies [18], the volunteered 
geographical information submitted to OSM is fairly 
accurate, with more than 80% of overlap between other 
specialized datasets, and often with more correct references 
in several countries around the world. 
D. LinkedGeoData 
LinkedGeoData (LGD) [2] is an effort to add a spatial 
dimension to the Semantic Web. It utilizes the information 
collected by the OpenSteetMap project and makes it 
available in Resource Description Frtamework (RDF) 
knowledge. The Semantic Web eases data and information 
integration by providing an infrastructure based on RDF 
ontologies, which are interactively transformed from OSM 
data. This procedure is believed to simplify real-life 
information 
integration 
that 
requires 
comprehensive 
background knowledge related to spatial features [17]. 
LinkedGeoData offers a flexible system for mapping data to 
RDF format, improved REST interface and direct interlinks 
to GeoNames and other geospatial data projects.  
The data acquired from OSM is processed in different 
routes. The LGD Dump Module converts the OSM planet 
file into RDF and loads the data into a triple store. This data 
is then available via the static SPARQL endpoint. The LGD 
Live Sync Module monitors and loads change sets to the 
RDF level in order to update the triple store accordingly. The 
Osmosis is a community developed tool, which supports 
setting up such a database from a planet file and applying 
change sets to it. For data access, LGD offers downloads, a 
REST API interface, Linked Data and SPARQL endpoints 
[17]. The REST API provides limited query capabilities 
about all nodes of OSM. 
LGD does not only contain linked data to OSM, but to 
other data services as well. It currently interlinks data with 
DBPedia and GeoNames [17], which is done on a per-class 
basis, where all instances of a set of classes of LGD are 
matched with all instances of a set of classes of other data 
sources using labels and spatial information. Since a vast 
amount of data is changed on OSM every few minutes, 
several filtering and synchronization procedures are used to 
ensure the data is kept relevant. Converting relational 
databases to RDF is also a significant area of research that 
LDG heavily depends on. These enhancements may further 
contribute to new semantic-spatial search engines to enable 
more linked data applications, such as geo-data syndication. 
However, certain limitations are still in the way of a more 
robust and scaling service, such as a lack of aggregating 
ontologies between OSM and the filtering system. 
E. Discussion 
Next, we discuss some aspects of online geodatabases 
that have been in the focus of the current research, namely, 
crowdsourcing, reliability and interoperability.  
1) Crowdsourcing 
A recent trend in neogeography has emerged by 
complementing information to geodatabases via several 
outside sources, namely social networks [19], shared media 
websites, and user’s GPS contributions, known as 
Volunteered Geographical Information (VGI). The potential 
of crowdsourcing is that it can be a highly exploitable 
activity, in which participants are encouraged to contribute to 
an alleged greater good. For example, in Wikipedia, well 
over 99.8% of visitors to the site do not contribute anything 
[18]; yet, this does not deter the contributors from doing 
most of the work. 
Since geospatial databases typically contain vast amounts 
of data, it is important to create mechanisms that can assist 
and verify the user-generated data submissions, which aim at 
improving internal data quality and resolving data conflicts 
between sources. These conflicts can be identified at the 
syntax (representation), structure (inconsistency), semantic 
(ambiguity) and cartographic (accuracy) levels [20]. 
Crowdsourcing in GIS has the following advantages: 
- 
Make datasets accessible by non-proprietary 
languages and tools; 
- 
Introduce formal semantics to make data machine 
learning possible, so the process can be automated between 
sources; 
- 
Enrich existing data with other sources in a 
combined way, therefore increasing location precision; 
- 
Allow cross-referencing and querying of multiple 
data sources simultaneously; 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

- 
Automatically detect on-going events and new 
places of interest from media and social networks. 
However, there are several obstacles to this approach: 
data conflicts must be carefully managed, and proper 
conversion 
methods 
must 
be 
employed 
to 
ensure   
consistency (e.g., different names and tags for the same 
places in different sources), as well as other mechanisms to 
verify data integrity from user submissions (data validation). 
Outdated sources of information must also be filtered. A 
layer structure by Multi-Providers cRowd-Enhanced Geo 
linked Data (M-PREGeD) has been proposed [20] to 
improve data quality by involving the users in the selection 
process. This practice adopts the use of shared vocabularies 
and links to help increase semantic consistency and 
accessibility among sources of data.  
In this case, results are stored in a local database and 
further enriched with matching Linked Geo Data nodes, 
which are verified and corrected by the Linked corrections 
layer, and only after that become available to the web 
applications layer. The user-generated matches are acquired 
by several applications, such as UrbanMatch [20], which is a 
game with a purpose for matching points of interest and 
photos, running on mobile geo-located services. The player 
is given a set of photos and is asked to match them with each 
location. The output is gathered from the players, verified 
and correlated and finally used to generate trusted links. A 
high number of similar answers are used to identify patterns 
of information and determine the accuracy of provided data.  
This process can be defined in 3 layers: the Linked Geo 
Data layer which contains unprocessed data from several 
sources, the Linked Connections layer that is composed of 
all verification methods, such as the UrbanMatch game. 
Finally, this data is submitted to the web applications layer to 
the general audience.  
Another process is done by analyzing metadata and tags 
from photos over different social media websites (such as 
Flickr and Twitter), by discovering associations between the 
media and the owner’s geographical position, and is also 
possible to populate geo-sets with news data collected from 
other sources by employing extraction and retrieving systems 
[21]. 
These experiments not only help increasing spatial 
accuracy for existing places, but can also be used to discover 
new points of interest. Conflicts can be detected and resolved 
by automatic procedures, and expanding these techniques is 
an on-going process, especially when certain errors can 
occur [19] due to old or mislabeled data, incorrect semantic 
relationships, or simply by geographic evolution overtime. 
For example, there is a high correlation between places of 
interest like restaurants and a number of photos containing 
tags such as “food”, “dinner” and “eating” being uploaded 
on the same location. This quantitative evaluation consists of 
very specific statistical and data mining methods with several 
levels of precision. In recent studies [19], several new places 
in London were found with the help of these methods that 
were not present in GeoNames or Foursquare. Since different 
database providers are constructed in different ways, this 
procedure takes into account how different places are 
submitted and represented internally, and tries to aggregate 
similar results into a location vector, which creates a 
classifier that calculates the likelihood that a given location 
contains a place in particular. Closer examinations detected 
conflicts or mislabeled data such as misleading Tweets and 
incorrect or semantically ambiguous tags, and this allowed 
excluding potential outliers based on standard deviation in 
the dataset. Using this method, new places of worship, 
schools, shops, restaurants and graveyards were found that 
did not yet exist in LinkedGeoData and GeoNames. With 
finer iteration it becomes possible to detect new places of 
interest 
with 
higher 
precision, 
such 
as 
extending 
OpenStreetMap to indoor environments [22]. This approach 
aims at increasing the detail of geo data by adding new tags 
to inner structures, such as airports, museums or train 
stations by employing a 3D building ontology. Again, such 
data is likely to be supplied voluntarily by individuals at 
those places of interest. This kind of non-profit projects 
greatly enhances user participation. 
2) Reliability 
The proliferation of information sources as a result of 
networked computers has prompted significant changes in 
the amount, availability, and nature of geographic 
information. Among the more significant changes is the 
increasing 
amount 
of 
readily 
available 
Volunteered 
Geographic Information, which is produced by millions of 
users. However, many of these results are not provided by 
professionals, but by amateur users; therefore, they do not 
follow the common standards in terms of data collection, 
verification and use, this creates an issue which is very 
frequently discussed and debated in the context of 
crowdsourcing activities. Several studies [18] [23] [24] [25] 
have analyzed the systematic quality of VGI in great detail, 
and claim that for the most part results can be fairly accurate 
compared to other private or governmental entities, and 
represent  the move from standardized data collection 
methods to data mining from available datasets. 
Evaluating the quality of geographical information has 
received the attention of surveyors, cartographers and 
geographers many years ago, which have carefully 
deliberated a number of quality standards [18]: 
- 
Lineage: the history of the dataset; 
- 
Positional accuracy: how well the coordinate of an 
object is related to reality; 
- 
Attribute accuracy: how well an object is 
represented with tag attributes; 
- 
Logical consistency: the internal consistency of the 
dataset; 
- 
Completeness: measuring the lack of data for a 
particular object; 
- 
Semantic accuracy: making sure an object’s 
representation is correctly interpreted; 
- 
Temporal quality: the validity of changes in the 
database in relation to real-world changes and also the rate of 
updates. 
Several methodologies were developed to quickly 
determine the data quality, from statistical comparison (using 
average standard deviation between different databases to 
calculate positional accuracy, object overlap percentages, tile 
boards, road length comparison among maps [25] and spatial 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

density among urban areas) to more empirical methods 
(visual density representations, road comparison). The results 
[25] state that there is an approximate overlap of 80% of 
motorway objects, roughly located within about 6m of 
distance recorded between OpenStreetMap and other 
proprietary map types in London, as well as less than 10% of 
total road length difference between OSM and TeleAtlas. 
3) Interoperability 
The growth of geospatial industry is stunted by the 
difficulty of reading and transforming suitable spatial data 
from different sources. Different databases have unalike 
conventions, classes, attributes and even entirely different 
semantic structures, which makes it difficult to interconnect 
and correlate data from different sources [26]. As billions of 
dollars are invested worldwide in the production of 
geospatial databases, it becomes imperative to find other 
alternatives for data translation and open, collaborative 
frameworks. As most GIS use their own proprietary format, 
translating this data into other formats can be a time 
consuming and inefficient process. Transformations between 
formats can also result in loss of information because 
different formats support different data types. Data 
translation also takes up a large amount of secondary storage 
and can be costly to develop. Other providers sometimes 
restrict access by repackaging products for a particular GIS.  
There have been several solutions in the past to alleviate 
the issue, such as object oriented open frameworks and open 
architectures. Other approaches consist in interpreting other 
formats through the use of a universal language (such as, the 
Open Geospatial Datastore Interface (OGDI)). As the 
translation process is a long and difficult progress, OGDI is 
based on reading different geospatial data formats directly, 
without translation or conversion [10]. In essence, it works 
as a comprehension tool instead of translation. This allows 
for different formats to be queried from a uniform data 
structure, as well as transparent adjustment of coordinate 
systems and cartographic projections. Such data structures 
can be implemented via simple object oriented concepts, 
such as point features instantiating a coordinate, line features 
being composed of 2 or more coordinates in the same 
directional vector, and area features consisting of several line 
features forming a closed ring. This transient vector structure 
is the backbone of the retrieval functions, and allows for 
transparent adjustments and understanding of multiple 
coordinate systems. OGDI also uses an API that can validate 
parameters and sequences, transform coordinates and 
projections and provide an entry point to OGDI functions for 
each driver. 
The multinational and multilevel initiatives, such as 
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) [27] and Defence 
Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG) [28], 
have been supporting and fostering the development of 
Digital Geospatial Information (DGI) standards that make 
spatial 
information 
more 
accessible 
to 
application 
developers.  
III. 
SYMBOLIC CITY 
In our previous work, we introduced our system 
architecture and the main structure of a symbolic world 
model. The world model we proposed is based on human 
mental models of space. It consists of objects, attributes, 
relations and relation attributes. The objects represent places 
and are further described by a set of attributes. Relations 
represent any kind of topological or other connection 
between places and also can be further described by a set of 
attributes. As such, our model can be visualized as a graph in 
which objects are nodes and relations are edges. A simple 
example is given in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  An exemple of a world model where places are nodes and 
relations are edges of a graph 
Figure 2, in turn, shows how the symbolic model is 
integrated in the system architecture which supports different 
sources of data: manually introduced data, using a web 
application (SC Space Editor), automatically retrieved, by 
physical sensors and obtained on demand by software 
modules that communicate with online geodatabases and 
Place-Based Social Networks (PBSN).  
 
Figure 2.  General system architecture 
In the scope of the first type of interaction, the user can 
insert, modify, remove and query all the objects represented 
in the world model. In the second case, a set of processing 
modules was developed to extract data from WiFi networks, 
process them and insert them automatically in the model. 
Finally, the third type of interaction with the symbolic model 
is based on data from online geodatabases and PBSN, 
namely Foursquare. This type of data feed can be considered 
semi-automatic, as it requires some user intervention, as we 
will further explain. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

We envision an application called Symbolic City that is 
based upon our world model and provides a new way of 
looking at places of interest in a city, as shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  Symbolic City service concept 
In order to achieve this kind of data crossing, we propose 
several sources of data and a set of processing modules that 
feed the model and allow for inference of place attributes 
that change with time, the creation of relations between 
places and user world model customization. The editing 
application was object of our previous work as well as the 
modules corresponding to WiFi data analysis. In the 
following subsections we describe the two remaining 
modules. 
A. 4Place Explorer 
Location integration in social networking applications 
provides means for people to share in real time places they or 
their friends and acquaintances visit as well as look for tips, 
comments and ranks of Points Of Interest (POIs) or places 
they intend to visit. Foursquare, Google+ and Facebook 
users are able to share their present location through the 
check-in mechanisms and comments about these places. 
Currently, these three applications are most commonly used 
in the scope of location sharing.  
4Place Explorer is a PHP module we implemented to 
allow for the integration of the available data from 
Foursquare and Google Maps (for the purpose of route 
finding between two places) with the world model data. It 
uses Foursquare API. OAuth standard is used as it provides 
the access to most of the API functions with a user account.  
In the current version of this module, the user searches 
for a place by its name. Data about that place are fetched 
from Foursquare in JSON format. The user chooses the 
matching place and a query in the symbolic model is made to 
check if that place already exists. If it exists, only the new 
attributes and new relations are inserted in the model, if there 
is any. If it does not exist, a new object is created with a set 
of attributes and a set of relations. The attributes that are 
extracted are the following: name, category, address, 
coordinates, city and country. The current number of check-
ins may act as an indicator of how many people are visiting a 
place and it also may be added to the model. Currently, three 
types of relations are created automatically: Is_In, between 
an object and a city or a country; Is_Near, based on the 
distance between two places, calculated in a given range 
from the found object; and Is_Accessible_From, if a route 
can be obtained from Google Maps. 
The purpose of this module is to provide a new 
perspective over the places that are represented in the two 
sources of geographical data, Foursquare and symbolic 
world model. The implemented mechanisms allow for 
automatic creation of new objects in the model as well as 
connecting objects with relevant topological relations.  
The existence of relations transforms a set of dispersed 
places to a graph of interrelated places, providing not only 
proximity of points of interest, but also inviting the visitor 
to nearby locations and contributing to a better publicity, be 
it for tourism or for commercial purposes. 
B. GeoPlace Explorer 
Current version of the GeoPlace Explorer application 
allows for creating new places manually and searching for a 
place by name in Factual, GeoNames and OpenStreetMap 
geodatabases. After the search results are shown, the user 
choses the object to be created in the database. Objects have 
default attributes such as name, category, latitude and 
longitude. The user that creates an object becomes its author. 
The online geodatabase source from which the object was 
retrieved is also registered. An object may have other free 
attributes specified during its creation. Objects belong to one 
of six basic categories (city, island, building, country, road 
and ocean) and can have relationships (with corresponding 
attributes) to one or more objects. For example, the object of 
category “city”, named Funchal can be related (relation 
“Is_In”) to the object called Madeira of category “island”, 
which, in turn, is related to the object Portugal, of category 
“country”.  
Our database is modeled in Neo4j [29], one of the most 
popular graph database models. The object creation and 
manipulation is done by a series of PHP files that interact 
with the database by the means of the Neo4j client library 
called Neo4jPHP [30] using Cypher queries.  
The purpose of this module is twofold: to learn and test a 
graph database as a possible solution for our world model 
repository; and to analyze APIs and data about POIs from 
three different online geodatabases. So far, the main findings 
were that graph databases are farther more flexible and 
scalable than the relational databases as they do not require a 
rigid predefined structure and that using the three studied 
online geodatabases is advantageous as the existing data may 
be complementary. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented an overview of the most 
popular online geodatabases and discussed their main 
characteristics and strengths. Crowdsourcing has shown to 
be the most significant way of maintenance of large spatial 
data repositories, be it directly, as in OSM, be it through 
social networking, as in Foursquare. We introduced a 
symbolic world model as a repository of spatial data created 
manually by the user through a web application as an image 
of their mental model of space, and automatically by a set of 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

processing modules that interact with sensors, place-based 
social networking applications and online geodatabases. 
The envisioned Symbolic City application is related with 
spotting not only the POIs in a city, but also the relations that 
exist between POIs and that are inferred automatically by the 
developed modules. We believe that the users may get more 
details about POIs of their choice by adding them to their 
own personal models by combining several different sources 
of data. We expect to achieve this as the integration of the 
SC Space Editor, the 4Place Explorer and the Geo Explorer 
may follow in the near future. 
However, there are still several challenges that we face in 
our present stage of research. They are related to the social 
and collaborative aspect of our application, with the choice 
of a database implementation (transition from a relational to 
a graph database or a hybrid solution), system distribution 
over several servers, and so on. There are already some 
promising solutions for each of these challenges, so in the 
near future we expect to obtain some new and exciting 
results. 
ACKOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a 
Ciência e Tecnologia within the Project Scope: PEst-
OE/EEI/UI0319/2014.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] “GeoNames.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.geonames.org/. [Accessed: 18-Jun-2013]. 
[2] “linkedgeodata.org  : 
About.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://linkedgeodata.org/About. [Accessed: 15-May-
2014]. 
[3] “Factual | Home - The Location Platform Enabling 
Mobile 
Personalization.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.factual.com/. [Accessed: 15-May-2014]. 
[4] “Facebook Asks Users to Clean Up Its Location 
Database with Places Editor and Favorite Places,” 
Inside 
Facebook. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.insidefacebook.com/2011/07/01/favorite-
places-editor-location-database/. [Accessed: 08-Jul-
2013]. 
[5] K. Baras and A. Moreira, “Groups and Frequent 
Visitors Shaping the Space Dynamics,” in Smart 
Spaces 
and 
Next 
Generation 
Wired/Wireless 
Networking, vol. 6869, S. Balandin, Y. Koucheryavy, 
and H. Hu, Eds. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, 
pp. 111–122. 
[6] B. Tversky, “Remembering Spaces,” in The Oxford 
handbook of memory, E. Tulving and F. I. M. Craik, 
Eds. New York, NY, US: Oxford University Press, 
2000, pp. 363–378. 
[7] K. Baras, “Dynamic world model for context-aware 
environments,” Ph.D. Dissertation, DSI, Universidade 
do Minho, Guimarães, Portugal, 2012. 
[8] A. Markowetz, T. Brinkhoff, and B. Seeger, 
“Exploiting the internet as a geospatial database,” 
presented at the Workshop on Next Generation 
Geospatial Information, 2003. 
[9] “OpenStreetMap.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.openstreetmap.org/about. [Accessed: 15-
May-2014]. 
[10] M. Schmidt and P. Weiser, “Web Mapping Services: 
Development and Trends,” in Online Maps with APIs 
and WebServices, M. P. Peterson, Ed. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 13–21. 
[11] “How Google Builds Its Maps—and What It Means for 
the Future of Everything,” The Atlantic, 06-Sep-2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/
09/how-google-builds-its-maps-and-what-it-means-
for-the-future-of-everything/261913/. [Accessed: 25-
Jul-2013]. 
[12] F. Derby, “Coordinates  : A resource on positioning, 
navigation and beyond  » Blog Archive  » Geospatial 
databases and the evolving role of the surveyor,” 21-
Mar-2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://mycoordinates.org/geospatial-databases-and-
the-evolving-role-of-the-surveyor/. [Accessed: 21-
Mar-2014]. 
[13] National Research Council, IT Roadmap to a 
Geospatial 
Future. 
Washington 
DC: 
National 
Academies Press, 2003. 
[14] V. Maltese and F. Farazi, “A semantic schema for 
GeoNames,” Information Engineering and Computer 
Science, 
University 
of 
Trento, 
Departmental 
Technical Report DISI-13-004, 2013. 
[15] “2013 OpenStreetMap Data Report,” 21-Mar-2014. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.mapbox.com/osm-
data-report/. [Accessed: 21-Mar-2014]. 
[16] P. Mooney, P. Corcoran, and A. C. Winstanley, “A 
study of data representation of natural features in 
openstreetmap,” presented at the 6th International 
GIScience Conference, 2010, vol. 150. 
[17] C. Stadler, J. Lehmann, K. Höffner, and S. Auer, 
“Linkedgeodata: A core for a web of spatial open 
data,” Semantic Web, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 333–354, 
2012. 
[18] M. Haklay, “How good is volunteered geographical 
information? A comparative study of OpenStreetMap 
and Ordnance Survey datasets,” Environ. Plan. B 
Plan. Des., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 682–703, 2010. 
[19] S. Van Canneyt, O. Van Laere, S. Schockaert, and B. 
Dhoedt, “Using Social Media to Find Places of 
Interest: A Case Study,” in Proceedings of the 1st 
ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on 
Crowdsourced 
and 
Volunteered 
Geographic 
Information, New York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 2–8. 
[20] R. Karam and M. Melchiori, “Improving geo-spatial 
linked data with the wisdom of the crowds,” in EDBT 
’13 Proceedings of the Joint EDBT/ICDT 2013 
Workshops, 2013, pp. 68–74. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

[21] P. López and J. César, “Geospatial database generation 
from digital newspapers: use case for risk and disaster 
domains.,” MSc, ISEGI, Universidade Nova de 
Lisboa, Lisbon, 2010. 
[22] M. Goetz and A. Zipf, “Extending openStreetMap to 
indoor 
environments: 
bringing 
volunteered 
geographic information to the next level,” Proc. 
Urban Reg. Data Manag. Udms Annu. 2011, pp. 47–
58, 2011. 
[23] A. J. Flanagin and M. J. Metzger, “The credibility of 
volunteered geographic information,” GeoJournal, 
vol. 72, no. 3–4, pp. 137–148, Aug. 2008. 
[24] “The Citizen Science Landscape: From Volunteers to 
Citizen Sensors and Beyond,” 21-Mar-2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ijz/2012/349630/. 
[Accessed: 21-Mar-2014]. 
[25] D. Zielstra and A. Zipf, “A comparative study of 
proprietary geodata and volunteered geographic 
information for Germany,” presented at the 3th 
AGILE international conference on geographic 
information science, Guimarães, Portugal, 2010, vol. 
2010. 
[26] S. 
Hahmann 
and 
D. 
Burghardt, 
“Connecting 
linkedgeodata and geonames in the spatial semantic 
web,” presented at the 6th International GIScience 
Conference, 2010. 
[27] Open Geospatial Consortium, “Open Geospatial 
Consortium | OGC(R),” Open Geospatial Consortium 
| 
OGC(R), 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/. [Accessed: 16-Jun-
2014]. 
[28] DGIWG, “DGIWG Home Page,” Defence Geospatial 
Information Working Group, n.d. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.dgiwg.org/dgiwg/index.htm. [Accessed: 
16-Jun-2014]. 
[29] Neo Technology, Inc., “Neo4j - The World’s Leading 
Graph Database,” Neo4j - The World’s Leading 
Graph 
Database, 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.neo4j.org/. [Accessed: 16-Jun-2014]. 
[30] J. Adell, “Everyman Software: Development Setup for 
Neo4j and PHP: Part 1,” Everyman Software  
Musings on software development, open source, PHP 
and current projects., 05-Nov-2011.  
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

