Smart Parking System Based on IoT Architecture
and Intelligent Sensors
Sofeem Nasim
Machine Vision and Signal Analysis
University of Oulu
Oulu, Finland
sofeem.nasim@oulu.fi
Mourad Oussalah
Machine vision and signal analysis
University of Oulu
Oulu, Finland
mourad.oussalah@oulu.fi
Tarja Outila
Department of Architecture
University of Oulu
Oulu, Finland
tarja.outila@oulu.fi
Johannes Jutila
Department of Architecture
University of Oulu
Oulu, Finland
johannes.jutila@oulu.fi
Abstract—The rapid growth in number of passengers per
household in major cities led to problems such as traffic conges-
tion, increase in harmful emissions, and traffic safety concerns.
Mismanagement of available parking spaces due to a lack of
intelligent parking systems is acknowledged as one of hot topics in
smart city concepts. In this paper, we present a small-scale study
conducted on the premises of University of Oulu parking space
to test a new real-time management of parking lot availability
using Internet-of-Things (IoT) sensors and a mobile application.
Index Terms—Smart Parking system, Internet of Things,
Smart Cities, Intelligent Systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
It is anticipated by the industry experts that there will be 2
billion automobiles in circulation by the year 2040 [1]. This
creates a constant need to appropriate infrastructure that must
be made accessible to support the growth in both the number
of vehicles and the human population within a constrained
area. Large urban areas with a high volume of pedestrians,
such as shopping malls, entertainment centers, and airports, are
prone to experiencing significant levels of traffic congestion.
This may be the result of improper parking of vehicles or
the absence of adequate parking management systems. As a
result, the need for efficient optimal car parking management
systems is crucial. Often inefficient car parking management
results in increased fuel, traffic congestion, and environmental
pollution [2].
Over the past few years, numerous studies have been carried
out in the field of intelligent car parking systems. These studies
were based on technologies such as Radio Frequency Identifi-
cation (RFID), Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), Bluetooth,
Wi-Fi, ZigBee, and image processing. However, in Finland,
numerous available mobile applications, namely, ParkMan
[3], and EasyPark [4], are limited to only facilitating users
with online parking tickets, without any ability to deliver on
parking lot availability. This paper proposes a smart parking
intelligent system based on IoT technologies, smart sensors,
and a mobile application that provides the user with real-time
parking information about the parking lot and available spaces.
In addition, we also present some exploratory analyses based
on the dataset collected from Feb 2021 to Nov 2021 at a
pilot study conducted within the premises of the University
of Oulu car parking area. The study was conducted as part
of a European Regional Funding on Smart Parking in the
Oulu region expects to create an economic, environmental, and
societal impact as well as contribute toward policy modeling
and evaluation.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we present the related works. In Section III, we provide an
overview of the architectural design of the proposed solution.
In Section IV, we present the detail of the mobile application.
In Section V, we present the small-scale study analysis. Finally,
we conclude our work in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Managing public parking spaces under municipal mobility
plans is a critical problem with significant economic reper-
cussions. A study in [5] revealed that 30 percent of the
congested traffic in the city is attributed to cars searching for
parking spots [5]. Likewise, it is also proven that the limited
availability of parking lots influences driver behavior, levels
of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, and traffic safety [6][7]
as well as traffic density [8].
The demand for available parking lots is dynamic, meaning
that this varies over time and space. There is a rational need
to provide drivers with real-time information on the location
and condition of available parking spaces [9]. With the large-
scale field deployments since 1996, the quantity of informa-
tion in this domain becomes extensive, especially with the
development of smart city concepts, which raises the question
of efficient use of such big data information. Lin et al. [10]
undergo a comprehensive, though not systematic, review of
smart parking solutions from 2000 to 2016, identifying certain
challenges and unaddressed concerns. In [11], the authors
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-959-1
SMART 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 1. Overall Smart Parking System Representation.
suggested using ultrasonic sensors to monitor occupancy status
and illegal parking in a multilevel parking lot. Light Emitting
Diode LEDs were suggested to show the number of available
parking spots, vehicle navigation, and parking lot conditions.
In [12], the authors utilized photoelectric sensors in to identify
cars in a controlled zone. The sensors were deployed at
the parking lot’s entrance and exit points and linked to the
server for data processing and distribution. Such a setup
may offer real-time information on the number of available
parking spaces but not the precise location of the available
spot. A microcontroller and an ultrasonic sensor network were
proposed in [13] to determine the occupancy of automobiles
in a parking lot. The drivers were given a mobile application
to search for open lots or book slots with payment choices.
If a mobile application is unavailable, the driver may view
a monitor at the entryway. A disadvantage of this approach
is the necessity of a human staff to process, validate, and
allot the slot rather than an autonomous procedure. Using
WSN’s, the authors in [14] built a parking system that used
a magnetometer as the sensing device to detect parking spots.
WSN was used to guarantee that the data was wirelessly
sent and routed to the base station, which was then used
to measure conditions of interest such as magnetic (metal)
fluctuations and light radiation (radiation or reflection of light
from objects). Authors in [15] used a light sensor to identify
the presence or absence of a vehicle by sensing the quantity
of ambient light by communicating via the ZigBee protocol.
Since this requires the use of additional sensors, this approach
is unreliable when utilized for outdoor parking. The use of
two distinct sensor networks - ultrasonic sensor for indoor
parking lots and magnetic sensor for outdoor parking lots - as
well as the usage of Bluetooth connection between the phone
and the sensor network was presented by the authors. An
Internet of things (IoT) based parking system with an online
reservation capability was presented in [16]. It involves the
use RFID tags and readers to verify automobiles for new and
existing users. The system performance may also be seen via
a web interface. Similarly, in [17], a prototype of intelligent
car parking was proposed using a wireless sensor network. The
proposed system is built on low-cost sensor nodes that identify
and monitor each parking lot’s state. Although the prolonged
lifetime of tags makes this technology suitable for a wide range
of application scenarios, their limited operational range (i.e. up
to 10 m) often restricts the usage of RFID-based solutions to
item identification and tracking in relatively small regions. In
[18], an IoT innovative system was suggested to provide a
parking slot assignment and route navigation system. It em-
ploys a novel algorithm for assigning vehicles to their desired
destination to the closest vacant parking slot using Dijkstra’s
algorithm for determining the best route within the parking
lot. The user interface was designed as a mobile application
for drivers to schedule and receive parking space allocations.
However, the use of ultrasonic sensors incorporates some
disadvantages, due particularly to their sensitivity to temper-
ature changes and extreme air turbulence. This inspired the
current research presented in this article, which examines the
design and implementation of a novel IoT-aware Smart Parking
System (SPS), which provides users with real-time parking lot
availability and the flexibility to accommodate various user
preferences. We also provided an exploratory study based on
data collected between February and November 2021. This
study aims to contribute to Oulu’s strategic development plan
and smart city development concept.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-959-1
SMART 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

III. SMART PARKING SYSTEM DESIGN
The functional elements of the overall smart parking system
are illustrated in Fig 1. The placepod sensors were placed in
10 different locations to detect the presence or absence of
a vehicle in the parking space. The sole purpose of these
sensors is to transmit the data packets into the network via
the Long Range Wide Area Network (LoRaWan) protocol,
which contains information related to the parking space. Later,
the gateway device capable of receiving LoRa wan packets
communicates the packets to the endpoint. In our case, the
endpoint is a message broker which subscribes to the packets
via pub/sub protocol. The broker is only limited to receiving
data packets. Therefore, the script is implemented to aid the
storing process. It runs on the cloud server to collect the pack-
ets from a broker and store the information in the database.
The server script decrypts and pre-processes the data packet
information before storing it. At last, the user interaction
took place using the Representational State Transfer (REST)
services. The Application Programmable Interface (API) is
created to establish the connection between the REST service
and mobile application.
More elaborated details of data communication are pre-
sented in the section below.
A. Sensor Placement
In this small-scale study, ten in-ground Place pod sensors
were installed on the premises of the University Oulu parking
area. The actual position of the sensors can be seen in
Fig
2. The green circles represent the sensor deployment
positions, accompanied by the number labels, which in turn,
are associated with their parking positions. PlacePod sensors
are high-precision smart parking sensors and designed to be
used in municipal and private parking management systems.
Due to the reliability of the generated signals regardless of
the weather conditions, low latency, ubiquitous nature, and
long-life battery (10 years), they can be ultimately integrated
into robust smart parking solutions in real-time. PlacePod PNI
sensor consists of an inductor with a saturable core that offers
stable and precise measurements regardless of environmental
factors such as snow or rain.
Figure 2. Sensor Positions Area.
B. Data Communication Protocols for Data Acquisition
This section elaborates on the protocols of data transmission
to acquire data.
1) LoRaWan (Sensors to Gateway): Fig 3 illustrates the
communication pattern between the in-ground Placepod sen-
sors and the installed gateway devices. LoRaWan is a low-
power wide-area networking protocol, explicitly designed for
battery-operated devices that wirelessly connect to the Internet
on a regional, national, or global scale. This supports vital
Internet of things requirements. Place pod sensors are built-in
LoRa® radio that communicates to a gateway. Our sensors
were configured and activated with network AppEUI and
Appkey and transmit data packets every 1 min interval. The
5G network of the University of Oulu was used for data
transmission.
2) Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) proto-
col (Gateway to Message Broker): The data communication
between gateway and message broker is handled on MQTT
protocol. Usually, the core of MQTT protocol is the publish-
subscribe model, which is distinguished from a client-server
model. It separates the client (publisher) who sends the
message from the client (subscriber) who receives it. The
fundamental of it is that an intermediate role called a broker
is responsible for all message routing and distribution. The
gateway acts as a publisher that transmits data packets to the
message broker. We have purchased a cloud MQTT online
service to act as a message broker and subscribe the data
packets as a message.
3) Rest API (Cloud Server to Mobile Application): The
Rest API was implemented to handle the communication be-
tween the database and mobile Application. Representational
State Transfer Application Programming Interface is more
commonly known as REST API web service. When a RESTful
API is called via uniform resource locations (URLs), the server
will transfer a representation of the requested resource’s state
to the client system. In our case, the mobile application act as
a client, which requests the server based on some parameters.
The request is passed to the server through the Restful API.
Table I
TABLE TYPE STYLES
Action/filter Records
Query Request URL
Individual Sensor
/api/v1/resources/Sensors?id=”
Datewise
/api/v1/resources/Date?date=”
Sensor and Datewise
api/v1/resources/DSensor?deviceid=”&date=”
The server then responds to the client’s request based on the
query requested. The primary request URLs are presented in
Table 1. Currently, the server is implemented to handle three
requests, as demonstrated in the Table 1. For instance, if the
user demands to view the record of only one parking space,
the request URL mentioning the ID of the sensor would be
queried to the server. Similarly, if the user wants to view the
sensor’s record pertaining to some time interval or a fixed date,
then the query based on date wise will be forwarded to the
server for fetching the records.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-959-1
SMART 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 3. Occupancy rate of parking space and area on daily basis, Real time status of parking space, history of parking spots and prediction.
IV. MOBILE APPLICATION (USER INTERACTION)
The android application is developed to facilitate the user
interaction. One of the main features of the mobile application
is to provide the user with the report of the occupancy rate
of each sensor on a daily basis and the overall parking
area, as shown in Fig
3. Similarly, another feature of the
application is that the user can be aware of the real-time
situation of the parking area and space. In Fig 3, the green
spot indicates that the parking space is vacant and can be used
for parking. Likewise, the red spot highlights the occupied
parking spaces. The mobile interacts with the server using
REST API protocols. The application sends the request to the
server, which further communicates with the database to fetch
the records based on the query provided by the user via mobile
application.
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The exploratory study is carried out on the dataset collection
between February 2021 and November 2021 at University of
Oulu car parking premises. We have considered the occupancy
rate based on different use cases, such as, overall aggregated
occupancy rate of days during the months, aggregated occu-
pancy rate during months, aggregated occupancy rate on time
window of 30 minutes, aggregated occupancy rate at different
sensor positions.
As presented in Fig 4, for case 1, the findings indicate that
the overall occupancy rate is high during the months 6th, 11th,
and 28th days. Therefore, the possibility of finding vacant
space during these days is low compared to other days, such
as 5th, 15th, and 17th, where the overall occupancy rate is
low.
Similarly, for case 2 considering the aggregated occupancy
rate of months. Fig 5 shows that the rate is low during 5th,
6th, and 7th month. This is because of summer season and
generally, the people are on vacations in these months
Figure 4. Aggregated occupancy rate over days of month.
Figure 5. Aggregated occupancy rate of different months.
For case 3, our results validate that the peak hour of parking
is during office hours, as shown in Fig 6. The gradual increase
in occupancy rate starts from 7:00 till 16:00 and decreases on
wards 16:00. The chances of getting vacant space are more
after 16:00. For case 4, the findings indicate that the parking
space equipped with sensor 10 is mostly occupied compared
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-959-1
SMART 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 6. Aggregated occupancy rate of time interval (30 mins).
to other parking spaces. The actual reason for that is not
known. However, the chances of parking in this space are
low compared to other spaces. Fig 7 illustrates the aggregated
occupancy rate of various sensor positions.
Figure 7. Aggregated occupancy rate of Sensor positions.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented the deployment of an IoT-
based smart parking system that can collect parking space
information and convey it to users, contributing to minimizing
traffic congestion and enhancing well-being standards. The
main novelty of the proposed approach lies on the context of
scalability, where the sensor nodes can be integrated with the
existing system and the introduction of a mobile application
that can predict the parking availability in advance.
Local gateways were used to assure scalability. Furthermore,
the gateways include an open, modular, adaptable, scalable,
and transformational hardware and software design, enabling
authorities and operators to swiftly implement traffic control
and monitoring methods employing Information Technology
Services (ITS) cooperative technologies. The findings showed
and validated that the occupancy rate is at its peak during
office hours, and low occupancy rates were found throughout
holidays, especially during the summer seasons. Similarly, the
maximum occupancy was observed in November compared
to other months. Another interesting finding is that some
days of the months have found to have a high percentage of
occupancy compared to other days. For future perspectives,
our investigation will be extended to explore the seasonal
variations of occupancy rates.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the ERDF IPaWa (2019-2022)
project. The authors would also like to thank members of
Center of wireless and communication department for their
help in configurations of sensor and gateway communication.
REFERENCES
[1] “The number of cars worldwide is set to double by 2040.”
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/04/the-number-of-cars-
worldwide-is-set-to-double-by-2040, 2016 (accessed May 04,
2022).
[2] K. Zhang and S. Batterman, “Air pollution and health risks due
to vehicle traffic,” Science of the total Environment, vol. 450,
pp. 307–316, 2013.
[3] “Parkman.” https://parkman.io/fi, 2022 (accessed April 04,
2022).
[4] “Easypark.” https://easypark.fi/fi, 2022 (accessed April 04,
2022).
[5] D. Shoup, “Free parking or free markets,” Access Magazine,
vol. 1, no. 38, pp. 28–35, 2011.
[6] P. T. McCoy, M. Ramanujam, M. Moussavi, and J. Ballard,
“Safety comparison of types of parking on urban streets in
nebraska,” Transportation Research Record, vol. 1270, pp. 28–
41, 1990.
[7] D. Shoup, “Cruising for parking,” Access Magazine, vol. 1,
no. 30, pp. 16–23, 2007.
[8] M. Jelokhani-Niaraki and J. Malczewski, “A group multicriteria
spatial decision support system for parking site selection prob-
lem: A case study,” Land Use Policy, vol. 42, pp. 492–508,
2015.
[9] M. Kodransky and G. Hermann, “Europe’s parking u-turn: from
accommodation to regulation.,” 2011.
[10] T. Lin, H. Rivano, and F. Le Mou¨el, “A survey of smart parking
solutions,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 3229–3253, 2017.
[11] A. Kianpisheh, N. Mustaffa, P. Limtrairut, and P. Keikhos-
rokiani, “Smart parking system (sps) architecture using ultra-
sonic detector,” International Journal of Software Engineering
and Its Applications, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 55–58, 2012.
[12] J. A. Vera-G´omez, A. Quesada-Arencibia, C. R. Garc´ıa,
R. Su´arez Moreno, and F. Guerra Hern´andez, “An intelligent
parking management system for urban areas,” Sensors, vol. 16,
no. 6, p. 931, 2016.
[13] M. H. Kadhim, “Arduino smart parking manage system based
on ultrasonic,” International Journal of Engineering & Technol-
ogy, vol. 7, no. 3.20, pp. 494–501, 2018.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-959-1
SMART 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

[14] A. Ahmed, J. G. Kolo, O. M. Olaniyi, and S. Oyetoro, “Devel-
oping smart car parking system using wireless sensor networks,”
2016.
[15] J. Joseph, R. G. Patil, S. K. K. Narahari, Y. Didagi, J. Bapat, and
D. Das, “Wireless sensor network based smart parking system,”
Sensors & Transducers, vol. 162, no. 1, p. 5, 2014.
[16] J. Cynthia, C. B. Priya, and P. Gopinath, “Iot based smart park-
ing management system,” Int. J. Recent Technol. Eng.(IJRTE),
vol. 7, no. 4, 2018.
[17] V. W. Tang, Y. Zheng, and J. Cao, “An intelligent car park
management system based on wireless sensor networks,” in
2006 First International Symposium on Pervasive Computing
and Applications, pp. 65–70, IEEE, 2006.
[18] L. F. Luque-Vega, D. A. Michel-Torres, E. Lopez-Neri, M. A.
Carlos-Mancilla, and L. E. Gonz´alez-Jim´enez, “Iot smart park-
ing system based on the visual-aided smart vehicle presence
sensor: Spin-v,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 5, p. 1476, 2020.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-959-1
SMART 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

