 
 Telco Role and Assets for the Internet of Things (IoT) Infrastructure  
Roberto De Bonis 
Open Innovation Research 
Telecom Italia  
Torino, Italy 
 roberto.debonis@telecomitalia.it 
Enrico Vinciarelli 
Open Innovation Research 
Telecom Italia  
Torino, Italy 
enrico.vinciarelli@telecomitalia.it  
 
Abstract— The paper presents an analysis of what, an application 
provider willing to launch an IoT service, needs in terms of 
physical infrastructure in the urban scenario and how, a Telco 
(Telecommunications Company), can support such a scenario. 
The paper shows the different characteristics that the different 
Telco assets have and how they can be used to deploy IoT 
services, giving some practical real cases. 
 
Keywords— gateways; radio coverage; urban infrastructure; short 
range; site. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
When we deal with Internet Of Things (IoT) we might think 
about a scenario where not only humans but also machines and 
objects (“things”) will be connected to the big internet. 
Nowadays only part of the IoT applications use a full Internet 
Protocol, since for many applications, IP gateways are used to 
interconnect short range devices to IP networks. Even if 
everybody is looking forward to a full IP IoT scenario, it is 
likely that for a long time we will still have to deal with nodes 
of the network that will be connected to internet through 
gateways. One of the consequences is that we will also deal in 
the next near future with “infrastructure” devices whose role 
will be to bridge and to route objects connected to Short Range 
Device (SRD) networks (e.g. ZigBee). Such devices will be 
more complex in terms of processing and storage capabilities 
compared to end nodes. In many cases such gateways could not 
be operated by batteries and hence one of the problem to solve, 
for those willing to deploy IoT applications, will be to find 
adequate sites to host the gateways ensuring power source and, 
in case of wireless applications, guaranteeing adequate radio 
coverage and level of capillarity. Such sites are hard to find and 
costly to manage and it is unrealistic to follow the approach 
that was taken for the radio mobile networks, since in that case, 
very expensive rental of building roofs for hosting mobile base 
stations (in Italy in some cases, rental went up to 80k euros per 
year for the most precious cities) was sustainable considering 
the interesting ARPU (Average Revenue Per Unit) for mobile 
terminals. In case of IoT, almost negligible ARPU of “things” 
lead to look for very cheap solutions for sites hosting the 
gateways and to share this infrastructure to reduce costs.  
II. 
 TELCOS ASSETS CHARACTERISTICS 
Telecom operators can support this scenario and fulfill those 
needs since they own both physical assets and sites to host the 
gateway and the appropriate skill to plan, deploy and operate 
those additional networks. Specific sites for hosting devices 
should have some specific characteristics such as: 
 
Availability of power source (or possibility to install 
a solar panel, or remote power feeding)  
 
Possibility to install antennas  
 
Protection against vandalism  
 
Enabling good radio coverage (in case of wireless 
devices)  
 
Adequate level of capillarity with respect to the 
service to    be provided  
 
Controlled access  
 
Non-intrusive integration with the environment  
 
Low rental costs  
 
Low authorization costs  
 
Low installation and maintenance costs  
 
Regional/National presence for specific services  
 
Preferably 
taking 
in 
advantage 
pre-existing 
infrastructure  
 
Many different types of urban infrastructure are available in 
particular in the cities (e.g. street lighting, broadcasters, energy 
utilities) but very few of them manage to find a suitable 
tradeoff among all the mentioned requirements that is also 
suitable for a plurality of services. Telco operators managing 
fixed and mobile services have plenty of communication 
network infrastructure devices and related sites that according 
to specific needs for the IoT service to be deployed, can be 
used. Nevertheless not all Telco assets can host devices for 
capillary network infrastructure. For different locations it must 
be evaluated how these, fit the characteristics of the devices 
and how these are useful for the capillary network deployment 
(Table 1). 
III. 
 CASE STUDIES  
The plethora of possible assets that a Telco can provide to host 
gateways (and repeaters) can simplify the difficult job of a 
service provider willing to deploy a wireless network for a 
specific smart city application. As an example in Figure 1 the 
set of mobile base stations (red pinpoints) and of street cabinets 
(green pinpoints) of a small town in the north of Italy is shown. 
It is clear how the two sets of assets already provide a good 
level of capillarity in the most “dense” areas of the city; if all 
the many available assets were shown (such as distribution 
network boxes or phone booths), the map would become 
unreadable. In Figure 2 the radio coverage that could be 
provided for that city is shown, such a radio coverage is 
provided using some of the mobile base stations of the Telco to 
host the data concentrators (gateways) of a Wireless MBus 
169MHz [1] network (this communication protocol is used in 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

TABLE I. Characteristics of the different assets 
 
 
Europe for smart gas metering). In Figure 3 a radio coverage 
of a ZigBee network (2.4GHz) is shown; in this case only the 
street cabinets were used to host either ZigBee gateways or 
routers; since both devices (routers and gateways) could not be 
battery-operated, remote power feeding can be provided at the 
street cabinet using the copper pairs not only for transmitting 
data but also for transmitting energy remotely.  
In this case a service provider interested in deploying a ZigBee 
network in that city for outdoor applications (e.g. waste 
management, pollution monitoring), could take advantage of 
the Telco street cabinets to obtain a good level of radio 
coverage (if a full mesh architecture was chosen where 
  
 
Fig. 1. Some of the available Telco assets in a small city 
 
  
Fig. 2. WMBus 169MHz Radio Coverage achieved using Base Stations only 
 
 
Fig. 3. ZigBee 2,4GHz Radio Coverage achieved using street cabinets 
 
also the end nodes could act as routers, the coverage would be 
even better). The example shows how independently from the 
chosen wireless technology and from the type of service, Telco 
assets can fulfill the infrastructural need for IoT applications; 
this added value can be accompanied with the skill of a Telco, 
to plan those networks (to define how many and where 
gateways should be places) and to operate and manage them 
efficiently, making Telcos significant stakeholders in the IoT 
development [3]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
For some time, some IoT devices will be too constrained in 
terms of size and processing capabilities to manage IP 
protocols; this means that such devices will be connected to 
internet through gateways. Adequate sites for installing and 
managing those gateways is and will be an issue; Telcos can 
play an important role in such a scenario enabling, with all 
their assets, the creation of a Smart Urban Infrastructure. 
Future work to demonstrate such an approach is the 
deployment of a multi-utility (gas and water) smart metering 
network (according to the requirements of the Italian Authority 
for Energy [2]) in 4 Italian cities where the data concentrators 
are installed only on the assets (mobile base stations and 
distribution network boxes) of Telecom Italia and they will 
collect meter readings from around 20000 gas and water 
meters.  
REFERENCES 
[1] European Committee for Standardization, “EN 13757-4” 2011.  
[2] Italian Authority for Electricity, Gas and Water, “ARG/gas 
155/08”22/10/2008 [retrieved: June, 2014]  
[3] G. Barillaro, R. De Bonis, E. Vinciarelli, “From Smart Metering 
to Smart Urban Infrastructure” Notiziario Tecnico Telecom 
Italia, February 2014  
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

