Window Panes Become Smart
How responsive materials and intelligent control will revolutionize the architecture of buildings
Sotirios D Kotsopoulos, Federico Casalegno
Comparative Media Studies
Mobile Experience Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
e-mail: skots@mit.edu, casalegno@mit.edu
Massahiro Ono, Wesley Graybill
Department of Computer Science
Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
e-mail: hiro_ono@mit.edu, wgray496@mit.edu
Abstract— The use of electronically activated, variable
transmission materials, and artificial intelligence control
methods in buildings can enhance environmentally and
socially sustainable behaviors. It is presented a smart façade,
allowing automated control of temperature, daylight, view
and privacy in the interior of a prototype house. The
programmable materials of the façade allow the precise
adjustment of solar transmittance and visibility, while an
intelligent controller optimizes the house performance based
on the conditions. Using constraint violations as a measure
of
success,
the
intelligent
controller
outperforms
the
deterministic control models.
Keywords—
Responsive materials;
intelligent
control;
smart windows.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This
paper
acknowledges
the
potential
of
programmable materials and artificial intelligence (AI)
methods to building control, in enhancing the quality of
environmentally
and
socially
sustainable
living
environments. Responsive, interactive skins can bridge the
gap between the traditional modes of building and the
recent
developments
in
material
science,
artificial
intelligence, and human-computer interaction. The merits
from the adoption of technological innovation in buildings
can be multifaceted. The ability to monitor and modify the
attributes
of
architectural
components
can
have
far
reaching implications in energy efficiency and in the ways
we practice design. This paper addresses the designing of
‘smart
windows’,
where
the
traditional
form
and
functionality of windows are revisited with a view to
integrate the current advances in electrically activated
materials research and control systems engineering.
A window is a transparent or translucent opening in a
wall, or a door that allows the passage of light and, if not
closed, air and sound. Windows are usually glazed or
covered in some transparent or translucent material like
float glass. They are held in place by frames, which
prevent them from collapsing and they can be un-operable
or operable. Operable windows may be actuated by the
users, to allow ventilation, or they may remain closed, to
exclude inclement weather. Windows play important role
in the adjustment of the interior lighting and thermal
conditions in buildings, and in the relationship between
interior and exterior. They also obtain significant social,
aesthetic and cultural associations. Primitive windows
were simple holes on the wall. Gradually, windows were
covered with animal hide, cloth, or wood, and shutters that
could be opened or closed were soon added. Over time,
materials such as small pieces of mullioned glass, paper,
flattened pieces of translucent animal horn, or plates of
thinly sliced marble have been used in window panes.
Ordinary glass windows became common in homes in the
early 17th century, while modern-style floor-to-ceiling
windows became possible only after the industrial glass
making process was perfected.
Today, responsive materials and intelligent control
methods, promise to add new dynamics to windows,
including the real time, adaptation of their aesthetic
presence and their performance, based on given conditions.
Smart windows aim to take active role in the dynamic
optimization of building performance with low operational
cost. For example, by actively controlling the state of
electrochromic glass panes, the solar transmittance of
windows becomes a programmable feature, by which it is
possible
to
regulate
the
interior
illuminance
and
temperature [1], [2]. The transitions of smart windows,
optimally operated, can contribute to the reduction of
energy consumption by heating and cooling [3]. Further,
polymer
dispersed
liquid
crystal
films
(PDLC)
and
suspended particle displays, can eliminate the need for
traditional blinds and shutter systems and revolutionize
building aesthetics. Optical dimming and density variation
can replace mechanical actuation with solid-state shading,
glare and view-control. Windows equipped with such
capacities, can provide new ways to think about the
management of energy, of daylight and of privacy, and can
drastically transform the way we perceive and inhabit the
built environment [4].
An example of the advantages in optimizing these
technologies at residential scale is presented next. It is
examined a building element of a prototype house –a
façade involving a matrix of smart windows – and the
adjustment of the lighting and thermal conditions at the
house interior. The façade operates as a dynamic filter
between exterior and interior. It filters solar radiation and
heat by allowing the modification of the chromatism and
light transmittance of each individual window. Varying the
number and the distribution of the active windows on the
façade permits the regulation of the incoming sunlight and
heat, and affects the aesthetic presence and performance of
the house. The apparatus of the example, yields optimum
façade configurations through the efficient management of
the electrochemical properties of the windows by an
intelligent control system.
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 1.
South elevation of the prototype house in Rovereto, Italy.
II.
BACKGROUND
The connected sustainable home concept – a prototype of
which is under construction in Rovereto, Italy (Figure 1) –
is an exemplary building structure resulting from the
integration
of
innovative
physical
and
computing
architecture. This prototype house constitutes a responsive
environment, aiming at remaining well tuned to the
comfort levels of the inhabitants, improving quality of life,
and supporting socially sustainable living.
One of the most notable features of the house is its
south façade. The windows of the façade incorporate
electrochromic technology, which permits the regulation of
the illuminance and temperature at the house interior
through the modification of the chromatism of each
individual windowpane. The smart windows are optimally
managed by an intelligent control system, aiming to reduce
the use of Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
system (HVAC) and artificial lighting, and to keep the
overall
energy
consumption
of
the
house
minimal
overtime. The intelligent control system of the house
exploits the passive thermal capacity of the building
envelope. During the hot summer days, keeping the
interior temperature lower than the exterior becomes a
high priority. To protect the interior from direct sun
exposure, the control system sets the electrochromic
material
of
the
windows
to
its
minimum
solar
transmittance. Conversely, during the cold winter days,
taking advantage of the sun heat becomes a high priority.
To expose the interior to the winter sun, the control system
sets the electrochromic material to its maximum solar
transmittance, thus permitting the storage of natural heat in
the home’s building structure. Hence, sunlight, heat and
shade are used to maintain comfortable interior conditions
with minimum use of artificial heating, cooling and
lighting.
The key to this approach is the fine management of the
passive and active systems of the house. Natural conditions
vary
and
so
do
the
activities
of
the
inhabitants.
Programmable materials enabled by the intelligent control,
contribute in securing proper living conditions, while
keeping energy cost minimal. The residents are prompted
to specify the preferred indoor temperature, humidity and
illumination, or they can allow the system to take charge,
yielding suitable conditions based on the weather. The
intelligent control maintains the stability of the indoor
environment, whenever the building is occupied. Of
course, uncertainty in weather and occupancy patterns
poses a risk of failure. The control system limits this risk
by explicitly addressing uncertain factors.
After an overview of related background work, this
presentation is divided into two main parts, namely,
responsive materials and intelligent control. The first is
exposing the performance and the technical characteristics
of the responsive materials used in this project. The second
is
presenting
the
intelligent
control
system.
More
specifically, the setting of a performed simulation test is
outlined and the comparison of the proposed controller
with two other baseline models is discussed.
This
presentation concludes with a discussion summarizing the
objectives and the contributions of this research.
III.
RELATED WORK
Given that electrochromic technology is not broadly
used, a number of papers describing the state of the art in
this
particular
research
domain
are
referenced.
For
example, [1] describes a study in which the effects of
electrochromic technology are monitored in a cube 3.0 m x
3.0 m x 3.0 m; [2] presents a technical comparison of data
determining the physical features of electrochromic glass;
[3] offers an overview on automated lighting and energy
control systems; finally, [4] reviews the historical basis of
building
compliance
methods
determining
minimum
energy efficiency and comfort standards, and proposes a
new basis for more efficient metrics.
The application of AI methods to building control has
been pursued by computational sustainability research. For
example, [5] employs the stochastic model-predictive
control (SMPC) approach to significantly reduce the
energy
consumption
of
a
building
with
stochastic
occupancy model. Further, [6] models end user energy
consumption in residential and commercial buildings.
Another relevant work is [7], which uses a robust plan
executive
for
autonomous
underwater
vehicles.
The
proposed plan executive, p-Sulu, is built upon the Iterative
Risk Allocation algorithm [8] and a deterministic plan
executive, Sulu [9].
IV.
RESPONSIVE MATERIALS
The smart façade of the prototype house is a matrix of
programmable windows that are individually addressable.
It was designed to achieve three performative objectives:
(1) regulate the percentage of sun-heat that penetrates the
house; (2) regulate the interior illuminance; and (3)
regulate the airflow. Each window pane is an overlay of
two electronically switchable materials. The first layer, the
electrochromic glass, is applied on the external glazing to
provide the desirable degree of sunlight penetration
securing daylight and thermal performance. The second
layer, the polymer dispersed liquid crystal film (PDLC), is
applied on the internal glazing to provide the desirable
degree of visibility, securing privacy (Figure 2).
Figure 2.
Axonometric section of the window. Each window pane is an
overlay of two materials: electrochromic glass and PDLC film.
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 3.
The overlay of materials: (1) the electrochromic and the
PDLC layers are inactive; (2) the electrochromic layer is innactive and
the PDLC layer is active; (3) the electrochromic layer is active and the
PDLC layer is innactive; (4) the electrochromic and the PDLC layers are
active.
Smart windows operate in selective mode, admitting
natural light, heat, and air, or excluding any of the above as
needed. At the global level, the windows are directed by
the central control system, without having any interference
among them. At the local level, each window is driven by
its own low level intelligence, software and custom
electronics that enable the activation of its switchable
materials. Each window pane is equipped with a photocell
to calculate the amount of light that it is exposed to, while
an IR sensor detects the presence of the residents. The
windows provide this sensory feedback to the central
control that compiles the information to activate any
number of windows is required. Since the switchable
materials have varying response times and exhibit different
optical, thermal and power consumption characteristics,
their activation
processing
is preplanned. The
slow
dimming response of 8 minutes, of the electrochromic
glass, is suitable for controlling sunlight and heat, while
the instant transition of the PDLC film is useful for
controlling shade and privacy. The PDLC film can be
switched to entirely block the view, or it can adjust the
degree of its opacity based on the detection of specific
patterns of user activity. For example, the PDLC film can
be programmed to output a varying opacity, corresponding
to the gesture of holding the hand in front of the photocell
for a range of time durations.
The management of the façade is driven by the
autonomous
control
system
of
the
house.
The
electrochromic technology operates as an alternative to a
traditional screening system [10]. Façade patterns can be
enabled to adjust the transmittance value of window panes.
The values of transmittance (τ) vary from 60-75%, for idle
glass, to 3-8% for active obscured glass [2]. Extensive
analysis and evaluation of simulation data allowed to
discover how the activation of the electrochromic glass
affects the levels of thermal comfort and interior daylight
illuminance, on the specific building, at the specified site,
throughout the year. The simulation software used in this
analysis was Relux Professional by Relux Informatik AG.
The climatic data used in the simulations was provided by
the database of the software, which also integrates the
lighting standards determined by Italian law. Relux Vision
(a plug-in of Relux Professional) was used in the ray-
tracing simulation. Typical outputs of each simulation test
included:
a)
the
min/max
and
average
values
of
illuminance and b) the lighting uniformity values and
average daylight factor.
Illuminance
in
daylight
conditions
is
subject
to
constant change of intensity and distribution. Interior
daylight is affected by the movement of the sun and of the
clouds in the sky. The parameters determining the
optimum daylight vary based on the daytime and month of
the year. The existing simulation models for buildings
provide a poor account of daylight modification [3]. These
models identify and approximate uncomplicated settings,
which do not reproduce the natural sunlight conditions. For
our purpose, two models – established by the Commission
Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) – were used in the
analysis and evaluation of natural light. The first, is the
Standard Overcast Sky model, which provides an account
of the sunlight emitted through cloudy sky. The second is
the Standard Clear Sky model, which computes sunlight
under the assumption that the sun is the single lighting
source, without calculating the diffused and reflected light
by the sky. Although the two models offer an accurate
account of the interior sunlight distribution in two distinct
settings, they provide only a partial understanding of the
phenomenon of daylight change. Because, they exclude the
assessment of transitory conditions, such as the momentary
passage of clouds across the sun [11].
Despite these limitations, the aim of calculating the
optimum façade settings is within reach. Exhaustive
simulation tests were performed and data corresponding to
the daylight conditions for each day of the year, was
collected, classified and used for the integration of an
optimization algorithm into the control system. After
setting a desired value of interior daylight illuminance in
lux the simulation tests helped to identify the required
numbers of active windows to reach this value for every
day of the year. A predictive model associating coverage
ratio and illuminance, in any specified time interval was
extracted and integrated into the control system. Based on
this model the number of active windows ensuring the
illuminance threshold in overcast sky throughout the year,
ranges from 50 to 75, in a total of 100.
The produced database was used as a foundation for
optimizing sunlight and heat. The combination of this
information with real time feedback from sensors enables
the reprogramming of the façade, even in conditions that
cannot be predicted by the static simulation model. The
overall system achieves two complementary objectives: a)
determines the optimum number of active electrochromic
glass units to reach the desired interior temperature and
illuminance level, and b) confines the current façade
patterns to this threshold.
Table 1.
Maximum numbers of active windows throughout the year at
1 p.m. in Standard Overcast Sky after simulation with Relux.
1
2
3
4
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 4.
A model gives the maximum number of active windows
yielding the threshold value during the whole year in Overcast Sky. In
doted line is the 75 % limit.
The interior daylight simulations confirmed that the
façade could switch from one pattern to another while
maintaining the same activation ratio, in order to possibly
satisfy
other
factors
of
performance.
A
generative
grammar producing any class of patterns was then
specified so that any desired level of interior daylight
conditions could be reached. In [12] the simulation process
of the electrochromic windows is described in detail and
the generative grammar capturing the language of the
optimum façade configurations
for
the prototype is
presented.
V.
INTELLIGENT CONTROL
The next sections describe the computational apparatus
managing the states of the responsive materials and the
temperature at the house interior. The windows are
controlled in a concerted manner by the central control
without having autonomous intelligence capability. The
controller is implemented in C++. Uncertainty in outdoor
temperature is taken into account. The hardware hosting
the controller is a standard computer with 8GB of RAM
and Intel Core i7 processor. A Mini-ITX system secures
low
energy
profile.
The
controller
also
manages
illumination and humidity. These extensions, which are
included in the prototype, are not presented here. First, the
three main control requirements enabling this overall
achievement are outlined, and then, the proposed solution
is exposed.
A.
Goal-directed planning with continuous effect
The controller should allow residents to specify desired
ranges of room temperature (i.e., state constraints in a
continuous domain) as well as their schedule (i.e.,
temporal constraints). Concisely, the control must be able
to execute plans with time-evolved goals, which are
specified as a sequence of state and temporal constraints.
Then, it must optimally adjust the operation of windows
and the HVAC system, so that the specified constraints are
satisfied.
B.
Optimal Planning
While guaranteeing that the time evolved goals are
achieved, the controller should also minimize the use of
non-renewable energy consumption.
C.
Robust planning with risk bounds
Optimal plan execution is susceptible to risk when
uncertainty is introduced. The house, involves a risk of
failure to maintain the room temperature within a specified
range due to unexpected climate changes. In the winter,
when the residents are absent, the energy consumption can
be minimized by turning off the heating. But, this involves
a risk that the pipes may freeze. Such risks must be limited
to acceptable levels specified by the residents. The plan
executive guarantees that the system is able to operate
within these bounds. Such constraints are called chance
constraints.
D.
Proposed Solution: p-Sulu
The
proposed
solution
[13]
to
overcome
these
challenges is a newly developed robust plan executive
called p-Sulu. Previous research [14] presents the risk-
sensitive finite-horizon planner, called p-Sulu planner,
which has the three capabilities. However, p-Sulu planner
is an off-line planner, meaning that it pre-plans the control
sequence for the entire plan duration. The off-line planner
could not possibly control the Sustainable Connected
Home due to two technical challenges. First, the house
must be operated continuously with no interruptions, while
p-Sulu planner can plan only for a finite time duration.
Second, building control requires frequent re-planning
every few seconds, while p-Sulu planner's solution time is
typically on the order of minutes. For example, a simple
path planning problem with only 10 time steps takes about
30 seconds to solve [14]. Moreover, the computation time
of p-Sulu planner varies widely from problem to problem.
To overcome the first challenge a receding horizon
control approach was adopted. At each planning cycle, a
planning problem is solved with a finite duration, which is
called a horizon. In the next planning cycle, the planning
problem is solved again over a horizon with the same
duration starting from the current time (hence, the horizon
is “receding”), by considering the latest observation of
uncertain parameters. This re-planning process is repeated
with a fixed time interval. The second challenge was faced
by building upon an anytime algorithm for chance-
constrained programming, called Iterative Risk Allocation
(IRA) [8]. IRA was originally developed for path planning
problems without time-evolved goals [8]. The proposed
approach extends IRA to deal with time-evolved goals.
p-Sulu RH takes as an input a plan representation
called
a
chance-constrained
qualitative
state
plan
(CCQSP), which encodes both time-evolved goals and
chance constraints [14]. The goal is to find a control
sequence, which is an assignment to real-valued control
variables, as well as a schedule, which is an assignment of
discrete execution time to events.
An advantage of p-Sulu over existing deterministic
plan executives is that it can explicitly consider a
stochastic plan model, which specifies probabilistic state
transitions in a continuous domain in the following form:
xt+1 = Atxt + Btut + wt
where xt is a continuous state vector at time t, ut is a
continuous control vector at t, and wt is a disturbance
whose probability distribution is known.
A chance-constrained qualitative state plan (CCQSP)
is a four-tuple P = (Є, A, T, C) where Є is a set of discrete
events, A is a set of episodes, T is a set of temporal
constraints, and C is a set of chance constraints.
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

An example of a resident schedule for a day is
presented in Figure 5 as a chance constrained qualitative
state plan or CCQSP, while the state space of the same
graph appears in Figure 6.
Figure 5.
An acylic directed graph depicting the resident's schedule in
the sample planning problem for the Connected Sustaianble Home
Figure 6.
The state space of the previous graph based on the 3 specified
ranges Home, Asleep, and Away.
The schedule is described first in plain English, as
follows:
"Maintain a comfortable sleeping temperature until I
wake up. Then, maintain room temperature until I go to
work. I may work at home, but I have to do 5 hours of
work at the office sometime between 9 am and 6 pm. No
temperature constraints while I am away. When I get
home, maintain room temperature until I go to sleep. The
probability of failure of these episodes must be less than
1%. The entire time, make sure the house doesn't get so
cold that the pipes freeze. Limit the probability of such a
failure to 0.01%."
At any time, the schedule confines a temperature range
to maintain over some duration. In the experiments, it was
assumed that a resident can specify one of 3 ranges: Home,
Asleep, and Away. In actuality, one is able to select any
number of temperature ranges. It was assumed that the
temperature must remain between 20° and 25° C while the
resident was at Home, between 18° and 22° C while
Asleep, and between 4° and 35° C while Away, to ensure
that the pipes would not freeze. Home and Asleep
episodes, were associated to a single chance constraint
class, with risk bound 10 %. This is the risk the resident is
willing
to
take
that
the
temperature
may
become
uncomfortable. Away episodes were associated to a single
chance constraint class with risk bound 0.01 %. This is the
acceptable risk by the resident that the pipes may freeze.
The above schedule was tested on a simulation setting
[15]. Two baseline models were compared with the
proposed controller p-Sulu: (a) a PID was used to illustrate
the energy savings of a model-predictive controller
compared to a traditional heating controller, and (b) Sulu,
the deterministic predecessor to p-Sulu, was used to
illustrate the robustness of p-Sulu. The initiating stage of
the PID controller was 21° C. The planning was based on
the resident schedule graph spanning a week. Then,
uncertainty wt is introduced and the plan is executed in a
stochastic simulation. Each controller was evaluated on the
basis of energy savings and percentage of executions that
fail because of constraint violations.
The next figures illustrate the results of a stochastic
simulation over two different days in the year, January 1
(Figure 7) and July 1 (Figure 8). It should be noticed that
the deterministic predecessor Sulu of the newly proposed
controller plans right up to the edge of the constraints,
often violating constraints when uncertainty is introduced,
while p-Sulu leaves a margin of the stochastic simulation.
Figure 7.
Results for PID, Sulu, and p-Sulu controllers on January 1.
p-Sulu controller appears in blue line.
Figure 8.
Results for PID, Sulu, and p-Sulu controllers on July 1.
p-Sulu controller appears in blue line.
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Table 2.
Comparison of energy use and failure rate of the PID, Sulu,
and p-Sulu controllers over a week-long schedule in all four seasons.
Failure rate is measured as the percentage of time steps with constraint
violations.
Table 2 presents the results on the weeklong scenario,
averaged over 100 Monte Carlo trials each. Notice that the
failure rate of p-Sulu is actually significantly lower than
the risk bound. Out of the 200 trials of Sulu in the winter
159 failed to complete due to infeasibility. Of the 41 trials
that completed, every single one had constraint violations
on at least 31 of the 168 time steps of the plan. All trials of
Sulu in the summer failed due to infeasibility.
Furthermore, the results illustrate that although the PID
controller did not violate temperature constraints, the Sulu
and
p-Sulu
performed
drastically
better
in
energy
consumption. While p-Sulu sacrificed some energy savings
compared to Sulu, these loses were met with drastic
improvements in robustness.
As a measure of comfort, one may compare the trials
that completed and consider the fraction of time steps on
which a constraint was violated. Table 2 shows that out of
the 168 time steps, Sulu violated constraints on 29.7% of
time steps in the winter, 30.8% in the spring, and 33.4% in
the autumn. Only a single trial of p-Sulu violated a single
constraint in winter. All other seasons, all trials satisfied all
temperature constraints. Using constraint violations as a
measure of success, the approach of p-Sulu outperforms
the deterministic approach of Sulu on every trial. Averaged
across all trials, p-Sulu exhibits a difference of 30.88% in
improvement in comfort over Sulu.
These results illustrate how critical risk-sensitive
control
is
in
guaranteeing
resident
comfort
and
encouraging the adoption of the technology. A control
system that produces uncomfortable conditions 30% of the
time would quickly be abandoned by the users.
VI.
DISCUSSION
Programmable materials and AI methods to building
control can be used to enhance sustainable living in
buildings. This paper addresses the designing of smart
windows at residential scale. The aim and functionality of
windows are revisited with a view to integrate innovative
building materials and control solutions.
The features of a programmable façade for a prototype
house were discussed. These features, rest on the capacity
to monitor and modify the state of each individual window
in real time. Each windowpane is an overlay of two
electronically switchable, variable transmission materials.
The first, electrochromic layer, provides the desirable
degree of sunlight penetration, securing sunlight and
thermal performance. The second, polymer dispersed
liquid crystal (PDLC) layer, provides the desirable degree
of visibility, securing privacy. At the global level, the
windows are directed by a central control system, without
having interference among them. At the local level, each
window is using low-level intelligence, software and
custom electronics that enable the activation of its
switchable materials.
An autonomous control system aiming at optimizing
the long-term energy performance of the house enables the
management of the programmable materials of the façade.
The control compiles data related to the seasonal levels of
light and heat, and real time feedback from sensors, to
reprogram the state of the façade, in order to take
advantage of the sun and to minimize energy use. Hence,
the façade functions as a responsive component, admitting
natural light, heat, and air, as needed. And further, the
adjustments of the façade transform how the house is
perceived from the public street.
Windows are typically operable building components
that are crucial to the good thermal performance of
buildings. Windows had evolved from holes covered with
cloth, mullioned glass, or paper, to modern-style floor-to-
ceiling curtain walls, sealed with industrial glass. Today,
responsive materials and AI control methods promise to
add new dynamics to the functionality and the aesthetics of
windows.
The "smart window" offers a new basis to rethink the
role of windows in buildings. It combines environmentally
responsible design with inventive technology, and it points
to new ways of improving the interaction among people.
The
reprogramming
of
a
smart
window
enables
autonomous, responsive and interactive behaviors, while
taking into account not only functionality, but also social
and cultural aspects. Smart windows re-establish some
familiar attributes of traditional windows in the digital age.
For
example,
modern-style
floor-to-ceiling
glass
curtain walls backed with constant artificial lighting,
heating, ventilating and air-conditioning, were aiming to
secure air-and-sound sealed interior environments. These
conventions of performance no longer apply, since the use
of artificial cooling and heating is energy intensive. At the
social level, modern curtain walls were restraining human
behavior by confining people strictly "inside" or "outside"
of a building.
The flexible modes of use of the dynamic façade range
from moderation of view and air for each window, to
privacy control, personalized daylight or shade, and
ultimately personal communication and self-expression.
Except from its function as interior climate regulator, the
façade operates as a responsive mediator between private
and public domain.
It is likely that in the future, interactive building
components, will give rise to new conceptions of space,
and eventually to "new architectures", where people will
become
engaged
with
their
environments
in
novel
emotional, social and intellectual modes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
research
was
conducted
within
the
Green
Connected Home Alliance between the Mobile Experience
Lab, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the
Fondazione Bruno Kessler in Trento, Italy
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

REFERENCES
[1]
E. S. Lee, D. L. Di Bartolomeo, J. H. Klems, M. Yazdanian
and S. E.Selkowitz, 2006, “Monitored energy performance
or electrochromic windows for daylighting and visual
comfort”,
ASHRAE
Summer
Meeting,
Quebec
City,
Canada.
[2]
T. Hausler, U. Fischer, M. Rottmann and K. H. Heckner,
2003, “Solar optical properties and daylight potential of
electrochromic windows, International Lighting and Colour
Conference, Capetown.
[3]
S.
Selkowitz,
O.
Aschehoug
and
E.
S.
Lee,
2003,
“Advanced interactive facades – critical elements for future
buildings?”, presented at USGBC expo.
[4]
J. Mardaljevic, L. Heschong and E. S. Lee, “Daylight
metrics and Energy savings”, Lighting Research and
Technology, 2009 41:261.
[5]
A. E. D. Mady, G. M. Provan, C. Ryan, and K. N. Brown,
2011. "Stochastic model predictive controller for the
integration of building use", Proceedings of Twenty-Fifth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-11),
Special Track on Computational Sustainability and AI.
[6]
J. Z. Kolter, and J. Ferreira, 2011, "A large-scale study on
predicting and contextualizing building energy usage",
Proceedings
of
Twenty-Fifth
AAAI
Conference
on
Artificial
Intelligence
(AAAI-12),
Special
Track
on
Computational Sustainability and AI.
[7]
H. Li, and B. C. Williams, 2011, "Hybrid planning with
temporally extended goals for sustainable ocean observing",
Proceedings
of
Twenty-Fifth
AAAI
Conference
on
Artificial
Intelligence
(AAAI-11),
Special
Track
on
Computational Sustainability and AI.
[8]
M. Ono, and B. C. Williams, 2008, "An efficient motion
planning algorithm for stochastic dynamic systems with
constraints on probability of failure", Proceedings of the
Twenty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI-08).
[9]
T. Leaute, and B. C. Williams, 2005, "Coordinating agile
systems through the model-based execution of temporal
plans", Proceedings of the Twentieth National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).
[10] F. Gugliermetti, and F. Bisegna, 2003, “Visual energy
management of electrochromic windows in Mediterranean
Climates”, Building Environment, 479-492.
[11] J. Wienold, 2007, “Dynamic simulation of blind control
strategies for visual comfort an energy balance analysis”,
International
Building
Performance
Simulation
Association, Beijing, China, 1197-1204.
[12] S. Kotsopoulos, G. Cara, W. Graybill, and F. Casalegno,
2012,
"The
dynamic
facade
pattern
grammar",
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[13] M. Ono, W. Graybill, and B. C. Williams, 2012, Risk-
sensitive plan execution for Sustainable Connected Home,
Proceedings of AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI-12), Special Track on Computational Sustainability
and AI, (in review)
[14] M. Ono, 2012, Robust, Goal-directed Plan Execution with
Bounded Risk. Ph.D. Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
[15] W. Graybill, 2012, Robust, Goal-Directed Planning and
Plan Recognition for the Sustainable Control of Homes.
Master's Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Figure 9.
Visualization of electrochromic patterns on the south façade of the prototype house, as percieved from the exterior and the interior.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

