Stability Improvement Solution of the Smart Power Grid by an Analysis of Voltage      
Variation in Intelligent Buildings                                                             
 
Abid Ahmad Khan, Torsten Wiens and Michael Massoth 
Department of Computer Science 
 Hochschule Darmstadt — University of Applied Sciences, Germany 
{abid.a.khan | torsten.wiens | michael.massoth}@h-da.de 
 
Abstract — This paper describes an approach to minimize the 
uneven effect of voltage and power in smart buildings and on 
electrical networks. The analysis is performed by considering 
diverse scenarios in smart power grids. The idea is to calculate 
the actual power consumption and power reserves of selected 
Smart Homes. In a second step, the effect of voltage variation 
on intelligent buildings and on electrical networks is 
investigated. In the last part, the control application of Next 
Generation Network (NGN) and stationary storages for 
improving the stability, especially those with a high percentage 
of in-feeds from renewable energy sources (RES) are discussed 
and evaluated. We consider intelligent buildings or Smart 
Homes based on Next Generation Network (NGN) components. 
The NGN components are applied as a communication and 
integration platform between the smart phone of smart home 
owners, the home automation and building control system as 
well as the energy suppliers of the smart power grid. Smart 
Home appliances based on the KNX bus, the Session Initiation 
Protocol (SIP) and the Presence Service are used to build a 
well performing and scalable system based on open source 
software.  
Keywords - Energy Management, Home Automation;Smart 
Power Grid, NGN, Presence Service. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Intelligent power grids are the core of the future power 
supply. As a part of smart cities, smart buildings (facilities 
or houses), smart appliances, smart thermostats, smart 
meters, real-time dynamic pricing and next-day energy 
information feedback to electricity users play an important 
role in this intelligent management infrastructure. Every part 
of our environment will be connected to each other and can 
be controlled with the given rights from central points, and 
to exchange both energy and information. The actual 
intelligence is the IT-supported structure and control tactics 
especially to match fluctuating Smart Grids, which are 
supposed to guarantee stable power supplies within the 
European Norms. For the stability of a system with a Smart 
Grid, there are two main criteria: First, the generation has to 
match the demand at any time and has to hold a reserve 
(battery storage) for immediate outages. Second, the grid 
has to provide sufficient capacity for the voltage stability at 
every portion. According to our particular status and main 
problems, all countries need to simplify the Smart cities and 
adjust it to fit their own features. The purpose and relevance 
of this paper is to describe energy management mechanisms 
and tactics that include manual and automated control of 
equipment from uncertain energy sources, and to investigate 
various issues regarding energy instabilities of the smart 
building systems. In our consideration, our Smart Homes 
make use of Next Generation Network technologies (NGN), 
based on the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and the 
Presence Service [1]. By this way, a near-real-time push 
solution is realized, using the IP Multimedia Subsystem 
(IMS) to remotely monitor and control Home Automation 
systems via mobile devices with open source software. This 
is described in our previous work [1][2]. According to the 
latest report by GTM Research, the U.S. home energy 
management market is forecasted to be worth over 4 billion 
USD by 2017[3]. This forecast shows the business 
opportunities and relevance of the proposed document for 
home control and energy management services. According 
to this source, the sectors with the biggest potential for 
saving energy are buildings and mobility. 
II. 
STRUCTURE OF THE PAPER 
Following the introduction, Section III shows related 
work for the suitability of our previous idea to apply a 
control solution based upon NGN technology. In Section IV, 
the general concept is outlined and important use cases are 
presented. The overall system design is described in Section 
V. The calculation is discussed and evaluated in Sections VI 
and VII. The components used to analyze the solution are 
presented in Section VIII. Section IX concludes the paper 
and gives an outlook of future work. 
III. 
RELATED  WORK  
Many companies and institutions are working on 
solutions for energy efficient management for buildings. In 
our previous work, [1], [2], [13], [17], we presented the 
detailed idea and hands-on work on operational tools and 
calculation experiments done on our prototype. The primary 
idea is to connect the technology of Next Generation 
Networks (NGN) to Smart Homes. The next step is to use 
SIP with all its benefits as the main communication protocol 
and connect it with a bus system standard, in this case KNX 
[4]. For the home appliances (sensors, actors), a signaling 
gateway between the KNX home automation and building 
control system [5] and SIP, allowing communication of 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

mobile devices with KNX sensors/actors using existing SIP 
infrastructure, is applied.  
The focus of this document is to analyze the 
instability of NGN based smart homes
today’s power system requirements; it is the upholding of the 
voltage regulation within the permitted voltage range in 
distribution grids on the low voltage and middle voltage 
level. The consumption of electrical power causes the 
voltage to drop at the junction point of the smart buildings
whereas injection of power will make it rise. This overshoot
and-dip-effect increases with the power and the distance of 
the smart buildings to the substation. If the voltage drop or 
rise gets too high, the distribution system operator has to take 
counter measures. This is because the end users
and electrical devices are designed for a certain voltage 
range defined by European norms EN50160:2007 [16
amplitude of the supply voltage is defined in the N
given in Table I.    
TABLE I.  
TABLE I. AMPLITUDE OF S
  Voltage Magnitude 
  LV: U =230V
  MV: "by convention"
  Voltage Magnitude 
  variations 
  LV, MV: ±10% for 95% week
 
It is defined in these norms that the magnitude
voltage and high voltage should be in the given range
IV. 
USE CASES OF SMART
MANAGEMENT 
In this section, the uneven effect of two typical use cases 
of smart energy management, electric load 
regulating are discussed.  
A.  Use case (UC1): Insufficient or lack of renewable      
energy 
In our previous work [1], [2], we di
case (UC1), the power consumption and load in the city 
reaches its maximum level. During the sam
feed-in of renewable energy is diminishing 
e.g., because of wind calm or the lack of sun radiation. 
Figure 1 illustrates this situation. 
Figure 1. Maximum load scenario 
mobile devices with KNX sensors/actors using existing SIP 
o analyze the power 
instability of NGN based smart homes. In order to meet 
is the upholding of the 
voltage regulation within the permitted voltage range in 
distribution grids on the low voltage and middle voltage 
. The consumption of electrical power causes the 
drop at the junction point of the smart buildings, 
injection of power will make it rise. This overshoot- 
effect increases with the power and the distance of 
the substation. If the voltage drop or 
rise gets too high, the distribution system operator has to take 
because the end users’ appliances 
and electrical devices are designed for a certain voltage 
50160:2007 [16]. The 
pply voltage is defined in the Norm and 
SUPPLY VOLTAGE 
LV: U =230V 
MV: "by convention" 
LV, MV: ±10% for 95% week 
magnitudes of the low 
voltage and high voltage should be in the given range. 
SMART ENERGY 
 
ffect of two typical use cases 
electric load balancing and 
Use case (UC1): Insufficient or lack of renewable      
we discussed that in use 
the power consumption and load in the city 
reaches its maximum level. During the same time frame, the 
in of renewable energy is diminishing to the minimum, 
because of wind calm or the lack of sun radiation. 
 
load scenario  
After further analysis on this topic
times of high load, the voltage at the terminals mig
below 0.9 p. u. (red line) equivalent to 207
supplied or consumed voltage level 
European Norm EN50160:2007
with the power and the distance of the smart houses to the 
substation. If the voltage drop gets too high, the distribution 
system operator has to take counter measures
instrument to counteract this effect
changer transformers, because the end users appliances and 
electrical devices are designed for a certain voltage rang
defined by European Norm. This lack of electric power shall 
be balanced with an optimum approach at least partly by the 
intelligent buildings of the city. In order to do that
of energy is signaled by the power providers towards the 
owners of intelligent buildings in the city by means of usual 
communication technologies. The house owners can then 
react by turning off domestic appliances (e.g., 
set air conditioning units or heat pumps into eco
deactivate charging stations for electric cars and vehicles. 
Therefore, the energy supply within the city could be 
balanced in a better way by the swarm behavior of the 
intelligent consumers by de-activating power loads.
B. Use case (UC2): Surplus or excess of renewable 
energy 
In our previous work [1]
(UC2), the power consumption and load in the city reaches 
its lowest level. During the same time frame, the renewable 
energy is fed into the power grid at maximum 
of strong winds or strong sun radiation.
this situation. 
Figure 2. Low  load scenario
In times of high Photo voltaic (PV)
load, this is likely to occur in the morning hours
Voltaic (PV) injection shown here is just to sketch 
of getting more power from 
Injection of power may make the voltage 
up to 1.1 p.u. (red line), equivalent to 253
possible voltage violation according to European 
overshoot effect increases with the power and the distance of 
smart houses to the substation. If the voltage rise gets too 
high, the distribution system operator has to take counter 
After further analysis on this topic, we have found that in 
times of high load, the voltage at the terminals might fall 
equivalent to 207 V, which is a  
supplied or consumed voltage level violation according to 
EN50160:2007. This dip effect increases 
ith the power and the distance of the smart houses to the 
substation. If the voltage drop gets too high, the distribution 
system operator has to take counter measures. The typical 
instrument to counteract this effect is the application of tap-
because the end users appliances and 
electrical devices are designed for a certain voltage range 
. This lack of electric power shall 
optimum approach at least partly by the 
ity. In order to do that, the lack 
of energy is signaled by the power providers towards the 
owners of intelligent buildings in the city by means of usual 
communication technologies. The house owners can then 
off domestic appliances (e.g., white goods), 
or heat pumps into eco-mode and 
deactivate charging stations for electric cars and vehicles. 
Therefore, the energy supply within the city could be 
balanced in a better way by the swarm behavior of the 
activating power loads. 
Use case (UC2): Surplus or excess of renewable 
], [2], we also discussed that in 
the power consumption and load in the city reaches 
its lowest level. During the same time frame, the renewable 
energy is fed into the power grid at maximum levels because 
of strong winds or strong sun radiation. Figure 2 illustrates 
 
Low  load scenario 
Photo voltaic (PV) injection and low 
load, this is likely to occur in the morning hours. High Photo 
injection shown here is just to sketch the idea 
of getting more power from the grid to the consumer. 
make the voltage at the terminals rise 
equivalent to 253 V, which is also a 
tion according to European Norm. This 
overshoot effect increases with the power and the distance of 
t houses to the substation. If the voltage rise gets too 
high, the distribution system operator has to take counter 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

measures, because the end users appliances and electrical 
devices are designed for a certain voltage range
above). Again, this surplus or excess of electric power shall
be used with optimum approach by the intelligent buildings 
of the city. In order to do that, the surplus of energy is 
signaled by the energy suppliers towards the owners of 
intelligent buildings in the city. In this 
app is used. The house owners with 
application can react by turning on additional
such as domestic appliances (e.g., white goods, air 
conditioning units or heat pumps), as well as electric cars 
and vehicles. Also in this case, the energy supply within the 
city could be balanced by the swarm behavior of the 
intelligent consumers. 
V. 
CONCEPT AND OVERALL SYSTEM
The core concept is to minimize the uneven 
smart buildings on electrical networks a
power grid, by analyzing and controlling the
the intelligent buildings. The use of information technology 
allows to improve how the electricity travels from the power 
grid with power system stability to consumer consumption 
integration. The basic idea is to balance loads in power grids 
by using KNX-enabled Smart Homes and a communication 
infrastructure based on NGN technologies and the Presence 
Service. The advantages of Next Generation Networks are 
used to build a communication platform between mobile 
devices and an intelligent building with a Home Automation 
solution.  
Figure 3. Control system with smart loads 
Figure 4. Transmission from Grid to distribution network
measures, because the end users appliances and electrical 
devices are designed for a certain voltage range only (as 
surplus or excess of electric power shall 
be used with optimum approach by the intelligent buildings 
of the city. In order to do that, the surplus of energy is again 
signaled by the energy suppliers towards the owners of 
this case, a smart phone 
The house owners with a smart phone 
application can react by turning on additional power loads 
such as domestic appliances (e.g., white goods, air 
conditioning units or heat pumps), as well as electric cars 
, the energy supply within the 
city could be balanced by the swarm behavior of the 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
The core concept is to minimize the uneven effect of 
networks and on the smart 
controlling the load profile of 
The use of information technology 
how the electricity travels from the power 
grid with power system stability to consumer consumption 
alance loads in power grids 
enabled Smart Homes and a communication 
infrastructure based on NGN technologies and the Presence 
Service. The advantages of Next Generation Networks are 
ion platform between mobile 
devices and an intelligent building with a Home Automation 
 
Control system with smart loads L9.....L20 
Figure 3 depicts the smart loads and 
architecture. For simplicity, the 
20. To analyze the facts related to smart homes and power 
networks, an integrated engineering tool is used 
power system calculations. The following features are 
provided by “Dig SILENT Power Factory
designed as an advanced integrated and interactive
package dedicated to electrical power system and control 
analysis in order to achieve the main objectives of  plann
and operation optimization. 
load-flow, stability calculation and modal analysis. 
To design a Distribution model of 
network and a power grid, 
applied which include the external grid, transformers, bus
bars etc. (see Figure 4.) At first
voltage) was connected to the bus
bar was connected to a transformer (step
parameters being 120/20 k
connected to the bus-bar (B2).
kV (step-down), the high-voltage end 
and the low-voltage end connected to B3. A specific 
transmission line, one end connected to B3 and the other
to consumer (load), was set up, the
400V and 230 V Line-Ground. There 
houses and 23 normal houses
power factor 0.95 to bus-bar B3. The transmission line
is 5 km in length. The resistance value for each kilometer of 
B3 is 0.2215 Ohm, with a reactance of 0.037
voltage is applied to the transmission line (B3), due to 
different loads, the voltage sags from 400
voltage 343 V is not according to the E
According to the norms, 
magnitude variation 
of the 
reference 
voltage
distribution grid model consists 
three transformers 0.4 kV, four 
cell) and one motor (battery). E
could be 1 to n number of customers. Three transmission 
lines are connected to one bus
transformer (20/0.4 kV). The other two transmission lines are 
connected to a separate bus
another transformer (20/0.4 k
tasks: Energy balancing and operational control. Both tasks 
 
Transmission from Grid to distribution network and transmission from distribution to consumer 
smart loads and their control system 
the loads are named L 9, 10, 19, 
o analyze the facts related to smart homes and power 
ngineering tool is used for the 
. The following features are 
Dig SILENT Power Factory” [10]: It has  been 
designed as an advanced integrated and interactive software 
package dedicated to electrical power system and control 
ve the main objectives of  planning 
 Some of these functions are 
calculation and modal analysis.  
model of a smart home electrical 
 the following steps have been 
external grid, transformers, bus-
At first, an external grid (medium 
the bus-bar (B1). The specific bus-
a transformer (step-down), the 
kV. The low-voltage side was 
bar (B2). Transformer T1…T3.20/0.4 
voltage end was connected to B2, 
voltage end connected to B3. A specific 
transmission line, one end connected to B3 and the other end 
, was set up, the Line-Line voltage being 
Ground. There is a total of 12 smart 
houses and 23 normal houses, resp.  Loads (1.14 kW each), 
bar B3. The transmission line of B3 
th. The resistance value for each kilometer of 
reactance of 0.037 Ohm. When 
transmission line (B3), due to 
voltage sags from 400 V to 343 V. The 
V is not according to the European norms. 
 there can be ±10% voltage 
of the 
reference 
voltage. The 
consists of five transmission lines, 
, four photo voltaic generators (PV 
cell) and one motor (battery). Every load at the consumer 
1 to n number of customers. Three transmission 
lines are connected to one bus-bar, which is connected to one 
The other two transmission lines are 
a separate bus-bar, which is connected to 
kV). Now, there are mainly two 
tasks: Energy balancing and operational control. Both tasks 
ransmission from distribution to consumer end 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

are closely linked, since the power which is generated at 
different places and times in the grid mus
transported. According to the German Energy Industry Act, 
the power from internal Renewable Energy Sources (RES) 
generators must be evacuated [6]. For further coverage of 
30% RES, contracts for RES outside the grid have been 
made. However, forecast and reality do not always match
neither on the generation nor on the load side
VI. EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS OF THE OUTPUT PLO
The scenario being displayed in Figure 5
load connection. It shows a voltage dip after each 
 
 
Figure 5. Transmission line with max load smart homes
In Figure 6, the scenario being displayed 
Figure 6. Plot: Voltage drop across supply line, high load at terminals
Given that the voltage has dropped from 1 p.u to 0.97 
p.u, equivalent to 207V, at the end of the line
shows that when smart high load is connected on a 
transmission line, there will be a voltage drop at the 
consumer end and the effect is increasing when the distance 
to the substation is increasing. Line-to
Phase voltages are reducing drastically. At the end, the 
voltage variations are violating the Norms.
EN50160:2007, it should be within the 10% range
tap-changer transformers are used by distribution system 
operators as the typical instrument to counteract this effect. 
The technique is to choose another tap winding
voltage in the substation increases, 
terminal voltage. However, they can only be operated in 
load-less state which is a great disadvantage. 
supplied from the grid, the feed-in of renewable energy is 
diminishing to the minimum and the consumer 
load state. The voltage at the transmission
which has to be improved to a standard according to the 
Norms. Electrical appliances can be damaged if the voltage 
levels are not kept within the Norms. The electrical 
appliances at households cannot bear such decreases in 
voltage. More current will be drawn by
are closely linked, since the power which is generated at 
d must be evacuated and 
to the German Energy Industry Act, 
the power from internal Renewable Energy Sources (RES) 
For further coverage of 
30% RES, contracts for RES outside the grid have been 
forecast and reality do not always match, 
neither on the generation nor on the load side [11].  
IS OF THE OUTPUT PLOTS  
in Figure 5 shows the high 
voltage dip after each load. 
 
Transmission line with max load smart homes 
scenario being displayed is high load.  
 
Voltage drop across supply line, high load at terminals 
that the voltage has dropped from 1 p.u to 0.97 
at the end of the line. The graph 
shows that when smart high load is connected on a 
transmission line, there will be a voltage drop at the 
and the effect is increasing when the distance 
to-Line and Line-to-
Phase voltages are reducing drastically. At the end, the 
voltage variations are violating the Norms. According to 
t should be within the 10% range. Usually, 
changer transformers are used by distribution system 
ors as the typical instrument to counteract this effect. 
another tap winding, so that the 
 also affecting the 
they can only be operated in 
less state which is a great disadvantage. If the voltage is 
in of renewable energy is 
and the consumer is in the high 
. The voltage at the transmission line is decreased 
andard according to the 
lectrical appliances can be damaged if the voltage 
levels are not kept within the Norms. The electrical 
appliances at households cannot bear such decreases in 
by appliances, causing 
more expenses and affect
appliances. In the following, 
(PV) injection scenario is described (Figure
connected to bus-bar B3 (0.4
connected via a generator to smart houses.
 
Figure 7. Transmission line with surplus power smart homes
In Figure 8, the scenario being displayed 
of in-feed, high Photo voltaic (PV
Figure 8. Plot: High Photo voltaic (PV)
Figure 8 shows the results, in which
from 1.0 p.u to 1.10 p.u equivalent to 253 V, at the end of 
the line. Due to the power injection by the generators (PV 
panels) on the specific loads
generator, the effect will be distributed and the voltage is 
increased after every kilometer. Due to this injection of 
power, the transmission line voltage went high. 
voltage shows an overshoot from norma
violating the Norms, when excess power is available. 
compensation should be made.
generators (roof of house) are replaced with asynchronous 
generators, just to implement the idea. The active power of 
each generator is 0.0045 MW, the reactive 
MVAr, and the consumer is considered 
the voltage is now supplied 
injection is applied with the consumer
the voltage at the transmission line is increased (overshoot), 
which has to be lowered to a standard according to the 
Norms. The electrical appliances at households cannot bear 
such increase in voltage. D
appliances. Also, the efficiency of these appliances
affected. 
VII. CALCULATION AND  
The purpose of this calculation is to find the actual power 
which is needed to minimize the uneven effect of our smart 
houses, so an optimal control and 
can be applied. Voltages with 
Concerning the given voltage magnitude variations, the 
and affecting the efficiency of these 
In the following, the second high Photo voltaic 
is described (Figure 7). Each load is 
bar B3 (0.4 kV). Every alternate load is 
enerator to smart houses. 
 
Transmission line with surplus power smart homes 
he scenario being displayed is high integration 
high Photo voltaic (PV) injection. 
 
igh Photo voltaic (PV) generation violates voltage criteria 
, in which the voltage increases 
from 1.0 p.u to 1.10 p.u equivalent to 253 V, at the end of 
ue to the power injection by the generators (PV 
cific loads, which are connected to that 
the effect will be distributed and the voltage is 
kilometer. Due to this injection of 
power, the transmission line voltage went high. The system 
voltage shows an overshoot from normal range, therefore 
orms, when excess power is available. Then, 
made. The Photovoltaic (PV) 
(roof of house) are replaced with asynchronous 
just to implement the idea. The active power of 
each generator is 0.0045 MW, the reactive Power is 0 
and the consumer is considered to be a household. If 
supplied by the grid and the generator 
injection is applied with the consumer having less load state, 
he voltage at the transmission line is increased (overshoot), 
which has to be lowered to a standard according to the 
Norms. The electrical appliances at households cannot bear 
Damage can be caused to the 
the efficiency of these appliances can be 
ALCULATION AND  EVALUATION 
of this calculation is to find the actual power 
which is needed to minimize the uneven effect of our smart 
optimal control and balancing technique [1] 
ith U=230V are used as reference. 
the given voltage magnitude variations, the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

admissible voltage range for the LV consumer 
ULV < 253 V. The terminal voltage is subject to the line 
impedance R, X and the apparent power, as shown 
9.
Figure 9: Equivalent circuit of supply line with line impedance
 
Figure 9 shows the equivalent circuit of a supply line 
with the voltage U0 at the substation and UL at the junction 
point to the load. The apparent power S 
and flowing towards the junction point. The voltage 
drops across the line impedance ZL = RL
defined as [12]: 
 
           
Figure 10 shows the voltage across a supply line in the 
low voltage grid. The flow of the active power P is directed 
from the MV-Grid downwards through the MV/LV 
transformer, over a stub line towards the customers
following, a calculation of different scena
high/low PV injection) is presented. 
 
Figure 10. Single line distribution
 
Apparent  power: 	   
   ⋅    
Let Q = 0, then S = P. Number of smart 
P/Customer = 1.14  ⋅  12   13.68
Voltage at Load:        
Deference Voltage  =   
 
Voltage  at  Customer End:  = ? 
Supply Voltage  = 230V  Line-Earth               
P [W] = U [V] ⋅ I [A] 
 
 
Current: I =  

 = 13.68 kW / 230 V  
I = 0.0594 kA = 59.4 A  
 
Change in Voltage:     ⋅    
admissible voltage range for the LV consumer is 207 V < 
V. The terminal voltage is subject to the line 
dance R, X and the apparent power, as shown in Figure 
 
: Equivalent circuit of supply line with line impedance 
shows the equivalent circuit of a supply line 
with the voltage U0 at the substation and UL at the junction 
 = P + jQ is injected 
and flowing towards the junction point. The voltage ∆U 
RL + jXL and can be 
  ! 
(1) 
shows the voltage across a supply line in the 
low voltage grid. The flow of the active power P is directed 
Grid downwards through the MV/LV 
transformer, over a stub line towards the customers. In the 
of different scenarios (high/low load,    
line distribution 
 
(2) 
smart loads = 12.  
68                  
(3) 
 
 
 
 
arth                
                   
 
 
(4) 
 
 
(5) 
   ⋅   
 
 
      j ⋅Xk 
 
Resistance = 0.207 Ω / km,                                        
Reactance  ! =  0.0804  Ω
    √0.5748     0.758155
    ⋅      59.4 ⋅  3
 Calculations of specific power
     ⋅      ⋅    
         230* –

,-   4.83 ⋅   59.4   286
 This power is needed to stabilize
(Figure 11).  
Figure 11.Unloaded Transmission line  
Calculation of the excessive and deficit of power as follows
      230 *  205 * 
      230 *  253 * 
Figure 12 defines the balanced l
and high load scenarios are
reducing power. 
Figure 12. Stabilized Voltage scenario
VIII. COMPONENTS
The following section introduces the components which 
are needed for the proposed analysis and calculation. 
following parts of the workspace are visible: 
grid (Figure 13) is fed by an external grid element.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
,                                        
Ω/km, Distance = 5 km.  
758155 ⋅  5   3.79 Ω  
(6) 
3.79   225.17 *    
(7) 
pecific power:  
 
 
 
 
–  225.17 *   4.83 *  
286.9  
(8) 
to stabilize the transmission line 
            
Unloaded Transmission line   
Calculation of the excessive and deficit of power as follows:    
 25 *   
  1.485     
(9)  
 23 *  
  1.366 kW   (10)  
alanced load profile. Low load 
are balanced by increasing or 
 
Stabilized Voltage scenario 
COMPONENTS 
The following section introduces the components which 
are needed for the proposed analysis and calculation. The 
ts of the workspace are visible: The distribution 
is fed by an external grid element. The 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

transmission grid has a load element in the middle which 
represents the distribution grid, as depicted by the red arrow.
 
Figure 13. Transmission grid single line diagram
In order to connect the two grids, we have to remove the 
external net object in the distribution grid, and 
load element in the transmission grid.  
 
Figure 14. Transformer connected to the single busbar system
To create a 110/33 kV transformer and 
110 kV double bus bar system with the 33 kV bus bar.
terminals (bus bars) of the substations are to be connected 
with two winding transformers to draw the first transformer
the upper terminal at the position is 
background pattern.  
The transformer is now connected
terminal at that position. The middle terminal make
second connection (see Figures 14 and 15)
C. Performing a Load Flow Calculation 
A load flow calculation may be started from the main 
menu. For this load flow, the following options 
set: Calculation Method = AC Load Flow, balanced, positive 
sequence. All other options on the basic options page
be disabled [10]. 
load element in the middle which 
represents the distribution grid, as depicted by the red arrow. 
 
Transmission grid single line diagram 
In order to connect the two grids, we have to remove the 
external net object in the distribution grid, and the middle 
 
Transformer connected to the single busbar system                    
create a 110/33 kV transformer and to connect the 
110 kV double bus bar system with the 33 kV bus bar. The 
terminals (bus bars) of the substations are to be connected 
o draw the first transformer, 
is suggested by the 
transformer is now connected graphically to the 
middle terminal makes the 
(see Figures 14 and 15).  
 
A load flow calculation may be started from the main 
For this load flow, the following options need to be 
Calculation Method = AC Load Flow, balanced, positive 
ll other options on the basic options page need to 
Figure 15. Two Winding Transformer Connection
The load flow calculation is not executed to resolve the 
error, one should first find the element for which the 
was reported. With the Power Factory output window, 
error can be corrected and the load flow calculated again.
 
Figure 16. Results of the
 
Then, the calculation shows that the load flow solving 
algorithm has found one area (separated area) in the whole 
system and chosen the external grid element as 
element. The single line graphic 
results of the load flow in the resul
IX. 
CONCLUSION
The presented solution enables to analy
effect of smart houses under 
and low voltage, when they are
standard of the EU Norms. Our results evaluate the 
following important conclusions: 
In case of high load and lack of power, and in case of 
excessive power and low load
certain amount of power which can balance the effect
could be done by reducing or raising the load with our load 
management and control solution.
 
Two Winding Transformer Connection 
The load flow calculation is not executed to resolve the 
first find the element for which the error 
was reported. With the Power Factory output window, the 
can be corrected and the load flow calculated again. 
 
Results of the  load  flow  calculation 
calculation shows that the load flow solving 
algorithm has found one area (separated area) in the whole 
system and chosen the external grid element as a reference 
element. The single line graphic in Figure 16 shows the 
results of the load flow in the result boxes.                                
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The presented solution enables to analyze the uneven 
nder the conditions of high voltage 
when they are not according to the given 
U Norms. Our results evaluate the 
following important conclusions:  
In case of high load and lack of power, and in case of 
excessive power and low load, we have to manage the 
which can balance the effect. This 
reducing or raising the load with our load 
management and control solution. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

According to our previous work, there is a need of a fully 
automated appropriate control and load management 
application with near-real-time push properties, which can 
respond in real time. This methodic approach could balance 
the existing smart buildings. Advancements are required in 
the existing power management systems [18]. 
An interesting alternative is the integration of battery 
backup systems. Already a proven technology for 
uninterrupted power supply (UPS) units, they become 
increasingly interesting for applications in power systems. 
They cannot only be used for energy balancing purposes, but 
can also serve as primary and secondary control reserve. 
Actually, this concept is not new: A battery-based system 
was built in Germany for voltage and frequency stabilization 
for the supply of the island network used in West Berlin 
1986. The 17 MW plant / 14 MWh [13] was to going 
through an entire charge and discharge cycle twice per day.. 
Keeping in view of the fact if emerging renewable energy 
sources act as separate generation, they cannot balance the 
existing energy demand [14]. It is necessary that RES will be 
integrated in the existing power grid. Due to this integration, 
the power demands will be balanced at the peak time 
duration in the grids. This idea will be addressed in future 
work. 
The software being used in this work is a limited version 
in which only small networks can be analyzed. For future 
work, voltage variations are to be looked upon at larger 
scales.  This will be done with an extended version of the 
software, allowing designing a whole city grid model. The 
number of transmission lines will be increased as well as the 
number of parameters for the distribution grid. Thus, we will 
have the knowledge to give an intelligent idea within this 
remarkable field of study.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been performed within the project “Smart 
Home Control” at Hochschule Darmstadt (University of 
Applied Sciences). The authors would like to acknowledge 
the support of the Energy Lab at the University for Access to 
the Dig Silent software and Albrecht JUNG GmbH & Co. 
KG for their contribution of KNX actors, sensors and other 
KNX home automation devices and kind support.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Massoth and T.Wiens, “Trustful interaction between intelligent 
building control and Energy suppliers of the smart power Grid". In: 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on smart system, 
devices and technology (SMART 2013),  IARIA, 2013. 
[2] M. Massoth et al., “Ubiquitous Smart Grid Control Solution based on 
a Next Generation Network as Integration Platform”. In: Proceedings 
of the 1st International Conference on Smart Grids, Green 
Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies (ENERGY 
2011), IARIA, 2011.  
[3] Greentech Media, Home Energy Management Systems.  [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.greentechmedia.com/research/report/ 
home-energy-management-systems-2013-2017 2014.05.01 
[4] Android. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.android.com 
2014.05.06. 
[5] KNXAssociation, KNX Standard. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.knx.org/knx-standard/standardisation 2014.05.06. 
[6] Bundesministerium des Inneren, Energiewirtschaftsgesetz. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/ 
bundesrecht/ Energy Act _[2005]/gesamt.pdf 2014.05.06. 
[7] P. Kundur and J. Paserb, “Definition and Classification of Power 
System Stability”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 19. 
pp. 1387-1401, Aug 2004. 
[8] AsianPower & EnergyFront, China challenging smart grid. [Online]. 
Available from: http://my.reset.jp/~adachihayao/indexE100319.htm 
2014.05.06. 
[9] G. M. Shafiullah, Potential challenges: Integrating renewable energy 
with the SmartGrid. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Universities Power 
Engineering Conference (AUPEC), 2010.  
[10] Dig Silent, Dig Silent Power Factory, version 14.23 software. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.digsilent.de/ 2014.05.06. 
[11] AsianPower & EnergyFront, Smart Grid. [Online]. Available from: 
http://my.reset.jp/~adachihayao/indexE100319.htm 2014.05.06. 
[12] L. Petry, “Renewable energies - Master of Electrical Engineering 
(Power)”. University of Applied Sciences Darmstadt,  2011. 
[13] T. H. Fiedler, “Mobile and Immobile Components in Modern Power 
Grids for Improving Stability”. Faculty of Electrical Engineering, 
IOSUD, 2010. 
[14] M. Liserre, T. Sauter and J. Y. Hung, “Future Energy Systems: 
Integrating Renewable Energy Sources into the Smart Power Grid 
through Industrial Electronics”, Industrial Electronics Magazine 
(IEEE), vol 4, issue 1, 2010. 
[15] tED 
magazine, 
Special 
Report. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.tedmag.com/news/news-room/special-report/Special- 
Report/Special-Report-[1-22-20098].aspx 2014.05.06. 
[16] Deutsches Institut für Normung, DIN EN 50160  [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.leonardo-energy.org/good-practice-guide/standard-
en-50160 
energy.org/repository/Library/PQGuide/5.Voltage%20Disturbances/5
.4.2%20Standard %20EN50160.pdf 2014.05.06. 
[17] T. Fiedler, D. Metz, P.-M. Mircea and I. Mircea, “Planning and 
Training Tools for Intelligent Power Systems”. In: Proceedings of the 
MedPower Conference, Thessaloniki, Greece, 2008. 
[18] Task Force on HarrnonicS Modeling and Shulation, “Modeling and 
simulation of the propagation of harmonics in electric power 
networks: Part 1: Concepts, models, and simulation techniques.”, 
IEEE Transactions  on Power Delivery, vol. 11, 1996, pp. 452–465. 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

