Developing a Sustainable and Transferable Visitor Information System 2.0 with the 
Internet of Things - A Prototype 
Dominik Visca, Max Hoppe, Pascal Neis 
Department of Technology 
Mainz University of Applied Sciences 
Mainz, Germany 
emails: dominik.visca@hs-mainz.de, max.hoppe@hs-mainz.de, pascal.neis@hs-mainz.de 
 
Abstract— In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, there is a 
growing need for accurate information about the real-time 
flow of visitors in public buildings, such as schools or 
university campuses. Conventional monitoring methods, 
including entrance checks and wide-area cameras, face 
challenges in terms of technical complexity, public acceptance, 
and privacy concerns. This paper proposes an alternative 
solution based on Internet of Things (IoT) sensors to establish 
a visitor information system. The system leverages the concepts 
of smart city and smart campus design to create a more 
intelligent, 
connected 
environment. 
The 
system 
uses 
smartphones, wearable devices, and low-cost sensors to collect 
and transmit data packets via Wi-Fi or Bluetooth. The 
received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) is used to draw 
conclusions about the distance between the transmitter and 
receiver, enabling the system to locate visitors. Thus, this paper 
reflects the growing use of assistive applications in IoT 
scenarios in terms of spatial orientation systems, as well as for 
smart management systems.  
Keywords-IoT-based 
solution; 
smart 
campus; 
visitor 
information system; low-cost sensors; real-time information  
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Information about real-time visitors and circulation in 
public buildings, such as administrative or school buildings, 
has become increasingly important since the COVID19 
pandemic. However, especially for those premises that are 
larger, monitoring by controlling visitors at building 
entrances is insufficient to obtain reliable information on 
how visitors are allocated. Implementation by area-wide 
cameras is not considered to be effective, not only because of 
the high technical effort involved, but also due to acceptance 
problems and possible infringements of personal rights. 
The presented approach for a visitor information system 
is different, as it is based on the use of connected IoT 
(Internet of Things) sensors. It incorporates concepts of 
smart city and smart campus design.  
Urbanization has resulted in large populations gathering 
in metropolitan areas, requiring a smart management 
solution for issues, such as traffic, pollution, energy, waste, 
and security. In this sense, a campus can be considered a 
miniature version of a smart city. In terms of integrating 
technology and communication, this brings both new 
opportunities, as well as challenges [1].  
In order to provide fine-grained, but privacy-compliant 
position data for a visitor information system, not only 
established devices, such as smartphones or tablets are used, 
but also the growing number of so-called "wearables" (e.g., 
smartwatches, fitness bracelets, bluetooth headphones). 
These devices are capable of communicating with one-
another and exchanging information through standardized 
information technologies, often generating an enormous but 
unused amount of data. 
Before the components of the prototype are outlined in 
Section III, the following Section II introduces into sensors 
used. Section IV explains the web-dashboard in which the 
collected data is brought together. The paper ends in Section 
V with a conclusion and an outlook regarding future 
potentials. 
II. USING SENSORS TO CAPTURE INDIVIDUALS 
Various methods exist for measuring the number of 
individuals at a specific point in a building (e.g., entrance), 
room, or area (e.g., hallway). Wahl, Milenkovic, Amft [2], 
and Tsou et al. [3] used Passive Infrared Light (PIR) sensors 
and motion detectors, respectively, to count people and 
detect visitor flows in buildings. However, if there is not a 
sufficient number of motion sensors, this method will not 
provide reliable results for estimating on how many visitors 
are present. 
The smartphones and wearables mentioned above, by 
contrast, communicate via Bluetooth or Wi-Fi to each other 
or to available Wi-Fi access points, transmitting data packets 
to the area around them. Conversely, these data packets can 
also be used to capture people in close proximity. The 
received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) is an essential 
factor in detecting communication with devices nearby. 
Narvaez and Guerra [4], for example, have already shown 
that this can be used in order to maintain safety distances. 
The RSSI enables conclusions to be drawn about the distance 
between the transmitter and receiver. In combination, 
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi can also be used to locate people 
[5][6][7]. 
Single-Board Computers (SBCs) equipped with low-cost 
sensors can be utilized to collect these data packets. In this 
case, a Raspberry Pi 4 Model B with 8 GB RAM is used as 
the SBC. The sensors include Wireless Local Area Network 
(Wi-Fi) and Bluetooth (BLE) modules, and a PIR motion 
detector and a second Wi-Fi adapter. One Wi-Fi adapter is 
required for communication with the data link layer, while 
the second adapter is set into monitor mode. The sensor 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

setup also takes into account information from the indoor 
Wi-Fi or its controller interface.  
III. PROTOTYPE OF THE VISITOR INFORMATION SYSTEM 
The prototype was developed at Mainz University of 
Applied Science and consists of three components in its 
basic design: Client, Web Service(s) and Sensors. The 
detailed structure – see Figure 1 - with its individual 
components is shown below. The sensors used are either the 
SBCs outlined above or the controller interface of the indoor 
Wi-Fi network, which provides information about connected 
and logged-in devices per access point. A total of just over 
180 indoor and outdoor access points are available at Mainz 
University of Applied Sciences with its two campuses and 
one external building. 
Data management and storage of the values collected is 
handled via the Open Geospatial Consortium SensorThings 
API (OGC SensorThings API) [8]. The implementation of 
this standard is based on the Fraunhofer Open Source 
SensorThings API Server (FROST), which is freely available 
from the Fraunhofer IOSB. The background maps of the 
buildings, floors or rooms required in the web dashboard are 
integrated according to the OGC Web Map Service [9] and 
OGC Web Feature Service specifications [10]. The publicly 
available GeoServer of the non-profit Open Source 
Geospatial Foundation organization (OSGeo) is used for 
implementation. 
The 
geodata 
originates 
from 
the 
OpenStreetMap project (OSM) and was extended by the 
university's own floor plans. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture of the visitor information system.   
Furthermore, the information system is designed in order 
to generate the necessary knowledge on the basis of the 
differently collected measured values in an effort to be able 
to determine future projections on visitor numbers and 
allocation, as well as movement flows. This will be realized 
in a forecasting module - see Figure 1 - which has not yet 
been finalized. It is planned to implement a process via the 
OGC Web Processing specification [11], which recognizes 
patterns from the input data by applying machine learning 
methods in order to draw conclusions from the actual to its 
future utilization of a building’s capacity. This allows a 
smart building and visitor monitoring to be carried out. 
IV. WEB-DASHBOARD 
The data collected from the sensors and analysis results 
are combined in a web dashboard – see Figure 2 - for users 
(e.g., 
university 
management 
or 
students 
orienting 
themselves in the building).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Web-Dashboard of the visitor information system. 
Unlike existing systems, not only static but also real-time 
information for one or more buildings can be displayed. In 
addition to the number of people present in the buildings (or 
floors or rooms), the visualization of flows or hot spots is an 
alternative. Visitors can thus call up information about 
building or room occupancy in advance or, if necessary, be 
automatically notified if the maximum number of people is 
exceeded, as long as there is an integration into the existing 
systems. 
V. CONCLUSION 
To ensure the sustainability of the presented prototype in 
terms of technology, the implementation was carried out 
using open source software, open data and open standards 
and data formats. This has resulted in a modular and open-
source spatial orientation system for the use case of a visitor 
information system that can be widely shared and 
customized by other universities, small and medium-sized 
enterprises, and public institutions. Thus, a technological 
transferability is made rather easy to achieve. By adding low-
cost sensors, the system could be supplemented with further 
metrics, such as air quality or temperature. For example, this 
allows the monitoring of hygiene concepts, but also provides 
relevant information for other issues. 
Additionally, the implementation outlined here is 
intended to contribute to the discussion of subcomponents of 
a smart campus in terms of the expected multiplication of 
sensors, 
devices, 
and 
terminals. 
Considering 
future 
developments, it is possible to argue that the ability to 
combine smart technologies with physical infrastructures to 
improve services, decision-making, and efficiency of public 
buildings is an emerging trend [12].  
A concrete extension would be, for example, the use of 
modern machine learning techniques based on the various 
sensor inputs as part of the aforementioned forecasting 
module. This can be used to predict future room occupancy 
in order to support the management of visitor flows and 
reservations. Roussel et al. shows that especially the use of 
multiple sensor sources - as also proposed in this publication 
- is promising for these use cases [13]. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

In this context, the transition to an a more integrated 
digital building or a smart campus will rely significantly on 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and IoT 
infrastructures. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Bruneo, S. et al., "An IoT service ecosystem for Smart 
Cities: The #SmartME project." Internet of Things, 5, pp. 12-
33, 2019, in J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and 
Magnetism, 3rd ed., vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon, pp.68–73, 
2019. 
[2] F. Wahl, M. Milenkovic and, O. Amft, "A Distributed PIR-
based Approach for Estimating People Count in Office 
Environments." IEEE 15th International Conference on 
Computational Science and Engineering, pp. 640–647, 2012. 
K. Elissa, “Title of paper if known,” unpublished. 
[3] P.R. Tsou, et al., "Counting People by Using Convolutional 
Neural Network and A PIR Array", in 21st IEEE International 
Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM). Versailles, 
France, 30.06.2020 - 03.07.2020: IEEE, pp. 342–347, 2020.  
[4] A.A. Narvaez and J.G. Guerra, "Received signal strength 
indication—based COVID-19 mobile application to comply 
with social distancing using Bluetooth signals from 
smartphones", in Data Science for COVID-19: Elsevier, pp. 
483–501, 2021. 
[5] P. Spachos and K.N. Plataniotis, "BLE Beacons for Indoor 
Positioning at an Interactive IoT-Based Smart Museum." 
IEEE Systems Journal 14 (3), pp. 3483–3493. DOI: 
10.1109/JSYST.2020.2969088, 2020. 
[6] Y. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu and, L. Cuthbert, 
"Bluetooth 
positioning 
using 
RSSI 
and 
triangulation 
methods." IEEE 10th Consumer Communications and 
Networking Conference, pp. 837–842, 2013. 
[7] C. Yang and H. Shao, "WiFi-based indoor positioning." IEEE 
Communications Magazine 53 (3), pp. 150–157. DOI: 
10.1109/mcom.2015.7060497, 2015. 
[8] OGC 
SensorThingsAPI, 
Open 
Geospatial 
Consortium 
SensorThings API Part 1: Sensing Implementation Standard 
Version 1.0, 2016. 
[9] OGC Web Map Service, Open Geospatial Consortium Web 
Map Service (WMS) Implementation Specification Version 
1.3.0, 2006. 
[10] OGC Web Feature Service, Open Geospatial Consortium 
Web Feature Service 2.0 Interface Standard Version 2.0.0, 
2010. 
[11] OGC Web Processing Service, Open Geospatial Consortium 
WPS 2.0 Interface Standard Version 2.0.2, 2018. 
[12] N. Min-Allah and S. Alrashed, "Smart campus-A sketch." 
Sustainable Cities and Society, 59, 102231. pp. 1-15. DOI: 
10.1016/j.scs.2020.102231, 2020. 
[13] C. Roussel, K. Böhm and, P. Neis, "Sensor Fusion for 
Occupancy Estimation: A Study Using Multiple Lecture 
Rooms in a Complex Building" Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 
2022, 4, pp. 803-813. DOI: 10.3390/make4030039, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

