Towards Tactile Alarms Systems for Increased Awareness in Smart Environments
Girts Strazdins
Maritime Human Factors Lab
Aalesund University College, Norway
gist@hials.no
Sashidharan Komandur
Maritime Human Factors Lab
Aalesund University College, Norway
sash.kom@hials.no
Frøy Birte Bjørneseth
Rolls Royce Marine AS
Aalesund, Norway
froy.bjorneseth@rolls-royce.com
Abstract—Alarms are an important part of automation systems
that raise user awareness in emergency situations. However,
research shows that existing audible and visual alarms are
ineffective. Failure to deliver alarm signals leads to lack of
awareness that results in accidents. This paper presents a work
in progress on a wearable tactile device application for smart
alarm systems. We describe our hypotheses that tactile alarms
can decrease user resistance and deliver more focused awareness
with directional hints. In this paper, the prototype of a wearable
tactile belt is described and its future improvements are analysed.
Keywords–tactile; belt; alarms; wearable computing; wireless
sensor networks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In many complex environments, the outcomes of critical
situations depend on user awareness. If necessary emergency
information is delivered on time, many accidents can be
avoided. Our research focuses mainly on the maritime domain:
offshore operations and ships in general. Offshore operations
and navigation involve multiple complex tasks and cooperative
work between people located in different physical locations.
In addition, ships are also complex systems consisting of
numerous subsystems. Ship accident reports show that many
accidents happen due to lack of timely awareness of danger-
ous system states. Operators either do not perceive existing
alarms [1], misinterpret them [2], or have turned them off due
to inefﬁcient and too frequent distractions [3].
In addition to maritime operations, we identify other envi-
ronments in which smart systems with increased awareness are
important. This might include control rooms of other complex
systems such as oil rigs, and nuclear reactors that require
constant monitoring. It can also be relevant for property night
watch ofﬁcers who monitor possible break-ins, as well as-for
other alarm systems in general. All of the above scenarios
involve human operators in protracted routine tasks where
highly active periods are rare. This can lead to high risk
situations for operators where fatigue plays a signiﬁcant role
and the operator can fall asleep. Effective alarm systems are
necessary that can wake up sleeping watch ofﬁcers.
Traditional alarm systems consist of two parts. User at-
tention is attracted by audible alarms that are able to deliver
signals to users regardless of their position and orientation of
their head. A detailed explanation of the alarm source and
type is presented as visual information: light indicators with
different color codes in simpler cases and textual displays in
more complex systems. However, accident reports [1][2][3]
show that existing alarm systems are not efﬁcient, and identify
the need for improved alarm systems that:
• Deliver alarms on time and in an easily perceivable manner.
• Minimize distractions during insigniﬁcant errors.
• Deliver alarms focused on the responsible persons, and not
directed to the general population.
In this paper, we present a novel alarm system based on
wearable sensor and actuator networks that delivers tactile
stimuli. We propose an approach, system architecture, and
its advantages in Section III. We have built a prototype of a
wearable tactile belt, described in Section IV. Its preliminary
evaluation and need for optimization is described in Section V.
Substantiation of our hypotheses require signiﬁcant future
work that we discuss in Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
Improved emergency detection has been proposed previ-
ously [4]. We focus on alarm delivery in this paper, rather
than detection. Tactile cues have been explored previously.
Recognition ability has been proved for tactile cues [5]. Mul-
tiple tactile wearable devices have been proposed, including
belts [6], vests [7] and wristbands [5]. Measurements show that
resolution of tactile stimuli is around 24mm [8]. We utilize
existing knowledge, but apply it to a different application:
dissemination of alarms. Conclusions will be reached only
after extensive ﬁeld studies. Nevertheless, description of the
system design process is an important step for both engineers
and researchers.
III.
TACTILE ALARM SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
We envision a smart alarm system that extends beyond
audible and visual stimulation. We want to challenge the
notion of traditional alarms that are obtrusive and render users
resistant to technology. Wearable tactile devices provide a
novel approach to solve traditional alarm system inefﬁciency.
This paper describes a work in progress with the following
hypotheses on the advantages of tactile alarm system:
• Tactile devices can better raise awareness of tired and
sleeping users regardless of their location and position.
• User resistance (and system turn-off probability) can be
mitigated by providing different levels of alarms and deliver
them in a more focused manner.
• Tactile (compared to audible) cues can be more efﬁcient
in directing user’s attention to the desired location and
providing hints on the type and source of error.
We set the following design rules for tactile alarm system
development:
1) Simplicity. The system should be easy and fast to don.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 1.
Proposed system architecture. Central automation system disseminates alarms that are translated to tactile cues by the wearable device. Wireless
communication exists between the two parts of the system.
2) Adaptability. The system should be interchangeable and
adaptable for persons with different bodily structure and
age.
3) Comfort. The system should be lightweight, small, and not
disturb the performance of daily activities and maritime
operations.
4) Robustness. The system should be waterproof, and with-
stand high pressure and temperature changes that might
occur during maritime operations. In addition to tasks on
the ship bridge, operators should be able to move to the
deck. It should not expose fragile parts, including wires
and sensors.
5) Accuracy. The system should be able to deliver all required
signals with acceptable latency while also not generating
false alarms.
6) Longevity. The system should be able to operate without
changing batteries for at least 24 hours. In the ideal case
the system should be able to operate for 7 days (168 hours).
The proposed system architecture is depicted in Figure 1.
The system consists of three parts. First, a central automation
and alarm generation system is considered. This paper focuses
only on alarm delivery, not detection or generation. Therefore,
it is assumed that this part is already provided. The second part
represents an add-on for the central automation system that
is responsible for monitoring of the whole environment and
raising alarm events accordingly. This component translates
system conditions into tactile alarms that incorporate actual
scene and user information. This sub-system is domain-speciﬁc
and must be speciﬁed per application. The third part consists
of a wearable sensor and actuator device that tracks users and
delivers physical tactile stimuli to them, according to com-
mands from the central system. The wireless sensor network
approach is used for communication between the two parts
of the system. Both parts of the system are independent and
interchangeable as long as common communication standards
and protocols are used, such as Bluetooth or 802.15.4.
In addition to attraction of user’s attention, tactile systems
can also deliver directional cues and focused alarms. Pointers
and hints of focus can be given to speciﬁc users who can react
on a particular event. Human location, pose and orientation
tracking must be used to keep the system informed of the actual
user state. Although localization techniques depend heavily on
the environmental constraints and no generic technique can
be provided, existing knowledge of indoor localization can be
used to develop custom solutions.
The main advantage of the proposed approach is the
interoperability of the components that are interchangeable.
The wearable system can be seen as another user interface
peripheral device, much like a remote headset or wireless
keyboard. It can even be implemented as an external speaker
that is able to translate speciﬁc sound patterns into tactile cues.
IV.
SYSTEM PROTOTYPE
There are several options for device types to be used for
our proposed system. The authors of this paper selected a
tactile belt as the most appropriate. Ideally, this would be
a smart belt that humans wear as usual during their daily
activities. But in these ﬁrst iterations this device will consist of
a stretchable add-on-type belt. It can be worn over the regular
belt or situated individually around the abdominal region.
Its main advantages: close contact with the user, naturalness
(immersiveness) that leads to low human resistance, ability to
follow the user 24 hours a day (during service hours), and
ability to provide accurate directions.
The tactile alarm system presented here is a sensor-actuator
network, although the ﬁrst implementations might seem other-
wise. Although the main focus of the system is actuation, not
sensing, in further, more advanced revisions, the system would
contain sensor modality, such as position and pose estimation
with inertial sensors, in combination with external vision-
based user tracking. In this experimental phase, the authors
have assembled only one prototype belt, yet for deployment at
least two belts are required for cooperative operators, such
as dynamic positioning and anchor handling operators on
offshore vessels. In general, offshore vessels would require
one belt for the captain and optional belts for other crew
members. Continuous connectivity would require a wireless
base station and router infrastructure that is able to provide
two-way communication with the mobile, wearable devices in
the environment that might be harsh in terms of interference
and signal attenuation.
As can be seen in Figure 1, the device consists of three
components: tactile actuators, actuator manager, and wireless
communication. All of these components are independent and
can have different implementations, as long as the interaction
protocol is followed. For example, wireless communication
can be implemented using WiFi, BlueTooth, ZigBee or other
standards; AVR, MSP430 or other microcontrollers can be
used as actuator managers; and different vibrating motors are
supported.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 2.
Tactile belt prototype.
We have created a hardware prototype, shown in Figure 2.
Its structural diagram is shown in Figure 3.
A. Hardware components
The belt consists of the following components:
• Bluetooth radio module acting as a wireless bridge between
the belt and external alarm system. Bluetooth Mate silver
is used for the prototype, consisting of a Roving Networks
RN-42 Bluetoth Class 2 module.
• 4 vibrating motors generating tactile cues. These are situ-
ated across the abdominal region of the user: one motor in
the front, one in back, one on the left side and one on the
right side. Literature studies show that users can distinguish
between 8 evenly spaced locations on a tactile belt [9],
yet we assume that four will be sufﬁcient at this early
investigative stage. The architecture is ﬂexible: additional
motors can be added later if necessary. A switch circuit
with a transistor is added for each motor so that it can
be controlled by a microcontroller. Precision Microdrives
307-100 Pico Vibe 0mm-25mm vibrating motors are used
in the prototype with switch circuits consisting of BC368
NPN transistor, 1N4148 diode, and a resistor mounted on
a LilyPad Small Protoboard.
• An Arduino LilyPad microcontroller acting as the manager:
parses wirelessly received messages and sends commands
to motors.
• A Lithium Polymer (LiPo) battery powering the whole belt.
A 400mAh battery weighting 9 grams (0.32 oz) is sufﬁcient
to supply the system for about 8 hours. A 2000mAh battery
(36 grams or 1.27 oz) would last about 40 hours.
• A power regulator module transforming unstable 3.7V
battery voltage to a stable 5V power source.
The choice of components was motivated by requirements
of rapid prototyping. Therefore, most of the components are
simple and available off-the-shelf modules, not necessarily the
best choices in terms of energy efﬁciency and performance.
B. Software components
The software is designed as a master-slave (or client-server)
system where tactile devices act as slaves/clients receiving
commands from a central computer. In deployment, the central
computer is represented as a module in the central alarm sys-
tem, while in test scenarios this can be any personal computer
or any other device capable of connecting to the tactile device
wireless network. Wireless communication involves reliability
Figure 3.
Tactile belt architecture.
issues potentially causing the alarm signals not to reach their
target. However, this is out of the scope of this paper and will
be researched further at a later stage in this project.
Client devices are programmed using the Arduino In-
tegrated Development Environment (IDE) [10]. The server
application was developed in Java, using the RXTX serial
communication library.
The motors are activated by sending a MotorCommand
message from the server to the client. The client responds
with an Acknowledgement message. If the server re-
ceives no Acknowledgement within a certain period of
time after sending a MotorCommand, it should resend the
MotorCommand message. Timeouts and number of retries
are system-speciﬁc and are not deﬁned here.
V.
OPTIMIZATIONS
The following problems have been identiﬁed for the pro-
totype implementation:
• Short network lifetime. The devices are not able to oper-
ate autonomously for the desired period of 7 days. There
are multiple reasons for this, including energy-inefﬁcient
hardware and task scheduling.
• No multi-hop communication support. While single-hop
communication is reasonable for tactile alarm dissemina-
tion in a single room, it prohibits the implementation of
alarm forwarding to watch ofﬁcers in other facilities.
• No multitasking. One can implement all required pro-
cesses (motor control, data reception, data transmission,
and sensor sampling) in a single thread, yet this would
involve the creation of a state machine with inefﬁcient and
error-prone polling strategies.
These drawbacks can be mitigated by following the wire-
less sensor network design rules proposed by Strazdins [11].
A. Network lifetime extension
The majority of energy is spent in radio listening mode.
Customized MAC protocols that allow changing the radio duty
cycle can help to reduce energy consumption signiﬁcantly. For
example, if the radio transmission is activated every 5 seconds
for a 250ms period (it takes around 100ms to send a 46-byte
packet [12]; 250ms is enough for two-way communication),
this results in a 20% duty cycle.
The current Bluetooth module does not allow control of
MAC protocols. Therefore, a more efﬁcient radio module
must be selected. In addition, the Arduino board with AVR
ATMega328 microcontroller is also not the best option in
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

terms of energy efﬁciency: it consumes around 25mA in active
mode, and additional 25mA for Bluetooth radio, the total
consumption of the platform is more than 50mA, or less than
8 hours of operation from a 400mAh battery.
Vibrator motor energy consumption cannot be accurately
predicted in the absence of a particular scenario. However, the
motor energy consumption in a realistic scenario is insigniﬁ-
cant, compared to consumption of the rest of the system.
Selection of an energy-efﬁcient wearable sensor-actuator
node increases the lifetime dramatically. Let us take a TelosB-
compatible platform with MSP430F1611 microcontroller and
CC2420 radio, such as TMote Sky, as an example. The whole
platform consumes 20-23mA during active radio transmission
or reception. With a 20% duty-cycle this would result in less
than 5mA average consumption. This is a tenfold increase in
energy efﬁciency, compared to the existing implementation.
Mercury is an example of a low-power wearable wireless
sensor network with average consumption below 5mA in-
cluding accelerometer and gyroscope sensors, and wireless
communication [13]. To conclude, a solution that supports
custom MAC protocols, TelosB-compatible platform, and low
duty-cycle, would lead to signiﬁcant lifetime extension of the
device.
B. Multi-hop communication
To implement a deployable system, alarm dissemination
is also required outside a single room, and 24-hour stable
operation is required. Multi-hop communication between the
alarm generation system and tactile wearable devices is an
essential part of this requirement. The solution can be im-
plemented in multiple different ways: either the conventional
automation system’s network (TCP/IP or other) is used to
create a backbone network and connect tactile devices using
gateway nodes attached to each backbone network router, or a
mesh network of wearable devices and corresponding sensor
network routers (802.15.4) can be installed in the environment
and connected to the automation system’s network using a
single (or multiple redundant) gateway nodes.
C. Multitasking support
There are multiple logical tasks running concurrently on
the wearable device: motor control, data reception, data trans-
mission, and sensor sampling (no sensors attached at the
moment, but these could be required in future deployments).
Support of multi-tasking by providing API for separate thread
creation is necessary for different reasons. First, it is correct to
separate and encapsulate threads with different responsibilities
and resources. It is logically more correct and makes the code
easier to maintain and expand. Second, correct multi-tasking
can improve the efﬁciency of the application in terms of time-
sharing: threads wait when they have no operation to perform
and start running whenever the expected event has occurred.
An operating system such as Contiki OS [14], permitting
multitasking, is essential part of maintenance improvement for
wearable systems.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a work-in-progress research study on
tactile device evaluation for alarm systems. We present an
architecture and a prototype device, and we analyse its draw-
backs and optimizations. Several further activities are planned
as future work to ﬁnish this research study. A ﬁeld study
must be executed to collect both qualitative user feedback and
quantitative data on reaction time and accuracy of directional
cues. Two challenges are identiﬁed. First, it is difﬁcult to
simulate real emergency situations, because long idle periods
are involved in such scenarios. Second, a trade-off between
unobtrusiveness and alarm redundancy must be maintained.
Studies in maritime operation simulators (an environment sim-
ilar to one used in [15]) are planned using the tactile belt as an
alarm delivery mechanism to attract user attention to particular
areas of the ship bridge. In synergy with other local research
activities [16], eye trackers will be used as quantitative tools
for reaction accuracy and latency measurement. In the case of
positive results, this research study can serve as an important
milestone for discussion involving industry, academia, and
standardization institutions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study is as a sub-project supported by Norwegian
Research Council (NFR) Grant in Marine Technology, Nr.
208530/O70 (2011-2014).
REFERENCES
[1]
Marine Accident Investigation Branch, “Accident Report No 14/2013 -
Beaumont,” Tech. Rep. 14, 2013.
[2]
——, “Accident Report No 2/2012 - CSL Thames,” Tech. Rep. 2, 2012.
[3]
——, “Accident Report No 3/2014 - Achieve,” Tech. Rep. 3, 2014.
[4]
W. Xihuai, X. Jianmei, and B. Minzhong, “A ship ﬁre alarm system
based on fuzzy neural network,” in Proc. 3rd World Congress on
Intelligent Control and Automation, vol. 3, June 2000, pp. 1734–1736.
[5]
L. Brown, S. Brewster, and H. Purchase, “Multidimensional tactons
for non-visual information presentation in mobile devices,” in Mobile-
HCI’06, November 2006, p. 8.
[6]
M. Pielot, N. Henze, and S. Boll, “Supporting map-based wayﬁnding
with tactile cues,” in MobileHCI ’09, September 2009, pp. 23–32.
[7]
N. J. J. M. Smets, G. M. te Brake, M. a. Neerincx, and J. Lindenberg,
“Effects of mobile map orientation and tactile feedback on navigation
speed and situation awareness,” MobileHCI’08, Sep. 2008, pp. 73–80.
[8]
L. Jones, “Mechanical and psychophysical studies of surface wave
propagation during vibrotactile stimulation,” IEEE Transactions on
Haptics, vol. 6, no. 3, 2013, pp. 320–329.
[9]
J. L. Merlo, “The effects of physiological stress on tactile communi-
cation,” in Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting,
vol. 50, no. 16, October 2006, pp. 1562–1566.
[10]
Arduino,
“Arduino
IDE.”
[Online].
Available:
http://arduino.cc/en/main/software
[11]
G. Strazdins, “Wireless Sensor Network Software Design Rules,” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Latvia, May 2014.
[12]
M. Amiri, “Measurements of energy consumption and execution time
of different operations on Tmote Sky sensor nodes,” Master’s thesis,
Masaryk University, 2010.
[13]
K. Lorincz, B. Chen, and G. Challen, “Mercury: a wearable sensor net-
work platform for high-ﬁdelity motion analysis.” in SenSys, November
2009, pp. 183–196.
[14]
A. Dunkels, B. Gronvall, and T. Voigt, “Contiki-a lightweight and
ﬂexible operating system for tiny networked sensors,” in IEEE LCN’04,
October 2004, pp. 455–462.
[15]
F. B. Bjørneseth, S. K. Renganayagalu, M. D. Dunlop, E. Homecker,
and S. Komandur, “Towards an experimental design framework for
evaluation of dynamic workload and situational awareness in safety
critical maritime settings,” in BCS’12, 2012, pp. 309–314.
[16]
S. Renganayagalu, S. Komandur, and R. Rylander, “Maritime simulator
training: Eye-trackers to improve training experience,” in AHFE’14,
July 2014 (to appear).
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

