From Micro Environmental Sensors to Citizen as Sensors:  
The Smart Environmental Sensing Web of EPA 
Shuenn-Chin Chang 
Environmental Protection Administration 
Taipei City. Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
e-mail:scchang@epa.gov.tw 
Yeuh-Bin Wang 
Environmental Protection Administration 
Taipei City. Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
e-mail: ybwang@epa.gov.tw
His-Chi Lin 
Environmental Protection Administration 
Taipei City. Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
e-mail:hsclin@epa.gov.tw 
Chun-Ming Huang 
Environmental Protection Administration 
Taipei City. Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
e-mail:chmihuang@epa.gov.tw
Yi-Dao Chiang 
Environmental Protection Administration 
Taipei City. Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
e-mail:yidao.chiang@epa.gov.tw 
Ying-Chieh Chen 
Environmental Protection Administration 
Taipei City. Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
e-mail: yingchieh.chen@epa.gov.tw
Abstract—This article describes how the Environmental 
Protection Administration (EPA) under the Executive Yuan of 
Taiwan (R.O.C.) leverages its Smart Environmental Sensing 
Web comprising crowdsourcing and crowd-sharing [1]   built 
on its existing internet of things (IoT) based environmental 
monitoring system to make the public care more about the 
quality of their living environment, and create positive 
feedback loops of information flows.  . 
Keywords- Micro Environmental Sensors; Social Network ; 
Citizen as Sensor; Crowd-sourcing; Internet of Things; 
Location-Based Service; PM2.5. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Smart Environmental Sensing Web includes 
continually expanding Micro Environmental Sensors, an 
environmental quality sensor networking platform, an 
Environmental Info Push application for smart phones, and 
an i-Environment website. In Section 2, we also encourage 
the deployment of sensors, Open Data and crowd-sharing to 
maximize the benefits of the Smart Environmental Sensing 
Web. Users may use community links to stimulate other 
people’s concern about the quality of living environment to 
create positive feedback cycle of data flows (in Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Figure 1. The Conceptual Cycle of Smart Environmental 
Sensing Web 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Data enrichment— Crowdsourcing 
In addition to collecting and disseminating the various 
types of environmental monitoring information generated by 
Taiwan EPA, the Smart Environmental Sensing Network 
will also incorporate data from Micro Environmental Sensors 
operated by local governments, educational institutions, 
enterprises, and individuals. 
In order to increase the density of the environmental 
sensing network, Taiwan EPA encourages citizens to join the 
network by installing personal air sensors in their living 
environment, such as AirBox and Location Aware Sensing 
System (LASS), which monitors air quality that people 
actually breathe. Since 2016, Taiwan EPA has also 
continued to develop new sensors that can transmit real-time 
data to the Smart Environmental Sensing Web via other 
modes of transmission, such as Bluetooth, Wifi, or Long 
range (LoRa) [3]. Since LoRa technology has advantages of 
low power consumption and long range capability, Taiwan 
EPA has begun deploying these sensors in a certain 
industrial park.   
B. Technique of implementation 
Smart 
Environmental 
Sensing 
Web 
comprises 
crowdsourcing and crowd-sharing built on its existing IoT-
based environmental monitoring system, including the 
continually expanding Micro Environmental Sensors, an 
environmental quality sensor networking platform with data 
visualization technology and location-based services to 
design graphical dashboards and interactive maps enabling 
users to access real-time local environmental information at 
any time, while also adding a convenient notification 
function that sends alerts when needed(in Figure 2). 
19
Copyright (c) The Government of R.O.C.(Taiwan), 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

The Environmental Info Push App provides the public 
with environmental information that is updated every minute. 
Internet access is all it takes for people to know the air 
quality near their home or the place they plan to visit, so they 
may take appropriate measures to protect their health. 
III. 
CURRENT PRACTICES—CROWD-SHARING 
To raise the public’s environmental awareness and call 
attention for sources of air pollution in people’s immediate 
living environment, in the spirit of crowdsourcing, EPA 
launched Air-Photo, a function of Environmental Info Push 
app through which people can share a photo stamping real-
time air quality data on it, and share the photo on the map as 
well as on one’s own Facebook Wall. Thus, through 
crowdsourcing and crowd-sharing, the public is engaged as 
“citizen sensors” and made more aware of environmental 
issues (see Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Environmental Info Push App  Air-Photo for crowdsourcing
（2018） 
The Air-Photo emoji from March to June in 2017 was 
analyzed and compared with the Air Quality Index (AQI) at 
the time of posting. It was found that emoji of “Normal” 
took the most part correspond to the first three AQI levels. 
On the other hand, when the AQI turned to unhealthy or very 
unhealthy, the posts of “Hate” or “Can’t Stand” emoji had 
increased significantly. (see Figure 4) 
 
 
Figure 3.  The Relationship between Environmental Info Push App Air-
Photo emoji and Air  Quality Index（2017/03-2017/06） 
Through the analysis of spatial and temporal changes of 
the Air-Photo emoji and the correspond AQI, it is found the 
Air-photo were mainly post within the metropolitan areas. 
Besides, the users of the posters spread from the north to the 
south and east of Taiwan. During summer, users were less 
likely to share the emoji with Air-Photo while the AQI were 
also better. However, when the AQI turned worse, there was 
a higher probability of Air-Photo sharing with negative 
emoji among users in central and south regions, while the 
correspond AQI tended to be the unhealthy to sensitive 
group or unhealthy. 
 
Figure 5. The analysis of spatial and temporal changes of the Air-Photo 
emoji and the correspond AQI（2017/03-2017/06） 
Meanwhile, the northern metropolitan area of Taiwan 
mixed different emoji levels. Thus, there was no obvious 
correlation between those emoji sharing and the change of 
the AQI in northern metropolitan. (see Figure 5.) 
 
IV. 
USING THE TEMPLATE 
In light of the worldwide positive acclaim of Open Data 
and Micro Environmental Sensors, Taiwan EPA will 
continue to maintain the concept of open, transparent and 
innovative applications [6] to serve society with public, 
diversified, and convenient information services to facilitate 
people’s decision-making that involves environmental 
aspects. Taiwan EPA furthermore hopes that the Smart 
Environmental Sensing Web along with the relative apps 
will motivate the citizen more concerning about the quality 
of their living environment and transfer the Micro 
Environmental Sensors to Citizen as Sensors, and create 
positive feedback loops of information flows 
 
REFERENCES 
1. 
M. N. Kamel Boulos et al., "Crowdsourcing, citizen sensing 
and sensor web technologies for public and environmental 
health surveillance and crisis management: trends, OGC 
standards and application examples," International Journal of 
Health Geographics, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 67, 2011, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-072X-10-67 
2. 
IIS-NRL, PM2.5 Open Data Portal. [Online]. Available 
from:https://pm25.lass-net.org/zh_tw/ 2017.03.22. 
3. 
LoRa Alliance, LoRaWAN What is it. Technical Marketing 
Workgroup 
1.0, 
Nov., 
2015. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.lora-
alliance.org/portals/0/documents/whitepapers/LoRaWAN101.
pdf 
4. 
Environmental Protection Administration. Environmental 
resource 
database. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:http://erdb.epa.gov.tw/ 2018.04. 10. 
5. 
Environmental Protection Administration. i-Environment.  
[Online]. Available from:https://ienv.epa.gov.tw/ 2018.04.01. 
Environmental Protection Administration. Opendata.epa, 
http://opendata.epa.gov.tw/ 2018.04.10. 
20
Copyright (c) The Government of R.O.C.(Taiwan), 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

