Smart Kitchen Cabinet for Aware Home 
Karuppiah Pal Amutha, Chidambaram Sethukkarasi, Raja Pitchiah  
National Ubiquitous Computing Research Centre 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
Chennai, India 
{palamuthak, ctsethu, rpitchiah}@cdac.in 
Abstract— This paper presents the design and development of 
a “Smart Kitchen Cabinet” which identifies the grocery items 
in the kitchen store. The Kitchen Cabinet is augmented with 
sensors to measure the weight of an item which is updated to a 
database whenever grocery items are placed or taken out for 
cooking. The jars in the kitchen cabinet are tagged with Radio-
frequency identification (RFID) tag for identifying and 
tracking the location. The optimal placement of jars 
(containing different ingredients) attached with RFID tags and 
antennas are tested for maximum read performance and the 
experimental results are presented. The system also generates 
automated shopping list when an item reaches the defined 
threshold level, which is based on requirement and 
consumption pattern of family members.  
 
Keywords-Ubiquitous Computing; Pervasive Computing;  
Smart artifact; Smart Kitchen Cabinet; RFID. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The kitchen is a very important place of a home and 
cooking is one of the day to day activities. The usual 
difficulty in a kitchen during cooking is finding the items to 
be out of stock.  
The growing popularity of automated systems indicates 
the demand of the household devices to be smart and 
automated to support us in our daily activities. The kitchen 
is one ideal place where automation at various levels can be 
done. Daily kitchen activities include stocking kitchen 
cabinet in relation to necessary dietary regiment, likes, and 
needs, tastes etc. 
Smart Kitchen Cabinet is an innovative appliance that 
incorporates interactive services. It is an embedded system 
which consists of a touch screen Liquid Crystal Display 
(LCD), load sensors, Radio-frequency identification (RFID) 
reader and tags to provide complete awareness about 
ingredients and availability information for better kitchen 
management. The features of the cabinet are: inventory 
management of grocery items, automatic shopping list 
preparation, item identification and tracking and balanced 
diet cooking. 
The contribution of the paper is as follows: 1) a location 
sensing and tracking algorithm for grocery items used at 
home using UHF RFID and load sensors. 2) Development of 
an embedded inventory management for kitchen groceries. 
3) Deployment results in actual kitchen environment. 4) 
Engineering of Smart Kitchen Cabinet. 5) Optimal 
placement of RFID antenna and Tags.  
The remaining of the paper is organized as: Section II 
discusses about the related work in this area. The system 
architecture and overview are described in Section III. The 
entire system testing and field reports are presented in 
Section IV. The limitations of the smart kitchen cabinet are 
mentioned in Section V. Conclusion and future work are 
described in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
 A prototype [1] called “Smart Kitchen” that enables 
traditional meal preparation and healthy cooking by raising 
awareness about facts on nutrition’s present in food 
ingredients. The sensors are used to detect cooking activities 
and provide feedback to the user about nutrition information 
Context-aware cooking [2] is implemented using 
augmented cutting board and sensor enriched knife. The 
cutting board is fixed with load and acceleration sensors to 
identify the type of food used. Microphone is used to 
recognize the cutting sound and a camera to identify the 
object. 
 Instrumented kitchen to automatically capture, share, 
and exploit semantically annotated cooking experiences has 
been realized in [4]. All necessary information should be 
observed from the user's natural course of actions during the 
preparation process, such that even users without any 
knowledge about ontologies are able to create and benefit 
from semantically represented recipes. 
Bonanni, et al. [5] presented an augmented reality 
interface based on a model of the user, the task and the 
environment that projects information on the status of work 
surfaces, storage and tools directly on the objects and spaces 
where users direct their attention. This prototype uses range 
finder to measure the surface temperature of food in pans on 
the range. The temperature of the water in the tap is sensed 
using heatsink and represented by different light colors. 4D 
FridgeCam is an augmented reality interface that projects 
the contents of the refrigerator directly onto the door in such 
a way as to add location and time-based information. 
Augmented Cabinetry is an active inventory system that 
reduces the time required to locate items in the kitchen 
cabinets. 
The accurate location sensing of different objects in a 
smart shelf using Ultra-high frequency (UHF) RFID 
technology is presented in [7]. Reference tags are kept in the 
shelf for location identification. The Received Signal 
9
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Strength Indicator (RSSI) value along with the tag 
interference level is used for locating an object.  
Experimental tests for detecting the pharmaceutical 
items in a small cabinet using UHF RFID operating at 
860MHz to 868MHz are demonstrated in [9]. They achieved 
a maximum of 61% full detection rate by using four 
antennas in a cabinet.  
Our 
development 
work 
describes 
practical 
implementation of embedding intelligence into existing 
kitchen cabinet for load sensing, location tracking and 
automatic shopping list preparation resulting in inventory 
management of grocery items in the kitchen. The RFID read 
performance with different type of grocery items used in 
kitchen environment is also presented. The system achieves 
better read performance by using two antennas and the 
placement of tags as described in Section IV.  
III. 
OVERVIEW AND ARCHITECTURE  
A. System Design 
 This section comprises technical description of the 
system.  RFID tags are used for identifying the item and 
load sensors are used for measuring the weight of items as 
well as locating the items in the cabinet. The RFID tags are 
attached to the containers and the load sensors are kept under 
the partitions of the cabinet. RFID antennas are mounted 
inside the cabinet. The placement of RFID antennas and tags 
[3] is tested for maximum read performance. When a 
container arrives/departs, the algorithm identifies the 
occurred event and updates in the database. The entire 
application is ported into an embedded platform based on 
Intel Atom processor. The user can interact with the system 
through a GUI. 
 
 
Figure 1.  System Overview. 
The functional representation of the system is shown in 
Figure 1. The sensors sense the environment and send the 
data to the application. The application analyzes the data, 
decide the action to be taken (IN/OUT) and update in the 
database. The user can interact with the system through the 
touch screen monitor. The entire system is deployed in a 
kitchen of C-DAC, Guest house (Figure 2) for testing 
purpose.  State transition diagram of smart kitchen cabinet is 
shown in Figure 3. It shows the entire activity of the system. 
User has to set all necessary fields like family setting, 
reminder - menu setting and mapping tagID with an item.  
Once initial settings are done, the system is ready to 
function. Monitoring weight state is continuously running in 
the system, if any weight variation occurs, the state is 
transited to the finding item state which finds and detects 
the item.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
Figure 2.  Deployment of Smart Kitchen Cabinet in C-DAC, Guest House. 
Detected item and its weight are stored in the database along 
with partition. When an item is found to be below the 
specified criteria level, the shopping list state is triggered. 
This state generates the shopping list and sent to the user 
through e-mail/SMS/printing according their request. 
 
Figure 3.  State Transition diagram of  Smart Kitchen Cabinet  
Load 
Sensor 
Antenna 
10
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

B. Identifying and Tracking Algorithm 
The System monitors the weight over the partitions (A 
and B shown in Figure 2) continuously. The weight 
measurement is done with a minimum delay between each 
cycle for the load sensor to get stabilized. An event is said to 
occur when the difference of the weight of current cycle (ith 
cycle) and previous cycle (i-1th cycle) exceeds a specified 
threshold ((Wi -Wi-1 )>Th). The occurred event may be any 
one of the following 1) Arrival of a new item 2) departure of 
an existing item 3) False Variation. If the difference value is 
below the threshold value, then it might be of false variation 
due to user’s hand pressure. It represents no action has to be 
taken. If the weight output of the current cycle is greater 
than the previous weight value, then an item has arrived. 
The current RFID scan (Tn) is compared with the previous 
RFID scan (To) to identify the arrived tag. (Tn ∩ To) gives 
the common items in current and previous RFID scan. 
Subtracting (Tn ∩ To) with the current RFID scan (Tn) 
gives the tag ID of the new arrived item. In case of arrival 
event, the database is updated with the arrived tag 
information and weight value. Otherwise, an item has 
departed from the cabinet. Again, the new and old RFID 
scan list is compared to find the departed tag. The item is 
marked as “OUT” in the database. The pseudo-code of the 
algorithm is described in Figure 4. The available items are 
listed out with the details like location and quantity to the 
user. 
 
//Wi-1 Weight output of i-1th cycle. 
//Wi Weight output of ith cycle. 
//To Represents set of existing tags (Set of tags read in 
previous scan). 
//Tn Represents set of tag read by current scan. 
//Th Threshold. 
 
 ELSE
END
 action to   be performed
//No
Error due to hand pressure
// 
ELSE
 IF
END
 ELSE
END
0 =
 Weight 
Item
 - (T    T ) 
 Item  = T
Departed
Depart of an existing item
// 
ELSE
      END IF
          
                          Item Weight = W - W
          
 - (T    T ) 
  Item  = T
Incoming
A New item has been arrived
// 
 ) THEN
      IF(W   > W
          
Th) THEN
) 
- W
IF((W
o
n
o
1-i
i
o
n
n
1-i
i
1-i
i
∩
∩
>
 
Figure 4.  Pseudo-code of Identifying and Tracking Algorithm. 
C. Inventory Management Functions for kitchen 
Inventory management includes managing the grocery 
items, 
efficient 
utilization 
of 
grocery 
items 
and 
communication to the user [6].   
 
1) Monthly requirement of a family: 
The amount of item (Cqty ) used per day is found out 
from the weight variation and logged in the database. From 
the Cqty, the required consumption (Rqty ) of an item for a 
particular time period (T) is calculated using the following 
formula.  
∑
=
=
T
i 1
Cqty(i) 
Rqty  
  
 
 
(1)  
2) Automatic Shopping List Preparation 
  N  * Rqty
Cq =
 
 
 
 
(2) 
A Minimum weight can be set for every item as a 
threshold limit called as critical quantity (Cq), calculated 
using formula (2). It denotes the quantity to be stocked for 
minimum number of days (N). For an example N=2 means 
the available quantity should serve the family for at least 2 
days. When the quantity of an item goes below critical 
quantity; it is automatically added in the shopping list along 
with the quantity (Sqty) need to buy.  The Sqty   is 
calculated with the help of formula (3). Ts represents 
shopping interval and Aqty represents available quantity. 
Sqty  = Rqty  *  Ts    - Aqty
 
 
 
(3) 
Once the shopping list is generated, it should be 
communicated to the user either by message/mail as per 
their request. The list is also displayed in the GUI. 
D. User Interface 
The user can interact with the system through Graphical 
User Interface. The following settings can be made through 
the GUI. User has to enter the details such as  number of 
adults in the family , number of children in the family, 
number of  guest (adult and children),  number of days the 
guest will stay, alert service such as  SMS or E-Mail or both 
and alert time.   
User has to set the details like mapping tag ID with the 
item, brand name, empty container weight, the quantity to 
be stocked for minimum number of days and Shopping 
interval. The reminders can also be set by the user. Recipe 
preparation tips are provided. The system suggests a suitable 
recipe that can be prepared from the available groceries. 
IV. 
TESTING OF SMART KITCHEN CABINET 
A. RFID Testing  
1) Materials Used: A cabinet made up of metal and 
wood with 4 partitions, a wooden Cabinet, UHF RFID 
reader from SIRIT operating at 860MHz to 868MHz, omni 
directional RFID antennas from Poynting, UHF passive 
RFID Tags operating at 860MHz to 869MHz, load sensors 
from loadstar, plastic containers of different height and size, 
porcelain 
containers, 
glass 
containers, 
Tupperware 
11
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

containers, stainless steel containers and grocery items are 
used.  The cost of the materials is listed in Table I.  
 
TABLE I.  
MATERIAL COST 
Material 
Quantity 
Cost (INR) 
RFID Reader 
1 
109031 
RFID Antenna 
2 
11975.97 
RFID Tag 
20 Approx 
998.00 
Load Sensor 
16 
318560.8 
Atom Processor Kit 
1 
70,000 
Cabinet 
1 
25,000 
 
2)  Test 1:  
The test had been carried out in the Cabinet (100 x 39 x 
70 cm) made up of both metal and wood (shown in Figure 
6). The test was conducted in our UBICOM laboratory.  
Scenario 1: 
Initially, the test was carried out with empty containers 
with tag attached on the side of the containers. Later the 
containers were loaded with grocery items. The tag 
detection rate of the containers was tested for different 
antenna position. Initially a circularly polarized antenna was 
mounted on the top of rack1 facing downwards. The racks 
were divided into grids and tested the detection rate in each 
grid. The read performance was around 77.7% in rack1, 
20% in rack 2, 33% in rack 3 and 25% in rack4 shown in 
Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  RFID detection result for single antenna 
        
 
Figure 6.  Cabinet made up of metal and wood. 
a) Scenario 2: 
There were several undetected tags in scenario 1 due to 
tag collision and tag orientation. In order to increase the 
detection rate, two antennas were used. One antenna was 
placed on the right side of the rack 2 and another on the left 
side of rack 3. The detection rate was 85.7% in rack 1, 
100% in rack 2, 85.7% in rack 3 and 62.5% in rack 4 shown 
in Figure 7.  
In glass and porcelain containers, the tag was read by the 
reader when it is fixed with some air gap as shown in Figure 
8 a) and b). In stainless steel containers, the tag was not read 
by the reader at any position. The RFID detection rate in 
different containers, materials and the effect of placement of 
antenna and tags are listed in table. II. 
 
 
Figure 7.  RFID detection result for two antennas 
 
 
TABLE II.  
RFID READ PERFORMANCE  
Container 
Material 
Content 
loaded in 
Container 
Tag 
Placement 
in 
Container 
Antenna 
Placement in 
Cabinet 
Read 
Performan
ce 
Stainless 
Steel 
Anything 
Anywhere 
Anywhere 
Very poor 
Plastic 
sugar, salt 
Fix tag with 
air gap (may 
be in the 
cap, or with 
some space 
in side ) 
In the rack 
where the 
antenna is 
kept 
Good 
Plastic 
oil 
Side 
In the rack 
where the 
antenna is 
not there 
Poor 
Plastic 
oil 
Side 
In the rack 
where the 
antenna is 
kept 
Good 
Plastic 
Items like 
dhal, rice, 
flour etc 
Side 
Any rack 
Good 
Small Size 
Plastic 
Containers 
Anything 
Side 
In the rack 
where the 
antenna is 
Poor 
12
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

not there 
Small Size 
Plastic 
Containers 
Anything 
Side 
In the rack 
where the 
antenna is 
kept 
Good 
Glass 
Anything 
Side with air 
gap 
Anywhere 
Good 
Porcelain 
Anything 
Side 
Anywhere 
Good 
 
 
 
    
 
Figure 8.  Tag attached with air gap in (a) Glass container and (b) 
Porcelain container. 
b) Scenario 3: 
We have found experimentally, that by adhering to the 
following conditions given below, the detection rate is 
improved to 100% (as shown in Figure 9). 
• 
Small containers should be kept closer to the antenna. 
• 
The sugar, salt and oil containers should be kept in the 
racks where the antennas are placed. 
• 
Ensure that the containers are kept in such a way that 
it should not touch each other and also the corners of 
the rack.  
• 
The grocery item inside the container should be below 
the level of the tag. 
 
 
Figure 9.  RFID Detection Result for scenario 3. 
The RFID connection between the reader and the tags 
were found to be not stable in the containers having sugar, 
salt and oil. 
3) Test 2:  
The system is deployed in C-DAC guest house shown in 
Figure 2. The cabinet (100 x 37 x 62 cm) is made up of 
wood and has two partitions. The problems faced during the 
field testing and the solutions followed are listed below: 
• 
Generation of shopping list: 
When a container was taken out of the cabinet, the 
tagged grocery item was added to the shopping list. This was 
a logical error in the shopping list preparation module. The 
error was corrected by measuring the weight of the tagged 
grocery item after the container is placed again.  
• 
RFID tags Arrive and Depart event problem: 
Our application was based on events generated by the 
RFID reader. The containers with salt, sugar, and  oil items, 
generate arrive and depart events  frequently; even though 
the containers were kept stable in the RF field.  
      The tag ID and weight variation information was 
maintained in separate queues. When a container was kept 
inside the cabinet, the arrive event occurred. The arrived tag 
ID and the change in weight were added in the RFID queue 
and load sensor queue respectively. As per the queue 
concept, the first element of both the queues were taken out 
and updated in the database. Because of occurrence of false 
arrive and depart events, the queue concept could not be 
successfully used for our application.        
Solutions:  
       The following modifications were made in our 
application: If both queues had an item, then the database 
would be updated otherwise it might be because of false 
arrive/depart event. Therefore, the elements were removed 
from both queues. Even after the modification, the problem 
was not solved completely. 
      We used the polling method for RFID tag identification. 
When there was a change in weight, a new RFID scan was 
initiated and compared with the previous scan to detect the 
occurrence of an event.   
     
Weight vs Error Percentage
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Weight (Kg)
Error Percentage (%)
 
Figure 10.  Weight versus Error Rate measurement.   
13
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

• 
The user’s hand pressure was also measured by the 
load sensor, while keeping the container inside the 
cabinet. Hence a delay was introduced in weight 
measurement for the load sensor to get stabilized. 
• 
RFID connection was not stable in sugar, rice, and salt 
containers due to water content.  
• 
Load sensor accuracy problem: 
Solutions 
      Tested load sensors with standard weights. Error rate was 
very high for small weights and decreasing to zero 
approximately for the weights above 1 Kg as shown in 
Figure 10. It was observed that the error rate was better for 
the maximum load capacity of the load sensor.   
V. 
LIMITATIONS 
When an item in the container is changed, the user needs 
to update it. RFID connection is not stable in sugar, oil and 
salt containers. The placement of tags on these items can be 
determined experimentally for better read performance. 
More accurate load sensors can be used to improve the 
accuracy of the measurement system.  
VI. 
 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Development of Smart Kitchen Cabinet is an effort 
towards kitchen automation using ubiquitous computing 
technologies. The system identifies the grocery items in the 
kitchen store. The Kitchen Cabinet is embedded with 
sensors to measure the weight of an item which is updated 
to a database whenever grocery items are placed or taken 
out for cooking.  Based on the database information the 
various services offered by Kitchen Cabinet such as 
inventory management and automatic shopping list 
preparation are useful and helping us to manage the kitchen 
activities effectively.  The optimal placement of RFID 
antennas and tags are analyzed for the particular cabinet and 
the results are presented.  
The smartness of the cabinet can be further extended by 
adding more functionality like Nutrition-aware cooking and 
personalized cooking. Image processing techniques could 
also be explored to identify the grocery item inside the 
container.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work is developed under National Ubiquitous 
Computing Research Project, funded by Department of 
Information Technology, Government of India.  We would 
like to thank Department of Electronics and Information 
Technology for providing us an opportunity to develop this 
smart artifact.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Jen-hao Chen, Peggy Pei-yu Chi, Hao-hua Chu, Cheryl Chia-Hui 
Chen, and Polly Huang “A Smart Kitchen for Nutrition-Aware 
Cooking,” Journals  Pervasive Computing,  IEEE, 2010,  pp. 58-65. 
[2] 
Matthias Kranz, Albrecht Schmidt, Alexis Maldonado, Radu Bogdan 
Rusu, Michael Beetz, Benedikt Hornler, and Gerhard Rigoll, 
“Context aware kitchen utilities,” ACM ,Proceedings of the 1st 
international conference on Tangible and embedded interaction  TEI 
‘07,  pp. 213-214. 
[3] 
Rajesh Kumar Kushwaha and Ramji Gupta, “Optimization of 
Antenna and Tag Position for RFID Based People Management 
System,”  Proceedings of ASCNT2010, pp. 22-30. 
[4] 
Michael Schneider, “The Semantic Cookbook: Sharing Cooking 
Experience in the Smart Kitchen,” 3rd IET International Conference 
on Intelligent Environments IE 07 (2007),  pp. 416-423. 
[5] 
Leonardo Bonanni, Chia-Hsun Lee, Rob Gens, and Ted Selker, 
“Augmented Reality Kitchen: Task-Specific Projection in a Multi-
User Work Environment,” ACM UIST,  2004. 
[6] 
http://www.invatol.com/  
[7] 
Jae Sung Choi, Hyun Lee, Member IEEE, Daniel W.Engels, Senior 
Member, IEEE, and Ramez Elmasri, Member ,IEEE, “Passive UHF 
RFID-Based Localization Using Detection of Tag Interence on Smart 
Shelf,”  IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part 
C: Applications and Reviews, 2011, pp. 1-9. 
[8] 
Christoph Schonegger, Dr. Michael E. Wernle, and Dr. Burkhard 
Stadlmann, “Analysis of an UHF RFID System for interior position 
sensing,” 4th European Workshop on RFID Systems and 
Technologies (RFID SysTech), 2008,   pp. 1-5.  
[9] 
Carla R. Medeiros, Cristina C.Serra, Carlos A. Fernades, and Jorge 
R.Costa,  “UHF RFID Cabinet,” IEEE International Symposium on 
Antennas and Propagation (APSURSI), 2011, pp. 1429-1432.
 
 
14
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

