Smart House with Smart Electricity  
The need for a DC Bus 
Yuval Beck 
Faculty of Engineering 
Holon Institute of Technology- HIT  
Holon, Israel 
e-mail: beck@hit.ac.il 
Gadi Golan 
President 
Holon Institute of Technology-HIT 
Holon, Israel 
e-mail: golan@hit.ac.il 
Edna Pasher 
 Edna Pasher PhD & Associates 
Tel-Aviv, Israel 
e-mail: edna@pasher.co.il
 
 
Abstract— The following work describes an ongoing idea that 
becomes more logical in the future of domestic and military 
electricity. This paper introduces the necessity for using a DC 
bus system in private homes as well as introducing an 
innovative bi-directional inverter for making the energy flow 
to and from the grid. The bi-directional inverter also enables 
smart control of the energy flow with harmonics cancelation, 
and the ability to be adjusted to the future demand of smart 
grids and multiple tariffs. The research also includes social 
aspects as an integrated subject in the control schemes of the 
electrical devices. 
Keywords- Smart house, Inverter, Smart grid, control 
circuits. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
THERE is a lot of interest in recent years in Smart Grid 
application. Dealing with these smart grid new concepts 
brings us back to basics and raises the question whether the 
current way of providing and consuming electricity is the 
correct or the best available way [1]. As for today, most of 
the electrical appliances that can be found in a typical house 
work on Direct Current (DC). A computer is assembled of 
DC circuits, TV is based on DC circuits, lighting and heating 
can also work on DC. The only appliances which require 
Alternating Current (AC) are the air-conditioners and the 
rotating machine based appliances, such as a washing 
machine and dryer. Although these appliances consume 
heavy loads, they consume only 30-60% of the total load. On 
the other hand, transporting energy for long distances is 
known to be more efficient in AC. Another factor that needs 
to be added to the new equation of the future energy world is 
the addition of renewable energy as a power source. 
Photovoltaic energy is DC and wind power which is AC 
based power sources. There is work done on DC distribution 
systems based on Photovoltaic generation and the electrical 
control strategy [3] , as well as on DC distributed systems for 
residential applications with the use of Bi directional Inverter 
[4]. 
The above mentioned situations lead to the question 
whether AC power in our home is the right way of providing 
our loads with the power [4],[5]. Moreover, the assimilation 
of communication and control capabilities in the future 
Smart grid enables us to control the efficiency of the power 
flow according to various criteria. These criteria can be 
influenced by the status of the total grid. As an example, let 
us consider a grid with over 30% renewable energy, and for 
stability issues the grid has to control the power flow from 
all renewable sources, namely, the photovoltaic inverters will 
not necessarily work in Maximum Power Point (MPP).  
This paper reviews the idea of combining a local DC bus 
grid in a few applications for increasing the total efficiency 
of energy transformations in the overall grid. A Bi-
Directional Inverter (BDI) for enabling the dual DC/AC and 
AC/DC power flow with reduction of harmonics and control 
is presented. The converting systems are treated as Time 
Variable Transformers with advanced control that combines 
also non-electrical parameters. The paper also deals with 
micro-grids and synchronization issues by using the DC bus 
and the social aspects of controlling this electricity in the 
Smart Grid environment. 
II. 
DOMESTIC DC BUS 
In recent years private installations of PV generators and 
wind generators are becoming common in many countries. 
There are differences in the supporting laws in each country 
but in general these renewable generators are a financial 
business in which the investor wants to restore the 
investment on the system and make a profit on the electricity 
he sells to the grid. For achieving this goal, the current 
installed inverters are equipped with Maximum Power Point 
Trackers (MPPT) for maximizing the power extracted to the 
grid. 
When renewable energy will reach a dominant 
percentage of the grid current, other issues of stability of the 
grid will rise. In this case not all renewable generation will 
be allowed to penetrate the grid at all times. Furthermore, 
future storage that will be available, even in domestic 
facilities, will require a more complex control on the power 
flow. 
The fact that most of the appliances in our homes are 
operating on DC raises the question whether it is logical to 
have a PV generator on the roof, then invert the DC to AC, 
then convert the AC back to DC to power all of our 
electronic circuits. This two conversion process is obviously 
not efficient since each energy conversion reduces the total 
efficiency of the process. 
It is probably more logical to have a separate DC bus at 
our home, parallel to the AC grid (that will power all the AC 
appliances such as air conditioners etc.) as seen in Fig.1. In 
this case the future computer, TV and all other DC 
appliances will not need to have an AC/DC rectifier in their 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

input power supply. This yields to more efficient and cheaper 
electrical appliances.  
 
Figure 1.  A combined DC and AC grid in a house 
Fig. 1 shows the components that are necessary for 
assembling an integrated DC and AC home. 
The house has two power grids: one is an AC grid and 
the other is the DC bus. The PV panels on the roof are 
connected to a DC/DC converter that has an MPPT and 
control schemes for various grid constrains algorithms.  This 
converter powers the DC bus. Moreover, there are storage 
capabilities that are connected to the DC bus also. 
Furthermore, there is an option of charging the DC bus from 
the grid with a bidirectional inverter that will be discussed 
later on. The purpose of the bi-directional inverter is to 
enable bidirectional power flow in cases such as: 
 
PV energy must be controlled due to grid constrains. 
 
PV is not available and DC power is required. 
 
Grid electricity is cheaper and DC power is required 
for charging the storage device. 
A. The bidirectional inverter  
The core of the system is the bidirectional inverter. A 
schematic drawing of the whole system is presented in Fig.  
2. 
 
Bi Directional 1ph/3ph 
Inverter
Unidirectional
1ph/3ph Inverter
1ph/3ph
Load
Other 
Reneable 
energy 
sources
GRID
DC BUS
Batteries
  
Figure 2.  A block diagram of the electrical system in a future house. 
In Fig. 2, it is clear that the gateway from the domestic 
electric grid to the "main" grid, namely, the utility, is the bi-
directional inverter. This inverter, in one direction, can 
transfer power flow from the power grid towards the loads 
and DC bus. In the other direction, it can transfer the power 
from the house back to the grid. The advantage of this device 
is the ability to control the power flow as well as controlling 
the power quality. The bidirectional inverter is equipped with 
a bidirectional power factor corrector and control that is also 
influenced by dynamic tariffs, social aspect such as 
nonintrusive algorithms and electrical efficiency control. 
 This system is designated for small to medium loads of 
up to 15kW with modularity capabilities for expansion.  The 
system is connected in one side via a Bi Directional one 
phase or three phase inverter to the grid. On the DC side of 
the inverter there is a unidirectional one phase or three phase 
inverter for supplying the load (home, commercial, 
industrial).  
When no renewable energy is available, the system is 
acting as an active filter for reducing harmonics [6]. When 
renewable energy is available, it produces energy directly to 
the DC bus and will smoothly supply energy.  The system 
will then divide the amount of energy that the grid supplies 
and the energy from the renewable sources. If there is excess 
supply from the renewable energy sources, the system will 
return energy back to the grid or store it in the storage bank. 
Moreover, if at any time electricity prices decrease, the 
system can store energy in the storage bank for later use. 
The main challenge is the development of optimal 
control strategies for energy usage aiming to maximize 
customer 
economic 
savings, 
while 
preserving 
user 
preferences and quality of experience, based on a proper 
subscribed power supply contract. The key aspect of the 
research is the optimal trade-off between the exploitation of 
convenient fares and the overload management, by 
considering the following electric devices: 
 
Loads characterized by different controllability 
degrees. 
 
Storage units. 
 
Uncontrollable Micro Generation. 
 
Other small size traditional power plants. 
Preliminary evaluation of the problem suggests that the 
control signals to be optimally generated consist of: 
 
The best times to run programmable loads. 
 
Power recharge/release evolution of the storage units. 
 
Evolution of generation set-points of traditional power 
plants. 
All these aspects need to be taken into account, together 
with time varying energy prices, estimated power 
consumption from not programmable loads and the forecast 
of generation from renewable and uncontrollable units. The 
solution of integrating distributed control algorithms with 
dynamic programming approaches will be investigated. The 
Implications on the Power Grid are considered too. 
The state of the art technology offers inverters with 
harmonics reduction. The common method is to use simple 
PWM controlled inverters and multilevel topologies for 
reduction of the harmonics content. Other techniques involve 
a controller that samples the current and phase shifts the 
current for achieving PFC. This research is offering a 
different 
approach 
by 
namely 
considering 
the 
Inverter/Converter as a Time Variable Transformer (TVT) 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

whose power stage is designed to be a simple Inverter and 
with flexibility and enhanced characteristics which are 
obtained by advanced control schemes. In this research the 
following control schemes are being developed, analyzed, 
simulated and implemented: 
 
Power flow control that enables the BDI to perform as 
an Inverter or as a Rectifier by demand. 
 
Control scheme to reduce harmonics at inversion. 
 
Control scheme to reduce harmonics at rectification. 
In general, the system is considered as a TVT, as seen in 
Fig. 3,[7],[8]: 
 
Time Varying 
Transformer
TVT
K(t):1
DC BUS
AC Grid
E
 
 
Figure 3.  TVT presentation of Bi- Directional Inverter 
The DC side is held at voltage E by either a storage bank 
or a large capacitor. The AC grid side is either a one phase or 
a three phase system. Namely, for the one phase system, the 
voltage is: 
 
( )
sin(
)
m
v t
V
t



  
 
 
      (1) 
 
For the 3 phase system the AC grid will have three phase 
voltages as follows: 
 
1
0
2
0
2
( )
sin(
)
( )
sin(
120 )
( )
sin(
120 )
m
m
m
v t
V
t
v t
V
t
v t
V
t














 
 
 
     (2) 
 
In the case of a three phase system, the power injected or 
drawn from the grid is constant and in the case of a one 
phase system, it is time dependant and fluctuating in a 
frequency that is double the grid's frequency [9]. By 
applying an appropriate control signal k(t), the AC and DC 
sides can be matched in a way that harmonics will be 
eliminated. For example, in an AC to DC conversion in a  
one phase system, the control signal for eliminating the 
harmonics, the transfer ratio of the TVT is: (when 
considering a realistic system with an internal resistance of 
the DC source of r) [8], [10]: 
 


2
2
sin
( )
2
cos
cos 2
1
1
m
m
V
t
k t
rI
t
E
E





















 
      (3) 
In a three phase system, the control due to the constant 
power behavior is simpler. However, the hardware is more 
complex and therefore there are more control signals (for 
each phase). The control can be represented as: 
 
    

1
2
3
( )
0
0
( )
0
( )
0
0
0
( )
k t
k t
k t
k t




 





  
 
      (4) 
 
Each element in the matrix (4) can be subdivided into the 
signals relative to each one of the switches (FET, IGBT, etc). 
In this way each element can be represented as a sub matrix. 
 
B. Local and Grid Control 
The existence of a BDI at the entrance to each house 
yields a lot of opportunities. Since each BDI is equipped 
with a unit that has a control and ability to be programmed, 
the general system can be divided into two main controls, as 
seen in Fig. 4. 
In Fig.4 the two control schemes are presented. Each BDI 
is controlled for maximizing the energy efficiency in the 
house. This control has distributed characteristics. On the 
other end, the units are connected to the smart grid and have 
a centralized grid control. This control can also be in a few 
hierarchies (neighborhood, city, country, etc.). The grid 
control takes into account constrains of the grid, namely, the 
ability of the grid to absorb energy from renewable energy 
sources, reducing the losses on main transmission lines, 
overload and frequency changes in the grid, stability etc. The 
local domestic control then responds to the grids demands 
and can change the profile of the prosumer for achieving 
efficiency in all levels. 
 
 
Figure 4.  A block diagram of the electrical system in the future home. 
III. 
MICRO-GRID APPLICATION 
Another important application can be micro-grids, as 
seen in Fig.5. 
In this example a small grid is being established (such as 
in field deployment applications). The grid is constructed by 
small generators, storage devices, renewable (PV and wind), 
DC and AC loads and an optional grid connection. The 
mixture of sources types and load types makes a single AC 
grid very difficult to implement. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 5.  A DC bus in a micro-grid application 
In a micro-grid, the synchronization of the various 
sources is difficult due to stability issues. The DC bus is then 
the natural solution due to the fact that no synchronization is 
necessary. All sources are contributing the power to the 
common DC bus via a DC/DC converter or an AC/DC 
inverter. The optional BDI enables connection to the general 
grid for emergency power need or for injecting power to the 
grid. 
IV. 
SOCIAL ASPECTS OF SMART ELECTRICITY  
This research will engage all stake holders up-front. The 
assumption is that in order to speed up the adoption of any 
new technology, all stake holders must be involved [11]. In 
the case of the DC Bus, the stake holders have to be mapped. 
First, they have to be identified and then discover their real 
needs. Another aspect that is highlighted here is the fact that 
in a large project a full engagement of the end-users is 
necessary. This methodology is named: 'user centered design' 
(UCD) or a 'living laboratory'. Another important aspect for 
knowledge-based development is the notion that change can 
happen only if all stakeholders are involved A Living Lab 
has to be created in which the consumers will become full 
partners in the iterative research and development cycle. This 
methodology was successfully used in other research 
projects where developing systems with state of the art 
technology of wearable computing was introduced into 
different 
environments 
[12], (www.wearitatwork.com). 
Social aspects will thus be studied using an Action Research 
approach producing guidelines to the developers to be 
followed by further ethnographic research and interviews for 
data collection, once prototypes have been introduced and 
then followed by further guidelines to the developers of the 
new technology. The conclusions of the social research will 
be implemented as control schemes for controlling the 
electrical equipment as non- intrusive operation. 
Thus, this research is interdisciplinary with better 
probability of quick exploitation by all stakeholders. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper describes an ongoing research which aims to 
enable the insertion of a separate DC bus to private homes 
and other applications where it is natural to use this idea. The 
main reason for utilizing this idea is the fact that most loads 
are DC operated as opposed to the load characteristics in the 
past (30 to 40 years ago). The system is based on BDI with 
control schemes that are designed for maximizing the power 
efficiency, minimize the harmonics for maintaining power 
quality and take into consideration the social aspects of the 
prosumer. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hashmi, S. Hänninen, and K. Mäki, "Survey of Smart 
Grid 
Concepts, 
Architectures,and 
Technological 
Demonstrations Worldwide", 2011 IEEE PES Conference on 
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT Latin America), 
pp. 1-7, Nov, 2011. 
[2] L. Zhang, K. Sun, Y. Xing, L. Feng and H. Ge, " A Modular 
Grid-Connected Photovoltaic Generation System Based on 
DC Bus", IEEE Trans. On Power Electronics, Vol. 26, No. 2, 
pp. 523-531, Feb, 2011. 
[3] T.-F. Wu, Y.-K. Chen, G. –R. Yu and Y. –C. Chang, "Design 
and Development of DC- Distributed System with Grid 
Connected for Residential Applications", 8th International 
Conference on Power Electronics-ECCE, Asia, pp. 235-241, 
May 30th- June 3rd, Korea, 2011. 
[4] D. J. Hammerstrom, “AC Versus DC Distribution Systems --- 
Did We  Get Right?,” IEEE Power Engineering Society 
General Meeting pp. 1-5, 2007. 
[5] A. Mohamed, , and O. Mohammed, "Smart Power Flow 
Control in DC Distribution Systems Involving Sustainable 
Energy 
Sources", 
2010 
IEEE/PES 
Transmission 
and 
Distribution Conference and Exposition: Latin America 
pp.372-379, 8-10 Nov. 2010 
[6] M.H. Rashid, Power Electronics Handbook, third edition, 
Academic Press, 2001. 
[7]  S. Singer, " Power Conversion and Control with Zero AC 
Current 
Harmonics 
by 
Means 
of 
a 
Time-Variable 
Transformer", IEE Procidings, Vol. 131, PT. G, NO. 4, pp. 
147-150, AUG. 1984 
[8]  S. Singer, " Modeling and Synthesis of Harmonic-Free Power 
Conversion and var Compensation Systems", IEEE Trans. On 
Industrial Electronics, Vol. IE-34, No.2, pp. 257-161, May, 
1987.  
[9] E. Paal, Z. Tatai, "Grid Connected Inverters Influence on 
Power Quality of Smart Grid" , 14th International Power 
Electronics and Motion Control Conference, EPE-PEMC 
2010, pp.35-39, 2010. 
[10] I.A. Khan, R.W. Erickson, "Synthesis and Analysis of 
Harmonic-Free Three-Phase Inverters", IEEE Transactions on 
Power Electronics, Vol. 9, No. 6. pp, 567-575, Nov. 1994. 
[11] M. Armstrong, D.J. Atkinson, C. M. Johnson, and T.D. 
Abeyasekera," Low Order Harmonic Cancellation in a Grid 
Connected Multiple Inverter System Via Current Control 
Parameter 
Randomization", 
IEEE 
Trans. 
on 
Power 
Electronics, Vol. 20, No. 4, July 2005. 
[12] E. Pasher, Z. Popper and H. Raz," WearIT@work: a wearable 
computing solution for knowledge-based development", Int. 
J. Knowledge-Based Development, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 346-
360, 2011. 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

