Design Criteria to Advance Technologies for the Aging Population  
Claudia B. Rebola  
Industrial Design, School of Design 
University of Cincinnati 
Cincinnati, OH USA 
claudia.rebola@uc.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Design and technology can have a significant impact 
on the aging with disability population, empowering these 
individuals to sustain independence, maintain health, engage 
safely in basic activities at home/community, and fully 
participate in society. Even though a large number of resources 
exist, there is a need to increase knowledge, practice, and 
availability of universal design for the aging with disability 
population. A competition can be an effective way to tap into a 
rich, diverse and collective design intelligence to address these 
issues. The TechSAge Design Competition was launched to 
inspire talented designers to develop innovative technology-
enabled design solutions. As part of the competition, judging 
criteria were framed through universal design to guide 
contestants in the design of technologies. This included: 
independence, integration, implementation, inspiration, and 
progression. This paper discusses the judging as a mechanism 
to promote effective universal design practices for the aging 
with disability population, as well as presents examples of 
competition entries reflecting the design criteria. 
Keywords-Design Criteria; Design for Aging; Technologies 
for Aging; Competition.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
User-centered design approaches have been dominating 
the creative disciplines in order to design products that better 
serve users [1]. IDEO, a global design company, was one of 
the pioneers in harnessing the power of methods to develop a 
more critical, nuanced and responsive design process [2]. 
Since then, a plethora of methods has emerged in response to 
better understanding user needs, especially participatory 
design methods aimed at involving the targeted user in the 
design process for meeting the needs of the stakeholders [3]–
[6]. While the aforementioned methods are effective for 
better identifying user requirements, usability, and adoption, 
they still challenge the impact on design practices as it 
relates to users with varied abilities such as older adults. 
Aside from methods, designing for older adults requires 
focused expertise, considerations, and principles for bringing 
about effective solutions for the population. There are a 
number of sources aimed at giving easily accessible 
information as a primer for designing for older adults. Fisk et 
al. offer a practical introduction to human factors and older 
adults by illustrating practical translations of scientific data 
into design applications [7]. Similarly, Universal Design 
principles provide guidance for designing products and 
environments involving the consideration of the human 
factors across populations of varied abilities [8].  Universal 
Design holds the promise to design products and 
environments to be usable by all people, to the greatest 
extent possible, without the need for adaptation or 
specialized design [9][10].  
While Universal Design principles are an invaluable 
guide to better design products for older adults, there is still 
the need to better educate audiences for the successful 
implementation, especially when designing new technologies 
[11]. There is a need to collectively position the principles by 
reformulating how they are presented and communicated. 
The goal is to set forward a better mechanism to present the 
universal design principles embedded in practice.  
A competition can be an effective way to tap into a rich, 
diverse and collective design intelligence to address the 
current needs of our older adults. Moreover, it can be a 
venue to effectively address the implementation of Universal 
Design principles in the design process. This paper discusses 
the guiding criteria for the TechSAge Design Competition 
built on the Universal Design principles [12]. As a result, the 
competition aids in not only identifying exemplary practices 
in design for aging but mainly as a platform to educate and 
encourage communities of interest to solve the problems the 
aging population face. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section II presents  
Universal Design competitions while Section III introduces  
the TechSAge Design Competition mission. Section IV 
describes the application areas for designing technologies for 
the older adult population. Section V describes the criteria 
for guiding the design. Lastly, Section VI presents the 
exemplars resulting from the competition followed by 
concluding thoughts about the design competition for 
framing 
Universal 
Design 
principles 
for 
advancing 
technologies to support a healthy aging for all. 
II. 
UNIVERSAL DESIGN COMPETITIONS 
There are a number of Universal Design Competitions 
that encourage students to design products for people with 
varied abilities. University of Southern California has been 
hosting since 2014 the annual Morton Kesten Universal 
Design Competition in order to create an opportunity for 
students across the United States to develop universally-
designed spaces and products. The competition is developed 
in association with the Morton Kesten Summit, which is held 
every two years featuring the latest developments in aging-
in-place efforts by organizations and professionals across the 
country [13]. The competition is framed following the 
principles of Universal Design [8]. It challenges students to 
create an innovative design using the principles of Universal 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Design that support aging-in-place in one of two areas: 
Space: a) re-conceptualizing an existing kitchen/bath space; 
or b) creating a brand-new kitchen/bath space; or Product: 
developing a product/prototype that embraces and utilizes 
the ideas and principles of Universal Design for use at home. 
While the applicants submit a visual presentation along with 
a description and explanation for the process, judges use the 
criteria of: 1-having done market research; 2-integrating 
aesthetic appeal with function; 3- addressing feasibility and 
cost-effectiveness; 4-being environmentally friendly; 5- 
describing how it supports aging in place; and most 
important, 6- showcasing the exercise of the universal design 
principles.  
There 
is 
also 
the 
Universal 
Design 
Grand 
Challenge (UDGC) in partnership with the National 
Disability Authority [14]. The competition has also been 
running since 2014 with the goal of promoting and awarding 
excellence in student projects that feature solutions that work 
for everyone. They offer applicants the option of entering 
into three categories: 1- Information and Communication 
Technology; 2- Built Environments; and 3- Products and 
Services. The main criterion for success in the competition is 
to see products designed using the Principles of Universal 
Design, with user feedback at the heart of the design process 
[8].  The competition emphasizes that the goal is not aimed 
at submitting solutions for disabled people or assistive 
technology but designing solutions for all. As a requirement, 
contestants need to be in their final two years of study, 
postgraduate students and recent graduates enter their best 
project. Via the website, the competition provides 
contestants with information on the principles, success 
stories, and other online resources related to universal 
design.  
While both competition sites offer resources for 
understanding the principles and other relevant literature for 
the topic, contestants are left unguided with a set of 
principles not linked to measurable outcomes other than the 
principles alone. Though one of the competitions offer entry 
categories, the openness of application areas may also be 
limiting for educating contestants about Universal Design. 
While universal design aims at designing products for all, 
there is a need to understand needs and provide guidance on 
the implementation of the principles as it relates to 
populations.  
The Stanford Center on Longevity Design Challenge 
offers cash prizes and free entrepreneur mentorship in a 
competition open to all university students around the world 
who want to design products and services for optimizing 
long life for us all [15]. While the challenge topics change 
every year, they provide focus areas related to promoting 
habits that improve the quality of life for individuals across 
the lifespan for guiding design creativity. For example, the 
latest challenge focused on three areas: 1- Healthy Living; 2- 
Social Engagement; and 3- Financial Security. The main 
differentiating factor about this competition is its mentorship 
approach through the two-phase design. Semifinalists are 
provided with mentorship to further develop the products 
and services concepts. The contestants then compete with 
developed ideas for grand prizes and places. While the aim 
of the competition is to design for all, their judging criteria is 
focused on: 1- Alignment with Challenge Topic; 2- Potential 
for Impact; 3- Originality; 4- Probability of Implementation; 
and 5- Economic Viability. As the center states, the best 
designs usually are the ones that are innovative/novel, 
engaging, practical, scalable, inexpensive and readily 
understood, in which user testing of designs has been a 
critical step for past winners. While this competition guides 
contestants well in the application areas and measurable 
success outcomes for a specific population—older adults, it 
lacks the integration of Universal Design principles for 
guiding the successful design of products and services for the 
population.  
Addressing 
the 
aforementioned 
limitations 
and 
combining the properties of these three competitions, it 
brings about an opportunity to develop a unique competition 
mechanism to educate, guide and mentor students in the 
successful implementation of Universal Design principles 
linked to the aging population. The next section describes in 
detail the design of the TechSAge Design Competition.  
III. 
TECHSAGE COMPETITION 
The TechSAge Design Competition is developed to 
inspire talented designers to bring about innovative 
technology-enabled design solutions for the aging population 
[12]. The competition is designed to be a two-phase 
submission system.  
Phase I focuses on the conceptualization of the designs. 
Phase II focuses on further developing the design through 
prototyping, testing and co-designing while incorporating 
feedback from experts in the field. Phase II of the 
competition allows mentorship though feedback and 
partnerships. The competition links contestants with varied 
experts in the topics of universal design, gerontology, human 
factors, human-computer interaction, to mention a few 
through different sectors ranging from researchers to 
practitioners.  
The goals of deploying the competition are not only to 
ignite the design of products, services, and systems for the 
older adult population but to guide, educate and train 
international younger generations engaged in effectively 
designing technologies for aging with disability. More 
specifically, the competition is framed within the missions: 
 
 
To support people with chronic conditions and long-term 
impairments who are at risk of disability or increased 
disability due to comorbid age-related losses; 
 
By 
empowering 
these 
individuals 
to 
sustain 
independence; maintain health; engage safely in basic 
activities at home and in the community, and fully participate 
in society; 
 
Through increasing knowledge about, availability of, and 
access to effective, universally-designed technologies. 
IV. 
AREAS OF DESIGN FOR AGING 
Through the competition, contestants are given categories 
for entering their designs. The categories reflect the 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

contemporary practices of design across sectors, academia, 
and industry, responding to the needs of healthy aging [11]. 
As such, contestants can opt to submit in four different areas: 
1- Health at Home; 2- Social Connectedness; 3- Active 
Lifestyle; and 4- Community mobility, as follows: 
• 
 Health in the Home: 
This category is focused on proposing designed 
technology solutions for the home environment that 
support health and healthy activities in support to 
the healthcare system.  
• 
Social Connectedness: 
This category is focused on proposing designed 
technology solutions to encourage communication, 
connectedness with people and social activities. 
• 
Active Lifestyle: 
This category is focused on proposing designed 
technology solutions to promote physical and 
cognitive activities, and how activities can promote 
healthy lifestyles. 
• 
Community Mobility: 
This category is focused on proposing designed 
technology solutions to facilitate access to activities 
and/or locations. 
V. 
DESIGN CRITERIA 
Contestants are given resources in the areas of resources 
for understanding topics on design, universal design, aging, 
and disability. While the resources play a significant role in 
helping contestants in designing their products, services or 
experiences for the population, the competition judging 
criteria play a significant role. The criteria were developed 
through an iterative process of questioning the limitations of 
the Universal Design principles as they are applied to the 
aging population with disability. The Universal Design 
Principles are embedded as enablers in each criterion. The 
results are five criteria for advancing the Universal Design 
principles: 
1- 
Independence; 
2- 
Integration; 
3- 
Implementation; 4- Inspiration; and 5- Progression (see 
Table I). These criteria are used as an evaluation mechanism 
that guides the designs. The criteria are explained in the next 
subsections.  
TABLE I.  
DESIGN CRITERIA 
Design Criteria To Advance Technologies for the Aging Population 
Independence 
Universal Design  
Principles  
1: Equitable Use. 
2: Flexibility in Use. 
3: Simple and Intuitive Use. 
4: Perceptible Information. 
5: Tolerance for Error. 
6: Low Physical Effort. 
7: Size and Space for Approach 
and Use. 
Integration 
Implementation 
Inspiration 
Progression 
A. Independence 
The focus of setting this criterion is to guide contestants 
in proposing products and/or systems to empower older 
adults to take action in their lives. The goal is to overcome 
the concept of “taking care of” or “doing things for” and 
enabling older adults to take initiative, take care of and do 
things for their lives. 
B. Integration 
The focus of setting this criterion is to guide contestants 
in 
proposing 
products 
and/or 
systems 
to 
build 
intergenerational, supported and connected communities. 
The goal is to develop bottom-up approaches across 
generations that can help older adults have access to a 
community of care. 
C. Implementation 
The focus of setting this criterion is to guide contestants 
in proposing products and/or systems to have a successful 
effect and longevity in the aging population. The goal is to 
develop solutions that are feasible for implementation in the 
near future and more importantly, sustainable from the point 
of view of self-maintaining. 
D. Inspiration 
The focus of setting this criterion is to guide contestants 
in proposing products and/or systems that are forward 
thinking and enablers. The goal is to celebrate the aging 
populating with creative, attractive and pervasive solutions 
that avoid physical, visual or experiential segregation. 
E. Progression 
The focus of setting this criterion is to guide contestants 
in proposing products and/or systems that allow positive 
growth. The goal is to develop solutions that grow with the 
aging population and inspire them to do more and be more. 
VI. 
 COMPETITION ENTRIES AND RESULTS 
Two competitions were deployed since the proposed 
design. This section reports the results from the first two 
years of the TechSAge Design Competition.  
For the entries, contestants were asked to submit detailed 
documentation of the concept for Phase I which included 
conceptual thinking, motivation and concept generation, 
different views of 3D representation, solutions described in 
use 
(i.e. 
storyboard/scenario), 
material/electronics 
specifications, and an implementation plan noting its 
feasibility/cost. For Phase II, contestants were required to 
resubmit updated documentations a from Phase I but more 
importantly, 
adding 
descriptions 
of 
the 
technology 
components, and development of a testing prototype that is 
validated through user studies with older adults. Phase II also 
required an additional submission of a poster and video 
documentary.  
The entries were judged in both phases with the same on 
the proposed criteria. Phase I judging was online, while 
Phase II judging was performed via an exhibition (see Figure 
1).  
  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

  
Figure 1.  Jury evaluating Phase II of the comeptition. 
A. First TechSAge Design Comeptition 
For the first competition, submissions were distributed 
across categories as follows: Health at Home category 
received 39% of the total entries; Active Lifestyle category 
received 30% of the total entries; Social Connectedness 
category received 22% of the total entries; and Community 
Mobility category received 9% of the total entries. The 
distribution reveals an increased interest among contestants 
in designing health technologies for the home as opposed to 
a reduced interest in designing technologies that enable 
mobility for older adults aging with a disability. In the first 
year of the competition, up to three semifinalists for each 
category were selected to move to Phase II of the 
competition. Contestants received financial support to further 
develop their concepts into working testable prototypes.  
The 1st place was awarded to Dex, a smart foot care 
system designed to promote exercise and health management 
for people with diabetes (see Figure 2). The Dex system 
features pressure sensitive shoe insoles that interact with a 
smartphone, enabling the user to monitor their foot pressure 
and play various exergames.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Dex Smart Sole System. 
CommuniTea, a connected scheduling board for older 
adults, was awarded second place (see Figure 3). The peg 
board tablet offers a simple, connected way for people to 
plan meeting arrangements based on their activities, skills 
and interests [16]. The CommuniTea concept exemplifies 
well the criteria of Progression and Inspiration. 
An airport wayfinding app for senior travelers, known as 
GatePal, took third place (see Figure 4). GatePal provides 
step-by-step instructions for users to successfully navigate 
the airport and complete key tasks, from checking in, 
locating their gate, and finding their luggage [17]. GatePal is 
universally designed so that older adults with different 
functional abilities are able to use this app at their own pace 
and in their preferred way.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  CommuniTea Interctive Scheduling Board. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  GatePal Navigation System. 
While all winning entries demonstrate well all the 
criteria, the Dex concept exemplifies well the criteria of 
Independence and Integration; the CommuniTea concept 
exemplifies well the criteria of Progression and Inspiration; 
and the GatePal concept exemplifies well the criteria of 
Implementation, Integration and Independence. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

B. Second TechSAge Design Comeptition 
For the second competition, submissions were distributed 
across categories as follows: Social Connectedness category 
received 36% of the total entries; Active Lifestyle category 
received 29% of the total entries; Health at Home category 
received 21% of the total entries; and Community Mobility 
category received 14% of the total entries. Compared to the 
previous year, Active Lifestyle maintained the lead of 
interest while Health at Home decreased two positions down 
in interest, switching places with Social Connectedness in 
the lead. Whereas, Community Mobility remained as the 
least interest category.  
Overall, combining results from the two competitions, 
students responding to the population needs results in 
positioning Health at Home in the first place, Social 
Connectedness in the second place, Active Lifestyle in the 
third place and Community Mobility last (see Figure 5). 
With these results, there is an opportunity to increase 
awareness and resources to better promote the development 
of design and technologies focusing on mobility.  
 
 
Figure 5.  TechSAge Competition Submissions  
Distribution Across Categories. 
With entries representing a large number of international 
institutions, the jury selected Releaf not only as the top score 
in the Active Lifestyle category but also awarded the First 
Place Prize in the second TechSAge Design Competition 
(see Figure 6) [18]. Releaf was created with the goal of 
increasing the opportunity for active gardening for seniors 
considering the barriers such as lost grip strength. The design 
featured a robotic glove that uses cables and servos wired to 
a sensor controlled by the pinky to engage and disengage the 
active assistance when gripping tools. 
Project Nettle won top place in the Social Connectedness 
category (see Figure 7). The project focuses on designing 
interfaces which do not require glowing screens or lengthy 
training to comprehend but instead working naturally with 
the way information is absorbed by the senses and physically 
tying into familiar forms. Nettle is an intuitive screen less 
interface for community connection consisting of a teapot 
and mug and employing the beloved rituals of making tea. 
Unlike 
products 
for 
teleconferencing 
distant 
family 
members, Nettle offers a safe and fun way to incorporate 
social outreach into everyday routines, fostering resilient 
community ties over time. 
Project “MODU” won top category Health at Home. 
MODU is a universal multipurpose, customizable and 
modular assistive system designed to assist those who face 
challenges in mobility. 
 
Figure 6.  Releaf Robotic Gradening Glove. 
 
Figure 7.  Nettle Communication Device. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Building on the strengths of Universal Design, this paper 
discussed the TechSAge Design Competition, launched to 
inspire talented designers to develop innovative technology-
enabled design solutions. The competition features a 
mechanism to implement Universal Design training on a 
broad basis. At the application area, it also generates 
international awareness and understanding of aging with 
disability and encourage contestants in generating new 
technologies for successful aging with disability. For training 
and awareness, the competition advances criteria for 
evaluating successful technologies for the older adult 
population 
aging 
with 
disability. 
The 
criteria 
are: 
independence, integration, implementation, inspiration, and 
progression. This paper serves an attempt to provide 
organized criteria that the design for aging with disability 
community and related disciplines can adopt for advancing 
technologies to improve the lives of older adult aging with 
disability. The significance of this paper is to introduce 
approaches that better guide the design of products, 
technologies and/or services when designing for the older 
34%
29%
25%
12%
Health at Home
Social Connectedness
Active Lifestyle
Community Mobility
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

adults. Through this contest, students get to understand that 
design activities cannot be separated from abilities; design IS 
ability, and creative technologies can emerge from looking at 
disabilities as a source of inspiration for great designs for all. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The contents of this paper were developed under a grant 
from the National Institute on Disability, Independent 
Living, and Rehabilitation Research (NIDILRR grant 
number 90RE5016-01-00) under the auspices of the 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Engineering 
Research 
Center 
on 
Technologies to Support Successful Aging with Disability 
(TechSAge; www.techsage.gatech.edu). NIDILRR is a 
Center within the Administration for Community Living 
(ACL), Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS).  The contents of this paper do not necessarily 
represent the policy of NIDILRR, ACL, or HHS, and you 
should not assume endorsement by the Federal Government. 
REFERENCES 
[1] IDEO, Human-Centered Design Toolkit: An Open-Source 
Toolkit to Inspire New Solutions in the Developing World, 2 
edition. IDEO, 2011. 
[2] IDEO [Online]. Available: https://www.ideo.com. [Accessed: 
05-Mar-2018]. 
[3] B. Hanington and B. Martin, Universal Methods of Design: 
100 Ways to Research Complex Problems, Develop 
Innovative Ideas, and Design Effective Solutions, 58480th 
edition. Beverly, MA: Rockport Publishers, 2012. 
[4] L. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, Convivial Toolbox: Generative 
Research for the Front End of Design. Amsterdam: BIS 
Publishers, 2013. 
[5] E. B.-N. Sanders, E. Brandt, and T. Binder, “A Framework 
for Organizing the Tools and Techniques of Participatory 
Design,” in Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory 
Design Conference, New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 195–
198. 
[6] V. Kumar, 101 Design Methods: A Structured Approach for 
Driving Innovation in Your Organization, 1 edition. 
Hoboken, N.J: Wiley, 2012. 
[7] A. D. Fisk, W. A. Rogers, N. Charness, S. J. Czaja, and J. 
Sharit, Designing for Older Adults: Principles and Creative 
Human Factors Approaches, Second Edition, 2 edition. Boca 
Raton: CRC Press, 2009. 
[8] Center for Universal Design, “The Principles of Universal 
Design.” 
[Online] 
Available: 
https://projects.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/about_ud/udprincipl
es.htm. [Accessed: 28-Feb-2018]. 
[9] W. Lidwell, K. Holden, and J. Butler, Universal Principles of 
Design, Revised and Updated: 125 Ways to Enhance 
Usability, Influence Perception, Increase Appeal, Make 
Better Design Decisions. Rockport Publishers, 2010. 
[10] J. A. Sanford, Universal Design as a Rehabilitation Strategy: 
Design for the Ages, 1 edition. New York: Springer 
Publishing Company, 2012. 
[11] C. B. Rebola, Designed Technologies for Healthy Aging. 
Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2015. 
[12] TechSAge 
Design 
Competition 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://techsagecompetition.com. [Accessed: 05-Mar-2018]. 
[13]  USC Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, “Morton Kesten 
Universal 
Design 
Competition.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://gero.usc.edu/udcompetition/. [Accessed: 27-Feb-2018]. 
[14]  Centre for Excellence in Universal Design, “Universal 
Design Grand Challenge Student Awards.” [Online]. 
Available: http://universaldesign.ie/Awards/Student-Awards/. 
[Accessed: 27-Feb-2018]. 
[15] Standford Center of Longevity, “Design Challenge.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://longevity.stanford.edu/design-
challenge-2017-18/. [Accessed: 28-Feb-2018]. 
[16] P. 
Giret, 
“CommuniTea.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://paulingiret.com/communitea. [Accessed: 28-Feb-2018]. 
[17] Y. E. Liu, C. Harrington, S. Melgen, and J. A. Sanford, 
“GatePal – Universal Design for Airport Navigation to Allow 
Departing Travellers to Stay Informed,” in Universal Access 
in 
Human-Computer 
Interaction. 
Users 
and 
Context 
Diversity, Cham, 2016, pp. 586–594. 
[18] J. 
Chang, 
“Releaf 
Glove.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://justinchangdesign.com/?p=1345 
[Accessed: 
5-Mar-
2018].
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

