An Intelligence-Based Tool for Energy Management by Device Interoperability in 
Smart Houses 
 
Andrea Capitanelli, Alessandra Papetti, Margherita Peruzzini, Michele Germani 
Department of Industrial Engineering and Mathematical Sciences 
Università Politecnica delle Marche 
Ancona, Italy 
e-mail: [a.capitanelli; a.papetti; m.peruzzini; m.germani]@univpm.it 
 
 
Abstract — The recent developments in Information 
and Communication Technologies (ICT) and Internet of 
Things (IoT) make several house devices cooperate to 
each other to achieve higher energy performances and 
offer new services. However, the increasing embedded 
intelligence of smart devices is also generating a huge 
quantity of data, which must be properly managed. In 
fact, it is difficult to easily manage data to make certain 
functions available and to define a strategy for results 
maximization. This paper defines a methodology to 
improve smart home information management based on 
the selection, aggregation and classification of the 
sensible data and the correlation with the device 
typology, nature, and destination of use. Furthermore, a 
case study focused on washing machine is presented to 
demonstrate how this methodology can be implemented 
to realize a supporting tool encouraging service ideation 
to benefit the different subjects involved. The proposed 
model represents a first step towards the creation of a 
standard for smart house information management and 
device interoperability. 
 
Keywords - Smart houses; Smart information processing; 
Smart energy and optimal consumption; Intelligence-based 
service design; Device Interoperability. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The actual growing world energy demand and the high 
attention to environmental impact reduction are generating a 
strong convergence of scientific, industrialists and politicians 
interests towards the use of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) tools to support a more efficient use of 
the energy resources. In this regard, the concepts of "Smart 
Grid" and "Internet of Things" push a radical technological 
change where objects cooperate to achieve high-level 
objectives. They create a continuous flow of information that 
can be used to support real-time decisions, optimize the use 
of resources and increase safety and quality of life. Their 
application is particularly significant if considering that 
actually the residential sector is responsible for about 20% of 
total consumption and system usually operates without any 
users’ cooperation.  
Nowadays, the rising intelligence of smart devices can 
make a large amount of information available every day 
about personal actions as well as events taking place at home 
or outside. However, bad information management and 
difficulties in capturing and effectively transmitting essential 
data as well as interpreting such useful information for end-
users, may drastically reduce the potential benefits and not 
encourage the diffusion of smart homes [1]. Therefore, a 
dedicated supporting tool must be designed and developed 
aiming to efficiently manage information on the basis of the 
users’ purposes and ensure all the connected devices to be 
really interoperable. This scope is still an open issue in smart 
home system design [2].  
The paper proposes a methodology to generate an 
innovative tool able to intelligently manage smart devices 
information in order to make them interoperable and provide 
tailored services to final users. It has been conceived for 
domestic environments, but it could be translated also in 
similar contexts. It provides to properly catalogue home 
devices and all the generated information, and it suggests 
how to realize an interoperable system able to implement 
home devices interoperability based on the correlation 
between system information categories and device classes. 
Furthermore, the paper adopts the proposed methodology to 
support a real use case focusing on washing machines: it 
allows identifying how to properly manage information for 
energy efficiency and how to provide a set of additional 
services according to the specific user needs. 
The remainder of the paper is organized in four sections. 
Section II provides a quick overview on the state of the art of 
information management in smart houses. Section III 
describes 
the 
methodology 
steps 
and 
presents 
the 
information devices classification. Section IV illustrates the 
use case supporting the tool rationale definition for washing 
machine smart energy management. 
 
II. 
BACKGROUND ON INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN 
SMART HOUSES 
Over the years many definitions of smart home, also 
called smart houses, have been proposed [3]. The basic 
definition defines the smart home as a special home where 
all the sub-systems (lighting, security, household appliance, 
sensors, etc.) are interconnected allowing the homeowner to 
save energy, to reduce operating costs and to improve safety, 
comfort and multimedia services. In recent years, the 
technological 
research 
has 
focused 
on 
sub-systems 
integration, leading to the rapid growth of residential 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

gateways [4]. Thanks to a gateway, domotic solutions have 
the ability to manage all the devices connected to the home 
area network. 
A considerable amount of new solutions for the smart 
home automation have been recently developed, i.e., several 
systems with different communication protocols and 
architectures. Existing systems can be classified into two 
groups: open systems and proprietary systems. The former, 
defined as "standard", are systems whose operating 
specifications are public to give companies the possibility to 
develop compatible devices. Well-known examples are: 
Konnex [5], Lonworks [6], Zigbee [7]. Proprietary systems 
are produced by software houses, which usually keep 
technical information as reserved and make them not 
available to third parties. Some examples are electrical and 
home automation systems: SCS by Bticino [8], Vimar By-
Me [9], C-BUS of Schneider Electric [10]. 
The availability of common rules is fundamental to make 
devices interoperable when they are produced by different 
manufacturers [11]. It is expected that in the future home 
automation systems will be based on a single standard 
facilitating smart home management. However the issue of 
interoperability is particular challenging due to the huge 
amount of data to manage and the level of complexity of the 
devices’ integration in the home area network. The 
introduction of smart appliances within a home network is 
not a new idea. However, it requires a more deepen 
investigation in respect with the actual strategies to achieve 
an efficient energy management. In particular, it entails 
understanding which functions a certain device is able to 
perform when connected to the network, what information 
can be sent and what for, and which commands must be 
received. In this context, the project CHAIN by the European 
Committee of Domestic Equipment Manufacturers (CECED) 
faced device interoperability issues and established a 
preliminary application profile for home connected, 
promoting 
the 
standard 
European 
Committee 
for 
Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC) in 2007 [12] 
[13]. However, the issue of interoperability between different 
home appliances is still open. Although numerous researches 
recently proposed different system architectures to obtain an 
integrated interoperable system, the existing system do not 
define an overall and unique standard data management tool, 
that is still missing. Actually, the majority of projects are 
focusing on the energy issue [14]. The most significant are: 
Smart Energy 2.0 (USA) [15], Energy@home (Italy) [16], 
EEBus/E-Energy (Germany) [17] [18]. All of them focus on 
network energy management via data exchange with smart 
grids and do not care about data elaboration and mining 
addressing high-level services. Indeed, the existing systems 
are finalized to provide a specific benefit or service such as 
monitoring, 
analyzing 
and 
estimating 
the 
energy 
consumption [19], even if they have great potentiality to be 
exploited for several purposes. Therefore, they have the 
advantage of introducing standard rules for the information 
exchange between the users and the utilities.  
In addition to energy information management, many 
other services could be integrated thanks to the existing 
technological infrastructures. However, there is a lack of an 
overall vision and a strategic roadmap for future 
developments. Services related to devices remote control 
have been proposed but there are some open issues regarding 
their implementation on the white goods [20]. Also 
appliances remote maintenance concept is studied to provide 
benefits for both users and companies, but it has been 
considered as a concept independently of any architecture 
and available tools capabilities [21]. 
For this reason, the paper aims to identify and classify the 
involved information and defines the tool rationale to support 
service ideation satisfying the needs of the different subjects 
involved and achieving bigger advantages. The classification 
proposed aims to provide an overall vision of the smart 
house as a whole, able to consider all information necessary 
to include different services cited and encourage their 
continuous improvement. The idea to create a smart 
management tool supporting an integrated system also paves 
the way for companies to carry out market analysis and 
service tailoring, which are still ignored in this context. 
Furthermore, a possible innovation is represented by the use 
of the information generated by white goods for the elder 
people assistance, which is currently not exploited for such 
scope. 
III. 
RESEARCH APPROACH AND SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
By definition a smart home has a lot of smart devices 
connected to the Home Area Network (HAN), which collect 
and/or exchange information about some specific aspects. 
The research approach aims to guarantee the classification, 
aggregation and selection of all the information according to 
the device typology, and identify a strategy to manage all the 
involved information by an intelligence-based information 
management tool. The proposed approach consists of five 
main steps: 
1) 
Classification of smart home devices into a set 
of homogenous classes (for typology, treated data, home 
interaction modalities, etc.); 
2) 
Definition of a possible system architecture able 
to effectively realize the desired information management 
and device interoperability; 
3) 
Identification 
of 
a 
general 
information 
management model characterized by information categories 
that  are significant for the smart home; 
4) 
Correlation 
between 
device 
classes 
and 
information categories to match their specific funtioning 
with the general information management model; 
5) 
Definition of a set of application rule, to be 
impememented intelligence-based information management, 
to design services on the basis of the users’ needs. 
A. Smart home devices classification 
The most popular devices in smart home have been 
analyzed and classified into a set of homogeneous classes as 
follows. 
Meters: this class includes electricity, gas and water 
meters, whose data are communicated through the home 
network and the smart grid. Control and safety systems (e.g. 
electrical safety, gas leaks, water leaks) are included in this 
category. Indeed, it is possible to detect gas or water leak in 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

real time and, consequently, shut off the corresponding meter 
remotely.  
Consumer electronics: it includes entertainment systems 
(e.g., tv, game console, audio equipment and players) and 
small household appliances (e.g., coffee makers, electronic 
cutters or graters, toasters). They typically have low and 
constant energy consumption and can be easily switched 
off/on by a remote control without any preventative 
measures. For this category the power consumption can be 
simply monitored as well as its usage (e.g., when and how 
long they are used; state of devices to allow a remote 
control). 
Household appliances: it includes the major household 
appliances grouped as cooling (refrigerator and freezer), 
cooking (oven, hob, and hood) and laundry (washer, dryer, 
and dishwasher), enhanced by some items: to be 
interoperable, they require a microcontroller [13] that 
manages the processes during the automatic operation mode 
as well as the remote control mode; to be connected to a 
home network, they need a communication node that it can 
be installed on board or located outside (e.g., a cheaper 
solution has been developed by Indesit Company, called 
"Ultra-Low 
cost 
Power-line” 
(ULP) 
[22]). 
The 
communication node can also contain the energy control 
technology (e.g., Dynamic Demand Control (DDC) [23]). 
Lighting, doors/windows, and security: it comprehends 
common classes of components such as lighting, doors, 
windows, window curtains and shutters. All of them can be 
controlled by similar functions (e.g. turn on/off, intensity 
regulation, opening/closing control, opening regulation). 
This category also includes the intrusion detection sensors 
for doors and windows of a generic alarm system. 
Information characterizing these devices is typically used for 
remote control and interaction analysis. In particular, thanks 
to motion sensors for automatic light switching, it also 
allows users to be localized and abnormal behaviors to be 
detected by recording the user’s movements. It may be 
useful for Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) scopes to 
improve safety and human health. 
DHW and HVAC: it includes Domestic Hot Water 
devices (DHW), Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning 
devices (HVAC), and all the devices and sensors related to 
their functioning, even when located in different areas or on 
other devices (e.g., sensors of indoor/outdoor temperature, 
humidity sensors, etc.). 
B. Smart home interoperable architecture 
The creation of an interoperable system able to mutually 
control all the devices and properly manage all the necessary 
data requires: a) the physical device connection to an HAN 
and b) the communication infrastructure. These items 
guarantee to deliver all the collected data to a central 
management tool and make data available for other systems 
or services (e.g., data analysis and data mining applications, 
user monitoring, remote control). 
The existing physical connections have different 
capabilities in terms of distance, speed and volume data 
transfer. The list below shows the physical media that can be 
actually used in the smart home for interoperability purposes. 
Power line: it can be realized by exploiting the existing 
house wiring that supplies all the electrical devices and the 
Power Line Communication (PLC) technology. Since every 
home already has it, power line is convenient and does not 
require 
any 
additional 
wiring. 
The 
most 
common 
communication standards for power line are X10 [24], 
HomePlug [25], and LonWorks [6]. However interference 
and noise issues inherently occur [26].  
Phone line and other wiring: it includes all the other 
wirings of the smart home, such as twisted pair, coaxial 
cable, fiber optic and others. They allow managing high 
bandwidth and huge quantity of data, as required by 
entertainment systems. Wired communication through these 
connections is more stable than the wireless one, as it is less 
subject to external interference; however it entails higher 
costs. Some wired communication standards are Ethernet, 
USB, and HomePNA.  
Wireless network: it uses electromagnetic waves to 
connect devices and send/receive information. It is practical 
because it allows connecting numerous devices in an easy 
way, also including devices not connectable by a physical 
cable. However, there may cause some problems due to the 
signal propagation (i.e., distance, presence of physical 
barriers 
and 
interferences). 
Well-known 
wireless 
communication standards are ZigBee, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth. 
As far as the creation of a unique communication 
infrastructure is concerned, it is worth to consider that each 
device has different requirements in terms of connections 
and communication protocols and a residential gateway is 
required. The gateway concentrates all data and serves as a 
bridge between the HAN and the Internet to exploits other 
systems or web services [27]. The user interface can be local 
(e.g., system display) or remote (e.g., web application or 
smartphone app). The user will monitor home conditions, 
control the devices and be informed about specific. 
Furthermore also utilities and companies can access some 
data transmitted from the smart home, according to the 
privacy policy, for specific services (e.g., remote assistance).  
The described architecture represents a valid structure to 
implement the methodology and tool proposed in this paper. 
C. The system information management model 
Such a complex architecture requires managing a large 
amount of data derived from home devices, understanding 
their explicit and tacit relationships, and identifying a set of 
algorithms to realize functions and services. For these 
purposes all relevant information has been classified and 
algorithms investigated. In this context, several classification 
criteria have been already proposed [28] [29]. However the 
proposed model merges theoretical studies and industrial 
experience and has been validated by practical cases to 
satisfy the research goals. The model is based on four 
information categories and their correlation with the devices 
classes as presented in Table I. The selected categories are 
described below. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

TABLE I.  
CORRELATION MATRIX BETWEEN SYSTEM INFORMATION CATEGORIES AND DEVICE CLASSES 
  
  
DEVICE CLASSES 
Meters 
Consumer electronics 
Household appliances 
Lighting 
Doors and windows 
Security 
DHW and HVAC 
INFORMATION CATEGORIES 
Continuous 
monitoring 
Ambient light level 
  
  
  
x 
x 
  
  
Gas consumption 
x 
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Outdoor temperature 
  
  
  
  
x 
  
x 
Power consumption 
x 
x 
x 
x 
  
  
x 
Rooms humidity 
  
  
  
  
  
  
x 
Rooms temperature 
  
  
  
  
x 
  
x 
Video surveillance 
  
  
  
  
  
x 
  
Water consumption 
x 
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
User interaction 
Interaction time 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Scheduled on/off time 
  
x 
x 
x 
  
  
x 
Scheduled open/close 
  
  
  
  
x 
  
  
Set extra function 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Set light brightness 
  
  
  
x 
  
  
  
Set program 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Set speed 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Set temperature 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Shutting on/off time 
x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
User presence 
  
  
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
Control 
parameters 
Air quality 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Air temperature 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Burnt out bulb 
  
  
x 
x 
  
  
  
Component parameters 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Cycle time 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
  
Door lock 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
  
Electrical overload 
x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Flow rate 
x 
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Intrusion detected 
  
  
  
  
  
x 
  
Noise level 
  
x 
x 
  
  
  
x 
Pressure 
x 
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
Short circuit 
x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Water temperature 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
x 
State parameters 
Cycle in progress 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
  
Light Brightness 
  
  
  
x 
  
  
  
Load presence 
  
  
x 
  
  
  
  
On/Off 
x 
x 
x 
x 
  
x 
x 
Open/Close 
  
  
x 
  
x 
  
  
Opening rate 
  
  
  
  
x 
  
  
Standby 
  
x 
x 
  
  
  
x 
 
Continuous monitoring category: it includes all the 
information that is continuously monitored when the 
appliances are turned on. They mainly consist of resources 
consumption data (e.g., energy, water, etc.). They are used 
to provide a direct feedback to final users, who are 
encouraged to make a more efficient use of energy as 
demonstrated by recent studies [30]. 
User interaction category: it refers to all the 
information regarding the user-product interaction and 
characterizing the users behaviors (e.g., selected options, 
duration of use, time of use, frequency, etc.). Generally, 
data are aggregated for statistic analysis to define 
significant user profiles or frequently events as well as for 
marketing analysis. Data are usually sent when required. 
Control parameters category: it comprises all data 
referring to the functional device parameters, which serve 
for supervising the device function or the user security. 
They are continuously analyzed and compare with a set of 
target parameters to predict a problem or detect dangerous 
conditions. Generally, they are forwarded to companies or 
service providers when a specific threshold is exceed. 
State parameters category: it refers to all information 
regarding the device state in a particular scenario and 
carrying out the remote control.  
The classification can also include two extra 
categories, which are not directly linked to the devices but 
they are from other entities. They are: 
External data: they are generated by external entities 
but provide useful information about the scenario (e.g., 
building typology, occupants’ characteristics, economic 
indicators, fees of utilities, climatic conditions). Also 
reference 
information 
(e.g., 
datasheets, 
standard 
consumptions, etc.) about the smart appliances provided 
by the manufactures can be included.  
Derived data: they are obtained by other data 
elaboration such as statistics analysis and post-processing 
for realizing specific service functionalities (e.g., average 
time of use, average expenditure over the time, use 
frequency of a particular function). 
IV. 
USE CASE: WASHING MACHINE SMART ENERGY 
MANAGEMENT 
This section presents how the proposed approach can 
be implemented and how an energy management tool can 
be used for supporting washing machine use. The case 
study focuses on household appliances that represent one 
of the most challenging class since they combine 
mechanical, electrical and IT parts and having a strong 
interaction with the final user. As a consequence, the use 
case allows testing the approach in a complex scenario by 
using the proposed tool to manage a huge quantity of 
information and to delivery some related services. Among 
all white goods, the use case focuses on washing machines 
that are probably the most common appliance. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

The first step was classifying all the information 
provided by the washing machine item. The second step 
was defining how to manage each specific data for each 
information category. The model application to the use 
case is shown in Figure 1. 
Continuous monitoring data are monitored in real time 
and their management is mainly finalized to improve the 
use of energy resources and save money. Final users can 
compare real consumptions with the target ones, view and 
analyze historical trends, see how they evolve over time, 
and receive useful advices by exploiting also External data 
(e.g., how to use the washing machine to save energy or 
when to use it to save money according to the energy fee 
policy or providing interesting commercial offers on the 
basis of the user’s needs). Furthermore, grid frequency 
information is useful to implement the DDC technology 
[23] and utilities could encourage this solution by 
rewarding users with cost reduction.  
User interaction data monitoring allow companies 
analyzing how their customers act, which programs or 
functions are more frequently selected, and whether a 
specific product feature is successful as expected. The 
analysis of the users’ habits can also support the definition 
of new functions and product options. Indeed, household 
appliances are generally optimized according to the 
standards and the customer habits, but real data can 
confirm or rebut such preliminary statements. Standard 
market analyses do not always provide truthful and 
accurate data because they depend on sample users’ 
collaboration and personal subjectivity. In the use case, 
statistics will be based on the observation and direct 
analysis of user-product interaction. Such information are 
used by manufacturing companies and service providers: 
the former can identify a set of user profiles and optimize 
their products for each of them, and the latter can conceive 
and propose services according to their effective needs. 
Combining this information with External data (e.g., 
number 
of 
people, 
location, 
profession) 
allows 
characterizing users according to different parameters to 
improve the company strategies by low cost investments. 
Data concerning user interaction can be also analyzed to 
extract relevant information useful for elderly assistance to 
evaluate 
their 
quality 
of 
life 
and 
ensure 
their 
independence. For example, changes in user behavior or 
loss of abilities (memory problems, oblivions, etc.) can be 
detected by monitoring wrong actions and/or forgetfulness. 
Furthermore, users may be guided to choose the best 
washing program according to the clothes typology.  
Control parameters allow directly interacting with 
devices at work for different purposes. For instance, 
corrective maintenance can be replaced by more accurate 
preventive or predictive actions. Manufacturers and users 
can agree to obtain mutual benefits: the company staff 
monitors some specific parameters to prevent failures and 
observe the appliance behavior to improve the product 
itself; contemporarily users have a continuous assistance 
and benefit from the reduction of product failure rate and 
downtime, and from a lower product consumption. It can 
support observing a malfunctioning, which is usually not 
detected also for a long time while product consumptions 
increase. In the use case, monitoring the selected 
parameters allows analyzing cycle execution and verifying 
if performances are good as desired. When real data 
exceed the defined thresholds, the manufacturer (or the 
technical assistance company) is noticed, predictive 
maintenance actions are scheduled, and the user is 
informed.  
Figure 1.  Tool rationale to schedule the washing machine start. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

The proposed tool also facilitates the implementation 
of device remote control, which is a crucial aspect to 
guarantee people safety and comfort. The customer can 
visualize whether and how the machine is working at 
home, and remotely start, stop or change the washing 
program. The state parameters information is the basis to 
realize such a service. In fact, to do the remote control, the 
washing machine door has to be closed and system has to 
know if there is a cycle in progress. Furthermore, it is 
favorable to know if the load or detergent is not present in 
the machine in order to the remote control is not activated 
unnecessarily. Figure 1 presents the tool rationale and 
shows how the proposed model has been implemented for 
the use case. Identification of the user needs and system 
goals represents the first step for the development of the 
rationale behind the tool. For the proposed use case, the 
goal is scheduling the machine start to minimize the cycle 
energy cost according to the user’s preferences. The user 
can select the set time to finish and the laundry cycle 
settings directly on the washing machine control panel or 
through the GUI. According to the information received 
and read, grouped in the GET table, the tool performs the 
actions described in the EXECUTE table to achieve the 
expected purpose. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper presented a methodology to improve smart 
home 
information 
management 
promoting 
device 
interoperability. It allows classifying data originated by 
different smart appliances and matching them with an 
information management model to propose intelligence-
based services. The research represents the first step to 
create a standard for information management and system 
interoperability, which can be applied also for other 
applications. The use case focused on washing machines 
and shown how to intelligently control data to save energy 
and provide energy-based services. Future works will 
consider a more detailed information asset, a wider 
devices’ classification and will assess the achieved 
benefits by Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and Life Cycle 
Costing (LCC). In this way, a more reliable methodology 
will be defined and a more robust aggregation of data will 
be managed. The proposed tool paves the way to the 
creation of standard systems the future smart home.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. L. Kim and J. Hwang, “Real-time Energy Monitoring 
and Controlling System based on ZigBee Sensor 
Networks,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 5, pp. 794-
797, 2011. 
[2] C. Y. Chen, Y. P. Tsou, S. C. Liao, and C. T. Lin, 
“Implementing the Design of Smart Home and Achieving 
Energy Conservation,” 7th IEEE International Conference 
on Industrial Informatics (INDIN 2009), Jun. 2009, pp. 
273-276. 
[3] J. K. W. Wong, H. Li, and S. W. Wang, “Intelligent 
building research: a review,” Automation in Construction, 
vol. 14, pp. 143-159, 2005. 
[4] T. Perumal, A. R. Ramli, C. Y. Leong, K. Samsudin, and S. 
Mansor, “Interoperability Among Heterogeneous Systems 
in Smart Home Environment,” Atlantis Ambient and 
Pervasive Intelligence, vol. 2, pp. 141-157, 2010. 
[5] www.knx.org, 2013. 
[6] www.echelon.com, 2013. 
[7] www.zigbee.org, 2013. 
[8] www.bticino.it, 2013. 
[9] www.vimar.it, 2013. 
[10] www.schneider-electric.com, 2013. 
[11] A. Kailas, V. Cecchi, and A. Mukherjee, “A Survey of 
Communications and Networking Technologies for Energy 
Management in Buildings and Home Automation,” 
Hindawi Publishing Corporation Journal of Computer 
Networks and Communications, Article ID 932181, 2012. 
[12] http://www.cenelec.eu/dyn/www/f?p=WEB:110:31348057
71974213::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_LANG_ID:16860,25 
[13] http://www.cenelec.eu/dyn/www/f?p=WEB:110:35577073
2961203::::FSP_PROJECT,FSP_LANG_ID:21849,25 
[14] M. R. Alam, M. B. I. Reaz, and M. A. M. Ali “A Review of 
Smart 
Homes-Past, 
Present, 
and 
Future,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-Part C: 
Applications and Reviews, vol. 42, pp. 1190-1203, 2012. 
[15] www.zigbee.org/SmartEnergy/, 2013. 
[16] www.energy-home.it, 2013. 
[17] www.eebus.org, 2013. 
[18] www.e-energy.de, 2013. 
[19] J. Shin and J. Hwang, “Intelligent energy information 
service based on a multi-home environment,” Procedia 
Computer Science, vol. 10, pp. 197-204, 2012. 
[20] P. Bansal, E. Vineyard, and O. Abdelaziz, “Advances in 
household appliances - A review,” Applied Thermal 
Engineering, vol. 31, pp. 3748-3760, 2011. 
[21] A. Mullera, A. C. Marquezb, and B. Iung, “On the concept 
of 
e-maintenance: 
Review 
and 
current 
research,” 
Reliability Engineering and System Safety, vol. 93, pp. 
1165-1187,  2008. 
[22] A. Ricci, V. Aisa, V. Cascio, G. Matrella, and P. 
Ciampolini, “Connecting electrical appliances to a Home 
Network using low-cost Power-Line Communication,” 
International Symposium on Power Line Communications 
and Its Applications, Apr. 2005, pp. 300-304. 
[23] A. Ricci, B. Vinerba, E. Smargiassi, I. De Munari, V. Aisa, 
and P. Ciampolini, “Power-Grid Load Balancing by Using 
Smart Home Appliances,” Digest of Technical Papers. 
International Conference on Consumer Electronics ICCE, 
Jan. 2008, pp. 1-2. 
[24] www.x10.org, 2013. 
[25] www.homeplug.org, 2013. 
[26] A. Usman and S. H. Shami, “Evolution of Communication 
Technologies for Smart Grid applications,” Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 19, pp. 191-199, 2013. 
[27] S. T. Cheng, C. H. Wang, and G. J. Horng, “OSGi-based 
smart home architecture for heterogeneous network,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 39, pp. 12418-
12429, 2012. 
[28] M. J. Kofler, C. Reinisch, and W. Kastner, “A semantic 
representation of energy-related information in future smart 
homes,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 47, pp. 169-179, 2012. 
[29] L. G. Swan and V. I. Ugursal, “Modeling of end-use energy 
consumption in the residential sector: A review of 
modeling techniques,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 13, pp. 1819-1835, 2009. 
[30] D. Bonino, F. Corno, and L. De Russis, “Home energy 
consumption feedback: A user survey,” Energy and 
Buildings, vol. 47, pp. 383-393, 2012. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

