Comparative Analysis of Wireless Devices
Maria Astrakhantceva
Samara State Aerospace University,
Moskovskoe sh., 34,
Samara, 443086, Russia
E-mail: astrakhantseva.ma@megafonvolga.ru
Andrei Sukhov
Samara State Aerospace University,
Moskovskoe sh., 34,
Samara, 443086, Russia
E-mail: amskh@yandex.ru
Abstract—In this paper, we attempt to compare the quality of
communication wireless equipment manufactured by different
vendors. A range of smart devices operating in the various
standards are available on the market today. Special attention is
paid to the WiFi standard as the most popular and affordable
due to cheap hardware. The dependence of packet loss on
the signal power level and load bus is described using linear
approximation. The resulting model coefﬁcients have been found
in the experiment and compared. A description is given of the
experiment, which was conducted for several types of equipment,
and the main features of the equipment are identiﬁed.
Keywords-quantitative comparison of the WiFi equipments;
packet
loss;
connection
quality
of
the
wireless
standard
IEEE802.11b/g/n
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern mobility requires fast connection to the global
Internet network at any point in the shortest time. The most
popular and cheapest type of wireless connection is a wireless
Ethernet of Wi-Fi standard (IEEE 802.11g/n) [6]. A Wi-Fi
network can be easily deployed in any building, including
historic buildings where cabling is not possible.
The question of choosing the best wireless device for each
user arises during the connection [12], [20]. Existing methods
of comparison are based on qualitative methods
[4], [22],
which rely on subjective human experience. The purpose of
this work is the construction of a universal analytical model
to allow us to compare quantitatively several parameters that
describe objectively the quality of wireless connection.
For example, streaming has been hard to implement in
wireless networks using the old standards (Wi-Fi, GSM, 3G)
because of a large percentage of packet loss. The percentage
of packet loss should not exceed 0.5% for the quality of the
wireless connection to be good. Streaming is generally not
possible if the percentage of packet loss is over 1.5% [15].
Therefore, in this paper special attention will be given to
minimizing the percentage of packet loss.
This paper is organized as follows. First, in Section II, we
note the basic parameters affecting the quality of network
connectivity, and based on these, we construct a simple ana-
lytical model that allows a quantitative comparison of several
parameters describing objectively the quality of the wireless
connection. In order to verify the model, an experiment in
the wireless network is proposed in Section III. The kernel of
this experiment will be the investigated wireless equipment.
Finally, Section IV discusses the ramiﬁcations of the experi-
ments.
II. THE MODEL OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
According to the IETF standard from RFC 2544 [1], the
quality characteristics of a TCP/IP based network are de-
scribed by the following parameters [5]:
• D - packet delay (measured in milliseconds, ms);
• p - packet loss (measured in percent, %);
• j - delay variation or network jitter (measured in mil-
liseconds, ms);
• B - available bandwidth for end to end connections
(measured in Megabits per second, Mbps).
For wireless networks the main parameter of network con-
nection quality is packet loss. In [13], it was shown that video
quality in wireless networks due to packet loss of 80% and
only 20% of network jitter. The aim of this work is to identify
the main parameters of wireless networks that have the greatest
impact on the quality of network connection (packet loss).
Preliminary tests in wireless networks show that the fol-
lowing parameters have the greatest impact on the quality of
wireless network connections:
• I is the signal power of the wireless network, measured
in dBm where the zero reference point corresponds to one
milliwatt;
• B is the average load of the wireless switch.
Each type of wireless network equipment can communicate
within certain limits. The range of values for signal strength
and network load will form an operations region (gray area in
Fig. 1)
S ∈

Imin : Imax; 0 : Bmax

,
(1)
where
• Imax is the maximum signal power, which can be ob-
tained by the client;
• Imin is the minimum power level at which the network
connection will still be carried out;
• Bmax is the maximum load of the wireless hub, that is,
the total rate of all channels passing through a wireless
device.
This area is an inherent characteristic of wireless equipment
and should be displayed in its documentation. The limit values
of the operation region are determined by packet loss rate p,
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Fig. 1.
The working plane p(I, B) and operations region S
which should not exceed 15% [11]. For this level of error,
it is easy to ﬁnd the upper limits of the operation region,
respectively, Imin and Bmax. Averaged values of packet loss
p(I, B), depending on the channel loading B and power of
wireless signal I, will form some kind of surface (I, B, p),
which characterizes the quality of the network connection.
In the ﬁrst approximation, dependence p(I, B) can be
described by a linear function. In other words, a surface
(I, B, p) is a plane which can be described by a normal vector
⃗N and the initial point (p0, Imax, 0). This surface is shown in
Fig. 1.
Thus, we obtain a set of parameters that will be evaluated
as a wireless connection:
• Imax is the maximum signal power;
• Imin is the minimum signal power;
• Bmax is the total loading of the wireless equipment;
•
⃗N (−α, β, −1) is the normal vector to the working plane;
• (Imax, 0, p0) is the starting point.
The equation of the working plane can then be written as:
⃗N

⃗R − ⃗R0

= 0,
(2)
where
• ⃗R (I, B, p) is a vector that characterizes the wireless
network state at the current time;
•
⃗R0 (Imax, 0, p0) is a vector characterizing the wireless
network state at maximal signal power.
Turning to the variables, we obtain a linear dependence for
function p(I, B):
p = p0 + α (Imax − I) + βB
(3)
where, coefﬁcients α and β reﬂect the linear relationship
between packet loss p vs signal strength I and packet loss
p vs the bus load of switch B correspondingly.
The question arises, in which case a linear approximation
can be used. During the experiment three values Ii, Bi, pi are
Fig. 2.
Scheme of experiment with iperf utility
measured. Next, we try to formulate the conditions that should
be applied to experimental data in order to be able to use
a linear approximation of Eqn. (3). As main criterion, it is
advisable to choose the following condition: the maximum
change of value p on the working area S of Eqn. (1) should
be two times higher than the experimental error. This condition
in an analytical form can be written as follows:
max ∆ptheor > 2∆pexp.
(4)
The values of the linear coefﬁcients α and β of Eqn. (3)
are found by the least squares method from the minimum to
the experimental error:
∆pexp =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
(pi − αIi − βBi)2,
(5)
where α and β should satisfy the condition
N
X
i=1
pi = α
N
X
i=1
Ii + β
N
X
i=1
Bi,
(6)
and they should be run through a range of possible values with
a step ∆α and ∆β, that is easy to implement for a grid with
parallel programming. Then the condition of sufﬁciency of the
linear approximation looks like:
|α(Imax − Imin)| + |β(Bmax − Bmin)|
≥ 2
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
(pi − αIi − βBi)2,
(7)
N is the number of measurements.
III. EXPERIMENT TESTS
In order to verify the above model and to calculate the
model coefﬁcients α and β, it is necessary to organize an
experiment with the wireless network, the core of which
will be the investigated equipment. The loading of wireless
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

switch B is removed using snmp protocol (simple network
management protocol [3]) directly with the wireless devices.
The scheme of the experiment is shown in Fig. 2.
Wireless switch is connected to the network via a twisted
pair. During the experiment, we study only one wireless
communication channel between the switch and the laptop.
In the proposed scheme, only the switch is replaced under
test, all tests were performed under equal conditions. In this
experiment, we compare the packet loss at equal signal power
and switch load.
In order to measure the signal power of the wireless
networks, the following utilities were installed on the computer
and tested: NetStumbler, inSSIDer, Wi-Fi SiStr, Wi-Fi Hopper.
Next, we present a comparative analysis of these products:
• NetStumbler is a tool for Windows that facilitates detec-
tion of Wireless LANs using the 802.11b, 802.11a and
802.11g WLAN standards. It runs on Microsoft Windows
operating systems from Windows 2000 to Windows XP.
The program is commonly used for: wardriving, verifying
network conﬁgurations, ﬁnding locations with poor cover-
age in a WLAN, detecting causes of wireless interference,
detecting unauthorized (rogue) access points, aiming di-
rectional antennas for long-haul WLAN links [18].
• inSSIDer like NetStumbler uses active scanning tech-
niques, and all found the information on access points
shown in the table [7].
• Wi-Fi SiStr works steadily and is compatible with
other software. It is particularly suitable for our exper-
iments [17].
• Wi-Fi Hopper can display details like SSID, network
mode, encryption type, RSSI, frequency and channel,
amongst numerous others, for a complete picture of the
environment. It is easy to ﬁlter out classes of networks
by using the network ﬁlters. Additionally, a GPS device
can be used for reviewing the approximate locations of
the detected access points [9].
From all the programs listed above, only Wi-Fi SiStr
works stably in conjunction with the software (Videolan [21],
Wireshark [16]). Other programs use active monitoring of
the network and do not allow parallel operation of other
applications, namely, to invalidate a connection to a wireless
network.
Wireshark software was used for analysis of packet loss.
This allows the user to view all the network trafﬁc in a real-
time regime. Wireshark distinguishes between the structures of
different network protocols, and therefore allows us to parse
the network packet, showing the value of each protocol ﬁeld at
any level. For our experiments, the use of a built-in Wireshark
RTP ﬂow analyzer was important to show the percentage of
packet loss.
On a laptop connected to a wireless network, two programs
were installed for network monitoring:
• iperf for information about the quality of the connection
(j, p, B) [8],
• Wi-Fi SiStr for measuring the signal strength (I),
• Wireshark for measuring the percentage of packet loss,
• Videolan for organizing the RTP stream.
With the utility iperf installed on the server we are able to
create the required network loading with different hosts. On
the server side, the iperf utility was run with the following
options:
iperf -s -u -i.
On the laptop side (client), it starts with the following
options:
iperf -c node2 -u -b 2m,
where node2 is IP address of the server, m is the required
switch loading. The scheme was originally used by testing
iperf, as shown in Fig. 2. In order to change the signal levels,
the distance between the laptop and switch is changed. In
the experiment, we investigated wireless switches produced
by 3COM (Model 7760) and D-Link (DAP-1150).
Because we were limited in time, only two equipment types
of two different manufacturers, D-Link and 3 COM, have
been tested. In the near future different wireless equipment
manufactured Cisco and Juniper is planned for testing.
A further feature of the utility iperf became clear during
the experiment. During measurement, it seeks to minimize the
packet loss by reducing the connection speed. Therefore, the
characteristics of the equipment are the dependence of the
data transfer rate of signal power and given value B. The
experimental setup was upgraded to detect packet loss (see
Fig. 3).
The
measurements
were
performed
with
RTP/UDP
streams [19].For our purposes, it is sufﬁcient to measure only
the percentage of lost packets in the stream. Since inside the
RTP/UDP stream packets are numbered, then packet loss is
easy to ﬁx at constant speed of transmission. It should be
noted that this study does not address the quality of the percept
video [10], [2], as well as different types of encryption.
Video was selected and encoded for transmission on the
network at different speeds (500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10 000
Kbps). Streaming was implemented using the Videolan server
(vlc) and the receiving stream data was recorded using the net-
work analyzer Wireshark. The RTP streams analyzer integrated
into this software package shows automatically the percentage
of packet loss, which varies depending on the signal I.
IV. THE RESULTS OF MEASUREMENTS
For RTP streams we obtained three values p, I, B, where I
is measured by Wi-Fi SiStr, B is wondered how the ﬂow rate
of during video. The data were processed in accordance with
the algorithms given in Section II, and the data are summarized
in Table I.
Parameters α and β were calculated as a result of testing
with different loads of equipment and signal levels. They
characterize the quality of wireless equipment and satisfy
Eqns. (5) and (6).
For a wireless switch produced by 3COM (model 7760),
measuring the level of the signal network shows that the
maximum power Imax does not exceed -25 dBm. When the
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Fig. 3.
Scheme of experiment with RTP/UDP stream
TABLE I
BASIC PARAMETERS OF ANALYTIC MODEL
Switch
Imax, dBm
Imin, dBm
Bmax, Mbps
α, dBm−1
β, Kbps−1
3COM
-30
-80
25
(1.0 ± 0.3) × 10−3
(1.0 ± 0.6) × 10−6
D-Link
-15
-70
25
(2.2 ± 1.2) × 10−3
(2.0 ± 1.6) × 10−6
signal level Imin = -80 dBm, connection terminates. Maxi-
mum load Bmax does not exceed 25 Mbps. The quality of
communication depends largely on the power of the received
signal and not on the speed of RTP streams.
The D-Link wireless switch (model DAP-1150) shows
greater signal power Imax = -15 than the 3COM. Other values
do not differ greatly from the 3COM switch. Measurements
for the wireless routers produced by D-Link and 3COM are
given in Table I.
Values of α and β coefﬁcients represent the slope angle of
the line in the planes (p, I) and (p, B). Comparison of α and
β coefﬁcients on the working area indicates that the signal
power deﬁnes the communication quality by 80 percent. In
general, the equipment 3COM showed that its performance in
more than two times better than the competitor D-Link.
It should be noted that the network conﬁguration of IEEE
802.11n is optimized to reduce the percentage of packet loss.
When reducing the power of the received signal, the baud
rate automatically drops to a value at which packets are no
longer lost. The real network load is reduced by 3-4 times
compared with that given by the utility iperf option m. Thus,
the communication quality at comparable settings when using
the D-Link router is almost an order of magnitude lower.
The TCP/IP connection is considered to be good if packet
loss does not exceed 0.5% [2], [14]. The obtained result is at
least an order lower than the good level.
In operating the model, experience of networks of standard
IEEE 802.11g was used for the network connections, which
are characterized by a signiﬁcant percentage of packet loss.
The IEEE 802.11n standard, however, is characterized by a
small percentage of errors, so the model presented here does
not describe the quality of the network connection well and
needs modiﬁcation.
The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 3, during the
experiment to evaluate the bandwidth used by the utility iperf.
The essence of the experiment is that for a given bandwidth is
a real load is considerably less, depending on the capacity of
the wireless signal. Experiments have shown that much better
equipment can be described by the following relationship:
• Breal is a real value bandwidth using the utility iperf;
• Biperf is a value indicating the key m in the utility iperf;
• I Wi-Fi Sistr is received signal strength.
The experimental results are presented in graphical form
depending on the achieved bandwidth of the signal power
are shown in Fig. 4. For example, when using iperf with
bandwidth Biperf=20 Mbps and signal level I = -70 Dbm,
the real speed of data transmission in a wireless network will
be
• for 3COM B3COM
real
= 6,8 Mbps
and
• for D-Link BD−Link
real
= 800 Kbps (see Fig. 4).
From this we can conclude that the quality of communica-
tion at comparable parameters when using a D-Link router is
of a lower order.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a simple analytical model is constructed to
compare the quality of wireless networks. Several parameters
are selected for quantitative comparison of the investigated
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Fig. 4.
Real iperf bandwidth
equipment. These options allow us to objectively describe
the quality of the wireless standard IEEE802.11b/g/n. The
experiments have conﬁrmed the suitability of the model for
assessing the quality of wireless equipment. Also, the study
revealed the superiority of the 3COM wireless device over
the D-Link equipment. However, our model needs to be
clariﬁed, as IEEE 802.11n networks are characterized by a
low percentage of losses that can be achieved by reducing the
data rate.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Bradner and J. McQuaid, Benchmarking Methodology for Network
Interconnect Devices, RFC 2544, March, 1999.
[2] P. Calyam, M. Sridharan, W. Mandrawa, P. Schopis, Performance Mea-
surement and Analysis of H.323 Trafﬁc, Passive and Active Measurement
Workshop (PAM), Volume 3015, April, 2004, pp. 137-146.
[3] J.D. Case, M. Fedor, M.L. Schoffstall and J. Davin, A Simple Network
Management Protocol (SNMP), RFC 1157, May, 1990.
[4] P. Deshpande, X. Hou, and Samir R. Das, Performance Comparison of
3G and Metro-Scale WiFi for Vehicular Network Access, in Proc. of
Conference on Internet Measurement, 2010, pp. 301-307.
[5] M. Jain and C. Dovrolis, End-to-end available bandwidth: Measurement
methodology, dynamics, and relation with TCP throughput, IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking 11(4), August, 2003, pp. 537-549.
[6] IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Phys-
ical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations (Part 11), 1999.
[7] inSSIDer, http://www.metageek.net/products/inssider.
[8] Iperf, http://sourceforge.net/projects/iperf.
[9] WiFi Hopper, http://wiﬁhopper.com.
[10] J. Klaue, B. Rathke, and A. Wolisz,”Evalvid-a framework for video
transmission and quality evaluation,”in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Modeling
Techniques and Tools for Computer Performance Evaluation, Urbana,
IL, Volume 2794, September, 2003, pp. 255-272.
[11] A. Kostuch, K. Gierlowski and J. Wozniak, Performance analysis of
multicast video streaming in IEEE 802.11 b/g/n testbed environment, in
Proc. IFIP of Conference on Wireless and Mobile Networking, Volume
308, September, 2009, pp. 92-105.
[12] A. Lyakhov and V. Vishnevsky, Comparative Study of 802.11 DCF and
its modiﬁcation in the presence of noise, Wireless Networks 11, 2005,
pp. 729-740.
[13] E. Sagatov, A. Sukhov and P. Calyam, Inﬂuence of Distortions of Key
Frames on Video Transfer in Wireless Networks, in IEEE International
Symposium on Image/Video Communications over Fixed and Mobile
Networks (ISIVC), May, 2010.
[14] Leandro Melo de Sales, Hyggo O. Almeida and Angelo Perkusich, On
the Performance of TCP, UDP and DCCP over 802.11g Networks, in
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM symposium on Applied computing, 2008,
pp. 2074-2078.
[15] J. Seyba, B. Mullins and G. Bonafede, Audio-video capacity of an IEEE
802.11g wireless LAN, 2007 International Symposium on Collaborative
Technologies and Systems (CTS 2007), Orlando FL, May, 2007, pp.
372-378.
[16] Wireshark Foundation: Wireshark. Go Deep, http://www.wireshark.org/.
[17] Wi-Fi SiStr, http://www.softpedia.com/get/Multimedia/ Audio/Other-
AUDIO-Tools/WiFi-SiStr.shtml.
[18] NetStumbler, http://www.netstumbler.com/.
[19] H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick, V. Jacobson, RTP: A Transport
Protocol for Real-Time Applications, RFC-1889, 1996.
[20] A. Symington, A Hardware Testbed for Measuring IEEE 802.11g DCF
Performance, Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of Computer and
Telecommunication Systems, 2009, MASCOTS ’09, pp. 61-67.
[21] VideoLAN Team: VideoLAN, Free Streaming and Multimedia Solutions
for All OS!,http://www.videolan.org/.
[22] Paul A Zandbergen, Accuracy of iPhone Locations: A Comparison of
Assisted GPS, WiFi and Cellular Positioning, Transactions in GIS, 13,
2009, pp. 5-26.
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

