IdeaBulb: A Smart and Tangible User Interface 
for Monitoring Ideation During Creative Sessions 
 
Julien Ambrosino 
ESTIA, Technopôle Izaberl 
F-64210 Bidart 
IMS, UMR 5218, Bât.A31, 
351 Cours de la Libération, F-33400 Talence 
Aerospace Valley, Chez ENSAM ParisTech 
F-33405 Talence Cedex 
ambrosino@aerospace-valley.com 
Maxime Daniel 
ESTIA, Technopôle Izaberl 
F-64210 Bidart 
LaBRI, UMR 5800, 
351 Cours de la Libération, F-33400 Talence 
m.daniel@estia.fr 
Dimitri Masson 
ESTIA, Technopôle Izaberl 
F-64210 Bidart 
d.masson@estia.fr 
 
 
 
 
Jérémy Legardeur 
ESTIA, Technopôle Izaberl 
F-64210 Bidart 
IMS, UMR 5218, Bât.A31, 
351 Cours de la Libération, F-33400 Talence 
j.legardeur@estia.fr 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a tangible user interface 
for the monitoring of new ideas generations (ideation phase) 
during creative sessions. Based on the analysis of different 
brainstorming, we highlight the dynamic of ideas production 
by different groups during ideation phase using electronic 
devices. We claim that this tangible user interface is designed 
in order to give live feedback concerning these dynamic of 
ideas production to the participants and the facilitator. Our 
work is the result of the interaction between two scientific 
approaches: the analysis of creative sessions and the design of 
tangible user interface. The result of our experiments show a 
creative cliff and propose a design concept for monitoring 
ideation phase. 
Keywords—creativity; ideation; tangible interface; idea 
generation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The use of creative processes is a factor increasingly 
recognized as essential in the emergence of new ideas or 
business opportunities [1]–[3]. These processes can be 
declined in a punctual way by involving groups of 
participants in a creative session, or a brainstorm session [4]. 
Open-Innovation oriented creative sessions gather 
participants 
from 
different 
backgrounds 
– 
services, 
companies - from clusters are more likely to be competitive 
domestically and globally when their business is competitive 
and collaborative at the same time [5]. These ambivalent 
aptitudes create a context of coopetition [6]. 
Creative sessions are day events led sometimes by a 
facilitator (internal or external) to help the generation and the 
evaluation of new ideas, also they follow a process 
characterized by a succession of convergent and divergent 
main phases according to the facilitation model proposed by 
Ambrosino et al. [7]. 
The generation of ideas called the ideation phase is a 
critical part of the innovation process [8] where participants 
are asked to produce as many ideas as possible in an allotted 
time. Time-constrained is thus important, because when 
deadline is fixed, it add an emotional power in the form of 
fear, lest participants may fall down [9]. 
In this article, we propose first to analyze the ideation 
phase of creative sessions in order to highlight the dynamic 
of ideas production within the group. 
Second, we propose a tangible user interface for the 
monitoring of ideation phase in order to improve creative 
sessions by giving to the participants and the facilitator a live 
feedback concerning these dynamic of ideas production. 
II. 
BRAINSTORMING TECHNIQUE AND SUPPORT TOOLS   
Classic brainstorming usually causes blocking and slows 
down the generation of ideas in groups [10]. Galuppe et al. 
[11] show electronic brainstorming systems can improve 
creative sessions by acting on three classes of explanatory 
mechanisms 
which 
can cause productivity 
loss 
in 
brainstorming groups: 
 
Procedural mechanisms like production blocking 
[12], when just only a person can speak at a time. 
 
Social psychology mechanisms  like drive-arousal 
[13] and self-attention [14], which is due to the 
presence of the other people and individual 
membership in the group. 
 
Economic mechanisms like social loafing [15] and 
free-riding [16], which correspond to an intentional 
withdrawal.  
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

IdeaValuation 
[17] 
is 
a 
structured 
electronic 
brainstorming tool. It supports the ideation and evaluation 
through a discovering matrix [18]. The matrix is composed 
of needs (rows) and means (columns). As advised by [10], 
the facilitator using IdeaValuation invites participants first 
to generate their ideas in individually in the relevant cells of 
the matrix. 
Then, these ideas are discussed and evaluated in a group 
session, following the instruction of the facilitator to 
evaluate each idea in turns. For each idea, the evaluation is 
done along four criteria and is followed by a short 
discussion between participants. 
III. 
CHARACTERIZING THE IDEAS PRODUCTION 
A. Experimental setup and process 
Simultaneously, two creative sessions were performed in 
an event dedicated to Innovation in France. Groups are 
composed of participants who are members of the regional 
Agency of Development and Innovation in Nouvelle-
Aquitaine (ADI-NA). There are located in two different 
rooms and the rooms do not interact together. 
First participants are introduced to IdeaValuation tool 
and in particular the discovering matrix used for this event. 
Then, participants are then invited to generate as many ideas 
as possible, following one of the 4 fundamental rules of 
brainstorming [19]. They use a Samsung Galaxy Tab A 
tablet connected by WIFI. 
Some characteristics of these ideation phases, which last 
20 minutes, are described in the matrix, in TABLE I. 
TABLE I.  CHARACTERISTIC SETTINGS OF TWO WORKSHOPS 
Information according 
phase concerned 
Workshop 1 
Workshop 2 
Registrering 
Thematics adressed 
Marine 
Renewable 
Energies 
Biomimicry for 
Sustainable 
Housing 
Number of 
participants registred 
42 
26 
Initial motivation 
“Expand my 
network” 
10 
6 
“Generate ideas 
for collaborative 
innovation 
projects” 
25 
14 
“Other” 
7 
12 
Discovering 
matrix 
Type of entries 
Needs vs Means 
Needs vs 
Means 
Size 
4 x 5 
5 x 5 
Results of 
ideation phase 
Number of 
participants who 
generate ideas 
23 
26 
Total amount of ideas 
79 
79 
 
While there were more participants registered to the 
workshop 1, only 23 of them submitted ideas through 
IdeaValuation, resulting in two groups of 23 and 26 idea 
producers. 
B. Observations and analyses 
The use of an electronic brainstorming tool such as 
IdeaValuation allows to monitor the production of ideas 
during the ideation phase. During 20 minutes of ideation 
phase, we compute every 2 min two metrics: the amount of 
ideas generated and the flow. 
1) Evolution of amount of ideas generated 
Figure 1 indicates the evolution of the amount of ideas 
generated during the ideation phase for both workshops. 
Participants slowly start to produce ideas. Then, 10 
minutes after the beginning, the group reaches a peak 
followed by a sharp drop: we observe it in the amount of 
ideas proposed after 12 minutes for group 1 and after 16 
minutes for group 2. In the case of group 2, no idea was 
proposed during the last three minutes. This part of the curve 
can be called the creative cliff. 
 
 
 
 
An ideal ideation phase could see all participants produce 
regularly until the end of the session. Without any external 
solicitation, the participants seem to be more limited by their 
ability to generate ideas than by time. 
 
2) Evolution of ideation flow 
Figure 2 indicates the evolution of ideation flow 
acceleration during ideation phase. 
 
 
 
 
creative cliff 
Figure 1. Highlighting the creative cliff 
Figure 2. Highlighting of the warning area of creativity 
warning area for creativity 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

There are some positive and negative variations of values 
which reflect the acceleration or deceleration flow of amount 
of ideas proposed. It seems to be a boundary beyond which 
the production of ideas tends to a zero value. When the 
curves tend to intersect this boundary, ideation flow is 
alarming. This part of the curve can be called the “warning 
area for creativity”. 
C. Opportunities for a tangible support tool 
1) Lack of efficiency: boost productivy 
As we have seen the time allocated to ideation phase is 
not fully used by all participant, the idea production cliff in 
the last quarter of the ideation phase. Individual generation 
lets them express and formulate ideas as they want, but the 
absence of external action, for example by giving to 
participants a live feedback about their progress may be a 
lever to increase their productivity. 
In workshop 1, many participants do not generate any 
idea. Although, the absence of propositions by 19 
participants in this workshop is notable, it is difficult to 
identify clearly the causes, but the use of a full digital 
solution may be at stake. 
2) Lack of competition and collaboration 
Despite the fact that competition benefits between 
intergroup 
are 
clearly 
highlighted 
as 
described 
in 
Introduction, participants need to have a live feedback of 
their progress. The only element which may be perceived as 
a competition one is the visualization of the other 
participants keyboarding during ideation phase. Currently, 
participants do not have any information about the real 
progress of the other participants. 
Collaboration benefits are implied since participants 
accept to involve themselves in an open-innovation oriented 
creative session. However, they individually generate ideas 
and they cannot read the ideas of the others. So, 
collaboration may be perceived as limited during ideation 
phase. 
In order to investigate these opportunities, we consider 
tangible user interfaces as a mean to give back control to 
participants on the productivity. 
IV. 
IDEABULB: A TANGIBLE USER INTERFACE DESIGNED 
FOR IMPROVING CREATIVE SESSIONS 
Tangible User Interfaces (TUIs) use physical objects to 
represent and/or manipulate digital information [20]. With 
the use of electronic brainstorming systems, we think TUIs 
to be adequate for enhancing collaboration and ideation in 
creative sessions thanks to a live feedback represented by a 
physical object, in order to make the ideation more tangible. 
They are known to support social interaction (e.g., 
collaboration) and to support thinking process (e.g., problem 
solving) through bodily actions, physical manipulation, and 
tangible representations [21]. 
A. Peripheral Interaction and Ambient Interfaces 
Because ideation phase during a creative session is a 
cognitive process that requires central attention and a lot of 
mental resources, we wish to design an ambient TUI 
working with peripheral attention and requiring little mental 
resources to interact with. 
Ambient awareness makes human beings aware of 
surrounding information [22]. Weiser and Brown [23] 
defined calm technologies as technologies able to move from 
the peripheral attention to the central attention of users, and 
backwards. They affirmed that calm technologies enhance 
ambient awareness by bringing more details into the 
periphery: it makes users aware of what is happening around 
them, what is going to happen, and what has just happened. 
In line with calm technologies, Ambient Interfaces use 
perceptible artefacts (e.g., shape, motion, sound, color, light, 
smell, air) to represent unobtrusively digital information. 
Bakker et al. [24] peripheral noted that recent studies have 
been conducted under the term peripheral interaction, 
aiming to broaden the scope of calm technology by 
designing not only for the perceptual periphery but also 
enabling users to physically interact with the digital world in 
their periphery. 
B. Design concept: IdeaBulb 
We think that giving live feedback to participants on their 
performance can mitigate ideation off-peaks. Therefore, we 
propose to design a smart interface to inform participants on 
the amount of idea they generated and their flow of ideation. 
Because we do not want to interrupt participants during their 
ideation process, we wish to design an ambient interface to 
subtly inform participant without being intrusive. 
1) General design: metaphorical items 
For designing IdeaBulb, we choose the metaphor of a 
bulb held by a hand, in Figure 3. Light bulb shape is part of 
the clichés to symbolize the ideation of an individual [25], 
while the hand holding it represents the group. 
 
 
Figure 3. IdeaBulb’s metaphorical design 
2) Feedbacks 
The smart interface IdeaBulb will give in real-time two 
types of feedback during ideation phase. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

a) Cumulative feedback on the amount of ideas 
submitted 
Using a led strip, IdeaBulb lights on its “belly” according 
to the amount of ideas submitted. For instance, IdeaBulb 
informs participants that there is a total of 3 ideas submitted 
by turning on 1 led over 30 leds maximum, as shown in 
Figure 4 (a). 
b) Immediate feedback on the flow and the submission 
of ideas 
Using a servomotor, IdeaBulb opens its “mouth” 
according to the flow of ideation. For instance, a flow of 0 
ideas by minute is represented by a mechanical dome widely 
opened meaning that IdeaBulb is “hungry” for ideas. In 
contrary, a flow of 4 ideas by minute is represented by a 
“mechanical dome” completely closed meaning that 
IdeaBulb is “satisfied”, in Figure 4 (b). 
 
 
Figure 4. Opening mechanism (b) and lighting of leds (a) 
Each time an idea is submitted, IdeaBulb quickly opens 
and closes its mechanical “mouth” meaning that an idea was 
eaten. Moreover, when IdeaBulb “eats” an idea, the led strip 
is animated informing participants that the idea is going 
down in the “belly” of IdeaBulb. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
Our work presented here is the result of the interface 
between two main scientific fields: analysis of live 
facilitation during creative sessions and the design approach 
for a tangible user interface in a context of competition and 
collaboration. Based on the analysis of our many 
experimental results, including the two workshops presented 
here, the monitoring of ideation phase highlights a creative 
cliff and a warning area for creativity, when generation of 
ideas becomes low. Then, we present a smart and tangible 
user interface, IdeaBulb, which could counteract the off-
peaks observed. 
The prototyping and testing during creative sessions 
could validate our assertions. The total amount of ideas, 
ideation flow and participant experience should be 
monitored. The context of competition and so creative 
performance could be increased by dividing the group into 
many sub-groups in order to enhance group creativity [26]. 
An IdeaBulb could be assigned for each sub-group. The 
implementation of a physical interaction or rewarding in a 
non-game context, can also be a process to foster 
participant’s performance, as gamification invite to in [27]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would especially like to thank the 
NEPTUNE project, coordinated by the Aerospace Valley 
competitiveness cluster and the New-Aquitaine Development 
and Innovation Agency, which support the work presented 
here. 
The NEPTUNE project received funding from the 
European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation 
Program under Grant Agreement No. 691554. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
W. A. Long and W. E. McMullan, Mapping the New Venture 
Opportunity Identification Process. University of Calgary, Faculty 
of Management, 1984. 
[2] 
G. E. Hills, R. C. Shrader, and G. T. Lumpkin, “Opportunity 
recognition as a creative process,” Front. Entrep. Res., pp. 216–227, 
1999. 
[3] 
D. R. DeTienne and G. N. Chandler, “Opportunity Identification and 
Its Role in the Entrepreneurial Classroom: A Pedagogical Approach 
and Empirical Test,” Acad. Manag. Learn. Educ., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 
242–257, 2004. 
[4] 
A. Osborn, Applied imagination principles and procedures of 
creative problem solving. Oxford, England, 1953. 
[5] 
P. Christensen, N. Mcintyre, and L. Pikholz, “Bridging community 
and economic development-A strategy for using industry clusters to 
link neighbourhoods to the regional economy.,” 2002. 
[6] 
M. E. Porter, “Clusters and the New Economics of Competition,” 
Harv. Bus. Rev., 1998. 
[7] 
J. Ambrosino, D. H. Masson, and J. Legardeur, “STAR : An 
animation methodology to facilitate the emergence of interclustering 
projects,” in AIP Primeca : Concevoir et produire dans les industries 
du futur, 2017. 
[8] 
N. W. Kohn, P. B. Paulus, and Y. Choi, “Building on the ideas of 
others: An examination of the idea combination process,” J. Exp. 
Soc. Psychol., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 554–561, May 2011. 
[9] 
C. C. Clark, Brainstorming. Paris: Dunod, 1962. 
[10] M. Diehl and W. Stroebe, “Productivity loss in brainstorming 
groups: Toward the solution of a riddle.,” J. Pers. Soc. Psychol., vol. 
53, no. 3, pp. 497–509, 1987. 
[11] R. B. Gallupe, L. M. Bastianutti, and W. H. Cooper, “Unblocking 
brainstorms,” J. Appl. Psychol., vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 137–142, 1991. 
[12] H. Lamm and G. Trommsdorff, “Group versus individual 
performance 
on 
tasks 
requiring 
ideational 
proficiency 
(brainstorming): A review,” Eur. J. Soc. Psychol., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 
361–388, 1973. 
[13] R. G. Geen and B. J. Bushman, “Theories of Group Behavior,” in 
Time, vol. 37, no. July, B. Mullen and G. R. Goethals, Eds. Springer, 
1979. 
[14] B. Mullen and R. F. Baumeister, “Group effects on self-attention and 
performance: Social loafing, social facilitation, and social 
impairment,” 1987. 
[15] B. Latané, K. Williams, and S. Harkins, “Many hands make light the 
work: The causes and consequences of social loafing.,” J. Pers. Soc. 
Psychol., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 822–832, 1979. 
[16] N. L. Kerr and S. E. Bruun, “Dispensability of member effort and 
group motivation losses: Free-rider effects,” J. Pers. Soc. Psychol., 
vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 78–94, 1983. 
[17] J. Ambrosino, D. H. Masson, J. Legardeur, and G. Tastet, 
“IdeaValuation : Favoriser les échanges lors d’un atelier de créativité 
(b) 
(a) 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

par le vote qualitatif des idées à l’aide d’un outil numérique,” in 
Proceedings of ERGO’IA 2016, 2016. 
[18] A. Moles, The scientific creation, Kister. Genève, 1954. 
[19] A. Osborn, Your Creative Power. 2008. 
[20] H. Ishii and B. Ullmer, “Tangible bits: towards seamless interfaces 
between people, bits, and atoms,” Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Intell. user 
interfaces, no. March, pp. 3–3, 1997. 
[21] O. Shaer and E. Hornecker, “Tangible User Interfaces: Past, Present, 
and Future Directions,” Found. Trends® Human–Computer 
Interact., vol. 3, no. 1–2, pp. 1–137, 2009. 
[22] C. Wisneski et al., “Ambient displays: Turning architectural space 
into an interface between people and digital information,” Lect. 
Notes Comput. Sci., vol. 1370, pp. 22–32, 1998. 
[23] M. Weiser and J. S. Brown, “The coming age of calm technology,” 
Xerox PARC, pp. 1–8, 1996. 
[24] S. Bakker, E. van den Hoven, and B. Eggen, “Peripheral interaction: 
characteristics and considerations,” Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 
19, no. 1, pp. 239–254, 2015. 
[25] J. M. Kennedy, “Metaphor in pictures,” Perception, vol. 11, no. 5, 
pp. 589–605, 1982. 
[26] M. Baer, A. K. Vadera, R. T. A. J. Leenders, and G. R. Oldham, 
“Intergroup Competition as a Double-Edged Sword: How Sex 
Composition Regulates the Effects of Competition on Group 
Creativity,” Organ. Sci., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 892–908, 2014. 
[27] S. Deterding, K. O´Hara, M. Sicart, D. Dixon, and L. Nacke, 
“Gamification: Using game design elements in non-game contexts,” 
Proc. 2011 Annu. Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst. (CHI 2011), 
pp. 1–4, 2011. 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

