Development of a Sharing System for Virtual Grafﬁti of Tourism Information among
Tourists using Image Recognition
Rei Miyagawa ∗, Keima Kumano ∗, Takayuki Kunieda †, Tetsuya Ikeda †, Naka Gotoda‡,
Masanobu Kii§ and Rihito Yaegashi§,
∗Graduate School of Engineering, Kagawa University, Japan
Hayashi-cho 2217-20, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0396, Japan
Email: s16g471@stu.kagawa-u.ac.jp
†Ricoh Company, Ltd., Japan
Ginza 8-13-1, Chuou-ku, Tokyo 104-8222, Japan
Email: takayuki.kunieda@nts.ricoh.co.jp
‡ Information Technology Center, Kagawa University
Saiwai-cho 1-1, Takamatsu, Kagawa 760-8521, Japan
Email: gotoda@eng.kagawa-u.ac.jp
§Faculty of Engineering, Kagawa University
Hayashi-cho 2217-20, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0396, Japan
Email: rihito@eng.kagawa-u.ac.jp
Abstract—We developed a sharing system for virtual grafﬁti of
tourism information among tourists using image recognition.
A tourist writes grafﬁti on a photo taken at a tourist spot
using virtual grafﬁti interface and shares the grafﬁti among
tourists who take similar photos on the system. Administrator
of tourist destination need not to prepare for any information.
Using our system, tourists can share tourism information with
other tourists who visited the same place just by taking a photo.
This paper describes the sharing system for virtual grafﬁti of
tourism information among tourists using image recognition.
Keywords–Virtual-grafﬁti;
Tourism-information;
Image-
recognition
I.
INTRODUCTION
The most important source of information for tourists is the
reviews from other tourists [1]. Tourists can look at personal
blogs and SNS to get reviews. However, when we focus on
the information that tourists get during sightseeing, most of
information is prepared by the tourist operator.
As the media to share reviews at tourists spot, there are
communication notebooks (grafﬁti notebooks) which are put
at shops and facilities, and grafﬁti on tourism resources. We
can write whatever in our mind by handwriting, and notes by
handwriting are more correct than typing [2]. It means that
handwritten information is effective for sharing. However, it
is insufﬁcient that the tourists voluntarily share information
without damaging the tourism resources in anywhere.
We developed the sharing system for tourist information
that shares information at the tourist spots and encourages
a casual input of information. Using the image recognition
technology, this system realizes to attach the scenes at tourist
spots to tourism information left by tourists by taking a
photo at a touring spot which is the general behaviour during
sightseeing. Besides, it does not limit the writing space for an
individual, and many and unspeciﬁed tourist write something
on an objective. The system provides virtual grafﬁti interface
like real grafﬁti that people write on one object. This paper
describes the development of a sharing system for virtual
grafﬁti of tourism information among tourists using image
recognition.
II.
DEVELOPMENT
This section describes the development of our prototype
system, which can share tourism information. The system
shares comments (Grafﬁti), which were written on a photo
by a tourist with other tourists using image-recognition. 2.1
explains the outline of the system. 2.2 describes the ﬂow of
system utilization during sightseeing.
A. System Overview
Figure 1 shows the outline of the sharing system for
virtual grafﬁti of tourist information. The system consists of
management server and virtual grafﬁti application.
We developed the Virtual grafﬁti application as Web appli-
cation, and thus it can run on tourists’mobile devices access to
the application without install special software. The application
has four functions, upload function, display function, grafﬁti
function and set up function. Upload function uploads a photo
that was taken by tourist (taken photo) to the management
server. Display function displays content which was created
by creation function in management server. The content is
the image which combines photos and some grafﬁti. Grafﬁti
function adds grafﬁti to the content and tourists handwrite
grafﬁti on the content. Set up function sets up the users ’
attribute which is given to grafﬁti.
The management server manages Grafﬁti Library. The
management server has four functions, Registration function,
Search function, Creation function and Save function, and has
registered images and a library. Registration function registers
a taken photo as a registered image. Search function searches
registered images which are similar to a taken photo in Library.
Search function uses Ricoh Visual Search (RVS) Technology
[3] developed by Ricoh Innovations Corporation at Silicon Val-
ley in U.S. It analyzes and quantiﬁes the features of image, and
can register the data and rapidly searches the database.Create
function creates content which combines registered images
with grafﬁti. Save function saves grafﬁti in library. In the
grafﬁti library, there are taken photos and registered images
in JPEG format and Grafﬁti in GIF format. Metadata include
information of creating content and user type.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Figure 1. The Outline of the Sharing System for Virtual Grafﬁti of Tourist
Information
Figure 2. The Use Image of the Share System for
Virtual Grafﬁti of Tourist Information.
B. Workﬂow of the System
Figure 2 shows the use image of the share system for
virtual grafﬁti of tourist information. Users of the system are
tourists who visit tourist spots. A tourist takes a photo in tourist
spot. The taken photo is uploaded to management server and
registered image is searched. If there is not registered image
which is similar to the taken photo in the library, it will be
registered in the library as a new registered image. If there is
a similar image, content which is added to past grafﬁti will be
created and sent to virtual grafﬁti application. Tourists look at
the content and add grafﬁti on it.Figure 3 shows the screen of
grafﬁti interface which a user wrote grafﬁti.
Figure 3. Screen of Grafﬁti Interfacen
III.
CONCLUSION
This paper described the development of a sharing system
for virtual grafﬁti of tourism information among tourists using
image recognition. Using the image recognition technology,
the system provides virtual grafﬁti interface, which is attached
to a scene in tourist spot and add new grafﬁti. The system
shares comments as grafﬁti which were described on a photo
by tourist with other tourists using image-recognition. We have
realized the system to provide the virtual grafﬁti interface
to a scene by taking a photo at a touring spot which is the
general behaviour during sightseeing. The sharing system of
tourism information gives metadata to the registered image,
grafﬁti, and taken photos. We can analyze grafﬁti and tourism
behaviours using metadata. Now, we are planning to conduct
a demonstration experiment from stored images and grafﬁti to
conﬁrm the effect of this system on the sharing of tourism
information at tourist spots.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. W. Litvin, R. E. Goldsmith, and B. Pan, “Electronic word-of-mouth
in hospitality and tourism management,” Tourism management, vol. 29,
no. 3, 2008, pp. 458–468.
[2]
M. D. Hamzah, S. Tano, M. Iwata, and T. Hashiyama, “Effectiveness of
annotating by hand for non-alphabetical languages,” in Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems. ACM,
2006, pp. 841–850.
[3]
“Ricoh
Visual
Search
(RVS)
Technology,”
2017,
URL:
http://www.ricoh.com/technology/tech/044search.html[accessed
:
2017 − 02 − 19].
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

