Comparing Low Power Listening Techniques with
Wake-up Receiver Technology
Malcolm Prinn, Liam Moore, Michael Hayes, Brendan O’Flynn
Microelectronic Application Integration
Tyndall National Institute (UCC)
Cork, Ireland
Email: malcolm.prinn@tyndall.ie, liam.moore@tyndall.ie, michael.hayes@tyndall.ie, brendan.oﬂynn@tyndall.ie
Abstract—One of the major challenges in wireless sensor
networks is in reducing power consumption of the individual
motes while not degrading the functionality of the network
as a whole. With wireless sensor technology becoming more
wide spread and larger deployments of this technology being
rolled out post deployment issues such as battery replacements
become a bigger issue. Reducing power consumption is essential
in situations where it is infeasible or impractical to frequently
replace batteries. Reducing the power consumption of the motes
to a level where batteries can last years or where ideally to
levels where energy scavenging becomes more feasible, resulting
in battery-less operation of wireless networks, is a major research
challenge. One of the main energy consumers on a wireless mote
is the radio transceiver. Current approaches using low power
listening techniques to reduce mote power while maintaining
meshing capabilities and this paper compares the state of the
art in low power listening (BOX-MAC 1 and 2) with the latest
in commercially available wake up radio technology (Austria
Microsystems (AMS) AS3933) to determine which approach is
more efﬁcient from an energy consumption view. A theoretical
approach has been taken to compare achievable lifetimes of motes
under different trafﬁc situations using both Low Power Listening
(LPL) methods and Wake up Receivers (WUR). This is then
compared against empirical data. As this paper shows, when
considering power draw of radios in different conﬁgurations,
WURs consume up to 20 times less power compared to tech-
niques, thereby enabling indoor energy harvesting (EH) solutions
to become practical.
Keywords—LPL; Wakeup Radio; BOX-MAC; BMAC; XMAC;
Wireless sensor networks
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the main challenges in Wireless sensor networks
(WSNs) to date is post deployment lifetime of the motes [8].
Batteries are often used to supply power to the wireless motes
as supplying a constant power source would be infeasible, for
example in outdoor locations where power infrastructure is
non-existent [14].
Moreover, regularly changing the batteries would be im-
practical and also expensive, while the costs of the batteries
are relatively cheap (sub 1 euro) the cost of maintenance staffs
time to carry out the work is not. Because of this, reducing
power consumption by as much as possible to either increase
the time between battery changes or make the devices energy
harvesting compatible is an important research topic.
Often, the most resource hungry device in a mote, for a
WSN is the radio, consuming around 19mA in receive mode
[12]; so, much work is put into reducing its on time. Two ways
in which power used by the radio may be reduced are either
using a duty-cycling media access control (MAC) protocol, or,
using a low-power wakeup radio (WUR) [4], which consumes
minute amounts of power while still being in a constant active
or listening state.
Low power listening (LPL) protocols reduce power con-
sumption by putting the radio into sleep mode with regular
intervals in which it will wake up to sample the channel for
activity. This introduces latency into the network which in
some cases would be unacceptable ,e.g., a system controlling
a solar panel or wind turbine where systems need to be shut
down to prevent damage to them in a timely fashion.
Despite the advantages that WURs may offer their uptake
in WSN applications to date has been limited, possibly due to
them having lower receive sensitivities when compared with
conventional radio frequency (RF) radios as well as much
reduced range. While there are designs available that consume
a few microwatts [1] while being able to receive data, their
beneﬁts vs. traditional low power techniques are still uncertain.
If validated, WUR could pave the way for much longer WSN
node lifetime.
I. Demirkol [4] have performed a previous comparison
between low power listening modes and wake-up radios, they
do not include a comparison of newer, more efﬁcient, low-
power listening protocols such as BOX-MAC [10]. Amre El-
Hoiydi in [5] discusses that the development challenge of
creating a WUR that consumes tens of µA necessitates the
further development of protocols that rely on the main radio.
W.S. Wang et al. [15] discuss power levels that are attain-
able from various indoor based energy harvesting solutions.
They determine that for a single solar cell in an indoor location,
the maximum power attainable is 151.6 µW. This paper uses
analytical work to show that with such a constrained power
budget, using LPL methods would be insufﬁcient for use in
battery-less operation.
The rest of the paper is ordered as follows. Section II covers
background work in the area of LPL MAC protocols as well as
advances in WUR technologies, it also includes the limitations
of wake up receivers compared to traditional radios utilising
LPL methods. Section III will cover the analytical work done.
Section IV outlines the experimental setup used to verify the
theoretical work carried out in Section III. The results of
analytical and empirical work are described in Section V.
Conclusions are presented in Section VI and future work the
authors wish to carry out in this space is listed in Section VII.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

II.
BACKGROUND WORK
A. Low power listening modes
The need to reduce power consumption for a device lead to
the creation of LPL methods, indeed, if the radio is left on in
listening mode constantly, the battery powering the mote could
be drained in as little as 3 days [11]. Because of this, much
research has been done on proposing new methods to reduce
the duty cycle of radios. Early work in this ﬁeld relied solely
on information from a single layer in the protocol stack ,e.g.,
sensor-MAC(S-MAC) [16], Berkeley-MAC (B-MAC) [13], X-
MAC [3], whereas newer techniques are starting to rely on
information from multiple layers to achieve better efﬁciencies,
example, BOX-MAC and WiseMAC [5].
1) S-MAC: S-MAC was designed with the reduction of
energy consumption as its primary goal, other aims for the pro-
tocol were to provide good scalability and collision avoidance,
and these secondary goals are achieved through the use of a
combined scheduling and contention scheme. S-MAC is based
on 802.11 MAC protocols. The authors of S-MAC identiﬁed
four major sources of energy waste.
Firstly, collision occurs when corrupted packets that are
discarded and need to be re-transmitted, this also has the un-
wanted effect of increasing latency in the network. Overhearing
is when a node receives a packet that it is not meant to. Thirdly,
the overhead that is required for control packets, and ﬁnally,
idle listening of the channel can consume 50%+ of the energy
required in receive mode [16]. S-MAC was created to tackle
these issues; it relies mainly on the physical layer and has a
ﬁxed listening period of 115ms with a variable sleep period
between checks to achieve different values for duty cycle [13].
2) B-MAC: B-MAC was created with the goal of increasing
packet delivery rates, throughput, latency, and energy con-
sumption compared to S-MAC. B-MAC uses clear channel
assessment (CCA) and packet back offs for channel arbitration.
Reliability is achieved through link layer acknowledgements,
with LPL being used for low power communications. While
S-MAC includes network and organization within the pro-
tocol, B-MAC does not include these functionalities (e.g.,
synchronization and routing), leaving it up to higher levels to
implement such things. B-MAC is the default MAC protocol
used by TinyOS and relies on the physical layer for channel
sensing.
3) X-MAC: Contrary to the previous two protocols, X-
MAC is primarily a link layer protocol. X-MAC aims to
achieve better lifetimes by employing a shorter preamble
and preamble sampling time when compared to protocols
like S-MAC and B-MAC. X-MAC is an adaptive algorithm
that dynamically adjusts the receiver duty cycles to optimize
energy consumption per packet, latency, or both parameters. X-
MAC has two proposed ideas to reduce energy consumption.
First, embed addressing data inside the preamble, so that
receivers which do not need to receive the packet can go
back to sleep mode, saving power. The second idea is to use
a strobed preamble; this allows a receiver node to interrupt
the transmitter before an entire preamble duration, reducing
energy losses on both transmitter and receiver side.
More modern MAC protocols, such as BOX-MAC have
been introduced that use information in multiple layers to
make more informed decisions about the state of the network,
thereby, making more efﬁcient use of the radio and reducing
power consumption by up to 50% when comparing X-MAC
with BOX-MAC [10], and up to 30% when being compared
to B-MAC.
4) BOX-MAC: BOX-MAC was developed as an evolution
of both B-MAC and X-MAC, while the earlier two protocols
rely on a single layer for information to perform power savings,
BOX-MACs 1 and 2 rely on information contained within
both the physical and link layers to achieve the goals of
LPL. Of the two versions of BOX-MAC, BOX-MAC-1 is a
predominately physical layer protocol that incorporates link
layer information, and BOX-MAC-2 is a packetized link layer
protocol that incorporates physical layer information.
BOX-MAC-1 acts as an improved version of B-MAC,
instead of B-MACs preamble, BOX-MAC-1 transmits a con-
tinual data packet. This allows nodes to save power by only
staying awake for packets that are meant for them. BOX-MAC-
2 improves upon X-MAC by ﬁrst checking whether or not
there is sufﬁcient energy on the channel as opposed to waking
up long enough to hear a complete packet. Because of this,
BOX-MAC-2 reduces receive check lengths by a factor of 4
compared to X-MAC.
BOX-MAC-1 has been shown to be more efﬁcient when
network trafﬁc is low and BOX-MAC-2 is better at high trafﬁc
applications. Because of this, and the base protocols they were
derived from, WURs have been compared with B-MAC and
BOX-MAC-1 in low trafﬁc situations and with X-MAC and
BOX-MAC-2 in high trafﬁc situations.
B. Wake up radios
There are two types of implementation for wake up radios,
namely an identity-based system and a range-based system.
Range-based systems work by transmitting a wake-up tone
which is then received by all nodes within range and triggers
all of those nodes to wake up their processors. Identity-based
systems work on the principle of a bit-sequence being received
and then decoded and checked against a pre-set identity.
1) Range based systems: These systems are often charge
pump based, and are realized using Schottky diodes [11]
or MOSFETs [7]. Once sufﬁcient activity is detected on a
channel, the wakeup circuit will then trigger an interrupt on
the sleeping micro-controller. The downside to this approach
is that a correct wakeup signal is treated the same way as
any other RF activity on that frequency, leading to an increase
in false wakeups, triggering the main radio more often than
necessary.
The attractive feature of these circuits is that they have very
low power consumption and in some cases can be completely
passive circuits [2], the caveat being that passive circuits have
even less range than active receiver based circuits.
2) Identity based systems: Identity based systems are able
to process information carried in the wakeup signal i.e. an
address. This results in less false wakeups per mote as only
motes that are actively being addressed will wake up the main
radios to receive data. Data is clocked into a register and is
compared against a pre-set value [4]. If the compared values
are correlated, a wakeup signal is sent to the micro-controller
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

TABLE I: WUR SUMMARY
Radio
Active current draw
Sensitivity(dBm)
Frequency (Mhz)
[6]
6µA
-80
868
[9]
2.4µA
-71
868
[1]
1.37µA
-67
0.11 - 0.15
[12]
18800µA
-98
2400
and then the main radio is switched on to receive the data
packet.
C. Advantages and disadvantages
Clearly, the reduced operational range of wake-up radios
diminishes their suitability in networks that require large
ranges between nodes while still maintaining a short latency
interval. Additionally, adding in a wakeup receiver increases
the complexity of hardware design on already constrained
systems so careful consideration must be taken into account
when designing such a system. The increased complexity and,
therefore, the increased cost of the overall system may negate
the yields gained from prolonged battery lifetimes.
The advantages of wake-up receivers include their much
reduced operational power requirements (µA operating current
versus mA for traditional radios). Also, as the wake up receiver
is constantly receiving, the requirement to synchronise between
sender and receiver is removed as it has become a purely
asynchronous communications network.
III.
ANALYTICAL WORK
This paper aims to show that using WUR technology, en-
ergy savings can be made in compared against LPL techniques.
All calculations in this paper are based purely on the
consumption of the radios as all other system components are
assumed to be equal and that their energy usage will remain the
same throughout all experiments, as a result of this, lifetimes
presented in the results will be higher than those achieved in
reality as the whole system will use more energy than is being
calculated here.
For this paper, Chipcons CC2520 [12] radio has been
selected to represent the main radio technology as it is widely
TABLE II: ORIGINAL ENERGY CALCULATIONS
Time spent on wake-up transmission deliveries
T TX (box1, bmac)= D * T
T TX (box2, xmac) = D *
(T / 2)
Time spent on incorrect radio packets
T I (box1, box2, xmac)= I *
20ms
T I (bmac) = I * T
Time spent for valid radio packets
T V (box1, bmac)= V * (T/2
+ 4.1ms)
T V (box2, xmac) = V *
4.1ms
Time spent checking the channel.
T CX (box1, bmac) = R *
0.78ms
T CX (box2) = R * 5.61ms
T CX (xmac) = R * 20ms
Time spent on idle power
TIDLE = Msec in day -
(T TX + T I + T C + T V)
used in WSN testbeds [11]. While many different possible
WUR technologies can be used (shown in Table I), a device
in the 110kHz ISM with a current consumption of 1.37 µA [1]
to represent a WUR with a decent sensitivity. These radios are
summarized in Table I. The lower sensitivity radios equate to
an indoor range of approximately 30m [6], which should be
sufﬁcient to cover a typical ofﬁce room.
Utilizing wake-up radios presents certain changes to the
calculations [10] used for the time the radios perform various
tasks; these changes are summarized in Table III.
For the analytical work, this paper assumes a standard time
for transmission of valid packets of 4.1ms (802.15.4 payload
transmission time) which remains equal for both LPL modes
as well as WUR solutions. The reason for the added 0.5ms is
that it takes this extra time to wake up the main radio from
sleep to active mode. TCX in this case equals the number of
milliseconds in a day as the radio is always listening.
These changes are reﬂected in Table III. Using the adjusted
calculations from Table III, and a Schott Solar cell which
is capable of generating up to 151.6 µW [15], a theoretical
limit for number of valid wake up messages per hour using a
WUR system was arrived at of 109 messages if using a single
Schott Solar cell. This measure does not take into account
sending messages back to a base station; further investigations
will need to be carried out to determine the upper limit for
communications in both directions.
Assuming that transmitting a response to a query would
take approximately the same amount of power as receiving
one packet, such a system would be able to achieve
55
asynchronous communications per hour. Using these equations
from Table II and Table III, a graph was plotted to visualise
average power consumed by each method for varying amounts
of valid packets per hour, this is visualised in Figure 1.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In order to validate the analytical calculations in III an
experiment was devised to measure the power consumption of
LPL and Wake up radios. The ﬁrst step of the experiment was
to measure power consumption on this platform in the follow-
ing scenarios, the wireless platform consuming the minimum
power possible to establish a baseline of power consumed by
the MCU and radio in sleep mode.
Next, the state of the art in low power listening methods
was measured for different values of receive check interval.
The LPL techniques selected were the physical layer B-MAC,
link layer X-MAC and the hybrid protocols BoX-MAC 1 and
2. No transmissions were carried out these measurements were
TABLE III: ADJUSTED CALCULATIONS FOR WUR
Value
Time spent per day
Time spent on wake-up transmission
deliveries
T TX = 0ms
Time spent on incorrect radio packets
T I = I * 20.5ms
Time spent for valid radio packets
T V = V * 4.9ms
Time spent checking the channel
T CX = 86400ms
Time spent on idle power
T IDLE = (86400ms - (T TX + T I +
T V))
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Fig. 1: Power draw calculations
only used to get the baseline average power consumption of
each LPL method.
For the hardware used in this setup, a wireless mote
consisting of an MSP430F5437 microcontroller and a Texas
Instruments CC2520 was chosen as the radio platform. The
mote platform is shown in Figure 2. The mote is a credit card
sized platform with expansion slots for additional peripheral
devices (sensor layers, radios, actuators etc). The mote also
has a number of jumper selectable options for power sources
and power distribution allowing complete control of which sub
components of the mote get powered up. For example the on-
board FTDI chip can be enabled or disabled depending on the
conﬁguration required.
To take advantage of the modular nature of the platform, a
daughter board was developed, pictured in Figure 3. This board
has a 32 kHz crystal acting as an external clock source for an
Austria AS3933 WUR. There is also a radio frequency passive
network on the daughter board which is tuned for 2.4GHz
signals.
The AS3933 WUR uses on off keying (OOK) modulation,
Fig. 2: Tyndall Mote
Fig. 3: Tyndall WUR expansion board
while it is an identity based WUR it can also be setup as
a ranged based WUR through register settings. The passive
network performs a low pass ﬁltering of the 2.4 GHz signal
down to 125 KHz in a fashion similar to that used in [11],
which is the frequency the WUR operates on.
To perform the power analysis, a DC Power Analyser from
Agilent Technologies (N6705B) was used to provide power to
the entire device via the red (positive) and blue (negative) wires
seen in Figure 4. The entire setup is shown in Figure 5. 64k
points of measurement over 4 seconds were taken using the
scope view function and then exported into csv format. These
individual points were then averaged to arrive at the ﬁgures
displayed in Table IV.
V.
RESULTS
Setting the supply voltage at 2.5V, measurements were
taken for low power listening methods when no packets are
Fig. 4: Boards connected
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

TABLE IV: POWER MEASUREMENT RESULTS
Protocol
Receive check
interval
Radio duty
cycle (%)
Average
power (µW)
All sleep mode
0
0
15.7
WUR
0
0
54.1
BMAC, Box-MAC1
50ms
1.52
1113.5
500ms
0.152
128.95
1s
0.076
72.5
2s
0.038
45
Box-MAC2
50ms
11.22
6128
500ms
1.122
631.53
1s
0.561
326.4675
2s
0.2805
176.75
XMAC
50ms
40
22022.75
500ms
4
2138.49
1s
2
1080
2s
1
549.345
delivered to determine absolute minimum power expended for
each method. The results are recorded below in Table IV.
The MCU is in low power mode whenever it is not
communicating with the radio chip, and the CC2520 is in the
lowest power mode (LPM2) when it is not in receiving mode
to listen for packets. The addition of the WUR to the base
system imposes an additional 40µW requirement for minimal
operations.
This base level requirement of
55µW is easily attained
using Schott Solar cells that can generate up to 151.6 µW
each [15]. Also from Table IV, for a single solar cell, LPL
methods are unable to achieve a low enough average power
draw while maintaining a low latency.
Comparing the LPL methods, XMAC consumes the most
power because of its relatively large on time for the radio when
performing a receive check. BMAC and BOX-MAC1 consume
equal amounts of power because the main radio is receiving
for equal lengths of time. The length of time the radio is on
and in receive mode is listed in Table II.
Fig. 5: Device under test
VI.
CONCLUSION
From the analytical work done, it has been shown that
WUR are much more suited to indoor battery-less solutions
than LPL techniques. Furthermore, from the initial recorded
measurements of power, the empirical data suggests that
WURs offer a lower power consumption while still maintain-
ing a lower latency over LPL methods. There are certain sce-
narios where WUR would not be suitable for a WSN, namely
where a long range between motes is required while still
maintaining a low latency in mote-to-mote communications,
however, in situations where long range is not required but
latency is not a crucial factor, WURs can still be employed
to prolong the lifetime of motes in a WSN. Wake-up radios
can reduce the energy usage of a system to a point where it
would enable indoor, asynchronous communications powered
by indoor based energy harvesting methods, which typically
dont offer as much energy as outdoor solutions.
VII.
FUTURE WORK
The ﬁrst step in creating a battery-less bi-directional wire-
less sensor platform is to ensure the power consumption of
the device is kept to an absolute minimum. Box-MAC1 when
its receive check interval is set to 2s, achieves low power
consumption (250uW). However, this ﬁgure still exceeds the
power provided by a single solar cell making it unsuitable for
an indoor EH solution that is based upon a single solar cell
[15]. The authors propose to perform the following:
1)
Integrate the mote platform (Figure 4) with Tyndalls
in house energy harvesting platform [15], pictured in
Figure 6.
2)
Include a sensing layer on to the mote; employ
asynchronous communications using the WUR.
3)
Build large scale deployment of battery-less WSN
platforms utilizing WUR technologies.
4)
Using a large scale deployment, validate the useful-
ness of WUR in modern WSN deployments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been co-funded by the European Com-
mission under the 7th Framework Programme , through the
GreenCom project (http://www.greencom-project.eu/).
Fig. 6: Energy harvesting platform
REFERENCES
[1]
AMS. As3933 3d low frequency wakeup receiver. Technical report,
Austria Microsystemss, 2010.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

[2]
He Ba, Jeff Parvin, Luis Soto, Ilker Demirkol, and Wendi Heinzelman.
Passive RFID-based wake-up radios for wireless sensor networks, pages
113–129. Springer, 2013.
[3]
Michael Buettner, Gary V Yee, Eric Anderson, and Richard Han. X-
mac: a short preamble mac protocol for duty-cycled wireless sensor
networks.
In Proceedings of the 4th international conference on
Embedded networked sensor systems, pages 307–320. ACM, 2006.
[4]
Ilker Demirkol, Cem Ersoy, and Ertan Onur. Wake-up receivers for
wireless sensor networks: beneﬁts and challenges. Wireless Communi-
cations, IEEE, 16(4):88–96, 2009.
[5]
Amre El-Hoiydi and Jean-Dominique Decotignie. WiseMAC: An ultra
low power MAC protocol for multi-hop wireless sensor networks, pages
18–31. Springer, 2004.
[6]
Lin Gu and John A Stankovic. Radio-triggered wake-up for wireless
sensor networks. Real-Time Systems, 29(2-3):157–182, 2005.
[7]
Christian Hambeck, Stefan Mahlknecht, and Thomas Herndl. A 2.4 w
wake-up receiver for wireless sensor nodes with 71dbm sensitivity. In
Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on,
pages 534–537. IEEE.
[8]
F. Kerasiotis, A. Prayati, C. Antonopoulos, C. Koulamas, and G. Pa-
padopoulos. Battery lifetime prediction model for a wsn platform. In
Sensor Technologies and Applications (SENSORCOMM), 2010 Fourth
International Conference on, pages 525–530.
[9]
Hyungchul Kim, Hanjin Cho, Yao Xi, Minsu Kim, Sungwook Kwon,
Joonhyung Lim, and Youngoo Yang.
Cmos passive wake-up circuit
for sensor network applications. Microwave and Optical Technology
Letters, 52(3):597–600, 2010.
[10]
David Moss and Philip Levis.
Box-macs: Exploiting physical and
link layer boundaries in low-power networking.
Computer Systems
Laboratory Stanford University, 2008.
[11]
Benjamin D Parks.
Analysis of the feasibility of utilizing wakeup
radios to optimize energy and latency performance of wireless sensor
networks. Master’s thesis, University of Nebraska - Lincoln, 2013.
[12]
Yu Peng, Qinghua Luo, and P. Xiyuan.
The design of low-power
wireless sensor node. In Instrumentation and Measurement Technology
Conference (I2MTC), 2010 IEEE, pages 917–922.
[13]
Joseph Polastre, Jason Hill, and David Culler.
Versatile low power
media access for wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd
international conference on Embedded networked sensor systems, pages
95–107. ACM, 2004.
[14]
Robert Szewczyk, Joseph Polastre, Alan Mainwaring, and David Culler.
Lessons from a sensor network expedition, pages 307–322. Springer,
2004.
[15]
W. S. Wang, T. O’Donnell, N. Wang, M. Hayes, B. O’Flynn, and
C. O’Mathuna. Design considerations of sub-mw indoor light energy
harvesting for wireless sensor systems.
J. Emerg. Technol. Comput.
Syst., 6(2):1–26, 2008.
[16]
Wei Ye, John Heidemann, and Deborah Estrin. An energy-efﬁcient mac
protocol for wireless sensor networks. In INFOCOM 2002. Twenty-First
Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications
Societies. Proceedings. IEEE, volume 3, pages 1567–1576. IEEE, 2002.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

