Universally Designed mHealth App for Individuals Aging with Multiple Sclerosis 
Ljilja Ruzic, Harshal P. Mahajan, and Jon A. Sanford 
The Center for Assistive Technology and Environmental Access (CATEA) 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA, USA 
e-mail: ljilja@gatech.edu, harshal.mahajan@design.gatech.edu, jon.sanford@design.gatech.edu
 
 
Abstract—Multiple Sclerosis (MS) presents with chronic 
symptoms that share many of the functional limitations 
associated with aging. Additionally, following the period of five 
years post-diagnosis a large number of individuals diagnosed 
with MS experience a major decline in their abilities due to the 
progression of MS. Consequently, they need to learn how to cope 
with the functional limitations caused by the disease and in 
addition to those caused by aging. These individuals have to 
manage the effects of the disease on their lives every day. 
mHealth apps provide potential support for disease self-
management. However, the number of mobile apps design 
specifically for individuals with MS is inadequate. Additionally, 
there is no evidence that utility and usability of these current 
consumer mobile apps were tested with their target population. 
This research paper describes the design of the mHealth app MS 
Assistant, an evidence-based app that provides the daily support 
and self-management of the disease to individuals aging with 
MS. It was developed based on the Universal Design Mobile 
Interface Guidelines, UDMIG v.2.1 and the results of the two 
previous studies that assessed the health and wellness self-
management needs in individuals with MS and tested the 
usability of current mHealth apps. The paper presents an app 
refinement based on the suggestions of the expert reviewers who 
tested the effectiveness of the implementation of the UDMIG 
v.2.1 in the app design and provided possible recommendations 
for its redesign. 
Keywords-mHealth apps; multiple sclerosis; aging with 
disabilities; universal design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The size of the population aging with disabilities is 
growing [1][2]. Individuals aging with Multiple Sclerosis 
(MS) are one example of this population. MS is an 
inflammatory disorder of the Central Nervous System (CNS). 
This chronic and progressive disease is affecting around 
400,000 individuals in the US and 2.5 million people 
worldwide, with approximately 10,000 newly diagnosed cases 
of MS annually [3]. It is one of the most common causes of 
disability in young adults. 
MS presents with chronic symptoms that share many of 
the functional limitations associated with aging (e.g., fatigue, 
problems with balance, weakness, vision impairments, 
cognitive impairment, pain, sleep disorders, bowel and 
bladder dysfunction) [4]-[7]. Additionally, a large number of 
people diagnosed with MS experience a major decline in their 
abilities due to the progression of MS after five years post-
diagnosis [8]. Consequently, these individuals need to learn 
how to cope with the functional limitations caused by the 
disease and in addition to those caused by aging. 
MS has significant consequences on patients' Quality of 
Life (QOL) [9][10]. Individuals with MS experience a large 
number of physical, cognitive and emotional challenges on a 
daily basis [11][12]. As the most common symptoms in 
people with MS, fatigue, functional disability, and cognitive 
impairment have an enormous impact on a person's health-
related QOL [13]. As a result, these individuals have to 
manage the effects of the disease on their lives every day. 
More specifically, they need a continuous disease, symptom, 
and medication management, coupled with education and 
effective strategies for addressing the exacerbations (i.e., a 
worsening of old symptoms or an onset of new symptoms for 
at least 24 hours, also called a relapse) [12].  
mHealth apps provide potential support for disease self-
management [14]. These health and wellness self-monitoring 
mobile apps can assist with the daily organization of health 
and wellness, communication with the healthcare providers, 
and patient education. The majority of individuals diagnosed 
with MS already use modern communication technology 
regularly [15]. They accepted and adopted new forms of 
electronic communication (e.g., mobile app, text messaging, 
email, and website) for exchanging information about MS 
with the health care providers for the management of MS and 
scheduling appointments.  
However, the number of mobile applications designed 
specifically for the people with MS is inadequate. 
Additionally, there is no evidence that utility and usability of 
these consumer mobile apps were tested with their target 
population. 
This paper describes the design of the mHealth app MS 
Assistant, an evidence-based app that provides individuals 
aging with MS with the daily support and self-management of 
their disease [16]. It was developed based on the Universal 
Design Mobile Interface Guidelines, UDMIG v.2.1 [17]-[20] 
and the results of the two previous studies [16][18] that 
assessed the health and wellness self-management needs in 
individuals with MS and tested the usability of current 
mHealth apps. The paper presents an app refinement based on 
the suggestions of the expert reviewers who tested the 
effectiveness of the implementation of the UDMIG v.2.1 in 
the app design and provided possible recommendations for its 
redesign. 
This paper is organized into six sections. Section II 
reviews the related work about technological support for 
people with MS and other chronic conditions that share 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

similar symptoms with MS. Section III describes the initial 
design of MS Assistant. Section IV summarizes the evaluation 
of the effectiveness of implementing UDMIG v.2.1 in the 
design of the app through an expert review. Section V presents 
the 
refinement 
of 
MS 
Assistant 
based 
on 
the 
recommendations of the expert reviewers. Section VI 
provides a conclusion and proposes future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The majority of individuals with MS use modern 
communication technology regularly (i.e., personal computer, 
internet, email, mobile phone) [15]. They have high levels of 
acceptance for using electronic communication methods for 
exchanging information with health care providers. Ninety six 
percent of them possessed mobile phones and older 
participants used it less frequently. However, there is a lack of 
relevant previous research on needs and concerns of 
individuals aging with MS [7] to inform the design of the 
mHealth apps for this group of end-users.  
There are only nine current mobile applications available 
to this group of users, which primarily focus on providing 
basic information about latest research, news, and practical 
tips on health, nutrition, and fitness, self-recording of health 
status, medication adherence, daily activities, symptoms, 
mood, and similar, and/or sharing the data with healthcare 
providers. These nine mobile apps provide only basic 
functionality that can be found in other health apps for the 
general population and individuals with other chronic 
conditions. Multiple Sclerosis Association of America 
(MSAA) released a mobile phone app for health self-
reporting, My MS Manager, for individuals with MS and their 
caretakers [21]. Similarly, MS self app offers a journal that 
can be later easily accessed by the user who can share their 
data with the healthcare team [22]. Another self-reporting app 
is called MySidekick for MS [23], which also provides 
medicine reminders and a memory exercise. My MS 
Conversations provides an interactive group session with 
experienced virtual patients on selected topics [24]. MS 
Journal is an injection reminder tool for individuals with MS 
and their caregivers limited to UK market only [25]. My 
Multiple Sclerosis Diary [26] is another injection reminder 
mobile app that offers injection location and time set up. 
SymTrack was designed as a health self-reporting tool that 
stores shares the health charts with healthcare providers [27]. 
Social app MS Buddy [28] pairs individuals with MS with 
another person with MS to chat daily. MS Attack app [29] 
helps users learn about MS symptoms, how these present 
themselves during the MS attack and provides a location of 
the UT MS Clinic and the Neuro Eye Center. 
III. 
MS ASSISTANT 
MS Assistant is an evidence-based app, which provides 
the health and wellness self-management-based functionality, 
allows for personalization, assists with medication adherence 
and other daily tasks with alert and reminder systems, and 
sends alerts to the caregivers, family members, and healthcare 
providers in a case of an emergency. Its eight functions were 
selected based on the findings of a qualitative study [16], 
which was conducted to identify the specific needs for self-
management of health and wellness among people aging with 
MS and to recognize the opportunities to meet those needs 
through mobile apps. The functions include diary, reports, MS 
friends, games, education, goals, vitals, and emergency. In 
addition, profile and settings were designed to offer 
personalization 
and 
customization. 
Additionally, 
MS 
Assistant was designed using the UDMIG v.2.1, which were 
prioritized based on the previous study [18] that assessed the 
usability of the two current mHealth apps for people with MS 
and one for the general population to provide the 
recommendations for the design of mobile health and wellness 
app for individuals with MS. 
A. Functionality 
Diary provides a comprehensive tool for understanding 
the disease on a daily basis and over time, and how best to 
manage it through everyday self-management tasks, such as 
mood, symptoms, energy level, activity, sleep length and 
quality, and diet. Reports allows users to compile their health 
management data into useful reports that can be shared 
electronically with healthcare providers and caregivers. MS 
Friends is a social support feature that connects users with 
other people with MS to share their experiences and everyday 
challenges. Games features VR games that would enable users 
to perform real-world activities that they might find 
challenging. In addition, this feature has cognitive and classic 
games that help people with MS with cognitive functioning, 
and physical games, which help them with the balance.  
Education provides the latest news and research about MS as 
well as health and wellness tips. Goals enables users to set up 
their personal health and wellness goals to keep them 
motivated and inspired. Vitals offers remote health and 
wellness monitoring through the Bluetooth connected devices, 
such as blood pressure monitoring devices, scales, sleep and 
activity trackers (e.g., Fitbit), and similar. Emergency lets 
users place calls directly to their healthcare providers, 
caregivers, and 911. 
The mHealth app sends alert messages to the caregivers, 
family members, and/or healthcare providers in a case of an 
emergency (i.e., when the values of certain vitals go above the 
threshold, such as blood pressure, self-reported depression, 
extreme values of the symptoms severity, etc.). 
B. Navigation 
MS Assistant provides two types of navigation: linear and 
random access. Linear interaction allows users to go through 
the pages by making or skipping a selection and pressing the 
Next button. Users can go through the whole interface in a 
linear fashion by using the Next and Back buttons on every 
page, which provides consistency and simplicity. After a 
selection is made, the Next button takes users to the following 
page of the interface.  When the user taps on any button, the 
button changes to the selected colored background and white 
text that visually emphasizes the selection. To change the 
selection, user can tap the button again to deselect it (Figure 
1). Random access allows skipping the options and provides a 
faster pace of the navigation through the direct selection 
(Figure 2). 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Figure 1.   Linear navigation on Reports page. 
Figure 2.  Random access on Diary page. 
C. Design Decisions 
MS Assistant was designed based on the UDMIG v. 2.1 
and corresponding design criteria, which has been previously 
reported [20]. For example, the design goal was one mobile 
app for all users, rather than accessible design for people with 
disabilities, and avoidance of specialized design and language 
(Same means of use). Consistent sequences of actions are 
required in similar situations (Consistency with expectations). 
Complexity is eliminated by having simple screen designs that 
require a small number of tasks per screen (Simple and natural 
use).  
 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF 
IMPLEMENTING THE UDMIG V.2.1 
Evaluation of the effectiveness of implementing UDMIG 
v.2.1 in the design of MS Assistant was conducted with expert 
reviewers who identified design elements that needed 
improvement to successfully apply the guidelines and 
recommend possible refinements [20]. 
A. Methods 
Ten researchers and/or designers with experience in aging, 
accessibility, human-computer interaction, human factors, 
industrial 
design, 
universal 
design, 
and/or 
usability 
participated in the study. They completed a demographic 
questionnaire [20], performed directed tasks using the script 
and MS Assistant without any training or assistance. The 
script included entering health and wellness data, emailing the 
reports, calling MS friend, finding virtual reality games, 
reading the MS news, setting up the weight goal, inputting the 
blood pressure, calling the healthcare provider, entering the 
personal information, and increasing the text size [20]. The 
whole study was audio recorded. Experts then used the 
UDMIG v.2.1 design criteria questionnaire to rate how well 
each guideline was implemented, to identify design elements 
needing 
improvement, 
and 
to 
provide 
possible 
recommendations for their refinement on the 5-point Likert 
scale where 1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree with 
each of the applicable design criteria. Additionally, the audio 
files during the participants’ use of MS Assistant and 
administration of the talk aloud protocol were analyzed to 
extract more usability problems they encountered during the 
interaction with the app. 
B. Results From the UDMIG v.2.1 Design Criteria 
Questionnaire 
10 participants rated 50 items (i.e., design criteria) on the 
checklist. The total number of responses was 484, with 16 
missing responses that were not used in the data analyses. The 
mean of all the design criteria ratings per participant was 
within a range of 3.90 – 4.89. Out of a total of 484 responses, 
almost 70% (n=332) of the design criteria was rated as 5.  An 
additional one-quarter (n=126) was rated as 4. The lowest 
rating for any criterion was 2 (n=6) and remaining 20 design 
criteria were rated as 3. Among the 10 participants, mean 
ratings ranged from 3.86 – 4.92. The participant with the 
lowest overall mean rating (M = 3.86) did not give a rating 
higher than 4 to any individual criterion with 44 rated as 4 and 
6 rated as 2 or 3. 
C. Results from the Audio Transcripts 
During the talk-aloud protocol expert reviewers identified 
usability problems with the interface. Audio transcripts 
revealed some additional usability problems reported by the 
participants and the existing problems were reported by a 
larger number of participants verbally, except in the case of 
the color contrast and alternative voices in Settings. All 
usability problems were grouped into the problematic design 
features and related characteristic so that appropriate design 
response could be specified. 
Main usability problems were labeling of the buttons, use 
of Next and Back buttons for the linear navigation, design of 
a number of UI elements, lack of page scrolling with the use 
of a keyboard, layout of a number of the buttons, certain 
feature requests, miscategorization of a number of labels, and 
 
 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

navigation related to the design of the buttons and pages. For 
example, problems with the labels for Education, Emergency, 
Input, and Output buttons were reported by a majority of the 
participants (Table I). Labeling of the Speech button was 
reported by 40% of the participants. Additionally, participants 
commented unfavorably on the use of Next and Back buttons 
for the linear navigation. However, they understood that the 
linear navigation using these two buttons might be more 
usable for the aging population of users. Moreover, they 
acknowledged that the smart interface and an option to switch 
from novice to expert user skips this way of the navigation for 
the more tech-savvy users.  
Design of certain UI elements was reported as well. For 
example, Profile and Settings did not look like buttons, and 
the slider needed some redesign to half of the participants. 
Thirty percent of participants reported that Header looked like 
a button and that certain icons need to be redesigned. 
Additionally, half of the participants reported that the page 
scrolling should be present while using the keyboard. Sixty 
percent of participants reported that the layout of the buttons 
needed to be changed (e.g., locations of Email Reports and 
View Reports buttons should be switched). Additionally, 40% 
of them thought that the spacing between the top buttons (e.g., 
Manual input button in Vitals, Week, Month, Year buttons in 
Reports) and the buttons bellow should be increased. Total of 
30% of participants thought that after missing to fill out all the 
fields on one page, the prompt that follows should give them 
two options. First, it should let them go back to the previous 
page to fill out the missing content. Alternatively, it should 
allow them to go to the following page and leave certain fields 
empty. 
There was a number of problems that were found on the 
audio transcripts, which were not reported on the 
questionnaire. For example, 60% of participants thought that 
the app would benefit from the additional features (e.g., a 
place to specify the body area in Difficulties, the user’s current 
weight with the text “This is what your weight is right now” 
in the weight goals, a lauder sound feedback with the use of 
the buttons, etc.). Miscategorization of certain labels was a 
problem to half of the participants. Additionally, 60% of 
participants reported problems with navigation due to the lack 
of direction, page design, and multiple selections.  
Moreover, there was a number of problems and related 
design features and characteristics that were reported by a 
small number of participants, listed in Table I (i.e., one and 
two participants).  
V. 
REFINEMENT OF MS ASSISTANT 
All the design features and related characteristics that 
needed to be redesigned based on the results of both the 
UDMIG v.2.1 design criteria questionnaire and audio 
transcripts were summarized (Table I). The rationale for the 
design response was to make a design change if in agreement 
with UDMIG v.2.1, if at least two participants reported the 
problem, and if the suggestions were not already present in the 
prototype of MS Assistant. For the number of participants in 
Table 1, the larger number reported by either the analysis of 
audio files or the UDMIG v.2.1 checklist was used. This way, 
the total number of participants reporting a problem was 
listed. 
Dark grey background on the instruction pages was 
changed into white to provide more contrast against the black 
and green (i.e., confirmation) text (Figure 3). “Education” was 
renamed into “Resources”, “Emergency” into “Emergency 
Contacts” (Figure 4), “Energized” (in Mood) into “Excited”, 
“Input” into “Speech Input”, “Touch” into “Touch Input”, 
“Output” into “Display and Sound”, and “Speech” was 
replaced with “Voice”. 
Due to the lack of space on the top navigation bar, name 
of the app, MS Assistant, was taken out of the Home page and 
the icons for Profile and Settings were added (Figure 4). The 
color of the icons for the current state (e.g., Diary, Reports, 
etc.) was changed from black into the color of that function 
(e.g., Diary icon in green, Reports icon in blue, etc.). In this 
way, the icon and the header look like the part of the page 
background and not like the buttons (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3.  Before (left) and after (right) Diary Instruction page 
 
Figure 4.  Before (left) and after (right) Home page 
 
 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

TABLE I.  
DESIGN CHANGES BASED ON THE IDENTIFIED PROBLEMS WITH THE DESIGN FEATURES AND CHARACTERISTICS THROUGH BOTH THE 
UDMIG V.2.1 DESIGN CRITERIA QUESTIONNAIRE AND AUDIO TRANSCRIPTS 
Design Feature and Related 
Characteristic 
Number of 
Participants, 
N 
Design Response 
Design Changes 
Background, Contrast 
N=3 
Increase contrast 
Grey was changed into white with black and green text on instruction 
pages. 
Next and Back buttons, Navigation 
N=7 
No change 
No change was made due to the design criteria IC2d. (i.e., Have more than 
one way to go to different pages while keeping the consistency). Next and 
Back buttons are typical of linear navigation. 
Buttons, 
Labeling 
Education 
N=7 
Change 
labeling: 
Education  
“Education” was renamed into “Resources”. 
Emergency 
N=7 
Change 
labeling: 
Emergency 
“Emergency” was renamed into “Emergency Contacts”. 
Energized 
N=2 
Change 
labeling: 
Energized  
“Energized” (in Mood) was changed into “Excited”. 
Input, Output 
N=7 
Change 
labeling: 
Input, Output 
“Input” was renamed into “Speech Input”, “Touch” into “Touch Input”, 
and “Output” into “Display and Sound”. 
Speech 
N=4 
Change 
labeling: 
Speech 
“Speech” was renamed into “Voice”. 
News 
N=1 
No change 
No change was made to “News” due to the inconsistency with other button 
labels within “Resources.” 
Diary 
N=1 
No change 
No change was made due to the small number of participnats reporting the 
problem. 
Do not show 
this again 
N=1 
No change 
No change was made due to the small number of participnats reporting the 
problem. 
UI 
elements, 
design 
(form 
and color) 
Profile, 
Settings 
N=5 
Redesign 
Profile 
and Settings buttons 
Name of the app, MS Assistant, was taken out of the Home page top 
navigation bar, and the icons for Profile and Settings were added.  
Header 
N=3 
Redesign header 
Black color of the icons for the current state was changed into the color of 
that function (e.g., Diary icon in green, Reports icon in blue, etc.). 
Slider 
N=5 
Redesign slider 
Numbers on the slider were placed on the top of it. 
Icons 
N=3 
Redesign icons 
Speech icon was replaced with Output icon, and Input icon with Speech 
icon. Output icon and Seeing icon (in Difficulties) were redesigned. 
MS type 
N=1 
No change 
No change was made due to problems that drop-down menu causes for 
people with limited dexterity, similar to the use of the picker. 
Settings, Alternative voices 
N=3 
No change 
No changes were made since this prototype included voices within the 
Settings.  
Keyboard, spell check 
N=1 
Provide spell check 
w/keyboard 
Spell check was provided within the keyboard. 
Keyboard, Page scrolling 
N=5 
Add page scrolling 
w/keyboard 
Page scrolling was added with the use of a keyboard. 
Prompt, Content 
N=3 
Redesign prompt 
Prompt was redesigned to inform about the missing data and to allow the 
navigation to the following page without having to fill out all information. 
System, Navigation 
N=2 
Add text to the first 
instruction page 
Text about the navigation and using Next and Back buttons was added to 
the first instruction page. 
Text, font size 
N=2 
Increase font size 
The font size of the MS News articles was increased. 
Buttons, Layout 
N=6 
Change the layout 
View Report button was moved above the Email Report button. Names of 
the VR games were shortened. The other changes were not made due to the 
inconsistencies. 
Buttons, Haptic feedback 
N=3 
No change 
iPhone 6 does not have the Taptic Engine that provides the vibration. 
Buttons, Single tap 
N=1 
No change 
No change was made due to the design criteria IC13a (i.e., Use a single tap 
throughout the app instead of double-clicking). 
Button spacing, Layout 
N=6 
Increase spacing 
Spacing between the top buttons and large buttons bellow was increased. 
Feature, Feature request 
N=6 
Add 
information 
about a MS friend 
Information about MS Friends was added on the calling page. No other 
changes were made due to the small number of participants reporting the 
specific problem (N=1 per problem). 
Labels, Miscategorization 
N=5 
No change 
No changes were made due to the small number of participnats reporting 
the specific problem (N=1 per problem). 
Page layout, Lack of consistency 
N=2 
No change 
No change was made to the second page of Reports due to the lack of page 
space. 
Keyboard, On-screen verification 
N=1 
No change 
No change was made since the on-screen verification exists within the input 
field. 
Buttons and pages, Navigation 
N=6 
No change 
No changes were made to the small number of participants reporting the 
specific problem (N=1 per problem). 
Lack of confirmation of an activity, 
Navigation 
N=1 
No change 
No change was made due to the small number of participants reporting the 
problem. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

Numbers on the slider were placed on the top of it. Speech 
icon was replaced with Output icon, and Input icon with 
Speech icon. Output icon and Seeing icon (in Difficulties) 
were redesigned. Even though only one participant reported 
that there was no spell check with the use of a keyboard, this 
general feature was implemented because it is present in a 
majority of the apps. Page scrolling was added with the use of 
a keyboard. A prompt was redesigned to inform about the 
missing data in a way that allows users to go to the following 
page without having to fill out all information (i.e., “Do you 
want to fill out the missing information?” with Yes that takes 
them back to the previous page, and No that takes them to the 
following page). Text about the navigation (i.e., linear 
navigation using Next and Back buttons) was added to the first 
instruction page. The font size of the MS News articles was 
increased. The layout of the buttons was changed (e.g., View 
Report button was moved above the Email Report button, and 
the names of the VR games were shortened). The other layout 
changes were not made due to the inconsistencies with the 
page layout. A spacing between the top buttons and large 
buttons bellow (e.g., Manual entry, and Week, Month, Year 
buttons) was increased. There was a number of feature 
requests. For example, additional information about MS 
Friends is added on the calling page (e.g., friend’s interests, 
MS type, and other information the person wants to share). No 
changes were made to the other feature requests due to the 
small number of participants reporting the problem (N=1 per 
problem). 
There were 7 participants reporting a problem with the 
navigation using Next and Back buttons. However, no change 
was made due to the design criteria IC2d. (i.e., Have more 
than one way to go to different pages while keeping the 
consistency). Next and Back buttons are typical of linear 
navigation and will be used in the novice user mode only. 
Additionally, 3 participants did not see that this prototype 
included alternative voices within the Settings and a problem 
with it. Similarly, 3 participants reported problems with the 
lack of the tactile feedback, which was not incorporated 
because iPhone 6 does not have the Taptic Engine that 
provides the vibration while tapping the buttons that was 
included in later versions. The total number of participants 
reporting the problems with the miscategorization of the labels 
was 5. However, no changes were made due to the small 
number of participants reporting the individual problem (N=1 
per problem). No change was made to the second page of the 
Reports due to the lack of page space (N=2). Even though was 
there was a total of 6 participants who reported a problem with 
the navigation due to the design of the buttons and pages, no 
changes were made due to the small number of participants 
reporting the specific problem (N=1 per problem). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The goal of the reported study was to have expert 
reviewers assess the usability of MS Assistant. The results of 
the expert review study confirm that MS Assistant effectively 
implemented UDMIG v.2.1. Most of the participants 
favorably agreed that the guidelines were implemented 
appropriately. Ninety percent of the mean values of the 
participants’ ratings were equal to 4 or higher. In addition, 
there was only a small number of recommendations related to 
the minor usability problems found in MS Assistant. These 
design changes were easily implemented in the MS Assistant. 
Future work will involve usability testing of this mHealth app 
with the individuals diagnosed with MS at least 5 years ago to 
understand the overall usability of this mHealth app to 
determine the effectiveness of UDMIG v.2.1 in producing a 
universally usable product. This study will help with the 
analysis of the user-specific differences and preferences 
towards the individual design features and resulting the design 
implications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by a grant from the National 
Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and Rehabilitation 
Research (NIDILRR grant number 90RE5016-01-00) under 
the auspices of The Rehabilitation Engineering Research 
Center on Technologies to Support Successful Aging with 
Disability (RERC TechSAge). NIDILRR is a Center within 
the 
Administration 
for 
Community 
Living 
(ACL), 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Sheets, "Aging with disabilities: ageism and more," 
Generations, vol. 29, pp. 37-41, 2005. 
[2] G. Anderson, "Chronic care: Making the case for ongoing 
care," Partnership for Solutions, 2010., 
[3] H. Moses, M. Picone, and V. Smith, Clinician's primer on 
multiple sclerosis: An in-depth overview. CMC, 2008. 
[4] M. Stern, "Aging with multiple sclerosis," Physical medicine 
and rehabilitation clinics of North America, vol. 16, pp. 219-
234, 2005. 
[5] M. Stern, L. Sorkin, K. Milton, and K. Sperber, "Aging with 
multiple sclerosis," Physical medicine and rehabilitation clinics 
of North America, vol. 21, pp. 403-417, 2010. 
[6] W. E. Fleming and C. P. Pollak, "Sleep disorders in multiple 
sclerosis," Seminars in Neurology, pp. 64-68, 2005. 
[7] M. Finlayson, "Health and social profile of older adults with 
MS: Findings from three studies," International Journal of MS 
Care, vol. 4, pp. 139-151, 2002. 
[8] E. E. Gulick, "Symptom and activities of daily living trajectory 
in multiple sclerosis: a 10-year study," Nursing Research, vol. 
47, pp. 137-14, 1998. 
[9] P.  Rompani and T. Dua, Atlas: Miltiple sclerosis resources in 
the world 2008.  WHO Press, World Health Organization, 
2008. 
[10] B. Yamout et at., "Predictors of quality of life among multiple 
sclerosis patients: a comprehensive analysis," European 
Journal of Neurology, vol. 20, pp. 756-764 , 2013. 
[11] A. C. Janssens et al., "Anxiety and depression influence the 
relation between disability status and quality of life in multiple 
sclerosis," Multiple Sclerosis Journal, vol. 9, pp. 397-403, 
2003. 
[12] A. D. Rae-Grant et al., "Self-management in neurological 
disorders: systematic review of the literature and potential 
interventions 
in 
multiple sclerosis care," Journal of 
Rehabilitaiton Research and Development, vol. 48, pp. 1087, 
2011.  
[13] R. Fraser et al., "Self-management for People with Multiple 
Sclerosis: Report from The First International Consensus 
Conference, November 15, 2010," International Journal of MS 
Care, vol. 15, pp. 99-106, 2013. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

[14] D. M. Zulman et al., "How can eHealth technology address 
challenges related to multimorbidity? Perspectives from 
patients with multiple chronic conditions," Journal of General 
Internal Medicine, vol. 30, pp. 1063-1070, 2015. 
[15] R. Haase, T. Schultheiss, R. Kempcke, K. Thomas, and T. 
Ziemssen, "Use and acceptance of electronic communication 
by patients with multiple sclerosis: a multicenter questionnaire 
study," Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 14, pp. e135, 
2012. 
[16] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Needs Assessment: Functional 
Features in Mobile Health and Wellness Self-Monitoring 
Applications for People with Multiple Sclerosis," Journal of 
Healthcare Informatics Research, 2017, in press. 
[17] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Universal design mobile interface 
guidelines (UDMIG) for an aging population," in Mobile e-
Health, pp. 17-37, 2017. 
[18] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Usability of mobile consumer 
applications for individuals aging with Multiple Sclerosis," 
Proc. 9th International Conference on Universal Access in 
Human-Computer Interaction (HCII2017), Springer, Jan. 
2017, pp. 258-276. 
[19] L. Ruzic, C. N. Harrington, and J. A. Sanford, "Design and 
evaluation of mobile interfaces for an aging population," The 
Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions (ACHI2017), Mar. 2017, pp. 305-309, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-538-8 
[20] L. Ruzic, C. N. Harrington, and J. A. Sanford, "Universal 
Design Mobile Interface Guidelines for mobile health and 
wellness apps for an aging population including people aging 
with disabilities," International Journal on Advances in 
Software, vol. 10, pp. 372-384, 2017. 
[21] My 
MS 
Manager. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
https://mymsaa.org/msaa-community/mobile/ [Accessed: 09-
Feb-2018]. 
[22] MS self™, the Multiple Sclerosis Mobile App. [Online]. 
Avalable: 
http://www.moveoverms.org/multiple-sclerosis-
app-ms-self/ [Accessed: 09-Feb-2018]. 
[23] MySidekick 
for 
MS. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
https://www.abovems.com/en_us/home/resources/ms-tools-
services/mysidekick-app.html [Accessed: 09-Feb-2018]. 
[24] My 
MS 
Conversations™. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.syandus.m
s_patiented_01&hl=en [Accessed: 09-Feb-2018]. 
[25] MS 
Journal. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ms-
journal/id523663325?mt=8 [Accessed: 09-Feb-2018]. 
[26] My 
Multiple 
Sclerosis 
Diary. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.appxient.m
ymsdiary&hl=en [Accessed: 09-Feb-2018]. 
[27] SymTrack. [Online]. Avalable: http://www.symtrac.com/ 
[Accessed: 09-Feb-2018]. 
[28] MS 
Buddy. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.healthline.
msbuddy [Accessed: 09-Feb-2018]. 
[29] MS 
Attack. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.cloudnined
evelopmentllc.MSAttack&hl=en [Accessed: 09-Feb-2018]. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-622-4
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018 : The Third International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

