 How to Co-Create Internet of Things-enabled Services for Smarter Cities  
Sauro Vicini 
eServices for Life and Health 
Fondazione Centro S. Raffaele del 
Monte Tabor 
Milano, Italy 
e-mail: vicini.sauro@hsr.it 
Sara Bellini 
eServices for Life and Health 
Fondazione Centro S. Raffaele del 
Monte Tabor 
Milano, Italy 
e-mail: bellini.sara@hsr.it 
Alberto Sanna 
eServices for Life and Health 
Fondazione Centro S. Raffaele del 
Monte Tabor 
Milano, Italy 
e-mail: sanna.alberto@hsr.it  
 
Abstract — What is the future of Smart Cities? The San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute (HSR)’s eServices for Life and 
Health unit in Milan strives to explore and push the 
boundaries of the Smart City concept through the ideation and 
implementation of smart services. Often, these services achieve 
their highest potential through Internet of Things, which 
enable the constituents of these services (users, products, 
environments) to be interconnected. In order to examine the 
dynamics between users, service touchpoints and Internet of 
Things, HSR decided to develop a methodology within a Living 
Lab framework and set up the City of the Future Living Lab. 
The City of the Future Living Lab is both a virtual and real 
research environment and community and embodies a Smart 
City (indeed it contains a university, laboratories, a hospital, 
offices, shops, a supermarket, post-offices, streets, parks, a 
light rail train and bus service, numerous ICTs, etc.). It 
therefore has exposure to all users and consumers of a city. 
This paper focuses on delivering an overview of the Living Lab 
methodology and the way it brings together people, 
environments, ICT and Internet of Things in the creation of e-
Services designed by and around the end user. The paper 
presents the methodology and tools implemented for all the 
phases of the Living Lab process and presents the case of 
Living Labs as user-driven open innovation ecosystems for 
services for future Smarter Cities. 
Keywords - Living Lab; Internet of Things; Smart City; Service 
Design; user-driven open-innovation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The concept of Smart City, and how it could evolve in 
the future, is a very hot topic. At the same time the advent of 
IoT (Internet of Things) as amplifier of traditional ICT 
(Information and Communication Technologies) has been 
recognized and is expected to greatly contribute to 
addressing today’s societal challenges (from healthcare to 
energy efficiency, from education to well-being, from 
mobility to accessibility). In this context, the e-Services for 
Life and Health unit of San Raffaele Scientific Institute in 
Milan (http://www.eservices4life.org) explores, analyses, 
and develops tomorrow’s services by fostering the 
collaboration between a number of different professionals, 
including doctors, engineers, designers, and psychologists. 
The aim of this research facility is to explore the ways in 
which the Smart City concept could evolve by involving 
users directly in the process for the creation of Internet of 
Things-enabled services within a real city environment. A 
user-driven open innovation ecosystem was adopted, 
successfully bridging the gap between fundamental and 
applied research. In order to integrate the strengths and 
engaging the efforts of users, stakeholders, researchers, 
SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) and policy makers, 
the City of the Future Living Lab was set up as a fruitful 
breeding ground for Smarter City Services. 
The following paper will tackle the topic of the future of 
Smart Cities by firstly explaining how eServices for Life and 
Health interprets the concept of Smart City, and how Internet 
of Things and eService design combined can be considered 
essential elements for the development of services for 
Smarter Cities. The paper will then present the Living Lab 
methodology and process adopted by City of the Future 
Living Lab through descriptions of both, as well as through 
the presentation of five eServices that are being developed 
and implemented by the research unit as substantiation of the 
integration of Internet of Things and the Living Lab process. 
II. 
SMART CITY & INTELLIGENT CITY 
There is an array of terms used to define what is meant 
by Smart City in contemporary literature. In order to identify 
an exhaustive definition that successfully encompasses in a 
single concept all the most important elements, an evaluation 
of existing texts was made. The research was further 
broadened by the unit’s team to include also definitions 
concerning Intelligent City in the search for the most 
successful umbrella term. 
The report published by the Centre of Regional Science 
at Vienna University of Technology in 2007 [1] offers a 
holistic definition of Smart City, which encompasses a series 
of very valuable characteristics that the HSR find equally 
important. For a city to be considered a Smart City, it must 
call for the cooperation of a multitude of fields of activities 
including industry, education, community participation, 
technical infrastructure, and various ‘soft factors’: “A Smart 
City is a city well performing in a forward-looking way in 
six characteristics (Smart Economy, Smart People, Smart 
Governance, Smart Mobility, Smart Environment, Smart 
Living), built on the smart combination of endowments and 
activities of self-decisive, independent and aware citizens.” 
If analyzed, the above-mentioned definition can be 
broken down into the following characteristics. A Smart City 
must have well-developed connectivity obtained through a 
networked infrastructure [2] [3]. High-tech and creative 
industries (known as ‘soft infrastructure’) [4] must emerge 
from this fertile foundation and over time attract new 
businesses and investments therefore producing both urban 
growth and a positive socio-economic performance [5]. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Concurrently, strong efforts must go into investing in social 
and relational capital, with the aim of creating a community 
that can successfully embrace technology and learn to 
comprehend, adapt and innovate it [6]. This in turn sets the 
base for social inclusion of urban residents within public 
services. Finally, for a city to be considered Smart, efforts 
must also go into investing in social and environmental 
sustainability, therefore successfully guaranteeing the safe 
and renewable use of natural heritage. 
In reviewing the literature regarding the concept of 
Intelligent City, other factors previously not mentioned in the 
definitions regarding Smart City can be taken into 
consideration, which give good indications on the 
technology necessary in building a city environment that is 
well-connected, can be successfully enjoyed and used by 
inhabitants, is an inspiration for new business, helps nurture 
soft infrastructures, and is socially and environmentally 
sustainable. Intelligent Cities are often associated to the idea 
of a digital city, which unites a wide range of electronic and 
digital applications related to digital spaces of communities 
and cities [7] into an ICT network and uses this “to transform 
life and work within its region in significant and 
fundamental, rather than incremental, ways” [8]. These 
electronic and digital applications are interconnected among 
themselves via “embedded technology, which provides users 
with 
intelligent 
and 
contextually 
relevant 
support, 
augmenting our lives and our experience of the physical 
world in a benign and non-intrusive manner” [9]. The 
outcome of an Intelligent City, which for HSR is of extreme 
importance, is an innovation and ICT system that helps to 
combine the creativity of talented individuals, institutions 
that enhance learning and innovation, and virtual innovation 
spaces facilitating innovation and knowledge management 
[10], thus enabling “superior cognitive capabilities and 
creativity to be collectively constructed from combinations 
of individual cognitive skills and information systems that 
operate in the physical, institutional, and digital spaces of 
cities” [11]. 
For HSR, a Smart City is indeed a melting pot of all of 
the above features: a seamlessly interconnected ecosystem 
where products and environments interact among themselves 
across a number of ICT and Internet of Things-enabled 
services, with the objective of not only empower users, but 
also catalyzing the innovation process and bringing about 
positive social, economic and environmental change for 
governments, industries and citizens. 
III. 
INTERNET OF THINGS AND ESERVICE DESIGN 
In order to understand why Internet of Things and 
Service Design are interconnected, it is useful to identify the 
features of both elements. The idea at the heart of Internet of 
Things, which is very similar to the definition of Intelligent 
City, is that all things and all environments can be improved 
from a functional point of view via the embedding of 
technology that remains invisible to the eye of the users, 
which enables both products and environments to become 
smart: meaning that they can gather data (or enable someone 
to gather data via them) from their surroundings, producing 
what Fleisch calls high-resolution data (or real-time data, 
essential in management and improvement of systems [12]), 
as well as communicating amongst themselves as well as 
with humans. Internet of Things is a strongly evolving field 
and it is useful to keep in mind that in the future it will be 
open, scalable, flexible, secure, customizable by its users, 
profoundly user-centric [13]. 
Service Design is the activity of arranging and managing 
both tangible and intangible goods such as people, 
infrastructures, communication, documents and products, for 
the attainment of users’ goals and the fulfillment of their 
needs. The aim of this process, as expressed by the Service 
Design Network Manifesto [14], is to create services that are 
useful, useable, desirable, efficient and effective, based on a 
human-centered and holistic approach that focuses on the 
customer 
experience 
whilst 
integrating 
team-based 
interdisciplinary approaches and methods, in ever-learning 
cycles. 
The service economy in developing countries is 
increasingly accountable for higher percentages of GDP 
(Gross Domestic Product) and is mostly concentrated in 
financial services, health, and education. At the same time, 
products today have a higher service component than in 
previous decades, replacing the old dichotomy between 
product and service with a unified service-product 
continuum. This is leading to greater expectations and more 
articulated demands both from users (for increasingly 
smarter and engaging products and environments) as well as 
by service providers and infrastructures (for more 
streamlined, real-time and differentiating artifacts). For this 
reason, the role of Internet of Things is for it to become an 
integrated element of both services and their design process, 
for its capability of capturing, communicating and supplying 
data directly from the users and making it accessible to 
stakeholders and decision-makers. 
Internet of Things can therefore be considered a powerful 
means through which to improve the value chain between 
users, products and environments and therefore better 
services. Providing adaptable, scalable and personalized 
services based on meaningful data collected via embedded 
technologies in products and environments pushes the 
concept of Smart Cities or Intelligent Cities towards a future 
where Cities are Smarter.  
IV. 
TOWARDS EXPERIENCE DESIGN 
Empowering 
users 
by 
delivering 
services 
that 
significantly improve their lives through augmented values 
and experiences is one of the key features of Intelligent 
Cities. At the same time, Smart Cities are those that 
stimulate communities to learn, adapt and innovate ICT and 
Internet of Things-enabled services, and therefore embrace 
technology. Thus it is safe to say that in both cases, users 
play a key role in defining the future of Smart Cities. Users’ 
experiences can therefore constitute the principle driving 
force behind the development of successful and sustainable 
services for smarter cities. Disciplines such as Service 
Design [15], Transformation Design [16], Interaction 
Design [17] and Experience Design [18], exist and thrive by 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

being cross contaminated by their users through a user-
driven approach.  
For these reasons, eServices for Life and Health, a 
department within HSR, has decided to adopt a user-driven 
approach to its innovation processes to produce an 
ecosystem where ideas are submitted to users’ in order to 
gain their feedback, in a continuous process of open 
innovation [19]. The unit is specialized in the application of 
Information Technology to the realm of health and well- 
being, with the aim of developing and delivering services to 
the hospital’s infrastructure as well as fostering innovation 
across numerous domains and disciplines. The reason for 
embracing a bottom-up approach is to have users 
contaminate the development process of an ICT or Internet 
of Things-enabled product or service so as to determine 
successful solutions that truly respond to (or even 
anticipate) 
user 
needs, 
bridging 
the 
gap 
between 
fundamental and applied research and diminishing the time 
and resources to deploy these on the market.  
Such a process finds its natural collocation within a 
Living Lab methodology. In this context, City of the Future 
was brought to life, as a response to the unit’s need to 
explore new practices to enrich ICT towards further 
innovation.  
V. 
CITY OF THE FUTURE LIVING LAB  
As previously anticipated, San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute has recently set up the City of the Future Living 
Lab, both a virtual as well as real research environment and 
community. The Living Lab follows along the conceptual 
framework presented by ENoLL (European Network of 
Living Labs) in which user-driven innovation is fully 
integrated within the co-creation process of new services, 
products and societal infrastructures.  
The City of the Future Living Lab is an ecosystem where 
a multitude of stakeholders and partners can work alongside 
each other sharing knowledge whilst interacting with a wide 
variety of ICTs, therefore creating a fertile ground for 
disruptive innovation and cross-disciplinary research and 
communication.  
A.  Living Lab Methodology 
The research methodology implemented by the City of 
the Future Living Lab is built on the widely recognized 
Living Lab process illustrated in Figure 1. The latter is based 
on four concurrent phases: co-creation, exploration, 
experimentation, and evaluation. Since this approach is an 
iterative and reflective one, a starting point is not defined and 
the LL process can be commenced at any stage of the design 
activity.  
The fundamental concept at the base of the City of the 
Future Living Lab is to gain direct and unfiltered access to 
users’ ideas, experiences, and knowledge, based on their 
daily needs and desire of feeling supported by products, 
services, or applications. Users are directly involved in co-
creating, exploring, experimenting and evaluating new ideas, 
concepts and technological artifacts related to Internet of 
Things 
applications 
and 
services. 
The 
Living 
Lab 
methodology an approach that focuses on making 
stakeholders and users constructive and active participants in 
the definition and construction of an artifact, be it a product, 
an interface, a service or an Internet of Things-enabled 
platform, with the aim of improving and building value into 
these same artifacts. Users and stakeholders are all involved 
from the early stage of the LL process and throughout its 
entirety (therefore, along the Co-creation phase, the 
Exploration phase, the Experimentation phase, and finally 
the Evaluation phase as above). Insights are gathered directly 
from the users in order to define and implement realistic, 
useful, desirable and effective artifacts. 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  A visual representation of the Living Lab process 
 
B.  Methods, Tools and Techniques used in the Living Lab 
Process 
The involvement of users in terms of an active 
integration of the end-users is a difficult task. One of the 
problems is that customer orientation is often based on 
classical market research tools, which puts customers in a 
passive “speaking only when spoken too” role [20]. City of 
the Future Living Lab studies, develops and implements a 
number of different tools throughout each phase of the living 
Lab process in order to best collect insights from users and 
use them to develop products and services that truly respond 
to their needs (both expressed and unexpressed). 
The most commonly used tools during the co-creation 
phase of the Living Lab process are focus groups, interviews, 
brainstorming sessions and questionnaires. Interviews, 
questionnaires and focus groups are the most practiced 
exercises and have been widely discussed throughout 
academia [21] [22]. Focus groups consist in involving a 
group of users in a collective activity or discussion around 
their perceptions, opinions, beliefs and attitudes towards 
something that could be a product, ad advertisement, a 
packaging, and so on. This is a useful tool to gain a general 
overview of a target user as well as of a market. The same 
can be achieved by using interviews, which generally are 
one-to-one and involve an interviewer or researcher asking 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

open questions to an identified user. Questionnaires are most 
often composed of closed or semi-open questions though a 
moderator or researcher is not needed. All these tools are 
qualitative and can be used concurrently to build a clear 
picture of wither a market or a targeted user. 
Another tool that can be used within the co-creation 
phase of the Living Lab process is the Lead User Method, 
developed by Von Hippel et al. [23] in the 1980s. It is a four-
stage approach where user needs are explored by involving 
what Hippel calls “lead users”, or expert users with extreme 
or very evolved requirements. Involving lead users at the 
birth of an idea allows researchers to delineate the contours 
of the market in which the idea could grow, benchmark 
existing solutions and therefore identify new opportunities. 
Users can be effectively involved in the innovation 
process also via co-creation groups and idea competitions. A 
co-creation group is similar in structure to a focus group, but 
requires users to actively participate in the creation and 
development of an idea, be it a product or a service, 
throughout a group session. An idea competition instead is 
when users are asked to submit ideas to the research team 
within a specific time frame, and these ideas are then voted 
either by peers, stakeholders or a selected jury. In these two 
ways users are able to express their own creative 
interpretation regarding a new product or service, providing 
a fresh and often disruptive approach. 
The previously mentioned tools are often used on a one-
off basis and help to produce very focused and detailed 
insights. As users are becoming evermore active, informed 
and empowered, another tool that is very useful on a more 
continuous basis is consumer or user partnering. This 
consists of building a long-lasting relationship with a user 
who on a regular basis meets up with the research team and 
discusses his her lifestyle, habits, and behavioral evolutions. 
Crowd sourcing is another way of gaining insight over time. 
It can involve a group of users or single users, as well as 
experts or amateurs. A web-based platform or digital 
application can be created through which users are able to 
contribute their views and opinions on a given subject [24]. 
In this way, researchers and users co-create value through 
their continuous interaction towards a common goal. 
An interesting emerging tool adopted during the co-
creation phase is serious gaming. Serious games are indeed 
games (they can be digitally based or physical) but their aim 
is not only to entertain, but also to train individuals or 
investigate an issue. Different topics can be explored via 
serious games such as behaviors and attitudes in stressful 
situations, approaches to education, social dynamics, etc. 
Serious games are a dynamic and effective tool to help users 
access and use new information in an enjoyable manner, 
providing an enrichment of skills and living experience to its 
users. As with regular games, serious games fix a set of rules 
and each player has a designated role so that everyone is 
encouraged to participate. They successfully involve users of 
all social and cultural backgrounds and the “fun” aspect 
successfully triggers the spontaneous generation of a great 
number of insights. 
In the exploration phase of the Living Lab process, the 
main tool used is prototyping. Prototypes can be made in two 
different manners: in a rough form (called low fidelity 
prototypes) and in a more finished yet not definite form 
(called high fidelity). Rough prototyping consists of making 
quick mock ups, and this exercise is used to simulate 
products and service components of an idea in order to better 
explain them to other members of the research team and 
stakeholders. High fidelity prototypes on the other hand 
consist of simulating a service’s experience by setting up a 
representation of the service in mind via all its elements in a 
more finished form. Both ways are very pragmatic: the first 
approach allows to de-contextualize problems and issues and 
confront them with a blank or white slate manner, the second 
allows for the demonstration and testing of a solution and  
the drawing up of a set of requirements which will form the 
basis of the service which will be deployed in the 
experimentation phase. 
Ethnography is a practice adopted from socio cultural 
anthropology and is based on a qualitative method where 
researchers examine the shared and learned patterns of 
values, behaviors, customers and beliefs in a group of users 
[25]. Researchers can observe users in their natural 
environment or in an artificially recreated one, though the 
prior is preferred because it allows users to feel at ease and 
therefore manifest more spontaneous attitudes. There are 
many techniques available, for instance, video ethnography, 
shadowing, disposable camera studies, day in the life studies, 
and so forth. 
Ethnography is a very useful and commonly used tool 
during the experimentation of the Living Lab process. 
Through the study of users interacting with a product, service 
or environment in the process of being developed, the 
research team aims to understand the nature of behaviors 
between these elements. The insight gathered is fed back into 
the Living Lab process, forming the base for the evaluation 
phase, and allows the product, service or environment to be 
improved and therefore to respond more successfully to their 
users, often generating insight beyond the subject researchers 
initially intend to study. 
The evaluation phase is the most critical step in the 
Living Lab process because it must identify the service’s 
ability to permeate across users and their environment. The 
evaluation of a service can be viewed through different 
lenses – for example a business focus aims at understanding 
whether a service has the capacity of generating revenue 
over time or if it is sustainable. HSR’s interest lies in 
understanding to what extent the services developed satisfy 
users’ expectations and contribute in producing positive 
experiences. For this reason, the City of the Future Living 
Lab alongside a number of partners have recently 
implemented an experiential analysis platform as an outcome 
of an EU-funded project entitled ELLIOT (Experiential 
Living Labs for the Internet Of Things - http://www.elliot-
project.eu/). Within this platform data are collected via the 
Internet of Things embedded in the products, services and 
environments around users (such as cameras, sensors, 
microphones, etc.), and provide a clear overview of their 
interactions and attitudes, thus providing researchers the 
opportunity to further optimize prototypes.  
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

The Living Lab Process is explored and validated by 
applying a set of KSB (Knowledge-Social-Business) 
Experience Models to each service and correlated products 
developed. Such Models, specifically designed at the onset 
of each design process and based upon users’ and 
stakeholders’ objectives and expectations, evaluates whether 
the user and stakeholder objectives and expectations are met 
or not.   
VI. 
EXAMPLES OF IOT SERVICES TESTED IN CITY OF THE 
FUTURE LIVING LAB 
A.  Interactive Totem Service 
The Interactive Totem Service is based on a totem 
equipped with a touch screen monitor and an easy-to-use 
interface suitable for children as shown in Figure 2. It is 
placed in the pediatric department of HSR and allows 
hospitalized children to interact with a number of games that 
allow them to learn whilst playing. A reward system 
stimulates children to order their own meals and learn about 
nutrition as well as understand better how to manage their 
condition during hospitalization.  
 
 
Figure 2: The Interactive TV Service within the hospital’s pediatric ward. 
B.  Nutritionally Aware Vending Service 
The vending service developed by HSR [26] offers a 
service for the promotion of healthy lifestyles, which 
stimulates users to reflect upon the benefits related to healthy 
living through a new concept of vending machines via an 
interactive touchscreen. The Vending Machine depicted in 
Figure 3 not only provides healthy foods, literature and 
music, as well as useful information regarding mobility and 
physical activity but also personalized information on how to 
adopt healthy lifestyle choices. 
 
 
Figure 3: The Nutritionally Conscious Vending Service being developed 
within the Feed For Good project. 
C.  Bicycle Activity Monitoring and Tourism Service 
This service is based on the Vainbici.it Web Portal and 
its aim is to promote initiatives for healthier and 
environmentally friendly lifestyles whilst providing new 
services for pedestrian-cycle mobility. It involves a digital 
platform (Figure 4) designed for exchanging and sharing 
information and digital content related to the world of bike 
and cycling and now includes a wearable monitoring system, 
which collects biological data from users as they cycles. 
 
 
Figure 4: The Bicycle Activity Monitoring and Tourism Service involves 
a web platform that users can through different digital touchpoints. 
D.  Infomobility Service 
The Infomobility Service proposed has the aim of 
improving the mobility of patients, visitors, staff and 
students in their travel to and from San Raffaele Hospital by 
offering a platform through which the latter can access a vast 
number of information including the timetable of the shuttle 
line, information about the condition of the automatic line 
and the next connections from and towards San Raffaele 
Hospital (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5: The app designed for the Infomobility Service involving the 
hospital’s light rail shuttle line. 
E.  Energy Management Service 
The Energy Management Service illustrated in Figure 6 has 
been developed as part of the eCube project, co-funded by 
the Italian Ministry of Economic Development and helps 
users monitor and improve their energy efficiency. Two 
pilots are being developed: an office pilot and a hospital pilot 
(which includes patients’ rooms, corridors and nurses’ 
room). Smart Appliances and Smart Plugs provided by 
project partners are being positioned in real work and 
hospital contexts and used by the users of these spaces. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Figure 6: The energy consumption of an environment can be managed by 
the user in our Energy Management Service. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
City of the Future Living Lab is a powerful 
representation 
of 
how 
user-driven 
open 
innovation 
ecosystems can contribute towards the evolution of the 
Smart City concept and the validation of Internet of Things-
enabled services. In this real research environment and 
community that embodies an evolved vision of Smart City, a 
number of services have been co-created and will continue to 
be designed and offered across different scenarios, with the 
objective of studying and measuring the interactions between 
users and services as well as the potential of Internet of 
Things technologies and their impact on creating Smarter 
Cities.  
The Living Lab process is actively and continuously 
contaminated by the user experience via a set of ever-
evolving tools and techniques: during the co-creation phase, 
users can contribute to the ideation of services by suggesting 
their own ideas and experiences; user inspiration is explored 
by the research team through the development of prototypes; 
refined versions of the proposed services are then opened to 
users so that they can experiment with them and provide 
their very personal feedback; insights subsequently are used 
to evaluate the tested service and improve it.  
HSR believes that this effective, user-driven process of 
innovation will play a vital role also in shaping the 
implementation of Future Internet technologies. As Smart 
Cities will embrace IoC-K (Internet of Content and 
Knowledge), IoP (Internet of People) and IoS (Internet of 
Services), Living Labs adopting a concurrently bottom-up 
and top-down approach achieved via a process of what we 
call co-creation, will become an evermore-important 
breeding ground for both incremental and especially 
disruptive innovation. This in turn will lead to the successful 
deployment 
of 
business, 
societal, 
economic 
and 
environmental change, which will provide the grounds upon 
which to build Smarter Cities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
City of the Future Living Lab would like to thank Rhea 
Vendors and S4Web for their technological contribution to 
the research projects mentioned.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Giffinger, R., Fertner, C., Kramar, H., Kalasek, R., Pichler-
Milanovic, N., and Meijers. E., “Smart cities – Ranking of 
European medium-sized cities”, Centre of Regional Science, 
Vienna 
(2007): 
http://www.smart-
cities.eu/download/smart_cities_final_report.pdf (retrieved in 
January 2012) 
[2] Hollands, R. G., “Will the real smart city please stand up?” 
City, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 303 - 320 (2008) 
[3] Florida, R. L. “The rise of the creative class: and how it's 
transforming work, leisure, community and everyday life”, 
Basic Books, New York (2002) 
[4] Domingue, J., Schaffers1, H., Komninos, N., Pallot, M., 
Trousse, B., Nilsson, M., and Oliveira, A., “Smart Cities and 
the Future Internet: Towards Cooperation Frameworks for 
Open Innovation”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Volume 6656, The Future Internet, pp. 431–446 (2011):  
http://www.springerlink.com/content/h6v7x10n5w7hkj23/ 
(retrieved in Decembre 2011)  
[5] Caragliu, A., Del Bo, C., and Nijkamp, P., “Smart cities in 
Europe”. Serie Research Memoranda 0048, VU University 
Amsterdam, Faculty of Economics, Business Administration 
and Econometrics, pp. 131– 143 (2009) 
[6] Coe, A., Paquet, G., and Roy, J. “E-governance and smart 
communities: a social learning challenge”, Social Science 
Computer Review, 19 (1), pp. 80-93 (2001) 
[7] Droege, P., “Intelligent Environments - Spatial Aspect of the 
Information Revolution”, Elsevier, Oxford (1997) 
[8] California Institute for Smart Communities, “Ten Steps to 
Becoming a Smart Community” (2001):  
http://www.smartcommunities.org/library_10steps.htm 
(retrieved in January 2012) 
[9] Steventon, A. and Wright, S., “Intelligent spaces: The 
application of pervasive ICT”, Springer, London (2006) 
[10] Komninos, N., “The Architecture of Intelligent Cities”, 
conference Proceedings from the 2nd IET International 
Conference on Intelligent Environments, Athens, pp. 13-20  
(2006) 
[11] Komninos, N., “Intelligent Cities: Innovation, knowledge 
systems and digital spaces”, London and New York, Taylor 
and Francis, Spon Press (2002) 
[12] Fleisch, E., “What is the Internet of Things? An Economic 
Perspective”, ITEM-HSG, Auto-ID Lab St. Gallen. (2006): 
http://www.autoidlabs.org/uploads/media/AUTOIDLABS-
WP-BIZAPP-53.pdf (retrieved in November 2011) 
[13] Uckelmann, D., Harrison, M., and Michahelles. F., 
“Architecting the Internet of Things”, Berlin, Germany: 
Springer. ISBN 978-3-642-19156-5 (2011) 
[14] Service 
Design 
Manifesto: 
http://www.service-design-
network.org/system/files/media/sdn%20Manifesto.pdf 
(retrieved in November 2011) 
[15] Parker, S. and Heapy, J., “The Journey to the Interface - How 
public service design can connect users to reform’. Demos, 
London (2006) 
[16] Burns. C., Cottam, H., Vanstone, C., and Winhall, J., “RED 
PAPER 
02 
Transformation 
Design”, 
(2006): 
http://www.designcouncil.info/mt/RED/transformationdesign/
TransformationDesignFinalDraft.pdf (retrieved in November 
2011) 
[17] Morridge, B., “Designing Interactions”, The MIT Press, 
Cambridge (2007) 
[18] Norman, D.. “The Design of Everyday Things”, Basic Books, 
New York (1988) 
[19] Chesbrough, H., “Open Innovation: The New Imperative for 
Creating and Profiting from Technology“, Harvard Business 
School Press (2003) 
[20] von Hippel, E., “Successful Industrial Products from 
Customer Ideas”, Journal of Marketing, 42(1), pp. 39-49 
(1978) 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

[21] Mariampolski,. 
H., 
“Qualitative 
Market 
Research: 
A 
Comprehensive Guide”, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks 
(2001)  
[22] Kuniavsky, M., “Observing the User Experience: A 
Practitioner’s Guide to User Research”, Morgan Kaufmann 
(2003) 
[23] von Hippel, E., “Lead Users: A Source of Novel Product 
Concepts”, Management Science, Vol. 32, No. 7. July, pp. 
791-805 (1986) 
[24] Howe, J. “The Rise of Crowsourcing”,  Wired magazine, June 
edition (2006):  
http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html 
(retrived in Januray 2012) 
[25] Angrosino, M., “Doing Ethnographic and Observational 
Research”, Sage Publications, London (2007) 
[26] Vicini, S., Sanna, A., and Bellini, S., “A Living Lab for 
Internet of Things Vending Machines”, Communications in 
Computer and Information Science, Volume 282, The Impact 
of Virtual, Remote, and Real Logistics Labs, Part 2, pp. 35-43 
(2012): 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/j2t467q358l07
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

