 
 
TRIPZOOM: A System to Motivate Sustainable Urban Mobility 
 
Paul Holleis, Marko Luther,  
Gregor Broll, Hu Cao 
DOCOMO Euro-Labs 
Munich, Germany 
{luther, holleis, broll, h.cao} 
@docomolab-euro.com
Johan Koolwaaij, Arjan Peddemors,  
Peter Ebben, Martin Wibbels 
Novay 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
{johan.koolwaaij, arjan.peddemors, 
peter.ebben, martin.wibbels}@novay.nl 
Koen Jacobs,  
Sebastiaan Raaphorst 
Locatienet 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
{koen.jacobs, sebastiaan} 
@locatienet.nl 
 
 
Abstract—The accelerating growth of cities provides new chal-
lenges for urban planning, especially related to transportation. 
Many existing infrastructures already operate at their limits 
during rush hours or large events. They need to be used more 
efficiently as they often cannot be extended without considera-
ble negative effects for citizens such as increasing pollution or 
travel costs. We describe a framework that enhances mobility 
data from existing urban infrastructure with data from partic-
ipatory sensing. Based on derived mobility patterns and direct 
feedback via social networks, a dynamic incentive system is 
provided to positively influence mobile behavior on a personal 
and city-wide scale beyond regular urban planning. We pre-
sent the design and architecture of such a system and point out 
critical issues and proposed solutions in an initial implementa-
tion aimed towards real world tests in several cities. 
Keywords - sustainable traffic; urban mobility; personal 
mobile sensing; incentives; social networks. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today, more than 50% of the world’s population lives in 
cities and the UN forecasts a further increase to 70% by 2050 
[1]. This metropolisation creates many challenges for the 
world’s cities [2]. Current transport infrastructures often 
cannot cope with the load anymore especially during peak 
times. They have to be used more sustainably as extensions 
incur considerable negative effects for citizens such as in-
creasing pollution and direct or indirect travel costs. 
The European FP7 project “Sustainable Social Network 
Services for Transport” (SUNSET [3]) is developing and 
evaluating the TRIPZOOM system [4] that implements a new 
approach to urban mobility management. The assumption is 
that sharing personal mobility patterns via social networks 
and the use of incentives can encourage citizens to utilize 
sustainable forms of transportation and to generate a win-win 
situation for all involved stakeholders (Fig. 1). Citizens can 
optimize their mobility needs using recommendation and 
personalized traffic services from the city authority, share 
travel related information with buddies on social networks 
(like the community-based traffic app WAZE [5]) and get 
rewarded for sustainable behavior. The city authority re-
ceives detailed mobility profiles of citizens, relevant to the 
assessment of current infrastructure use and future mobility 
needs, and achieves optimizations by offering incentives. 
Communities, like employees of a company or participants 
of a car sharing system, are supported in networking and in 
enlarging their groups. Third party service providers can tap 
into the data to create novel offerings and integrate with 
others through common incentive structures (like the loca-
tion-based incentive application FOURSQUARE [6]). 
To reach the project goals, we are realizing a technical 
and socially supportive environment called TRIPZOOM that 
complements urban infrastructure sensing with participatory 
mobility sensing. TRIPZOOM is based on our competences 
gained by developing and operating the context-aware com-
munity application IYOUIT [7], the mobility capturing ap-
plication TRAVELWATCHER [8], as well as the traffic jam 
alerting application FILEWEKKER [9]. In contrast to other 
real-time mobility monitoring systems focusing on anony-
mous, aggregated data (such as [10]), TRIPZOOM generates 
detailed personal mobility patterns. These allow users to 
zoom in on trip details and raise awareness by computing trip 
overviews and eco feedback [11] that can be shared with 
friends or the community. 
It is often assumed that direct feedback can positively in-
fluence the mobility behavior of individuals and that social 
influence is probably the most powerful factor behind human 
behavior change. We will use the TRIPZOOM system to evalu-
ate these assumptions and to develop feasible and successful 
incentives by operating living labs in three European cities. 
In the following, Section II describes the incentive and 
social networking aspect on which TRIPZOOM is built. Sec-
tion III highlights important aspects of the mobile sensing 
part while Sections IV and IV provide details about the ar-
chitecture and implementation. We conclude with a descrip-
tion of the current status and next steps within the project. 
 
Figure 1. The TRIPZOOM eco-system. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
II. 
INCENTIVES AND SOCIAL NETWORKING 
TRIPZOOM aims at providing different types of incentives 
to relevant target groups at relevant places and in relevant 
situations. To incorporate the most effective types of incen-
tives, we conducted an analysis of individual travel behavior 
[12]. This research implies that influential incentives should 
be based on the following areas: 
• 
Time: efficient use, control, saving, and planning 
• 
Money: save (e.g., discounts on transportation tick-
ets) or even generate (e.g., coupons) 
• 
Information: receive (real-time, personalized) infor-
mation about progress, travel alternatives, … 
• 
(Social) recognition: of being green and healthy/fit; 
give feedback to and receive feedback from others 
In TRIPZOOM, incentives appear mostly in form of a chal-
lenge defined by a set of rules that users have to fulfill and a 
reward that they can earn (e.g., take the bike instead of the 
car to get a coupon financed by a bicycle store). To be able 
to evaluate the effect of different (combinations of) incen-
tives, TRIPZOOM offers dynamic and controllable incentive 
management. It allows for generating and placing incentives 
in real-time during the entire runtime of the system. This 
means that weak or unintended side effects of incentive of-
fers [13] can be detected early and that incentive operators 
such as city representatives can alter incentives accordingly. 
For this purpose, a component called city dashboard (see 
Section IV) is being developed that will offer a live view on 
various aggregated statistics and anonymized data of the 
users within a city. It can be used to efficiently check and 
evaluate the effect of incentive measures. This approach can 
be used to change overall mobility behavior (e.g., fewer cars 
in the city) or to target specific goals, e.g., optimizing the use 
of alternative travel modalities before and after large events. 
TRIPZOOM uses a point scheme as one way to integrate 
various offers, and to open the incentive system to third par-
ties: each incentive is worth a certain number of points, 
which can be exchanged for certain rewards, for example 
information or monetary items such as access to fare reduc-
tions. This point scheme also makes it easier for users to 
track their progress as well as to share and compare it with 
friends and colleagues (Fig. 2). This adds competition as a 
gamification feature [14] and creates a more playful experi-
ence. For that purpose, TRIPZOOM offers a set of social net-
working features that connect to popular sites such as 
FACEBOOK, FOURSQUARE and TWITTER. That way, existing 
social networks are used to advertise TRIPZOOM and to allow 
users to share their progress and achievements with others. 
These social connections can themselves be seen as a power-
ful tool for inducing behavior change as people can engage 
in competitions. Furthermore, all users’ privacy and sharing 
settings are defined with respect to their connections. 
III. 
 MOBILITY SENSING 
To optimize mobility, one needs to identify individuals 
that are relevant for the optimization targets under considera-
tion. Therefore, mobility sensing plays a fundamental role in 
the proposed TRIPZOOM system. To gain profound insight 
into mobility behavior, TRIPZOOM combines the strengths of 
two orthogonal approaches: infrastructure sensing that 
measures vehicle intensities or travel times in urban net-
works (e.g., roads, rails, bus lanes), and personal mobility 
sensing that uses mobile phones to track how citizens make 
use of that network. 
Infrastructure sensing includes traffic light and intersec-
tion status providing information about traffic intensity, in-
tervals of traffic light phases, and delay times. License plate 
cameras can estimate dynamic travel times on the roads be-
tween any two cameras. Parking areas deliver information 
about the number of total and available lots. Further data can 
be real-time public transport information such as the actual 
location of buses. Infrastructure data is often limited in geo-
graphic coverage, and has restricted possibilities to track 
individuals throughout the whole transportation network. 
Personal mobility sensing uses various technologies in 
citizens’ mobile phones (e.g., GPS / Wi-Fi / accelerometer 
[8]) to detect or deduce the 4 Ws of personal mobility: when 
do people move, where (via which route), with whom, and 
using which modality (bike, car, etc.). While personal mobil-
ity data allows detailed individual tracking, only a small part 
of the city community can be expected to participate. Still, 
the goal is to get an overall mobility profile per citizen 
(Fig. 3) covering a 24/7 period. The use of mobile phone 
sensors and battery power has to be carefully balanced with 
the measurement accuracy to be achieved [15]. 
 
Figure 3. Trips and detected modalities. 
 
Figure 2. Buddy list including current incentives points.
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
Combining and correlating both approaches relieves the-
se shortcomings by improving the level of detail regarding 
the geographic and community coverage of the TRIPZOOM 
measurement approach. 
IV. 
ARCHITECTURE 
TRIPZOOM consists of a network of Core Services guard-
ed by Proxy and Security Services. Mobile clients, a web 
portal, and the city dashboard act as interfaces to the user. 
Furthermore, a social network infrastructure allows for easy 
sharing of data (see Fig. 4 and detailed description in [16]). 
The service infrastructure delivers incentives (see Section 
II), mobility monitoring (see Section III), and basic social 
network services. The security layer allows access to the 
TRIPZOOM universe only according to user consent. 
The mobile application supports sensing of personal mo-
bility by connecting to (sensor) data such as mobile phone 
location information and offers a means to interact with the 
user. The Web portal additionally provides visualizations of 
statistical data as well as comparisons with respect to com-
munity mobility patterns. Traffic authorities and researchers 
use the city dashboard to get an overview of the current mo-
bility situation and have control over applied incentives. 
Additionally, TRIPZOOM uses resources offered by exter-
nal or third party components, e.g., sensors and services to 
monitor road traffic and to obtain public transportation status 
information. In the same way, third party applications can 
request access to services provided by the system compo-
nents depending on user consent. Six components provide 
the core service functionality. 
Personal Mobility Store (PMS): collects raw measure-
ments from mobile clients and preprocesses them to be input 
to algorithms such as pattern detection. 
Mobility Pattern Detector (MPD): receives data from 
the PMS and employs sophisticated algorithms to detect 
patterns for individuals, groups, places, regions, routes, or 
vehicles such as bus lines or a taxi. 
Mobility Pattern Visualizer (MPV): takes the patterns 
derived by the MPD and turns them into interpretable and 
easily accessible visualizations depicting long-term statistics, 
trends and personal, city-wide, or place-oriented perfor-
mance with respect to set goals. 
Relation, Identity, and Privacy Manager (RIP): pro-
vides its own social network implementation and organizes 
the privacy policies of users based on their social relations or 
ad-hoc groupings computed by the MPD. 
Social Network Connector (SNC): connects the internal 
social network (RIP) with existing social networks such as 
FACEBOOK or FOURSQUARE, to facilitate user registration, 
information sharing (e.g., a notification on the successful 
completion of an incentive), importing contacts, or showing 
visualizations from the MPV. 
Incentives Market Place (IMP): provides a platform for 
incentives as rewards, recognition, or real-time feedback to 
encourage travelers to improve their behavior with respect to 
the system’s and individual’s objectives. The IMP matches 
challenges with mobility patterns from the MPD, profiles 
and preferences from the RIP, general transport information, 
and can publish performance and events using the SNC. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The distributed system is implemented building on Rep-
resentational State Transfer (REST) and JavaScript Object 
Notation (JSON). This supports loose-coupling between the 
components, clear interfaces, and independence of platform 
and programming language. The security layer uses OAuth 
[17], a simple mechanism to publish and interact with data 
that needs access control. It is wide-spread and used by many 
systems such as FACEBOOK or TWITTER. The TRIPZOOM 
social network features such as the Social Network Connect-
or build on the open source social networking engine ELGG 
[18] Using such a platform has the advantages that users are 
not required to use a specific network and it simplifies the 
integration with other functionality that the portal and mobile 
application offer. 
A. Mobile Client 
Information from mobile device sensors (GPS, Wi-Fi, 
and GSM measurements) is combined into one model that 
can deal with the varying accuracy of location measure-
ments. In line with other research in this area (such as [14]), 
TRIPZOOM uses a smart strategy to record trips in detail but 
applies less detailed sensing when people are in buildings, or 
on frequently used routes. 
To implement the trip detection in a battery-efficient 
way, the application listens to ‘significant’ location changes 
using Wi-Fi (preferred) or GSM location updates and only 
enables the battery-hungry GPS if it has reasons to assume 
that the user has left the (static) location. Attempts to acquire 
a GPS fix are kept short – if there is no fix within that time, 
the GPS is turned off and will be re-enabled only after some 
time. By varying those time intervals, a trade-off is made 
between consuming battery power and attempting to record 
the trip as detailed as possible. We refer to [19] for details on 
this sampling strategy. Our initial tests within a limited user 
community have shown that battery life is 20 hours on aver-
age, with quite some variations related to differences in cov-
erage (GSM, GPS, etc.) and mobile phone use. 
The mobile application submits all location recordings to 
the TRIPZOOM server. All recorded trips are displayed on the 
mobile application to increase the awareness for personal 
mobility behavior. Specifically, regular trips, personal places 
and the mobility footprint of the user are visualized. The 
latter includes an estimate of the mobility impact in terms of 
costs, total and lost time, and CO2 emissions. 
 
Figure 4. Main system components.  
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
B. Server 
On the back-end, the goal is to further enhance the data 
and to apply smoothing and outlier detection to the location 
data and to improve trip timings. To gather information on 
overall modality use and reward calculation, trips need to be 
stitched and split such that each segment is made of a single 
modality only. To facilitate modality detection, each route is 
mapped onto the underlying infrastructure network. Our 
algorithms estimate the modalities of each trip based on the 
location measurements as well as derived parameters such as 
the speed pattern, infrastructure usage, and origin and desti-
nation of the trip. The latter are automatically linked to plac-
es, to reveal the trip purpose, such as commuting between 
home and work, and improve the accuracy of modality 
recognition. Personal places frequently visited by the user in 
the past, like home or office, are recognized but can be ad-
justed by the user. Common places, like train station or thea-
ter, are mapped to crowd-sourced places as defined, e.g., in 
FOURSQUARE. 
Trip modality recognition applies rules to all gathered in-
formation and calculates modality likelihoods. For example, 
a trip going from one airport to another with an average 
speed above 150km/h will likely have been made by plane. 
Users travelling on roads closed for car traffic are likely to 
walk or cycle depending on their speed pattern, etc. Still, it is 
important to allow users to manually adapt the recognized 
modality, in case of any error. The current system has an 
accuracy of about 77%, which already saves considerable 
effort compared to manually labeling all trips and is similar 
to other state-of-the-art approaches [20]. Its algorithm works 
better on ‘walking’, ‘cycling’, ‘car’, ‘plane’, and ‘train’  than 
on other modalities including ‘bus’ and ‘tram’. An improved 
approach for better recognizing those modalities is currently 
in the design phase. 
VI. 
STATUS AND OUTLOOK 
SUNSET is an ongoing project. After the identification 
of the stakeholders, the creation of usage scenarios and re-
quirements analysis [21], the overall system has been de-
signed and the architecture defined as described in the 
previous section. Several parts of it have already been im-
plemented, connections to external infrastructure and sensor 
data have been established, and the underlying social net-
work functionality has been provided. Additionally, func-
tional prototypes of the mobile application (for iPhone and 
Android) are available and a basic web portal is running for 
evaluation purposes. 
The next step after the finalization of the core system de-
velopment is the start of living labs in three European cities 
(Enschede, NL, Gothenburg, SE, and Leeds, UK). In cooper-
ation with city councils and public transport data providers, 
this serves as a test setting and evaluation platform [22] for 
the defined scenarios, algorithms such as modality and pat-
tern detection, and the power of incentives. To maximize the 
overall outcome, each living lab will focus on different target 
groups and follow different evaluation goals [23]. The living 
labs will be started in a sequence to allow the transfer of the 
acquired knowledge and experiences from one to the next. 
Finally, we plan to assess the transferability of the system 
and living lab results to other cities and environments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been performed in the framework of the 
EU FP7-270227 project SUNSET, which is partly funded by 
the European Union. The authors would like to acknowledge 
the contributions of their colleagues. 
REFERENCES 
[1] http://esa.un.org/unup/index.asp?panel=1, accessed 5/14/2012 
[2] M. Naphade, G. Banavar, C. Harrison, J. Paraszczak, and 
R. Morris. Smarter cities and their innovation challenges. 
Computer, 44(6): pp. 32–39, June 2011. 
[3] http://www.sunset-project.eu/, accessed 5/14/2012 
[4] http://www.tripzoom.eu/, accessed 5/14/2012 
[5] http://world.waze.com/, accessed 5/14/2012 
[6] http//foursquare.com/, accessed 5/14/2012 
[7] S. Böhm, J. Koolwaaij, M. Luther, B. Souville, M. Wagner, 
and M. Wibbels. Introducing IYOUIT. In Proc. of the Int. 
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC’08), Springer, pp. 804–817, 
2008. 
[8] W. B. Teeuw, J. Koolwaaij, and A. Peddemors. User 
behaviour captured by mobile phones. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Interactive Human Behavior Analysis in Open 
or Public Spaces (INTERHUB’11), 2011.  
[9] http://www.filewekker.com/, accessed 5/14/2012 
[10] F. Calabrese and C. Ratti. Real time Rome. Networks and 
Communication Studies. Journal of the IGU’s Geography of 
Information Society Commission, 20(3/4): pp. 247–258, 
2006. 
[11] J. E. Froehlich, L. Findlater, and J. A. Landay. The design of 
eco-feedback technology. In Proceedings of the Int. Conf. on 
Human factors in computing systems (CHI’10), pp. 1999-
2008, 2010. 
[12] A. Ma, editor. Feasible and Potentially Successful Incentives. 
EU Project SUNSET, Deliverable D3.4, 2012. To Appear. 
[13] J. Costa-Font, M. Jofre-Bonet, and S. T. Yen. Not all 
incentives wash out the warm glow. CESifo Working Paper 
Series 3527, CESifo Group Munich, 2011. 
[14] G. Zichermann, Gamification by Design, O'Reilly, 2011. 
[15] K. Lin, A. Kansal, D. Lymberopoulos, and F. Zhao. Energy-
accuracy trade-off for continuous mobile device location. In 
Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Mobile Systems, Applications and 
Services (MobiSys’10), pp. 285–298. ACM, 2010. 
[16] S. Poslad, editor. Service Framework Architecture and 
Design. EU Project SUNSET, Deliverable D5.1, 2011. 
[17] http://oauth.net, accessed 12/5/2012 
[18] http://elgg.org, accessed 12/5/2012 
[19] M. Luther, editor. Initial Mobile Application Design. EU 
Project SUNSET, Deliverable D4.1, 2011 
[20] V. Manzoni, 
D. Maniloff, 
K. Kloeckl, 
and 
C. Ratti. 
Transportation mode identification and real-time CO2 
emission estimation using smartphones. Technical report, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 2010. 
[21] S. Poslad, editor. Preliminary User, System Requirements 
Review and Specification. EU Project SUNSET, Deliverable D1.1, 
2011. 
[22] T. Broens, 
H. ter Hofte, 
and 
P. Ebben. 
A 
reference 
architecture for living lab measurement systems. In Proc. of 
the Mobile Living Labs Workshop (MLL’09), 2009. 
[23] M. Meeuwissen, editor. Living Lab Plan. EU Project 
SUNSET, Deliverable D7.1, 2012. To Appear. 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

