Researching Motivational Factors Towards a 
Sustainable Electricity Consumption 
Louise Jensen 
IT University of 
Copenhagen 
Rued Langgaardsvej 7 
Copenhagen S, Denmark 
loje@itu.dk  
 
Line Mulvad 
IT University of 
Copenhagen 
Rued Langgaardsvej 7 
Copenhagen S, Denmark 
limu@itu.dk  
 
Sofie Hauge Katan 
IT University of 
Copenhagen 
Rued Langgaardsvej 7 
Copenhagen S, Denmark 
shka@itu.dk 
  
Nicolaj Valberg 
Sundahl 
IT University of 
Copenhagen 
Rued Langgaardsvej 7 
Copenhagen S, Denmark 
nvsu@itu.dk  
 
 
 
Abstract— In relation to Smart Grid, which is currently in 
the making, this article presents findings from a 
qualitative study researching the motivational factors 
towards a sustainable electricity consumption. While there 
is a tendency mainly to look at the technical aspects of the 
implementation, we wish to take a critical look at the 
current implementation issues from the users’ point of 
view. Previous empirical studies indicate that social 
interaction 
and 
visualisation 
of 
real 
time 
energy 
consumption patterns can trigger more ecologically 
responsible behaviour. This paper focuses on exploring 
this assertion through a qualitative study of a design called 
the “The Social Electricity Meter” by revealing an 
indication of motivational factors to change ones electricity 
use based on social stimuli. By reflecting theoretically on 
how this kind of empirical data is essential when designing 
future Smart Grid experiences, we also evaluate the 
capability of the approach Research Through Design to 
gather insights about future social practice. 
 
Keywords - Smart Grid; Research Through Design; Eco-
visualisation; social interaction; electricity consumption. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
By the year 2050, the Danish Government is striving to 
make Denmark almost independent of fossil fuels estimating 
that up to 80 percent of produced energy will come from 
renewable sources such as wind, wave, and solar production. 
As the current energy infrastructure is not constructed to 
handle these kinds of energy sources, it requires major 
changes in our existing energy infrastructure for these desired 
outcomes to be actualised [1]. Several initiatives have been 
taken to develop this new infrastructure, which is widely 
referred to as Smart Grid – a yet undefined concept with the 
purpose of creating a more flexible electricity grid through 
intelligent communication between the load of energy in the 
grid, the consumers, and their devices. Because renewable 
energy sources are uncontrollable, the electricity infrastructure 
must adapt and support flexible consumption in order to 
effectively make use of the renewable energy. 
Right now, the consumption in Denmark is concentrated 
around electricity peak hours. This requires power stations to 
produce larger amounts of energy at certain hours of the day. 
It is not currently possible to store electricity extracted from 
renewable energy. Therefore, to utilise the renewable 
electricity it has to be used immediately in order for it not to 
be wasted. To eliminate the waste the aim is to move the 
current consumption in peak hours to periods when there is an 
overload of electricity available in the grid [1]. Due to the 
many aspects and the complexity of Smart Grid as a concept, 
we focus solely on private electricity consumption and the 
problems of peaks in electricity consumption. 
Company stakeholders (GreenWave, HP, IBM, and DONG) 
in the field of Smart Grid have tested Smart Meters with the 
purpose of providing visualised information to inform 
individual users. The individual users’ specific energy usage is 
visualised in an attempt to foster awareness of one's own 
energy consumption and as an incentive to change one’s 
consumption practices [2]. Smart Meter is a development of 
the regular electricity meter that uses visual models and 
representations to display. In this regard, Tiffany Holmes, 
professor in art and technology, appropriately uses the term 
eco-visualisations to describe real time dynamic data 
visualisations of energy consumption as a method for inspiring 
environmental stewardship [3]. 
Steen Kramer Jensen, official energy consultant at 
Energinet.dk, points out that incentives for intelligent 
electricity consumption cannot only be economical [1]. Thus it 
is necessary to explore what other possible incentives might 
persuade users to modify their electricity consumption patterns. 
Research undertaken by different company stakeholders within 
the field of Smart Grid identifies social relations as having an 
influence on change in energy consumption behaviour [1, 4]. 
Therefore, we wish to explore and discuss how social 
interaction and eco-visualisation influence the user’s practice 
around electricity consumption patterns. This study aims to 
advance the understanding of motivational factors behind 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

behavioural change, and should be seen as an early exploration 
that provides inspiration and foundation for future research. 
II. 
THEORY 
Research has been undertaken in relation to Smart Grid, 
including the forementioned Smart Meters. Common to all this 
research is a focus on the technological aspects, or testing of 
new technologies. As professor of sociology, Elisabeth Shove 
argues: there is a tendency ”... to pay greater attention to the 
invention and acquisition of the new things than to the way 
such novelties are subsequently deployed in practice” [5, p. 2]. 
Thus research within the field of Smart Grid seems to 
primarily focus on how to implement new technologies that 
will affect the everyday life but with limited understanding of 
the actual users. Hence, the research appears not to take into 
account how technologies and practices are mutually 
influenced because they are affected by the meso and macro 
level context in, which they are located or deployed [5].  
Johan Redström, docent in interaction design, argues that 
design is defined by the user, in the situated use, and shaped 
by the context and practices of the user. By using the approach 
Research Through Design we want to make use of the process 
in, which the user assigns meaning and function to the design 
in relation to their existing practices and experiences [6]. 
Fallman and Stolterman note that bringing forth an artifact to 
explore alternative designs is “shaped by the ambition to 
explore new solutions, new directions, new technology and 
new usage, to broaden the overall design space or to rock the 
boat, without necessarily trying to solve existing and well-
deﬁned problems” [7, p. 270]. Furthermore, the chosen 
approach to this study, is based on the belief that individuals 
create meaning based on their own “lived experiences of a 
concept or a phenomenon” [8, p. 57]. 
Smart Grid as a technology is still in the development 
stage. Research Through Design presents an opportunity to 
transform the world from a current state into a preferred state 
by introducing a design artifact. In this case, providing a way to 
explore the users experience with elements of technology 
design not yet invented [9]. Thus, our main approach is the 
presentation of the design for the user and the exploration of 
what and how the formation of meaning is created. 
III. 
DESIGN ELEMENTS 
To explore how social relations can have an influence on 
change in energy consumption behaviour we have designed 
what we call “The Social Electricity Meter” based on game 
and eco-visualisations theory. One of the purposes of the 
design is to inform users about their specific energy usage in 
an attempt to foster awareness of one’s own energy 
consumption patterns through visualisation and thereby create 
an incentive to change consumption habits [3]. 
By integrating game elements in our design we aim to 
explore how social interaction can influence our behaviour in 
relation to private electricity consumption and understanding 
of electricity. Game designer Chris Swain argues how games 
can be designed to affect social change: “Games are well-
suited to communicating a shared understanding of a problem 
because they allow users to experiment with potential 
solutions in a safe setting and generate their own mental 
frames for how it works” [10, p. 806]. The foundation for 
taking a playful approach to the design is that games set a 
frame, which people can relate to. Given that the 
implementation of Smart Grid is complex, and the 
understanding of electricity is abstract, it is beneficial to bring 
it into a game context where participants can draw upon 
previous experiences and thereby know how to play by the 
rules. By creating a design inspired by game theory we try to 
raise the energy usage issue without causing the user to get a 
bad conscience. By integrating social interaction, we aim to 
facilitate a community of practice, a term from the social 
anthropologist Etienne Wenge who has shown that by making 
it possible to share experiences and knowledge users build 
social capital and accumulate new knowledge and innovation 
[10]. 
Game theoreticians Zichermann & Cunningham emphasise 
that an important game mechanic, and one of the key corners of 
gamification, is feedback [11]. Based on this, the design 
contained a direct feedback in the form of points and comments 
triggered by the informants’ performance, which indicate 
whether or not they were heading in the right direction. 
IV. 
THE DESIGN 
The design consists of a visual interface designed using 
HTML and PHP displayed on an iPad, which was placed in 
each of the informants’ home. The visual interface consists of 
5 elements; 3 “score-bars” presenting individual scores as well 
as the average score through lightning graphics, a windmill, 
and a button (Fig. 1). The informants’ were asked to register 
every time they used certain products (washing machine, 
coffee machine etc.) by touching the button on the screen. The 
button was either green or red to symbolise whether it was a 
period with an abundance of electricity available in the grid or 
not. To further illustrate that there is an  abundance of 
electricity in the grid (when the button is green) the windmill 
rotates as if moved by wind. Whenever the informants 
registered electricity used in the “green period” they gained a 
point and vice versa if it was registered in the “red period”. 
The main function of the design was to show the two 
informants their individual point score as well as the average 
amount of points of both informants. This makes both of them 
able to compare their energy consumption continuously. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 1. An example of the interface the user would see. In this case there is 
no abundance in the electricity grid, which is symbolized by the windmill not 
moving and the button turning red. If the user presses the button, which is now 
red, they will immediately get feedback in the sense of losing a “lightning-
point” 
 
Four informants, two pairs of friends, were using the design 
for seven days. The important selection criterion was to find 
pairs of informants who already had a social connection thus 
creating the best conditions for studying the impact of the 
social interaction. Two semi-structured qualitative interviews 
were afterwards conducted to follow up on their experience 
using the design, and how their electricity usage was 
influenced by the social aspect [12]. 
As we are not trying to provide categorical “truths”, but 
rather raise questions of what social practices are possible, 
more informants would not necessarily have created more 
representative findings. Thus this study can be seen as 
exploratory by examining the use and formation of meaning in 
relation to a specific design [13]. The empirical data was then 
analysed by reducing the information to significant statements, 
and then placing it into themes [8]. 
V. 
FINDINGS 
In our data analysis, five particular themes were identified: 
A. Solidarity 
Contrary to expectations, it turned out that the informants 
could not relate to the part of the design, which showed their 
common score. We expected that they would contact one 
another to cheer, motivate and tell when the energy was green 
with the aim of increasing their shared score. However, they 
expressed that they could not influence their partners’ 
performance, thus giving no incentive to contact their partner. 
Additionally, they described a feeling of the common goal as 
being too abstract, which might be caused by the design not 
being distinct enough and giving no clear incentive to reach a 
common goal. This resulted in a lower support of direct social 
interaction and sense of solidarity between the participants 
than expected. Therefore, reaching the common goal of 
gathering points together was not a substantial part of their 
experience. 
B. Discourse 
An important finding was the indication of a strong 
established societal discourse constituting that one has to act 
environmentally responsible. This was distinctively visible in 
several ways but most significantly in verbal statements from 
all of the informants who implied that energy responsibility is 
common sense.  It is interesting that the discourse was a 
motivational factor in the sense that it was the decisive term 
behind the desire to create a representation of oneself as 
environmentally responsible both in relation to others and to 
one self. Thus it was the major premise behind the following 
motivational factors. 
C. Self presentation 
It seems that it was a motivational factor for the informants 
that others were able to monitor their performance. The study 
indicates 
two 
different 
motivational 
aspects 
of 
self 
presentation in relation to electricity consumption. The first 
aspect is explicit as it is focused on actively presenting one’s 
own results to others, e.g., by posting it on social network 
sites, or having the device a central place in the home. The 
other aspect is implicit as it is grounded in an automatic 
presentation of results, which is triggered by the system e.g., 
posting the electricity consumption of last week on a social 
network site. 
D. Comprehension 
In spite of the common goal being too abstract, the 
informants were unanimous in their expression that electricity 
consumption was made tangible and easier to comprehend 
when it was visualised through the design within a certain 
continuum. It was also considered motivating to see one’s own 
performance compared with the friend’s performance because 
this made their own consumption tangible. 
E. Predictability 
The informants indicated that they only had a limited 
amount of time and willingness to wait for the “green” 
electricity in order to use it. In certain instances, some of the 
informants mentioned that they did wait for the “green” 
electricity before performing a specific task. There would, 
however, be a larger willingness to wait if they could get an 
indication of when this was going to happen as suggested by 
one of the informants. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Initially, we expected this study to show how social 
interaction would have an effect on energy consumption by 
creating a sense of community. On the contrary, what seemed 
to be a coherent tendency was the way social relations had an 
effect on the energy consumption in relation to the individual 
and self representation. This was due to either an implicit or 
explicit wish to represent one self as energy responsible. The 
sense of solidarity was not visible but instead the primary 
motivational factors for changing behaviour seemed to be on 
an individual level. 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Research Through Design as an approach to explore future 
practices enabled us to zoom in on the detailed elements of 
electricity consumption and the behaviour around it. Thereby, 
we arrived at specific findings of the motivational factors in 
relation to electricity consumption. 
Contrary to former research within the field of Smart Grid 
[1, 4] we have been able to explore the effect of social 
relations and also acquire information and an understanding of 
the underlying structures governing the motivational factors 
embedded in the social interaction. Because the design is put 
to actual use, existing practices are projected into the users’ 
understanding of the design. Especially notable is how the 
aformentioned societal discourse on energy consumption has 
an influence on the use and understanding of the design. Most 
significant was how the elements of the design, which 
supports enrolment in the discourse, served as the motivational 
factors to change consumption behaviour. 
The visualisation aspect of the design turned out to be a 
strong medium with the attribute of making the energy 
consumption tangible. Thus, it becomes a means for the user 
to create an understanding and a sense of self in relation to the 
above mentioned discourse on energy consumption. The 
pivotal factor for the visualisation aspect seemed to be the 
allocation of points reflecting energy responsible behaviour. It 
seemed, though, that the comparison of the points in relation 
to the other informant was what made the concept of 
consumption tangible. This was because of the ability to 
assign a value to the points on the basis of comparison. The 
value assigned to the points was primarily due to the social 
interaction through the design. Not only did they create a base 
for comparison with each other but also with one self over 
time. The comparison on different levels created a foundation 
for self representation. Thus, the motivational factor was both 
a clearer conscience and also representing oneself as an 
environmentally responsible person on the basis of the shared 
discourse. 
Shove argues that the technology and the social discourses 
are coherently shaped by each other [5]. Thus, the 
understanding and the use of the design was very much 
assigned to this correlation. It also indicates that the design 
influences the discourse and the users’ existing understandings 
of energy consumption. This seems evident in the way that the 
users, to some degree, have broadened their understanding of 
energy responsible behaviour from an understanding that 
energy responsible behaviour is only equivalent to reducing 
consumption, to a reformed understanding. A reformed 
understanding in, which it was not only about reducing 
consumption but also focused on what sources the energy 
derived from e.g., fossil fuels vs. renewable energy sources 
and how the production is distributed throughout the day. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This study took starting point from other research within the 
field of Smart Grid, but with the method Research Through 
Design we took it into a more defined context and thereby 
gathered more detailed and focused data. An underlying 
societal discourse was located as the premise behind other 
motivational factors to change electricity consumption 
behaviours. 
The visualisation enabled the user to compare their 
performance with others thereby making it more tangible and 
concrete as to what their contribution to a renewable 
environment looks like. Hereby transforming abstract and 
“diffused” information into comparable and comprehensible 
data and altering the understanding of what constitutes 
sustainable electricity consumption. Also, self representation 
played a part in the motivation for behavioural change. We 
have distinguished between whether the self presentation 
happens 
explicitly 
or 
implicitly 
through 
automated 
presentations. 
The study has opened up the design space by showing how 
social interaction, because of the societal discourse can be a 
motivational factor towards sustainable energy consumption. 
The specific findings could be used as guidelines when 
researching and designing for behavioural change within the 
field of smart grid. Either as an inspirational point of 
departure, or a continuation of this research by redesigning 
“The Social Electricity meter” and going into depth with the 
elements, which were regarded as motivational. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Energinet.dk. Denmark opts for Smart Grid, ”Intelligent power system 
with more renable energy.” Magazine, Energinet.dk, 2011.  
[2] 
Venables, M. “Smart meters make smart consumers.” Engineering & 
Technology, 2007: 23-23. 
[3] 
Holmes, T. “Eco-visualization: Combining Art and Technology.” ACM, 
2007: 153-162. 
[4] 
Valocchi M., Juliano J., and Schurr A. “Lighting the way: 
Understanding the smart energy consumer.” IBM Institute for Business 
Value, 2009. 
[5] 
Shove, E., “Converging Conventions of Comfort, Cleanliness and 
Convenience.” 2002: 1-16.  
[6] 
Redström, J. “RE:Definitions of use.” Design Studies, Elsevier Ltd., 29, 
nr. 4 (2008): 410-423.  
[7] 
Fallman, D., and Stolterman E. “Establishing criteria of rigour and 
relevance in interaction design research.” Digital Creativity, Routledge, 
21, nr. 4 (2010): 265-272. 
[8] 
Creswell, J. W., “Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design: Choosing 
among five approaches.”  London: Sage, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4129-1607-
3. 
[9] 
Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi J., and Evenson S. “Research Through Desing 
as a Method for Interaction Design Research in HCI.” SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems. San Jose, 
California: Carnegie Mellon University Research Showcase, 2007. 493-
502. 
[10] Swain, C. “Designing Games to Effect Social Change.” DiGRA. 
DiGRA, 2007. 805-809. 
[11] Zichermann, G., and Cunningham C. “Gamification by Design: 
Implementing Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps.” 1st ed., 
Sebastopol, California.: O'Reilly Media Inc, 2011. p. 77. ISBN 978-1-
449-39767-8. 
[12] Kvale, S. “Interviews. An Introduction to Qualitative Research 
Interviewing.” Thousand Oaks, California: Sage, 1996. ISBN 0-8039-
5820-X. 
[13] Silverman, D. “Doing Qualitative Research.” 3rd ed., London: Sage, 
2010. ISBN 978-1-84860-034-8.
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

