1
Design of an Accessible VR-Escape Room for Accessibility Education
Saba Mateen, Paula Wiesem¨uller, Sarah Voß-Nakkour
studiumdigitale
Goethe University Frankfurt
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
e-mail: mateen@sd.uni-frankfurt.de, wiesemueller@sd.uni-frankfurt.de, voss@sd.uni-frankfurt.de
Abstract—Access to Escape is a Virtual Reality (VR) Escape
Room, aimed at sensitizing computer science students to the
importance of digital accessibility. Since these students will
develop digital content in the future, this target group is an
important starting point to create awareness towards the topic.
This article outlines the development of a VR game based on the
viewpoints of Accessibility Education, Game Accessibility, and
accessible VR to offer access to a wide range of people. The
primary objective is to address the research question of what
steps are necessary to create an accessible VR game and what the
design process should entail to achieve this goal. The development
process of Access to Escape showed that the Game Accessibility
Guidelines (GAG) workflow offered a low threshold starting
point, for example, by making the vast amount of accessibility
guidelines more tangible. Here, it should be emphasized that the
prioritization, as suggested by the workflow, must not lead to
the exclusion of any applicable guidelines, since every guideline
is needed to guarantee an accessible game experience. However,
during the implementation process of our VR-Escape Room,
it became apparent that many resources and a well-defined
time schedule are needed to achieve a fully accessible game. To
counteract this issue, more information material and open-source
solutions are needed to meet all accessibility requirements.
Keywords-Accessibility
Education;
Virtual
Reality;
Game
Accessibility; Escape Room.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the increasingly digital nature of everyday life, the
importance of digital accessibility moves further into focus.
“The fast-growing market for making digital products and
services more accessible comprises a range of economic
operators, such as those who develop websites [...].” [1],
making it necessary to train these operators. In consideration
of that, we developed the Virtual Reality (VR) Escape
Room Access to Escape to educate computer science students
about digital accessibility. As computer science students
represent the future developers of digital products, it is
necessary to educate these stakeholders on the importance of
digital accessibility and teach them methods on implementing
inclusive software. Using an immersive learning format such
as a VR game, it was aimed to sensitize the players by
making barriers more tangible and thus relatable. Although
gamification and VR technology offer benefits such as the
mentioned immersion, they also introduce new challenges,
including the need for accessible VR gaming experiences.
To design an accessible VR-Escape Room, we formulate the
following research question:
“What does the design process for creating an accessible
VR game entail, and what implementation steps are necessary
to achieve this goal?”
To address the posed research question, we will first give
an overview of the related topics in Section 2 which include
Accessibility Education, Game Accessibility, and Accessible
VR. Section 3 will offer an overview of the implementation
of Access to Escape. We will explain the game story and the
corresponding learning goals, how we implemented the GAG
workflow, and demonstrate the outcome of the implementation
of accessibility features. The lessons learned and limitations
of the VR-Escape Room will then be discussed in Section 4.
Finally, in Section 5, we summarize our findings and formulate
tasks for future work.
II. DISCIPLINES OF ACCESSIBILITY
For a successful implementation of the introduced VR-
Escape Room, it is necessary to consider different disciplines
of digital accessibility. Access to Escape, for one, represents
a tool for learners to grasp the content related to digital
accessibility. For another, the VR game needs to be accessible
so it can be played by every learner. In the following, the
teaching of accessibility, the accessible design of a game, as
well as of the VR application itself will be examined, which
are needed to achieve the mentioned goals.
A. Accessibility Education
Accessibility Education is a broad field in which learners
are supposed to acquire various competencies: Initially, they
need to develop theoretical understanding and procedural
knowledge regarding accessibility [2]. Only with the aid of
this foundational knowledge, learners can build technical skills
in this discipline.
To teach these skills, educators need resources that can
teach accessibility while considering the current knowledge
and skill set of students [3]. As digital accessibility is still
not a widespread mandatory subject at every university, it is
necessary to create such learning materials that provide a low-
threshold introduction to the subject, so even students who
do not have any prior educational knowledge about digital
accessibility can have an easy access to the content.
In order to provide a simple introduction to the topic, it is
beneficial to make barriers tangible and thus provide learners
with a realistic experience [4]. For example, Kletenik and
Adler [5] developed three games in which the players are
confronted with simulated disabilities to generate awareness
of the topic accessibility. It became apparent that students who
played these games increased their empathy for people with
impairments or disabilities and also their motivation to design
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

2
more accessible content.
To simulate barriers even more immersive, VR technology
has the potential to create such experiences and make them as
tangible as possible [6].
B. Game Accessibility
Game
Accessibility
describes
the
subarea
of
game
development that addresses the removal of barriers for people
with impairments or disabilities [7]. It should be emphasized
that removing the barriers, and by that, creating an accessible
game, is limited by the game rules as games often include
intended barriers which represent the challenges of the game
story. If those challenges would be removed, the intention
and / or the entertaining character of the game could be
compromised.
For the development of accessible games in accordance
with the corresponding game rules, the Game Accessibility
Guidelines (GAG) [8] by the International Game Developers
Association
(IGDA)
have
been
established
in
different
elaborations [7], [9], [10], [11]. The GAG [8] are guidelines
which are based on an online survey that gathered methods
to make games more accessible to different user groups. The
current version (May 2021) includes 122 guidelines that can
be classified according to motor, cognitive, visual, auditory,
linguistic, and general barriers. Each of these six groups is
again classified into three subgroups (basic, intermediate, and
advanced). The classification into these subgroups depends on
the following three factors:
Reach: The number of people who benefit from meeting the
corresponding requirements.
Impact: The qualitative difference this adjustment makes for
players.
Value: The cost incurred for implementation.
The basic guidelines [8] describe accessibility features that
make playing easier for a large number of players and are also
easy to implement. The intermediate guidelines [8] include
features that require additional planning and resources, but
are still easy to implement and reach many players. Finally,
the advanced guidelines [8] involve complex modifications
and high costs. Although only a few specific players benefit
quantitatively from these modifications, they have a very high
qualitative value for those players.
The need for each guideline of the GAG is emphasized by
a realistic use case, making the traceability of a barrier easier
for developers [8]. Further support provided by the guidelines
are the listed best-practice games that have particularly well
implemented the respective guideline.
Regarding the implementation of accessible games, the
following workflow is recommended by the IGDA [8]:
1) Familiarize: Before the implementation phase begins,
the guidelines must be considered, since a variety of
requirements can already be met through simple design
decisions in the conception phase.
2) Evaluate & plan: In the second phase, it must be
investigated which guidelines will be relevant and
applicable in the context of the planned game to create
a reduced subset of requirements to be implemented.
3) Prioritize & schedule: The chosen requirements from the
second phase are prioritized with respect to the available
resources and scheduled in the development plan.
4) Implement: To achieve the best results, experts and
players with a disability or impairment should also test
the game during the implementation phase.
5) Inform:
Players
should
be
made
aware
of
the
implemented guidelines in tutorials and loading screens,
as there is a risk that they will go unnoticed in various
menu settings.
6) Review & learn: Information on how often players have
used accessibility features helps future projects when
conducting the third phase, especially when prioritizing
requirements.
C. Accessible VR
The use of VR is steadily increasing and is becoming
a more prevalent tool in education. This makes the access
to VR technology even more important. The developer
manual of the company Oculus emphasizes that accessible
VR applications can reach a wider range of users [12].
VR applications are considered accessible when people with
different types of visual, auditory, mobility, perceptual, and
cognitive impairments can interact with the given content.
The manual presents procedures for seven application areas
of a VR application, which partly overlap with the GAG and
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) [7]. The
sections of the manual are presented in the following:
User Experience (UX) and User Interaction (UI) [12]: To
achieve an inclusive UX, game developers must first become
aware of exclusive UX design. As an example of such an
exclusive design, the chosen size of the play area is mentioned:
Players with a limited movement area could experience a
below-average or even unplayable user experience. Only when
the game can be completed without blockages or external help,
an inclusive UX design is achieved. It must be constantly
tested to see if this is the case. For example, it is useful to play
the game with disabled sound or color filters. Also, the use of
auditory, visual, and haptic interaction possibilities makes the
UX more inclusive.
Controls and Interactions [12]: The predefined controls of
a game can hinder players, for example those with motor
impairments, in interacting with the game. To improve this
situation, selection options and alternative types of interaction
should be presented. Modifications help not only people with
disabilities but also all players. For example, the ability to
re-assign control keys not only helps players who cannot
fulfill the default input requirements due to motor impairments
but also benefits habitual players who prefer a personalized
interaction.
Movement and Locomotion [12]: In order for the movement
of players in the virtual world to be feasible for everyone,
among other things, developers must consider how a person
who cannot move in the real world could still move around
in the virtual world. For example, navigation via joysticks
eliminates the barrier for players who cannot move freely in
the real world.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

3
Fig. 1. Puzzle 3: Using a color filter, the player experiences the perception
of a person with a color vision deficiency (deuteranopia)
Display [12]: Personalizing screen displays, such as variable
brightness settings, is now standard on many devices. In
VR applications, this personalization is even more important
because the complete occupancy of the visual space and the
proximity to the human eye pose a risk of sensory overload. A
personalized display prevents this danger for all players, with
and without impairments. For example, the ability to enlarge
text elements or objects in the virtual world can support people
with visual impairments.
App Design [12]: Elements of app design can support the
accessibility of VR applications. For example, a clear and
mandatory tutorial at the beginning of the game provides
the opportunity to become familiar with the game mechanics.
Clearly defined rules and objectives help players stay focused
on the game. Through such methods, the basic understanding
of the game can be simplified for all players. Additionally,
the game can be made more accessible by adding a guiding
character. For players who were unable to process auditory,
visual, or haptic signals, these characters can, for example,
provide additional hints.
Audio [12]: In addition to the possibilities of visual
and
haptic
interaction,
audio
offers
another
form
of
communication. Short and simple audio tracks can signal
actions and processes. However, despite the advantages of
sound, the option should be kept open to deactivate it without
loss: People who, for example, have difficulty concentrating
and therefore choose to turn off the sound, must not experience
any loss of information.
Captions and Subtitling [12]: Captions refer to the textual
reproduction of spoken dialogues. Whereas, subtitling refers to
the translated textual reproduction of spoken foreign-language
dialogues. These forms of information transfer help a variety
of people: players with hearing or cognitive impairments,
players who do not understand the game language, and players
who prefer to read dialogues instead of hearing them.
III. IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation is divided in different sections: First,
we introduce the VR-Escape Room Access to Escape and its
learning objectives. They specify what skills and knowledge
the learners are supposed to gain. Next, the application of
the GAG workflow is presented, which exemplifies how
the workflow can be integrated in the development process.
Finally, the implemented accessibility features are presented
and categories for clustering them are proposed.
A. Access to Escape
At the beginning of the game, the player is in a university
building and has to find a certain auditorium. Initially, the
person playing is on the first floor were a training room is
located. As soon as the player is ready, they can use an elevator
to go to the desired location but because of a defect, the
elevator crashes shortly after. Finally, the player lands on the
basement floor where five puzzles, each representing a barrier,
need to be solved to get the elevator running again.
• Puzzle 1: The player is faced with an incomprehensible
speaker announcement that is caused by an incorrect
language setting. The learning objective of the first puzzle
is based on the WCAG guideline 3.1.1 Language of Page
(Level A). This requires the ability to programmatically
determine the language of the content at hand. People
who use a screen reader will encounter this barrier,
for example, when a web page has no or an incorrect
language tag. If the screen reader pronounces text in
a different sound than the language in which the text
is written, the read-out text is very difficult or even
impossible to understand.
• Puzzle 2: An important code which is needed to move
on within the game is displayed via an extremely blurry
image. By that, the player is introduced to the difficulties
caused by inaccessible graphics which are mentioned
in the WCAG guideline 1.1.1 Non-text Content (Level
A). Here, it is described that non-text content needs an
alternative textual access point.
• Puzzle 3: The player enters a room that contains a
color-dependent puzzle but can only see a limited set
of colors due to a color filter (see Fig. 1). The player
is introduced to the content of WCAG Guideline 1.4.1
Use of Color (Level A), which states that color should
not be the only way to convey information. If content is
conveyed through color alone, people with limited color
perception may not be able to assimilate this information.
Therefore, the player is introduced to other ways in which
information can be conveyed, such as patterns.
• Puzzle 4: A cliff has to be crossed by choosing the correct
order of labeled buttons which represent heading levels
(see Fig. 2) and by that the player becomes familiar
with the content of WCAG Guideline 1.3.1 Info and
Relationships (Level A). This guideline requires that the
structure of (web) content must be programmatically
determinable. If the correctness of the heading order is
not given, the comprehensibility of the digital content is
limited.
• Puzzle 5: To reactivate the elevator, the player is
confronted with buttons of insufficient size (see Fig.
3). Based on the WCAG guideline 2.5.5 Target Size
(Level AAA) it is necessary to maintain a minimum size
for buttons (and other interactive elements) in order to
guarantee their operability for all users.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

4
Fig. 2.
Puzzle 4: Three button options next to the magic carpet, each
representing a different heading level
Fig. 3.
Puzzle 5: Inaccessible target size of the ON-Button making it
impossible to select the element
B. Implementation of GAG Workflow
The development process of the VR-Escape Room follows
the
phases
of
the
IGDA
workflow
for
an
accessible
implementation:
Phase 1 - Familiarization: The structure and content of the
GAG and the presented Oculus manual were considered.
Phase 2 - Evaluate & Plan: The GAG are provided in
form of an Excel spreadsheet in which each row represents
a guideline whereas the Oculus manual contains various texts,
which are spread over several pages. To allow a structured
evaluation, we converted the content of the Oculus manual
into an organized Excel spreadsheet. The further evaluation of
the now prepared guidelines was approached together with the
following phase.
Phase 3 - Prioritizing & Scheduling: The prioritization of
the guidelines has been carried out in several steps. First, it was
decided that, in addition to the Oculus manual, only the basic
GAG guidelines would be considered. These do not require
a complex implementation and yet help a large number of
gamers, making them a suitable basis for the first prototypical
implementation. In the next step, the Excel spreadsheet
from phase 2 was extended by two additional columns,
“Importance” and “Ease”, which take a value between 1
(important resp. easy) and 3 (rather unimportant resp. difficult)
for each guideline (see Fig. 4). “Importance” is used to indicate
how necessary a guideline is for the concrete game experience
of Access to Escape. Thus, the guideline to use a readable
text size is associated with the importance of ’1’, whereas
Fig. 4. Excel spreadsheet with rating of guidelines
the guideline to inform about accessibility features during the
game is rated with an importance of ’2’. The latter policy aims
to improve the game experience by providing information;
the former policy aims to provide a basic perceptible game
experience, which is why it is considered more important.
“Ease” describes how complex and time-consuming a potential
implementation of the policy is estimated. After determining
whether a policy is applicable to the game (see Phase 2),
the values of “Importance” and “Ease” were discussed and
recorded. By looking at the final scores, a prioritization of the
guidelines or features could be performed.
Phase 4 - Implementation: Throughout the development
process, the game was evaluated by usability and accessibility
experts. Because of these evaluations, an implemented puzzle
could be identified as a trigger for simulator sickness and thus
as non-accessible. Therefore, an alternative path to the game
was developed, which avoids the sickness indicating factors.
Phase 5 - Informing: Game-internal informing was not
considered in the context of the prototypical VR-Escape
Room. Access to Escape does not have any settings that can be
accessed by the players but the implemented policies represent
features that are inevitably encountered in the game anyways.
Phase 6 - Assessing & Learning: The testing phase of
Access to Escape included 11 participants with connections
to the study field of computer science [13]. We were present
throughout the testing, which made it easy to observe how
the participants reacted to the accessibility features. Here, it
became apparent that the implemented features were also able
to provide a better gaming experience for players without
impairments or disabilities. They showed positive reactions to
multiple access possibilities. Examples are the textual content
conveyance through subtitles, the auditory signaling of events
via sound effects, and the haptic feedback in form of different
vibration patterns of the controllers.
C. Implementation of Accessibility Features
This section sketches the implemented and discarded
guidelines and presents different categories in which these
guidelines can be clustered. The respective categories are
not to be considered disjunctively; thus, a guideline that is
assigned to one category may also be part of another. In the
following, the categories and exemplary associated guidelines
are presented in ascending order of effort.
1. Implementation by the game engine: Besides guidelines
which have to be implemented manually, there are also
accessibility features which can be implemented by pre-
developed templates of the chosen game engine (in our case
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

5
Unreal Engine), such as: “Representation of the controllers
in the virtual environment” [12]. In order for the players
to have a reference to the real controllers during the game
and to simplify their use, a virtual copy of the controllers
should be displayed (see Fig. 3). This not only shows the
position of the buttons on the controllers, so that the players
do not have to remember them, but also marks the position
of the controllers in the real space, and thus simplifies their
findability [12]. The game engine Unreal also provides this
feature in the engine’s own VR-template.
2.
Implementation
based
on
prior
knowledge
of
accessibility: Further, there are such guidelines that can
be implemented simply and with small expenditure, if there
is knowledge of their necessity. One of these guidelines
being: “Ensure no essential information is conveyed by a
color alone” [8]. Since not everyone can perceive information
through color, an alternative form of communication must be
implemented [8]. This can be in the form of patterns, icons,
or text.
In Access to Escape, a combination of these approaches is
used. At one point, color signals the activation of a button
which is additionally symbolized by sound and changing text.
Another example are color-coded blocks that are equipped
with patterns, so that they can be clearly differentiated
without the visibility of color.
3. Implementation through elementary game design: A
subset of the guidelines can be grouped under features that
every common game design includes to make the application
fundamentally playable, for example: “Placing UI elements
in a user-friendly way” [12]. For an unrestricted gaming
experience, the elements of the user interface must be easily
accessible and visibly positioned, otherwise the game flow
suffers [12]. The chosen position should indicate the relation
of the element to the rest of the room.
In our VR-Escape Room, the guideline was planned into the
visual conception of the games. The previous considerations
about the positioning of individual UI elements have greatly
simplified the fulfillment of this guideline.
4. Implementation through high effort: The guidelines sets
also include policies that require costly implementation, such
as “Provide subtitles for all important speech” [8]. Purely
auditory instructions and narrations exclude persons with
hearing impairments or persons who are more likely to take
in written information from a full game experience [8]. To
counteract this, the use of subtitles can be considered.
However, the implementation of these is not possible
without further effort using Unreal Engine. The option to add
subtitles to audio tracks is offered, but these are displayed in
a font size that is too small and in an unsuitable position in
the game. During our research, no option could be found to
change font size and position, so another approach had to be
taken: The subtitles are currently displayed as a separate text
field based on predefined time frames (see Fig. 5). Due to
the complexity of this approach, the subtitles in the prototype
were only implemented as an exemplary feature in one scene
of the game.
5. Implementation not possible: Lastly, there are policies
that have not been implemented. In our case this had several
Fig. 5. Visualization of captions of spoken dialogue of the guiding character
reasons; for one, the guidelines may not be in accordance
with the game rules or the game form: “Provide details
of accessibility features on packaging and / or website”
[8]. To benefit from the implemented accessibility features,
players must first be made aware of them [8]. If these are
implemented but not advertised, players may overlook them
and, therefore, assume that the game is not playable for
them. In addition, advertising the features can increase search
engine traffic and distinguish the application from other
games of the same kind.
However, since Access to Escape is only a prototype and
no public deployment is currently planned, this policy was
not implemented for the current application.
For another, the reason for the lack of implementation may
be resource constraints, as some implementations of policies
may require additional expertise or time:
“Personalization of Controller-Based Movements” [12]. For
example, players who have difficulty holding a game-required
arm position for an extended period of time should have
the opportunity to personalize controller-based movements
[12]. If a position, such as an outstretched arm, cannot be
achieved in the real world, it should nevertheless be possible
to personalize the parameters of size, rotation or distance, so
the virtual arm can be fully extended or moved to a different
position. Due to different mobility abilities, these “hand
profiles” should be individually implemented for the left
and right hand. This guideline was not implemented within
Access to Escape due to its extensive implementation work
and project time restrictions.
IV. DISCUSSION & LIMITATIONS
The discipline of Game Accessibility deals with eliminating
avoidable barriers for people with disabilities or impairments
within the framework of game rules [7]. This creates a
dilemma between adhering to the game rules and making the
game as accessible as possible. Game rules typically require
overcoming intended barriers that are presented in the form of
game challenges.
For example, a digital chess game where each move is timed
cannot fulfill the guideline of variable game speed without
violating the game rules [11]. Furthermore, not every guideline
is relevant to every game. For example, the guideline that
requires the use of subtitles cannot be applied to a game that
does not have audio. Therefore, developers must be aware that
a game may not be entirely accessible due to the game rules
but also that a game can still be accessible even if not every
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

6
single guideline is met. Thus, developers are faced with the
challenge of recognizing which guidelines are feasible and
relevant for the game.
Within the scope of this work, the GAG workflow has
proven to be a suitable approach, especially for the needed
structured exploration of the guidelines. Furthermore, the
transfer of this workflow to other guidelines has also been
successful and can be recommended. However, developers
must consider that a resource-based prioritization, as suggested
in phase 3 of the GAG workflow, cannot produce an accessible
application. This goal can only be achieved by implementing
all applicable guidelines. The EU Directive 2016/2102 (39)
also emphasizes this fact: “Only legitimate reasons should be
taken into account in any assessment of the extent to which the
accessibility requirements cannot be met because they would
impose a disproportionate burden. Lack of priority, time, or
knowledge should not be considered as legitimate reasons.”
Therefore, while the GAG workflow provides a structured
approach to develop an application with low barriers, it
is only suitable for developing an accessible application
if prioritization within the workflow does not lead to the
exclusion of other applicable policies. This is crucial as each
guideline ensures the access to the presented content for a
specific target group and further, as confirmed by our results,
they have the possibility to improve the game experience
for everybody. To comply with all applicable guidelines,
it is necessary to schedule enough time to implement the
accessibility features that were not achieved to the desired
extent in the discussed implementation. In retrospect, it could
be recognized that a classification of guidelines into categories
is possible, which could support better time management
during the development process. Another aspect that must
be addressed early on during the development process is
the cooperation with people affected by impairments or
disabilities. Since no test person stated that they are affected,
the question of inclusion can only be answered theoretically,
not practically.
In conclusion, the development of an accessible VR game
requires enough resources and a well-defined time schedule.
To plan these factors, the GAG workflow offers a supporting
guide but is not sufficient on its own which is why thorough
research and more tangible implementation templates are
needed.
V. CONCLUSION
Summarizing, the research question “What does the design
process for creating an accessible VR game entail and what
implementation steps are necessary to achieve this goal?” can
be answered supported by the GAG workflow. It offers a
suitable starting point for developing accessible games and a
structured approach on working with large sets of accessibility
guidelines like the GAG and the Oculus manual. The workflow
is especially useful for identifying and prioritizing policies that
can be implemented in a first implementation cycle. But here,
the examination of the guidelines alone is not sufficient for a
sustainable assessment of which prioritization these features
should take. A retrospective view of the implemented features
shows that preceding steps are needed, like the consideration
of the features that the chosen game engine already offers,
as well as the documentation of existing implementations.
Here, the classification into the categories presented in this
paper could benefit the development process. They offer the
possibility of assessing the workload that would be needed
to meet each guideline. However, since many guidelines fall
under the category of “Implementation through high effort” or
“Implementation not possible”, our VR-Escape Room Access
to Escape cannot meet the requirements of an accessible
VR game. Our research phase indicated that there is a
need for low-level solutions for accessible games and VR
applications so that accessibility features that were classified
under the mentioned categories can ideally be classified into
“Implementation by game engine”. Since this is not the case
yet, the guidelines were implemented in an exemplary manner
at various points in our VR-Escape Room, but not consistently,
which is unsatisfactory and needs to be addressed in future
design iterations. Another aspect that needs to be included in
future work is the evaluation of Access to Escape by people
with impairments or disabilities to get reliable insights on the
accessibility of the VR game.
REFERENCES
[1] The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union,
“Directive (eu) 2016/2102,” 2016,
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:3201-
6L2102.
[2] S. Lewthwaite and D. Sloan, “Exploring pedagogical culture for
accessibility education in computing science,” in Proceedings of the 13th
International Web for All Conference, 2016, pp. 1–4.
[3] Y. N. El-Glaly, “Teaching accessibility to software engineering students,”
in Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium on Computer
Science Education, 2020, pp. 121–127.
[4] C. Putnam, M. Dahman, E. Rose, J. Cheng, and G. Bradford, “Teaching
accessibility, learning empathy,” in Proceedings of the 17th International
ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & Accessibility, 2015, pp.
333–334.
[5] D. Kletenik and R. F. Adler, “Let’s play: Increasing accessibility
awareness and empathy through games,” in Proceedings of the 53rd
ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1, 2022,
pp. 182–188.
[6] S. Kavanagh, A. Luxton-Reilly, B. Wuensche, and B. Plimmer, “A
systematic review of virtual reality in education,” Themes in Science
and Technology Education, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 85–119, 2017.
[7] T. Westin, J. J. Ku, J. Dupire, and I. Hamilton, “Game accessibility
guidelines and wcag 2.0–a gap analysis,” in International Conference
on Computers Helping People with Special Needs.
Springer, 2018, pp.
270–279.
[8] I.
G.
D.
Association.
(2021)
”Game
Accessibility
Guidelines
-
A
straightforward
reference
for
inclusive
game
design”.
Last
visited:
08.03.2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://gameaccessibilityguidelines.com/
[9] R. Ossman, “Guidelines for developing accessible games,” Retrieved
August, vol. 12, p. 2011, 2006.
[10] J. R. Porter and J. A. Kientz, “An empirical study of issues and
barriers to mainstream video game accessibility,” in Proceedings of
the 15th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on computers and
accessibility, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[11] B. Yuan, E. Folmer, and F. C. Harris, “Game accessibility: a survey,”
Universal Access in the information Society, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 81–100,
2011.
[12] Oculus. (2022) ”Designing Accessible VR”. Last visited: 08.03.2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://developer.oculus.com/resources/design-
accessible-vr/
[13] P. Wiesem¨uller, S. Mateen, S. Voß-Nakkour, and A. Dengel, “Access to
escape - an immersive game-based learning experience for accessibility
education in virtual reality,” in 2023 9th International Conference of the
Immersive Learning Research Network (iLRN).
IEEE, 2023 (in press).
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

