A Study on the Application Service for Effective Disaster Management based on BIM
Ji-eun Kim
Multi-Disaster Countermeasures Organization
Korea Institute of Civil engineering and Building Technology
Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea
e-mail: jekim@kict.re.kr
Chang-hee Hong
Multi-Disaster Countermeasures Organization
Korea Institute of Civil engineering and Building Technology
Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea
e-mail: chhong@kict.re.kr
Abstract— Recently, because of the continuous occurrence of 
various disasters, such as fires, earthquakes, and flooding at 
Korea and abroad, the periodic and systemic disaster 
management has become more important than ever. For 
effective disaster management, facilities should be managed 
through periodic inspection and regular maintenance on a
daily, and also in an emergency, the accurate and rapid 
communication is essential
reflecting the situation. The 
Building Information Modeling (BIM) technology can handle a 
whole building property data related the specific purpose by 
using the effective 3D visualization model. It can be used for 
various management with objects including sensors, Closed 
Circuit Television (CCTV), which are set in a building. Thus, 
this study investigates and analyzes several cases of domestic 
and overseas disaster management based on BIM for effective 
disaster response. Then, we present disaster management 
scenarios for daily/emergency/inspection and proposed the 
detailed data definitions for the application services.
Keywords-Building 
Information 
Modeling; 
Disaster 
management; Facility management; 
I.
INTRODUCTION
The importance of maintenance and management has 
been highlighted as a systematic daily preparedness 
requirement, which must be performed periodically, as an 
emergency response. It is preferred to the introduction and 
construction of simple disaster facilities, as the aftermath of 
the recent disaster cases, such as London high-rise building 
fire, domestic Dongtan high-rise building complex fire, 
Busan tsunami, Gyeongju earthquake. The Building 
Information Modeling (BIM) technology manages a building 
not only single objects, but also it collects the entire property 
data of the building by using effective 3D visualization 
model. This makes the BIM suitable for various purposes 
from the planning stage of the building to its design-
structure-completion stages, and even be used for building 
maintenance and management after the construction. 
The functions of a BIM-based facility maintenance 
system are designed according to the management needs of a 
landlord or a manager for various maintenance requirements 
and, accordingly, the BIM data for maintenance and 
management are typically handled by using a BIM model 
designed for room lighting to room-floor-building depending 
on the Level of Detail (LOD). BIM model for disaster 
management of buildings has numerous factors to be 
intensively managed, such as major objects including 
existing extensive 
maintenance BIM 
data, 
essential 
requirements 
for 
disaster 
management, 
Mechanical 
Electronic Plumbing (MEP), and evacuation-related facilities 
depending on the use and management, or their purposes.
Particularly, the visualization of the intuitive three-
dimensional model that can cope with disaster situations 
quickly and accurately, and the presentation of the necessary 
information, are the key factors. These are preferred to the 
spectacular and tremendous information presentation when 
an emergency occurs. From the viewpoint of fire control, the 
information, such as the internal structure of the building, the 
evacuation floor, the evacuation staircase, the number of 
floors, and the entrance are major items that allow a clear 
judgment in an urgent situation. Furthermore, such 
information 
can 
provide 
intuitive 
understanding 
in 
visualizing evacuation routes and planning based on floor 
structure and scenario. For this purpose, the tasks, which 
require building information, such as property information 
and 3D models, should be identified.
Thus, this study investigated and analyzed disaster 
Facility Management (FM) cases with BIM at domestic and 
overseas in Section 2. In Section 3, the facility management 
systems are analyzed and the utilized service and data are 
defined. In Section 4, BIM-based disaster management 
services are proposed as daily / emergency / inspection 
scenarios.
II.
RESEARCH ANALYSIS
Recent studies on disaster management and response 
have suggested effective measures in terms of minimizing 
the spread of disasters. As the necessity of disaster 
management using three-dimensional data has recently 
emerged, various studies on pre-/post-utilization methods 
have been conducted. In this chapter, the domestic and 
overseas research trends on disaster management using BIM 
are examined.
Bin Wang et al. [1] reported on issues, such as fire 
evacuation simulation and various evacuation routes, which 
are mainly mentioned in the emergency management field of 
buildings, through BIM-based virtual environment, which is 
widely used in the Virtual Reality (VR) technology and 
game engine. Drogemuller Robin [2] presented a method to 
support pre-simulation of occupant behavior and building 
operation in regular and emergency situations by using 
physical virtual objects including the space of 3D BIM 
model. Jung-Hoon Han, et al. [3] studied the developmental 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

direction of the active integrated disaster prevention system 
using 3D shape visualization by applying BIM technology to 
build situation management and response framework 
required for active disaster management. Byung-cheol Gong, 
et al. [4] developed a fire control module to solve the 
problems of the high-cost installation system having only the 
simple alarm function, and constructed a preventive system 
capable 
of 
performing 
self-diagnosis 
check, 
initial 
suppression, and fire-fighting information management. 
Geon-Hyung Lee [5] proposed the effects and utilization of 
BIM in terms of quality/cost/process/safety/environment 
when installing BIM in the fire prevention and disaster field 
through construction, utilization and monitoring of BIM DB. 
Eun-Ho Oh, et al. [6] presented a conceptual framework of 
real-time facility disaster management system based on 
spatial information by linking to BIM and sensor information 
model at buildings. 
Although previous studies have focused on disaster 
management systems using 3D visualization and location 
information of sensors for facility disaster management, BIM 
data were used for conceptual simulation or simple 
visualization in the prevention aspect. Thus, this study 
analyzes various existing domestic disaster management 
cases and suggests maintenance services and utilization 
scenarios capable of effective response using BIM for 
effective facility disaster management.
III.
OVERVIEW OF BIM-BASED FACILITY DISASTER 
MANAGEMENT
A.
Multi-Disaster Definition
Among various natural and social disasters, the study 
defined the earthquake, fire, and flooding that had recently 
gained much attention in Korea as the subjects of complex 
disasters. The number of earthquakes in Korea, including the 
Gyeongju earthquake (magnitude 5.8) on September 12, 
2016, has been increasing. These earthquakes caused huge 
casualties and economic losses over a wide range of areas, 
resulting in national disasters, including paralysis of the 
national nervous network. In addition, major fires in the past 
3 years and the Busan tsunami have required improvement of 
existing systems and development of new technologies. This 
study develops an integrated disaster data platform utilizing 
3D BIM data with experts in earthquake, fire and flooding 
fields to build a digital twin-type facility disaster 
management system that can be effectively addressed. It is 
intended to be established of response strategy for multi-
disaster, and advanced disaster response system centered 
around the integrated control tower. 
B.
Facility Management System Analysis and Function Definition
This study investigated and analyzed domestic and 
overseas facility management systems to define BIM
infrastructure disaster management functions. The BIM-
based facility disaster management proposed in this study 
should be able to manage the overall facility and to respond 
to needs through an integrated system in case of an 
emergency. In this case, the management system should 
receive the data from real-time/non-real-time sensors, 
recognize the situation, confirm the more accurate situation 
with Closed Circuit Television (CCTV), and respond to the 
situation through use of the proper firefighting facilities, 
which are all required for effective disaster management 
system. 
Typically, the facility management system consists of 
basic information inquiry, energy usage inquiry, space 
management, facility management, maintenance, and event 
alarms [7]. In case of a disaster, the monitoring system is 
constructed based on the detection of the initial situation 
using CCTV [8]. This is the level at which managers use the 
primary CCTV equipment to judge and respond to the
situation. A more specialized system is composed of 
functions, such as notification of sensor data and real-time 
monitoring data based on spatial information about the 
location of occurrence, by linking to sensors and system for 
detecting the initial situation [9]. 
Figure 1. Process of facility disaster management service derivation
Through a BIM-based facility management service 
derivation process, as shown in Figure 1, this study 
categorized main functions to be proposed by using the BIM 
data among various similar services obtained from the above 
examples, in terms of 1) facility information management 
area, 2) 3D visualization area, and 3) disaster management 
area. 
·
FM- A single system was formed by the division of 
functional units, such as space management, energy 
management, cost management, etc.
·
3D visualization - 3D model object control method 
differs by each system. / 2D/3D conversion mode is 
required depending on the function. / There are 
various ways to represent attribute information, such 
as pop-ups and tooltips.
·
Disaster Control - Visual effect methods of notifying 
the disaster occurrence space are diverse (the whole 
space, icon utilization, etc.) / Real-time notification 
board is provided to control facilities
C.
Utilized Services and Data Definition
This study limited the utilized service target to high-rise 
and complex facilities that are easier to manage within the 
environment, as well as to information management of 
facility disaster management system. Furthermore, a 
consultation meeting was held with numerous related experts,
such as the actual high-rise apartment managers, FM 
managers at major domestic complex facilities and trade 
centers, as well as experts from the disaster safety industry 
and academia. As a result, space management and the 
disaster-related facility management were finally selected by 
primarily organizing common management functions in 
terms of facility disaster management. 
The space management work is performed to improve the 
efficiency in using each space of the facility. To improve the 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

efficiency, it is necessary to analyze the BIM-based spatial 
condition and establish the space allocation standard. To 
analyze the actual condition of a space, the functional 
requirements 
include 
computerization 
of 
drawings, 
standardization of space (use classification, organization 
classification, 
and 
location 
classification), 
and 
area 
aggregation by space. The space management system can 
provide accurate results for this analysis. The space 
management in the disaster management system is primarily 
aimed at intuitively recognizing and identifying the 
situations in a timely and appropriate manner by using 3D 
BIM data in case of an emergency; thus, it is essential to 
focus on core fundamental functions in space management.
TABLE I. 
SAMPLE OF FIRE FIGHTING FACILITY PART OF THE DATA 
DEFINITION AND BIM LINKAGE INFORMATION
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
BIM data
Fire-
fighting 
facility basic
data
management
Facility type 
management
Fire-fighting
facility type
Object
Detailed facility type
management
Detailed
fire-fighting type
Object
Facility name
management
Fire-fighting
facility name
Object
Location
management
location
information
Object/
Space
Fire-
fighting 
facility
location info.
management
Fire-fighting facility
Installation location
management
Location info. by building
Object/
Space
Location info. by floor
Object/
Space
Location info.by fire-
fighting facility
Object/
Space
Fire-fighting facility
Installation status
management
Status info. by building
Object/
Building
Status info. by floor
Object/
Floor
Status info. by
fire-fighting facility
Object/
Space
Fire-
fighting 
facility 
monitoring
Daily
monitoring
Fire-fighting facility 
operation
Object/
Space
Fire-fighting facility 
status observation
Object/
Space
Fire-fighting facility 
operation history
Object/
Space
Disaster situation
monitoring
Fire-fighting facility 
operation
Object/
Space
Fire-fighting facility 
status observation
Object/
Space
Fire-fighting facility 
operation history
Object/
Space
Location display for 
situation occurred
Object/
Space
Disaster-related facility management is the task of 
monitoring the building status in a comprehensive manner by 
managing the information of each facility constituting the 
building. Thus, the management of the systematic facility 
information in a regular manner should be able to respond to 
emergency situations immediately. The information handled 
in facility management mainly includes basic data, such as 
type of each facility, installation date, location information, 
and management information. This study created a facility 
management list and service data for sensors, CCTV, and 
fire-fighting facilities. Table 1 is a fire fighting facility part 
of the detailed data definition for disaster management 
service.
IV.
BIM-BASED DISASTER MANAGEMENT SERVICE
Based on the utilized services and data for facility 
disaster management previously created, the BIM-based 
service for daily monitoring / disaster response service 
operated in the event of a disaster / facility inspection service
for disaster were defined as follows, respectively.
A.
Daily Monitoring 
The daily scenarios of BIM-based facility disaster 
management focus on the basic information and static data 
checking of the site including the building. Daily monitoring
can inquire basic information on BIM-based building 
situation, construction information, auxiliary facilities, and 
floor information on the building site. In Figure 2, CCTV
monitoring can analyze the timely symptoms, which looks 
like the disaster, and inform the suspected area with 3D 
building and location information. Particularly, in the case of 
a dangerous area or space, it is possible to construct a floor 
plan separately for the use as an emergency evacuation route 
and related danger area notification through a space-based 
management as shown in Figure 3.
B.
Disaster Response
The corresponding scenario consists of major functions 
for rapid disaster identification and response, in the event of 
Figure 2. CCTV management
Figure 3. Space management for cautious spaces
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

a disaster, to automatically transition from an existing daily 
system to a disaster response system. 3D BIM data can be 
used to intuitively access disaster-detected areas, and the 
integrated disaster management manager can make quick 
decisions by using the notification from the nearby CCTV 
and sensors in the target area. Furthermore, as shown in 
Figure 4, it is possible to provide detailed and clear 
information to the firefighting team by recognizing spread of 
additional disaster through floor- and space-based disaster 
detection, as well as by using the BIM data on building 
structure, materials, and facility location related to a disaster. 
Thus, it is further possible to recognize the initial situation. 
C.
Facility Inspection
Inspection scenarios have the function for inspection of 
various facilities including sensors, CCTV, and fire-fighting 
facilities for disaster preparedness. 
As shown in Figure 5, the facility maintenance team can 
use the facility location information within the BIM model to 
establish the plans for daily and periodic inspections, and can 
manage the detailed inspection history by filtering the 
inspections by equipment type, inspection date, and floor 
unit. Sensors can inquire abnormal signals and disaster 
information history depending on real-time/non-real-time 
inspection cycle.
V.
CONCLUSION
This study investigated and analyzed domestic and 
overseas disasters cases, and identified the problems 
regarding these cases to derive facility disaster management 
scenarios. The study summarized the requirements for 
effective 
disaster 
management 
through 
numerous 
consultation meetings with facilities FM personnel of major 
high-rise 
and 
complex 
facilities. 
Based 
on 
these 
consultations, this study defined the disaster-related services 
and data using the system, along with the necessity for a 3D 
data-based system for an effective disaster management. 
This study further presented the purpose-specific scenarios 
for daily/disaster/inspection situations.
The calamity and disaster field particularly requires quick 
situation judgment and visualization to intuitively foresee 
various possibilities. In 
this regard, the integrated 
management system can prevent disasters and seek early 
suppression through daily preparedness as well as emergency 
response. Future studies will integrate this system with 
AR/VR technology, which is recently gaining popularity, to 
build various contents,
such as mobile-based facility 
inspection and management, fire-fighting training simulation, 
and operation support.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Research 
Council of Science & Technology (NST) grant by the Korea 
government (MSIP) (No. CRC-16-02-KICT)
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Wang, H. Li, Y. Rezgui, A. Bradley, and H. N. Ong, “BIM 
based Virtual Environment for Fire Emergency Evacuation”, 
The Scientific World Journal, Vol.2014, pp.1-22, 2014.
[2]
D. Robin, “BIM support for disaster response”, Proc. of 9th 
annual international conference of the International Institute
for Infrastructure Renewal and Reconstruction, pp. 391-405, 
2013.
[3]
J. H. Han, C. W. Lee, S. H. Nam, C. S. Jeong, and S. H. Lee, 
“Application 
of 
BIM 
technology 
to 
active 
disaster 
management for flood control facility”, Proc. of KIBIM 
Annual Conference 2012, Vol.2, No.1, pp.47-48, 2012.
[4]
B. C. Kong and S. H. Lee, “Design and Implementation of an 
effective Complex Fire Detector Module”, Journal of 
academia-industrial technology, Vol.11, No.3, pp.1079-1084, 
2010.
[5]
K. H. Lee, “The methodology of BIM implementation for 
efficient prevention and response in firefighting and disaster 
fields”, Korean Institute of Architectural Sustainable 
Environment and Building Systems, special issues, Vol.11, 
No.2, pp.23-34, 2017. 
[6]
E. H. Oh, S. K. Lee, E. Y. Shin, T. K. Kang, and Y. S. Lee, “A 
Framework of Realtime Infrastructure Disaster Management 
System based on the Integration of the Building Information Model 
and the Sensor Information Model”, Journal of Korea society of 
hazard mitigation, Vol.12, No.6, pp.7-14, 2012.
[7]
Honeywell, Building solutions. [Online]. Available from:
https://building solutions.honeywell.com [retrieved: April, 
2018]
[8]
Anyang-Si, U-ITS Center. [Online]. 
Available 
from:
http://its.anyang.go. kr/ITSCenter.do [retrieved: April, 2018]
[9]
Iconics energy management dashboard. [Online]. Available 
from:
https:// cross-automation.com/blog/industrial-energy-
management-dashboards-require-great-toolkit 
[retrieved: 
April, 2018]
Figure 4. Confirmation of BIM-based disaster facilities
Figure 5. Facility inspection related to disaster
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

