Online Barter
Trade of Goods in Digital Communities
Leonardo Lima, Janduí Silva, Bárbara França, Victor Souto, Felipe Ferraz
CESAR - Center of Study and Advanced Systems of Recife
Recife, Brazil
emails: lccsl@cesar.org.br, janduijorge@gmail.com, barbara1408@gmail.com, victorsarmentomtb@gmail.com, fsf@cesar.org.br
Abstract—This study aims to explore the terms of trade
in a virtual environment to identify opportunities for the
actors involved. The methodology used in this research
was the development of mental maps by human and
nonhuman
entities.
In
order
to
understand
this
phenomenon, this study explored the current online
barter scenarios, the collaborative consumption in Brazil
and the analysis of the Facebook Barter Group, detailed
here. In addition to this, it explores how social networks
have been taking part in this initiative. Conclusions
point to structural and behavioral aspects, identifying
the need to build an application tool to provide a better
consumer experience.
Keywords-Smart
Cities;
Online
Barter;
Sustainability;
Collaborative Consumption.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the discussion about a society that provides
sustainable solutions is growing due to the quick and easy
access to information. This way, services of collaborative
consumption have emerged with the goal to dematerialize
products by proposing their uses beyond the consumption.
The term "collaborative" means two or more people who
collaborate on a product exchange system, such as sharing,
trading, renting or lending objects [1].
"Consumption can be understood as a set of
sociocultural
processes
that
permeate
the
appropriation and the uses of goods beyond the
likes
of
exercises,
whims
and
thoughtless
purchases,
according
to
moral
judgments
or
individual attitudes as often exploited by research
market"[2].
Services involved in a collaborative consumption system
are divided into three systems: product service systems
(paying to use the product without owning it), redistribution
markets
(goods
are
redistributed
-
modified)
and
collaborative lifestyles (people with similar interests gather
together to share and exchange less tangible assets such as
time, space, skills, etc.) [3].
In
Brazil,
some
solutions
promote
collaborative
consumption. Among the existing solutions, this paper will
approach the online product exchange through Facebook.
Product exchange is a trend of sustainable consumption, and
social networks help spread this practice. Some Facebook
groups stimulate the exchange and, without it, these people
would probably not have the chance to meet each other.
This project is the analysis of existent solutions, validating
their impact and seeking to identify new opportunities that
can improve the exchange of products in a practical and
efficient way. Section 2 deals with the concepts of
collaborative consumption and the problems that may occur
during the exchange process of online products. Section 3
presents some existing solutions and a quick analysis of
them. In Section 4, proposals are presented and then Section
5 concludes the paper and presents future research and its
development.
II. COLLABORATIVE CONSUMPTION
Collaborative consumption as an exchange of products is
a complex system influenced by several factors, such as
economic, political, sustainable trends, human behavior, and
the culture of a society.
"Collaborative
consumption
is
a
sustainable
practice that requires a non-individual action, as
in sustainability itself, but the cooperation between
two or more consumers. Exchange of products
and/or services between
consumers who
stop
buying from a supplier and start to work together,
feeding their consumption needs" [4].
It was necessary to systematically analyze the factors
involved in the service to study the online barter and then
propose solutions. So, it was possible to "have the micro
view, but also the macro view of all processes involving a
problem, see how they interrelate and what are the inputs
and outputs of their subsystems and the system as a
whole"[1].
The Actor-Network Theory (ANT), also known as
Sociology of Translation [5], is a contestation of traditional
sociology, which does not consider the concept of society
and understands the social dimension as a collection of
human and non-human entities, such as people, animals,
things and institutions, supported by an agency through the
association in networks. It represents interconnections
where actors are involved, and networks can take them to
any side or direction and establish connections with actors
who show some similarity or relationship [6].
First, linking humans and entities involved in the
process, as shown in Figure 1, has created a mental map.
After making all the connections between the actors, it was
possible to ask questions and investigate the potential
problems for the exchange of products in online services.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 1.
Mental map with human and non-human actors.
III. ANALYSIS OF EXISTING SOLUTIONS
In order to understand the online trading system, the
websites ‘Permuta Digital’, ‘Zaznu’, ‘Impact Hub’, ‘Skoob’,
‘Caronetas’, ‘Tem Açúcar?’, ‘Troca Jogo’, ‘Joaninha’ and
‘Samba’ were visited, as well as Facebook groups. Those
are websites used to share common goods, such as games,
books, toys, bikes, and carpools. Most of the observed
websites do not stimulate the sense of social interaction and
the product exchange happens in a complex way. Some of
them demand currency that users can buy, and with that,
users can evaluate and offer to exchange for other products;
that makes the system not fully based on trades. Some
difficulties of communication between users were observed.
Among this group of websites, the Facebook Group
'Escambo' was chosen for a detailed analysis, because other
solutions still allow the exchange of goods using cache. The
mentioned Facebook Group only allows users to exchange
objects for another object them, it does not allow any kind
of operation involving money.
In the Group, there is also a close review of the
collaborative consumption concepts, something that was not
observed
in
other
tools
that
promote
online
barter.
‘Escambo’
has
the
main
features
of
collaborative
consumption, such as sharing an offer within a community,
news, and recommendations of products widely transmitted
by the social network [7].
A. Analysis of the Facebook Group – ‘Escambo’
The Group has over 20,000 registered users. There are
constant exchanges of products among people and many of
them believe in the exchange process as a way to practice a
sustainable consumption. ‘Escambo’ has social guidelines
that emphasize the exchange experiences, and forbids
buying and selling products.
The dynamics of trades are simple: any user can post a
picture of what they want to pass on, describing the object,
and also they would like to receive for it, or if it is possible
to simply leave it open [8]. Then, through the additional
comments, people interested in the product start offering
their own items in exchange for the announced good. The
owner of the advertised object decides who will get the
product through the exchange transaction. New exchange
negotiations may appear from comments in any publication,
since many people report what they have available so they
can attract the interest of others.
Factors that boost the trade or not:
●
From the moment that people start to exchange
things, negotiations become more complex;
●
Individualistic and critical sense among people;
●
Many conflicts among participants, there is usually
someone
willing
to
take
advantage
of
the
transaction;
●
Some participants do not have the collaborative
spirit about the advantages of trading goods;
●
No
care
about
appearance,
cleanliness,
or
organization of the offered product, based on the
available pictures.
IV. PROPOSALS
From the previous observations about the interactions in
the Group, some proposals to solve the above-mentioned
problems are listed below:
●
Develop Facebook application tools to register
people and organize product information as photos,
reviews and negotiations;
●
Create actions to inform and educate people about
the principles of sharing and consumer awareness
to demonstrate that the exchange experience is
better than having a financial gain - It has been
noticed that there are some people who are
individualistic and more worried with financial
benefits instead of thinking about the community
and the goal of collaborative consumption;
●
Stimulate the collective and social thinking inside
the group, because it has been noticed that there are
some conflicts and insults between the participants
of the group.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an alternative to improve collaborative
consumption through exchange of products was proposed by
using Facebook Groups tools. Encouraging interaction
between different people and the exchange of common
interests are part of this experience. The goal of being able
to identify problems in the exchange of products on the
Internet was also achieved. The analysis of the main
difficulties of a collaborative service provided ideas and
solutions that improve the relationship between individuals.
As future works, the authors are prototyping the proposed
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

solution in order to validate with users how the project will
affect communities.
REFERENCES
[1] A. B. L. Lauro, E. A. D. Merino, and L. F. G.
Figueiredo, “The Design Management in collaborative
consumption services: strategic, tactical and operational
actions”, Estudos em Design, Rio de Janeiro. v.21, n.2,
2013, p. 01 – 22.
[2] R. V. Souza, and N. S. Munhoz, “Collaborative
Consumption Bazaars of Facebook Exchanges: A
Research in Style Exchanges Bazaar”. Intercom –
Brazilian
Society
of
Interdisciplinary
Studies
of
Communication
XXXVI
Congresso
Brasileiro
de
Ciências da Comunicação, Manaus, Brazil, 2013.
[3] R. Botsman, R. Rogers, “What's is mine is your: How
collaborative consumption is changing the way we
live”, London, Harper Collins Business, 2011.
[4]
M. S. Jorge, M. B. Brasil, and V. H. A. Ferreira,
“Society Networking and Collaborative Consumption
In
Perspective
Of
Contemporary”.
II
Congresso
Internacional do Direito e Contemporaneidade, Santa
Maria, RS, 2013.
[5]
Fernback, J., 2007. “Beyond the Diluted Community
Concept: A Symbolic Interactionist Perspective on
Online Social Relations’’. Temple University, USA,
2007.
[6]
B. Latour, “Reassembling the Social”, 1ª ed. Oxford,
University Press, 2005, 311p.
[7]
L. Gansky, "The Mesh: Why the Future of Business Is
Sharing", London, Portfolio Penguin, 2010.
[8]
R. Belk, “You are what you can access: Sharing and
collaborative consumption online”. Journal of Business
Research, Toronto, 2013.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

