Beyond the ‘Smart’ City: Reflecting Human Values in the Urban Environment 
 
 
Louise Mullagh∗, Lynne Blair∗, Nick Dunn†, 
∗School of Computing and Communication 
Lancaster University, 
Email: l.mullagh@lancaster.ac.uk, l.blair@lancaster.ac.uk 
†Imagination Lancaster 
Lancaster University, 
Email: nick.dunn@lancaster.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—The paper presents a work in progress that will develop 
a tool for mapping and reflection upon human values within the 
context of the ‘smart’ city. As the rise in ‘smart’ city initiatives 
and 
implementation 
of 
technologies 
within 
the 
urban 
environment become more evident, citizens face irrevocable 
changes to their environment and their lives within the city. 
Such a reliance upon technological strategies to fix cities’ ills 
and a drive for constant innovation within the ‘smart’ city is 
largely being driven by technology companies and city leaders. 
Citizens must live with the consequences of  such  strategies  
which  have  the  potential to change their environments in 
momentous ways. In order to develop new technologies within 
the urban environment Living Labs are becoming  increasingly  
prevalent,  enabling  designers of technologies to engage with 
multiple stakeholders, including citizens, in the design and  
implementation  of  new  products. We present a work in 
progress that develops a tool for the mapping of and reflection 
upon, human values in order  to avoid unnecessary technologies 
being imposed upon citizens. Furthermore, we seek to engage 
those currently driving the ‘smart’ city agenda in envisioning 
an alternative future where consideration of citizen’s values 
and the effectiveness of the city takes priority over technology 
implementation for the sake of efficiencies. We present the 
need for this new tool as it goes further than existing methods in 
its potential for enabling citizens to develop clear understanding 
of the values present in the ‘smart’ city environment. 
Keywords–urban areas; social factors; appropriate technology 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The contemporary city is a progressively complex entity, 
with issues such as increasing populations, sustainability and 
the need for greater efficiency becoming the focus for city 
leaders and technology companies. As examples of ‘smart’ 
cities increase and the implementation of urban, mobile and 
ubiquitous computing within this environment become more 
apparent, the landscape of the city is becoming redefined in 
a seemingly irreversible race toward autonomous operation of 
the urban sphere [1]. 
Physical environments impact upon human psychology and 
behaviour [2], yet there is little evidence to demonstrate the 
human aspects  of what  makes a  city  are considered  when 
leaders or technology companies begin to consider transfor- 
mations to make a city smart [3]. Currently there seems to 
be a focus on the ‘smart’ rather than the ‘city’, with a bias 
toward technological solutions [4]. Although cities are making 
some advances in dealing with major issues such as increases 
in population, decreases in funding and pressure on existing 
services, this is not done in a holistic and integrated manner. 
This results in the neglection of human factors [3][5] and too 
much reliance upon technology to fix existing and future ills 
[6]. 
There is little consensus as to what exactly defines this 
emerging paradigm between ‘smart’ cities across the globe, 
many differing approaches to their development currently exist 
[4][5][7]. “A city can be called a ‘smart’ city when 
investments in the human and social capital and traditional 
ICT based infrastructure fuel a sustainable economic growth 
and a high quality of life, with wise management of natural 
resources” [8]. 
This definition can be contrasted with the following state- 
ment, taken from a white paper on “Smart Cities and the 
Internet of Everything” [9]. 
“Smart cities are a future reality for municipalities around 
the world. These cities will use the power of ubiquitous 
communication networks, highly distributed wireless sensor 
technology, and intelligent management systems to solve cur- 
rent and future challenges and create exciting new services” 
[9]. 
The first definition places ‘human and social capital’ before 
‘ICT based infrastructure’, whereas the second definition talks 
exclusively of technological based solutions. It is this conflict, 
between the significance of human and technological drivers 
within ‘smart’ cities, that forms the basis of this paper. 
Within the context of the ‘smart’ city, Living Labs [10] 
have sought to involve ‘users’ in the development of technolo- 
gies, with a broad aim of demonstrating a “user-centric open 
innovation approach for fostering everyday life innovation in 
users’ real life context” [10]. As with ‘smart’ cities, there is no 
consensual definition of a Living Lab, but they are increasing 
in numbers globally, engaging in user-centric research relating 
to technology but not exclusively within the ‘smart’ city 
context. 
The paper is structured as follows; the introduction (section 
I) presents the context of the ‘smart’ city and Living Labs, 
section II presents a discussion of Living Labs and their role 
in shaping ‘smart’ cities, using the particular example of the 
UrBan Interactions (UBI) programme in Oulu, Finland. This is 
followed by the introduction of human values and technology, 
a justification for their consideration within this discussion, 
and an example of values based HCI approaches in section 
III. In section IV we present a discussion of technology in the 
urban environment and in section V we introduce the Value 
Reflection Map, a tool through which values can be evaluated 
within Living Labs in relation to ‘smart’ cities. This forms the 
basis for the next stages of the research development. Section 
VI concludes the paper with proposals for future work. 
 
II. THE RISE OF THE LIVING LAB IN THE SMART CITY. 
Living Labs are increasingly considered to be effective sites 
through which to engage citizens in the development of tech- 
nologies deployed within cities [11]. As sites of innovation, 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

they began development in the 1990s as a method to test new 
technologies in a home-like environment at MIT Medialab. 
More recently they have developed a more user-centric, open 
innovation approach across many technological fields. They 
can be found in cities across the globe with differing scopes 
and different funding models, sharing no unified methodology 
or framework. Although no unified framework or definition 
is available, they tend to share the ethos of user-centred 
approaches [10] with the broad aim of enabling citizen based 
innovation for the development of new technologies. 
New networks such as the European Network of Living 
Labs (ENoLL) [12] aim to develop a more coherent and con- 
nected approach, using the following definition; “A Living Lab 
is a real-life test and experimentation environment where users 
and producers co-create innovations. Living Labs have been 
characterised by the European Commission as Public-Private- 
People Partnerships (PPPP) for user-driven open innovation.” 
ENoll consider Living Labs to adopt four main activities; co- 
creation, exploration, experimentation and evaluation. [12] 
Oulu, a member of the ENoLL network and situated in 
northern Finland, offers an example of a partnership operating 
across public and private organisations. It seeks to integrate 
technology into all aspects of city life and to place itself as a 
leading archetype of the ‘smart’ city and living lab movements. 
The city has the largest regional research and design spending 
per capita in Finland and fifth largest in Europe, providing 
14000 jobs in the ICT sector. In the late 1990s Oulu was ranked 
as the world’s third “silicon valley” in Wired Magazine and 
the area has the youngest population average in Finland and 
Europe [13]. 
Ubidisplays are currently deployed outdoors and indoors in 
Oulu city centre, in order to experiment and test technologies 
and applications ‘in the wild’. Displays are implemented, 
deployed and evaluated in a ‘real world setting atop an open 
urban computing testbed’ [14][15]. This approach marks a 
response to criticisms that technologies designed and tested 
in labs do not account for ‘real world’ environments or 
applications [16]. The UrBan Interactions (Ubi) programme is 
joint sponsored by the City of Oulu and Nokia, with a budget 
of e6 million. 
The hypothesis for the deployment of Ubidisplays states 
“by deploying new technology and services in the urban 
space we make it a ‘better’ place for people” [17]. Without 
a description as to what ‘better’ is, the hypothesis suggests 
a place is enhanced by the deployment of technology, in this 
case the Ubidisplays. In literature relating to the project there 
appears to be little consideration of the environment in which 
the displays are being deployed, or evidence that citizens are 
engaged prior to the design process. This also suggests that 
deploying a piece of technology enhances a space, without 
surveying the environment or indeed the need or desire for 
having such a display within the public arena. Through the 
mapping of human values within the urban environment, our 
research aims to establish the appropriateness of a technolog- 
ical fix to perceived problems within the ‘smart’ city. Such 
an approach fundamentally questions the current methods of 
user-participation methodologies and highlights the need for 
value elicitation and reflection tools. 
 
III. HUMAN VALUES AND TECHNOLOGY 
It is widely accepted that human values become manifest in 
the design and use of new technologies [18], and as such are a 
vital component of our research. Human values have long been 
recognised as important in disciplines such as anthropology, 
sociology and psychology [19]. Values in psychology are 
conceptions of desirable ways of behaving or desirable end 
states, characterised as relatively stable, transcending specific 
situations [18][19]. Empirical  evidence  demonstrates  that all 
values are held by all people, across cultures all of the 
time, but their importance is ranked differently within each 
individual. [19].  Within more technology-based disciplines, 
communities such as CSCW and Participatory Design have 
also long embraced overarching human values such as coop- 
eration, participation and democracy in their design methods 
[20]–[22]. 
An important and co-dependent relationship exists between 
human values and design as a result of their fundamental 
shaping of the human condition and people’s attitudes towards 
technology [18]. Values are also a fundamental component of 
the design process, as has been recognised in the field of 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI). In this particular case, 
we take the ‘smart’, technologically mediated city as the 
context. Citizen’s experiences will be affected by the design 
and implementation of such technologies to their everyday 
environment, therefore it is essential to take into account their 
values and ensure they are not negatively affected. 
A design tradition which has placed values at the heart 
of its practice is Participatory Design (PD) [22] , in that it 
considers stake-holder participation in the design of technol- 
ogy as fundamental. The inclusion of values within the core 
design criteria of PD echoes a similar approach within Value 
Sensitive Design (VSD), a theory aiming to offer a principled 
and comprehensive framework for accounting for a set of 
(universally held) human values of ethical import throughout 
the design process [23]. The field of HCI has acknowledged 
the need to respond to human values, echoed by Sellen et al 
[24], who believe that greater finesse will be required in order 
to determine and understand values in the context of large 
systems and sets of systems that users operate within. They 
state “Much effort also needs to be expended on determining 
what is desirable within a place, an institution, or a society” 
[24]. 
 
IV. TECHNOLOGY AND THE URBAN ENVIRONMENT 
Within the field of HCI methods do exist to work with 
values during the design phase of the development of new 
technologies, however there is a lack of tools allowing users 
role to actively define their own contextualised values within 
the design process [18]. Values are not explicit and easy to 
discuss, leading to interpretation issues between users and 
designers. The lack of existing tools is acknowledged by 
Kujala and Va¨a¨na¨nen-Vainio-Mattila [18], who call for further 
research and the development of a toolkit which will enable 
this to occur more effectively. However, the toolkit has not 
been developed, leaving a space for the development of a Value 
Reflection Mapping tool (VRM). The tool will enable greater 
understanding and development of user’s values in two ways. 
Firstly, the VRM will enable citizens or organisations to map 
values for new technology designs and the urban space into 
which they might be placed. Secondly, it encourages question- 
ing of the suitability of new technologies and whether they are 
needed, rather than jumping immediately to a technological 
solution. 
Introducing technology into the urban environment, as can 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

be seen with the ‘smart’ city paradigm, changes the nature 
of place. As a result the city is transformed into a digitally 
augmented physical space, and therefore can be considered 
as ‘hybrid’. In this respect, we can understand the intention 
to augment a physical space with technology as a means of 
attempting to improve that particular space, as can be seen in 
the example of Oulu’s Ubidisplays and their aim of making 
the space ‘better’. 
At present there are too few theoretical and methodological 
approaches which examine the effects of technologies upon 
physical spaces and subsequently the human relationship to 
them [25][26]. A need for new ways of understanding 
physical spaces with respect to their digital augmentation is 
required. This is a view held by Ciolfi, [26], particularly in 
terms of how their “features support and affect our physical 
presence and further experiences with the environment...in 
order to shape the way in which a system will be embedded 
in the space itself.” 
Deployment of technology within the city might be the so- 
lution to some important issues affecting citizens, but without 
considering the value environment in which such issues exist 
and active engagement with all citizens, it is not possible to 
determine if it is necessarily the most appropriate answer. By 
beginning with human values and mapping layers of values 
within the urban environment, suitability emerges and will 
enable a ’bottom up’, human approach. Human values are 
certainly present within technologies and urban environments 
but often remain hidden to both citizens and those developing 
new technologies within the urban environment. 
 
V. THE VALUE REFLECTION MAP 
A prototype tool, the Value Reflection Map (VRM), was 
developed as part of a short research project with one city 
based stakeholder in Lancaster, UK, in order to assess the 
viability of such an approach. As an independent retailer and 
cafe´ owner, the stakeholder has engaged in projects seeking to 
introduce a variety of digital interactions within his business 
spaces [27]. The starting point was to question the approach 
taken by Oulu in order to evaluate the environment into which 
a new technology might be placed. Central to this study was 
the question of how human values can be made manifest within 
a physical space and objects within that space. 
We began by questioning whether design processes con- 
sidered the spaces where interactions were being placed, 
furthermore whether human values were taken into account 
in such a process. Through eliciting contextualised values of 
the stakeholder, we sought to investigate how consideration of 
values might enable designers to question whether introducing 
new technologies into a space was appropriate and if so, how 
values might be designed into such technologies. 
The method employed to develop the VRM consisted of 
three stages, with the output being a paper based map of colour 
coded values elicited from the physical environment and ob- 
jects contained within. Schwartz’s value model [28] was taken 
as a starting point, where the stakeholder answered questions 
from the European Social Survey (ESS) [29]. This survey was 
chosen due  to it  being based  upon empirically  established 
questions, which seek to elicit values of individuals across 
different cultures. Other models could have been employed, 
but for the purpose of the initial short research project it was 
useful to use an example with existing surveys and against 
which answers could be modelled. 
We built upon the ESS in the next stage through conducting 
a contextualising interview with the aim of elaborating on the 
information gained from the values survey. In order to discover 
values held by the stakeholder which were made explicit within 
the physical space the interview was coded and specific values 
identified. The third step, artefactual analysis, was conducted in 
order to interpret how the stakeholders values were embedded 
and communicated within the environment. Using an image of 
The Hall, we systematically identified the stakeholder’s values 
for each object within the space, colour coding each value. 
Areas of particular value density were identified that helped the 
stakeholder visually aware of where his values were manifest 
within the space. 
As a short and initial research project, we produced a paper 
artefact that mapped one particular space with the values of 
one person. One very encouraging aspect of this technique, 
as identified from the initial  test  with  the  stakeholder,  is 
the ease in their understanding of the Value Reflection Map. 
Through employing a visual map the stakeholder was able to 
clearly identify value clusters within the space where he was 
considered the introduction of digital interactions. 
Insights from the initial research included feedback that the 
stakeholder is immediately able to identify with the physical 
space and objects. We also discovered use of imagery rather 
than text led to a clear and unambiguous reflection of values. 
A further reflection was that a paper based artefact widens 
potential access to citizens who do not engage with technology, 
either through choice or circumstance. By developing the 
VRM further it will enable the values of multiple people 
within multiple spaces to be considered and reflected. Further 
development of this tool will require the creation of a new 
methodology, as it is vital to engage citizens and investigate 
their experiences within the built environment. 
The term ‘mapping’ is embedded within the practice of 
cartography, but is often used when information is being 
visualised. We employ this term in order to enable citizens 
and organisations to use the map as a way-finding and sense 
making tool in order to elicit their own values and those of 
the designers of technologies. Human values are not always 
easy to discuss, even though we all hold them, we do not 
necessarily make connections between what we value and the 
expression of those values. We believe a primarily visual tool 
will facilitate more effective elicitation of values within the 
environment. 
Existing methods and tools have created some interesting 
and challenging approaches to mapping emotions or charting 
citizen unrest within urban environments. PanoRemo [30] 
enables designers to map user’s emotions onto a variety of 
panoramic images, employing emotional design and market 
research techniques in order to evaluate how people feel about 
a particular environment. The Centre for Urban Pedagogy 
(CUP) [31] work with stakeholders in cities, most often 
disadvantaged or marginalised groups. They develop informa- 
tion brochures that are of particular use to that community, 
employing analogue techniques and community led design. A 
variety of different techniques for making visible issues that 
are hidden are included in The Atlas of Radical Cartography. 
The most notable example featured is iSee [32], an online 
initiative where citizens log and map surveillance such as 
CCTV throughout the city, meaning they can then plot their 
routes through the ‘path of least surveillance’. The VRM does 
build upon the principles of making information visible and 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

community led design, but the point of departure is that it is 
not a digital tool, nor will it be employed for market research 
as Panoremo. It also differs from the work carried out by 
CUP, in that the aim of the VRM is for citizens to discover 
information and values for themselves, rather than relying upon 
organisations to do so. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The aim of this initial investigation was to identify the 
potential effectiveness a visual approach to representation and 
reflection of values might have and if the VRM was a valid 
starting point for further work. Through questioning current 
approaches taken by cities such as Oulu, we intend to develop a 
longer term research project. Based upon the position we have 
taken regarding the current focus upon the ’smart’ within cities, 
we believe the VRM tool will be effective if employed within 
contexts such as Living Labs. Furthermore it will enable the 
visualisation of citizen’s contextual values before the design 
of any technology occurs. 
Distinct opportunities exist in cities as technological envi- 
ronments, such as improvements in health care, education and 
sustainability [33], however these need to be realised in balance 
with the potentially negative consequences produced by the 
introduction of such technologies as big data, ubiquitous and 
mobile computing. At present the balance within the ‘smart’ 
city paradigm favours efficiencies rather than effectiveness, 
which does not always provide the optimal environment for 
citizens. 
Key to the next stage of research is the engagement of 
Living Labs involved in the development of new technologies 
within the ‘smart’ city. In order to develop the Value Reflection 
Map further, we intend to use such sites as case studies, to 
enable us to begin developing the new methodology through 
engaging with real world practices within the city. 
A crucial strength of the Value Reflection Map will lie 
in the visual representation of values, enabling designers and 
citizens to clearly identify important values. Visual repre- 
sentation of values within spaces will ensure connection of 
citizens, space, objects and values, leading to more informed 
decisions regarding implementation of technology in the city. It 
is through the deployment and use of this tool that we intend to 
ensure focus on citizens within the city is valued more highly 
than focus on the ‘smart’. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Townsend, Smart Cities, ser. Big data, civic hackers, and the quest 
for a new utopia.  London: W.W Norton and Company, Inc, Mar. 2013. 
[2]   R.   Gifford,   Environmental   Psychology:   Principles   and   Practice. 
Colville,WA: Optimal Books, Mar. 2002. 
[3] J. Kim and A. L. Steenkamp, “Analysis of Smart City Models and 
the Four-Foci Taxonomy for Smart City Design,” The Visibility of 
Research, 2013, p. 637. 
[4] G. Galdon-Clavell, “(Not so) smart cities?: The drivers, impact and 
risks of surveillance-enabled smart environments,” Science and Public 
Policy, vol. 40, no. 6, Dec 2013, pp. 717–723. 
[5] R. G. Hollands, “Will the real smart city please stand up?” City, vol. 12, 
no. 3, Dec. 2008, pp. 303–320. 
[6] A. Greenfield, Against the smart city: The City is here for you to use, 
1st ed.   New York: Do Projects, 2013. 
[7] H. Schaffers and et al, “Integrating Living Labs with Future Internet 
experimental platforms for co-creating services within Smart Cities,” 
Audio, Transactions of the IRE Professional Group on, May 2011, pp. 
1–11. 
[8] A. Caragliu, C. Del Bo, and P. Nijkamp, “Smart Cities in Europe,” 
Journal of Urban Technology, vol. 18, no. 2, Apr. 2011, pp. 65–82. 
[9] R. Yesner Clarke, “Smart Cities and the Internet of Everything: The 
Foundation for Delivering Next-Generation Citizen Services,” Alexan- 
dria,VA, Tech. Rep., Oct. 2013. 
[10] T. Tang and M. Ha¨ma¨la¨inen, “Living lab methods and tools for fostering 
everyday life innovation,” 2012, pp. 1–8. 
[11] “FIREBALL white paper on Smart Cities as Innovation Ecosystems 
sustained by the Future Internet.” 
[12]   http://www.openlivinglabs.eu - (accessed February 2014). 
[13] N. Simicˇ, “Smart City as an Innovation Engine: Case Oulu,” Jan. 2013, 
pp. 1–7. 
[14] V. Kostakos and T. Ojala, “Public Displays Invade Urban Spaces,” Ieee 
Pervasive Computing, vol. 12, no. 1, 2013, pp. 8–13. 
[15] T. Ojala and V. Kostakos, “UBI challenge: research coopetition on real- 
world urban computing,” 2011, pp. 205–208. 
[16] T. Ojala and et al, “Multipurpose Interactive Public Displays in the 
Wild: Three Years Later,” Computer, vol. 45, no. 5, May 2012, pp. 
42–49. 
[17]   PanOULU  Network  and  UBI  Programme  Presentation.  [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.slideshare.net/ftemmerm/timo-ojala-oulu- 
university-helsinki-panoulu-network-and-urban-interactions-program- 
unique-publicprivate-partnership-and-living-lab-in-oulu-finland 
(accessed February 2014) 
[18] S. Kujala and K. Va¨a¨na¨nen-Vainio-Mattila, “Value of information 
systems and products: Understanding the users’ perspective and values,” 
Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application (JITTA), 
vol. 9, no. 4, 2009, pp. 23–39. 
[19] A.-S. Cheng and K. R. Fleischmann, “Developing a metainventory of 
human values,” Proceedings of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology, vol. 47, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1–10. 
[20] J. Grudin and S. Poltrock, “Computer supported cooperative work,” in 
The Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction, M. Soegaard and 
R. Dam, Eds.   Oxford: Interaction Design Foundation, Sep. 2013. 
[21]   J. Halloran, E. Hornecker, M. Stringer, E. Harris, and G. Fitzpatrick, 
“The value of values: Resourcing co-design of ubiquitous computing,” 
CoDesign, vol. 5, no. 4, Dec. 2009, pp. 245–273. 
[22] O. S. Iversen, K. Halskov, and T. W. Leong, “Rekindling values in 
participatory design,” 2010, pp. 91–100. 
[23]   B. Friedman, “Value-sensitive design,” Interactions, vol. 3, no. 6, 1996, 
pp. 16–23. 
[24] A. Sellen, Y. Rogers, R. Harper, and T. Rodden, “Reflecting human 
values in the digital age,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 52, no. 3, 
Mar. 2009, p. 58. 
[25] L. Ciolfi and L. J. Bannon, “Designing hybrid places: merging inter- 
action design, ubiquitous technologies and geographies of the museum 
space,” CoDesign, vol. 3, no. 3, Sep. 2007, pp. 159–180. 
[26] L. Ciolfi, “Supporting affective experiences of place through interaction 
design,” CoDesign, vol. 3, no. sup1, Jan. 2007, pp. 183–198. 
[27] E. Edwards, L. Mullagh, G. Dean, and G. Blair, “Collective spaces and 
collected action: towards reconnecting food, consumers and nature,” in 
UbiComp ’13 Adjunct: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM conference on 
Pervasive and ubiquitous computing adjunct publication. ACM Request 
Permissions, 2013, p. 563. 
[28] S. H. Schwartz, “Are there universal aspects in the structure and 
contents of human values?” Journal of social issues, vol. 50, no. 4, 
1994, pp. 19–45. 
[29] R. O’Shea, C. Bryson, and R. Jowell, “European Social Survey,” 
London, Tech. Rep., Oct. 2006. 
[30]   PanorEmo. [Online]. Available: http://www.panoremo.com / (accessed   
 
February 2014) 
[31] 
Centre 
for 
Urban 
Pedagogy. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://welcometocup.org/ (accessed February 2014) 
[32] 
Insitute 
for 
Applied 
Autonomy. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.appliedautonomy.com/isee.html (accessed February 2014) 
[33] C. G. Susanne Dirks and M. Keeling, “Smarter cities for smarter 
growth,” Jan. 2014, pp. 1–24. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-363-6
SMART 2014 : The Third International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

