DSM of Electric Vehicles using Future Internet 
Balancing the grid in cases of unplanned events causing frequency instability  
 
Jesse Kielthy, Anthony 
Kiely, Cathal O’Connor, 
Miguel Ponce de Leon 
TSSG  
Waterford IT 
Waterford, Ireland 
{jkielthy, akiely, coconnor, 
mpdl}@tssg.org 
 
 
Mark Daly, John Howard 
ESB eCars 
ESB 
Dublin, Ireland 
{mark.daly, 
john.howard}@esb.ie 
 
 
 
 
Jonas Fluhr 
FIR 
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
jonas.fluhr@fir.rwth-
aachen.de 
 
 
 
 
Matthias Sund 
Alcatel-Lucent AG 
Bell Labs 
Berlin, Germany 
matthias.sund@alcatel-
lucent.com 
 
 Abstract — Transitioning to a more automated grid requires 
changes and enhancements to grid operations, to the network 
structure and to end-user interaction. Concurrently, a desire to 
integrate renewable power sources into the grid imposes 
significant strains on existing electricity infrastructures and can 
lead to critical volatility in the grid frequency as a result of these 
unreliable supply sources. Of all the elements of frequency 
control available to a Transmission Systems Operator (TSO), by 
far the most valuable is the availability of an autonomous 5-15 
second response window. In this paper, we demonstrate the 
feasibility of using future internet technologies to balance the 
load on the grid in cases where unplanned events e.g., a drop in 
Renewable Energy Supply (RES), has caused fluctuations in grid 
frequency. This is done by, but not limited to, remotely 
controlling the load drawn by the domestic Electric Vehicle (EV) 
charge points.  
Keywords – demand side management; electric mobility; 
electric vehicles; renewable energies; future internet; smart energy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The European Commission outlines ambitious targets for 
“raising the share of EU energy consumption produced from 
renewable resources to 20%” [1]. In Ireland, this is even more 
ambitious, with a target of “40% electricity consumption from 
renewable sources by 2020” [2]. Due to the abundance of wind 
in Ireland (see Figure 1, where dark grey indicates high wind 
speeds), this will be the predominant source of renewable 
energy to meet these targets [3]. 
However, this desire to integrate renewable power sources 
(other proposed sources include solar, tidal) into the grid 
imposes 
significant 
strains 
on 
existing 
electricity 
infrastructures. Figure 2 illustrates that short term fluctuations 
in wind energy supply are random, frequent and, though 
weather modeling plays a crucial role in predicting wind 
patterns and movements, it is still extremely difficult to 
accurately forecast this supply.  
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1 - 31 Jan 2012
MW
 
Figure 2. Wind Power Ireland - Jan 2012 
A continuous balance between power generated and power 
consumed is required to maintain a constant, synchronous grid 
frequency (in Europe this is 50Hz). Any imbalance in power 
(generated or consumed) can result in a deviation in this 
frequency which, in turn, can adversely affect the transmission 
and distribution of electricity around the grid. Frequency 
control can ensure that the system remains within acceptable 
limits, and one such element of frequency control is Demand 
Side Management (DSM), which involves controlling the 
power demand so that it tracks the power supply. 
Electric Vehicles (EVs) are suitable candidates for DSM 
due to their charging power demand of 3.6 kW (single phase at 
16A) on a standard residential plug. For every 1000 Electric 
Vehicles (EV) charging on the grid, the load drawn is 
approximately 2.5-3.5MW. By reducing the charge rates of 
EV’s on the grid by just 50% during the initial minutes of the 
disturbance, a grid can be stabilized while spinning reserve is 
ramped up to take up the slack. Here, generators are available 
to provide power typically within 10 minutes. These reserves 
are used when another generator on the system goes down or 
deactivates unexpectedly [4]. The effect on EV charging is 
negligible over the course of a 6-8 hour night-time charging 
period. 
Charging independent of external EV requirements (i.e., 
non-battery related) is known as smart or intelligent charging. 
Several investigations have been conducted with respect to 
 
 
Figure 1. On/Offshore Wind Availability in Ireland 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

different external requirements. Most of these investigations 
focus on charging in dependence of availability of Renewable 
Energy Supply (RES) in the grid [5][6], others investigate 
coherence with driving profiles [7][8]. External requirements 
such as local or global grid parameters (frequency, voltage) are 
mainly considered under the umbrella of the potentially bi-
directional power flows called Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) [9-12] or 
by simulations [13]. Therefore, the following scenario focuses 
on uni-directional power-flows in dependence of grid 
parameters. It leverages Future Internet (FI) technologies and 
uses a testbed approach instead of pure simulations. 
In order to allow for a scenario where EVs support grid 
stability as part of DSM, several general requirements are to be 
fulfilled, such as secure and fast communication, sufficient 
availability of EV (time and place) as well as effective market 
integration. These requirements where considered when 
defining the scenario (section II) and designing the testbed 
(section III). 
Section II describes the DSM scenario and provides further 
background details about the issues that have given rise to this 
work; Section III details the connectivity requirements, the 
critical response requirements of the scenario and testbed 
architecture; Section IV describes technical implementation of 
a future internet frequency response framework; Section V 
outlines some of the challenges that are yet to be addressed; 
and finally, Section VI offers some conclusions. 
II. 
SCENARIO  
In 
day-to-day 
operations, 
generating 
stations 
can 
experience protective load shedding events. These events are 
protection actions which de-rate the generated power of a 
turbine until a stable operating condition is reached. The load 
shedding takes place under a pre-determined ramp rate 
(typically 3MW/sec). As generation is lost, this requires a 
balancing of the load in order to stabilize the grid. 
The speed of reaction in applying this load balancing is 
crucial. Direct Unit Trips (DUT) are available which can drop 
generation by hundreds of MW instantly – for example, wind 
turbines can shut down in blocks due to gusting winds, 
dropping 10’s of MW generation from the grid instantly. 
Generators who experience protective load shedding send 
signals to the grid controller. These signals notify of imminent 
events. Instantaneous disturbances will first be identified by a 
frequency drop. 
Of all the elements of frequency control available to a 
Transmission Systems Operator (TSO) (apart from DUTs), by 
far the most valuable is the availability of an autonomous 5s-
15s response which constitutes Primary frequency control. 
Following that, a secondary (15s-900s) and tertiary (900s+) 
response period provides the operator with an opportunity to 
control additional resources in order to restore stability to the 
grid as well as to react to changes in the anticipated load 
pattern. Figure 3 shows the system frequency profile as it is 
restored through these periods. 
The grid is designed to absorb limited frequency 
fluctuations (positive and negative). For example, if the 
frequency deviates from 50Hz to 49.8Hz, then the system will 
continue to operate as normal. 
 
Figure 3. Frequency control phases 
The response to more critical frequency deviations can be 
considered in a stepwise manner. Table I presents the nominal 
sliding scale of response to frequency fluctuations (this was 
defined for the purposes of testing, though can be considered as 
indicative of a step-wise response to frequency fluctuations).  
TABLE I.  
SLIDING SCALE OF RESPONSE 
Frequency  
Reaction 
50 to 49.8 Hz  
• 
No reaction 
49.8 to 49.5 Hz 
• 
Reduce current 25 % (5 min) 
49.5 to 49.3 Hz  
• 
Reduce current 50 % (5 min) 
Below 49.3 Hz 
• 
Stop charging (10 min) 
Post-Stability 
• 
Ramp back for 15 minutes 
 
The scenario presented here uses Future Internet (FI) ICT 
to provide a smarter, more efficient, autonomous Demand Side 
Management system. This system empowers operators to 
manage the demand for energy across the network – in this 
case, by limiting or stopping the load drawn by EVs. This is 
done by remotely controlling the Electric Vehicle Supply 
Equipment (EVSE) i.e., the EV charge point. EVs represent a 
special type of load in this case, whereas DSM is not limited to 
controlling a particular demand, but may utilize additional 
controllable loads, e.g., air conditioning systems. In doing this, 
Figure 4. DSM of EV charge points using Future Internet 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

TSOs can offset decreases in energy supply, and any 
corresponding grid frequency fluctuations, by regulating the 
load being drawn down by, e.g., EVs as they are charging. 
Figure 4 is a storyboard that illustrates the basic setup of 
the scenario – (from top left to right) the Energy Supplier has 
ever-increasing volumes of RES to be supported on the grid. 
RES generation can vary dramatically thus causing fluctuations 
in the overall energy supply and, as a consequence, cause grid 
frequency instability. The grid frequency is continuously 
monitored via a high-capacity management system. If the grid 
frequency fluctuates, then the Operator can use the energy 
management system to offset the drop in supply by controlling 
the load drawn down by the EVSE via the home energy 
manager (HEM), say, in a similar fashion to those reactions 
outlined in Table I (these are illustrative responses, rather than 
standard). 
III. 
SCENARIO ARCHITECTURE 
Once the grid frequency simulation is initiated, it is 
assumed the grid frequency is becoming unstable. A Grid 
Event is then recognized and acted upon by the TSO. 
Following that, real-world management and control of the load 
on the network (e.g., electric vehicles) demonstrates the 
feasibility of the use case by allowing the TSO to stabilize the 
grid. 
 
Figure 5. Connectivity diagram for testbed 
The three main entities involved in this scenario are: 
• 
Energy Supply Company (ESCO): trades on the 
Energy Market. Expected to be included in this 
trading is the sale of spinning reserve, a reserve that 
is very quickly available (this is currently not 
possible however is likely to be possible in future 
dynamic markets). The quantity of spinning reserve 
available is dynamic and regularly sent to the 
Transmission System Operator (TSO). 
• 
Transmission Systems Operator (TSO): operates the 
transmission grid. 
• 
HEM: monitors and manages the energy consumption 
with the Home Area Network (HAN). The EVSE is 
an element of the HAN and, as a result, can be 
remotely controlled and managed via the HEM.  
• 
Network Control Server: establishes network paths, 
subject to specific requirements, between the TSO 
and the HEM 
 
As illustrated in Figure 5, this scenario makes use of VPNs 
and network API’s to dynamically configure links, thus 
ensuring that end-to-end connectivity is available. The main 
interfaces are: 
A.  
From the ESCO to the TSO – a bi-directional 
interface that allows frequency notifications to be sent from 
TSO to ESCO, and tradable power information from ESCO to 
TSO.  
B. & C.  From the TSO to Network Control Server – the 
TSO instructs the Network Control Server to initialize the 
process to establish links between the TSO and HEM. The 
Network Control Server then uses the Network API to 
dynamically configure the various interfaces i.e., to the TSO 
and HEM. 
D. & E.   From the TSO to the HEM – connectivity is 
verified so that an end-to-end connection is available between 
the TSO and the HEM.  This enables the TSO to remotely 
control the load being drawn down EVSE via HEM. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION  
The overall operation of the end-to-end scenario is captured 
in Figure 6, where the different stakeholders (ESCO, TSO, 
HEM and EVSE) are encapsulated in an Autonomous 
Frequency Response Framework.  
This figure illustrates the interaction between the different 
components that, together, help deliver an end-to-end demand 
side management solution. The framework is comprised of 
both simulated and real-world elements and the algorithm is 
designed so that, as the frequency breaches the thresholds 
defined by Table I, a proportional response is implemented to 
reflect the severity of the respective breach.  
(1) The Device Communication Layer is a bi-directional 
component that takes in the data from various sources 
e.g., from the grid, electric vehicle or from the user, while 
at the same time it can affect change by communicating 
the required response commands to the end-user devices 
i.e., EV charge point 
(2) The Service Management component receives all of the 
necessary information from the various sources in the 
system, models the service in order to determine whether 
it is behaving appropriately or not, and makes the 
decisions to affect change by defining the correct 
responses to be implemented.  
 Following that, the development environment and related 
testbed was configured as in Figure 7. The EVSE was 
connected to a WIFI access point. The WIFI network is 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

managed by a HEM and this allows the TSO to instruct the 
HEM to stop / start / control the load of the EVSE.  
 
Figure 6. Autonomous frequency response framework 
The TSO supports a service that provides the frequency 
data and a timestamp from the ESCO. When the TSO receives 
this request, it checks to see if the timestamp is greater than the 
previous timestamp. This is to ensure that the TSO has 
received a new frequency value. If the timestamp is greater, it 
proceeds with its work and, if it is not, it informs the user of 
this.  
The TSO checks the received frequency value as according 
to thresholds outlined in Table I. 
So if, for example, the frequency is in the 49.8-50Hz range, 
the TSO contacts the Home Energy Manager (HEM) to find 
out the current status of the charge point (on/off). 
For the HEM to get this status information it has to 
communicate with the charge point (CP) through a Telnet 
session. Telnet is a network protocol that can be used to enable 
devices in separate locations to remotely connect. Initially, 
when the TSO sends a request to the HEM, it opens up a telnet 
session to the charge point. The HEM parses the data that it 
receives from the CP so that it can see the current status of the 
CP. The status information is then returned from the HEM to 
the TSO. If the CP is currently on it sends a message from the 
TSO to the ESCO stating that the CP is on. This information is 
then displayed as the log entry (see Figure 8).  
When the frequency is below 49.3Hz, the TSO sends a 
request to the HEM for an updated status message. If the HEM 
sends a response to the TSO stating that the CP status is on, the 
TSO will send a request to the HEM to turn off the CP. The 
HEM will open up a session with the CP and send a command 
to turn the CP off. The HEM will then send a response back to 
the TSO stating the current status (off) of the CP. This current 
status of the CP and the frequency is sent from the TSO to the 
ESCO. This information is then added to the.  
 
Figure 7. Testbed infrastructure 
When the frequency is above 49.3 Hz, the same process as 
above takes place where the HEM sends an “on” command to 
the CP which will turn the CP on again. The new status of the 
CP and the frequency will be recorded as a log entry.  
 
 
Figure 8. DSM demo interface 
V. 
CHALLENGES 
A. 
Scalability 
With a target of 10% of all Irish vehicles on the road to be 
electric by 2020 [2], the demand side management application 
would potentially have cater for up to 250,000 electric cars.  
Web services may not be a solution that scales efficiently 
for a large scale deployment of a management solution such as 
this and, though using web services has provided valuable 
insights to the design and engineering of the solution, further 
investigations are required to evaluate the most effective 
technology. Potential alternative technologies may include the 
use of FI-WARE [14] platform and technologies to deliver 
generic capabilities (e.g., QoS, connectivity, security), upon 
Slider to simulate 
frequency 
fluctuations 
Video of car 
dashboard  
Log of EVSE status, 
events and updates 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

which specific components (e.g., smart chargers) can be 
developed and integrated. 
B. 
Extendibility  
As well as EVs, other controllable loads ought to be 
considered for this application – for example, smart public 
street-lighting, televisions and fridge-freezers within the HEM, 
etc. Furthermore, it may be useful to consider the aggregation 
of these loads e.g., by towns, cities, regions, so that the TSO is 
able to apply a regional demand side solution to a regional 
supply problem. 
C. 
Speed of Response 
Due to the severe impact of a frequency drop on the energy 
grid, communications to the cars must be prioritized over delay 
tolerant Internet applications. In this case, the telecoms 
network should support contractual service level agreements 
with smart grid applications and should have interfaces to the 
network to actively manage its capacities and services in real 
time. 
D. 
Security  
There are a number of security considerations to this 
research - consideration for user identification and verification, 
anonimization of information, identity management and secure 
data 
handling 
will 
need 
to 
be 
considered. 
Secure 
communication tunnels between endpoints (e.g., TSO and 
HEM) will encrypt the data, ensure privacy and prevent 
snooping and spoofing.  
E. 
User incentivisation 
It is envisaged this scenario can deliver dual benefits to 
both the consumer and the grid operator. For the former, an 
incentivisation scheme could ensure that users who subscribe 
to the event scheme could partake of a loyalty system and avail 
of having potential kWh credits or reduced kWh tariffs while 
interruptible. 
Operators 
could 
benefit 
from 
increased 
acceptance of renewables on the grid and could additionally 
offset grid penalties and reward loyal customers who opt-in to 
allow them to control their charge points to ensure grid 
stability.  
Not all users will be able to participate in this scenario – for 
example, an on-call doctor would not like to have the charging 
of their car interrupted. However, it is important to get users to 
opt-in to this scheme and one way to do this is through 
incentivisation e.g., if a user partakes in this scheme and their 
charge is interrupted, say, twice in 3 months then the energy 
provider could compensate them through reduced tariffs on 
their next bill.  
The transfer of benefit data and loyalty benefits will need to 
be exchanged and redeemable. All quantities such as kW’s and 
credits will require to be validated for audit and transparency 
purposes.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Frequency control can be called upon for a variety of 
conditions ranging from a gradual change in load levels over 
time to a sudden loss of generation or step increase in demand. 
The solution presented here, while demonstrated using 
electric vehicles smart charge points, can utilize other 
interruptible loads to gain greater advantage of demand side 
management – including additional loads from within the home 
or through the aggregation of loads within a region in order to 
provide a localized solution.  
Providing grid operators with the real-time ability to 
stabilize the grid frequency by controlling the demand can 
become a critical tool for the future energy consumption of EV 
in the smart grid. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work was undertaken as part of the FINSENY project 
and funded by the EU Future Internet – Public Private 
Partnership (FI-PPP) programme under the Grant Agreement 
number 285135. The authors would like to acknowledge the 
invaluable insight of FINSENY colleagues. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
E. Morgera, K. Kulovesi, M. Munoz “The EU climate and energy 
package” Social Science and Research Network (SSRN), Nov. 2010, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1711395 
[2] 
Department of Communications, Energy & Natural Resources (DCENR) 
Ireland “National Renewable Energy Action Plan IRELAND” Nov. 
2009 
[3] 
Risø National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy “European Wind 
Atlas”  
[4] 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) “Grid Integration of 
large-capacity Renewable Energy Sources and use of large-capacity 
Electrical Energy Storage” Oct. 2012 
[5] 
M. Agsten, S. Schlegel, S. Bohn, D. Westermann, X. Pfab 
“Determinants of successful management of charging Electric Vehicles” 
Smart Grid VDE Congress, Stuttgart, 2012 
[6] 
D. Dallinger, J. Link, F. Kley, M. Wietschel “Variable tariffs for 
demand response with grid-connected electric vehicles and their 
contribution to integrate intermittent renewable generation” Smart grids 
and E-mobility, 2nd European Conference on Smart Grids and E-
Mobility, Oct. 2010, ISBN: 978-3-941785-14-4 
[7] 
F. Kley, D. Dallinger, M. Wietschel, “Optimizing the charge profile - 
considering users’ driving profiles” Unpublished, Sustainability and 
Innovation No. S 6/2010, Frauenhofer ISI 
[8] 
J. Fluhr, K-H. Ahlert, C. Weinhardt “A Stochastic Model for Simulating 
the Availability of Electric Vehicles for Services to the Power Grid” 
43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS). 
2010 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2010.33 
[9] 
W. Kempton, J. Tomic, “Vehicle-to-grid power fundamentals: 
Calculation capacity and net revenue” Journal of Power Sources. Vol. 
144 (2005) 268–279 
[10] W. Kempton, J. Tomic, “Vehicle-to-grid power implementation: From 
stabilizing the grid to supporting large-scale renewable energy” Journal 
of Power Sources. Vol. 144 (2005) 280–294 
[11] W. Kempton, J. Tomic, “Using fleets of electric-drive vehicles for grid 
support” Journal of Power Sources. Vol. 168, Iss. 2 (2007) 459–468 
[12] D. Dallinger, D. Krampe, M. Wietschel “Vehicle-to-Grid Regulation 
Reserves Based on a Dynamic Simulation of Mobility Behavior” IEEE 
Transactions on Smart Grid, Vol. 2, No. 2, June 2011 
[13] A. Rautiainen, S. Repo, P. Järventausta “Using Frequency Dependent 
Charging of Plug-in Vehicles to Enhance Power System's Frequency 
Stability” European Conference on Smart Grids and E-mobility, 
Würzburg, Germany 
[14] FI-WARE http://www.fi-ware.eu/   
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

