 
 
The Clinical Potential of a Cognitive Training Program Embedded in an Adaptive 
Video Game  
 
Martina Ratto, John E. Harrison, Keiron T. Sparrowhawk, Paul B. Cliveden 
MyCognition Ltd. 
London, United Kingdom 
e-mail: martina@mycognition.com 
 
 
Abstract—Cognitive training programs commonly involve 
single game features, but they are rarely embedded in a 
complete, adaptive video game where the player can 
experience game-flow. The aim of this paper is to present a 
video game designed to train users’ cognition across five key 
domains and to describe its potential. The training program is 
calibrated based on the individual scores obtained in a self-
administered, online assessment targeting attention, working 
memory, episodic memory, executive function, and processing 
speed, which is automatically linked to the video game 
software, adapting itself to the player’s progress. Structural 
features in the game contribute to creating an engaging 
experience 
for 
the 
users. 
Successful 
examples 
of 
implementation of the program have been tested in diverse 
settings, including educational programs and clinical trials. 
Improvements in cognitive function and transfer effects in 
academic and everyday life skills and behavior have been 
demonstrated and show promise for further analyses. The 
adaptive mechanisms and the game-like structure of the 
presented training program make it a potentially valuable 
starting point for further research on innovative cognitive 
programs. 
Keywords-Cognitive assessment & training; gamification; 
adaptive video games; performance improvements. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Computer-based solutions for cognitive training are 
becoming progressively more popular in the commercial, 
clinical, educational, and business sectors. Most of these 
solutions have introduced elements of gamification [1], 
including 
feedback, 
an 
achievement 
level 
structure, 
competitions, and time pressure. However, only a few of 
these show a true involvement of the player, typically 
observed in the most sophisticated of video games, which 
can produce a game-flow experience. Flow may be defined 
as the complete absorption in an activity in which a person is 
involved [2]. In the case of gaming, the flow primarily 
depends on how much the game itself is adaptive, i.e., how 
much it can modify itself according to the user’s progress to 
be sufficiently challenging. Other factors producing the flow 
experience may be a representation of the self inside within 
the game, a 3D environment, a narrative context, or a music 
background [3].  
Traditional brain-training programs may be considered as 
a separate category compared to the video games, as they do 
not completely incorporate such game features, stopping at a 
puzzle level [4]. Most traditional cognitive games only 
introduce single game features, such as progress bars, level 
structure, and feedback, without producing an actual video 
game, even if some exceptions have been identified [5]. 
However, the cognitive programs following this type of 
approach do not embed an assessment tool to monitor the 
progress in cognition and to set in the game a level of play 
adapting to the user’s cognitive level.  
The aim of this paper is to present a novel approach 
which attempts to overcome these limitations by proposing 
an online, self-administered software tool, integrating both 
an assessment and a training program, where the training is 
embedded in an engaging video game, MyCognition 
AquaSnap. 
In Section 2, the MyCognition software, integrating a 
cognitive assessment and a training video game is introduced 
and game elements are described. The structure of the 
training game will then be described more in more detail in 
Section 3. Some examples of successful adoption of the 
MyCognition programs are presented in Section 4, 
underlining the training conditions necessary to gain 
performance 
improvements. 
In 
Section 
5 
some 
considerations about future perspectives will be appraised 
and future directions will be outlined in Section 6. 
II. 
THE MYCOGNITION PROGRAM 
AquaSnap is a scientifically designed, cognitive training 
video game developed to improve cognitive function, 
targeting five key cognitive domains — attention, working 
memory, episodic memory, executive function, and 
processing speed [10].  
To produce personalized training for every user, the 
amount of training for each cognitive domain is calibrated on 
the individual scores obtained in a cognitive assessment 
integrated into the system, the MyCognitive Quotient 
(MyCQ) assessment. MyCQ comprises a digital version of 
the most validated psychometric tests widely used over 
almost 200 years of neuropsychological research in their 
original, traditional, paper-and-pencil versions. In contrast, 
MyCQ is an online, self-administered assessment, whose 
final scores for each cognitive domain are automatically 
generated by the software system and feed the game engine. 
In this system, the lower a player’s score in a particular 
cognitive domain, the more intense the training will be for 
that domain.  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
The game has an aquatic theme in which players must 
venture into the ocean to undertake various activities. The 
activities include exploring rich underwater worlds populated 
with a range of fish and sea creatures, seeking out and 
photographing different types of fish, each with their own 
characteristics. The photos are placed for sale on the open 
market, to build wealth and reputation for the player. 
Finances must be mastered, as currency is spent to push 
further into the ocean to see the rarest and most elusive of 
fish. 
The game is built from the player’s self-perspective, 
which is represented in the ship moving across the ocean 
chart and in the camera’s lens in the underwater 
environment. The ocean chart itself embeds a narrative 
aspect in the game, as it tracks the players’ progress history 
and can be explored backward and forward. The evocative 
names of each oceanic area contribute to make the 
environment the scenario of a narration. 
Moving from the 2D environment of the map to the 
underwater zone, the player can experience a 3D 
environment with the illusion of moving through the water 
and encountering different objects and animals as a part of 
each training task. The music in the background also 
contributes to creating a flow experience, facilitating the 
player’s concentration during the training and ultimately 
advancing to produce a longer-term effect on behavior, as 
suggested in studies involving children with behavioral 
difficulties [7]. 
 
III. 
THE STRUCTURE OF AQUASNAP 
The training works by encouraging the player to 
undertake repetitive, and increasingly more challenging, 
tasks that are embedded in the video game. The tasks are 
designed to train a specific cognitive domain.  
Each cognitive domain is mainly trained by a specific 
loop, with some domains trained using several tasks. The 
game develops on different structural levels. At the basic 
structural level, there are the loops which correspond to the 
five first tasks in Table 1. The loops are organized in dives, 
so that in each different dive the user can experience a set of 
loops. 
The ocean map represents a meta-level of cognition. At 
the map level, users must organize their dive to both achieve 
the proposed mission and to discover new areas. 
The progress of the players on the map, and consequently 
the growth of difficulty in the training game, depend on the 
coins the players can collect during their dives. In this way, 
the game adapts its difficulty to the level of improvement 
reached by the player. 
The intensity of the training depends on the individual 
MyCQ scores, too, as mentioned above, as the number of 
loops for each type of task that the user experiences depends 
on the score obtained in each cognitive domain. In this way, 
more impaired domains will receive more intensive training. 
In the following section, further details about the amount 
of time the users play the training game and in-game 
adaptive mechanisms will be introduced, as these relate to 
real-world implementations of the program. 
  
IV. 
MYCOGNITION PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION STUDIES 
Considerable evidence has been produced in randomized 
controlled trials (RCT) in clinical and school settings and in 
individual and group case-studies in school and home 
settings, as described in the following paragraphs. These 
have shown the effectiveness of the described training video 
game 
in 
improving 
players’ 
cognition 
and 
related 
performance for different categories of users. MyCognition 
generally recommends following the training program by 
playing the cognitive game at least 90 minutes per week, at 
least three times each week for eight/twelve weeks, and 
taking the MyCQ assessment at the baseline, in the middle, 
and after the conclusion of the program. The game itself 
keeps track of the diving time and displays it to the player. 
Also, the game proposes among the daily missions the task 
of playing at least 15 minutes in order to get 3 coins. As the 
coins are an essential tool to progress in exploring the 
oceanic map, players not complying with the recommended 
time adaptively have a slowed progress through training 
levels, which corresponds to their slowed cognitive 
improvement.  
TABLE I.  
INDIVIDUAL TASKS IN AQUASNAP AND TRAINED DOMAINS 
Task 
Task Description 
Name 
Activity 
Cognitive 
Domain 
1 
Memory Shot 
Remember the 
position of the 
glowing fish in the 
loop. 
Working 
Memory 
2 
Quick Shot 
Snap the fish as 
soon as you see it. 
Processing 
Speed & 
Attention 
3 
Careful Quick Shot 
Snap the fish as 
soon as you see it, 
but be careful not to 
snap the shocking 
fish. 
Attention & 
Executive 
Function 
4 
Group Shot 
Snap the group of 
fish when all 
together. 
Attention & 
Processing 
Speed 
5 
Fish Tracker 
Remember which 
fish are glowing 
after they change 
position. 
Working 
Memory 
6 
Oceanic Survey 
Remember which 
fish you have seen at 
the end of the dive. 
Episodic 
Memory 
7 
Missions & Map 
Exploration 
Achieve the goals 
proposed by the 
daily missions and 
try to discover new 
areas on the ocean 
map. 
Executive 
Function 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
Users following the recommended program are usually 
able to get at least a 10 points increase in their MyCQ score 
on a scale going from 1 to 100, corresponding to a 20% 
increase for the average population, having a baseline score 
of 50 points. 
The first clinical evidence came from two studies 
involving 
a 
psychiatric 
population 
affected 
by 
schizophrenia, 
schizoaffective 
disorder, 
obsessive-
compulsive disorder, and major depressive disorder. 
Significant improvements in episodic memory were shown 
in the group of patients playing the cognitive game in 
addition to the usual treatment [15]. 
Outcomes are currently being measured across all the key 
cognitive domains in a Parkinson’s disease population with 
mild cognitive impairment [18]. 
Several other clinical trials are ongoing, investigating the 
usefulness and usability of the cognitive video games in 
populations with neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders 
and in other conditions, including cancer. 
Evidence of the effectiveness of the training program and 
the attractiveness of the video game have been studied also 
in various education scenarios, involving mainstream and 
special 
educational 
needs 
students. 
In 
addition 
to 
improvement in cognition, students of different ages also 
showed advances in their learning skills, in academic 
achievements, and in class behavior [11][12][17]. 
Current studies are still investigating the usability of the 
programs in other contexts, such as social and health services 
and corporate wellbeing, showing preliminary promising 
outcomes [16]. 
V. 
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
Once the potential and the effectiveness of the training 
program presented has been shown in different settings, a 
further step in the development work would be to export the 
basic structure of the game and its different cognitive tasks t 
other analogous video games with different environments 
which can embed the training program itself.  
Also, further research can be done in order to develop 
more sophisticated features to enhance players’ engagement 
and the game’s user-adaption, together with more sensitive 
assessment tasks and training loops. 
Evaluations of similar and comparable studies can also 
be deepened, as well as analogous counterparts in the fields 
of serious games and exergames.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Even if the work presented has limitations due to its “in 
progress” state, some innovative points have been identified 
and early evidence of the potential of the program has been 
shown.  Future research can lead to the development of 
more sophisticated game features that are able to produce a 
more totally engaging game-flow experience in different 
categories of players, from the youngest children to the 
elderly population.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Anna Domen, Sjors C. van de Weijer, and Dr. 
Anne Bellens for their assistance with recruiting and 
managing participants in trials. We are grateful to all study 
participants for their contributions. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke, “From 
game design elements to gamefulness: defining gamification,” 
Proceedings of the 15th international academic MindTrek 
conference: Envisioning future media environments, pp. 9-15, 
2011. 
[2] M. Csiksentmihalyi, Flow. The psychology of optimal 
experience, New York: Harper & Row, 1990. 
[3] B. Reeves and J. L. Read, Total engagement: How games and 
virtual worlds are changing the way people work and 
businesses compete, Harvard Business Press, 2015. 
[4] M. Ninaus et al., “Game elements improve performance in a 
working memory training task,” International Journal of 
Serious Games, Vol. 2, pp. 3-16, 2015. 
[5] J. Lumsden, E. A. Edwards, N. S. Lawrence, D. Coyle, and 
M. R. Munafò, “Gamification of cognitive assessment and 
cognitive training: a systematic review of applications and 
efficacy,” 
JMIR 
Serious 
Games, 
vol 
4(2), 
doi: 
10.2196/games.5888, 2016. 
[6] J. A. Anguera and A. Gazzaley, "Video games, cognitive 
exercises, and the enhancement of cognitive abilities,” 
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, vol. 4, pp. 160-165, 
2015. 
[7] S. Hallam and J. Price, “Can the use of background music 
improve the behaviour and academic performance of children 
with emotional and behavioural difficulties?,” British journal 
of special education, vol. 25(2), pp. 88-91, 1998. 
[8] A. C. Domen et al., “The validation of a new, online cognitive 
assessment tool,” European Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 
25, p. S344, 2015.  
[9] A. Domen et al., “The validation of a new online cognitive 
assessment tool,” European Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 
26, pp. S342-S343, 2016. 
[10] J. E. Harrison,  J. H. Van Rijswijk, K. T. Sparrowhawk, and 
D. A. Knight, U.S. Patent No. 20,150,279,226. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 2015.  
[11] P. Shah, R. Kumar, A. McCone, K. Sparrowhawk, and J. 
Thomas, “The impact of cognitive function assessment and 
adaptive training on academic performance in students with 
learning 
difficulties,” 
Poster 
session 
presented 
at: 
Copenhagen, DK: 10th Federation of European Neuroscience 
Societies (FENS) Forum of Neuroscience, Jul. 2016. 
[12] K. Sparrowhawk, R. Kumar, and A. McCone, “Evaluation of 
cognitive function and training in school children,” Poster 
session presented at: Copenhagen, DK: 10th Federation of 
European 
Neuroscience 
Societies 
(FENS) 
Forum 
of 
Neuroscience, Jul. 2016. 
[13] A. McCone, R. Kumar, K. Sparrowhawk, and L. Franchi, 
“Evaluating the impact of cognitive training for SEN children 
when used at home,” Poster session presented at: 
Copenhagen, DK: 10th Federation of European Neuroscience 
Societies (FENS) Forum of Neuroscience, Jul. 2015. 
[14] K. Sparrowhawk, R. Kumar, and J. Harrison, “Adaptive 
Video Games can Assess and Enhance Cognitive Health,”  
Value in Health, vol. 17(7), p. A454, 2014. 
[15] D. Nieman et al., “Cognitive remediation in psychiatric 
patients with an online cognitive game and assessment tool,”  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

 
 
European Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 25, pp. S344-
S345, 2015. 
[16] K. Sparrowhawk, P. Cliveden, M. Ratto, W. Ogle-Welbourne, 
A. Sunley, “Evaluating the cost-benefit of a cognitive 
assessment and training program across a smart city 
population in the UK,” Value in Health, vol. 19(7), pp. A693-
A694, 2016. 
[17] K. Sparrowhawk, J. Harrison, R. Kumar, D. Knight, 
“Working memory and executive functioning are improved in 
school students using an applied action video game,” Poster 
session presented at: Milan, IT: 9th Federation of European 
Neuroscience Societies (FENS) Forum of Neuroscience, Jul. 
2014. 
[18] S. C. van de Weijer et al., “The Parkin’Play study: protocol of 
a phase II randomized controlled trial to assess the effects of a 
health game on cognition in Parkinson’s disease,” BMC 
Neurology, vol. 16(1), 209, doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0731-z, 
2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

