Low Cost Mobile Embedded System for Air Quality Monitoring 
Air quality real-time monitoring in order to preserve citizens’ health 
Adrian Florea 
Computer Science and Electrical Engineering Department 
‘Lucian Blaga’ University of Sibiu 
Sibiu, Romania 
email: adrian.florea@ulbsibiu.ro 
Lasse Berntzen, Marius Rohde Johannessen 
Department of Business, History and Social Sciences 
University College of Southeast Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
email: {lasse.berntzen, marius.johannessen}@usn.no
Daniela Stoica, Ionel Stelian Naicu 
National Environmental Protection Agency 
Sibiu, Romania 
email: danastoica68@yahoo.com, office@apmsb.anpm.ro 
Vlad Cazan 
Civic Alert 
Bucharest, Romania 
email: vlad.cazan@civicalert.ro
 
 
Abstract - This paper reports on a case study using a mobile 
platform for air-quality monitoring. This case study was done 
in Sibiu, Romania, and includes a description of related work, 
a survey, a summary of existing results regarding air quality, a 
description of the mobile air quality monitoring platform, and 
the results of trials done in February 2017. The aim of the case 
study is to pave the road for further studies of using mobile 
low-cost units for air quality monitoring. 
Keywords-air quality monitoring; environmental monitoring; 
sensor platform; traffic optimization; crowdsensing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper reports on a case study using a mobile 
platform for air-quality monitoring as part of a research 
project jointly conducted by the “Lucian Blaga” University 
of Sibiu, Romania and University College of Southeast 
Norway. The case study was done in Sibiu, Romania. Sibiu 
experience air quality problems caused by traffic. The design 
and development of the platform has been described in an 
earlier paper [1], and will only be briefly described here. The 
aim is to show how the platform is used, and to compare 
with other studies. The case study includes a survey among 
university students and employees to investigate their 
concerns about air quality. 
A. Background 
Europe and the rest of the world face severe societal 
challenges, especially related to energy consumption, 
environment and security. Air quality has become an 
important issue in most industrialized and urban areas. The 
use of fuels for cars, ships and production of energy, heavy 
traffic and inefficient modes of transport, waste burning, and 
industrial activities degrade air quality [2][3]. Information 
and communication technologies contribute around 2% of 
the global CO2 emissions and approximately 8% of the 
European Union´s use of electricity [4]. Contamination of 
the air is both a global and a local problem. On a global level 
the emissions of CO2 and NOX influences climate and global 
warming. On local level air pollution (detectable particles 
from smoke, ash, dust, spore, pollen and mildew) has an 
important impact on human health, causing health issues like 
asthma, allergies and bronchitis. According to World Health 
Organization (WHO) report from September 2016, 3 million 
deaths a year are linked with exposure to outdoor air 
pollution [5]. Air pollution may also reduce the value of 
properties in exposed areas. 
Many cities, including London, Madrid and Paris, 
experience severe problems with air quality, especially 
during the winter season. Air pollution on cold days affects 
many citizens, and forces them to make quick decisions to 
avoid exposure, either to stay inside or choose an alternative 
route. 
Even Norwegian cities such as Oslo and Bergen suffer 
due to climatic conditions, as the polluted air doesn’t get 
warm enough to escape the cities surrounded by hills or 
mountains. When pollution levels are high, the cities of 
Bergen and Paris restrict the use of cars based on the last 
digit of the number plates. In January 2017, Oslo was closed 
for diesel cars for a short period. The city council considers 
raising traffic tolls on days with high pollution levels. Air 
pollution is a top priority for citizens especially in megacities 
from all around the globe [6]. More than that, each flight 
Paris-New York is melting 3 cube meter of icecap. If the 
trend continues, the Arctic ice cap will disappear in 30 years 
[7]. 
According to information presented by Dr. L. Roman 
from Autohaus Huber SRL (Sibiu), in a workshop1 organized 
as part of the project, the pollution levels caused by 
automobiles change (to the worse) depending on several 
factors such as: 
 
Road traffic contributing to particle pollution both 
because of car tires wearing down the asphalt surface, 
and due to incomplete combustion. 
 
Quality of the fuels and lubricants. 
 
State of wear of the mechanical components of the 
engine and its auxiliary installations. 
                                                           
1 http://www.ulbsibiu.ro/myaccount/src/file.php?file=file1&news=true&id=2816 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
State of wear of electrical and electronic components. 
 
Running distance on which the vehicle is used daily. 
 
Quality of car maintenance. 
 
Driving quality (skill) of the vehicle users. 
 
Political decisions of reducing taxes on importing 
second hand cars. 
In most cases, it is no quick fix for air pollution. Shutting 
down power stations or industries polluting the air are 
normally long-term projects. The use of filters and catalyzers 
may reduce the output of pollution. However, small projects 
may help reduce local pollution. One example is to provide 
passages for pedestrians under or above heavily trafficked 
roads [8], and building viaducts over railroads. This can 
increase the flow of vehicles and reduce the pollution caused 
by still-standing cars. 
To combat air pollution, it is necessary to have objective 
air-quality measurements. Today, most of the air quality 
monitoring is done by a relatively small number of expensive 
stationary units. This causes a problem with granularity. A 
stationary unit collects data from a single geographical point 
and the data may not be representative for a larger area. 
One strategy to improve air quality is to reduce traffic, 
and optimize the remaining traffic. This can be done in a 
multitude of ways: increasing traffic tolls, improving public 
transport, introducing smart parking systems that direct the 
driver to an available parking spot, and by disallowing 
certain types of cars to be used. In Oslo, cars need to pay a 
special tax if the car uses winter tires with spikes, to 
encourage car owners to choose more environmentally-
friendly tires. (The spikes wear down the asphalt and create 
dust particles.) 
The cities may implement different regulatory measures 
to reduce the emission of pollutants. For example, the 
mayors of Paris, Madrid, Athens and Mexico City have 
announced that trucks will not be allowed to enter their city 
centers from 2025. Also, diesel cars will be banned and the 
city councils are considering raising tolls on days with high 
pollution levels [9]. Walking and cycling will be encouraged 
and citizens will be provided incentives for the use of electric 
or hybrid vehicles [10]. 
The aim of this paper is to present a project to measure 
air quality by using a mobile platform for monitoring. This 
platform can provide more accurate information on air 
quality issues. Such monitoring can help raise awareness of 
air quality problems, their causes, and their impact, and 
thereby contribute to better decision making. 
The project goals are: 
 
Give citizens a real image of the air quality in cities by 
making the mobile monitoring platform collect 
information from sensors, and send the data to a server 
for further analysis and visualization. 
 
Improve the quality of environmental monitoring by 
designing and developing a low cost "proof of concept" 
prototype for use in cars. 
 
Cars host the mobile environmental monitoring 
platform. Whenever the car is parked, the platform will 
start monitoring the environment around itself, and 
forward this information to the server. (The platform can 
also be used when the car is moving). 
 
The platform may perform some preprocessing of data 
to reduce the data traffic generated. Instead of sending 
data at fixed intervals, the platform can send alerts when 
changes happen. This can improve the scalability of the 
solution. 
 
The rest of the paper is organized into four sections, 
where Section II briefly reviews some state of the art papers 
related to this study. Section III presents the Sibiu case study, 
including the survey, some existing studies from the 
Romanian National Network of Air Quality Monitoring, and 
information from traffic and roads administration. Section IV 
describes the research design - the mobile platform for 
environmental monitoring - both from hardware and 
software point of view, including some obtained results. 
Finally, in Section V, we provide implications and 
conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Air quality monitoring has been around for many years, 
but has mostly been done by public authorities responsible 
for environmental monitoring. In most cases, the monitoring 
is done by expensive monitoring platforms in fixed locations. 
The aim of our project was to investigate alternative ways of 
obtaining measurement results to improve the granularity of 
measurements. 
A. Hand-held units connected to smartphones 
One approach is to use hand-held units to be carried 
around by citizens. Such units normally connect to a smart 
phone, and use the smartphone to obtain access to the 
internet.  
Leonardi, Cappellotto, Caraviello, Lepri and Antonelli 
[11] developed an air quality monitoring unit to be carried 
around by citizens. An important reason for developing the 
mobile unit was: “Official authorities use to monitor and 
publish air quality data collected by networks of static 
measurement stations. However, this approach is often 
costly, hard to maintain and not scalable in the long term”. 
They also argue that fixed station provides “a lack of 
accuracy in the intra-urban air pollution maps”. The authors 
collected data from 80 persons in Trento, Italy. The unit, 
called “SecondNose”, measures temperature, light, humidity, 
altitude, pressure and two air pollution parameters: carbon-
monoxide (CO) and nitrogen-dioxide (NO2). The unit 
communicates with an app installed in an Android 
smartphone through Bluetooth. The unit weighs only 28 
grams, and has a battery capacity of five days. 
Dutta, Chowdhury, Roy, Middya and Gazi [12] 
developed “AirSense”, a monitoring platform based on 
Arduino Nano equipped with two sensors, one for air quality 
(MQ135) and one for carbon-monoxide (MQ7). The 
platform connects to an Android smartphone through 
Bluetooth, and weighs around 60 grams. The authors cited 
inadequate number of fixed monitoring stations as the reason 
for developing “AirSense”. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

CITI-SENSE, an EU-funded project, developed a hand-
held sensory unit to be carried around [13]. The “Little 
Environmental Observatory” (LEO) is a portable sensor 
pack. It measures NO, NO2 and O3 using electrochemical 
sensors. It also provides information about the current 
temperature and relative humidity. LEO connects to an 
Android smartphone through Bluetooth. CITI-SENSE also 
developed an app to let citizens report their own perception 
of air quality. CITI-SENSE ran from 2012 to 2016. 
AIRALERT [14] is a service recently launched by the 
Romanian NGO CivicAlert. The service obtains data from a 
handheld sensor platform “AirBeam” with Bluetooth 
connection to an Android smartphone. Their idea is to collect 
data by issuing units to volunteer bicyclists. AIRALERT is 
using an existing visualization package to display results. 
Z. Pan, H. Yu, C. Miao and C. Leung [15] used a 
somewhat different approach, by using smartphone cameras 
to detect air pollution through artificial intelligence 
techniques to determine particle pollution. This solution 
requires humans to actively do measurements.  
B. Units equiped with GSM communication 
Another approach is to equip the monitoring platform 
with built-in Global System for Mobile Communications 
(GSM) communication capabilities. 
C. Migliore [16] developed a platform mounted on a 
bike, “SwarmBike”, to measure air pollution. The unit has a 
Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver, a GSM module to 
handle communication, and sensors for barometric pressure, 
temperature, humidity and a CO sensor. His thesis describes 
other types of sensors for measuring air quality. 
The projects OpenSense and OpenSense II [17] installed 
air quality measurement units on trams in Zurich and buses 
in Lausanne, Switzerland. The sensor platform measures 
ozone (O3), nitrogen-dioxide (NO2), carbon-monoxide (CO) 
and ultra-fine particles (UFP). The platform has a GPS-
receiver, and transmits data to a server using GSM. A sensor 
was also installed in a Citroen C-Zero. 
C. Related work compared to our platform 
The problem with hand-held units is that someone must 
carry them around. Several solutions require Android 
smartphones. This excludes the large number of Apple 
iPhone users. Users may also be reluctant to provide access 
through their own phones. It seems that most of the projects 
described above lasted for a limited period. 
Leonardi, Cappellotto, Caraviello, Lepri and Antonelli 
[11] reported that usage of “SecondNose” declined over time. 
Users said they were curious in the beginning, but soon 
learnt the characteristics of the places they measured. This 
may partially explain the non-sustainability of the projects 
using hand-held sensors. 
Our unit is autonomous. No human is needed to carry it 
or turn it on or off. It uses a GSM module, and does not need 
smart phone for communication. It also has a built-in GPS. 
Insert a SIM-card and connect to car battery, and it is 
operating (plug-and-play). 
The hand-held units described above seem to be more 
expensive. The sensor used by Leonardi, Cappellotto, 
Caraviello, Lepri and Antonelli [11] (SensorDrone) costs 
around USD 200. It only contains sensors and Bluetooth.  
The components for our unit cost around 130 Euro, 
including sensors and GSM/GPS-module. 
 
The OpenSense platform [17] closely resembles our 
platform, but collects data from trams and buses on the 
move. This brings some uncertainty caused by trucks being 
close to the measurement platform. 
Our novel approach is to use parked cars. Parked cars 
provide the possibility to measure from one location over 
time. It is not dependent on human intervention to make the 
measurements. A city always owns cars used to provide 
services. But it is also possible to call on volunteers to host 
the platform in their cars. 
D. Shared characteristics of monitoring platforms 
Environmental monitoring platforms might be used by 
the municipality to create another layer in the city map 
(transparent for citizens), like layers showing networks of 
water, gas and electric cables, the sewer network, telephone 
and cable TV networks etc. Such layers may easily be 
implemented in a GIS system and can be used for increased 
transparency, 
sustainable 
regional 
development 
and 
innovative applications visualizing the pollution levels. 
By collecting data from city and surroundings areas, 
platforms can identify the city’s pollution hotspots (from air 
quality viewpoint), suggesting alternative positions for fixed 
stations or the need to introduce new ones. Such data will be 
valuable for the authorities responsible for air quality 
monitoring (National Environmental Protection Agency). 
Platforms, like the ones described above, may provide 
real-time monitoring to preserve citizens’ health and warn 
them when permissible level of pollution are exceeded. 
Platforms equipped with particle detectors may warn citizens 
about increasing levels of pollen or dust (producing 
allergies). In such situations, it may advise people to avoid 
areas that could be dangerous for health conditions and 
choose another detour and locate the closest pharmacies 
where antihistamine pills can be bought. 
III. 
SIBIU CASE STUDY 
This section presents the case study done as part of a 
research project conducted jointly by the “Lucian Blaga” 
University of Sibiu and University College of Southeast 
Norway and financed by European Economic Area (EEA) 
grants [18]. The focus is on a specific case for air quality 
monitoring: the city of Sibiu, Romania. The city is in 
Transylvania, 
and 
has 
a 
permanent 
population 
of 
approximately 155.000, and up to 25.000 students and 
temporary inhabitants. The traffic is high since two national 
roads, one south-north and one west-east, are meeting in the 
city. According to technical data obtained from Romanian 
National Company of Road Infrastructure Management, 
more than 70,000 cars are crossing Sibiu city every day. 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

TABLE I.  
SURVEY QUESTIONS AND RESULTS 
Q1: 
A1: 
How interested are you in air quality in general?  
The citizens of Sibiu have high interest (>85%) in air quality 
and pollution level 
Q2: 
A21: 
A22: 
A23: 
How would you describe the air quality in Sibiu in general? 
The air quality in Sibiu is rather good (70%) 
The air quality in Sibiu is poor (21%).  
Uncertain: 9%. 
Arguments of respondents for “good air quality” consist in: 
 
The air is clean and fresh due to relatively small distance 
to Carpathians mountains (Păltiniș). 
 
There are enough green spaces in and outside the city 
(“Sub Arini” large park and “Dumbrava” forest – as 
known as “the city lung”). 
 
The industrial areas are placed outside, rather to isolate 
the city by generated pollution. 
 
Sibiu is a small town with relatively small number of 
inhabitants. 
 
The Sibiu ring road reduced the traffic and contributed to 
diminish the noxious cars’ emissions, even on highly 
travelled boulevards. 
Arguments for “poor air quality” are the followings: 
 
The transformation of green spaces in residential districts. 
 
The inefficient modes of transport and traffic. 
 
There are many cars that pollute the air. 
 
31% of persons over 18 from Sibiu County have own cars 
(117.663 
of 
378.382), 
according 
to 
the 
Public 
Community Service for Driving License and Vehicle 
Registration Sibiu. 
 
The number of cars increased in recent years: 6.14% from 
2015 to 2016. 
Q3: 
 
A3: 
To what extent do you think that the air quality in Sibiu affects 
your health? 
Most subjects (76%) believe that air quality in Sibiu might be 
an important factor that can influence their health. 
Q4:  
 
 
A4: 
Do you consider air quality when moving around in Sibiu (e.g. 
avoid cycling in busy roads or exercising outdoors if air quality 
is bad)? 
About one third (35%) think they should avoid activities when 
pollution levels are high. 
Q5:  
 
 
A5: 
What do you think about accessibility to air quality information 
in Sibiu? Or  “How often do you consciously look at air quality 
information (e.g. via television, newspapers, Internet)”? 
Consciously, people are rarely seeking information on air 
quality (About once a month 18%). 
Although interest in environmental quality exists and 
usefulness of such information is obvious, the biggest problem 
lies in finding it. 
Q6: 
A6: 
Who can improve air quality in Sibiu? And How? 
The top three groups which can contribute to air quality 
improvement are: 
The municipality (e.g., city council): 
 
By not allowing deforestation in the whole county, except 
dry/sick wood, which should be replaced by other freshly 
planted trees. 
 
Protecting parks and forests, and developing new green 
spaces. 
 
Introduction of electric public transport. 
 
Optimize traffic in order to avoid congestion and useless 
fuel consumption. 
Industry and commerce: 
 
Industry and commerce can find ways to pollute less by 
controlling 
their 
activities 
(dematerialization 
of 
economy). 
 
Proper management of waste. 
People who spend most of their time in the city (e.g., residents, 
workers, students): 
 
Students could participate as volunteers to plant trees in 
deforested areas. 
 
Large scale use of public transportation or other 
alternatives (e.g. bicycle) 
Other groups were regional agencies or research scientists: 
 
Regional and central government agencies must take 
responsibility to respect the law regarding the maximum 
level of air pollution, and if this level is overrun by any 
industrial company take appropriate measures. 
 
Proposing legislation to reduce urban pollution. 
 
Research scientists can contribute by finding new ways to 
stop air pollution. 
Q7:  
 
A7: 
What steps do you think you would personally take to help 
improve air quality in Sibiu? 
The large majority of the respondents are willing to: 
 
use 
more 
environmentally-friendly 
means 
of 
transportation (electric bus, bicycle, etc). 
 
involvement in public policy making, of social polls and 
participating to citizen advisory committees. 
 
use greener systems at home such as renewables energy 
and electric heating to the detriment of burning wood. 
Q8: 
 
A8: 
In which format would you prefer to receive air quality 
information? 
Subjects suggested that an application for mobile phone would 
be most appropriate since they live in the "Internet of Things" 
and, nowadays over half of them use such easy accessible 
technology. Smartphones have excellent processing and 
storage capabilities and people carry them in their daily lives. 
Alternatively, information might be exhibited on panels in 
main public places, in public transport but also using social 
networks where information dissemination can be done very 
easily. 
Websites, TV and radio were also mentioned as alternatives. 
Q9: 
If you could have an application mobile phone app to inform 
you about air quality, how important would it be to have the 
following features? 
A9: 
See table II. 
Q10: 
 
 
A10: 
In relation with the previous question, are there any other 
features you would like to have in a mobile app to be informed 
about air quality? 
In addition to the numerical information about concentrations 
of air pollutants it would be useful that each pollutant to be 
accompanied by immediate and long-term effects on health. 
Possibility to select decongested routes to move in the city 
 
A. Survey about air quality perception of people 
Before starting our project implementation, we developed 
a survey regarding air quality perception by people, to see  
the relevance of air quality monitoring in Sibiu and its 
surroundings. We requested feedback from people working / 
studying / living in Sibiu (66% being in their twenties, 10% 
being between 30 and 45, and 24% being older than 45), 
most of them being students at the Faculty of Engineering. 
200 participants were surveyed, 54% men, 46% women. 
81% of respondents have secondary level education, 19% 
have higher education (Bachelor, Master, PhD). In the 
following we present the most important questions and the 
answers we received. 
Table II lists the possible features of a mobile app to 
inform about air quality. The most important feature sought 
was information on how to protect own health. The second 
important feature sought was information about current air 
quality, followed by an air quality index to show how air 
quality improves or degrades. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

TABLE II.  
SURVEY RESULTS (Q9) 
No. 
Feature 
Priority 
 
 
High 
Med.  
Low 
Not a 
priority 
1. 
Air quality in 
your immediate 
vicinity 
58.5 
29.3 
11 
1.2 
2. 
Numeric 
information on 
pollutant  
40.2 
41.5 
14.6 
3.7 
3. 
An air quality 
index indicating 
if the air quality 
is poor or good 
72 
23.2 
3.7 
1.2 
4. 
Ability to report 
what you think 
the air quality is 
like 
28 
45.1 
22 
4.9 
5. 
Ability to see 
what other users 
have reported 
18.3 
42.7 
26.8 
12.2 
6. 
Information on 
past air quality 
36.6 
34.1 
22 
7.3 
7. 
Information on 
current air 
quality 
75.6 
20.7 
3.7 
0 
8. 
Information on 
forecasted air 
quality 
43.9 
42.7 
11 
2.4 
9. 
Information on 
what to do to 
protect your 
health 
84 
14.8 
1.2 
0 
10. 
Notifications in 
case of increased 
air pollution 
65.9 
29.3 
4.9 
0 
11. 
Possibility to see 
the air quality 
levels in the 
routes you move 
around the city 
59.8 
26.8 
12.2 
1.2 
12. 
Possibility to 
select cleaner 
routes to move in 
the city 
59.8 
25.6 
11 
3.7 
 
B. Earlier Studies 
In Romania, air quality from ambient environment is 
legislated in accordance with European laws by the Air Act 
(no. 104/2011) [19], which establishes that the responsibility 
for air quality monitoring is undertaken by the National 
Environmental Protection Agency, through the National 
Network for Monitoring Air Quality [3]. Unfortunately, the 
number of air quality monitoring stations in Romania is 
rather small (142 fixed & 17 mobile units). This network 
includes four fixed stations in Sibiu County, which 
continuously monitor the air quality (Two are located in 
Sibiu, one in Mediaş and one in Copşa Mică). 
The results presented in Figure 1 and Figure 2 were 
obtained from the two stationary units located in Sibiu city: 
SB1 – urban residential station and SB2 – industrial-type 
station.  
The figures show CO and NO2 concentration levels, for 
2016. The agency has also on occasions used mobile units. 
The monitored parameters are: Sulphur dioxide (SO2), 
nitrogen oxides (NOX), carbon monoxide (CO), ozone (O3), 
particles (PM 10 and PM 2.5), benzene (C6H6) and lead (Pb). 
 
 
Figure 1.  CO concentration levels in 2016 
 
The evolution of values for CO concentration between 
1st of January to 31st of December 2016 show that there 
were no exceedances of the daily limit value for health, 
taking into account that the daily maximum of averages at 
each 8 hours is 10 mg/m3, according to the Air Act 
104/2011. 
 
 
Figure 2.  NO2 concentration levels in 2016 
 
The NO2 pollution indicator has not revealed breaches of 
the hourly limit of 200 µg/m3 (the maximum number of 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

exceeding’s allowed by Air Act 104/2011 is 18 times yearly 
/ station). 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
SB1
PM10 [µg/m3] - Daily data collected and validated 
 
Figure 3.  Particle concentration levels (PM10) in 2016 
 
Particles are measured by size. PM 10 is the unit used to 
measure particles with a diameter between 2.5 and 10 µm. 
The particles (PM 10) pollution indicator is measured at SB1 
station both automatically and manually. Figure 3 shows the 
daily limit values from SB1 and SB2 obtained in 2016. In 
2016, the SB1 station reported 8 overruns of daily limit (50 
µg/m3) but which is still acceptable considering that the limit 
set by Air Act is 35 times yearly / station. (Single overruns 
cannot be seen in Figure 3, due to low resolution in the X-
axis). Measurement results indicate that particle pollution is 
mainly caused by heavy traffic. The maximum (60.28 µg/m3) 
was recorded in a heavily transited location at the entrance to 
the city where several hypermarkets are in the same area, 
while in Sub Arini Park (the largest park in the city) the 
recorded value of 13.93 µg/m3 was far below the daily limit 
value. 
Explanations for this situation are: Apparently, in Sibiu 
the air quality is rather good, but the results might be pseudo 
true. The two fixed stations are situated as follows: SB1 is 
placed in an area where the traffic is relatively low and, SB2 
is placed in an area which, on its deployment, in 2007, was 
heavily industrialized. Today, most industry has relocated 
(outside the city). Air pollution contributes to climate 
changes and to the emergence of urban heat islands (higher 
temperatures concentrated in urban areas densely populated 
and built), which cause temperature increases by up to 5 
degrees compared with unaffected areas. 
IV. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The main objectives of the mobile air quality monitoring 
platform project were to: 
 
Develop a low-cost mobile platform for air quality 
monitoring 
where 
data 
are 
collected 
through 
crowdsensing. 
 
Test the platform in the City of Sibiu, Romania (and 
other locations) and compare collected data with already 
existing data, to verify results and extend the number of 
measurements being made. 
 
Make the necessary groundwork for establishing a larger 
project on air quality monitoring, this time with focus on 
analysis, prediction and visualization. 
A. The Platform 
The platform has been described in an earlier paper [1]. 
Shortly summarized the platform consists of a processor unit 
(LinkedIt Smart Duo 7688 - an open development board with 
two processors, one running Linux, the other compatible 
with Arduino), a combined GPS/GSM unit for location and 
communication, a gas sensor for measuring CO2 and NOX 
(SainSmart MQ135 Sensor Air Quality Sensor and 
Hazardous Gas Detection Module), a particle sensor 
measuring PM 10 (Grove Dust Particle Concentration 
Detection Sensor), and sensors for temperature (DS18B20 
Temperature Sensor) and barometric pressure (BMP085 
Digital Barometric Pressure Measurement Sensor). The 
technologies used are: Eagle (for printing the PCB) and 
Custom Electronic Shields, ASP.NET and Microsoft Azure 
(for database and cloud), C/C++ (for LinkedIt 8266 
programming). 16 prototypes were built for experiments. 
B. Hardware and Software Architecture 
On the client side, the software will detect when the car is 
parked, and then start data collection from the sensors at 
regular intervals. The data are stamped with time and 
location (both retrieved from the GPS receiver) and sent to a 
server using a GSM data connection. Figures 4 and 5 show 
the hardware design of printed circuit board holding the 
sensors (except the particle sensor which is connected by a 
wire). 
 
 
Figure 4.  
The hardware design of prototype 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Sensor printed circuit board 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

On the server side, the data are stored in a database for 
further analysis. The location of active cars is shown on a 
map (Google maps) with the possibility to click on one 
specific car to see the latest data. 
C. Visualizing data 
By clicking on each point from the map, information 
from each sensor is disclosed. The map is shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Clickable Google Maps 
D. The Test 
The platform was used for air-quality monitoring in Sibiu 
first weeks of February 2017. Data were collected from four 
units, each installed within a car. The data collected 
generally corresponds to earlier data collected by the 
National Environmental Protection Agency. At the same 
time, we showed that granularity has been improved since 
we could measure from many more locations. Some data 
were collected from cars driving the same route at different 
times. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Data collection in Sibiu (moving cars). 
 
Figure 7 illustrates a Google Maps snapshot with the 
route on which the data were collected at 5 pm when many 
people return from work. The red color shows heavy traffic 
because this road is connecting the airport with the city 
center and represents the single entrance in the city from the 
west side. In Figure 8, we present the chart with CO2 
variation during the route that takes around 16 minutes. The 
measurements were done with MQ135 gas sensor set up for 
CO2 and the results are exhibited in parts per million (PPM). 
Regarding the MQ135 sensor and its detection capability, the 
researchers consider that the general sensitivity is roughly 
the same for all the gases sensed [14]. Since CO2 is the 
fourth most abundant trace gas in the earth’s atmosphere 
they recommend that it is safe to assume that in a normal 
atmosphere the MQ 135 sensor mostly detects CO2. The 
values from Figure 8 somewhat faithfully follows the route 
from Figure 7, namely, where there is heavy traffic, CO2 
values are higher than 230 PPM. However, the maximum 
value obtained (277 PPM) is under the highest-ever daily 
average2 at planet level (409.44 PPM) reached in 9 of April 
2016. 
 
 
Figure 8.  CO2 values [PPM] collected with MQ 135 gas sensor from a 
heavy traffic boulevard from Sibiu 
 
Table III presents the range where are situated the 
measured parameters (gas, temperature, dust and humidity). 
From a temperature point of view is observed how the heavy 
traffic produces higher temperature by approximately 2 
degrees compared with unaffected areas (urban heat islands 
effect). 
TABLE III.  
PARAMETERS VARIATION 
 
CO2 
Temperature 
Dust 
Humidity 
 
[PPM] 
[Celsius 
degree] 
[mg/m3] 
[%] 
Maximum 
277 
2 
0.35 
87 
Average 
207.92 
1 
0.33 
87 
Minimum 
141 
0 
0.32 
87 
 
Measurements were also made from parked cars in an 
densely populated area close to a major road, and here CO2 
values varied between 200 to 500, depending on the time of 
the day. 
E. Making Groundwork for a New Project 
EU Research & Innovation program H2020 3  has 
allocated 80 billion Euros funding for initiatives related to 
environmental sustainability and energy efficiency. In a 
follow-up project, we intend to focus on further developing 
analytics, prediction algorithms and visualization. By 
collecting data over a longer period, we will be able to 
predict when pollution levels reach certain levels. Such 
information will be useful for decision-making. 
                                                           
2 https://www.co2.earth/daily-co2 
3 http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/portal/desktop/en/opportunities/ 
277
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
660
720
780
840
900
960
Time (s)
PPM (CO2) Concentration in time
CO2 concentration
Highest-ever daily average
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
As mentioned earlier, several cities around the world are 
restricting car use when air pollution levels are too high. The 
use of stationary units provides low granularity of 
measurements, and are expensive. This project has shown 
that data can be collected by means of crowdsensing, either 
by using cars of the municipality or calling upon volunteers 
to accommodate units in their cars. 
Largely, the obtained results are consistent with 
measurements from fixed stations. However, our solution 
provides much higher granularity of the measurements. 
In a longer perspective, our aim is to further develop our 
platform as part of a system for smart-cities with the purpose 
of providing insights about people and environmental 
conditions, and disseminate such information to the public 
through multiple channels. Such a system will be important 
for decision making related to environmental issues, and be a 
measure to increase the transparency of the cities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by a grant from 
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, contract type “Small size 
bilateral 
cooperation 
projects, 
Scholarships 
and 
interinstitutional cooperation program” - RO15, EEA 
Financial Mechanism 2009-2014, the Romanian National 
Agency for Community Programs in the Field of Education 
and Vocational Training, Contract Nos. 3/07.07.2016, COD: 
16-SEE-PCB-RO SIBIU01 / 01. 
The authors would like to thank Iosif Băncioiu and 
Ovidiu Hodorogea, students in the Computer Science and 
Electrical Engineering Department at “Lucian Blaga” 
University of Sibiu for providing useful technical help in the 
hardware and software implementation of the prototypes. We 
want to express our sincere gratitude to Mr. Liviu Crețu, the 
Chief of Sibiu National Roads Department, for providing 
useful information regarding the traffic level in Sibiu 
County. Last but not the least, our sincere thanks go to Dr. 
Lucian Roman from SC AutoHaus Huber SRL Sibiu, which 
has provided relevant insights regarding the influence of 
fuels and vehicles’ operating parameters on air pollution. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Berntzen, M. Rohde Johannessen, and A. Florea,  “Smart 
Cities: 
Challenges 
and 
a 
Sensor-based 
Solution,” 
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems 9 (3 
& 4), IARIA, pp. 579-588, 2016. 
[2] United States Environmental Protection Agency: Air 
Pollution: Current and Future Challenges. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.epa.gov/clean-air-act-
overview/air-pollution-current-and-future-challenges 
[3] Romanian National Network of Air Quality Monitoring. 
[Online]. Available from: 
http://www.calitateaer.ro/structura.php 
[4] Ericsson: Ericsson energy, carbon report. On the impact of 
the networked society. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2013/ericsson-energy-and-
carbon-report.pdf 
[5] WHO: WHO releases country estimates on air polution 
exposure and health impact. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2016/air-
pollution-estimates/en/ 
[6] Independent:  London´s air pollution worse than Beijing´s as 
smog chokes UK capital. [Online]. Available from:    
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/london-air-
pollution-rates-worse-beijing-smog-china-vehicles-weather-
a7545446.html 
[7] Foxcrawl: Arctic Ocean could melt in 30 years. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.foxcrawl.com/2016/11/07/arctic-
ocean-thawing-ice-cap-melting-30-years/ 
[8] M. Inta, A. Muntean, C. Purcar, and M. Badescu, “The Study 
of Traffic Decongestion In A Crowded Intersection,” Annals 
of the Oradea University. Fascicle of Management and 
Technological Engineering, Volume XII(XXII), ISSN 2285-
3278, pp. 367-370, Oradea, 2013. 
[9] M. Holder, “Paris, Mexico City, Madrid and Athens to ban 
diesel vehicles by 2025,” BusinessGreen,  [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/3000622/paris-
mexico-city-madrid-and-athens-to-ban-diesel-vehicles-by-
2025 
[10] European Commission: A European Strategy for low-emission 
mobility, European Commission - Fact Sheet, Brussels, 20 
July 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-16-2497_en.htm 
[11] C. Leonardi, A. Cappellotto, M. Caraviello, B. Lepri, and F. 
Antonelli “SecondNose: an air quality mobile crowdsensing 
system,” In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on 
Human-Computer 
Interaction: 
Fun, 
Fast, 
Foundational (NordiCHI '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
1051-1054. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2670273, 
2014. 
[12] J. Dutta, C. Chowdhury, S. Roy, A.I. Middya, and F. Gazi, 
“Towards Smart City: Sensing Air Quality in City based on 
Opportunistic Crowd-sensing,” In Proceedings of the 18th 
International Conference on Distributed Computing and 
Networking (ICDCN '17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, , 
Article 
42 
, 
6 
pages. 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3007748.3018286, 2017 
[13] CITI-SENSE 
Product 
Informaton 
Brochure. 
[Online]. 
Available from: http://www.citi-sense.eu 
[14] AIRALERT 
website. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.airalert.ro 
[15] Z. Pan, H.  Yu, H., C. Miao, and C. Leung, “Crowdsensing 
Air 
Quality 
with 
Camera-Enabled 
Mobile 
Devices,” 
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on 
Innovative Applications (IAAI-17), pp. 4728-4733, 2017. 
[16] C. Migliore, “SwarmBike: an IoT Sensing Platform for Air 
Pollution,” Tesi di Laurea Magistrale. Politechnico di Torino, 
2016. 
[17] OpenSense 
website. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://opensense.epfl.ch/wiki/index.php/OpenSense_2 
[18] EEA 
grants 
website. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://eeagrants.org/ 
[19] Romanian Parliament: Air Law, Act no. 104/2011. [Online]. 
Available from: 
http://www.anpm.ro/documents/12220/2049969/Lege+104+a
er.pdf/d764d447-baca-448a-9f6d-cfea9bc39252
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-565-4
SMART 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

