 
 
A Vision of Traffic Lights for Color-Blind People 
Izautino P. Oliveira, Renata Souza, Frank Junior, Lanna Sales, Felipe Ferraz* 
CESAR - Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems, Recife, Brazil 
*CIN - Informatics Center, Federal University of Pernambuco, Brazil 
izautino.oliveira@gmail.com, {renata.sdsouza, fcbj, lannallimas}@gmail.com 
*fsf3@cin.ufpe.br 
 
 
Abstract - This paper presents a work in progress and an 
analysis about the difficulties for color-blind people to 
recognize traffic lights. Colorblindness (dyschromatopsia or 
discromatopsia) is a disease characterized by an abnormality 
in the photosensor pigment cells of the eye, resulting in the 
malfunction of color detection, most frequently in red and 
green shades. With this work, we want to understand the main 
concern about how smart cities will provide an accessible 
environment for colorblind drivers. 
Keywords - smart city; accessibility; color blindness. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Worldwide, hundreds of millions of people have vision 
problems and color blindness is one of them. In Brazil, 
14.5% of the population have some vision disability and 
10% have some kind of color blindness [1]. It is a genetic 
disorder that affects the X chromosome, causing inability to 
distinguish any primary colors. A color-blind person has 
deficient cells, resulting in a distorted perception of colors. 
The most common color confusion is between green and red 
shades [2].  
The lack of standardization of traffic lights generates 
some difficulties for color-blind people, such as walking 
and driving or to identifying traffic lights. So, it is possible 
to identify opportunities for learning and for better 
management of special needs to accessible and smart cities 
[3]. 
Due to fast urban growth, cities now face many risks and 
an urgent need to find smarter ways to manage challenges 
such as adopting solutions and including disabled people 
[4][5]. The study contained here is an effort to identify and 
analyze traffic lights problems and how it could be used to 
create better solution to color-blind drivers. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section I is the 
introduction of this study. Sections II and III are a review of 
the literature about color blindness. Section IV is research 
description and methodology and section V the research 
results. Finally, in Section VI there are conclusions and 
proposals for future works. 
II. COLOR PERCEPTION AND BLINDNESS 
Retinal cells, called cones, are responsible for the 
perception of colors. There are three kinds of cones and 
each one is responsible for the colors red, green and blue, 
known as basic colors and the other colors are a 
combination of those three colors. Color perception is a 
sensorial process that gives meaning to objects and 
environment lights through the use of memory to convert 
colors into sensations [1][2]. Therefore, for the colors to 
exist, we need two main elements: eye and light. An 
important factor to decode colors through the eye is the 
wavelength, since human visual perception is a sensation 
[6][7][8] and the white color is not considered a color, just a 
sum of all colors. The maximum spectrum of light 
sensitivity to give wave range are the colors yellow, green 
and blue [6][7][9]. The most common symptoms of color 
blindness are the problems to identify color brilliance and 
nearby colors [10][11]. Color is a fundamental part of visual 
communication. The meaning of colors can be covered in 
many aspects in society - it is common to use color as a 
direct reference to qualify objects, based on the guidelines 
of traffic lights, the red light means the driver needs to stop 
and green light means to go. 
Color blindness is a cone cell deficiency that changes  
color perception; it is a problem that affects about 10% of 
the world population. Color blindness is a genetic problem 
with the X chromosome and it is more frequent among men 
with only one X chromosome, while females have two X 
chromosomes. 
The degrees of dyschromatopsia are variable and they 
are classified into four categories: Protanopia, the most 
common, which is the inability to distinguish between red 
and green shades, deuteranopia, a confusion of red and 
green shades, tritanopia, a conflict between blue and yellow 
shades, and achromatopsia, a total blindness to other colors, 
providing a black and white vision. 
One of the most common ways to discover color 
blindness ID is applying the Ishihara test [5]. This test 
consists of 32 colorful cards with various circles with a 
different hue, saturation and brightness in the same board 
[2]. Unfortunately, there is no solution to correct color 
blindness and people usually learn how to live with the 
problem. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
III. COLOR BLINDNESS AND TRAFFIC LIGHTS 
Driving may not be the most difficult activity for color-
blind people. Nowadays, there is no evidence of traffic 
infractions by color-blind people. This particular situation 
demands a reflection about the relationship with traffic signs 
and lights for colorblind people. A colorblind person has the 
ability from visual perception about shapes and textures; so, 
no matter what traffic sign colors shown, a colorblind 
person will have no difficulty to understand color meaning.  
Many types of colors and cards do not represent an 
obstacle to understand the messages as long as it follows a 
previously known pattern. 
However, traffic lights must be considered a problem 
because they do not have an established standard. Many 
traffic lights do not have colors vertically distributed using 
the red light on top, yellow in the middle and green at the 
bottom. This lack of standardization contributes with the 
inability of color-blind people to understand traffic lights. 
Perception of green and red colors is the biggest problem for 
people with this disability. Some cities have already adapted 
accessible traffic lights. Most of the adapted traffic lights 
have a white band by the side of the yellow light, allowing 
the color-blind to distinguish a color signal by the 
illumination and position of the light. Some cities use 
horizontal traffic lights with the red light on the left and the 
green light on the right. If a color-blind guides himself by 
which side each color is, he will probably mix them all. 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
Based on a research with young color-blind drivers, data 
production was carried out between December 2014 and 
February 2015. The population of the study was composed 
by 14 male participants, from 18 to 40 years old, recruited 
and invited to participate in the study. They answered 
questions about driving in attention to mobility and 
accessibility in streets and avenues. 
The objective of the survey was to identify problems 
with disordered and chaotic traffic signs and possibilities to 
solve urban problems. Questions were developed to help in 
the comprehension of the problem:  
a) What mean of transportation do they use?  
b) Do they feel any difficulty to identify traffic lights 
while driving?  
c) How often do they drive?  
d) How do they understand traffic lights?   
e) What do they think about the traffic lights of the city? 
 
Through survey, we first obtained information about 
how often the volunteers drive, which routes they take and 
their perception about traffic lights. Then, in order to 
identify color blindness, all volunteers were submitted to the 
Ishihara test, the most effective tool for color blindness 
detection in red and green shades, the most common kind 
[11]. For this study, we used a version with 24 plates to 
distinguish defects in the red-green axis. To confirm color 
blindness, volunteers must at least, fail in eight of the 24 
plates. All the recruited failed in the test, confirming the 
presence of the disability. Through data collection, a semi-
structured interview allowed a deep knowledge of users 
personal meanings about traffic lights.  
To build the set of common data, all responses were 
transcript to use in future works. Analysis of content from 
interviews and data interpretation and convergent aspects of 
responses had a thematic categorization. 
V. RESULTS 
The research revealed that 70% of the volunteers have 
problems with the lack of standardization in traffic lights. 
Data showed that in order to improve contrast, it is essential 
to increase traffic light visibility. For 15% of the 
respondents, LED (light emitter diode) traffic lights create 
more difficulty to identify colors because of their excessive 
luminosity; focusing on LED lights is more difficult, 
especially at night. The radiation of bright lights might 
confuse users. When a color-blind person drives at night 
there is a risk of not identifying which shining light is up or 
down. In developing countries as Brazil, the biggest 
limitation for color-blind people is a prohibition to drive. 
According to the Brazilian law, Resolution No. 80 on 
11/19/98 
of 
the 
National 
Traffic 
Council, 
an 
ophthalmological evaluation is required (art. 1, Annex I, 
item 2.1, a) and it demands full color vision (item 3.3.4). 
Brazilian Traffic Council statement says: "the candidate 
must be able to identify the colors red, yellow and green" 
(item 3.8.1). In developed countries, it is quite different. 
Some European cities have adopted the first color letter 
matching its correspondent light. It is possible to match each 
color with different geometric shapes.  
The most frequent answer to the survey was that  87% of 
the volunteers did different moves when they had doubts 
related to the color light. In some cases, the driver follows 
other drivers nearby when they do not know which color the 
traffic light is.  We also found that when the carrier of the 
disability cannot identify the color of the traffic lights, there 
is a reduction of the speed until he reaches the semaphore. 
When meeting an intersection, color-blind people tend to 
stop and wait for another car to cross the roads. In critical 
cases, color-blind people do not feel safe driving alone; in 
this case, they always go with friends or family, so that they 
can assist them in the traffic. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This research sought to understand difficulties of  color-
blind people and their relation to traffic signals. Distinct 
solutions were identified and each possible potential benefit 
will be shown in a future work. Even defining research 
questions and protocol beforehand, strict validation, 
especially related to the solution of problems, will benefit 
future research efforts. The lack of standardization of traffic 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
lights must be an urgent subject to propose to governmental 
institutions.  
However, it is important and relevant for this work to 
continue this research and propose relevant alternatives to 
improve accessibility for color-blind people - using 
technology to provide smart solutions such as identifying 
traffic signals and others, not only based on colors but on 
more accessible and adaptive ways for people with vision 
problems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Vespucci M. Katia, Color Blind Behind the Wheel 2000. 
[2] T. De Curitiba, “Maps, Graphical representation for color blind: A 
case study,” 2013. 
[3] M. Naphade, G. Banavar, C. Harrison, J. Paraszczak, and R. Morris, 
“Smarter cities and their innovation challenges,” Computer (Long. 
Beach. Calif)., 2011. Vol. 44, pp. 32–39. 
[4] T. Nam and T. a. Pardo, “Conceptualizing smart city with dimensions 
of technology, people, and institutions,” Proc. 12th Annu. Int. Digit. 
Gov. Res. Conf. Digit. Gov. Innov. Challenging Times - 2011. dg.o 
’11, p. 282.  
[5] Ishihara Test. Available: < http://www.ibrau.com.br/ishihara.htm > 
Last access; 5/4/2015 17:00 
[6] I. Itiro. Ergonomics: "Design and Production". 2nd. Revised and 
expanded edition. Editora Edgard Blucher. São Paulo, 2005 
[7] Pedrosa, I.  ”None of color to color”. 10 Ed. Senac, Rio de Janeiro, 
2009 
[8] A. André and G. Rafael. Visocor: "Visual Accessibility System." 
Institute of Mathematics and Statistics. University of Sao Paulo, 
2009. 
[9] F. Modesto, R. Maria Clotilde, F. Heliodoro. “Psicodinâmica das 
Cores em Comunicação”. 5a. Edição. Edgard Blucher. São Paulo, 
2006 
[10] N. Miguel. “Color Identification System for colorblind: Monochrome 
Code ". Master's thesis. Minho University, Portugal, 2008 
[11] The New York Times – “Color blindness is the inability to see certain 
colors in the usual way”. Available: 
[12] <http://www.nytimes.com/health/guides/disease/color-
blindness/overview.html> Last access; 5/4/2015 17:00 
[13] FDE Tecnologia, “Congenital dyschromatopsia perception” 2009. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

