Experimental Study on User Acceptance and Affordability                                   
of Intelligent Wheelchair 
- Questionnaires on Human Machine Interface-  
Naohisa Hashimoto, Yusuke Takinami, Osamu Mastumoto 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) 
Tsukuba, Japan  
e-mail:{naohisa-hashimoto}@aist.go.jp 
 
Ali Boyali 
Toyota Technical Institute (TTI),  
Nagoya, Japan 
 
Abstract—We proposed the use of an intelligent wheelchair for 
new mobility for not only elderly people but also everyone. Our 
intelligent wheelchair has autonomous function and new gesture 
interface. For the introduction of the proposed intelligent 
wheelchair, there are several challenges associated with the use 
of the wheelchair. One of the most important points is the user 
acceptance, and it must be investigated with a plenty of subjects 
by experiments. In addition, the affordability is also important 
for the introduction. The two points were investigated by 
performing the several experiments with subjects. In the 
experiments, we did a questionnaire about the intelligent 
wheelchair. In this paper, we introduce experiments and the 
questionnaire results, and the results are compared and 
discussed in this paper. The questionnaire results proved that 
most subjects had the favorable opinions about autonomous 
function and new gesture interfaces. On the other hand, the 
challenging issues for improving the user acceptance of 
intelligent wheelchair were also found especially for the gesture 
interface. These results must be valuable for developers and 
researchers of new wheelchairs. 
 
Keywords- Intelligent Wheelchair; Elderly People; User 
Acceptance; Human Machine Interface; Pilito Study. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rapid increase in the proportion of elderly people in the 
population has caused several issues in Japan [1]. Thanks to 
the advancing science and inherent adaptability of humankind 
to though life conditions, there has been an increase not only 
in the average life expectancy, but also the population of aged 
and disabled people that in the need of mobility aid. The 
current figures report that nearly 15% of the population, 
corresponding to one billion in the world, are with some form 
of disability or impairment [2]. Besides that, according to the 
studies [3][4] the household rate of the people using 
wheelchair only in the USA, doubled from 1.5% to 3% from 
1990 to 2010 and the majority of the wheelchair users are 
elderly. Useful, affordable and safe wheelchair is expected for 
elderly and disabled people [5-7]. 
We proposed an intelligent wheelchair to solve mobility 
issues [8-12]. The proposed wheelchair has two new features. 
One is an autonomous function, and the other is a new 
interface. With the autonomous function the rider in the 
wheelchair is not required to control the chair by a joystick, 
which is a conventional controller for a wheelchair. However, 
there are several challenges associated with the use of an 
autonomous system, the most difficult being cost. Several 
expensive sensors are necessary for a wheelchair to achieve 
complete autonomous functionality. These sensors increase 
the cost of an intelligent wheelchair, making it difficult for 
elderly people to purchase an intelligent wheelchair. With 
respect to new interface, as wheelchairs are smarter and more 
intelligent, a conventional joystick controller cannot be 
suitable. Also, people usually would like to use a new 
interface, and elderly people would like to use cool interface, 
because they want to look younger than they are. Seeing that 
the gestures as a one-way process from mind to body; how can 
gestures be used in creating user interfaces remains an open 
research question. A few numbers of studies discuss the 
usability and acceptance of gestural interfaces by the different 
age groups while touching the fact that design of intuitive 
gestures must be separately handled. 
Preliminary experiments were performed with the proposed 
wheelchair, and we proved that there was a possibility to use 
the proposed wheelchair by performing experiments. It is 
important to evaluate user acceptance, and affordability with 
real subjects, and to get feedback from the real users 
In this paper, the performed experiments with the proposed 
intelligent wheelchair and questionnaire results will be 
introduced, and user acceptance will be evaluated with 
questionnaire result. 
Herein, in Section 2, the Tsukuba Designated Zone, where 
the real-world experiment was conducted, is described. In 
Section 3, we explain the proposed intelligent wheelchair. In 
Section 4, the experiments and the questionnaire result of real-
world experiments with the proposed intelligent wheelchair 
used by several subjects are explained. 
 
II. 
TSUKUBA DESIGNATED ZONE FOR EXPERIMENTS 
This section describes the Tsukuba Designated Zone, 
where the experiment was performed. This institution was 
formed to improve robotics technology. It was officially 
approved as the Tsukuba Designated Zone by the Cabinet 
Office in Japan on January 29th, 2010 [13]. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

The Designated Zone has two areas for conducting 
experiments. One is the Tsukuba Center Station area, and the 
other is the Kenkyugakuen Station area, shown in Fig.1. The 
Tsukuba Center Station area consists mainly of a pedestrian 
road from the University of Tsukuba to Akatsuka Park, with a 
major focus on Tsukuba Central Station. The width of this 
road is greater than three meter and is sufficient to allow use 
by bicycles. For these reasons, this public area is appropriate 
for experimental research. Even within the Tsukuba 
Designated Zone, there are some regulations that apply to 
conducting experiments. The committee of Tsukuba 
Designated Zone is applying relaxations of regulations for the 
experiments. We performed experiments on automated 
function in Tsukuba Center Area and Kenkyugakuen Area, 
and experiments on gesture interface. 
 
 
Figure 1. Tsukuba Designated Zone (Red: Tsukuba center area, Blue: 
Kenkyugakuen area) [13] 
 
III. 
DEVELOPPED INTELLIGENT WHEELCHAIR 
The intelligent wheelchair used in the experiment have 
been developed at the National Institute of Advanced 
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). This wheelchair 
was modified from the wheelchair produced by AISIN SEIKI 
Corporation, shown in Fig.2. Figure 3 shows the system 
configuration of this wheelchair. It can be controlled by an on-
board PC through an electrical signal. This wheelchair can 
move at 6 [km/h]; hence, the maximum velocity was set to 4 
[km/h] during the experiments. This wheelchair can be used 
for traveling for about 2 hours without charging. The 
wheelchair has one Real Time Kinematic (RTK)-GPS sensor, 
one laser scanner sensor (LSS), one gyro sensor, two encoder 
sensors for counting left and right wheel speeds, a laptop PC, 
and an onboard PC. This wheelchair has two modes, one is 
autonomous mode and the other is a gesture interface mode.  
In the autonomous mode, the system enables the intelligent 
wheelchair to travel autonomously with accurate positions 
estimated by the Kalman Filter and desired path[8][11][14]. 
In this mode, the rider doesn’t need to do anything on 
controlling. This autonomous function was already developed 
and has enough level to do experiments outside and indoor 
environments. 
 
 
Figure 2 Intelligent wheelchair 
 
In the gesture interface mode, functions of obstacle 
avoidance and autonomous navigation were not used during 
the experiments. A gesture based interface is implemented by 
adding a Leap Motion camera to the wheelchair under the arm 
support, shown in Fig.4. Gesture interface needs the gesture 
recognition algorithm, which can estimate which rider’s 
gesture is. This algorithm was already proposed [9][10] by 
referring to the presented theory[16-20]. There are four 
patterns of gestures, which were defined for the wheel chair 
control. These gestures are “Go Straight”, “Turn Left”, “Turn 
Right” and “Stop” hand gestures, shown in Fig.5. The gesture 
recognition algorithm recognizes both the hand gestures and 
postures with an overwhelming accuracy. Along with the 
gesture recognition system, a function of the Leap Motion 
development kit is used to recognize fingers touching and 
hand fist actions to add extra caution to the stop gesture. The 
system halts using three stop conditions as the experiments 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

were conducted in a public area in Tsukuba. The wheelchair 
comes to stop in three conditions for either of finger touches, 
hand fist or hand is not seen in the sight volume of the camera. 
It was confirmed that the algorithm can correspond to 
everyone including elderly people [12]. Thus, it has enough 
robust and high accuracy to perform experiments in indoor 
and outdoor environments. 
 
 
Figure 3 System Configuration 
 
 
Figure 4 Gesture Sensor 
 
 
Figure 5 Gesture Pattern 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS WITH INTELLIGENT WHEELCHAIR 
We conducted an operational evaluation through real-world 
experiments and introduced some of the experimental results 
the previous papers [10][11][14]. In this section, two 
conducted scenarios are described with the proposed 
intelligent wheelchair. The experimental conditions, the 
questionnaires provided, and the experimental results, as well 
as an overall discussion are explained. In addition to previous 
results, discussion based on experimental and questionnaire 
results, which were not presented in the previous papers, will 
be done in the next section. Experimental places used in this 
study were located in the Tsukuba Designated Zone in Japan, 
which is described in Section 2. Before conducting the 
experiments, we applied a risk assessment of riding the 
intelligent wheelchair for every route. Each of the two 
scenarios is described in the following sub-sections. 
 
A. Experiments for autonomous wheelchair 
59 subjects who are not disable people were employed for 
these experiments. We asked the subjects to ride the 
intelligent wheelchair with automated function. The 
experimental duration was set to 20 minutes for each subject. 
After the experiments, several questionnaires about the 
intelligent wheelchair were done.  
 
1) Provided Questionnaire 
Before participating in the experiment, the subjects 
answered same questionnaire about gender and age. 
After experiments, the questionnaires, which all subjects 
answered are as follows: 
Q1. Did you feel any near miss events during the riding? 
(If yes, please explain in detail. If no, please imagine 
near miss event with the intelligent wheelchair) 
Q2. What distance do you think is appropriate between the 
wheelchair and surroundings?  
Q3. How much do you want to pay for this autonomous 
function? 
Q4. How do you feel about the stability on a scale of one 
to ten? (10 is best) 
Q5. How do you feel about the fun on a scale of one to 
ten? (10 is best) 
Q6. How do you feel about the comfortability on a scale 
of one to ten? (10 is best) 
Q7. When these intelligent wheelchairs are available in a 
supermarket or shopping center, do you think do they 
encourage you to go there? 
Q8. If you have any comments regarding these 
experiments, please let us know. 
 
2) Questionnaire Result 
In question1 (Q1), about 20 % subjects answered “yes”, 
and comments about the event are as follows: 
- 
The wheelchair traveled very close to pedestrian 
- 
The wheelchair suddenly stopped for the obstacle 
- 
He unintentionally touched joystick controller 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

- 
The route, which the wheelchair chose, was different 
from the route he expected 
- 
Suddenly, a pedestrian crossed in front of the 
wheelchair  
Those who answered “no”, and comments they imagined 
are as follows: 
- 
The wheelchair travels at high speed 
- 
The rider forgets to turn off the switch 
- 
The wheelchair travels in rainy, crowded, non-flat or 
slope conditions 
- 
Software bugs exist 
- 
High speed obstacles including bicycle cross in front 
of the wheelchair 
With respect to Q2, average distance is about 1.29[m] and 
standard deviation is about 0.64[m]. This distance is about 
double person’s width, and the personal differences are large 
by considering the standard deviation. Thus, it is supposed 
that autonomous wheelchair needs to keep enough distance 
(more than 1.2[m]) between obstacles and the wheelchair, 
and the distance should be able to be changed by users. 
With respect to Q3, average cost is about 137000 Japanese 
yen (1370 US dollar) and standard deviation is about 209000 
Japanese yen (2090 US dollar). In Japan, an electric 
wheelchair costs from 200000 to 500000 Japanese Yen [21]. 
This autonomous function must be under this wheelchair 
costs, and the number of this standard deviation means that 
the value of autonomous function depends on users, thus, 
some users strongly want to use this function, and there is a 
strong possibility that they will pay for this function. 
With respect to Q4, Q5 and Q6, Table 1 shows the 
questionnaire results. This result shows that comfortability 
and fun are enough high, but stability needs to be improved. 
This means that subjects didn’t trust the autonomous function 
yet, despite no accident in the experiments. 
In Q7, the result shows that about 90 % subjects answered 
“yes”.  This means that the intelligent wheelchair is very 
attractive for a supermarket or a shopping center. 
Their comments in Q8 are given below. 
- 
The design of the wheelchair should be changed 
- 
Interface for a rider is important even when the 
wheelchair travels autonomously 
- 
The wheelchair should move more smoothly 
- 
A rider wants to confirm surroundings, as the 
wheelchair recognizes 
We found that the subjects expressed favorable opinions 
regarding the intelligent wheelchairs, and many expressed a 
desire to use it again in the future. 
 
TABLE. 1 QUESTIONNAIRE RESULT OF Q4, Q5 AND Q6 (Average 
and Standard Deviation of each score. 10 is best and 1 is worst.) 
 
B. Experiments for new interface 
The experiments for evaluating the intelligent wheelchair 
with the new gesture interface were performed. The subjects 
who are not disable people were instructed how to use these 
gestures to command the wheelchair before using the 
intelligent wheelchair. The experimental place was Tsukuba 
designated zone, which was explained in Section 2. The 
duration of the experiment for each subject was about 20 
minutes. Figure 6 shows the experimental scene.  
 
 
Figure 6 Experimental Scene 
1) Provided Questionnaire  
Before participating in the experiment, the subjects 
answered their gender, age. We wanted to know the 
impressions of two kinds of controlling wheelchair (one is 
new gesture method, the other is conventional joystick 
method), thus we asked the following questions after we 
showed the movie about joystick and gesture interfaces. 
Q1. How do you feel about the gesture interface on a scale 
of one to five? (5 is best) 
Q2. How do you feel about the conventional joystick 
interface on a scale of one to five? (5 is best) 
   After the experiment, each subject filled out a questionnaire 
providing answers to the following questions. 
Q3. How did you feel about the gesture interface on a scale 
of one to five after you used it? (5 is best) 
Q4. How did you feel about the conventional joystick 
interface on a scale of one to five after you used it? (5 
is best) 
Q5. Can you tell me pros and cons of using the joystick for 
controlling the intelligent wheelchair? 
Q6. Could you control the intelligent wheelchair by the 
gesture interface? If not, please let know about when 
and what condition you thought that you couldn’t 
control it. 
Q7. Do you have any comments about the gesture for “go 
straight”?  
Q8. Do you have any comments about the gesture for “turn 
right”?  
Q9. Do you have any comments about the gesture for “turn 
left”?  
Q10. Do you have any comments about the gesture for 
“stop”?  
Q11. Where or which condition would you like to use the 
gesture interface? 
Q12. If you have any comments regarding these 
experiments, please let us know. 
Q4
Q5
Q6
Average
6.99
8.20
8.95
Standard
Deviation
2.03
1.96
1.80
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

2) Questionnaire Result and Discussion 
    Table 2 shows the results for Question 1, 2, 3 and 4 (Q1, 
Q2, Q3 and Q4). From this results, before using gesture, 
subjects thought the gesture interface was very interesting 
and useful more conventional joystick. On the other hand, 
after the experiments, unfortunately, the subjects thought the 
gesture interface wasn’t satisfied yet. Thus, there are several 
challenging issue remaining in the gesture interface, and 
comments, which will be introduced in the result of Q6-Q12, 
are important.  
Their comments in Q5 are as follows: 
- 
Good reaction of turning and forward 
- 
Easy to operate than gestures 
- 
To get accustomed to the joystick interface more easily 
than the gesture interface 
- 
Easy to use, without learning 
With respect to Q6, 14.2% subjects answered “no”. Those 
who answered “no” regarding Q6, their reasons are as 
follows: 
- 
It was difficult to understand proper spacing of the 
hands and the sensor 
- 
It was possible to smoothly steer in the beginning of the 
experiment. But, after practicing the gesture interface, it 
became easy. 
- 
I wasn’t able to successfully steer because the 
sensitivity of the sensor wasn’t enough. 
- 
Operation of the left hand, which was not dominant 
hand,  was difficult 
- 
I was able to operate “go straight” and “turn left”, but to 
operate “turn right” was difficult. 
- 
It was possible to operate “turn left”, but to operate “turn 
right” was difficult. 
From this result, it is confirmed that we need to improve the 
gesture interface, but this comments are valuable for 
improving the gesture interface. For example, the 
specification of the sensor should be improved, and 
explanation and trial are important to get accustomed to this 
new interface. The operation of “turn right” seems to be 
difficult for several users, and this problem can be fixed if 
this gesture pattern of “turn right” is changed. 
With respect to Q7, Q8, Q9 and Q10, Table 3 shows the 
questionnaire results. As shown in the result of Q6, the 
operation of “turn right” should be changed and appropriate 
places of the arm and the hand must be easily fixed. 
With respect to Q11, several interesting comments about 
condition are given and they are as follows: 
- 
Operations using the center of gravity of the body 
- 
Operation by using the leg or the neck.  
- 
I want to operate in my dominant hand for the gesture 
interface. 
- 
Not for me, but I think some people are interested in this 
gesture interface by considering the level of disability 
In these experiments, we chose hand gesture but it will be 
interesting that other body gestures are employed for the new 
interface. 
Their comments about the gesture interface in Q12 are as 
follows: 
- 
The hand and arm should be fixed for keeping the 
appropriate place of the hand. 
- 
We expect that the system should be more reliable 
and accurate 
- 
It takes some time for this operation to get 
accustomed to. 
- 
Gesture interface was funny 
- 
I was impressed that the wheelchair moves with the 
gesture interface, and I want to use this sometime. 
- 
It was fun to use, but it may be difficult for elderly to 
understand the operation for proper use 
We found that the subjects expressed favorable opinions 
regarding the gesture interface, and many expressed a desire 
to use it again in the future. These comments indicate that we 
need to strongly improve the intelligent wheelchair. 
 
TABLE.2 QUESTIONNAIRE RESULT OF Q1, Q2, Q3 AND Q4 
(Average and Standard Deviation of each score. 10 is best and 1 is worst.) 
 
 
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Average
4.14
3.71
2.71
4.00
Standard
Deviation
0.35
0.88
1.16
0.76
Go Straight
Turn Right
Turn Left 
Stop
Good
To keep appropriate distance between
the hand and the sensor was difficult
Good
Good
Very easy
Difficult to operate
It was easier than "turn right"
Reaction of the wheelchair was good
It was easy to operate straight
comparing to left and right
"Turn right" is more difficult than "turn left" Turn left was simpler than "turn right"
Easy
It was difficult to fix the place
of the hand
At first, it was not able to turn right.
It was possible to operate
after changing position of the arm
It was easy to operate.
Distance between the sensor and
the hand was important
It was easy
because the system recognizes "stop"
when the hand was released from the sensor
Hard to operate
On operationg "turn right",
the left hand was too close to the sensor,
and sensor couldn't recognize the hand
It was able to operate as intended
I didn't feel the anxiety
because the wheelchair stopped in safety
I could not proceed straight
without shifting a little to the left
Very easy
Very easy
Table.3 Qustionnaire results of Q7, Q8, Q9 and Q10
TABLE.3 QUESTIONNAIRE RESULT OF Q7, Q8, Q9 AND Q10 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

V. 
CONCLUSION 
We proposed the use of an intelligent wheelchair for new 
mobility not only for elderly people but also for everyone. 
Our intelligent wheelchair has autonomous function and new 
gesture interface. For the introduction of the proposed 
intelligent wheelchair, there are several challenges associated 
with the use of the wheelchair. One of the most important 
points is the user acceptance, and it must be investigated with 
a plenty of subjects by experiments. In addition, the 
affordability is also important for the introduction. The two 
points were investigated by performing the several 
experiments with subjects. In the experiments, we did a 
questionnaire about the intelligent wheelchair. In this paper, 
we introduce experiments and the questionnaire results, and 
the results are compared and discussed in this paper. The 
questionnaire results proved that most subjects had the 
favorable opinions about autonomous function and new 
gesture interfaces. On the other hand, the challenging issues 
for improving the user acceptance of intelligent wheelchair 
were also found especially for the gesture interface. One of 
the most important points is to choose easy operation 
especially for elderly people. These results must be valuable 
for developers and researchers of new wheelchairs. 
For future work, we will perform the experiments under 
more situations and with more subjects including disable 
subjects. In addition, we will develop new intelligent 
wheelchairs by using feedback from this research. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 This work was supported by Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS) fellowship program, the 
KAKENHI Grant (Grant Number 15F13739) and Tsukuba 
City Government Office. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
National Police Agency in Japan, “Statictics Repot 2012” , (in 
Japanese). 
[2] 
Disability and health fact sheet 352,World Health Organization 
“http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs352/en/index.html”, 
(Accessed 22 Feb 2017) 
[3] 
M. LaPlante and H. Kaye, “Demographics and trends in wheeled 
mobility equipment use and accessibility in the community,” Assistive 
Tech., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 3–17, 2010. 
[4] 
H. Kaye, T. Kang and M. LaPlante, “Mobility device use in the United 
States. National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research,” 
US Dept. Educ., vol.14, 2000. 
[5] 
B. Balcik, B. Beamon and K. Smilowitz, “Last Mile Distribution in 
Humanitarian Relief,” Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, 
Vol. 12, No. 2, 2008, p.51–63. 
[6] 
N. Hashimoto, S. Kato and S. Tsugawa, “A Cooperative Assistance 
System Between Vehicles for Elderly Drivers”, IATSS research, vol.33, 
No.1, 2009, p.35-41. 
[7] 
S. Tsugawa, S. Kato, N. Hashimoto, N. Minobe, M. Kawai, “Elderly 
driver assistance systems with cooperation between vehicles: the 
concept and experiments”, Proceddings of Intelligent Vehicles 
Symposium, 2007, pp.668-673. 
[8] 
N. Hashimoto, Y. Takinami and O. Matsumoto, “An Experimental 
Study on Vehicle Behavior to Wheel Chairs and Standing-type 
Vehicles at Intersection”, Proceedings of 13th International 
Conference on ITS Telecommunications, 2013, p.350–355. 
[9] 
A. Boyali , N. Hashimoto and O. Matsumato, "Hand posture control of 
a robotic wheelchair using a leap motion sensor and block sparse 
representation based classification.", The Third International 
Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies. 2014, 
pp.20-25. 
[10] A. Boyali and N. Hashimoto, “Block-Sparse Representation 
Classification based Gesture Recognition Approach for a Robotic 
Wheelchair”, Proceedings of Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2014, 
p.1133-1138. 
[11] N. Hashimoto, K. Tomita, A. Boyali, Y. Takinami and O. Matsumoto, 
“Surveillance of Capability, Acceptability, and Usability of Riding an 
Autonomous Wheelchair System in a Public Area: An Experimental 
Study”, Proceedings of Transportation Research Board 95th Annual 
Meeting, 2016. 
[12] A. Boyali and N. Hashimoto, Y.Takinami and S.Mita, “An 
Experimental Study Wheelchair Navigation Control by Gesture for 
elderly”, IEICE Technical Reort, 2015. 
[13] Tsukuba robot community for real worl experiments, http://mobility.rt-
tsukuba.jp/ , (Accessd 22 Feb 2017) 
[14] M. Omae, N. Hashimoto, T. Sugamoto and H. Shimizu, “Measurement 
of driver's reaction time to failure of steering controller during 
automatic driving”, Review of automotive engineering, Vol.26, No.2, 
pp.213-215. 
[15] N. Hashimoto, U. Ozguner and N. Sawant, “Evaluation of control in a 
convoy scenario”, Proceedings of Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 
2011, pp.350-355 
[16] M. David, “Gesture and thought”, University of Chicago Press, 2008. 
[17] C. Hans, “Acceptance of 3d-gestures based on age, gender and 
experience”. MSc Thesis, Gjøvik University College, 2013. 
[18] G. Sukeshini, G. Joue and I. Mittelberg, "Understanding naturalness 
and intuitiveness in gesture production: insights for touchless gestural 
interfaces." Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems. ACM, 2011. 
[19] D. Paul. “Where the action is: the foundations of embodied interaction”, 
MIT press, 2004. 
[20] E. Ehsan and R. Vidal. "Sparse subspace clustering: Algorithm, theory, 
and applications." Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE 
Transactions on 35.11 (2013): 2765-2781. 
[21] Organization of safety and spread for electric wheelchair 
http://www.den-ankyo.org, (in Japanese), (Accessd 22 Feb 2017)  
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

