Contemporary Smart Cities: Key Issues and Best Practices 
Katalin Fehér Ph.D. 
Budapest Business School University of Applied Sciences 
Budapest, Hungary 
e-mail: feher.katalin@uni-bge.hu 
Abstract—The goal of the paper is to summarise the most 
common key issues and best practices of contemporary 
smart cities based on a globally selected and analysed 
research corpus with governmental and business 
documents from the last three years. The paper also 
provides a comparative analysis of the corpus with recently 
published academic sources. The ultimate goal is to create a 
framework study of the contemporary smart city landscape 
to support the connected research projects from different 
disciplines, and also, to give ammunition for policy makers 
of future cities to their strategies. 
Keywords-Smart city; data-driven society; life quality; 
mobilisation; smart citizen; artificial intelligence 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Smart services, products and systems promise that 
the latest technology is going to force emerging 
developments and digital ecosystem constantly. The 
question is where are we on this timeline. 
The latest digital technology presents so-called smart 
devices and smart services. However, our expectation is 
based on more and more advanced level smart solutions 
in an intensive competition of digital markets. Our 
research questions concern a contemporary view. Is 
“smartness” available in fact, or, do we recognise the 
early stage of smart technology? Is, eventually, a sudden 
leap required for a more complex smart systems based 
on artificial intelligence? Which ideas, issues and 
initiatives describe contemporary smart environments, 
from a global view? 
Studying the academic sources or professional trend 
reports of emerging digital technologies led to the 
identification of two major approaches. A significant 
amount of scholarly papers have a wide perspective on 
social-cultural-economic changes reflecting smart 
technologies and the first developments based on the 
upcoming artificial intelligence [1][2]. The other 
massive majority of academic research has presented a 
zoom into the state of art technologies regarding the 
highest level of developments and initiatives [3][4]. In 
conclusion, these approaches point out a non-
comprehensive field of the so-called smart 
environments. 
Building a basis of a more comprehensive summary, 
a short literature review is going to summarise the 
academic point of view of the contemporary smart city 
developments. These theoretical pillars are going to 
prepare the presentation of the corpus-based research. 
The subject of the research project is going to propose a 
comparative, two-dimensional analysis of emerging 
digital technologies with their effects on smart cities 
based on the most popular business and governmental 
documents. The first dimension is going to highlight the 
key issues of the smart environments and the second one 
is going to present the most cited best practices. Both of 
them are created by a carefully selected corpus 
containing the most popular strategic documents or trend 
reports of smart cities from the last three years. 
The ultimate purpose of the paper is to map the 
contemporary smart city landscape providing a 
comprehensive summary of governmental and business 
decision making on this field with an academic 
analytical view. 
The paper consists of five sections. First and 
foremost, the Consideration of Terminology outlines the 
suggested approach of smart ecosystem. This section 
introduces the next one, called Short Literature Review 
presenting the academic sources. The section provides a 
summary of a research corpus and its interpretation. The 
Methodological Concerns follows it to describe the 
criteria of content filtering, software-supported and 
manual methods of the analysis. Findings are presented 
in the next section which specifies the key issues and 
best practices of smart cities based on the corpus. The 
Conclusion closes and summarises the theoretical and 
the research-based results, particularly in context of 
upcoming artificial intelligence and expectation of 
engagement by smart citizens. 
II. CONSIDERATION OF TERMINOLOGY 
Smart ecosystem has been recently defined by 
building new business, society and culture by digital 
devices and services in networks. This approach is 
particularly valid for smart cities facilitated by local 
governments and business. Following the academic and 
market-based discourses on this field, our digital 
environment has become smart, and artificial 
intelligence (AI) seems to be on the doorstep.
Per definitionem, a smart ecosystem is associated 
with a place or system highly related to information and 
communication technologies [5], ubiquitous sensing, 
data-driven decisions and cognitive computing [6], and 
optimisation of operations [7][8]. These ingredients 
determine the design of smart environments with an 
expected final goal of an artificial intelligence driven 
ecosystem. The term “smart” describes an intermediate 
milestone between an initial state of digitalisation and 
the upcoming artificial intelligence. The former 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

milestone belonged to the coding and the first digital 
networks. The latter assumes a created non-human 
intelligence, what is capable to be rational or is able to 
act rationally [9] and which holds a potential for a good-
AI-society with human dignity, governmental 
responsibility and ethical-normative innovations [10]. 
Considering these simplified definitions, smart 
technology supported environments are available. 
However, certain smart environments still are supported 
by limited digital services, while others present 
advanced automated and self-managed developments. 
The overall picture is therefore not uniformed, moreover, 
different milestones are represented in the same 
environments. In other words, digital, smart and artificial 
intelligence based ecosystems are not available in 
themselves, only mixtures of their elements are relevant 
to different goals and different circumstances from the 
cultural background to the financial investments. 
Investigating this complex landscape, numerous 
news, agendas, top lists, reports and visions are available 
but a simplified global summary of these is missing. 
However, a contemporary brief has become 
indispensable for policy makers and researchers to 
support constructive co-operations with stakeholders, 
shareholders and connected research projects. After the 
considered terminology, this paper targets to fill the 
mentioned gap by an outline of current academic 
literature in the next section, and also, by results of 
corpus-driven qualitative research for an overall and 
comprehensive picture. 
III. SHORT LITERATURE REVIEW 
Starting with the academic sources, the most 
remarkable summary of smart city approaches is the 
work of Albino and his co-authors from 2015 [11]. Their 
research project was focusing on the meaning of ‘smart’ 
in the 'smart city' context first. Their in-depth literature 
review revealed a wide range of smart city 
characteristics including among others built and natural 
environments, quality of life, mobility, info-
communication technology, innovation, and also, 
economic or socio-political issues. 
Besides, concerning the wide range of academic 
publications and exploring the highly cited sources 
related to the topic, the most emphasised issues are the 
“big data” and “algorithms” in the smart city context 
[12][13]. Regarding the city-based datasets, the 
emerging trend is to study the city-operation and citizen-
driven open data, and in particular the smart city 
engagement by locals to share their activities, ideas and 
opinions [14][15]. In parallel, the number of papers in 
governmental issues [16] and in local entrepreneurship 
vs. global companies are growing rapidly with critical 
aspects [17]. 
Meanwhile, the technological conditions are 
changing drastically. According to the Complimentary 
White Paper: IoT Platforms – Enabling the Internet of 
Things [18], there were 15.4 billion devices available in 
2015. The number is growing to 30.7 billion until 2020 
and to 75.4 billion until 2025 with emerging Industrial 
Internet of Things (IIoT) ratio in it. 
These developments are closely related to further 
rapid changes via cloud, mobile internet, advanced 
robotics, 3D printing, autonomous vehicles and further 
upcoming technological trends [19]. In parallel, half of 
the full population is using the internet and more sensors 
and machines are getting connected. The advantages of 
the Machine to Machine communication (M2M), the 
automatised operations, the networks of dynamic 
software [20] are measured in dollar billions year by 
year with direct impact to economy, society, and also, to 
city maintenance [21]. These trends and numbers 
represent how the smart technology wires more and 
more fields of operations and how fast is the speed of 
emerging info-communication technology via data 
traffic and digital services. 
A smart ecosystem was created recently [22] for 
efficient operations and for discovering new options for 
human beings. Regarding the business research trends, 
Gartner offers a digital hype cycle trend report to with 
expected technologies in every year [23]. Additionally, 
Huawei has a Digital Activity Heat Map developing an 
index of transformation and connectivity [24]. Last but 
not least, top lists of smart cities by Forbes [25] and 
further trendsetter summaries represent the strong 
interest in emerging technologies and their predictable 
effects in the society and business. Although, these 
reports summarise developments and innovations by 
branded contents, an independent approach is also 
needed. 
The next question is how can we improve a 
comprehensive summary of mainstream contemporary 
trends in smart technology, which is also useful for 
academic research and for governmental or business 
strategies? What kind of key issues and factors force the 
present developments and forecasts? Which patterns are 
visible and transparent for a framework study on the 
field of smart cities? The next section is going to present 
a research methodology and results to the contemporary 
smart cities. 
IV. METHODOLOGICAL CONCERNS 
Based on the studied academic sources, our research 
project focused on the latest governmental and business 
documents building a corpus via multiple filters. The 
analysed corpus was created by strategic documents, 
trend reports, white papers, future visions and 
implementation reports of smart cities from all over the 
world. Only completed and published files were 
selected, which were official communication of business 
and governmental partnerships. The selection criteria 
belonged to the time dimension and the global 
representation. The last three years presented the 
timeframe for a contemporary summary. For global 
overview, all inhabited continents were filtered and the 
focus was only on the cities, not on regions or further 
kind of localities to present a comparative approach. It 
was a decision to pre-select the most searched 
documents from the same regions and about the cities 
avoiding overlapped descriptions. 
Based on these criteria, the most popular and most 
downloaded, publicly available documents were assorted 
by the globally used search engine called Google. The 
content criteria required summaries with governmental 
and business research co-operations. The language 
criteria assumed only the texts in English for the widest 
filtering option and for the comparative research study in 
global context. 
Due to the above mentioned criteria, one hundred 
and fifty documents created the research corpus. Most of 
them were white papers, trend reports, city reports and 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

strategic visions. Besides them, industrial agendas, local 
government plans, analysis of governmental-business 
collaborations, blueprint documents, implementation 
reports, market analysis, partnership reports and strategic 
submit documents were also appeared in a smaller 
proportion. 
After eliminating the non-informative stop-words 
from the documents (such as “a”, “the”, “or”) and the 
short texts from the visual illustrations (e.g., repeated 
and highlighted sentences or keywords from the texts), 
the frequency of key issues have become available from 
the text analysis. For the common occurrence in a 
variety of text units the research applied WORDij and 
Quadratic Assignment Procedure (QAP). Based on 
Pearson Correlation [26], word connection frequencies 
and strong ties among the key elements were found to 
interpret the word pairs and content networks. Gephi 
0.9.1 supported the visualisation of the results regarding 
the key issues. The most cited best practices were 
collected by the word frequency of the city names and 
based on it, a manual content analysis produced the short 
comparative summary of the city reports. The key issues 
and best practices of the contemporary smart cities in the 
last three years have become available in this way. The 
next section outlines the obtained results. 
V. FINDINGS 
This section will present the general frequency and 
its interpretation based on the whole corpus first. 
Concerning the word connection frequencies and strong 
ties among the key issues, word pairs and content 
networks are going to be analysed. Last but not least, 
best practices are going to be highlighted as the content 
analysis. 
A.Key Issues 
The corpus of the one hundred and fifty documents 
presents thousands of pages with hundreds of key 
elements in a text network. Most of these elements have 
average strong connections. The goal was to find the 
most central issues with the strongest ties. 
According to our findings, the first strongest word 
pair is evidently the “city” and “smart” together in this 
order. On the third place, there is “data” all above of the 
further frequent keywords with similar strong connection 
to the “smart city" word pair, which result is closely 
related to the already mentioned academic approaches. 
Consequently, all further key issues are connected to the 
strongly tied central content elements, namely “smart-
city-data”. 
Concerning the corpus results, big data, open data, 
data sets, data analysis and data-driven decision are 
providing primarily the innovation, optimisation and 
creative ideas in the presented projects and future plans. 
In other words, smart city does not exist without digital 
data, which is the alfa and the origo of future city 
developments. The concepts of data-driven society has 
become a city management approach. The term 
“information” is also in the top keywords as an extra 
interpretative layer on “data”. Information-
communication technology, information management, 
information security, information governance and 
information economy are built on the data-driven society 
to utilise the advantages of the digitalisation. 
Listing the further key findings, project-based 
thinking, service-oriented logic, public issues, 
developments with strong correlation to research, 
governmental decisions and financial sources, energy 
sector and technological concerns are representing the 
key issues with the highest frequency. These focal points 
summarise a complex city operation with multiple key 
functions. 
Compared to the academic sources, the role of 
artificial intelligence in a smart ecosystem is 
underrepresented and not available in the list of key 
issues. Neither the technological developments nor the 
human vs. machine aspects are mentioned in the smart 
city context. 
TABLE 1. MOST FREQUENT WORD PAIRS DEFINED BY PROPORTION, ENTROPY AND MUTUAL INFORMATION
Word pairs
Frequency
Proportion
Entropy Term
Mutual information
life
quality
561.000000
0.000601
0.004460
5.535064
city
design
575.000000
0.000616
0.004556
4.085312
private
public
577.000000
0.000619
0.004570
4.033457
city
development
607.000000
0.000651
0.004775
3.099892
public
sector
620.000000
0.000665
0.004863
4.017711
smart
solutions
670.000000
0.000718
0.005199
2.502526
private
sector
693.000000
0.000743
0.005353
5.297493
smart
development
813.000000
0.000872
0.006140
2.067863
data
city
922.000000
0.000988
0.006839
1.333144
smart
project
951.000000
0.001020
0.007023
2.602895
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

Referring to the academic literature review in 
another aspect, the human factors and the engagement of 
local citizens are more represented in the corpus than it 
was expected. However, these human factors are also 
underrepresented compared to the frequency of the key 
issues. Primarily the citizen-driven open data is 
highlighted in this context along various sectors and 
decision points. The focus is on the contribution to the 
common interests via automatisation and comfortable 
smart city services supporting the local business and 
higher standard of living. Engagement by locals or their 
involvement into the decision making are at least seldom 
mentioned as a result of the activities of the NGOs, 
volunteering or being ambassadors of innovative 
technologies. 
The text analysis has also revealed the word pairs to 
understand the closest connections of the key issues. 
Beyond the frequency, the proportion, the entropy term 
and the mutual information have specified and defined 
the core correlations of a contemporary smart city (see 
Table 1). According to the results, the “life quality” 
presents the fundamental category and the goal of the 
smart city strategies and trends. The “liveable city”, even 
more accurately, a “welfare city” or the the improvement 
of the city lifestyle are in the focus in most of the 
analysed city concepts. 
The “city design” category on the second place 
reflects on the ongoing changing status from planning to 
testing and to the implementations. Besides, several 
digital services have become built-in technologies or 
invisible but elementary part of the life quality. The 
fundamental motivation is the potential for the cost 
reductions of the city operation. The reason behind the 
intensive investment to the smart technology by 
governments and business is consistent to the statistics 
of M2M in the literature review. Additionally, the 
documents emphasise the importance of “building three 
layers together” regarding a human-made physical layer 
from buildings to roads, a digital layer from maintenance 
to optimisation, and also, a layer of nature with 
sensorised parks with monitoring systems and breathing 
buildings with natural building ventilation technology in 
a post-carbon city. These three dimensions provide the 
main constructions of the targeted life quality. 
On the third place in the word pair list, “private" and 
“public” issues are represented together. In most of the 
cases, the interest of general public and moral or legal 
questions of privacy matters are not in line. The already 
mentioned “open data” and its platforms or the 
optimised operations via these platforms belong to the 
public interest in a society or business. However, users 
of digital systems strive to keep their sensitive or private 
data, and also, control them. In conclusion, the 
documents in the corpus draw different boundaries 
between private and public issues as different cultures, 
technological developments or political systems. In the 
top ten word pairs, “public” and “private” appear as 
sectors and their interpretation highlights the “city as an 
operation” approach. The final goal is to engage the 
general public to share their data collections and ideas 
about their cities as local citizens. The above mentioned 
life quality is the most relevant common incentive in this 
mutual goal. 
After the analysis of the podium finish, the following 
elements are presented in word pairs, “project”, 
“development” and “solution”, what is in line with the 
key issues based on frequency analysis above. In 
parallel, the “data city” also appears. It confirms the key 
central elements, such as “smart-city-data”, mentioned at 
the beginning of this section. 
Investigating the content networks, the highlights are 
different in the case of governmental and business 
approaches (see Figure 1 and Figure 2). Although the 
first and foremost component is the “data”, it is more 
crucial for business than for the governmental strategies. 
According to the corpus, national and local governments 
are also focusing on the information, which depends on 
the informative data sets or values. This interpretative 
approach results in a project-based view in governmental 
context. Otherwise, the business considerations are more 
technology-oriented and the energy sector plays a key 
role in its fundamental issues. 
The overlapped fields are the “developments”, 
“services” and the “public sector” presenting the main 
Figure 2. Key issues of business in a smart city
Figure 1. Key issues of the governments in a smart city
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

columns of the co-operations between business and 
governments. Analysing only the top issues, it is 
remarkable, how determinant is the governmental 
strategy for the business and not vice versa. This is 
related to that the framework conditions and fundings of 
smart cities derived from the national or local 
governments. 
Consequently, the key issues of the contemporary 
smart cities are the open data, the life quality, the 
governmental framework and strategy, the capable 
business to the city design by projects, services and 
developments. The most sensitive matters belong to the 
boundaries between the public and private sector. The 
next section is going to deal with their details. 
B.Best Practices 
Studying the best practices, the most referred cities 
are London, Austin, Prague and Hong Kong in the 
corpus, which is partially unexpected result compared to 
the latest smart city top lists of business and academic 
reviews. However, the most searched hits globally 
presented the following scope, presumably due to the 
cumulative results of the three years timeframe. All these 
referred cities have a strong “data” focus with special 
interest in open data platforms. The optimisation by 
projects, developments and services are also highlighted 
in their best practice citations. 
Including the highlighted key issues, the profiles of 
these smart cities present different strategies. The “big 
data” and “open data” items of London reflect a data-
driven decision making in the city strategy, which is 
correlate to the results of academic sources, and also, the 
findings of text analysis. Austin joins this data-gathering 
strategy by Data Rodeo building mostly as an innovative 
mobilisation. Prague works as a learning organisation 
using smart e-government with data-collections and also 
developing a modern public transport. Hong Kong 
implements also a data-technology hub which supports 
the sustainable mobilisation and in addition, the ICT-
technologies. 
Regarding the life quality, the role of the public 
transport and the optimised mobilisation are highlighted 
mostly in the best practice cases. In this context, the 
improvement of air quality is also a fundamental part of 
these examples, especially in case of Hong Kong. Austin 
emphasises also the mobilisation issue, additionally with 
available and affordable city-based services. Prague 
highlights the importance of sustainability and 
mitigation of the effects of climate change. Last but not 
least, London also joins these strategic elements and the 
city management supports the living labs to test of life 
quality via new implementations. 
Concerning the governmental vs. business supported 
solutions, the competitiveness of the cities and the data-
based governmental-business collaborations are cited 
mostly in the case studies. Illustrating with examples, the 
Smart London Board co-operates with the 
representatives of academic and leading technology 
sectors, while Prague, Austin and Hong Kong facilitate 
the local business and the hubs of global companies via 
accelerated and simplified public administration.  
Finally, the dilemmas of the public vs. private sector 
are less represented in the best practice cases. The reason 
is probably a simplified approach, namely the mentioned 
cities presuppose the possible balance between public 
interest and the individual or community interests. In 
details, London is open for feedbacks by communities 
and neighbourhoods, Austin applies knowledge sharing 
and public hearings, Prague uses digital education or 
open evaluation system and Hong Kong invites the 
citizens to smart and creative development services. 
To sum it up, the highlighted best practices also 
confirm the open or big data as key issues. The 
supplementary common element is the mobilisation in 
this part of the analysis. An unexpected result is that the 
smart citizenship with public and private matters is low-
represented by the best practices compared to its 
significance. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The goal of this paper was to map the key factors and 
best practices of contemporary smart city. Comparing 
the literature review to the results of the corpus analysis, 
smart city implementations have diverse patterns in 
approaches and applications. However, the data-driven 
logics and the goal of higher life quality are all above. 
Overlapped fields are the business facilitation in the 
framework of local government strategy, the 
mobilisation and public transport for liveability with less 
polluted air quality. Dilemmas of the public and private 
sectors can be resolved by improving engagement of 
citizens, communities and neighbourhoods in open data 
systems or services. 
There are expectations on engagement of smart 
citizens by the academic reviews. However, this 
expectation is low-represented and less elaborated in the 
research corpus. The practice depends on the political 
decisions, fundings and the calculated cost reductions. 
The upcoming artificial intelligence should be more 
represented with clarified distinctions compared to the 
milestones of digital and smart services. 
In conclusion, the studied documents in context of 
academic literature review essentially draw attention to 
universal key issues of contemporary smart cities, and 
also, emphasise on a few fundamental fields, which 
requires profound investigation before the area of 
artificial intelligence. Considering the original dilemma, 
namely where we were on the timeline of digital-smart-
AI-based operation, “digital” and “smart” services were 
highlighted. The AI-based systems are partly available, 
which starts to support more complex landscape of 
contemporary smart cities. 
According to key issues and best practices, one of the 
most undigested field is the citizen-based open data and 
the expected active participation of citizens in the smart 
cities. The future plan of the research project is to 
investigate the role of human factors in urban 
environments from citizen engagement to public or 
privacy matters. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper has been written with the support and within 
the framework of: KÖFOP 2.1.2 – VEKOP – 
15-2016-00001 Public Service Development for 
Establishing Good Governance: The Digital Governance 
and Research Program. Istvan Boros sociologist and 
research assistant of the grant provided great help as 
contributor of the methodological analysis. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

REFERENCES 
1.
N. T. Buck, and A. While, “Competitive urbanism and the 
limits to smart city innovation: The UK Future Cities 
initiative” Urban Studies, vol. 54, issue 2, pp. 501-519, 
2015, doi: 10.1177/0042098015597162 
2.
V. Albino, U. Berardi, and R. M. Dangelico, “Smart 
Cities: Definitions, Dimensions, Performance, and 
Initiatives.” Journal of Urban Technology, vol. 22, issue 1, 
pp. 3-21, 2015, doi: 10.1080/10630732.2014.942092 
3.
Y. Mehmood, N. Haider, and I. Muhammad, “M2M 
Communications in 5G: State-of-the-Art Architecture, 
Recent Advances, and Research Challenges.” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, issue: 9, pp. 194-201, 
2017. doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600559 
4.
C. Rametta, G. Baldoni, A. Lombardo, S. Micalizzi, and 
A. Vassallo, “S6: a Smart, Social and SDN-based 
Surveillance System for Smart-cities” Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 110, pp. 361-368, 2017, doi: 10.1016/
j.procs.2017.06.078 
5.
O. Melaha, “Citizen-driven dashboards in smart 
ecosystems: a framework.” Interaction Design and 
Architecture(s) Journal - IxD&A, N. 31, pp. 32-42, 2016. 
6.
D. T. Larose, and C. D. Larose, “Discovering knowledge 
in data. An introduction to data mining” 2nd Ed. New 
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
7.
Ericsson Networked Society, “The three ages of 
megacities” [Online]. Available from: https://
www.ericsson.com/assets/local/news/2012/8/
ns_megacities_report_4.pdf 2012. Retrieved: 3 June 2018. 
8.
N. Verhoeff, “A logic flayers: Indexicality of iPhone 
navigation in augmented reality” In Hjorth, L., Burgess, J. 
and Richardson, I. (eds.) Studying mobile media cultural 
technologies, mobile communication, and the iPhone. NY, 
London: Routledge. 2012. 
9.
S. J. Russell, and P. Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence. A 
Modern Approach” 3rd Ed. Harlow: Pearson, 2015. 
10. C. Cath, S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, M. Taddeo, and 
L. Floridi, “Artificial Intelligence and the 'Good Society': 
The US, EU, and UK Approach” Science and Engineering 
Ethics April 2018, Vol. 24, Issue 2, pp. 505–528, 2017, 
doi: 10.1007/s11948-017-9901-7 
11. V. Albino, U. Berardi, and R. M. Dangelico, “Smart 
Cities: Definitions, Dimensions, Performance, and 
Initiatives.” Journal of Urban Technology, vol. 22, issue 1, 
pp. 3-21, 2015, doi: 10.1080/10630732.2014.942092 
12. D. Beer, “The social power of algorithms" Journal 
Information, Communication & Society, vol. 20, no. 1, 
1-13, 2017, doi: 10.1080/1369118X.2016.1216147 
13. I. A. T. Hashem, V. Chang, N. B. Anuar, K. Adewole, I. 
Yaqoob, A. Gani, E. Ahmed, and H. Chiroma, “The role 
of big data in smart city” International Journal of 
Information Management, vol. 36, issue 5, pp. 748-758, 
2016, doi: 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.002 
14. A. Degbelo, C. Granell, S. Trilles, D. Bhattacharya, S. 
Casteleyn, and C. Kray, “Opening up Smart Cities: 
Citizen-Centric Challenges and Opportunities from 
GIScience” International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 
5, issue 2, 16, 2016, doi: 10.3390/ijgi5020016 
15. F. Salim, F. “Urban computing in the wild: A survey on 
large scale participation and citizen engagement with 
ubiquitous computing, cyber physical systems, and 
Internet of Things” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 81. pp. 31-48, 2015, doi: 10.1016/
j.ijhcs.2015.03.003 
16. A. Meijer, and M. P. R. Bolívar, “Governing the smart 
city: A review of the literature on smart urban 
governance” International Review of Administrative 
Sciences, vol. 82, issue 2, pp. 392–408, 2015, doi: 
10.1177/0020852314564308 
17. R. G. Hollands, “Critical interventions into the corporate 
smart city” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and 
Society, vol. 8, issue, 1, pp. 61-77, 2015, doi: 10.1093/
cjres/rsu011 
18. IHS Markit, “Complimentary White Paper: IoT Platforms 
- Enabling the Internet of Things” [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.ihs.com/Info/0416/internet-of-
things.html 2016. Retrieved: 3 June 2018. 
19. McKinsey and Company, “Internet of Things” [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/
internet-of-things. 2016. Retrieved: 3 June 2018. 
20. B. Edson by Microsoft, “Creating the internet of your 
t h i n g s . ” [ O n l i n e ] . A v a i l a b l e f r o m : 
www.InternetOfYourThings.com by Microsoft, 2015. 
Retrieved: 3 June 2018. 
21. McKinsey and Company, “The internet of things: 
Mapping the value beyond the hype" [Online]. Available 
f r o m : h t t p : / / w w w. m c k i n s e y. c o m / i n s i g h t s /
business_technology 2015. Retrieved: 3 June 2018. 
22. S. B. Letaifa, “How to strategize smart cities: Revealing 
the SMART model”, Journal of Business Research, vol. 
68, issue 7, pp. 1414-1419, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.
2015.01.024 
23. Gartner Hype Cycle, [Online]. Available from: https://
www.gartner.com/technology/research/methodologies/
hype-cycle.jsp Retrieved: 3 June 2018. 
24. Huawei Digital Economy Heat Map, [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.huawei.com/minisite/gci/en/index.html 
Retrieved: 3 June 2018. 
25. Top Smart City Rankings, [Online]. Available also from: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/iese/2017/05/31/the-
smartest-cities-in-the-world-for-2017/ OR https://
www.forbes.com/sites/chynes/2017/11/10/singapore-
ranks-as-one-of-the-top-smart-cities-in-the-world/
#4e260802717d (the latest ones). Retrieved: 3 June 2018. 
26. M. L. Patten and M. Newhart (2018) Understanding 
Research Methods. 10th Ed. New York. London: 
Routledge.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-653-8
SMART 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

