Barrierfree Mobility for All by a Smart and Individual Travel Assistance 
 
Nadine Schlüter, Jan-Peter Nicklas, Petra Winzer 
Research Group of Product Safety and Quality Engineering 
University of Wuppertal 
Wuppertal, Germany 
e-mail: schlueter@uni-wuppertal.de; nicklas@uni-
wuppertal.de; winzer@uni-wuppertal.de 
Lars Schnieder 
Institute of Transportation Systems 
German Aerospace Center 
Braunschweig, Germany 
e-mail: lars.schnieder@dlr.de
 
Abstract—Public transport operators focus on a public 
transport system which is inclusive and fair to all groups of 
society. This requires a holistic approach, which considers the 
user and the service provider perspective. From the passengers’ 
view, it becomes obvious that not only the accessibility of a single 
transportation system is relevant. The interchanges within the 
system as well as the change-over to other systems must be 
improved regarding the special requirements of people with 
reduced mobility and/or sensory restrictions. This article 
describes how this objective can be achieved in the project 
aim4it by an individual and smart solution, which is available 
and useable for every passenger-group. System components are 
presented and first results are pointed out. 
Keywords- cross-modal public transportation; barrierfree; 
smart solutions, customer-orientation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Every mobility chain is accompanied by an information 
chain, which has to be carried out at best parallel. Especially 
passengers with reduced mobility and/or sensory restrictions 
have to be informed in time about unexpected events and 
resulting changeover times. Also, for barrier-free information, 
the information has to be understandable, e.g., in sign 
language, as well [1]. 
Today, Intermodal Transport Information Systems (ITIS) 
manage the challenge to provide relevant pre-/on- and post-
trip information to passengers [2]. But a barrier-free travel 
assistant includes information representation that is tailored to 
the specific requirements of passengers with sensory 
restrictions (e.g. information display in sign language). This 
increases perceived service quality and the usage of public 
transportation. With suitable evaluation algorithms, customer 
feedback can be systematically elicited, evaluated and 
interpreted. This is the basis for a continuous improvement of 
public transport operations. Timetables can be adjusted or 
available digital maps advanced, service personal can be used 
more appropriate [3]. Overall this will result in a better quality 
of services for passengers with reduced mobility and/or 
sensory restrictions. 
II. 
HOLISTIC APPROACH FOR BARRIER-FREE PUBLIC 
TRANSPORTATION  
The project aim4it incorporates the user’s and service 
provider’s point of view. When a trip is viewed from the 
perspective of the customer/user, it becomes clear that it is not 
enough to design individual transport modes and facilities for 
just one transport system. In order to be passenger-friendly 
and suitable for use by passengers with special mobility needs 
(i.e., visually impaired passengers and the deaf and hard of 
hearing) all transport modes and therefore all service 
providers have to be considered for barrier-freeness [4]. For a 
given destination to be reachable by everyone, barrier-free 
mobility chains for all transport modes should be set up. 
Therefore, passengers with reduced mobility have to get all 
relevant information about departure times, necessary transfer 
procedures and updates/changes due to breakdowns. This 
information must be up-to-date and understandable at 
important nodes before, along, as well as after the journey. 
Significant information needs to be conveyed in optical, 
acoustical and/or tactile form [3]. 
III. 
COMPONENTS OF THE AIM4IT SYSTEM 
ARCHITECTURE  
The intended overall aim4it assistance system provides a 
benefit from the user’s as well as the service provider’s point 
of view. Thereby, the aim4it smartphone app is the key 
element. 
A. aim4it smartphone app 
With the aim4it smartphone app the passenger can start the 
planning of the trip by entering information about the start and 
the destination into the smartphone at home. Data entry and 
display for the aim4it user interface are designed in an 
innovative user-centered way: All information provided will 
be displayed as multi-sensual output to secure information for 
the different groups of passengers. Afterwards the aim4it 
smartphone app sends a request for a barrier free trip to the 
ITIS [2]. 
B. Link to Intermodal Transport Information (ITIS) and 
Transport Control Systems (ITCS) 
Based on the start and endpoint of the requested trip the 
ITIS performs barrier-free routing. The following Use-Case is 
considered: The route reflects information from augmented 
digital maps (e.g., based on crowdsourcing projects such as 
wheelmap), error messages from the Intermodal Traffic 
Control System (ITCS) as well as events entered by local 
service staff at stations (e.g. malfunction of an escalator). The 
barrier-free route compiled by the ITIS is sent to the 
smartphone app. There it is displayed for barrier-free 
navigation along the planned trip chain. An additional feature 
is the request for bus driver assistance, e.g., to board the 
vehicle. This is entered and sent to the ITIS. By the ITIS this 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

request is passed to the ITCS where the corresponding vehicle 
is identified. Via the existing data link between the ITCS and 
the vehicle the request for bus driver assistance is sent [2]. 
There it has to be displayed to the bus driver within the aim4it 
bus driver user interface when the vehicle approaches the 
proposed station. 
IV. 
VALUE-ADDED SERVICES AND THEIR CONTINUOUS 
IMPROVEMENT  
With the aim4it smartphone app passengers with reduced 
mobility and/or sensory restrictions get on-trip assistance. 
This includes several services, which are described further 
below: 
A. Incident information in sign language 
Whenever 
service 
irregularities 
(e.g., 
delays, 
cancellations, missed connections) are detected in the ITCS 
error information is forwarded to the passenger. The aim4it 
message generator automatically transforms the text message 
to a video stream, displaying error information in sign 
language for deaf and hard of hearing passengers.  
B. (Re-)Routing 
In addition to just following a static pre-planned route 
dynamic re-routing is an integral part of the system. Using 
available information in the ITIS each barrier-free route will 
be monitored. Whenever a deviation is detected re-routing 
will be automatically activated and the passenger will be 
informed about alternatives.  
C. Request for mobility assistance 
On trip the passenger can make stop requests along with 
requests for bus driver assistance. This information is send to 
the vehicle by an IP-based communication link. Also, it will 
be displayed at the aim4it bus driver interface.  
D. Request for connection protection 
The same mechanism is used for the passenger request of 
connection protection. In this case, the request is generated by 
the aim4it smartphone app and send from the passenger in the 
feeder bus via ITIS and ITCS to the bus driver of the 
corresponding distributor bus. Waiting time of the connecting 
distributor bus at the interchange station will be extended. 
E. Feedback for continuous improvement 
With the aim4it smartphone app passengers with reduced 
mobility and/or sensory restrictions can provide feedback to 
the public transport operator (post-trip perspective) for 
continuous improvement [5]. Therewith public transport 
operators can enhance their service, e.g., for barrier-free 
transport services. Further feedback can be entered to various 
quality aspects (e.g., vehicles conditions, service staff). This 
information will be sent to the aim4it evaluation and planning 
tool for reporting. Information can be used for schedule 
updates or service improvements. In case of schedule updates, 
these will become effective and be the basis for operations 
monitored in the ITCS. Then, trip requests sent to the ITIS. 
Based on available customer feedback, digital maps can be 
revised and additional features added. These additional 
features can be used for generating barrier-free trips in the 
ITIS. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A demonstrator of the aim4it architecture is currently been 
developed by the consortium members. Results of the project 
will be demonstrated in the city of Vienna (Austria) as well as 
the city of Karlsruhe (Germany). The value-added services for 
travel assistance based on the technical specifications that 
result from the previous standardization project for IP-based 
communication in public transport (IP-KOM-ÖV). The 
Association of German Transport Companies (VDV) will 
continuously update these technical specifications. They are 
open to future adaptations and amendments. As the value-
added services developed in the aim4it project (connection 
protection and request for bus driver assistance) build on and 
further enhance this standard, the results will result in a new 
work item proposal in the standardization procedure managed 
by VDV. Following this procedure the changes and 
amendments to the technical specifications suggested by the 
aim4it project will be discussed in a forum of domain experts 
and incorporated into a revision of the Travellers‘ Real-time 
Information and Advisory Standard (TRIAS). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The promotion plan 64.004/2014 of the European research 
program era-net transport has been funded by the German 
Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure based 
on an enactment of the German Parliament. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.-P. Nicklas, N. Schlüter, L. Schnieder, P. Winzer, 
„Entwicklung einer anforderungsgerechten Mobilitätsassistenz 
für in ihrer Mobilität eingeschränkte Reisende.“ S. Bracke, M. 
Mamrot, P. Winzer Eds. „Qualitätsmethoden im Diskurs 
zwischen Wissenschaft und Praxis.“ Proc. GQW-Jahrestagung 
2015, Shaker Verlag, Aachen, 2015, pp. 229-242. 
[2] L. Schnieder, D. Wermser, M. Barrilero, “Integrated Modelling 
of Business Processes and Communication Events for Public 
Transport.” Proc. of Symposium FORMS/FORMAT - Formal 
Methods for Automation and Safety in Railway and Automotive 
Systems, Braunschweig (Germany), 2014, pp. 233 – 242. 
[3] H. Bandelin, T. Franke, R. Kruppa, A. Wehrmann, D. Weißert, 
„Einheitliche Plattform für ÖPNV-Kommunikation auf gutem 
Weg.“ Der Nahverkehr 30 (2012), issue 7-8, p. 44. 
[4] J.-P. Nicklas, N. Schlüter, P. Winzer, “Integrating customers‘ 
voice inside network environments”In: Dahlgaard, J. (Ed): 
Total Quality Management & Business Excellence Journal, 
Volume 24, numbers 7-8, July-August 2013. Taylor & Francis, 
2013. ISSN: 1478-3363, pp. 980-990.  
[5] EN 13816:2002, “Transportation - Logistics and services - 
Public passenger transport- Service quality definition, targeting 
and measurement”. 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

