Demonstration of Free-Space Optical Communications 
 
Narkis Shatz 
SureFire, LLC 
Fountain Valley, USA 
nshatz@surefire.com 
 
 
Mark Squire  
SureFire, LLC  
Fountain Valley, USA  
msquire@surefire.com
 
 
Abstract—We introduce a new communications technology for 
consumers in Smart Cities, which we refer to as Augmented-
Reality Optical Narrowcasting (ARON). This technology has 
the potential to significantly enhance mobile consumer 
communications by enabling information exchange between 
multiple transmitters and multiple receivers using free-space 
optical data transmission in the near infrared. A practical 
communication range of 400 meters in broad daylight is 
achievable with miniaturized optics transmitting HD video, for 
example, to smartphones and 1,000 meters to vehicles.  An 
augmented-reality-style 
user 
interface, 
wherein 
visual 
representations of available information sources are overlaid on 
a live display of local video imagery allows users to conveniently 
manage transmissions from multiple parties. The new 
technology is envisioned to be installed in smartphones and 
other mobile devices and in vehicles, opening new vistas for 
commerce and social interaction. We have demonstrated key 
features of the technology using custom optical communications 
hardware and software developed especially for this purpose. 
 
Keywords- optical communication; augmented reality; 
smartphones; automobiles; nonimaging optics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
    To demonstrate the feasibility and functionality of the 
Augmented-Reality Optical Narrowcasting (ARON) concept 
[1], we have developed and fabricated a Technology 
Demonstration Unit (TDU) that provides a communication 
channel in the 810-890 nm Near-Infrared (NIR) wavelength 
band, with a data rate greater than 1 megabit per second and 
an operational range tested to work in excess of 200 meters in 
broad daylight. The unit consists of an Optical Transmitter 
(OT) in Fig. 1 and an Optical Receiver (OR) in Fig. 2.   This 
unit can transmit and receive HD video and other digital files. 
 
II. THE TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATOR UNIT 
 
    An ARON Optical Beacon Receiver (OBR) measures the 
horizontal and vertical angular positions of ARON 
transmitters detected within its Field Of View (FOV) and then 
creates visual representations of the locations of the 
transmitters, including the identities of entities operating the 
transmitters. These representations comprise icons and text 
overlaid at the positions of these transmitters within live 
imagery produced by a video camera collocated with each 
ARON receiver. For example, the availability of information 
transmitted from a pizza restaurant may appear in the form of 
an iconic representation of a pizza accompanied by the name 
of the restaurant, where the icon and text are overlaid at the 
location of the actual restaurant within the live video imagery. 
Controls are provided for allowing users to opt to receive 
high-bandwidth information of interest to them from the pizza 
restaurant’s ARON transmitter or from additional ARON 
transmitters that may also be viewable in the FOV. 
  
 
 
Figure 1. Cross-sectional perspective view of optical transmitter assembly 
for technology demonstration unit employing a nonimaging wineglass 
collimator. 
 
    The TDU’s OT design comprises OT electronics, an 
incoherent solid-state NIR emitter, and a nonimaging 
beamforming optic. Our transmitter requires a mere 4 W of 
electrical power and has an exit-pupil diameter of 18 mm. The 
ARON system requires each OT to simultaneously transmit 
two types of modulated optical beams. The first type, referred 
to as a beacon, provides the means for an OR to: (1) detect the 
presence of OTs, (2) identify entities operating OTs, and (3) 
determine the positions of OTs within the FOV of the OR’s 
visible-light camera. The second type of modulated beam, 
referred to as the signal, provides the actual information the 
operator of the OT wishes to send. Typically, the average data 
rate transmitted by an OT in the form of signals will be much 
higher than that transmitted in the form of beacons. 
Temporary obstructions of the beam path that may occur due 
to moving obstacles are handled effectively using forward 
error correction algorithms. To simultaneously transmit 
beacons and signals, the TDU uses a double-modulation 
scheme, in which a beacon having a data rate of 10 bits per 
second modulates a signal having a data rate greater than 1 
megabit per second (ARON systems having far higher bit 
rates are feasible). The double-modulation scheme has the 
advantage of allowing it to utilize a single NIR source and 
beamforming optic to simultaneously transmit both beacons 
and signals. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
 
Figure 2. Optical receiver assembly of technology demonstration unit, 
mounted in a smartphone case. 
 
    Fig. 1 depicts a cross sectional view of the NIR source and 
beamforming optic for the TDU’s OT. The efficient, highly 
compact nonimaging optical design of the beamforming optic 
utilizes an advanced reflective collimator followed by a 
Köhler homogenizer to transform the output of the source into 
a NIR beam that is highly uniform within an 8°-square angular 
region. The uniform square output beam allows copies of this 
optic, each with its own emitter, to be combined as modules 
to produce a customized tiled beam swath consisting of 
multiples of the 8°-square, arranged horizontally and/or 
vertically. A wide beam swath enables widely separated 
receivers to be able to simultaneously tune in to the 
transmission. The beamforming optical design used in the 
TDU is representative of a design that could be used for an OT 
mounted at a fixed installation (e.g., outside or inside a 
building) or on a vehicle.  The wineglass collimator optic 
achieves a volume reduction factor of 2.5 compared to a 
conventional parabolic reflector. This is because the 
wineglass collimator is an aplanat and therefore experiences 
much less étendue dilution when collecting light from an 
extended source than the parabolic reflector. 
 
    The TDU OT electronics shown in Fig. 3 consist of a 
smartphone interfaced via USB On-The-Go (OTG) to a 
Universal Asynchronous Transmitter/Receiver (UART) 
which converts the byte-wise transmit data into a proprietary 
return-to-zero serial data format with a high level of 
embedded forward error correction. A current driver is used 
to modulate the solid-state NIR LED emitter with this data. 
 
 
Figure 3. Technology Demonstrator Unit transmitter block diagram. 
 
    The OR design for the TDU (Fig. 4) comprises OR 
electronics, a beacon receiver, and a signal receiver, all 
mounted within a smartphone case and interfaced with a 
smartphone by means of a USB connection. An ARON app 
installed in the receiver smartphone provides the capability of 
combining beacon information received from OTs with live 
imagery produced by the phone’s camera to create and display 
AR presentations. 
 
Figure 4. Technology Demonstrator Unit signal receiver block diagram 
 
    The TDU’s beacon receiver is a monochrome NIR video 
camera, which serves the purpose of detecting beacon data 
transmitted by the OT and using this data to determine the 
angular position of the OT within the FOV of the visible-light 
camera. The beacon receiver also receives and decodes 
identifying information encoded in transmitted beacons, 
allowing the OR to identify the entity operating the OT.  Once 
a beacon has been detected, the processor determines its 
horizontal and vertical position within the visible-light 
camera’s FOV and generates and overlays an augmented 
reality icon with identifying text at the correct location on the 
live video imagery, where the icon and text represent the 
identity of the detected OT obtained from its beacon. Multiple 
beacons can be handled.  These functions could easily be 
integrated with a cell phone’s existing camera if the OR is also 
integrated into the phone, as opposed to being in a cell phone 
case for the TDU. 
 
    The TDU’s signal receiver uses a 6x6 array of square-
aperture lenslets to concentrate flux onto a 6x6 array of silicon 
photodetectors. The outputs of all 36 detectors are summed, 
amplified, filtered and digitized to produce the signal output. 
The signal receiver has a 3.6°-square FOV within which it can 
receive signals. Since this FOV is much smaller than the FOV 
of the beacon receiver and the phone’s visible-light camera, in 
order to receive a signal from a detected OT, the TDU user 
needs to manually tilt the phone until the OT is within the 
signal receiver’s FOV.   
 
    Fig. 5 depicts the display screen of the receiver smartphone 
after the ARON app has been activated, showing the live 
video feed, overlaid with a central box representing the FOV 
of the signal receiver and an icon and text representing a 
detected OT. To receive a signal from the detected OT, the 
phone is tilted manually until the icon is located inside the 
box, at which time signal data will begin to be received. 
Receipt of signal data will continue as long as the icon is kept 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

within the box.  Once received, the app allows the user to view 
the signal data in various ways.  
 
Figure 5. Display produced by augmented-reality optical narrowcasting app 
in technology demonstration unit’s receiver smartphone. 
 
III. CONCLUSION 
    In this work, we have described the elements of a 
technology demonstrator unit that provides an optical 
communication channel in the 810-890 nm near-infrared 
(NIR) wavelength band, with a data rate greater than 1 
megabit per second and an operational range tested to work 
in excess of 200 meters in broad daylight.  In its planned 
production 
configuration, 
as 
an 
integrated 
internal 
component within a smartphone, an ARON receiver and 
optical assembly will ultimately occupy a footprint no larger 
than a conventional video camera.  In this consumer 
configuration, the phone will not require tilting to receive 
signals.   
REFERENCES 
 
[1] N. Shatz and M. Squire, "Augmented-Reality Optical 
Narrowcasting," SMART 2023, The Twelfth International 
Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and 
Technologies, Nice, France, 2023. 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-071-1
SMART 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies

