Secure Integration of DER into Smart Energy Grid and Smart Market  
 
Steffen Fries, Rainer Falk 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {steffen.fries|rainer.falk}@siemens.com 
Henry Dawidczak, Thierry Dufaure 
Energy Management 
Siemens AG 
Berlin, Germany 
e-mail: {henry.dawidczak|thierry.dufaure}@siemens.com
 
 
Abstract—The integration of decentralized energy resources 
and loads into the smart energy grid and into smart market is 
gaining more importance to cope with the increasing demand on 
energy while reducing load on the energy transmission network 
that is not affected by energy exchange between local generation 
and consumption. Characteristic for the involved control 
systems is the data exchange between intelligent electronic 
devices (IEDs), which are used to monitor and control the 
operation. For the integration Decentralized Energy Resources 
(DER), these IEDs provide the data for obtaining a system view 
of connected decentralized energy resources – DER. Based on 
this system view a set of DER, realizing a Virtual Power Plant 
(VPP), can be managed reliably. In substation automation, the 
standard IEC 61850 is used to enable communication between 
similar IEDs to control the central energy generation and 
distribution. This standard being enhanced with features and 
mappings to enable its application also for DER. One problem 
to be solved here is the integration of IEDs residing on a 
customer network, most likely to be operated behind Firewalls 
and Network Address Translation (NAT). The solution required 
must ensure end-to-end secured communication between DER 
and control center also over public networks. Here, adequate IT 
security measures are a necessary prerequisite to prevent 
intentional manipulations, affecting the reliable operation of the 
energy grid. This paper investigates into currently available 
security measures and utilizes them to propose a secure 
communication architecture for DER integration. The 
described 
solution 
is 
currently 
proposed 
within 
the 
International 
Electrotechnical 
Commission 
(IEC) 
for 
enhancements of the energy automation communication 
standard IEC 61850. Besides that, this paper also investigates 
into open issues related to the secure integration of DER.  
 
Keywords–security; 
device 
authentication; 
firewall; 
decentralized energy resource, substation automation; smart grid; 
smart Market, IEC 61850, IEC 60870-5, IEC 62351, XMPP 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
DER, i.e., renewable energy sources like solar cells or 
wind power, are becoming increasingly important to generate 
environmentally sustainable energy and thus to reduce 
greenhouse gases leading to global warming. Integrating DER 
into the current energy distribution network poses great 
challenges for energy automation: DER need to be monitored 
and controlled to a similar level as centralized energy 
generation 
in 
power 
plants. 
Widely 
distributed 
communication networks are required for exchanging control 
communication. Multiple DER may also be aggregated on a 
higher architecture level to form a so-called virtual power 
plant. Such a virtual power plant can be viewed from the 
overall energy automation system in a similar way as a 
common centralized power plant with respect to energy 
generation capacity. But due to its decentralized nature, the 
demands on automation and communication necessary to 
control the virtual power plant are much more challenging.  
Furthermore, the introduction of controllable loads on 
residential level requires enhancements to the energy 
automation communication infrastructure as used today. 
Clearly, secure communication between a control station and 
DER equipment or energy loads of users as well as with 
decentralized field equipment must be addressed. Standard 
communication technologies based on IEC 61850 [1], which 
are used today for substation automation, cannot directly be 
applied and need enhancements. An abstract view of the setup 
used as base for the security discussion is shown in Figure 1. 
  
Figure 1. DER Integration based on IEC 61850 over XMPP 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

Figure 1 depicts the integration of DERs into the Smart Grid 
and Smart Market. The lower part of the figure shows the 
distributed generators and loads, which shall be managed by 
the control function shown in the upper part. The control 
function may be located at a Distribution Network Operator 
(DNO), a VPP operator, or a smart energy market operator. 
Also shown are typical security infrastructure elements – 
Firewalls – which shield the different sub-networks. 
Communication is realized by applying IEC 61850 
transmitted over the eXtensible Message and Presence 
Protocol (XMPP) [1][2]. XMPP is a well-known protocol 
standardized in the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) as 
RFC 6120 and is used for instance in chat applications. It 
supports Firewall and NAT traversal and also device 
registration and discovery. As XMPP, IEC 61850 itself is a 
client-server protocol. In the scenario shown in Figure 1, the 
IEC 61850 server part resides at the DER sides. Thus, a direct 
connection to control the DER may not be possible due to 
blocked inbound connections at the Firewall of the network 
the DER is connected to. This is the part where XMPP is 
utilized, as the XMPP client resides on the DER and starts 
establishing a connection with the XMPP server, which can 
used to facilitate the IEC 61850 communication.  
The remaining part of the paper is organized as following: 
Section II provides an introduction to IEC 61850 and also 
investigates into missing parts for the integration of DER into 
Smart Grids. Section III analysis the security requirements and 
also potential security measures, by applying existing 
technology as far as possible. Section IV discusses the 
resulting security approach, which is also proposed for 
standardization. Section V concludes the paper and provides 
an outlook for further work.   
Note that this paper targets the identification of existing 
security means as well as existing gaps for the concept of 
secure DER integration. Implementations as proof of concept 
are not finished, yet. 
II. 
IEC 61850 OVERVIEW 
A. The IEC 61850 principles 
While the first edition of the IEC 61850 series [1], 
published in 2003 focused on standardizing communication 
between applications within a Substation Automation 
Domain, the second edition published in 2010 extends its 
domain of application up to the Power Utility Automation 
System. The IEC 61850 series specifies: 
 An Abstract Communication Service Interface (ACSI), 
 A semantic model based on an object oriented 
architecture, 
 Specific Communication Service Mappings (SCSM), 
 A 
project 
engineering 
workflow 
including 
a 
configuration description language (SCL) based on the 
XML language. 
Using the IEC 61850 philosophy, i.e., decoupling the IEC 
61850 object model and associated services from the 
communication technologies allows the standard to be 
technology independent, that is, specifying new technologies 
when a set of new requirements is being processed by the 
standardization 
body 
without 
modifying 
the 
system 
architecture.   Services in IEC 61850 include:  
 Client and Server communication within the scope of a 
Two Party Application Association (or session), for 
discovering, 
controlling 
and 
monitoring 
objects 
implemented in the device model, 
 Peer to peer communication within the scope of a 
Multicast Application Association, for providing a 
unidirectional information exchange from one source to 
one or many destination.  
The IEC 61850-8-1 SCSM part has specified the mapping 
of IEC 61850 object model and associated services to MMS 
(ISO 9506 series [3]). While IEC 61850-8-1 SCSM has proven 
to be a very efficient communication technology within the 
substation, i.e., within a private network, new challenges 
appear with the integration of the DERs. A current effort in 
the standardization has gathered the requirements for an IEC 
61850 SCSM to Web Protocols. 
Public network/infrastructure are neither administered by 
the DER owners nor by the control function operator; the use 
of public network represents therefore a major change in 
comparison 
to 
the 
way 
IEC 
61850 
Systems 
and 
communication have been deployed within the substation. 
The gathered requirements [4] show also that the response 
times are less critical than they are in the substation 
environment. Both the number of devices connected to the 
Smart Grid as well as the dynamic changes of the system 
(continuous integration of new resources) encourage the use 
of a technology that supports the volatility of the system.  
The decision criteria used in the standardization committee 
lead to elect XMPP [5] technology as a network layer in the 
SCSM. 
B. The  XMPP principles 
XMPP is a communication protocol enabling two entities 
(XMPP clients) to exchange pieces of XML data called 
stanzas. As shown in Fig.1, both the DERs (IEC 61850 
servers) and the VPP or DNO control center (IEC 61850 
client) are then exposed as XMPP clients. They are not 
directly connected together but can exchange XML messages 
over the XMPP server(s) they are connected to. Each XMPP 
client is responsible for initiating a TCP/IP connection to the 
XMPP server of the domain the XMPP client belongs to. The 
XMPP servers are located in the WAN and their location can 
either be statically configured in the DERs or can be 
discovered by the DERs via DNS-SRV records [6].  
Since DERs will be located behind (most of the time 
unmanaged) 
firewalls, 
the 
XMPP 
servers 
cannot 
reach/connect to them (requirement – blocked inbound 
connection); nevertheless DERs can reach/connect to the 
XMPP server of their domain over the stateful firewall of their 
infrastructure. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

As soon as the TCP/IP connection to its XMPP server is 
established, each XMPP client starts a bi-directional XML 
stream with its XMPP server. 
Each XMPP client has a unique system identifier, a so-
called JIDs, whose format is quite similar to the well-known 
mail addresses format: entity@domain.tld. 
Communication between XMPP clients occurs over the 
XML streams, each client has negotiated with their XMPP 
server, the server acting then as router forwarding the message 
exchange. 
The XMPP series define three different XML message 
formats called stanza. Similar to the mail message, each stanza 
contains an attribute “from” (from=”JID of the source of the 
message”) and an attribute “to” (to=”JID of the destination of 
the message”). The message formats are: 
 of type <iq> (dedicated for request/response exchange - 
solicited service),  
 of type <message> (dedicated for push-exchange - 
unsolicited communication),  
 or of type <presence> (dedicated for presence 
announcement).  
C. Mapping of IEC 61850 to XMPP 
The current draft of IEC 61850-8-2 foresees XER encoding 
of MMS using following mapping of the services to the XMPP 
stanza: 
 request/reponse services will be mapped to the <iq> 
stanza 
(e.g., 
initiate-RequestPDU, 
initiate-
ResponsePDU, writeRequestPDU, …) 
 reporting services will be mapped to the unsolicited 
<message> stanza (e.g., informationReportPDU, …). 
Through the mapping of MMS to XMPP the MMS defined 
security measures are directly applicable as outlined in the 
next section. 
The XMPP standard provides protocol extensions (so called 
XEPs [7]), i.e., optional technical specifications to solve 
additional communication requirements. The developments of 
the specifications are hosted and coordinated by the XMPP 
foundation [8]. For example, the XEP-0045 specifies the 
Multi-User Chat (MUC) environment, with which XMPP 
clients can exchange messages in the context of an 
administrated room. The IEC 61850 multicast application 
association defined the abstract model could easily be mapped 
to a moderated room, where the moderator is the publisher of 
the unidirectional information, and the subscribers are 
dynamically invited to join the room in which the information 
is being published.   
III. 
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS 
This section investigates into IT security requirements and 
maps them to existing security measures. 
A. Security Requirements 
Security requirements targeting the integration of DER into 
a power system architecture are typically derived from a given 
system architecture like the one shown in Figure 1 and use 
cases describing the interactions of the components. Hence, 
the main focus here is placed on the investigation of the 
communication relations and data assets exchanged between 
the components. Table I below provides the most relevant data 
assets. 
TABLE I. DATA ASSETS 
Asset  
Description, example content  
Security relation  
Customer 
related 
information 
Customer name, identification 
number, schedule information, 
location data, electrical network 
topology data 
Effects on customer 
privacy  
Meter Data  
Meter 
readings 
that 
allow 
calculation of the quantity of 
electricity consumed or supplied 
over a time period.  
Effects on system 
control 
functions 
and 
billing 
(and 
thus also privacy) 
Control 
Commands  
Actions 
requested 
by 
one 
component. These may include 
Inquiries, Alarms, Events, and 
Notifications.  
Effects on system 
stability 
and 
reliability and also 
safety  
Tariff Data  
Utilities 
or 
other 
energy 
providers 
may 
inform 
consumers of new or temporary 
tariffs as a basis for purchase 
decisions.  
Effects on customer 
privacy 
and 
competition  
Data exchange of this information can be performed using 
hop-to-hop, end-to-end, and multicast communication, 
depending on the context and the involved entities. Based on 
Figure 1 the following trust assumptions are assumed: 
 DER resource (XMPP client on IEC 61850 server)  
belongs to DER owner 
 DER control (XMPP client on IEC 61850 client/server) 
belongs to DNO or 3rd party grid service  
 XMPP 
server 
may 
belong 
to 
DNO 
or 
3rd  
party grid service provider 
 Trust relation between DER resource owner and DNO 
(e.g., based on contract) 
 XMPP server operator trusted regarding resource 
discovery and message transfer (not handling!)  
These trust assumptions for the data exchange lead to base 
security requirements enumerated in Table II below: 
TABLE II. SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Security requirements  
R1 
End-to-middle source authentication ensures peers are properly 
identification and authentication. It is required between XMPP 
client and XMPP server or between XMPP servers. Note that here 
it may target mainly component authentication. 
R2 
End-to-end source authentication ensures peers are properly 
identification and authentication. It is required between IEC 61850 
client and server instances. This authentication goes across the 
XMPP server (“application layer”) and may be bound to a 
dedicated instance running on the IEC 61850 host.  
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

 
Security requirements  
R3 
End-to-middle integrity protection to ensure that data in transit has 
not been tampered with (unauthorized modification) between the 
XMPP client and XMPP server.  
R4 
End-to-end integrity protection to ensure that data in transit has 
not been tampered with (unauthorized modification) between the 
IEC 61850 client and server instances. Based on the different 
communication relations, the protection needs to support  
a) unicast: peer-to-peer related communication 
b) multicast: group based communication (via the MUC) 
R5 
End-to-middle confidentiality protection to ensure that data in 
transit has not been accessed (read) in an unauthorized way 
between the XMPP client and XMPP server. 
R6 
End-to-end confidentiality protection to ensure that data in transit 
has not been accessed (read) in an unauthorized way between the 
IEC 61850 client and server instances. Based on the different 
communication relations, the protection needs to support  
a) unicast: peer-to-peer related communication 
b) multicast: group based communication (via the MUC) 
Mapping the enumerated requirements to the base 
architecture from Figure 1 is depicted in Figure 2 below.  
 
Figure 2. Security Relations for DER Integration  
The consequent next step is the mapping of existing 
security measures to the base requirements to identify a target 
system architecture and also potential missing pieces.  
B. Mapping of exisiting Security Measures 
The following subsections map the security requirements 
to existing security measures, to discuss their applicability. 
1) Security Options in XMPP 
XMPP as defined in RFC 6120 and shown in Figure 3 
already considers the following integrated security measures:  
 Transport layer protection using Transport Layer 
Security(TLS, RFC 5246, ref. [9]), allows for  
 Mutual authentication of involved peers 
 Integrity protection of data transfer  
 Confidentiality protection of data transfer 
Depending on the chosen cipher suite, the application 
of this security mean addresses the security 
requirements R1, R3, and R5. 
 XMPP peer authentication with two options 
 Rely on TLS authentication (addresses R1), or 
 Using the separate Simple Authentication and 
Security Layer (SASL) authentication (in XMPP 
[10], addresses R1) to authenticate users. 
Figure 3. XMPP Security Options  
Note that the XMPP security features target the 
communication between a XMPP client and XMPP server in 
the first place. Additional means to address end-to-end 
security support (between XMPP clients) on higher protocol 
layers are being available or discussed. Examples are: 
 RFC 3923 [11] describes end-to-end signing and object 
encryption utilizing basically S/MIME. This approach 
addresses the security requirements R2, R4a, and R6a by 
applying asymmetric cryptography on a per message 
base. This may influence performance. 
 The IETF draft draft-miller-xmpp-e2e [12] describes 
end-to-end object encryption and signatures between 
two entities with multiple devices. This addresses the 
situation, where some end points for a given recipient 
may share keys, some may use different keys, some may 
have no keys and some may not support encryption or 
signature verification at all.  The draft defines a 
symmetric key table that is managed via three 
mechanisms that enable a key to be pushed to an end 
point, to be pulled from an originator or negotiated. If 
applicable it addresses R4a and R6a. 
 
2) Security in IEC 61850 
The working group IEC TC 57 WG15 is responsible for 
maintaining and evolving different security mechanisms 
applicable to the power systems domain. Here, IEC 62351 
[13] has been defined, which is meanwhile split into 13 
different parts with different level of completeness. Mainly 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

four parts are within scope for the further discussion of 
security mechanisms, which help to protect XMPP 
communication. Note that three parts are already available as 
technical standard (TS), but are currently being revised and 
updated, while the fourth one is defined in edition 1.The parts 
referred to are: 
 IEC 62351-3: Profiles including TCP/IP: This part 
basically profiles the use of TLS and is referenced from 
part 4, 6, and 9. 
 IEC 62351-4: Profiles including MMS: This part is 
currently in revision. The current document defines 
protection of MMS messages on transport and 
application layer. The application layer provides only 
limited protection as it does only allow for an 
authentication during the initial MMS session handshake 
without a cryptographic binding to the remaining part of 
session. As new scenarios arise, involving intermediate 
devices, this protection is no longer sufficient. Hence, 
IEC 62351-4 is being revised to enhance the protection 
of MMS traffic with additional application layer security 
profiles. 
 
Now, 
MMS 
session 
integrity 
and 
confidentiality protection is provided as depicted in 
Figure 4: 
 
Figure 4. IEC 62351-4 A-Profile enhancements 
This approach can be leveraged for the transport over 
XMPP to address R2, R4a and R6a. 
 IEC 62351-6: Security for IEC 61850: This part targets 
the protection of Ethernet multicast communication 
exchanges in substations.  The applied security measure 
bases on digital signatures and is currently being 
reworked to address performance shortcomings. It will 
be enhanced to allow for a group security approach 
utilizing symmetric cryptography. This approach can 
also be leveraged to realize for the secure integration of 
DER addressing R4b and R6b.  
 Draft IEC/TS 62351-9: Cyber security key management 
for power system equipment: This part focuses on the 
base key management of asymmetric key material like 
X.509 certificates and corresponding private keys, but 
also 
symmetric 
keys 
applicable 
for 
group 
communication. For the latter, the IETF defined “Group 
Domain of Interpretation”, RFC 6407 [14], is used to 
provide the key material for IEC 62351-6. 
IV. 
PROPOSED COMMUNICATION SECURITY APPROACH 
Based on the discussed trust assumptions, the security 
requirements and the security means in Section III, the 
following measures are proposed as base for a secure 
communication architecture to enable the secure integration 
of DER systems into the Smart Grid. The measures are 
distinguished into unicast and multicast communication. Also 
identified are open issues, which have to be addressed. 
A. Unicast security means 
For unicast communication, the security requirements can 
be fulfilled by the security means described in the sequel. Both 
hop-to-hop and end-to-end security are required to fulfill the 
security requirements. 
Mutual authentication, session integrity and confidentiality 
of an XMPP-based client, -server, or server-server 
communication are protected (hop-to-hop security from IEC 
61850 point of view). This fulfills the requirements R1, R3, 
and R5. The TLS security protocol as specified in RFC 6120 
(XMPP Core) is applied, using the cipher suites and settings 
defined in IEC/IS 62351-3 defining a SSL/TLS profile for 
protecting TCP based IEC 61850 traffic. The credentials used 
for authentication are X.509 certificates of the involved peers. 
The verification of XMPP client or XMPP server certificates 
requires that the root certificate of the issuing certificate 
authority (CA) is available at the other peer. Most likely the 
CA has a relation to the DNO or another 3rd party grid service 
provider.  
End-to-end authentication, integrity, and confidentiality can 
be achieved by applying the draft IEC/IS 62351-4 MMS 
secure session concept as stated in section 2) utilizing the AE+ 
profile to address R2, R4a, and R6a. 
Open at this point in time is if there is a distinction between 
the transport layer authentication and the application layer 
authentication in terms of utilized credentials. Using the same 
credentials for both may require access lists of allowed XMPP 
clients (DER resources) for the XMPP server upfront provided 
by the DNO (as blacklist or white list).  
B. Multicast security means 
For multicast communication, the multicast distribution 
point is the MUC, residing at the XMPP server side. Multicast 
communication is protected only hop-to-hop between MUC 
and XMPP clients. Here, the solution defined in IEC 61351-
6, i.e., the application of a group key for multicast 
communication, in conjunction with IEC 62351-9 defining the 
group key distribution, can be re-used directly to address 
security requirements R2, R4b and R6b.  
The realization of the group key management is open, i.e., 
which entity generates the group key, and distributes it to the 
clients. Based on the given requirements, and the trust 
assumptions, the group key generation would be performed at 
the DNO side, while the group key distribution would be 
performed using the MUC of the XMPP architecture. This 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

distributed key management certainly requires a protected 
end-to-end transport of the group key to avoid that the XMPP 
server operator has access to this sensitive information. 
Further information about multicast authentication can also be 
found in [15]. 
V. 
IDENTIFIED OPEN ISSUES  
As stated in the previous section, open issues have been 
identified regarding the credentials used for the peer 
authentication (hop-to-hop, and end-to-end) in unicast 
communication, and also regarding the mapping of certain 
multicast security related functions to the various involved 
entities. Another issue besides the selection of the 
authentication credential relates to the performance of peer 
authentication of XMPP clients towards the XMPP server. It 
has to be determined, which entity performs the authentication 
and access control. Different options have been identified: 
 Option 1: The XMPP server performs the client 
authentication locally, using a locally available access 
control list. The access control list can be provided by 
the DNO, or by another 3rd party grid service provider 
over a secure configuration protocol. 
 Option 2: The DNO, or another 3rd party grid service 
provider, performs the authentication, and access control 
check remotely, based on a redirection from the XMPP 
server. Frameworks like OAuth [16]could be involved 
here 
 Option 3: While the authentication is performed locally 
by the XMPP server, the access control check is 
performed remotely. 
These topics require further research, and will have to be 
included in future standardization work. 
Based on a threat and risk analysis, the options for using 
single credential or different credentials for hop-to-hop, and 
end-to-end security, have to be compared in the specific 
application context. This is the basis to make a well-founded 
design decision. It has to be defined whether the choice can be 
left to the energy operator to provide flexibility for both 
options. If all peers authenticate using X.509 certificates, and 
corresponding private keys, the creation, and distribution of 
these operational certificates needs to be defined from a 
process, and also a technical point of view. The standard IEC 
62351-9 (targeting key management) provides guidance here, 
but the involved peers need to be identified, and their 
responsibility needs to be described for all use cases at a fine 
granularity to assure interoperability.  
Further issues requiring future research are the 
management of multicast membership: Which entity is 
determining which XMPP client is allowed to participate in 
which MUC multicast room.  How is the multicast key 
distribution being performed? It could be performed 
independently from the MUC, or alternatively using the MUC 
for distribution of the (encrypted) multicast key. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
This paper proposes security measures for the integration 
of DER systems into Smart Energy Grid and Smart Market, 
utilizing and combining mostly existing, or security means 
currently defined by different standardization organizations. 
The process for the definition of a standardized security 
solution is currently ongoing within the IEC.  
Open issues requiring further research have been 
identified, and possible directions for defining a suitable 
solution have been outlined. While open issues lie in the 
technical domain, they have dependencies also in the 
operational domain as security management operations have 
to be aligned with general operational use cases. The means to 
address have not been decided yet and need further research. 
It is envisioned to provide an implementation in the next 
step as proof of concept for the applicability of the proposed 
security approach. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ISO 61850-x: Communication networks and systems for power 
utility 
automation, 
http://www.iec.ch/smartgrid/standards/ 
[retrieved: Jan. 2015] 
[2] “Efficient Energy Automation with the IEC 61850 Standard 
Application Examples”, Siemens AG, December 2010, 
http://www.energy.siemens.com/mx/pool/hq/energy-
topics/standards/iec-61850/Application_examples_en.pdf 
[retrieved: Dec. 2014]. 
[3] ISO 9506: Industrial Automation Systems – Manufacturing 
Message Specification. 
[4] IEC TR 61850-80-3: Mapping to Web Protocols – 
Requirement Analysis and Technology Assessment  
[5] P. Saint-Andre, ”Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol 
(XMPP): Core”, RFC 6120, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6120 
[retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[6]  A. Gulbrandsen, P. Vixie, and L. Esibov, “A DNS RR for 
specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)”, RFC 2782, 
http://tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2782.txt [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[7] XMPP 
Protocol 
extensions: 
http://xmpp.org/xmpp-
protocols/xmpp-extensions/ [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[8] XMPP foundation: http://www.xmpp.org [retrieved: April. 
2015] 
[9] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) Protocol Version 1.2”, RFC 5246, Aug. 2008, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246 [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[10] A. Melenikov and K.Zeilenga, “Simple Authentication and 
Security 
Layer 
(SASL)”, 
RFC 
4422, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4422 [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[11] P. Saint-Andre, “End-to-End Signing and Object Encryption 
for the Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP)”, 
RFC 3923, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3923 [retrieved: Jan. 
2015]. 
[12] M.Miller and C.Wallace, “End-to-End Object Encryption and 
Signatures 
for 
XMPP”, 
Draft, 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-miller-xmpp-e2e/ 
[retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[13] IEC 62351-x Power systems management and associated 
information exchange – Data and communication security, 
http://www.iec.ch/smartgrid/standards/ [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[14] B. Weiss, S. Rowles, and T. Hardjono, “The Group Domain of 
Interpretation”, 
RFC 
6407, 
Oct. 
2011, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6407  [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[15] S. Fries and R. Falk, “Efficient Multicast Authentication in 
Energy Environments”, Proc. IARIA Energy 2013, March 
2013, 
ISBN 
978-1-61208-259-2, 
pp. 
65-71, 
http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=energy_20
13_3_30_40056 [retrieved Dec. 2014]. 
[16] OAuth - OAuth 2.0 authorization framework, http://oauth.net/ 
[retrieved Jan. 2015]. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-414-5
SMART 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

