Multiradio Sensing Systems for Home Area Networking and Building Management 
Brendan O’Flynn, Marco De Donno, Wassim Magnin 
Tyndall National Institute 
University College Cork 
Cork, Ireland 
email: brendan.oflynn@tyndall.ie 
 
Abstract—Many WSN systems use proprietary systems so 
interoperability between different devices and systems can be 
at best difficult with various protocols (standards based and 
non-standards based) used (ZigBee, EnOcean, MODBUS, 
KNEX, DALI, Powerline, etc.). This work describes the 
development of a novel low power consumption multiradio 
system incorporating 32-bit ARM-Cortex microcontroller and 
multiple radio interfaces - ZigBee/6LoWPAN/Bluetooth LE 
(Low Energy)/868MHz platform. The multiradio sensing 
system lends itself to interoperability and standardization 
between the different technologies which typically make up a 
heterogeneous network of sensors for both standards based 
and non-standards based systems. The configurability of the 
system enables energy savings, and increases the range 
between single points enabling the implementation of adaptive 
networking architectures of different configurations. The 
system described provides a future-proof wireless platform for 
Home Automation Networks with regards to the network 
heterogeneity in terms of hardware and protocols defined as 
being critical for use in the built environment. This system is 
the first to provide the capability to communicate in the 
2.4GHz band as well as the 868MHz band as well as the feature 
of multiboot capability. 
Keywords - Smart Sensing; Home Area Networks; Energy 
Management; Multiradio Systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) systems have the 
potential to be ubiquitous in today’s society in a myriad of 
applications such as Smart Homes, Building Energy 
Management 
(BEM), 
micro 
grid 
management, 
environmental 
monitoring 
and 
smart 
cities. 
New 
architectures are required to offer improved inter-operability, 
to improve reliability of data communications and to address 
the spread spectrum requirements associated with next 
generation sensor systems through the development of smart 
radio systems. Currently available platforms exist that have 
multiple radios but these tend to operate in a single 
Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) band (typically 
2.4GHz) – and not in combination with the 868MHz ISM 
Band which is ideal for the built environment due to its long 
range, low data rate properties. 
The value of WSNs as a sensing system is clear - 
typically wired sensor systems are expensive to install with 
70-90% of the cost of a sensor system installation relating to 
labor and wiring – which ranges from 40 to $2000 per linear 
foot of wiring [1]. A number of challenges still need to be 
addressed to ensure WSN technology achieves its’ full 
potential across all application areas. An abundance of 
communications technologies persist within the Home Area 
Networking (HAN) domain, with no single technology 
identifying itself as the "one size fits all" solution. 
The AUTonomic HomE area NeTwork InfrastruCture 
(AUTHENTIC) project [2][3] funded by the International 
Energy Research Centre (IERC) [4] seeks to explore, the 
design and delivery of a HAN infrastructure capable of 
supporting opportunistic decision making pertaining to 
effective energy management within the home. This requires 
the integration of key enabling heterogeneous technologies 
including a variety of physical sensors within the home 
(temperature, contact sensors, passive infra-red), cyber 
sensor sources (services) outside of the home (e.g., 
meteorological data, energy providers dynamic pricing sites) 
together with effective interfacing with the smart grid 
beyond the home. Section I of this paper introduces the 
subject matter and application space associated with wireless 
sensing solutions for the built environment. Section II 
reviews some of the state of the art in current wireless 
sensing system technologies, with emphasis on multiradio 
systems. Section III describes the “Authentic Board” 
developed within the project. Section IV describes the 
multiradio functionality and Section V examines the results 
of initial trials and tests carried out using the system. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORKS 
There are a variety of standards available (proprietary 
and non-proprietary), which are widely used within the many 
deployments of HAN which exist. ZigBee, Bluetooth, IEEE 
802.11x (Wi-Fi) are globally recognized as references in 
wireless communications and go far beyond the scope of 
WSN. Those technologies have been developed using the 
license-free ISM band of 2.4-2.5GHz, although ZigBee has 
an implementation for the 868MHz and the latest 802.11.n 
standard used by Wi-Fi offers support for both 2.4 and 
5GHz. Indoor range above the GHz frequency is quite 
limited especially for indoor applications with dense 
obstacles. The Wi-Fi technology surpasses those issues with 
higher transmission power (up to 100 times higher than 
ZigBee/802.15.4), which is of course not suitable for battery 
powered systems in low power WSN systems. 
Although some manufacturers provide WSN systems 
using 868MHz or even 433MHz, it is more common to see 
them designed around proprietary technologies such as 
ZigBee. An interesting trade off investigated in this paper is 
the development of a system with the ability to adapt its 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

communications channel to use the best radio link depending 
on the throughput and range requirements in any 
configuration. 
Multiradio platforms are a subject of research for WSN 
as 
they 
offer 
some 
attractive 
characteristics 
and 
improvements over single radio WSN platforms. Multiradio 
systems with radios covering Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and 
6LoWPAN (IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area 
Networks) operating at the 2.45 GHz ISM band have 
reported to achieve enhanced robustness, latency and energy 
characteristics [5].  In different implementations, multiradio 
systems operating at the 433MHz and 2.45 GHz ISM bands 
were reported [6] using a preamble sampling technique in a 
wakeup 
radio 
implementation 
showing 
experimental 
performance evaluation of a developed protocol in terms of 
power consumption and latency over different duty cycle 
values and under various amounts of traffic loads.  A 
multiradio platform for on the body WSN applications 
operating in 433MHz and 868Mz is reported in [7] with 
focus on the platform architecture. More consideration on the 
issues of antenna design for such devices is found in [8] [9].  
The OPAL is an example of a multiradio platform where 
increased performance in terms of the network realization, 
latency, data throughput and power consumption were 
achieved compared to single radio platforms [10].  The 
OPAL platform is a high throughput sensing module that 
includes two onboard 802.15.4 radios operating in the 900 
MHz and 2.4GHz bands to provide communication diversity 
and an aggregate transfer rate of 3 Mbps.  It embeds a 96 
MHz Cortex SAM3U processor with dynamic core 
frequency scaling, a feature that can be used to fine-tune 
processing speed with the higher communication rates while 
minimizing energy consumption. 
The platform described in the following sections of this 
paper is a novel low power consumption multiradio system 
incorporating 32-bit ARM-Cortex microcontroller and 
multiple radio interfaces - ZigBee/6LoWPAN/Bluetooth 
LE/868MHz platform, which features autonomous behavior 
to enable interoperability between systems utilizing different 
radio front ends. It provides a solution for network 
congestion in environments such as HAN and Commercial 
Buildings in a credit card sized form factor (see Figure 1 
below). It also provides better interoperability than the usual 
wireless 
sensor 
devices 
approach, 
enhancing 
the 
communicability between different network entities (sensor 
nodes, smart meters, media, smartphones), and driving the 
wireless sensor networks to the smart cities application 
space. 
III. 
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
The aim of this system development is to provide a future-
proof wireless platform for HAN with regards to the 
network heterogeneity in terms of hardware and protocols 
currently in use and under development. 
A specification process was undertaken with industry 
partners and service providers in the area of building 
management – to identify the core requirements associated 
with a wireless system for deployment in homes and offices. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. AUTHENTIC Credit Card Form Factor Platform. 
The four main issues that need to be considered prior to 
selecting any unit or design approaches are: over all power 
consumption, cost, complete module size and user 
friendliness. Technical features assessed and considered 
included:  functionality requirements as regards, actuation 
and control, quality of service, latency, number and types of 
sensors/meters 
and interfaces, 
programming methods 
(wireless/non wireless), power supplies/energy harvesting 
compatibility, radio frequency band, standards/non standards 
communications and data transmission range. 
In conjunction with these end users, as part of our system 
specification, three communication standards were identified 
as being needed within the home area network environment: 
ZigBee – 2.4GHz, 6LoWPan – 2.4GHz, Bluetooth Low 
Energy – 2.4GHz, as well as a non-standards based ISM 
band 868MHz transceiver as a response to the 2.4GHz 
limitations identified - bandwidth congestion and data loss 
associated with non line of sight (NLOS) effects of the 
building structure limited RF range. The board has been 
designed around the standard ARM CORTEX-M3 based 
microcontroller, which offers a good trade-off between 
power consumption and performance. See Figure 2 for an 
overview of features and functionalities. 
 
  
Figure 2. Block diagram of AUTHENTIC Platform functionality. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
 
Figure 3. AUTHENTIC multiradio embedded system. 
 
The final embedded system was designed around a 
credit card form factor (Figure 3) and deployed in offices 
and homes for preliminary tests and characterization 
Microcontroller: The heart of the system is the ATMEL 
SAM3S8C microcontroller, a 32-bit ARM Cortex M3 Core.  
- 64MHz Maximum, 512KB flash, 64KB RAM, USB 2.0. 
External Flash Memories: Two external flash memories: 
128MB NAND flash for data logging, 16MB NOR-flash for 
code execution. The two memories are connected to the 
microcontroller External Bus Interface (EBI). 
Radio Communication: The platform integrates three radio 
chips: Bluetooth Low Energy radio chip, (manufacturer: 
NORDIC, model: NRF8001), ZigBee/6LoWPAN radio 
chip, (manufacturer: ATMEL, model: AT86RF231), Sub-
GHz 
radio 
chip 
(868MHz), 
(manufacturer: 
ST 
Microelectronics, model: SPIRIT1). 
Sensors: Two sensors were interface via an I2C interface: 
temperature sensor, accuracy: ±0.5°C, (manufacturer: 
MAXIM, model: MAX31725MTA+), light sensor, range: 
0.045 Lux to 188,000 Lux, (manufacturer: MAXIM, model: 
MAX44009EDT+T). These are used for detecting in home 
activity monitoring occupancy through lighting usage. 
Battery: The battery used is a lithium prismatic battery with 
a capacity of 1.3mAh which is recharged through the USB 
port or through the use of energy harvesting systems 
compatible with the built environment [11]. 
IV. 
MULTIRADIO FUNCTIONALITY 
A. Communication Architectures using Multiradio systems 
In the context of “crowded radio frequency spectrum”, a 
wireless sensor network composed with a number of the 
proposed devices’ architectures can automatically adapt to 
the most reliable frequency communication channel based on 
the local interferences. This type of architecture has some 
interesting 
commercial 
applications 
for 
interoperable 
networks, HAN’s, commercial buildings and smart cities. 
Compared to single-end radio devices, it has the potential to 
provide increased connectivity in deployment, and can 
potentially reduce the interference impact on the network  as 
the system can hop from ISM band to ISM band in an 
autonomous and opportunistic manner.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. AUTHENTIC multiradio system in operation 
 
By developing smart mechanisms for multi-protocol 
routing between the different radios, this architecture can 
potentially reduce the number of repeaters (and thus the 
infrastructure cost) compared to a standard single ended 
radio platform. In addition, multiradio systems provide better 
interoperability with Off-The-Shelf wireless devices, many 
of which operate on a variety of different standards and 
which may constitute a typical smart home deployment. 
From a research point of view, such a platform can be 
used to develop and evaluate firmware/wireless protocols 
using different frequency bands. 
The multiradio concept is illustrated in Figure 4 and 
shows how, by jumping between the 2.4GHz and 
868MHzfrequency bands, a connection can be made between 
remote clusters of ZigBee nodes which are in different 
locations or separated by a congested spectrum making 
communication at 2.4GHz difficult. 
Thus the network automatically switches to the 868MHz 
frequency in order to maintain communication with the out 
of range node. In that case, one node from the first cluster 
will act as a virtual “dual sensing” node, providing two 
inputs to the ZigBee Network. 
B. Multiradio Aspect 
The Bluetooth and 868MHz multiradio functionality has 
been tested as a proof of concept in a HAN as part of the 
AUTHENTIC deployment in office environments and in 
homes (for open field testing, the system was deployed 
temporarily outside).  
To 
evaluate 
the 
capabilities 
of 
the multiradio 
functionality, the remote node sends data (light, temperature 
or other peripheral sensor) to the base station using the 
868MHz radio or the 2.4GHz ZigBee network. The base 
station then sends the received data to a Smart Phone/HAN 
gateway using the Bluetooth interface that displays the data 
stream (in this case, temperature and light level from the 
remote sensor) as shown in Figure 5. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
 
Figure 5. AUTHENTIC multiradio system 
C. Multiboot - Autonomous system Implementation 
Multiboot capability enables the system to boot up and run 
according to various boot images [12] [13] which are stored 
in various sectors (region) of memory see Figure 6.  
To facilitate energy savings at an embedded system 
level, the multiboot configuration of the system will allow 
the platform to host two different applications and jump 
between them (via a boot loader). The applications can and 
will use different radios in future deployments, which will 
be useful for overcoming transmission issues in a 
congested/noisy environment. The targeted example is the 
mote running a ZigBee 2.4GHz application and an 868MHz 
application. Failing to transmit data at 2.4GHz due to 
electromagnetic effects or long range requirements, the node 
would switch to the 868MHz application to operate in a less 
congested ISM band. This behavior would be coordinated 
among the network nodes in protocols under development. 
In this case, the idea is to allocate memory regions to 
specific applications. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. AUTHENTIC Multiboot reconfigurability 
The Multi-Application Software Management tool 
acts as a main application that we will call “Leader”. The 
Leader is programmed in a specific area of the memory and 
will act as what is commonly known as a Bootstrap Loader. 
The particular boot state functionality can be associated 
with a range of communications modalities say ZigBee, 
Bluetooth or Wireless Modbus according to application 
requirements associated with energy consumption, latency 
or Quality of Service. 
The Leader can access any location of the memory. The 
applications that will contain the required functionalities of 
the system (e.g., sensing, communication) will be described 
as “Users”. The Leader can then grant the leadership to the 
different Users that will need to return the leadership to the 
Leader (different solutions are possible for the latter).  
The 
Leader 
will 
provide 
API 
(Application 
Programming Interface) in order to modify intrinsic 
parameters of the system (e.g., system clock frequency, 
timers etc.). Thus, this functionality will considerably 
reduce the complexity of the development from the user 
developer’s point of view. 
From a smart home/building management system 
deployment perspective, it will provide an essential software 
management tool for multiradio platforms. 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. AUTHENTIC Board Power Characterization 
To carry out theses energy consumption tests the 
following modalities were implemented as shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
SYSTEM POWER CONSUMPTION IN DIFFERENT MODES 
Symbol 
Operational Mode Measured 
Value 
Unit 
ITX868 
Current 
consumption 
in 
TX 
mode 
868MHzmodule, POUT = +12 dBm, all 
components on 
43.98 
mA 
Isb868 
Current consumption in standby mode 
868MHzmodule, all components on 
28.24 
mA 
ITXBLE, 
0dBm 
Current consumption in TX mode BLE 
module, POUT = 0 dBm, all components 
on 
24.80 
mA 
IsbBLE 
Current consumption in standby mode 
(between 2 transmissions) BLE module, all 
components on 
17.29 
mA 
ITX, 
ZigBee1 
Current consumption in TX mode ZigBee 
module, POUT = +3 dBm, all components 
on, 1 led on 
64.07 
mA 
ITX, 
ZigBee2 
Current consumption in TX mode ZigBee 
module, POUT = +3 dBm, all components 
on, 1 led off 
71.12 
mA 
Isleep1 
Current 
consumption 
in 
sleep 
mode 
(microcontroller) 
and 
all 
the 
other 
components on 
15.73 
mA 
Isleep2 
Current 
consumption 
in 
sleep 
mode 
(microcontroller) 
and 
all 
the 
other 
components off 
3.18 
mA 
Isleep3 
Current consumption in deepest sleep mode 
(microcontroller) 
and 
all 
the 
other 
components on 
3.1 
mA 
Isleep4 
Current consumption in deepest sleep mode 
and components off / removed 
3.5 
µA 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

The MCU is programmed to turn on all the devices, 
setting the output power of the module to (+12 dBm for 868 
MHz module, 0 dBm for BLE, +3 dBm for ZigBee), start 
the transmission of a single packet (1 byte length) and then 
put it in standby mode. Sleep mode tests include the MCU 
turning on all the devices before going into sleep mode, 
turning off all the devices and entering sleep mode, turning 
on all the devices and entering deepest sleep mode and 
turning off all the devices and goes into deepest sleep mode. 
For the 868 MHz tests, GFSK (Gaussian frequency-shift 
keying) modulation with the Gaussian filter “BT Product” 
set to 1 was used. For the Bluetooth LE modules the default 
Gaussian filter used is 0.5. For the ZigBee module 
quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK) modulation was 
used. Table I shows the results of all tests in different 
modes. These provide the building blocks for developing 
low-power networking algorithims for optimising the 
lifetime of the WSN systems and QoS parameters.  
B. Multiradio Range Test Comparison 
1) Indoor Non Line of Sight (NLOS) range testing 
This section focuses on the NLOS testing of the 868 
MHz, Bluetooth and ZigBee radio modules on the 
AUTHENTIC Board. Two boards are used: one acts as a 
sensing node and one as a Base Station. The node reads data 
from the temperature sensor as well as received signal 
strength indication (RSSI) values. This is then sent to the 
Base Station where it is converted into a value expressed in 
°C (minimizing energy consumption associated with 
processing on the node), which is in turn sent to our visual 
interface (a smartphone connected via Bluetooth). The test 
took place in an office environment consisting of open plan 
cubicles, closed offices, coffee dock facilities and meeting 
rooms in a simulated “home environment”. The node 
(represented by the star) was kept stationary while the base 
station and the smartphone moved around the entire area for 
data gathering at the different frequencies under test. In 
Figures 7, 8, 9, the areas where the data is received perfectly 
are reported in green, in orange the areas where the signal is 
poor and the data is received intermittently, in red the areas 
where there is no signal and data is not received. 
 
 
Figure 7. 868MHzrange test  
 
 
Figure 8. Bluetooth range test  
 
 
 
Figure 9. ZigBee 2.4GHz range test  
 
Theory would suggest that the range associated with 
lower frequency (868MHz) ISM bands would significantly 
outperform higher frequency ISM bands (2.4GHz). In this 
experiment, the difference is little more than a 10% 
improvement see Table II. We expected 868MHz to be much 
better than ZigBee, a possible reason (under investigation) is 
that the 868MHz data rate (500 kbps) is higher than the 
ZigBee one (250 kbps) and there is a tradeoff between the 
range and the data rate. Moreover, the modulation used by 
the modules are different: the value of Eb/N0 (noise power 
per unit bandwidth) of the offset-QPSK is less than that of 
the GFSK; this means that the bit error rate is better for the 
ZigBee module operating at 2.4GHz. To improve the 
868MHz range, it is possible to increase the power of the 
module (it can reach +16 dB) and reduce the data rate. 
Further experiments are under way to validate this. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF RANGE FOR INDOOR NLOS TESTS  
Radio 
Appoximate Area 
Covered 
Max. distance 
(Line of sight) 
868 MHz 
130.4  m2 
11.4  m 
Bluetooth LE 
60.04  m2 
7  m 
ZigBee 
108.6  m2 
10.6  m 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

 
2) Outdoor Line of Sight (LOS) range testing 
An open field is one of the simplest and most 
commonly used environments to do RF range tests. In this 
section tests for the three modules on the AUTHENTIC 
Board (868 MHz, Bluetooth, and ZigBee) are reported. The 
tests took place in a sports field in University College Cork, 
which offered a long range LOS measurement 
868 MHz: To test the Sub-GHz module, two 
AUTHENTIC boards were used, one as Node Remote and 
one as Base Station. The first reads data every four seconds 
from the temperature sensor and sends it to the Base Station. 
The maximum range measured was 193m. 
Bluetooth: For this test two devices were used: one 
AUTHENTIC Board and a smartphone. The board was left 
stationary and the smartphone was moved around the area 
checking if the connection was still available or not. The 
maximum LOS distance measured was 18.4m. 
ZigBee: 
To 
test 
the 
ZigBee 
module, 
two 
AUTHENTIC boards (one as Trust Center and one as 
Occupancy Sensor) were used along with a RF231USB-RD 
USB Stick (as Remote Control) were used. The Trust Center 
creates the network and the other two devices join it. After 
this, the Occupancy Sensor reads the value of the LED 
(on/off) and sends it every four seconds to the Remote 
Control that moves around the area. The maximum range 
measured was 193m. 
The maximum distance measured in Line of Sight for 
both the ZigBee and 868MHz system was 193m, but this 
value could be greater and additional tests need to be carried 
out to establish the maximum range for each. The maximum 
range achieved was due to the presence of physical 
obstacles (walls/buildings, which would have interfered 
with the LOS measurements at the maximum extremity of 
the test location. The results are tabulated in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
COMPARISON OF RANGE FOR OUTDOOR LOS TESTS  
Radio 
Max. distance (Line of Sight) 
868MHz 
193m  * 
Bluetooth LE 
18.4m 
ZigBee 
193m  * 
* Limit of the field measurement not the technology 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK 
This work describes the development and preliminary 
characterization of a novel low power consumption 
multiradio system incorporating multiple radio interfaces - 
ZigBee/6LoWPAN/Bluetooth 
LE/868MHz 
platform. 
It 
provides a solution for network congestion in environment 
such as Home Area Network and Commercial Buildings in a 
credit card sized form factor. The multiradio sensing system 
shows the potential for such systems to improve 
interoperability between the different wireless technologies 
enhancing the communications between heterogeneous 
network entities (Sensor Nodes, Smart Meters, Media, Smart 
Phones), and driving the Wireless Sensor Networks use case 
in the built environment The configurability of the system 
can increase the range between single sensor points and can 
enable 
the 
implementation 
of 
adaptive 
networking 
architectures of different configurations. 
Additional characterization and optimization of the 
system in a variety of environments is underway and 
development of frequency hopping protocols to maximize 
the potential of the multiradio system and its possibilities to 
maximize system lifetime of a WSN in a Smart Home or 
office environment through the development of networking 
protocols leveraging off the platforms capabilities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of 
Enterprise Ireland and the International Energy Research 
Centre (IERC) for funding the AUTHENTIC project 
(TC20121002A/B). This publication has emanated from 
research supported in part by Science Foundation Ireland 
(SFI) and is co-funded under the European Regional 
Development Fund, Grant Number 13/RC/2077-CONNECT. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Feng Zhao Leonidas, J. Guibas, Wireless Sensor Networks: An 
Information Processing Approach, ISBN-9781558609143, Chapter 8, 
pp. 294. 
[2] 
AUTHENTIC Webpage, 
http://www.creativedesign.ie/ierc_test/?homeareanetworks=authentic-
for-home-area-networks-han [retrieved: April, 2016] 
[3] 
K. Curran, Recent Advances in Ambient Intelligence and Context-
Aware 
Computing. 
IGI 
global 
book 
series, 
Advances 
in 
Computational Intelligence and Robotics (ACIR)(ISSN: 2327-0411), 
Chapter 10, pp. 155-169.  
[4] 
IERC Website: http://www.ierc.ie/ [retrieved: April, 2016] 
[5] 
M. T. Delgado, H. Khaleel, C. Pastrone, and M. A. Spirito, 
“Underlying connectivity mechanisms for multiradio wireless sensor 
and actuator networks”, In Wireless and Mobile Computing, 
Networking and Communications  (WiMob),  2013  IEEE 9th 
International Conference on, pp. 408-413. 
[6] 
J. Ansari, X. Zhang, and P.I Mahonen, “Multi radio medium access 
control protocol for wireless sensor networks”, Int. J. Sen. Netw., vol. 
8, no. 1, 2010 pp. 47-61. 
[7] 
J.  Buckley,  et al, “A novel and miniaturized 433/868mhz multi-band 
wireless sensor platform for body sensor network applications”,  In 
Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks (BSN), 2012 Ninth 
International Conference on, 2012, pp. 63-66. 
[8] 
L. Loizou J. Buckley, and B. O’Flynn,  “Design and analysis of a 
dual-band inverted-f antenna with orthogonal frequency-controlled 
radiation planes”,  Antennas and Propagation, IEEE Transactions on, 
Vol. 61, no. 8, 2013, pp. 3946-3951. 
[9] 
L. Loizou et al, “Design and measurement of a planar dual-band 
antenna for the tyndall multiradio wireless sensing platform”, In 
Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS), 2013 IEEE, pp. 11-14, 
2013.  
[10] R. Jurdak et al, “Opal: A multiradio platform for high throughput 
wireless sensor networks”, IEEE Embedded Systems Letters, vol. 3, 
no. 4, 2011, pp. 121-124. 
[11]  C. O’Mathuna, T. O'Donnell, R. Martinez-Catala, J. Rohan and B. 
O'Flynn,  “Energy Scavenging For Long-Term Deployable Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, Talanta, vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 613-623. 
[12]  D. Fuji, T. Yamakami, and K. Ishiguro, “A fast-boot method for 
embedded mobile Linux: Toward a single-digit user sensed boot time 
for full-featured commercial phones,” Proc. - 25th IEEE Int. Conf. 
Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl. Work. WAINA 2011, pp. 81–85, 2011. 
[13]  C. W. Chang, C. Y. Yang, Y. H. Chang, and T. W. Kuo, “Booting 
time minimization for real-time embedded systems with non-volatile 
memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 63, no. 4, 2014, pp. 847–859. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-4763
SMART 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (includes URBAN COMPUTING 2016)

