Exploring the Relationship Between Smart City Policy and Implementation  
 
Ellie Cosgrave 
Industrial Doctorate Centre in Systems 
University of Bristol  
Bristol, UK 
Ec5226@bris.ac.uk 
Theo Tryfonas 
Industrial Doctorate Centre in Systems 
University of Bristol  
Bristol, UK 
Theo.tryfonas@bris.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— The implementation of smart technologies gives rise 
to concerns about how imposed technologies create genuine 
value to a city. City leaders are facing increasing pressure to 
meet ambitious targets with limited resources. Much of the 
private sector heralds ‘smart city’ solutions as the way forward 
for meeting these targets, but city leaders often find it difficult 
to align the technology solutions with the intended policy 
outcomes. This paper investigates the core themes within the 
field of smart cities and future city policy, in order to derive an 
interpretive conceptual model of the relationships between 
them. We find that devising appropriate solutions should be 
framed not only by policy goals but a wider understanding of 
local challenges and opportunities, as well as an interpretation 
of public value.  
Keywords- Future cities; policy implementation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The ‘information age’ has driven a significant shift in 
nearly all aspects of modern life. In the past decade, we have 
seen a fundamental change in the way we work (networking 
through social media, distance working etc.), how we shop 
(online, price comparison), interact with family and friends 
(skype, social media), and our expectations of government 
(FixMyStreet, opendata). It has also heralded a new era of 
activism and community unity. “In the Arab Spring, social 
media facilitated action in the Middle East and North Africa 
(MENA) region, providing a free and accessible method of 
organising and coordinating demonstrations”[1]. This was 
echoed in the London riots and the subsequent cleanup 
operation [2].  
“The 
networked 
information 
environment 
has 
dramatically transformed the marketplace, creating new 
modes and opportunities for how we produce and consume 
information” [3]. Companies like Facebook, Amazon and 
Google have capitalized on this opportunity by using 
information to provide value to their customers. These 
companies utilize information as a core asset, and leverage it 
to create products and services that respond to user desires 
and expectations. The current ‘information marketplace’ in 
cities already creates value for citizens as highlighted in 
recent reports such as “Information Marketplaces: The New 
Economics of Cities” [4]. Innovative products and services 
create jobs and support citizens in navigating and using the 
city in effective, educational and enjoyable ways. However 
the true value has not yet been quantified or captured by city 
leaders. Governments are struggling to realize the 
opportunities offered by ubiquitous information, ‘smart’ 
technologies, social media, and anytime, anywhere access. 
They are unable to articulate the value of the market within 
their own city, let alone the ‘value chain’ [5] in term of 
inputs, outputs and outcomes for citizens. In an interview, 
Emer Coleman (Deputy Director Digital Engagement 
Government Digital Services at the Cabinet Office) 
explained, “this requires new leadership from the public 
sector. Data surfaces political decisions.”  
This paper investigates the core themes within the field 
of smart cities and future city policy, in order to derive an 
interpretive conceptual model of the relationships between 
them. Section two sets out a methodology for investigation, 
sections three to six investigate the core themes through 
analysis of second-hand evidence. Finally, we introduce our 
model in section seven and set a further research agenda in 
section eight.   
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
Investigating local government decision making around 
‘smart cities’ requires an understanding beyond the business 
case analysis for a given solution or investment. While a 
rigorous financial justification is important for smart city 
investments, it is also useful to consider the wider context of 
decision-making; the motivations for change, the value 
systems, and the political paradigm within which both long 
and short term decisions are made. Furthermore, “a city is an 
enormously complex and open-ended system, with many 
intertwining force fields influencing its form simultaneously” 
[6]. An investigation into single technology-solutions is 
largely obsolete if the wider context and relationships are not 
understood. In this light, we have undertaken a multi-
disciplinary literature review of the way in which decisions 
are made in the public sector. Taking a grounded approach 
we extracted core themes and explored the relationship and 
flows between them to create an interpretive conceptual 
model. We then explored, validated and developed this 
model through consultation with a series of ‘smart city’ 
experts.  
We intend to use this model to compliment our research 
into how cities should invest in the ‘information economy’ 
and ‘smart cities.’ Setting this research in its wider context of 
public sector decision making helps to ensure that research 
findings are directed towards recommendations that are 
politically acceptable, actionable and that are a genuine 
contribution to the creation of public value.  
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

III. 
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES 
All city leaders operate within a unique context. The 
challenges and opportunities that the city faces are derived 
from 
the 
socio-economic 
conditions, 
demographics, 
population size, accessibility, infrastructure, local business 
types etc. These form the baseline, or ‘building blocks’[7] 
that the city leaders have to work from. These baselines are 
continually moving, and forecasting is used to assess future 
challenges. For example, a report on ‘Demographic 
Challenges for European Regions’ cites that “demographic 
change might lead to further increases in social polarization 
in Europe”[8] in the next 10 years.  
According to the report “All Our Futures” (a forecasting 
report from the UK Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, 
based on a literature review, trends analysis, a Delphi survey 
and futures events) “in 2015 many of the pressures of 
government will manifest most dramatically at a local level. 
More flexibility and responsiveness at a local level would 
significantly enhance governments’ capability to meet the 
challenges successfully” [7]. It is becoming important then, 
that city leaders actively engage in seeking out and 
responding to the opportunities and challenges faced by their 
particular locality.  
Static snapshots of understanding are of limited value. 
This is because of the dynamic nature of the problem; the 
solution itself will change the operating context. For example 
the ‘information economy’, which has been driven by 
technological advances, is itself a driver of change for a 
city’s challenges and opportunities. In turn, the way a city 
chooses to respond (perhaps through investing in start-ups or 
providing free public wifi) will affect the operating context 
yet further. Here, there is a reinforcing loop between the 
‘challenges and opportunities’ and the solutions that might 
be implemented. The implication of this is that, if cities are 
to stay effective and responsive to citizen needs, they must 
continually evaluate the operating context through analysis 
of its challenges and opportunities. This can be achieved 
through local, national or international schemes such as the 
Covenant of Mayors [9].  
IV. 
POLICY GOALS 
The quantified challenges and opportunities are the basic 
facts about a city’s context although ‘opportunities’ may be 
more subjective. “Once facts are accepted the ethics 
discussion begins as to how facts can be used or the 
appropriateness of facts in any specific case” [10]. Political 
leaders must translate these facts into goals or aspirations of 
where they would like to be; they must translate the “is” and 
“is-nots” into “ought” and “ought-nots” [11]. So, the 
‘challenges and opportunities’ from part III, influence the 
development of policy goals. This process is heavily value-
laden and requires the facts to be filtered through a political 
and cultural value system.  
There is, however, an ongoing debate about the role of 
ICT in challenging the political and cultural paradigms of 
city leadership. The opportunities created by the ‘smart city’ 
“may lead us to a more fundamental choice between a 
privatized government (in which most issues are dealt with 
according to commercial relationships and principles, with 
services paid for by clients) and traditional, public 
government (in which many services considered to be of 
public interest are provided to citizens and businesses 
according to a variety of criteria not necessarily linked to 
commercial considerations)” [12]. The political context will 
fundamentally change how presented facts are interpreted 
into policy goals. City leaders must take care to ensure that 
the ability of ICT to outsource city services does not dictate 
the political direction, but that instead, investment in ICT is 
derived from a sound articulation of political, social and 
cultural values.  
The policy goals are created to address the challenges 
and opportunities in a given context, and can directly affect 
citizen quality of life, environmental impact and civic 
engagement. In their research, Oxendine et al. found that 
“policy approaches regarding information technology 
interact with civic activity to predict both general internet 
use among citizens, as well as citizens’ likelihood to use the 
Internet to seek out information about local government and 
community activities” [13].  There is therefore a tangible role 
for local and national governments to create policy goals that 
can genuinely respond to local challenges and capitalize on 
opportunities.  
V. 
PUBLIC VALUE 
The concept of public value management has become 
increasingly important for city leaders in recent years. 
O’Flynn explains that “public managers have multiple goals 
which in addition to the achievement of performance targets, 
are more broadly concerned with aspects such as steering 
networks of providers in the quest for public value creation, 
creating and maintaining trust, and responding to collective 
preferences of the citizenry” [14]. The creation of public 
value is described by Baptista as the “raison-d’etre of 
government,” [12] and is distinct from simple cost cutting. 
“Public value argues that public services are distinctive 
because they are characterised by claims of rights by citizens 
to services that have been authorized and funded through 
some democratic process” [13]. It is delivered when 
solutions implemented adequately respond to a city’s 
challenges and opportunities, and contribute the achievement 
of policy goals. It covers a host of outcomes from the 
tangible examples such as ‘reduced crime on busses’ to the 
more intangible delivery of ‘feeling of safety’ or ‘level of 
happiness’ [15].  Kelly and Muers [16] claim that public 
value can be achieved through the: 
• 
Delivery of high quality services 
• 
Achievement of outcomes that are seen as desirable 
by the public (will depend on opportunities and 
challenges as well as culture and values) 
• 
Trust in public institutions 
Kearns argues that “(public value) can be used both as an 
aid to judgment by governments when deciding what 
activities to undertake and as a yardstick against which to 
assess government performance” [17]. In this way, the 
delivery of public value determines the types of solutions 
that are implemented as well as delivering on policy goals. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

VI. 
SOLUTIONS 
In order to address the challenges and opportunities of 
the city and deliver public value, city leaders invest in 
solutions. These solutions are actionable long or short term 
projects or programmes that can take many forms including 
regulation, 
facilitation 
or 
procurement. 
These 
are 
exemplified by smart grid implementation projects, e-
ticketing or facilitation programmes such as the iShed in 
Bristol, the Bristol Council initiative “to produce creative 
technology collaborations” [18]. 
ICT or ‘smart’ solutions that the governments invest in 
can have direct and indirect implications for the creation of 
‘public value’. Cresswell et al. identify three core 
mechanisms in the creation of public value through ICT [19]: 
1.  Direct service impacts (which “occur when IT is 
embedded directly in a service delivery process, 
generating service changes that enhance value to 
the citizen”) 
2. Indirect service impacts (which “occur when back 
office or infrastructure investments produces 
changes in a government business process”) 
3. Mixed service and environmental value impact 
(where “the new IT is also linked to changes in the 
environment and relationships between the direct 
beneficiaries and other entities in the public area”) 
VII. MODEL 
The core themes derived from the literature review 
include: Opportunities and challenges, policy goals, public 
value, and solutions. These themes are distinct but related, 
and the conceptual model in Figure 1 interprets the 
relationships between them. The model highlights that a 
city’s challenges and opportunities influence city leaders’ 
policy goals as well as the types of solution they might 
employ. These solutions are intended to resolve the 
challenges and opportunities of the city, but also deliver a 
wider contribution to public value, which in turn also 
supports the delivery of policy goals.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Grounded model of smart city policy and implementation 
concepts. 
This model is not hierarchical. It is not the case that 
governments always set policy goals to directly address 
challenges and opportunities within their cities, for which 
appropriate solutions are derived. Often there is a ‘solutions 
push,’ i.e. a solution that is put in place because it seems to 
make sense and creates ‘public value,’ even if it does not 
directly come from a policy goal or a specifically quantified 
challenge. This model can be applied to interpreting the 
Greater London Authority’s action around open data [20], 
which shows a city making an investment driven from a 
bottom-up understanding of creating public value. Emer 
Coleman saw that for a relatively small investment of 
£15,000 she could set up an Open Datastore for London. The 
decision to invest was driven by an inherent understanding of 
value to Londoners in terms of economic and social 
development, as well the delivery of better services and the 
transparency of government. It also responded to the city’s 
‘challenges and opportunities’ around private sector 
innovation and supporting start-up companies. Here, an 
investment in a solution was made as a contribution to public 
value rather than being instigated from a particular policy 
goal. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The model in figure 1 shows two core influencing 
features which are; the “challenges and opportunities” and 
the concept of “public value”. These two factors form the 
context for any government action, and should be 
specifically articulated and continually explored. To respond 
to these two factors, governments act in two ways. Firstly 
they create policy goals which are intended to set investment 
priorities. These policy goals are explicitly or implicitly 
responding to local challenges and opportunities, as well as 
attempting to create public value. Secondly, city leaders 
intervene with solutions. Likewise, these respond to the core 
influencers in the system, and, through the tackling of these 
influencers, are intended to achieve policy goals.  
Achieving policy goals through implementing solutions 
is often oversimplified, with public sector investment being 
directly informed by policy goals without consideration of 
the wider context. This is exemplified by the multiple 
failures of bike hire schemes across the UK (e.g., in Reading, 
Cardiff and Bristol). Often these schemes are developed 
directly from a local government policy to increase healthy 
lifestyles and reduce carbon emissions, but fail to understand 
where the true public value lies. This might include, for 
example, the failure to understand primary user groups and 
usage patterns. The ultimate goal should be to align policy 
goals with appropriate solutions. However, this is not 
achieved through directly jumping between them, but instead 
requires a consideration of the wider view offered by this 
model.  
Achieving this in the complex city environment where 
long and short term local goals must be balanced with 
national and international-interest policies is especially 
demanding. For city leaders, this complexity is further 
compounded by the huge advancements in the ICT industry, 
which has fundamentally shifted the citizen behavior, 
expectations, 
and 
the 
economy. 
Devising 
solution 
programmes that will work effectively within this system, as 
well as respond to global calls for emissions reductions will 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

be the defining feature in local governance in the next ten 
years.  
This simple model in its current state is unable to offer 
the level of insight that a strategic decision maker requires in 
order to justify investment. To develop this model further we 
plan to explore each of the core components in turn and 
create a more detailed, dynamic model. This could include 
causal mapping and system dynamics modeling. For 
example, to investigate how cities might leverage policy 
goals and solutions to maximize public value from the 
information economy, we first need to gain a comprehension 
of the value that is already provided by information (or 
perhaps ‘information products’ [4]) within the city. 
Undertaking this research goes some way to quantifying the 
‘challenges and opportunities’ that exist within a certain city. 
This research will be undertaken using case studies, for 
which a ‘value chain’ approach will be adopted to map the 
source of, and quantify the value. This builds upon work by 
Mulligan in her book “The Communications Industries in the 
Era of Convergence” [5]. This understanding will be 
combined with an investigation into what is considered of 
‘public value’ to that city. Combining these two will support 
the development of appropriate policy goals and, a solution 
roadmap. The intention is to support cities in maximizing the 
value created from the ‘information economy’, or ‘smart 
city’, and ensuring that they have a robust understanding of 
both the direction of their policy goals, and the appropriate 
solutions.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Systems Centre at the 
University of Bristol, UK; the EPSRC funded Industrial 
Doctorate Centre in Systems (Grant EP/G037353/1); and 
Arup. The authors would like to thank Volker Buscher and 
John Davis for supporting this research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Kenna, M. “Social media: following EU public diplomacy 
and friending MENA”, European Policy Centre, Policy brief, 
July 2011. 
[2] Bright, P. “How the London riots showed us two sides of 
social 
networking”, 
available 
at: 
< 
http://arstechnica.com/techpolicy/news/2011/08/the-two-
sides-of-social-networking-ondisplay-in-the-london-riots.ars 
>, September 2011. [retrieved: March, 2012]. 
[3] Kazman, R. and Chen, H. The metropolis model: a new logic 
for development of corwdsourced systems, Communications 
of The ACM, 2009. 
[4] Webb, M et al. “Information Marketplaces: the new 
economics of cities”, The Climate Group, Arup, Accenture, 
Horizon, London, December 2011. 
[5] Mulligan, C. “The Communications Industries in the Era of 
Convergence”, Routledge, 2011. 
[6] Sevtsuk, A. and Beinart, J. The effects of ICT on City Form. 
MIT School of Architecture and Planning, Cambridge, 2005. 
[7] Tavistock Institute, “All Our Futures: The challenges for local 
governance in 2015”, The Office of the deputy prime 
minister, London, 2006. 
[8] Fésüs, G., Rillaers, A., Poelman, H., and Gákova Z. “Regions 
2020: Demographic challenges for European regions” 
Brussels, November 2008. 
[9] The 
Covenant 
of 
mayors, 
available 
at 
< 
http://www.eumayors.eu/index_en.html > ,  Jan 2012. 
[retrieved: March, 2012]. 
[10] Gortner, H. “Values and Ethics”, 2001. In: Cooper, T. 
“Handbook of administrative ethics”, Marcel Dekker Inc. 
New York, 2001. 
[11] Hume, D. “A Treatise of Human Nature”, OUP Oxford, 1978. 
[12] Baptista, M. “e-Government and State Reform: Policy 
Dilemmas for Europe”. the Electronic Journal of e- 
Government, 2005. 
[13] Oxendine, A., Sullivan, J., Borgida, E., Riedel, E., Jackson, 
M., and Dial, J. The Importance of Political Context for 
Understanding Civic Engagement: A Longitudinal Analysis. 
Ploitical Behaviour, Vol 29, No1. (mar 2007) pp. 31-67. 
[14] O’Flynn, J. ‘From New Public Management to Public Value: 
Paradigmatic Change and Managerial Implications’, The 
Australian Journal of Public Administration, 2007, vol 66 no 
3, pp. 353-366. 
[15] Rodríguez-Posea, A. and Maslauskaitec, K. “Can policy make 
us happier? Individual characteristics, socio-economic factors 
and life satisfaction in Central and Eastern Europe”. 
Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and society, 2011. 
[16] Kelly, G. and Muers, S. Creating Public Value, Cabinet 
Office Strategy Unit, 2002. 
[17] Kearns, I. “Public Value and eGovernment”, Institute for 
Public Policy Research, London, 2004. 
[18] Ished, avialable at < http://www.watershed.co.uk/ished/ > 
2012. [retrieved: March, 2012]. 
[19] Cresswell, A., Burke, G., and Pardo, T. “Advancing Return 
on Investment Analysis for Government IT: A Public Value 
Framework”. 
[20] London Datastore, available at < http://data.london.gov.uk/ > 
2012. [retrieved: March, 2012]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-225-7
SMART 2012 : The First International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

