An Audible Handheld Ultra-Sonic-Sonar (AHRUS) to Support Human Echo 
Location
Florian von Zabiensky and Michael Kreutzer 
THM - University of Applied Sciences 
Institute for Technology and Computer Science  
Giessen, Germany 
e-mail: Florian.von.Zabiensky@mni.thm.de, Michael.Kreutzer@mni.thm.de
Abstract—A 
portable 
device 
to 
support 
human 
echolocation is presented in the form of a handheld audible 
ultrasonic sonar called AHRUS. The device generates a 
bundled ultrasonic beam with which the environment can be 
scanned. A special modulation process uses the non-linear 
properties of the air as a transmission medium. After reflection 
at an obstacle, the beam changes to audible sound, which can 
be perceived with normal human hearing. In this way, blind 
people can perceive illuminated objects as if they were emitting 
noise themselves. This gives the impression of a kind of simple 
bat hearing supporting orientation in unfamiliar surroundings. 
Keywords—Human Echo Localization; Audible Ultrasound 
Sonar; Blind People; Spatial Hearing; Obstacle Detection 
I.
INTRODUCTION
The human echolocation is used by people who are visual 
impaired or blind to help build a mental spatial map of their 
environment. Echolocation is often enabled by creating a 
clicking sound with their tongue. Objects in the 
environment reflect discernible sounds to the human ear. 
The human brain can construct a structured image of the 
environment to build a mental spatial map. With this 
method, also known as flash sonar, trained users reach 
enormous perception performances. The position, size, or 
density of objects could be determined. [1] 
Unlike bats, which perceive structures in submillimeter 
range by ultrasonic echolocation, the human perception is 
restricted by the large wavelength of acoustic waves. This 
article shows how these disadvantages can be overcome by 
using parametric ultrasound to get a little closer to bat 
hearing. 
II.
BENEFITS OF ULTRASOUND
Fig: 1 shows the difference between the sound propagation 
of a sharp tongue click and the featured Audible-High-
Resolution-Ultrasonic-Sonar (AHRUS), which works as a 
kind of acoustic scanning beam. 
Ultrasonic waves are reflected back by little, finely 
structured or soft objects where acoustic waves pass through 
objects like fences, bushes or thin piles without any 
considerable reflection. 
Another problem is smooth surfaces whose normal does 
not point in the direction of the user. As light will be spread 
back at finely structured surfaces, even roughly structured 
surfaces act like a mirror for acoustic waves. As a result, 
transversal sound waves from the user to the objects are 
reflected away from the user (stealth effect). This way, it is 
not possible for the user to detect such objects. Ultrasonic 
waves with high frequencies or short wavelengths, 
conversely, are reflected to the sound source at smaller 
structures as soon as the wavelength reaches the order of 
magnitude of the structure size. 
Figure 1. Comparison of sound intensity and directivity of a tongue click 
(left) and the AHRUS system (right). [3] 
III.
HOW IT WORKS
Nevertheless, a way to use ultrasonic waves in combination 
with the human ear is enabled by nonlinear acoustics. This 
principle is also called a parametric ultrasonic loudspeaker. 
They are usually used for highly directed audio spotlights, 
e.g. for a playback of sharply demarcated audio information 
in a museum. [2] 
In the presence of high sound pressure levels, the air 
behaves in a nonlinear manner. This enables the 
transformation of ultrasonic to acoustic waves in the air 
itself by amplitude modulation of the ultrasonic signal. 
During the process of transformation, the physical 
features of the ultrasonic signal retain in the acoustic signal. 
This auto conversion from ultrasonic to acoustic waves, 
enables the user at perceive ultrasonic signals with their own 
ears. 
IV.
REALIZATION OF A HANDHELD DEVICE
     AHRUS is a new tool that brings human echolocation a 
step closer to bat hearing and makes it easier for 
inexperienced people to get started. The small device emits 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

a sharply bundled ultrasound beam, which gradually turns 
into audible sound using the concept of parametric 
ultrasound.It can be compared to a kind of acoustic 
flashlight, with the sound cone of which the environment is 
scanned. In the imagination of the experienced user, an 
acoustic image is created that is far more finely structured 
than with classic echolocation with tongue clicks.  [3] 
Fig: 2 shows the prototype of the AHRUS system. It is 
operated via a menu with voice output to adjust system-
parameters. 
Figure 2. 3D-Printed AHRUS-Prototype. 
The transducer is composed of 19 piezo ultrasound 
emitters, producing an ultrasound pressure level up to 135 
dB at a frequency of 40 kHz. The beam is very focused with 
an aperture angle of about 5 degrees.  
 The short wavelength of the ultrasonic waves of 8mm 
(0.3 in) results in well audible echoes, also from rarely 
structured or small obstacles like wire fences or twigs. 
A configurable synthesizer for signal generation has 
been implemented on an ARM Cortex-M4 signal processor. 
It allows the generation of click, noise or sound signals, as a 
continuous signal or pulses with selectable pulse frequency 
and width. A frequency modulation for generation of signals 
in which the frequency increases or decreases, so called 
chirp-signals, is also included. Chirps are also used by bats 
or dolphins for echo localization. 
V.
CONCLUSION
     AHRUS was developed at the Institute for Technology & 
Computer Science in Gießen with the support of people that 
are blind themselves. It is intended to demonstrate the 
possibilities of spatial auditory perception and form a basis 
for future research activities.  
AHRUS tries to eliminate the significant disadvantages 
of classic active echolocation techniques. By using self-
demodulating ultrasonic waves, it enables the perception of 
much smaller object structures. 
In contrast to electronic aids that use headphones as 
audio interface to the user, AHRUS uses the individual and 
efficient ears of the user himself. With the great advantage, 
the ears stay free to hear the normal information from the 
environment. By using soft but striking signals, e.g., noisy 
clicks, the signals are easy to hear but not disturbing during 
travel. Because of the advantages of ultrasonic waves and 
configurable signals, AHRUS is an excellent extension to 
classical flash sonar. 
Nonetheless, the full potential of AHRUS will be 
discovered after more people who are blind use this 
technology to discover its pros and cons. We hope to find a 
strong partner for the production of the device soon to be 
able to offer the technology to a large group of blind users.  
REFERENCES
[1]
Kish, D. (2009). Human echolocation: How to “see” like a 
bat. New Scientist, 202(2703), 31-33. 
[2]
Weinzierl, S. (Ed.). (2008). Handbuch der Audiotechnik. 
Springer Science & Business Media. 
[3]
von Zabiensky, F., Kreutzer, M., & Bienhaus, D. (2018). 
Ultrasonic waves to support human echolocation. In Universal 
Access 
in 
Human-Computer 
Interaction. 
Methods, 
Technologies, and Users: 12th International Conference, 
UAHCI 2018, Held as Part of HCI International 2018, Las 
Vegas, NV, USA, July 15-20, 2018, Proceedings, Part I 12 
(pp. 433-449). Springer International Publishing. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-084-1
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

