Inclusion of Down Syndrome in Architectural Design: Towards a Methodology  
Clémentine Schelings, Catherine Elsen 
LUCID-ULg 
University of Liège 
Liège, Belgium 
e-mail: {clementine.schelings; catherine.elsen}@ulg.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract—This paper develops an in-situ methodology to help 
architects insure better inclusion of people with Down 
syndrome all along preliminary phases of the architectural 
design process, and eventually to the designed space. This 
methodology first offers architects some design keys in regard 
of how people with Down syndrome interact with two types of 
spaces: their personal dwellings and some completely unknown 
spaces. The methodology then unfolds towards more pro-active 
inclusion of the participants thanks to playful expression of 
their feelings and perceptions. This paper discusses how this 
methodology relates to inclusive and universal principles, 
useful to design smart environments be they ICT-enabled or 
not. This paper closes on prevalent models of disability in 
architecture and how they articulate with the model of 
“architectural handicap”. 
Keywords-disability; Down syndrome; inclusive design; 
universal design; methodological framework. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper tackles the challenge of disability inclusion to 
architecture, disability considered here as a temporary or 
permanent condition likely to show up at any time of 
everyone’s life. Statistically speaking, disability concerns 
15% of the European population, i.e., more than 80 millions 
individuals [1]. Among them, only 20% are disabled from 
birth, while 80% will experience impairment later in life, as a 
result of an accident, an illness, ageing or a more temporary 
condition such as pregnancy [2]. We are therefore all 
concerned with disability, whatever our current situation. 
Designers are yet struggling with the inclusion of 
disabled people, given the variety of disabilities and the 
variety of adaptations those disabilities require on both 
spatial and functional levels. In architectural design, and in 
Belgium more specifically, norms about persons with 
reduced mobility (PRM) constitute one of the few 
frameworks available to help designers integrate the needs of 
people who use a wheelchair or blind people. This 
regulation, yet, does not take into account cognitive 
impairments (nor hearing loss) that are thus generally 
neglected during the architectural design process. Likewise, 
in ICT related fields, cognitive impairments seem to be less 
often considered than visual or hearing loss impairments. 
Consequently, this paper aims at offering concrete design 
tools to architects confronted to the needs of people with 
cognitive disabilities, and more specifically people with 
Down syndrome. The paper will first aim at studying the 
impact of architecture on the spatial perception of people 
with 
cognitive 
disabilities. 
In-situ 
observations 
of 
participants evolving through various spaces will provide 
some useful design keys in that regard. The methodology 
will then be expanded in order to include those users into a 
more active encounter with architecture, providing architects 
with fruitful information about how people with Down 
syndrome experience space on a more multisensory level.  
In Section 2, literature review and the resulting research 
questions are presented. Section 3 details the methodology 
developed in order to conduct the observations. Section 4 
describes the obtained results, presented in two subsections: 
design keys (Subsection A) and methodological keys 
(Subsection B) for inclusion of Down syndrome in 
architectural design. Section 5 closes on a theoretical 
discussion considering prevalent models of inclusion and 
disability in architecture and how these models should be 
revised in order to consider people with Down syndrome’s 
sensitiveness as opportunity rather than threat to the 
architectural design process. Some insights built in this paper 
might be relevant for universal/inclusive design for ICT 
related fields. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
We highlight here two main observations from 
architectural state of the art. First, as observed by several 
phenomenologists, architecture suffers some kind of uni-
sensoriality hegemony. Architecture, according to these 
authors, has been reduced through the Modernist era to the 
sole consequence of visual expression and experience, 
neglecting the other perceptual senses and consequently 
deviating from the users’ multisensorial realities [3], [4], [5]. 
This hegemony, authors argue, has impoverished the 
architectural experience and, as a result, the whole design 
process [6]. Second, theories of environmental psychology 
and healing environments suggest that the architectural 
environment 
influences 
the 
wellbeing, 
considering 
architecture either as a factor having a positive (curative 
architecture) or a negative (disabling architecture) impact on 
the emotional and physical experience [7], [8]. 
Building on these two main observations, some authors 
propose to interact with disabled people and to integrate their 
perceptions as soon as early stages of the design process [9], 
[10]. This early integration helps architects consider other 
users than the “average, six-foot-tall, 20-years-old male, with 
perfect vision and a good grip [11 (p. 60.7)],” encouraging 
them to question and reinstate users’ multi-sensoriality and 
sensitivity into their work. In this case, disabled people are 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

considered as experts and become a real source of creativity 
for designers [10]. The disability is then considered as an 
opportunity, both for architects who develop new ideas and 
for disabled people who take part in a process from which 
they are usually excluded. 
This design approach fits the inclusive design theory and 
its two main principles, i.e., (i) considering the users’ and 
designers’ complementarity given their respective specific 
knowledge and expertise [12] and (ii) re-integrating the 
users’ emotions and reactions in order to design sensitive 
architecture ensuring their wellbeing [13]. 
As opposed to this inclusive vision, more traditional 
approaches characterize disability as a constraint for both 
designers and users. Architects indeed sometimes apprehend 
the norms regarding disabled people rather as obstacles to 
their creativity [14]. Those traditional approaches, along with 
their regulations, moreover only consider limited variety of 
disabilities, not taking into account variations within the 
same disability. The main studied disabilities are motor 
impairments and blindness, while cognitive impairments are 
more rarely addressed, except for autism that has been 
widely explored. Yet, just like people with autism spectrum 
disorders, Tufvesson and Tufvesson argue people with Down 
syndrome present a remarkable hypersensitivity and a 
particular spatial perception [15]. Even studies aiming at 
“turning disability experience into expertise in assessing 
building accessibility [16 (p. 144)]” or at designing multi-
sensorial spaces [6] until now remained essentially focused 
on motor and visual impairments, neglecting the assessment 
of other peculiar ways to experience space. 
The resulting recommendations and designs are thus 
never perfectly adapted to the users with cognitive disability 
who can then feel excluded and misunderstood [17]. We 
therefore formulate the following two research questions: 
• 
How do people with Down syndrome perceive 
space at a multi-sensory level? 
• 
How to set up a specific methodology to approach 
and leverage Down syndrome’s specificities in 
architectural design? 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
To answer those research questions, we build on a 
methodology of in-situ observation and interaction with 
disabled participants as suggested by Nijs and Heylighen 
[16]. Their methodology consists in considering disabled 
people as experts of their own peculiar way of experiencing 
spatiality and architecture. Through several cases studies, 
these researchers invited groups of disabled people (mainly 
persons with reduced mobility and visually impaired people) 
to experience a building and to discuss their own experience 
verbally, thanks to different keywords suggested by the 
researchers. While this section will develop how we 
implemented this methodology, Section 4 will come back on 
how and why this methodology had to be adapted given the 
communication difficulties of people with Down syndrome. 
Firstly, we proceeded to the selection of the participants 
affected by Down syndrome among the residents of a 
Belgian non-profit association welcoming adults with 
cognitive disabilities and specifically intended to develop 
residents’ artistic skills. Six participants were eventually 
chosen on the basis of several criteria such as the sex (to 
ensure gender parity), the housing type (in order to compare 
the participants’ experience in terms of living with family or 
living permanently in the residence) or the severity of their 
disability and the impact it could have on their capability to 
express their experiences and feelings (Tab. 1). 
Secondly, 
we 
conducted 
two 
phases 
of 
in-situ 
observations: first the visit of the residents’ own dwellings 
and later the discovery of a public building, a local town hall 
unknown by the participants. The goal here was to compare 
the spatial perceptions of people with Down syndrome when 
confronted to familiar vs. unknown spaces. Those two 
observation sequences were video-recorded for practical 
reasons. 
At the beginning of the visit of each dwelling, we set up a 
discussion table in order to collect some basic information 
such as, for instance, the resident’s age or favorite room(s). 
This stage also helped us create a climate of confidence with 
the participant and his or her referee (family member or close 
relative). We then organized a playful activity that consisted 
in visiting the resident’s three preferred rooms and 
interviewing him or her about his or her felt experience 
thanks to illustrated cards. 
This combination of observation and interview methods, 
close to the “shadowing” technique, enables the researcher to 
follow a person in his or her daily activities while asking him 
or her some questions to complete the observed information 
[18]. Within this framework, the researcher takes over the 
role of observer-as-participant, i.e., he or she spends more 
time observing than participating. This role has several 
benefits: it is especially adapted for short interviews, it 
enables real-time filling of observation grids and it ensures 
transparency of the research goals towards the observed 
subjects [19]. However, given the brevity of each session (40 
minutes in average), a mutual misunderstanding can occur 
between the observer and the observed person. Hence there 
is the need to quickly build confidence [19]. This could be 
achieved with the help of the participant’s relatives that were 
present.  
The methodology implemented during the visit of the 
town hall was rather similar: a few days later, we invited the 
same  six  participants  to  visit  three  rooms of the town hall, 
TABLE I.  
DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE OF THE PARTICIPANTS 
HIGHLIGHTING SOME ADDITIONAL SPECIFICITIES 
# 
Table Column Head 
Gender 
Age 
Housing type 
Cognitive 
specificity 
Mobility 
specificity 
1 
female 
25 
family house 
/ 
artificial 
hip 
2 
female 
48 
residence 
/ 
slower 
motion 
3 
male 
27 
family house 
verbalizes 
through 
onomatopoeias 
/ 
4 
male 
36 
family house 
/ 
/ 
5 
male 
27 
residence 
/ 
/ 
6 
male 
49 
residence 
/ 
/ 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

hall, this time chosen by the researcher in order to compare 
each participant’s reactions. The visit of those three selected 
rooms was made individually. In the meantime the five other 
participants were guided by a social worker for a photo 
recreational activity. The pictures taken by the residents, as 
well as drawings produced later, are an additional means of 
expression completing or confirming the information 
collected during the individual visits. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The two next sections will present the results of the in-
situ observations, starting with design tools in regard of 
space perception and following with some methodological 
recommendations. 
A. Design Keys in Regard of Space Perception 
During 
the 
two 
observation 
phases, 
four 
main 
phenomena have been observed. 
Firstly, the people with Down syndrome who took part to 
this study all experienced some difficulties in identifying the 
limits between spaces that were not clearly delineated by a 
physical boundary. In the town hall, the reception and 
entrance halls were separated by a simple inner bay frame 
(Fig. 1), but the participants designated those two spaces as 
one single room. When asked to walk around the reception 
hall, they indeed systematically travelled both halls, 
obviously confused by the proximity of two sub-spaces 
whose functions were insufficiently distinct. Similarly in the 
case of private dwelling, one participant walked around the 
living room when asked to delineate the kitchen. 
Secondly, and in contrast with the previous point, people 
with Down syndrome who took part to this study paid 
particular attention to the privacy of a space and how this 
sense of privacy could make distinct one space from another. 
During the visits of their dwellings, the participants have 
always chosen their own bedroom as their favorite room, 
which underlines their need to have a personal space 
available. This characteristic could also be observed while 
experiencing  the  public  building,  especially  when  some 
 
 
Figure 1.  Reception and entrance halls separated by an inner bay frame. 
residents felt the need to be alone and left in search of some 
smaller, more comfortable and/or less traveled space to 
retreat to for some time. In the case of their private spaces 
(their rooms), privacy did, in spite of its intangible nature, 
build some boundary between two subspaces. This 
phenomenon was specifically observed in a bedroom shared 
by two residents who never crossed the invisible line 
dividing the room into two individual and appropriated 
zones. 
Thirdly, the participants demonstrated a particular 
attraction for light, bay windows, illuminated objects and 
surfaces. This characteristic was observed several times, 
particularly when participants were asked to point to their 
favorite object within a room. One of them, for instance, 
showed us his stereo, occupying a special spot on the 
windowsill of his bedroom, which was particularly well lit. 
Fourthly, our observations revealed the great importance 
of material landmarks in the everyday-life of the participants, 
especially in regard of their day-to-day rituals and habits. 
Those well-known elements, which could be objects, pieces 
of furniture or even a specific material (e.g., local brown 
stone), were reassuring to them especially because they 
reminded them of aspects of their daily life and 
environments. In one of the residences, we visited a living 
room that had just been rearranged and refurnished. Inside 
this living room, social workers had left a small wooden 
table (Fig. 2) greatly appreciated by the participants because 
it had been crafted by one of the residents. This small table, 
placed there as a landmark of the previous space 
configuration, greatly facilitated the occupants’ appropriation 
of this new way of organizing the room. The presence of this 
recognizable piece of furniture helped the acceptance of a 
new situation otherwise potentially disturbing. 
Besides those four design keys of perceiving space, we 
have observed two additional mechanisms engaged in 
different settings: the visuo-spatial memory participants 
developed in regard of everyday spaces, and the multi-
sensoriality participants deployed especially in unknown 
spaces. 
- 
 
Figure 2.  Wooden table in the living room of one residence: the 
reassuring landmark easing the space re-organisation and appropriation. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

When interviewed inside their dwellings, the residents 
generally looked beyond the current situation and appealed 
to their memory to describe the space as they generally 
experience it, rather than describing it in regard of its 
specificities at the time of observation. For instance, one 
participant stated that the living room was a place where “it 
was dark” while it was a bright middle of the afternoon at the 
time. The participant described the room as he usually 
perceives it in situation of most frequent use, i.e., when he 
watches TV in the evening, appealing to his visuo-spatial 
memory instead of his instant capacities of observation. 
In the town hall, moreover, participants largely mobilized 
their five senses to experience space. For example, they 
relied on their hearing to determine the level of activity of 
the rooms: one participant said that the entrance hall was 
“here, quiet, everything is quiet” because we were alone in 
the room, while another one later found the space 
“animated” because several employees were present at the 
time. We observed that multi-sensoriality was generally only 
engaged during the discovery phases of a new space or a 
potentially disturbing environment. 
B. Methodological Recommendations 
In this section, we summarize adaptations made to Nijs 
and Heylighen’s methodology [16] in order to make it more 
suitable to the specificities of people with cognitive disability 
(for which oral expression, for instance, can be difficult). 
The importance of the referee (family member, close 
relative or educator) was made clear during the first phases 
of “discussion tables” we added to the methodology: this 
person, acting as mediator between the observer and the 
observed person, played a crucial role in decoding both 
stakeholders’ words, intentions and behaviors and in 
ensuring their mutual understanding. In one particular case, 
the presence of the participants’ parents turned out to be 
essential to “translate” his personal vocabulary mainly 
composed of onomatopoeias. 
Expression of feelings and perceptual spatial experiences 
were moreover greatly facilitated by the use of four cards 
illustrated with cartoony human faces, each featuring one of 
the most widespread human primary emotions (happiness, 
sadness, nervousness and fear). These cards, chosen with the 
help of a psychologist specialized in assisting people with 
Down syndrome, were voluntary simple (free of superfluous 
details) and limited in their number in order to help 
participants express their feelings as accurately as possible. 
Participants were nevertheless free to combine several 
pictures to enrich their answers if necessary. Those cards, as 
suggested by Chase, adequately complement the content 
usually collected through narrative inquiry [20]. One 
important preliminary step, when presenting these cards for 
the first time, was to proceed to the emotions’ recognition, 
i.e., to align our understanding to what the cards meant in the 
eyes of the participants. For instance, one resident had 
identified the card of the scared figure as a person “who 
winced”, and this definition was therefore used for the rest of 
those observations. Those cards proved really useful to 
interact with the participants once on the field, and could 
efficiently replace the keywords used by Nijs and Heylighen 
[16] when interacting with people experiencing difficulties 
with verbal expression. 
From an organizational perspective, we visited each 
room in two phases: first, we started interviewing the 
participant, and then we let him or her walk around the room. 
During the visit of one dwelling, one of the residents at first 
refused to sit and to answer our questions. We had to wait 
until he stopped moving before obtaining a single answer. 
Organizing the intervention in several, distinct and 
repeatable phases thus allowed us to progressively channel 
the resident’s attention on our questions. We moreover 
observed that interviewing each participant separately proved 
particularly important to avoid participants influencing each 
other: at one point of the town hall visit, all six participants 
started to interact about the space and the influence of one of 
them was clearly at the disadvantage of self-expression. 
Eventually, considering additional means of expression, 
such as photography or drawing for instance, proved very 
useful to complete some participants’ comments. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Our in-situ observations contribute to an adapted 
methodology and to design keys useful for architects willing 
to include people with Down syndrome (their specific needs, 
their specific ways of experiencing spaces) into preliminary 
phases of their design processes. Since the results presented 
here are issued from six participants only, the findings 
should not be generalized to a larger group. As Kinnaer, 
Baumers and Heylighen underline in their research about 
autism, individual preferences play an important role for the 
perception and appreciation of certain spaces and should not 
be dismissed [21]. This has proven also true for people with 
Down syndrome, as one of the participants distinguished 
from the five others by his particular appeal for dark spaces. 
In this case, the participant considered his own bedroom, 
indeed rather dark, as his personal shelter of privacy, a space 
where he could freely unleash his emotions. He therefore 
associated dark spaces to this personal space, a protective 
cocoon where he could express himself untroubled. 
Designers willing to replicate the suggested adapted 
methodology might apply the saturation criterion [22] as a 
way to capture both specific and shared spatial perceptions. 
 Down syndrome, as any other cognitive disability, 
consequently ought to be considered as a complex condition, 
characterized by a variety of realities confined to a global 
medical model [17]. Yet, current theoretical and practical 
disability frameworks hardly take into account this 
variability. On the one hand, norms and regulations have the 
tendency to reduce the user to a single, « representative » 
profile: even the architectural norms applied to the inclusion 
of persons with reduced mobility (PRM) tend to dismiss 
personal specificities one wheelchair user can develop in 
regard of another. Theories such as Universal design, on the 
other hand, intend to transform architecture into some 
universal product including the diversity of needs of all 
potential users [23]. Such Universal architecture, by doing 
so, might even reduce the model of the user and his/her uses, 
as each Universal user potentially accumulates the 
incapacities of a larger diversity of users, the design object 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

being consequently reduced to its lowest common possible 
use [24]. 
This research is therefore rather in favor of the inclusive 
model, taking into account the specificities of users and 
considering them, as much as possible, as creative input. We 
argue the methodology developed in this paper, favoring 
playfulness rather than simple consultation of the end-users, 
might potentially help architects in conducting in-situ 
research and in gaining knowledge about how specific 
groups of people with Down syndrome interact with 
architecture. Participants, considered as experts of their own 
disability and their own specific ways of experiencing space, 
might in this way contribute to architectural projects more 
prone to benefit the greatest number of users. As much as 
hypersensitivity [15], people with Down syndrome’s specific 
ways to apprehend an architectural space, for instance 
through higher multisensoriality, could equip designers in 
their perception of end-users’ needs. Whereas universal 
design aims at the lowest common denominator, inclusive 
design, we argue, provides more diversified avenues for 
design exploration. 
Including participants with Down syndrome as soon as 
preliminary phases of the architectural design process, and 
specifically empowering them with a certain expertise, 
moreover suggests a possible evolution of current models of 
handicap in architecture. Disability has originally been 
considered the result of a medical condition, therefore 
building the “medical model” of disability in architecture. 
This model, focusing exclusively on disability as an illness 
together with its symptoms, nurtured a hygienist design of 
specialized institutions. Later, a social model of disability in 
architecture rather focused on the human being rather than 
on the mere “patient” and integrated notions such as “origin, 
milieu, education, profession, economical position and social 
status [25 (p. 11)], quoted by [26 (p. 19)]” to the design of 
adapted spaces. This social model, as a consequence, 
informed the design of healing environments outside the 
institutionalized boundaries of the hospitals and proposed 
living environments “accommodating people with a social 
framework and, thus, supporting residents in developing 
their identity [26 (p. 24)].” 
Following our observations, we would advocate a third 
model of disability, i.e., architecture considered as a 
potentially disabling factor. This model, as an extension of 
the social model, would “focus on individuality, difference 
(instead of commonality), experience and giving voice to 
people [26 (p. 25)],” while redefining the role of architecture 
and the architects. 
This concept, introduced by Goldsmith in the context of a 
research focusing on motor and visual impairments [27], 
states that architecture can constitute a proper physical 
barrier as much for disabled users than for people with 
temporary limited mobility (injured or pregnant person for 
instance). This “architectural handicap” therefore translates 
into an uncomfortable and constraining situation for the user, 
caused by the lack of consideration or anticipation from the 
designer that would not, or could not take into account the 
specificities of a larger group of potential users [8]. 
We argue this notion of architectural handicap extends to 
any type of disability, including cognitive ones, as well as 
any type of design field, including ICT-related ones. In the 
case of people with Down syndrome, our results suggest that 
architecture sometimes not only constitutes some physical 
barrier to one’s mobility, but also a psychological barrier. 
Unclearly delineated spaces, for instance, can generate loss 
of reference points, misunderstanding of sub-functions and 
consequently loss of autonomy and social exclusion. 
Architecture and architects therefore have a crucial role 
to play in terms of avoiding such handicapping situations: 
the design keys and methodology proposed in this paper 
offer support to architects who wish to deal with this new 
responsibility. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper develops a methodology to approach Down 
syndrome in architectural design, in line with inclusive 
design theories. The originality of this methodology lies in 
its early integration of participants and its playfulness, 
enabling to go beyond simple consultation with users and to 
value the disability experience as an expertise. 
The methodology and design keys suggested in this paper 
may be suitable to other user profiles, such as people bearers 
of another cognitive impairment, seniors or children who 
share some characteristics with people with Down syndrome. 
Our research also highlights the limits of the current 
normative frameworks. Nonetheless, the actual lack of 
consideration 
for 
people 
with 
cognitive 
impairment 
compared with other disabilities, like motor impairment, 
demonstrates the benefits of such a norm. Since a strict 
regulatory framework would not be an adequate solution, 
this paper rather paves the way for a toolbox for designers, 
encouraging them to take into account people with cognitive 
disability and suggesting them some interaction techniques 
to reach this goal. 
No longer considering disability as a threat or obstacle 
for architectural design, this work rather suggests that people 
with Down syndrome experience space with some specific 
sensitiveness. This sensitiveness could be leveraged as a 
source of creativity for the designer (“disability as 
opportunity”), while architecture could be considered as a 
potentially handicapping factor for the user (“architectural 
handicap”). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank all who contributed to 
this research, in particular the team and residents of “Les 
Hautes Ardennes” center (Vielsalm, Belgium). The authors 
also thank Ms. Henry, psychologist at “Cité de l’Espoir” 
(Andrimont, Belgium), for her advices in carefully choosing 
the content of the illustrated cards. 
REFERENCES 
[1] AViQ Agence pour une Vie de Qualité. How many people are 
disabled in Belgium, in Wallonia? [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.aviq.be/handicap/questions/infos_conseils/statisti
ques.html 2017.02.20 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

[2] AViQ Agence pour une Vie de Qualité. The disabled 
workers? 
Workers! 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.aviq.be/handicap/pdf/documentation/publications
/emploi/Brochure-Travailleurs-handicapes.pdf 2017.02.20 
[3] A. Dalhin, On architecture, aesthetic experience and the 
embodied mind. Seven Essays. Stockholm: Royal Institute of 
Technology, School of Architecture, KTH, 2002. 
[4] M. Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of perception. London 
and New York: Routledge, 2002. 
[5] J. Pallasmaa, The eyes of the skin. Chichester: John Wiley, 
2005. 
[6] J. Herssens and A. Heylighen, “Haptics and vision in 
architecture: designing for more senses,” Conference Sensory 
Urbanism, Flâneur Press, Jan. 2008, pp. 102-112, ISBN: 978-
0-95599-060-1. 
[7] V. Van der Linden, M. Annemans, and A. Heylighen, “You’d 
want an energy from a building: user experience of healing 
environment in a Maggie’s cancer caring centre,” Proceedings 
of the 3rd European Conference on Design4Health, Design 
Society, Jul. 2015, pp. 1-9, ISBN: 978-1-84387-385-3. 
[8] H. Froyen, E. Verdonck, D. De Meester, and A. Heylighen,  
“Documenting handicap situations and eliminations through 
universal design patterns,” Australasian Medical Journal, vol. 
1 (12), pp. 199-203, 2009, doi:10.4066/AMJ.2009.158. 
[9] A. Heylighen, P. Devlieger, and M. Strickfaden, “Design 
expertise as disability and vice versa,” Communicating (by) 
Design, Chalmers University of Technology, Hogeschool 
voor Wetenschap & Kunst, School of Architecture Sint-
Lucas, Apr. 2009, pp. 227-235, ISBN: 978-9-08132-380-2. 
[10] J. Herssens and A. Heylighen, “Haptic architecture becomes 
architectural hap,” Ergonomics for a future, Proceedings of 
the 39th Annual Congres of the Nordic Ergonomic Society 
(NES), NES, Oct. 2007, ISBN: 978-9-19715-212-9. 
[11] V. Fletcher, “A neighborhood fit for people,” in Universal 
design handbook, W. Preiser and E. Ostroff, Eds. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, pp. 60.1–60.15, 2001. 
[12] A. Heylighen and M. Bianchin, “How does inclusive design 
relate to good design? Designing as a deliberative enterprise,” 
Design Studies, vol. 34 (1), pp. 93-110, Jan. 2013, 
doi:10.1016/j.destud.2012.05.002. 
[13] M. Ferreira, D. Cabral de Mello, and J. Duarte, “Embodied 
emotions: a phenomenological approach to computation to 
explore empathy through architecture,” Digital Physicality,  
Proceedings of the 30th eCAADe Conference, vol. 2, Czech 
Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Architecture, Sep. 
2012, pp. 599-604. 
[14] G. Nijs, P. Vermeersch, P. Devlieger, and A. Heylighen,  
“Extending the dialogue between design(ers) and disabled 
use(rs): from conversation to embodied skill,” in DS 60: 
Proceedings of Design 2010, the 11th International Design 
Conference, D. Marjanovic, M. Storga, N. Pavkovic, and N. 
Bojcetic, Eds. Dubrovnik: Design society, pp. 1817-1826, 
2010. 
[15] C. Tufvesson and J. Tufvesson, “The building process as a 
tool towards an all-inclusive school. A Swedish example 
focusing on children with defined concentration difficulties 
such as ADHD, autism and Down's syndrome,” Journal of 
Housing and the Built Environment, vol. 24 (1), pp. 47-66, 
Apr. 2009, doi:10.1007/s10901-008-9129-6. 
[16] G. Nijs and A. Heylighen,  “Turning disability experience into 
expertise in assessing building accessibility: a contribution to 
articulating disability epistemology,” Alter, vol. 9 (2), pp. 
144-156, Apr. 2015, doi:10.1016/j.alter.2014.12.001. 
[17] K. McAllister and B. Maguire, “Design considerations for the 
autism spectrum disorder-friendly key stage 1 classroom,” 
Support for Learning, vol.  27 (3), pp. 103-112, Aug. 2012, 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9604.2012.01525.x. 
[18] S. McDonald, “Studying actions in context: a qualitative 
shadowing method for organizational research,” Qualitative 
Research, 
vol. 
5 
(4), 
pp. 
455-473, 
Nov. 
2005, 
doi:10.1177/1468794105056923. 
[19] R. L. Gold, “Roles in sociological field observations,” Social 
Forces, 
vol. 
36 
(3), 
pp. 
217-223, 
Mar. 
1958, 
doi:10.2307/2573808. 
[20] S. E. Chase, “Narrative inquiry Still a field in the making,” in 
The sage handbook of qualitative research 4, N. K. Denzin & 
Y. S. Lincoln, Eds. Oaks: Sage, pp. 421-434, 2011. 
[21] M. Kinnaer, S. Baumers, and A. Heylighen, “How do people 
with autism (like to) live?,” in Inclusive designing Joining 
usability, accessibility, and inclusion, P. Langdon, J. Lazar, A. 
Heylighen, and H. Dong, Eds. Cambridge: Springer, pp. 175-
185, 2014. 
[22] G. Guest, A. Bunce, and L. Johnson, “How many interviews 
are enough? An experiment with data saturation and 
variability,” Field Methods, vol. 18 (1), pp. 59-82, Feb. 2006, 
doi: 10.1177/1525822X05279903. 
[23] R. L. Mace, “Universal design in housing,” Assistive 
Technology, vol. 10 (1), pp. 21-28, Oct. 2010, doi: 
10.1080/10400435.1998.10131957. 
[24] M. Winance, “Universal design and the challenge of diversity. 
Reflections on the principles of universal design, based on 
empirical research of people’s mobility,” Disability and 
Rehabilitation, vol. 36 (16), pp. 1334-1343, Jul. 2014, doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2014.936564. 
[25] N. Mens and C. Wagenaar, The architecture of the elderly. 
Building for housing and care. Rotterdam: NAi Uitgevers, 
2009. 
[26] I. Van Steenwinckel, Offering architects insights into living 
with dementia Three case studies on orientation in space-
time-identity (doctoral dissertation). 
Kampenhout: 
KU 
Leuven, 2015. 
[27] S. Goldsmith, Designing for the disabled The new paradigm. 
New-York: Routledge, pp. 147-158, 2012. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-589-0
SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2017 : The Second International Conference on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart Environments

