Co-Production of Health in Smart Cities: The M3 Case Study 
Vicini Sauro, Bellini Sara and Sanna Alberto 
City of the Future Living Lab 
Fondazione Centro San Raffaele 
Milan, Italy 
vicini.sauro@hsr.it 
Abstract — Personalized interventions that empower users 
through pertinent and reliable information - alongside 
ubiquitous and user-friendly services, interfaces and products -
can provide users with the opportunity to adopt healthy 
lifestyle choices, which improve quality of life and help prevent 
a vast number of chronic diseases. This paper would like to 
present the case of the Mobile Medical Monitoring (M3) 
project as representative of the work carried out by the 
eServices for Life and Health research unit alongside the City 
of the Future Living Lab; this project was based on an 
eService design approach of deploying innovative ICT 
(Information and Communication Technology) and multi-
device based services. The focus of this paper is therefore to 
explore the Engineering AwarenessTM approach alongside the 
co-creation living lab methodology. 
Keywords: Co-production; ICT; Living Lab; eService design; 
Co-creation Living Lab process. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 
chronic, non-communicable diseases (NCDs) are the leading 
cause of morbidity, disability and mortality across all 
countries of the globe, and that these are all related to an 
individual’s lifestyle choices. As a result, there is an  
impellent need for medicine and the delivery of healthcare 
services to play a much more proactive role in an individual's 
life and to develop strategies that address the individual in a 
human-centric, non-intrusive and eco-sustainable manner in 
order to trigger long-lasting and healthier lifestyle-choices 
and behavior patterns. 
This paper will initially address briefly those different 
strategies identified by the e-Services for Life and Health 
research department of San Raffaele Hospital (FCSR) which 
should be adopted in order to improve the way in which 
healthcare services actively participate in an individual’s life;  
further on, the paper will briefly present the Mobile Medical 
Monitoring (M3) Case Study and how this service, 
embodying those strategies, had an effect on a study group. 
II. 
STRATEGIES FOR IMPROVING THE DELIVERY OF 
HEALTHCARE SERVICES 
The strategies developed by the e-Services for Life and 
Health unit can be summarized as follows (and will be 
described in the upcoming paragraphs): a revisited and ICT-
enabled and smart clinical assessment process; prevention 
through personalized information and education, together 
with a more active role on the part of healthcare 
professionals; the adoption of a co-production approach.  
A. Transform prescriptions into an experience 
     In order to improve their efficacy in disease prevention as 
well as disease control and management, medicine and 
health delivery services need to play a more proactive role in 
an individual's life. To be able to understand the importance 
of adopting healthy lifestyle choices and behavior patterns in 
the prevention of disease or how to best manage a diagnosed 
condition and prevent it from becoming chronic, an 
individual must be informed and educated via a network of 
trustworthy healthcare professionals. The information 
provided by those figures of reference should be 
personalized and contextualized – reflecting an individual’s 
real everyday needs and objectives – to avoid being viewed 
as impositions but rather as motivational  triggers.  
In order to provide such rich and targeted information, a 
360° profile of the individual must exist, a profile which 
matches both medical data as well as lifestyle and personal 
data. In other words, a drug prescription should no longer be 
a list of medicines, doses and times of day in which they 
should be administered; rather, it should be a lifestyle 
prescription, composed of comprehensible, practical and 
actionable advice; it should also include on-demand 
continuous guidance that the individual can relate to at all 
times in a typical day and throughout his/her life. The 
doctor-patient relationship is thereby raised to a higher level 
of mutual collaboration, thus forming a Health Personal 
Guidance System (Health PGS). 
At all levels of society, individuals may not necessarily 
have the proper skills to make informed choices or the 
appropriate culture to understand risks. At the same time, 
they may not have the opportunity to elaborate compatible 
alternatives (should those alternatives be offered to them). It 
is for this reason that personalized, contextualized and 
pertinent information and education are key in promoting 
responsible and conscientious lifestyle choices. Indeed,  
there are many examples and discussions in literature that 
address the concept that the greater degree to which 
interventions are personalized and involve highly-skilled 
medical experts the higher their success rate when compared 
to 
the 
impersonal 
interventions 
of 
mass 
media 
communication campaigns.  
B. ICT as a healthier ecosystem enabler 
Such a detailed, individual profile will present healthcare 
professionals with an unprecedented amount of an personal 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

data, both medical and lifestyle-related. From a knowledge 
management perspective, a radical change in the structure of 
the Electronic Healthcare Record (EHR) systems will have 
to occur, evolving from the present semi-static paradigm into 
a completely different and much broader one, that eServices 
for Life and Health unit likes to call the Personal Health 
Record (PHR). The PHR must give structure to the rapidly 
growing, vast amount of dynamic patient data spread across 
a multiplicity of specialties and gained via a widespread set 
of actuators (including existing databases, the individual 
himself/herself, remote devices, embedded technologies and 
sensors, healthcare smart cards and so on), thus demanding 
exceptional levels of data storage, data protection, data 
visualization, decision support and analytical tools that can 
be enabled only by a total redesign of ICT platforms.  
ICT platforms must therefore expand and embrace a 
multitude of fields of activities and meaningful data from 
industry, education, community participation, technical 
infrastructure and various soft factors [1] in order to produce 
an ICT network able “to transform life and work … in 
significant and fundamental, rather than incremental, ways” 
[2], thus producing a Smart City which promotes and 
supports the prescription experience.  
C. A co-production approach 
In a traditional sense, co-production in healthcare refers 
to the contribution of service-users to the provision of 
services [3]. It is an approach which challenges the usual 
relationship between professionals and service-users since it 
stimulates the latter to be considered experts in their own 
circumstances and therefore capable of making decisions and 
having control as responsible citizens [4]. Co-production also 
implies a change in the role of healthcare professionals, from 
fixers of problems to facilitators who find solutions by 
working with their clients [5]. 
The e-Services for Life and Health research unit and the 
City of the Future Living Lab have developed a model and a 
methodology that embody the essence of the co-production 
approach, bringing it to a new level where the end-user is 
truly an active participant in a healthcare service. The 
following two sections will address both these developments. 
III. 
ENGINEERING AWARENESSTM 
Engineering AwarenessTM (Fig. 1) is a unique service 
design model that synchronizes emotions (a trigger to an 
individual's psychological reaction in context with his/her 
preferences) and relations (a trigger for a social interaction 
with other individuals physically present or not, and/or with 
a proximity or remote environment in context with his/her 
preferences) with regard to functions (an individual's 
practical need addressed by the service) delivered.  
 
Figure 1.  Engineering AwarenessTM. 
 
Figure 2.  Engineering AwarenessTM, a model on health and lifestyles. 
Designing for an individual's awareness and behavioral 
change is the primary ethical objective of any personalized 
service developed within the eServices for Life and Health 
unit. The mission of this research unit is not to manipulate 
individuals (i.e., making them do a supposedly "right 
thing/healthy thing" decided on their behalf by a 
knowledgeable third party) but to provide them with an 
unbiased understanding of the impact that a given 
decision/action implies. Each individual is characterized by 
his/her own digital profile, a complex, dynamic and 
progressive repository of personal data, information and 
events which is split into three parts as illustrated in Fig. 2: 
 
needs, i.e., the medical part of the profile: the genetic 
blueprint 
and 
the 
meaningful 
biochemical/physiological 
parameters 
of 
an 
individual that are considered relevant for a 
statistical health risk assessment at the level of state- 
of-the-art 
knowledge 
in 
primary/secondary 
preventive medicine and predictive medicine; 
 
preferences, i.e., the “personal preferences” section 
of the profile: the unique cultural resources of an 
individual, including his/her likes and dislikes and 
ethical beliefs; 
 
actions, i.e., “the health-related actions” part of the 
individual's profile: the unique (and constantly 
evolving) series of meaningful,  health-related 
actions 
performed 
by 
an 
individual 
("Behavioromics") and exposures to environmental 
factors ("Exposomics") in his/her daily life. 
IV. 
THE CO-CREATION LIVING LAB METHODOLOGY  
The San Raffaele City of the Future Living Lab is an 
ecosystem within an area of 300,000 m2 that can be 
described as a tertiary urban area (or a compact urban 
district) where all typical, daily operations are concentrated 
within a reduced space. The way it has been designed allows 
its research team to access, understand, study and measure 
the interactions among an estimated 27,000+ community of 
City of the Future daily-users (20,000+ a day turn-over of 
inpatients, outpatients and visitors of all ages and needs; 
5000+ on-site employees, researchers, etc.; and 1700+ 
students).  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

It is both a virtual as well as real research environment 
and community, managed and organized by  the eServices 
for Life and Health research unit. The Living Lab follows  
the conceptual framework presented by ESoCE-Net in which 
user-driven and open innovation is fully integrated within the 
co-creation process of new services, products and societal 
infrastructures [6]. As of 2012, the City of the Future Living 
Lab has been awarded membership of the Enoll (European 
Network of Living Labs) network. 
Such a unique environment has been the field of 
international ICT research projects in 5th, 6th and 7th 
European Commission Framework R&D Programs and 
Italian/Lombardy Region R&D Programs since 2000, 
nurturing intense, cross-disciplinary collaborations among 
medical and healthcare professionals, designers, engineers, 
scientists, policy makers and entrepreneurs across a number 
of well-being, life and health-related fields. 
Living Labs are innovation environments that focus on 
user communities embedded within “real life” situations and 
environments. The fundamental concept at the base of a 
Living Lab is to gain direct and unfiltered access to users’ 
ideas, experiences and knowledge, based on their daily needs 
and desires of feeling supported by products, services or 
applications. The Living Lab methodology ideated and put 
into practice by the City of the Future Living Lab is based on 
a revisited version of the traditional Living Lab methodology 
and is centered around a co-creation approach. Indeed, end 
users as well as stakeholders (including City of the Future  
Living 
Lab 
designers, 
information 
technology 
and 
mechanical engineers, project managers and ethnographers, 
as 
well 
as 
pediatricians, 
psychologists, 
dieticians, 
physiotherapists, 
sociologist, 
nutritionists, 
teachers, 
marketers and so on) are actively involved throughout 
project 
ideation, 
exploration, 
implementation 
and 
experimentation. Such an approach was chosen because the 
City of the Future Living Lab firmly believes that users and 
stakeholders should influence the design process so that what 
comes out of it is a solution that can respond effectively to 
their needs and fit into their everyday lives. Insights are 
gathered directly from the users in order to define and 
implement realistic, useful, desirable and effective artifacts. 
The Co-Creation process ideated and developed by the 
City of the Future Living Lab is based on four concurrent 
phases 
(Fig. 
3): 
Co-design; 
Implementation; 
Experimentation; Evaluation. Since this approach is an 
iterative and reflective one, a starting point remains 
undefined, and the Living Lab process can be commenced at 
any stage of the design activity.  
V. 
M3 CASE STUDY 
Mobile Medical Monitoring (M3) is project funded by 
the Italian Region of Lombardy. It consists of a wearable 
patch, shown in Fig. 4 (composed of a durable part to which 
standard electrodes can be attached), a smartphone and tablet 
app and web portal. It is a service where users (both 
professional athletes as well as average individuals)
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The Co-Creation Living Lab methodology adopted by the City of the Future Living Lab 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

can monitor different biological parameters (e.g., heart 
rate, breathing and metabolic equivalents) and share this 
data, along with other information, with their trainers, 
doctors, nutritionists and so on, in order to receive from 
them personalized help via both the app and the web 
portal. This service is integrated with individuals’ PHR. 
The M3 information platform is also complemented by a 
non-clinical, educational and motivational platform whose 
aim is to promote active lifestyles for the general public. 
 
 
Figure 4.  The M3’s Patch and Smartphone applications 
The M3 project is currently in its evaluation phase.  
The project started off with a very strong and highly- 
technological objective: to create a working platform of an 
ICT-enabled and Smart service for healthcare prevention 
and education able to be integrated with both physiological 
as well as behavioral data. Thus, the co-design  phase 
consisted of the participation in a focus group of expert 
users (including nutritionists, cardiologists, biomedical 
engineers and professional athletes) alongside a team of 
City of the Future researchers (including engineers and 
designers). Throughout this activity, the different actors 
were guided through a phase of analysis (with questions 
like “who could the service’s end-user be”, “what are the 
user requirements of this user”, “in what context could the 
service be used on a day-to-day basis”, “what other similar 
products and services already exist” and so on) as well as 
through a phase of brainstorming.  
The insights gathered from the co-design phase (and 
which include the Engineering AwarenessTM Model) were 
used as base for the implementation phase, where ideas 
and user and service requirements were translated by the 
City of the Future’s tech team into a series of rough 
prototypes for the smart patch.  In order to evaluate both 
the comfort of the patch as well as the correct flow of data 
from the patch through the smart device application to the 
platform (Fig. 5), these criteria were tested by volunteers 
recruited by the City of the Future Living Lab, including 
both sports enthusiasts as well as individuals uninterested 
in physical activity.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Moments during the M3’s Implementation phase  
Following the implementation phase, a more refined 
prototype of the service was administered to a new set of 
volunteers. For a period of three consecutive days, ten 
individuals were divided into two groups: the first who 
was asked to wear the patch, use the smart device 
application and the web platform; the second was asked to  
wear only the patch and not access the M3 app or portal. 
The reason for this was to explore the impact that viewing 
one’s physiological data or receiving communication on 
behalf of a medical professional could have on the service. 
Throughout the experiment, all participants were asked 
to keep notes of their day-to-day experiences, and, 
following this timeframe, they were interviewed by a 
researcher at the City of the Future Living Lab and asked 
to answer a questionnaire. Qualitative data regarding the 
usability and overall user experience of the entire service 
was then collected. 
During the evaluation phase, what emerged from the 
questionnaires (composed of three sets of nine statements 
for patch, app and portal, to which each participant had to 
select to what extent they identified with them by selecting 
a number from 0-5, alongside two open-ended questions 
for each element of the service where participants could 
freely write down any comment they wanted); and 
interviews are a set of insights, which will be further 
analyzed during the evaluation phase by a set of usability 
experts. 
For the majority of participants, the patch was 
described as easy to position, to wear and to charge (it 
received a vote above 3/5 for 9 out of 10 participants). It 
was also deemed easy to read and to use, though scores 
were slightly lower, suggesting that the patch’s interface 
needs improvement (it received a vote above 3/5 for 8 out 
of 10 participants). The patch was also described as having 
a strong appeal since participants found it innovative, 
original, attractive and inviting (it received a vote above 
3/5 for 9 out of 10 participants). 
Nevertheless, for six out of ten participants, there were 
some wearability issues regarding the electrodes since, 
after awhile, they were described as irritating to the skin 
(especially for women) or beginning to peel off (especially 
during strenuous, sweaty physical activity) or impeding 
movement during physical activity. 
Though all participants got used to wearing the patch 
(eventually, even those who wore it during physical 
exercise), it was much harder for them to remember to 
bring along the device assigned to them  and upon which 
the M3 app was downloaded (especially for those with a 
tablet). As of today, the patch requires the user to have a 
device through which to send the collected data to the 
platform since it can store only a certain amount at a time. 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

This fact suggests that the memory of the patch would 
benefit from being expanded or for there to be a smaller 
device to be integrated into the system for the storage and 
passing on of data to the platform. 
Instead, the app and portal were described as less 
usable since the language adopted was not always clear,  
navigation was not always intuitive and the data visualized 
in the form of charts was not always easy to decode and 
understand, and users therefore found it difficult to relate 
to. 
For those who could access the app and portal, the 
service was described as being able to trigger a new 
awareness or consciousness of one’s state of health 
(receiving a vote above 3/5 for five out of five 
participants). Individuals felt that seeing their data made 
them more curious about their state of health and how to 
improve it and preserve it throughout the day. Some said 
that they were going to speak to their doctors about what 
they had learned, wanting to understand how they could 
improve their state of health. One person said that 
participating in the experiment made her want to take up a 
sports activity or at least be more physically active during 
the day (using the stairs or walking to the closest metro 
station rather than taking the bus), whilst another 
participant who, instead, was a sports enthusiast said it 
made her want to perform better during training. A small 
minority felt that wearing the patch and having a service 
that stores data made them feel more looked after and 
secure, whilst another small minority felt that wearing the 
patch almost made them feel ill or different. 
All participants who had access to the patch, app and 
portal stated that the device’s pairing process with the app 
and the visualization of data on the portal could be 
improved and made more intuitive. They also suggested 
enriching the portal in the following ways: direct feedback 
from doctor or sport trainer or nutritionist; ways of tagging 
data so that non-biological info, such as lifestyle activities 
or emotional states, could be associated with it; introduce 
ways of cross-referencing data in a personalized manner in 
order to understand the whole picture better, thus making 
it more meaningful; possible setting ranges so that, during 
physical activity, the patch would vibrate or produce a 
sound to indicate that the individual has exceeded the 
desired parameters; a social network where people who 
like the same sports can organize training or people who 
work together can meet up for lunch and have a walk. 
The feedback collected and the insights which are 
being analyzed show how important and valuable it is to 
involve the end-user throughout a service’s innovation 
process. This feedback highlights improvements and 
modifications that can help deploy a healthcare service 
that truly understands and meets the needs of the end-user. 
Through meaningful information and education, a drug 
prescription can turn into an experience able to motivate 
people to live a healthier, more conscientious life. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The overall user experience of the M3 service 
described in this paper by those who participated in the 
experimentation of the patch, the M3 app and portal was 
positive; more importantly, however, it has emphasized the 
service’s high potential for improvement via a co-
operative and participatory approach. The patch alone 
generated little appeal beyond that of the attraction to its 
novelty, whilst the app and portal generated more 
involvement, showing that a service which provides added 
value through meaningful information can raise awareness 
and conscientiousness of healthy lifestyle choices and 
disease prevention. 
Throughout the innovation process of a smart and ICT-
enabled healthcare service, the M3 project is a practical 
representation of the methodology adopted by the City of 
the Future Living, taking the co-production of healthcare 
services to a new level of active participation and 
contribution on behalf of the end user. Having a living lab 
through which to explore and develop a service allows 
researchers to have direct, unfiltered and continuous 
access to a vast number of users which promotes 
participation and produces user insights. It is just these 
insights that can mould a service’s ability to permeate 
successfully everyday life because it is able to respond to 
real user needs as embodied by the Engineering 
AwarenessTM model.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Giffinger, C. Fertner, H. Kramar, P. Kalasek, N. Pichler- 
Milanovic, and E. Meijers, “Smart cities – ranking of 
European medium-sized cities”, Centre of Regional 
Science, Vienna, 2007. 
[2] California Institute for Smart Communities, “Ten steps to 
becoming a smart community”, California, 2001. 
[3] A. Realpe, and L. M. Wallace,  “What is co-production?,” 
The Health Foundation, London, 2010. 
[4] D. Boyle, S. Clarke, S. and Burns, “Aspects of co-
production: the implications for work, health and 
volunteering”, New Economics Foundation. London, 2006. 
[5] C. Needham, and S. Carr, “SCIE Research briefing 31: co-
production: an emerging evidence base for adult social care 
transformation,” Social Care Institute for Excellence. 
London, 2009. 
[6] R. Santoro, and M. Conte, “Living Labs in open innovation 
functional regions”, ESoCE-NET White Paper, Rome, 
2010.
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-282-0
SMART 2013 : The Second International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies

