Synchronized Recording System Using Multiple Smartphones 
 
Naoki Morita, Md Saidi Muhammad Ashraf Naim 
School of Information Telecommunication Engineering 
Tokai University 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: {wv062303@tsc, 0cjt2118@cc}.u-tokai.ac.jp 
Chiharu Nakanishi, Chiaki Sawada 
Kunitachi College of Music 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: {nakanishi.chiharu, sawada.chiaki}@kunitachi.ac.jp 
Kenta Morita 
Faculty of Medical Engineering Dept. 
Suzuka University of Medical Science 
Mie, Japan 
e-mail: morita@suzuka-u.ac.jp 
Kazue Kawai 
Faculty of Literature 
Seitoku University 
Chiba, Japan 
e-mail: kawai.kazue@wa.seitoku.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract—The author aims to pass down the tradition of 
classical music to the next generation by significantly 
reforming and evolving traditional piano teaching methods. 
Most of the studies on piano lessons aim to teach beginners 
how to accurately read scores and play the keys with accurate 
rhythms and without mistakes. This study aims to enable 
intermediate students to master musical expression. A system 
was developed to retrospectively analyze the movements of the 
upper body, hands, and feet from various angles using 
synchronized recording with multiple smartphones or tablets. 
This allows for multi-angle viewing without the need for 
complex wiring or data transfer from USB cameras or video 
cameras. By objectively evaluating actual performances, it is 
anticipated that disparities between the ideal and reality will 
be identified, and new challenges will be discovered. 
Keywords- Piano Lesson; support; Recording system; 
visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is part of research conducted at Japanese 
music universities to pass down the tradition of classical 
piano to the next generation. Most of the previous studies on 
piano lessons [1] - [15] have been aimed at helping beginners 
learn how to read scores accurately and play keys with 
accurate rhythms and without mistakes. The Idea, 
Connection, and Extension (ICE) model [16] is a framework 
describing phases of learning. In the piano ICE model, these 
preceding studies were in the Idea stage. 
This study focuses on the Connection stage in which 
musical expression is acquired. In order to acquire musical 
expression, it is necessary to understand the overall picture 
of the song and play it using the whole body, not just the 
fingertips Recording one’s own play-through on video and 
reviewing it is important. However, traditional video 
playback platforms did not allow for quickly cueing up 
specific phrases or scenes. 
This study aims to develop a “Piano Lesson Total 
Visualization System” that allows the user to instantly check 
the movements of the performer’s body (upper body, hands, 
feet) in conjunction with the score [17] - [19]. In this study, 
we report on the development of a system that can utilize 
smartphones and tablet devices to record performances from 
multiple angles and allow playback from annotated points 
through cueing up. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, this paper discusses the results of a survey on 
reviewing piano lesson videos, and Session III explains the 
concept of the proposed system that visualizes the entire 
piano lesson. Section IV discusses the multi-angle recording 
system developed in this study, and Section V provides 
conclusions and discusses future work. 
II. 
QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY RESULT 
We conducted a survey regarding reviewing piano lesson 
videos [17]. The following responses were obtained: 
(1) Most of the students record their piano lessons. 
However, almost none of them reviewed all previously 
recorded lesson videos due to a lack of time and 
motivation to watch the videos from the beginning until 
the end. 
(2) Students feel dissatisfied when watching the videos, e.g., 
“I can’t see how I touch the keyboard,” “I can’t see my 
own face or hear my tone.” 
(3) Students were dissatisfied with video viewing, e.g., “It 
takes too much time to find my desired video from the 
video archive,” “It is difficult to pinpoint the part that I 
am interested in,” “It is difficult to go back in time to 
watch.” 
(4) Students and instructors have complaints about the 
device itself and application when handling the device, 
e.g., “Connecting is difficult,” “I don’t know how to use 
the app.” 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

III. 
THE SYSTEM CONCEPT 
We have the following concepts for the visualization 
system of piano lessons: 
(1) A system that can synchronize recording using multiple 
smartphones or tablets. This function will be discussed 
in Section IV. 
(2) The system can instantly play a specific part of the video, 
playing the video from the measure clicked by the user. 
The association between the score and the video is made 
by comparing the scale recognized from the score and 
the pitch recognized from the video. These functions are 
currently successful with some melody scores and 
arpeggio staves [19]. 
(3) Videos recorded in the system are added to the calendar 
index by score name and recording time. Past and 
current performances can be instantly searched. 
IV. 
THE DEVELOPED SYSTEM 
The developed system realizes multi-angle recording and 
linkage of recorded performance videos and calendars. 
A. System Architecture 
This developed system consists of a server and a client. 
The server side is implemented using the Laravel framework, 
and the client side is implemented using Vue.js. The server 
coordinates with database and file management, as well as 
previously developed [19] score analysis and video analysis 
modules. The client provides a calendar, score upload, video 
recording, and video viewing to the user. 
B. Recording 
This section explains multi-angle recording using an 
example of three angles: the upper body, hands, and feet. 
Four smartphones are used. One is used as the controller 
machine for starting/stopping and for recording with the 
microphone. The remaining three smartphones are used as 
video cameras. 
After logging in on the controller smartphone, the system 
displays a QR code when selecting the score that the user 
uploaded in advance. The QR code contains the URL of the 
recording web address and user authentication information. 
When the user scans the QR code with another smartphone 
and clicks to allow camera access, the camera activates and 
will be in the recording standby state. Figure 1 shows the 
placement during the recording of a performance and each 
camera angle. 
Recording is synchronized with the start/stop signal from 
the controller device, and automatically uploaded to the 
server upon completion. This allows for multi-angle 
recording without the cumbersome wiring of USB cameras 
or data transfer from video cameras. This system has been 
tested for operation using Chrome browsers on PCs, iOS, 
and Android. The audio is saved in mp3 format on iOS, 
recording is possible in mp4 format for up to approximately 
12 minutes (110MB), and on Android, in WebM format for 
up to approximately 27 minutes (45MB). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Example of camera angle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Example of score and video viewing page. 
 
C. Review 
When the user clicks on an index (score name and 
practice time) on the calendar, the score and the video are 
displayed. Figure 2 is the viewing page. One angle of the 
video is displayed prominently, while the remaining angles 
are displayed as thumbnails. Selecting a thumbnail switches 
between the enlarged display and thumbnail display. If the 
previously developed Score Analysis Module [19] and Video 
Analysis Module [19] allow the linkage of scores and videos, 
playback can be started from the corresponding scene by 
clicking on a measure in the score. If a module cannot be 
parsed correctly, the user can watch the video once and add 
an annotation to the timestamp they want to review, making 
it easier to review from the second time onwards. In the 
example in Figure 2, annotations are added at the 2nd, 5th, 
and 11th measures during the initial listening session. 
D. Trial 
Before using this system in an actual class, we conducted 
a demonstration and interviewed an instructor. 
• 
USB cameras are difficult to set angles because the 
screen is not visible. On the other hand, smartphone 
cameras are easy. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

• 
It is convenient because no data transfer is required.  
• 
The sound quality is not very good. 
E. Discussion 
The purpose of this research is to develop a user interface 
that enables recording and playback from multiple angles 
using readily available PCs and smartphones, simplifying the 
review process through annotation functionality, all without 
the need for special equipment for the “Score Click Playback 
System.” The current system can only record up to 12 
minutes, so it cannot record an entire 60 minutes lecture. 
However, it is possible to record a single performance. In 
addition, being able to review immediately without data 
transfer is considered useful for reviewing performances 
External microphone support may be needed to improve 
sound quality issues. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This study aimed to record performances from multiple 
angles so that performers themselves can check how they use 
their bodies. Traditional single-camera shooting had 
problems, such as difficulty checking the use of hands and 
feet when shooting the whole. In this study, a multi-angle 
recording system was built that can shoot in cooperation with 
multiple smartphones. Future work will be to make the 
sound quality clearer. And then, examine the effectiveness of 
the system in actual lessons. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The present study was supported by the Japan Society for 
the Promotion of Science (JSPS) through KAKENHI Grant 
Number 21K18528. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Oshima, K. Nishimoto, and M. Suzuki, “A Piano Duo 
Performance Support System to Motivate Children’s Practice 
at Home,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 46, No. 1, pp.157–171, 2005. 
[2] K. Nakahira, M. Akabane, and Y. Hukami, “Faculty 
Development for Playing and Singing Education with 
Blended 
Learning,” 
Japan 
Society 
for 
Educational 
Technology, Vol.34, pp.45–48, 2010. 
[3] Y. Yokoyama, and K. Nishimoto, “A piano practice support 
system for preventing performance cessation caused by 
performance errors,” IPSJ Interaction, pp.118–127, 2010. 
[4] E. Nakamura, H. Takeda, R. Yamamoto, S. Sako, and S. 
Sagayam, “Score Following Handling Performances with 
Arbitrary 
Repeats 
and 
Skips 
and 
Automatic 
Accompaniment,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 54, No. 4, pp.1338–
1349, 2013. 
[5] Y. Takegawa, T. Terada, and M. Tsukamoto, “Design and 
Implementation of a Piano Learning Support System 
Considering Rhythm Learning,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 54, No. 4, 
pp.1383–1392, 2013. 
[6] H. Kato, N. Emura, and M. Miura, “Support system for 
practicing piano-scale performances,” Acoustical Society of 
Japan, Vol.70, No.6, pp.273–276, 2014. 
[7] F. Yuto, T. Yoshinari, and Y. Hidekatsu, “Design and 
Implementation of a Piano Learning Support System 
Considering Motivation,” IPSJ Interaction, pp.118–127, 2015. 
[8] K. Yamada, K. Yamamoto, and T. Noma, “A Piano Learning 
System with Visual Correspondence Between Musical Scale 
and Keyboard,” IPSJ EC, pp.378–385, 2015. 
[9] K. Ueda, Y. Takegawa, and K. Hirata, “Design and 
Implementation of a Piano Learning Support System 
Focusing on Visualization of Keying Information and 
Annotation,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 57, No. 12, pp.2617–2025, 
2016. 
[10] Y. Takegawa, K. Hirata, E. Tayanagi, and M. Tsubakimoto, 
“Evaluation Analysis of a Piano Learning Support System 
Focusing on the Learning Process,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 58, No. 
5, pp.1093–1100, 2017. 
[11] T. Ishigami, and T. Hamamoto, “A Piano Practice Support 
System Visualizing Correspondence Between Music Scores 
and Key Positions,” ITE Technical Report, Vol.41, No.14, 
pp.71–76, 2017. 
[12] N. Takaya, S. Nakahira, and M. Kitajima, “Analysis of the 
relationships between the proficiency levels of piano playing 
and the changes in visual behaviors while reading score and 
performing piano,” IPSJ SIG Technical Report, pp.1–7, 2017. 
[13] T. Suzuki, K. Tanaka, R. Ogura, and Y. Tsuji, “Practice of 
Beginners’ Piano Skill Training Support Using ‘Visualization 
System for Piano Performance (VSPP)’,” IPSJ SIG Technical 
Report, Vol.2018-MUS-119 No.16, pp.1-6, 2018. 
[14] R. Matsui, Y. Takegawa, and K. Hirata, “Tel-Gerich: Remote 
Piano Lesson System Considering Joint Attention Camera 
Switching and Cam- era Switching,” Human interface: the 
transaction of Human Interface Society, Vol.20, No.3, 
pp.321–332, 2018. 
[15] R. Matsui, A. Hasegawa, Y. Takegawa, K. Hirata, and Y. 
Yanagawa, “Design, Implementation and Assessment of a 
Support System to Find Bad Fingering Habits for Piano 
Teachers,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 61, No. 4, pp.789–797, 2020. 
[16] F. S. Young, and R. J. Wilson, “Assessment and learning: The 
ICE approach. Winnipeg,” MB: Portage and Main Press., 
2000. 
[17] C. Nakanishi, C. Sawada, K. Kawai, K. Morita, and N. Morita, 
“An Analysis of Needs for Developing a Tool for Piano 
Learning,” Proceedings of the 2022th National Convention of 
Society for Educational Technology, pp.35–36, 2022. 
[18] N. Morita, C. Nakanishi, C. Sawada, K. Morita, and K. Kawai, 
“Requirements 
for 
Piano 
Lesson 
Support 
System,” 
Proceedings of SIGNAL 2023, pp.18–20, 2023. 
[19] M. Wakiyama, et al., “Development of a Score Click 
Playback System,” Proceedings of SIGNAL 2023, pp.21–23, 
2023. 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

