Universally Designed Augmented Reality (AR) for the School of the Future 
Making eXtended Reality (XR) technology inclusive for students with and without disabilities 
Joschua Thomas Simon-Liedtke, Till Halbach 
Norwegian Computing Center 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: {joschua,halbach}@nr.no
Abstract—Augmented Reality (AR), together with other 
technologies collectively referred to as eXtended Reality (XR), 
can offer opportunities in education for experiential learning 
and the visualization of abstract concepts. However, there is a 
lack of universal design and significant challenges for students 
with disabilities. This paper presents a case study of AR 
technology used in Norwegian schools to identify inhibitors and 
facilitators for the inclusive use of AR in education. We let 
students with and without visual and cognitive disabilities try 
out an AR app for books. The AR app would superimpose 
virtual 3D models and videos on the books similar to a pop-up 
book. Interviews with educators and a focus group session with 
developers identified opportunities, benefits, user expectations, 
best 
practices, 
challenges, 
common 
pitfalls, 
and 
recommendations and concrete measures to address said 
challenges and pitfalls. Our study emphasizes the lack of 
support for assistive technologies, the over-emphasis on visual 
stimuli that can be hindering for students with visual 
disabilities, the significant demand of AR on cognitive 
capabilities, which might be challenging for students with 
cognitive disabilities, and the lack of awareness of and access to 
guidelines and best practices among developers. We suggest 
enabling compatibility with assistive technologies, increased 
multi-modality that engages hearing and touch, and increased 
usage of visual explanations and elements like symbols and 
icons. In addition, we suggest collecting, organizing, and 
promoting existing and new guidelines for the universal design 
of both XR and AR. We argue that many of our findings for AR 
are relevant to other technologies gathered under the umbrella 
of XR, including Mixed Reality (MR) and Virtual Reality (VR).  
Keywords - Universal design; accessibility; usability; 
inclusion; eXtended Reality; Augmented Reality; Virtual Reality; 
Mixed Reality; XR; AR; MR; VR; education; learning; disability; 
barriers; solutions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
eXtended Reality (XR) is an umbrella term to describe 
Virtual Reality (VR), Mixed Reality (MR), and Augmented 
Reality (AR) [1]. XR has been used in entertainment [2], 
industry [3], and education [4][5]. XR has benefits for 
education including new interaction methods, a high degree 
of sensory immersion, and high information density [4]. We 
previously examined the state of universal design of XR 
usage in Norwegian primary schools [5][6][7][8].  
We conducted a literature review about the different uses 
of XR, their opportunities and challenges, and we identified 
solutions to overcome these challenges and enhance the 
integration of XR in primary education [5][6]. This review 
shows that there are systemic and technical challenges that 
require improved pedagogical research and integration, skill-
set and acceptance improvement among educators and 
decision-makers, infrastructure development for XR in 
schools, and development of funding and procurement 
schemes for the technology [8]. Further, there is a need for 
increased co-creation of XR technology, the identification of 
barriers for students with disabilities, the development of 
solutions 
for 
said 
barriers, 
the 
advancement 
of 
standardization of guidelines and best practices, and the 
development of methods to assess the degree of accessibility 
and usability of an XR device or application [7].  
Moreover, we recruited informants among educators, 
decision-makers, 
representatives 
from 
civil 
society 
organizations, and developers of XR technology [7][8]. The 
participants emphasized the benefit of XR as an experience-
based technology that can facilitate the visualization of 
abstract concepts in an engaging and motivating way [7]. The 
informants also highlighted the need for making pedagogical 
benefits and limitations of XR better visible, including advice 
on utilizing opportunities XR technology offers, while 
mitigating challenges [8]. Especially the need for case study 
research and applicable solutions in schools has been 
emphasized. Likewise, there is a significant lack of research 
focusing on users and students with disabilities [7][9][10]. 
Last but not least, existing guidelines and best practices for 
digital user interfaces in general [11][12][13], and XR in 
particular [14][15][16][17], lack general recognition, 
acceptance, and compliance among developers [7]. The Web 
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) for accessibility 
and usability of digital interfaces, for instance, serve as 
standards in many national and international ICT regulations 
[11][12][13][18][19][20] but lack an adequate translation for 
XR technology. 
In this work, we attempt to decrease the knowledge gap 
by presenting results from a case study that investigates the 
accessibility and usability of a concrete AR application used 
in Norwegian primary schools. We conducted user testing, 
interviews, and a focus group to identify AR application 
opportunities and barriers and solutions to these barriers. The 
research involved students with and without disabilities, their 
educators, and AR developers.  
In this paper, we first present the protocol for user testing 
and interviews, and its implementation in Section II. Then, 
we present the results of the user evaluations and interviews 
conducted in the fall of 2022 in Section III and discuss our 
observations in Section IV. Finally, we conclude with 
suggestions for future research and improvements to the 
universal design of XR technology in Section V. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

II. 
METHODOLOGY & IMPLEMENTATION 
Our accessibility and usability assessment was inspired 
by inclusive-design approaches and strategies for the 
evaluation of design artifacts by focusing on user-centered 
evaluation, iterative processes, addressing the whole user 
experience, the integration of multidisciplinary skills and 
perspectives, and an iterative technical and formative 
evaluation [21][22]. We used user evaluations by students 
based on a thinking-aloud approach as a primary research 
method. Here, we identified the key features of the AR 
application and specified tasks that participants were asked to 
complete. A secondary method was focus group and semi-
structured interviews engaging educators and developers 
[23][24]. The protocols for the interviews consisted of 
guiding questions and conversation starters focusing on 
accessibility, usability, and universal design of AR in 
education. 
In the current study, we evaluated an AR application for 
mobile devices called Ludenso Explore, developed by 
Ludenso AS (cf. Figure 1). The app is an extension to the 
science book Solaris 9 used in Norwegian primary schools 
[25]. Ludenso Explore is similar to a traditional pop-up book 
in that students, after downloading the app, can gain access 
to several types of interactive content by scanning the pages 
of their book. Depending on the content, the app then shows 
a virtual interactive 3D model, a video that is superimposed 
on the paper page, or links to external digital learning 
resources on the publisher’s web pages (cf. Figure 1). 
The user evaluations involved four primary schools in 
Norway during the fall/winter of 2022: Jordal ungdomsskole, 
Midtstuen ungdomsskole, Holmen barneskole, and Greåker 
videregående skole. These schools represented a diverse 
range of students with and without disabilities. In this study, 
we focused specifically on cognitive and visual impairments. 
A total of 34 students between 9 and 16 years of both genders 
participated. 15 children had cognitive impairments. The 
cognitive impairments can be categorized as ASD and 
developmental disabilities. Several of the students had 
personal assistants and teachers who also were interviewed. 
Three students had visual impairments. One student had a 
significant amount of remaining vision, another had limited 
remaining vision, and one student was completely blind. We 
also interviewed a teacher with severe visual impairment. 
During the user evaluations, the students completed the tasks 
defined in the protocol, using the AR app on their phones or 
on the devices we provided. We asked them to comment 
aloud what they were doing and thinking as they completed 
the tasks, at the same time as we encouraged conversation 
with follow-up questions. The observations from these user 
evaluations were supplemented by conversations with 11 
educators and three AR developers, which were conducted 
during one-on-one interviews and focus groups.  
At least two researchers were present for each user 
evaluation. One researcher led the evaluation by presenting 
tasks, supporting students, and asking questions. The other 
researcher focused on observation and notetaking. We did not 
take any recordings during the evaluations to preserve the 
students’ privacy. After the evaluations, each researcher 
transcribed observations from the experiments conducted a 
thematic analysis of their notes, and summarized identifying 
themes to extract the most relevant and important points. 
Both researchers discussed their respective data sets. Finally, 
they summarized and compacted the findings across all 
evaluations combined. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Here, we present benefits and pedagogical opportunities, 
user expectations and best practices, systemic and practical 
challenges, and common technical and functional pitfalls. 
Further, we provide organizational recommendations and 
concrete measures to improve universal design of AR. We 
grouped observations into sections. Each category is 
summarized in bold font, followed by detailed explanations 
and examples. 
A. Pedagogical Opportunities and General Benefits 
AR can engage students with the curriculum in novel 
and more practical ways. AR can effectively illustrate 
abstract ideas and “obscured” objects, like atoms or planets, 
replacing the need for physical models. AR can enhance 
practical knowledge compared to text or 2D sketches. 
AR typically captures students' interest and attention 
better than traditional learning materials, leading to increased 
interest, motivation, and engagement. This increased 
engagement and motivation might be related to the use of 
innovative technology and the fact that many students are 
highly responsive and significantly drawn to tablets and 
mobile apps. Likewise, AR can provide various gamification 
elements that stimulate engagement. At the same time, 
research questions the long-term effect of XR technology in 
light of the so-called novelty effect [4][10]. 
Figure 1.  A student interacts with a virtual 3D model in the Ludenso 
Explore app on a smartphone. © Johanne Nyborg 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

Consequently, AR might add variation to the learning 
process that can lead to positive learning effects, such as 
enhancing cognitive skills like comprehension and 
cooperation. For instance, AR allows for interactive 
exploration, enabling students to move around and zoom in 
on models, which can result in a better learning experience 
and increased understanding. AR may invite students to 
cooperate around the virtual content and to learn from each 
other when navigating the app. 
AR, on par with other digital learning aids, can 
provide benefits for the organization and distribution of 
curriculum materials. Organizing the curriculum digitally 
has the advantage of consolidating various resources in one 
easily accessible place for all students. Educators can more 
flexibly choose and use learning resources in the classroom. 
AR has the potential to increase inclusion if the 
accessibility of AR technology is properly addressed. 
Compared to the challenges of adapting analog learning aids 
in the past, AR can offer more flexible and easier adoption, 
as long as universal design is addressed from early in the 
design and development process. In general, digital learning 
aids including AR could more easily be adapted for screen 
readers than traditional paper books. Likewise, AR could 
provide interfaces for assistive technology like hearing aids 
and alternative input/output devices. However, this requires 
developers to be aware of users with disabilities and address 
their needs satisfactorily. 
AR serves as a suitable learning alternative for those who 
prefer visual and less text-based approaches, such as students 
with dyslexia, ADHD, or learning difficulties. 
B. User Expectations and Best Practices 
Users anticipate seamless and efficient user experience 
while utilizing an app, including installation, general 
usage, and scanning and tracking of virtual content. The 
students in the study appreciated the simple and convenient 
installation process of an AR app that can be downloaded 
from app stores like Apple's App Store or Google Play. They 
also appreciated robust and reliable tracking of AR content, 
particularly 3D models.  
Users respond positively to user-friendly interfaces 
with intuitive and familiar functions and elements. The 
students appreciated quick and easy access to digital content, 
such as videos and 3D models. The students appreciated an 
interface that is easy to understand and intuitive, with 
comprehensive buttons and tabs. Choosing the right default 
is also essential. Many students, for instance, preferred 
watching videos in full screen. Likewise, they appreciated 
features like auto-play combined with the initial muting of 
the video.  
An intuitive navigation within the AR app was positively 
received. This includes navigation of AR content based on 
functionality known from other apps like zooming in and out 
using pinch gestures, along with familiar icons for full screen, 
muting, and other functional elements. 
Users prefer a variety of interactivity options with 
virtual content. Many students preferred the option to access 
and freely interact with virtual content like 3D models by 
choosing it from a digital library instead of using image 
recognition or AR markers that restrict them to the literal 
confines of the paper book. Also, many students preferred 
using the standalone function for 3D models, i.e., the 
possibility to place 3D models in the physical room without 
connection to the physical paper book. 
C. Systemic and Practical Challenges 
AR 
might 
encounter 
technical 
and 
practical 
challenges in schools. There might be limited access to 
necessary hardware and reliable online access with sufficient 
capacity in schools. Also, limited physical environments can 
hinder AR use in practice, like overcrowded classrooms with 
restricting space to move around in. 
Lack of digital skills and experience with AR among 
educators and students might be a challenge. AR requires 
technical skills, posing a potentially steep learning curve for 
users, particularly older teachers who may struggle or are 
reluctant to adapt. Students with disabilities might lack the 
necessary skills to use AR devices. 
Insufficient universal design of digital learning tools, 
including AR, is likely to negatively impact accessibility 
for students with disabilities.  
There is a lack of awareness of and expertise in 
universal design of AR among developers and decision-
makers in schools and authorities. The awareness and 
knowledge about accessibility and usability among 
developers can be improved. The participating developers 
were partially familiar with general programming guidelines 
for accessibility and usability [26] [27] [28]. Even though 
national 
and 
international 
legal 
requirements 
exist 
[18][19][20][29], these are not widely known to developers.  
Some developers were aware of WCAG [11] [12] [13] but 
reported that their knowledge about them was very 
superficial and not embedded in any organizational or 
structural routines. When presented with surveys of barriers 
[9][15] and accessibility guidelines for gaming and XR 
[9][14][15][16][17], the participants were not aware of them. 
Universal design is by some considered costly and 
conflicting with aesthetics. The developers were concerned 
that limited resources and restrictive development budgets in 
AR companies may lead to situations where universal design 
is neglected. The developers in the study also reported a lack 
of demand for universal design of AR applications by 
decision-makers 
in 
schools, 
education 
boards, 
and 
authorities.  
Focus on visual presentation of the virtual content can be 
a challenge for some students. AR predominantly embraces 
visual aspects, limiting its suitability for individuals with 
visual impairments or cognitive challenges. It is our 
impression that sensory and auditory elements, such as sound 
effects and tactile feedback, are not adequately addressed in 
today’s digital learning tools, including AR. 
AR and other digital learning tools may distract 
students. Students may be distracted by other apps. Potential 
noise issues can occur when multiple students use the digital 
learning tools simultaneously, for instance by playing video 
simultaneously. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

D. Common Technical and Functional Pitfalls 
Some apps may have technical challenges related to 
their stability, performance, unexpected behavior, or 
erroneous tracking of virtual content that can disrupt the 
user experience, together with unreliable devices and the 
lack of cross-platform compatibility. An AR app might 
freeze and exhibit unexpected behavior, requiring restarts. 
Some students reported that their devices went into sleep 
mode while watching videos. Other students reported that 
some AR apps might be incompatible with newer versions of 
iOS or Android, limiting their usability. 
Many students reported that they experienced unreliable 
tracking behavior in many AR apps. Some students struggled 
to choose the best camera position and angle for proper 
scanning of the AR markers. Other students experienced 
challenges due to heterogeneous illumination conditions or 
physical distortions of the AR markers. 
Some apps lack tutorials, explanations for specific 
features and functions, intuitive presentation of functions, 
and sufficient feedback functionality. An AR app might 
lack suitable guides or tutorials, especially for users new to 
AR. The students in the study inquired about explanations of 
AR and its possibilities in general, and how to navigate an 
app's features in specific. 
Navigating the interface of an AR app and understanding 
its elements and functions might prove challenging for some 
users. Some functions might not be explained sufficiently. 
Some students might not understand features like muting, and 
full-screen mode when indicated by icons only. Features like 
choosing 3D models from a library instead of scanning might 
be particularly difficult for and feel non-intuitive to students 
with cognitive impairments. 
Apps might lack feedback after functions have been 
completed, either successfully or failed. An AR app might 
not provide proper feedback on functionality, like 
downloading content, leaving users uncertain about 
successful or failed downloads.  
Some apps lack localization for the country in which 
the app is deployed. An AR app targeted at Norwegian 
schools that is only available in English can pose difficulties 
for younger users or users with cognitive disabilities who 
may not fully understand the language. 
AR apps might not conform to universal design 
requirements and common accessibility guidelines. An 
AR app might not adhere to commonly used accessibility 
guidelines [13][16]. The most common missing measures 
include alternative ALT text for images, support for screen 
readers, proper semantic markup, adjustable text sizes, audio 
descriptions for videos, and keyboard navigation.  
The content of an AR app might be unsuitable for 
students with cognitive impairments. Videos may be too 
complex or delivered at a fast pace, posing difficulties for 
reading and comprehension. 
Motion-based navigation of 3D content can be 
challenging for students with and without disabilities. 
Visually impaired students might encounter challenges, as 
well as any students in small classrooms. Physical devices, 
such as tablets, may be challenging for young or physically 
impaired users due to their weight. 
E. Organizational Recommendations 
There should be an effort to increase awareness of and 
expertise in universal design of AR among developers, 
educators, and decision-makers. Educators and decision-
makers in municipalities need increased expertise in and 
awareness of accessibility, usability, and universal design of 
AR at all levels including development, testing, and 
procurement. Awareness can be raised by revisiting literature 
about barriers to XR technology and their solutions 
[5][8][9][15][16]. Likewise, training for developers and 
decision-makers should focus on universal design of ICT and 
digital inclusion in general, considering how universal design 
requirements can be integrated with modern and effective 
development and production.  
Schools should consciously demand universal design of 
digital learning materials and content, including AR, as a 
mandatory requirement by referencing existing legislation 
and living it in practice, too. 
Research on the cost-benefit of universal design in AR 
should be conducted and shared with stakeholders. 
Especially, the hypothesis that universally designed AR is 
more beneficial and cost-efficient than AR without UD 
should be investigated. 
Priority should be given to the development, 
organization, and distribution of guidelines, best 
practices, evaluation methods, and action plans. All digital 
learning materials and content should comply with national 
and international legal requirements and standards for 
universal design of ICT [18][19][20][29]. Existing guidelines 
for universally designed programming, XR, games, and user 
interfaces should be distributed and promoted among 
developers 
[12][13][14][16][17][26][27][28]. 
Relevant 
guidelines and best practices for AR and XR should be 
organized and highlighted for the production of XR 
applications (cf. Section III.F).  
More research on the needs of and challenges for XR 
users with disabilities and the solutions to said challenges is 
needed. More resources and literature targeting the universal 
design of XR in general and AR specifically should be 
developed for vendors of XR technology and content.  
Companies should create and implement concrete plans 
on how universal design is integrated into their development 
and production of products and services. Automated 
accessibility and usability tests, e.g., contrast checks, should 
be available for developers. Checklists, recommendations, 
and best practices tailored to XR and AR should be created. 
Development should include user testing throughout 
the entire planning, implementation, and testing stages of 
the production process, making the app as flexible, 
robust, and glitch-free as possible. Developers should 
deploy an agile development process with multiple iterations 
of planning, execution, review, and retrospective [30]. In this 
process, bugs and performance issues can be uncovered and 
then fixed. From the planning stage to pre-release, the app 
should be assessed by actual students with and without 
disabilities.  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

F. Technical and Practical Measures to Increase Universal 
Design of AR 
Robust and stable scanning of the markers or image 
recognition should be a priority, as well as stable and 
robust tracking. This includes accommodating various 
exterior conditions related to lighting, surface texture, and 
structure, as well as a variety of possible user interactions. 
The AR app should be compatible with the latest versions of 
operating systems like iOS and Android. 
Efforts should be made to enhance the usability and 
user experience of an app by facilitating access to 
documentation and tutorials, including a feedback 
mechanism, 
and 
highlighting 
essential 
functions. 
Comprehensive installation instructions and documentation 
should be available to users. Tutorials and explanatory 
texts/illustrations for AR in general and specific app features 
should be provided. Instructions and information about 
pedagogical possibilities and the functionality of AR in 
education should be provided to teachers and decision-
makers. A feedback mechanism should be provided 
throughout the installation process and app usage that allows 
users to report bugs or send in suggestions. 
The most common functions should be easily 
understandable. Existing features like unmuting videos or 
standalone 3D models should be highlighted and provided 
with clear explanations.  
Internationalization and localization in the primary 
country language should be made available. The language 
used in texts should be kept as simple as possible for better 
comprehensiveness.  
AR content should be available in offline mode, 
including 3D models, video snippets, and audio files. 
Developers should revisit the presentation of text, 
speech, and non-textual elements by offering textual and 
non-textual alternatives to support students with visual 
and cognitive impairments. An AR app should incorporate 
both text and visual representation for its AR content, 
elements, and functions including explanatory descriptions 
and illustrations [15]. On the one hand, AR apps should 
increase the use of non-textual elements like symbols, icons, 
images, graphic elements, and images of 3D models to 
support students with cognitive impairments. On the other 
hand, all functional visual elements should have explanatory 
and descriptive text alternatives. If support for screen readers 
is yet unavailable, a text-to-speech feature can be considered. 
Efforts should be made to conform with existing 
standards, guidelines, and best practices. An AR app 
should be designed according to the latest WCAG [12][13], 
in particular the following success criteria :  
● 
Support for keyboard navigation and screen readers 
(cf. Guidelines 2.1 and 4.1). 
● 
Captions and audio description, or a text alternative 
for all videos (cf. 1.2.2 and 1.2.3). 
● 
Text alternatives for all visual elements (cf. 1.1). 
● 
Recommendations for distinguishable elements 
including the use of color, contrast, text size, 
dynamic adaptation, and text spacing (cf. 1.4). 
An AR app should be designed according to W3C's XR 
user requirements [16], including the following guidelines: 
● 
Adaptation to various assistive aids and output 
devices (cf. 4.1, 4.8, 4.13, and 4.14). 
● 
Alternative navigation options include using voice 
commands and providing alternatives to motion 
controls (cf. 4.2, 4.5, and 4.9). 
● 
The option to personalize content for students with 
cognitive challenges (cf. 4.3). 
● 
Establishing safe spaces and time limits to prevent 
overwhelm and exhaustion (cf. 4.11 and 4.12). 
● 
Allowing interaction speeds for, among others, text, 
video, and audio (cf. 4.15). 
● 
Captions for audio-visual media (cf. 4.19). 
Developers should follow best practices aiming at 
programming in general [26][27][28], and XR technology 
and games in specific [14][17]. 
AR and XR equipment and apps should accommodate 
special needs, both physically and programmatically. 
Support for assistive technology and alternative input 
and output devices should be implemented. AR and XR 
equipment should be lightweight and work on a variety of 
screens and devices [15]. Compatibility with common 
assistive technology should be enabled, including screen 
readers or text-to-speech tools for users with low vision, 
hearing aids for those with a hearing impairment, voice or 
gaze command, and wheelchairs with motor or mobility 
impairments [9][15]. Note that the most common aids are 
regular glasses that should be compatible with all AR and XR 
devices [31]. Alternative input devices are keyboards, 
computer mice, customized controllers, or buttons, whereas 
alternative output devices include additional external screens, 
customized headphones, or refreshable braille displays 
[9][15].  
Compatibility with these aids should work both 
programmatically and physically. Programmatically, by 
providing an interface or API for these technologies, e.g., 
screen readers, input or output devices. Physically, by not 
interfering with or hindering the usage of assistive 
technology, e.g., hearing aids, wheelchairs, or glasses. 
Moreover, all digital information needs to be available and 
accessible with and without assistive technology, e.g., 
through text alternatives for screen readers. 
Compatibility with screen readers like VoiceOver / 
TalkBack for students with visual impairments should be 
prioritized. Likewise, navigation within the interface and the 
virtual world through alternative input devices should also be 
prioritized. 
Developers should enhance the multi-modality of the 
virtual content. AR content should be presented through 
various 
modalities, 
i.e., 
engage 
multiple 
senses 
simultaneously, such as hearing and touch [15]. AR content 
should be expanded through modalities, such as sound, 
vibration, 3D-printed artifacts, and tactile display units. 
Different modalities should also be considered for user 
interaction, including auditory elements like sound effects, 
vibrations, and tactile feedback. We advise employing user 
preferences for modalities, combined with profiles for 
personalized experiences. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

Presentation of the virtual content without tracking 
should be available. There should be the possibility for a 
purely virtual representation of 3D models within the app 
through a so-called “stand-alone” mode. This would allow 
exploration without scanning book pages, tracking markers, 
or placing models in the classroom.  
Navigation within the virtual content should be 
possible without motion control through on-screen 
buttons. Navigation through various control methods, such 
as buttons, keyboard, motion control, gestures, and voice 
commands should be available. Navigation without motion 
control should be available through plus and minus buttons 
for zooming, buttons to rotate 3D models, or buttons to view 
the inside of models by zooming inside. Rotation should be 
possible along all axes, i.e., the x-, y-, and z-axes. 
The AR app should have a certain level of tolerance 
for input errors when it comes to navigating the 3D 
models. There should be designated areas on the screen 
where fingers and palms can be placed without triggering 
unintended gestures. 
AR apps should consider including more interactive 
features and educational content that is available both 
online and offline. AR apps should incorporate more 
interactive elements, such as opening/closing parts of models 
and 
displaying 
dynamic 
processes 
or 
animations. 
Gamification elements, such as progress indicators, levels, 
challenges, rewards, and competitions could be included. A 
collection of educational tasks that can be used outside the 
curriculum and without internet access could be provided. 
Measures 
to 
address 
distractions 
should 
be 
implemented. AR and digital learning materials should limit 
potential digital distractions. Features like locking the app or 
disabling the exit button for students can be considered. 
Notifications from other apps, particularly social media, 
should be disabled during app usage. 
Age and skill set, e.g., reading and abstract thinking, 
recommendations for using the learning tool should be 
provided in the description of an app and its content. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The current study validates previous observations and 
introduces new findings regarding AR and other XR 
technologies in education. Although we have focused on AR, 
many of the findings can be applied to Mixed Reality (MR), 
Virtual Reality (VR), and other digital learning aids as well. 
AR shares many similarities with other digital learning aids 
that rely on tablets or mobile phones, as they utilize the same 
underlying technology. Thus, many of our findings are 
relevant to other tablet, mobile, or computer apps as well. 
Moreover, the differences between AR, MR, and VR 
technologies are blurred. For these technologies are often 
placed inside a “virtuality continuum”, also referred to as 
eXtended Reality, with a completely real environment on one 
end and a completely virtual environment at the other end 
[1][32]. Thus, most findings for AR are transferable to other 
XR technologies. The barriers associated with the necessary 
hardware, for instance, become more apparent in VR and MR 
than in AR, as both VR and MR require more extensive and 
immersive equipment. Thus, barriers related to virtual worlds 
and the demands placed on the user's abstraction and spatial 
sense become more apparent, as the level of immersion 
increases for MR and VR compared to AR. Likewise, the 
dominating focus on visual aspects is relevant for all XR 
technologies. In future research, we recommend investigating 
multiple types of XR technologies, while indicating which 
findings are most or least relevant to each respective type. 
Positive outcomes mentioned in the literature could be 
confirmed, such as increased motivation, collaboration, 
interest, and experiential learning [5][8]. Further, our study 
confirms practical challenges mentioned in the literature 
related to space and illumination limitations of the physical 
environments, availability of XR devices, and Internet 
availability in schools, along with the need for improved 
digital and XR skills among teachers, decision-makers and 
students [5][8]. In previous research, educators reported the 
lack of educational AR content suitable to national 
curriculums and daily routines in schools [5][8]. We 
addressed this challenge in the current study by evaluating an 
AR solution tailored to the Norwegian science curriculum. 
Nevertheless, participants in this study pointed out that there 
is still a need for more content in other subjects. 
The insufficient representation of students with 
disabilities during the development and testing of XR 
technology [5] is addressed in this study by including 
students with disabilities. Generally, this inclusion might lead 
to improved user experience for all students: Simplifying the 
user interface, integrating icons and graphical elements, and 
adding sound and vibration effects might benefit students 
with and without disabilities alike. This synergy is commonly 
referred to as the “curb-cut” effect [33][34]. Thus, future 
research could investigate how integrating students with 
disabilities in evaluations including other minority groups, 
such as those with hearing, motor, and mobility disabilities, 
as well as people with chronic conditions, could provide 
numerous benefits. 
The study further confirms the lack of accessibility and 
usability of current XR technology [5][7]. Barriers include 
the absence of support for assistive technology like screen 
readers, alternative input/output devices, glasses, hearing 
aids, or wheelchairs, and the complexity of virtual content for 
users 
with 
cognitive 
disabilities 
[5][7][9]. 
Without 
adjustments, AR and XR are little suited for people with 
cognitive disabilities and largely unusable for students with 
visual disabilities. We particularly suggest making sure that 
the app is compatible with and does not hinder the use of 
assistive technologies. Furthermore, we suggest exploring 
alternative modalities, such as sound effects, vibrations, 
(physical) 3D-printed artifacts, and tactile displays to 
enhance accessibility. Examples of such solutions are a white 
cane with auditory and tactile feedback in VR [35], or a 
toolbox with improvements for users with low vision [36]. 
Additionally, incorporating icons, images, and graphical 
elements may be helpful for students with cognitive 
challenges who lack linguistic capabilities and the ability to 
process abstraction. An example of this is using pictograms 
and icons for users with cognitive disabilities [37]. 
Our findings from the interviews with developers of XR 
technology echo previous findings [5]. Companies are often 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

aware of universal design to some extent but lack the 
necessary resources and tools to enhance the accessibility and 
usability of their technology. Developers may also not be 
aware of barriers faced by users with disabilities or lack the 
expertise to adequately address these barriers. Existing 
guidelines 
and 
frameworks 
from other 
ICT 
areas 
[11][12][13][14][17], 
are 
often 
not 
adequately 
communicated. Additionally, developers express the need for 
easily accessible and usable best practices. The participating 
developers noted that many customers do not prioritize 
increased universal design, which may lead to a lack of 
emphasis on universal design at the management level. 
Developers of systems should be made aware that several 
directives and legal regulations already exist that require the 
universal design of digital learning aids [18][19][20][29]. 
Therefore, we suggest increasing the awareness of and 
expertise in universal design among developers, designers, 
and decision-makers responsible for procuring digital 
learning resources in both the private and public sectors. This 
can be achieved by promoting existing guidelines, visualizing 
concrete barriers, providing specific solutions to these 
barriers, and offering practical best practices. Additionally, 
guidelines from other areas like programming or video games 
[11][12][13][14][26][27][28] should be reviewed for their 
relevance to XR technology. Likewise, we argue that WCAG, 
originally developed for websites, is also relevant for XR 
through the integration of WCAG 2.0 and 2.1 in national and 
international legislations for ICT in general and digital 
learning aids in specific [12][13][20].  
At the same time, AR companies should incorporate 
dedicated procedures for universal design in their 
development and evaluation processes. This may include 
automated or manual checks for accessible and user-friendly 
user interfaces, testing for compatibility with ATs, and 
regular user trials involving students with and without 
disabilities. Similarly, decision-makers, educators, and 
buyers of digital learning solutions should demand and test 
for compliance with universal design requirements. The 
referenced guidelines and standards for user interfaces, video 
games, programming, and XR applications in this paper, 
provide some examples of what XR developers can use 
during the development process, and to which decision-
makers can refer for requirement specifications. 
Finally, our findings demonstrate the consequences of 
inaccessible learning resources used in schools, as well as the 
potential for improved integration if universal design is 
adequately addressed. Inaccessible digital learning resources 
can easily result in knowledge gaps, with students who lack 
essential knowledge struggling to keep up when more 
advanced topics are introduced. Students with disabilities, 
particularly those with visual impairments and cognitive 
challenges, are especially vulnerable to these difficulties. 
However, AR can serve as a suitable alternative for learners 
who rely less on text-based approaches, such as students with 
dyslexia, ADHD, and other learning disabilities. These 
findings align with findings from previous research we 
conducted [5]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this article, we presented a case study that explores the 
universal design of Augmented Reality (AR) technology in 
educational settings. We believe that the findings will also be 
relevant to other technologies under the umbrella of 
eXtended Reality (XR), such as Mixed Reality (MR) and 
Virtual Reality (VR). Central to the assessment is the 
evaluation of an AR-based pop-up-like book designed for 
primary schools in Norway. User evaluations and interviews 
were conducted with students, including those with 
disabilities, educators, and developers to assess the 
opportunities and benefits, user expectations and best 
practices, challenges, and common pitfalls of using AR in 
educational materials. The study especially identified barriers 
faced by students with visual and cognitive disabilities. 
Furthermore, we provided recommendations and concrete 
measures to improve the integration of AR into the primary 
school curriculum and enhance its accessibility and usability 
for students with and without disabilities. 
One significant challenge highlighted is the heavy 
reliance on visual stimuli in AR, which may pose difficulties 
for students with visual disabilities. Another challenge is the 
complexity and virtuality of AR putting a significant demand 
on the cognitive capabilities of the students, including spatial 
visualization ability and the concept of virtuality. This makes 
AR challenging for students with cognitive disabilities, 
especially in cases where the app lacks both visual and textual 
explanations. These challenges should be addressed by 
employing different approaches, such as incorporating 
alternative modalities like sound and tactile feedback, 
utilizing visual explanations, enhancing engaging symbols 
and icons to captivate students’ interest, and offering textual 
descriptions as alternatives for visual content. Consequently, 
these improvements could enhance the accessibility and 
usability of AR technology for students with and without 
disabilities alike. 
Moreover, many students with disabilities rely on 
assistive technology, like screen readers, hearing aids, 
glasses, or wheelchairs. Developers need to ensure that the 
AR application, including its operation, is compatible with 
these technologies, both physically and programmatically. 
Finally, we recommend raising awareness of and 
expertise in universal design among developers and decision-
makers in private companies and public institutions. This can 
be achieved by gathering best practices, consolidating 
existing guidelines for AR and XR technology, adapting 
relevant guidelines from other ICT areas, and making these 
guidelines easily accessible and widely distributed to 
developers and designers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research has been conducted in cooperation with 
Ludenso AS. The authors thank Ingrid Skrede for her 
contributions, and all participating informants as well. This 
work has been supported by the UnIKT program of the 
Norwegian Directorate for Children, Youth, and Family 
Affairs (Bufdir). 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

REFERENCES 
[1] C. Andrews, M. K. Southworth, J. N. A. Silva, and J. R. Silva, 
“Extended Reality in Medical Practice,” Curr. Treat. Options 
Cardiovasc. Med., vol. 21, no. 4, p. 18, Mar. 2019, doi: 
10.1007/s11936-019-0722-7. 
[2] S. Z. A. Ansari, V. K. Shukla, K. Saxena, and B. Filomeno, 
“Implementing Virtual Reality in Entertainment Industry,” in Cyber 
Intelligence and Information Retrieval, Springer Singapore, 2022, pp. 
561–570. doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-4284-5_49. 
[3] E. Yildiz, C. Møller, and A. Bilberg, “Virtual Factory: Digital Twin 
Based Integrated Factory Simulations,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 93, pp. 
216–221, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2020.04.043. 
[4] N. Pellas, I. Kazanidis, and G. Palaigeorgiou, “A systematic literature 
review of mixed reality environments in K-12 education,” Education 
and Information Technologies, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2481–2520, Jul. 2020, 
doi: 10.1007/s10639-019-10076-4. 
[5] J. T. Simon-Liedtke and R. C. Baraas, “The Need for Universal Design 
of eXtended Reality (XR) Technology in Primary and Secondary 
Education,” in Proc. of the HCII 2022, Springer International 
Publishing, 2022, pp. 121–141. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-06015-1_9. 
[6] J. T. Simon-Liedtke and R. C. Baraas, “Investigating Universal Design 
of XR Technology in Primary Schools,” original: “Kartlegging av 
universell utforming av XR-teknologi i grunnskoler,” Norsk 
Regnesentral, 2022. 
[7] J. T. Simon-Liedtke and R. C. Baraas, “Towards eXtended Universal 
Design,” Stud. Health Technol. Inform., vol. 297, pp. 391–399, 2022, 
doi: 10.3233/SHTI220865. 
[8] J. T. Simon-Liedtke and R. C. Baraas, “The Future of eXtended Reality 
in Primary and Secondary Education,” Stud. Health Technol. Inform., 
vol. 297, pp. 549–556, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.3233/SHTI220886. 
[9] A. Wong, H. Gillis, and B. Peck, “VR accessibility: Survey for people 
with disabilities.” Disability Visibility Project, 2017. 
[10] J. Quintero, S. Baldiris, R. Rubira, J. Cerón, and G. Velez, “Augmented 
Reality in Educational Inclusion. A Systematic Review on the Last 
Decade,” Front. Psychol., vol. 10, p. 1835, Aug. 2019, doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01835. 
[11] World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), “Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines 
(WCAG) 
2.0,” 
Dec. 
2008. 
https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ (retr. Oct., 2023). 
[12] World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), “Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines 
(WCAG) 
2.1,” 
Jun. 
2018. 
https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/ (retr. Oct., 2023). 
[13] World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), “Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines 
(WCAG) 
2.2,” 
May 
2023. 
https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG22 (retr. Oct., 2023). 
[14] B. 
Ellis 
et 
al., 
“Game 
accessibility 
guidelines,” 
2013. 
http://gameaccessibilityguidelines.com/ (retr. Oct., 2023). 
[15] M. Mott et al., “Accessible by Design: An Opportunity for Virtual 
Reality,” in 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and 
Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct), Oct. 2019, pp. 451–454. 
doi: 10.1109/ISMAR-Adjunct.2019.00122. 
[16] World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), “XR Accessibility User 
Requirements,” 2020. https://www.w3.org/TR/xaur/ (retr. Oct., 2023). 
[17] XR Association, “XRA’s Developers Guide, Chapter Three: 
Accessibility & inclusive design in immersive experiences,” Oct. 27, 
2020. https://xra.org/research/xra-developers-guide-accessibility-and-
inclusive-design/ (retr. Oct., 2023). 
[18] Kommunal- 
og 
moderniseringsdepartementet, 
“Regulation 
on 
Universal Design of Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) Solutions (FOR-2013-06-21-732),” original: “Forskrift om 
universell utforming av informasjons- og kommunikasjonsteknologiske 
(IKT)-løsninger 
(FOR-2013-06-21-732),” 
Jun. 
2013. 
https://lovdata.no/dokument/SF/forskrift/2013-06-21-732 (retr. Oct., 
2023). 
[19] European Union (EU), “Web Accessibility Directive (WAD) - 
Directive 
(EU) 
2016/2102,” 
Oct. 
2016. 
https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2016/2102/oj 
[20] European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), “EN 301 
549 v3.2.1 (2021-03): Accessibility requirements for ICT products and 
services.” 
Mar. 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/301500_301599/301549/03.02.01
_60/en_301549v030201p.pdf 
[21] K. S. Fuglerud and D. Sloan, “The Link between Inclusive Design and 
Innovation: Some Key Elements,” in Human-Computer Interaction. 
Human-Centred 
Design 
Approaches, 
Methods, 
Tools, 
and 
Environments, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 41–50. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-39232-0_5. 
[22] J. Venable, J. Pries-Heje, and R. Baskerville, “FEDS: A Framework for 
Evaluation in Design Science Research,” European Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 77–89, 2016, doi: 
10.1057/ejis.2014.36. 
[23] T. Boren and J. Ramey, “Thinking aloud: reconciling theory and 
practice,” IEEE Trans. Prof. Commun., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 261–278, Sep. 
2000, doi: 10.1109/47.867942. 
[24] C. Power and H. Petrie, “Working With Participants,” in Web 
Accessibility, Y. Yesilada and S. Harper, Eds., in Human–Computer 
Interaction Series. London: Springer, 2019, pp. 153–168. doi: 
10.1007/978-1-4471-7440-0_9. 
[25] T. F. Gregers, E. Kalleson, S. H. Rosness, and S. Skarshaug, Solaris 9. 
in Solaris 1-10. Oslo, Norge: H. Aschehoug & Co. (W. Nygaard), 2021. 
[26] S. Zaraysky, “The designer’s guide to accessibility research,” Google 
Design, Mar. 15, 2018. https://design.google/library/designers-guide-
accessibility-research (retr. Oct., 2023). 
[27] Google, “Design for Android,” Android Developers, May 05, 2023. 
https://developer.android.com/design (retr. Oct., 2023). 
[28] Google, 
“Accessibility,” 
Material 
Design, 
May 
05, 
2023. 
https://m2.material.io/design/usability/accessibility.html (retr. Oct., 
2023). 
[29] Kulturdepartementet, 
“Act 
on 
Equality 
and 
Prohibition 
of 
Discrimination (Equality and Discrimination Act, ACT-2017-06-16-
51),” Jun. 2017. https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/2017-06-16-51 
(retr. Oct., 2023). 
[30] M. Drury, K. Conboy, and K. Power, “Obstacles to decision making in 
Agile software development teams,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 
1239–1254, Jun. 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2012.01.058. 
[31] T. Pladere, E. Svarverud, G. Krumina, S. J. Gilson, and R. C. Baraas, 
“Inclusivity in stereoscopic XR: Human vision first,” Frontiers in 
Virtual Reality, vol. 3, 2022, doi: 10.3389/frvir.2022.1006021. 
[32] P. Milgram and F. Kishino, “A taxonomy of mixed reality visual 
displays,” IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 77, no. 12, pp. 1321–1329, 1994, 
[Online]. Available: https://search.ieice.org/bin/summary.php?id=e77-
d_12_1321 
[33] C. H. Heydarian, “The Curb-Cut Effect and its Interplay with Video 
Games,” Master of Science in Graphic Information Technology, 
Arizona State University, 2020. 
[34] A. G. Blackwell, “The Curb-Cut Effect,” Stanford Social Innovation 
Review, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 28–33, 2017, doi: 10.48558/YVMS-CC96. 
[35] Y. Zhao et al., “Enabling People with Visual Impairments to Navigate 
Virtual Reality with a Haptic and Auditory Cane Simulation,” in Proc. 
of the 2018 CHI Conference, in CHI ’18. New York, NY, USA: 
Association for Computing Machinery, Apr. 2018, pp. 1–14. doi: 
10.1145/3173574.3173690. 
[36] Y. Zhao et al., “SeeingVR: A Set of Tools to Make Virtual Reality More 
Accessible to People with Low Vision,” in Proc. of the 2019 CHI 
Conference, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing 
Machinery, May 2019, pp. 1–14. doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300341. 
[37] M. Mastrogiuseppe, L. Soares Guedes, M. Landoni, S. Span, and E. 
Bortolotti, “Technology Use and Familiarity as an Indicator of Its 
Adoption in Museum by People with Intellectual Disabilities,” Stud. 
Health Technol. Inform., vol. 297, pp. 400–407, 2022, doi: 
10.3233/SHTI220866. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

