Recommendation Systems Supporting the
Educational Procedure: the Case of Grifobot
Vassilis Poulopoulos, Manolis Wallace, Panagiotis Kokkinos, Marina Lantzouni
Knowledge and Uncertainty Research Laboratory
University of the Peloponnese
Tripolis, Greece
vacilos@uop.gr, wallace@uop.gr, p.kokkinos@uop.gr, lantzouni@sch.gr
Abstract—As we enter a novel era for education, the need for
adaptation of both students and their teachers to the modern
educational procedures arises. Using technology in education
and especially games as a learning tool has gained attention
throughout the years but it seems the time has come for it to
be applied on large scale. Under these circumstances, we have
designed and implemented “Grifobot” an online Game-Based
Learning platform. Grifobot was initially designed to provide an
entertaining learning tool, but pivoted and changed to become
a recommendation system that can support the educational
procedures. In this paper, we present the main idea of the
recommendation system and the first results of its experimental
evaluation.
Index Terms—educational procedure, recommendation sys-
tems, modern education, grifobot
I. INTRODUCTION
The educational procedure as a whole has gained attention
during the first months of 2020, due to the “lockdowns”
applied in many countries worldwide, as a precaution measure
against the COVID-19 pandemic. Several educational systems
– including Greece’s – were forced to apply, in a matter
of days, distance learning procedures. The political decisions
were the ones that directly affected the social, economical and
cultural aspects of our lives, leading students to face a new
educational process.
While the use of novel technologies in education is a
research field that flourishes for decades, still, many teachers
and educators have difficulties adopting them. In fact, a large
number of educators avoid the usage of technology, as it is
not directly supported by the educational systems in several
countries. Researching the state of the art in the combination of
technology and education, reveals that the discussion remains
the same for more than 30 years. In 1987, Seymour Papert
– the father of LOGO – wrote about “computer criticism vs
technocentric thinking” in an attempt to analyze the different
points of view between “technologists” and “humanists” [1].
He furthermore analyzed how a specific computer program-
ming language (LOGO) can be used as a cultural building
material, and not as a conservative educational policy. The
discussion was not about the use of technology at school or
not, but on how to successfully adopt the technology and
how to teach it in the classroom. Ten years later – more
than 20 years ago – Fabry and Higgs performed research on
the barriers of effective use of Technology in Education [2].
They concluded that despite the existence of the infrastructure,
there were still persistent barriers to overcome, including not
only the lack of sufficient computer units for the students,
but most importantly the lack of technical support, and inad-
equate professional development. At the same time, research
on the effects of technology integration in education on the
attitudes of teachers and students, revealed that in 1995 the
U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment reported that
“helping teachers effectively incorporate technology into the
teaching and learning process is one of the most important
steps the nation can take to make the most of past and
continuing investments in educational technology”; which lead
to the conclusion that for more than 25 years countries were
trying to adopt technology in education [4]. On the other hand,
from the very past [3] till nowadays [5] [32] [33] the question
remains the same: what is the attitude of educators towards
technology in education?
Technology has emerged during the last decades, offering a
wide variety of solutions to several sectors, education included.
There is a considerable amount of literature regarding the
available tools and how they can be used in the classroom.
It is important to focus on educators who are not technology-
related, as they are the ones that are reluctant in using digital
tools in class. Throughout the last - many - years there
is a keyword repeating itself in the research in the field
ICT and Education: ”new technology tools”. Researchers and
educators keep collaborating in order to generate novel tools
that can be used during the educational procedure. Starting
from the very early ages (1980s), videos, images and sounds
progressing to today’s tools for synchronous and asynchronous
communication, technology can play an important role in a
classroom. Tools for asynchronous education include multi-
media, online data (encyclopedias), web forms (tests), forums;
while tools for synchronous educational procedure lead mainly
to teleconference platforms and online chats. In parallel there
is a number of tools - not necessarily related to classrooms,
but directly related to the educational procedures - that use
serious games in education leading a field often referred to as
Game-Based Learning [36]. A large number of EU projects
(as well as EU calls for funding) are directly related to
Game-Based Learning. EU-funded projects like NAVIGATE,
GUINEVERE, Beaconing, Mobile Game-Based Learning and
SIG-GLUE are only some of the projects that have as their
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-020-9
SOCIETY TRENDS 2022 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences

main scope Game-Based Learning and serious games.
In this paper, we will present Grifobot, an online educational
game created during the COVID-19 lock-down in order to
educate and entertain primary school students, which turned
out to be a very successful tool that was finally altered
and enhanced to become a teacher’s supporting tool. The
initial problem-solving-using-code tool (the first version of
Grifobot) was changed in order to include recommendations
for automated or supportive education. This online game is
a proof that a paradigm shift in education is possible, and
that both students and teachers can adapt to such unexpected
situations, if they are provided with the appropriate tools.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II presents related work in the field of educational games
and recommendation systems, while Section III presents the
architecture of Grifobot. Section IV presents the experimental
evaluation of the online game and Section V concludes with
future remarks.
II. RELATED WORK
Game-Based Learning is a research field that has gained
attention since the early years of modern pedagogical systems
formulation. John Magney wrote back in 1990 that “Game-
Based Teaching is a relatively recent addition to the formal
curricula of schools and colleges”, but still he recognizes
Game-Based Learning as a procedure that can lead back to
examples from the past (e.g., war games) [7]. Although the
game procedures are recognized as a learning procedure for
more than 30 years, it is the evolution of technology that
provided more assistance and infrastructure to both students
and educators in order to apply them in the classroom. A
similar outcome is described in [9], stating that computer
games may create a new learning culture. Gee focuses more
on video games and their ”ability” to be ideal for learning
[34].
From the early 2000’ Prensky noted that students need
motivation in order to successfully learn [8]. Students often
refer to their educational system and procedures as ”boring”
or ”dry”, as the same researcher states. He also expresses his
certainty that a combination of learning and the motivation of
games is exactly what the learners need.
Trying to define what consists of the first part of the research
field ”game” is usually assumed as a digital game, but it is
not always the case [12]. In [13], the game is described as
”a system in which players engage in an artificial conflict,
defined by rules, that results in a quantifiable outcome”, which
is sufficient for the involvement of gaming procedures in the
educational procedure. But what is this ”game” all about in a
classroom? Kili recognizes four main aspects of Game-Based
Learning (GBL) [10]. It is all about Motivation [14], Player
Engagement [15], Adaptivity [16] and Graceful Failure [17].
An analysis of the role of games in education, and how they
can be used, or even the exact models for each class or lesson
is nowadays a multi-disciplinary field of research including
several different proposals that cover a very wide variety of
educators’ and students needs [18] [19] [20] [21]. In parallel,
there is literature that criticizes the use of video-games as a
learning tool [22].
A number of EU-funded projects are related to the GBL
and “serious” games field as the European Commission pro-
vides financial tools for the combination of education and
technology. “Gaming Horizons” [23] is a project funded by
the European Commission under the Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme. Its scope is to democratically
open up new areas of public value for the games industry
as a whole, beyond sectorial distinctions between ”leisure”
and ”serious” games. Navigate project [24] is an Erasmus+
project that intends to apply an innovative approach based on
digital gaming to increase competences on information literacy
(IL), starting from higher education students in Humanities.
BEACONING - that stands for Breaking Educational Barriers
with Contextualised, Pervasive and Gameful Learning - is
another EU-funded project that focuses on ‘anytime anywhere’
learning by exploiting pervasive, context-aware and gamified
techniques and technologies, framed under the Problem-Based
Learning approach [25]. ProActive project [26] and SIG-
GLUE project [27] as part of the Lifelong Learning EU
funding scheme, explore paths of the usage of technology for
learning and life-long learning, while a number of projects are
exploring the combination of technology and education [28]
[29] [30] [31].
Grifobot is a prototype attempt to empower the use of
technology in education aiming to facilitate educators in
evaluating the skills and level of their students, and to help
them to recognize the weaknesses of their class and adjust
their educational procedure accordingly.
III. GRIFOBOT
Grifobot is an online game that was designed and imple-
mented within a very short period of time as its scope was
entertainment and education during the COVID-19 lockdown.
The game’s name is a compound bilingual word made up from
the greek word γριϕos meaning riddle, connundrum, and the
word bot.
Its initial version was very simple and focused on maths,
language and literature. The game consists of a square board
(5x5) with cells. Each cell is either empty, blocked or has a
quiz as presented in Figure 1.
The students have an avatar with an initial position. The
scope of the game is to solve as many quizzes as possible,
guiding the avatar from question to question trying to find the
shortest path. Each time a correct answer is given, the avatar
must move to the correct cell using code. Giving the wrong
answers means missing the quiz and points. The ”code” was
actually a process of finding the steps that lead from the current
position to the position of the correct answer.
A. The Game
The game is simple to use and easy for the students to
learn. Each student is registered to the system recording his/her
grade. According to the grade, the system presents boards with
questions on maths and literature. The students have to find the
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-020-9
SOCIETY TRENDS 2022 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences

correct answer and guide their avatar to the cell for the next
question. They are instructed to use the shortest path through
their way to the questions as this procedure is the one that
helps earning the most points.
Fig. 1. Board of Grifobot’s initial version.
B. The idea of the recommender version
Grifobot had gained enough attention and had undergone
three major changes, and it was already interactive enough
to perform the next step, which was adding features that
will make Grifobot an educational tool for the teachers. The
questions were separated into categories and sections, and
were assigned a difficulty level. The role of the teacher was
added to the back-end of the system and a new dashboard
was designed for them. Each teacher could create his/her own
class and create questions and quizzes for each class. The
quizzes could have categories (e.g., maths, geography, history),
sections of categories (e.g., maths/fractions, history/Trojan
War, etc.) and a difficulty level of each section in a range
of one to ten (1..10). Furthermore, the quizzes (categories and
sections) were ”sequenced”; meaning that the section fractions
was placed after the section integer numbers. The students
were able to follow a specific category and section (with the
guidance of their teacher) and start the quizzes. According to
their progress the system was able to recognize their strengths
and weakness and either progress to the next difficulty level
and the next section, or repeat the procedure until the student
is strong enough to progress. In case a student remained weak,
the system could downgrade the level. The teacher is aware of
the students’ progress and is able to know the strengths and
weaknesses of each one.
Fig. 2. System architecture.
C. Architecture
The system architecture follows the classic client-server
model, having the game logic both in the back-end as well
as in the web-based front-end. The system has several levels
of discrete tiers while it is built-in open standards in order
to easily adapt add-ons and useful extensions (Figure 2). The
basis of the system is a database layer that stores information
about the games and the users and stores the pool of questions
to be answered. Each question has a number of metadata
including category, section, level, type of answer, accompany-
ing images, correct answer, possible answers, book reference
and explanation. According to the type of procedure that an
educator wants to follow the respective fields can be filled with
data. By filling the complete set of metadata, the student is be
able to see the correct answer, to get some assistance from the
system, to find a book reference so that she or he can search
for the correct answer.
The question management module is responsible for han-
dling all the information related to the questions and answers.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-020-9
SOCIETY TRENDS 2022 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences

The main back-end features include - apart from the question
management - the parts of the user management as well as
the recommender system. User management module stores
information about the system users, educators, students and
system administrators. The user data include information that
is useful system-wise (student grade) and classroom-wise. In
the latter we can find information about what kind of questions
are answered (category), what is the level for each category,
in which level the student shows strengths and weaknesses,
and general data including playing duration, number of boards
solved and more.
Grifobot is designed and implemented on Laravel frame-
work [6] and its main code engine can be found on Github [?].
A board generator is the final module of the “back-end” as it
includes a mechanism to create a non-blocking board, selecting
the appropriate type of questions, size of boards and graphics.
The output of the board generator is a web-standards object
and specifically it is JSON formatted code. This selection is
made in order to decouple the procedure of board creation to
the end-device. The rest of the game-logic is upon the client-
side implementation and is also available on the open game
repository.
This implementation helped us create a totally different look
and feel for the recommender version of the system without
having to change anything related to the code or logic, just by
altering the client side styling. This was selected in order to
attract the students to use the system (Figure 5).
Fig. 3. Board used by the recommender system.
D. Recommendation System - Assisting Educators
The recommendation system is built as a main part of the
system, as the whole system pivots towards this direction. The
recommendation system follows a two step procedure in the
students’ evaluation. The first step is the identification of the
students’ capabilities through an assessment procedure. The
second step includes iterations over a number of questions, in
order to locate the weaknesses and strengths of each student.
The system uses different subject categories, topics in
categories and difficulty levels of a specific topic within a
category. For each of the topics the questions can be assigned a
level; for example the question 1+1 is of lower level, compared
to the question 6+3 (within the same topic).
1) System Initialization: The assessment procedure on a
particular category, starts by selecting random questions from
the lower level of the first topic. If the questions are answered
correctly and quickly, the assessment procedure raises the
level. If top level in a topic is reached the next topic is
selected. If a student is not able to reach the top level the
assessment procedure stops. The combination of topic/level
indicates the progress of the user. For example, if a user
manages to complete all the questions up to the third topic
second level, then its progress within the Grifobot system is
3.2. The system records this number as the current level of
the user for the specific category.
The assessment provides information to the teacher on
the level of understanding of the student or for the whole
classroom. This step is performed, when students enter a new
category, in order to determine his/her overall status. It is also
helpful for the educators in order to recognize the level of
understanding of their classroom.
2) Main procedure: According to the progress recognized
from the initialization procedure, a student can start per-
forming exercises on his/her current level. The system keeps
providing questions from the current level, while giving clues
and tips related to techniques or useful information to help
the students find the correct answer. A level is considered to
be “completed” when a user is able to find solutions for more
than 75% of the questions without using system tips and clues.
If all levels of a topic are completed, then the user is able to
progress to the next topic. Finalizing the whole set of topics
means that the user has “mastered” the current category.
E. The system as a tool
The system can be used throughout the year as it offers
several positive aspects for both the students and the educators.
First of all, talking about a “serious” game with scoreboard
among the students of the same classroom it motivates the
users to play and learn, it engages the students with the current
gaming procedures, its support and help on error mechanism
provides graceful failure and it helps the educators adapt on the
needs of the classroom. It is both a tool for revision and a tool
to recognize the weaknesses of students or the classroom. So,
it can be helpful in order to personalize the teaching procedure
for groups of students or even sole students.
IV. SYSTEM USAGE
With the help of educators from primary and secondary
schools in Greece, the system was tested in a real environment
and more specifically the tests were performed during the
period of lockdown (due to COVID-19) using Grifobot as just
an educational game to play.
45 students participated in the game consisting of 7 topics
with 3 levels, in the category of Maths. This would make
the system having the levels 1.1 to level 7.3. An assessment
procedure was initiated in order to define the level of each
student. As the procedure was initiated almost in the middle
of the year the assessment concluded to the graph presented in
Figure 4. A first outcome was that the majority of the students
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-020-9
SOCIETY TRENDS 2022 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences

could reach up to topic 4 level 3 (22 students), while an almost
equal amount (20 students) could reach levels 4.1 or 4.2. This
indicator helped the educator realize on which specific point
in the theoretical part of the lesson he/she could focus and
progress.
Fig. 4. Assessment of students.
The students keep “playing” with the system as it would
present their score in a table per topic and level (Figure ??),
a part that they really enjoyed and engaged them (according
to their comments). The parts that students enjoyed most -
according to their comments- were on the one hand the game
itself and the fact that they would be able to watch the scores
within the classroom and on the other hand the fact that when
they were unable to provide the correct answer, they were
guided by the system in order to locate the correct answer in
their books.
Fig. 5. Sample results table.
The system was tested during the difficult period of the
lockdown, as such, the students were more “on their own”
Fig. 6. Students’ progress in 10 weeks time.
when reading and progressing rather than under the strict
supervision of their educators. Under this circumstance, the
system could monitor their progress in a 10 weeks time period
that they used the Grifobot recommender system. It is clear
that all the students managed to make even a small progress
with the majority of them (more than 70%) being able to
progress more than 2 topics in average.
Figure 6 presents a comparison of the different levels
of students progress. The solid line represents students that
scored higher during the assessment, the dashed line represents
students with medium (to lower) scores while the dotted line
represents students with the lowest score. It is obvious that
the system was able to record their progress through time and
helped the teacher realize during the 6-8 weeks that there is
a difficulty in progress for a number of students which was
inspected quick enough in order to progress better during the
last 2 weeks.
V. CONCLUSIONS
As GBL gains more and more attention and while tech-
nology becomes a part of our educational systems, Grifobot
introduced a novel educational culture, combining a ”serious”
game with the educational procedure. We performed a detailed
analysis on the importance of gaming within the classroom and
by recognizing the problems that both students and teachers
face we built Grifobot.
Grifobot, an online platform that was created during the
lock-down due to COVID-19 virus, was constructed in order to
support students of the preliminary schools revise their lessons.
A system that turned out to become a recommendation system
that can support the educational procedure within a classroom.
The usage of the system can help gain the four main aspects
of game-based learning: motivation, engagement, adaptability,
graceful failure, as well as empower the teachers with a tool
to analyze the strengths and weaknesses of their classrooms;
and thus their lessons’ outlines.
We presented experimental results of the system’s usage
within a real classroom and how this provided evidence to the
educators about the progress that the class is able to make
according to the curriculum.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-020-9
SOCIETY TRENDS 2022 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences

The system - being at an experimental phase of application
in classrooms - is a live organization changing frequently,
adapting to educators’ and students’ needs and is enhanced
with novel and innovative features in order to cover the
excessive demands that young people have.
Some of the features to be applied in the next versions
include advanced graphics interface in order to further enhance
children’s engagement, create a mobile application instead of
mobile friendly web application, construct an adventure game
that will further enhance the coding part of the system and
create a double-interface API in order for game developers
to be able to create add-ons that can easily be connected to
Grifobot platform.
An important aspect of the system is the ability to support
several different levels of education. As the core of the sys-
tem remains the same (solving problems), the accompanying
environment can be adapted to the needs of students. An
experimentation of the system that is being conduct the last
year is examining whether a system like Grifobot, can be
applied to University Students with non-technical background.
The idea is that students mainly of humanities can benefit from
a system that could be used as a recommender system, in order
to monitor their progress, and be a tool for assessment, while
in parallel being able to compete and learn soft-skills related
to algorithms and sequential coding procedures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work was partially funded by ARTEST project (project
no. 618802-EPP-1-2020-1-DE-EPPKA2-CBHE-JP. ARTEST
Project is co-funded by the ERASMUS+ Programme of the
European Union.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Papert, Information technology and education: Computer criticism vs.
technocentric thinking. Educational researcher, 16(1), pp. 22-30, 1987.
[2] D. L. Fabry and J. R. Higgs, Barriers to the effective use of technology
in education: Current status. Journal of educational computing research,
17(4), pp. 385-395, 1997.
[3] C. P. Gressard and B. H. Loyd, Validation studies of a new computer
attitude scale. AEDS Journal, 19(4), pp. 295-301, 1986.
[4] R. Christensen, Effects of technology integration education on the
attitudes of teachers and students. Journal of Research on technology
in Education, 34(4), pp. 411-433, 2002.
[5] L. N. Tabata and L. K. Johnsrud (). The impact of faculty attitudes
toward technology, distance education, and innovation. Research in
higher education, 49(7), 625, 2008.
[6] Laravel, the PHP Framework for Web Artisans. http://laravel.com (last
accessed June 2022)
[7] J. Magney, Game-based teaching. The Education Digest, 55(5), 54, 1990.
[8] M. Prensky, Digital game-based learning. Computers in Entertainment
(CIE), 1(1), pp. 21-21, 2003.
[9] D. A. Norman, Things that make us smart: defending human attributes
in the age of the machine, 1993.
[10] K. Kiili, Digital game-based learning: Towards an experiential gaming
model. The Internet and higher education, 8(1), pp. 13-24, 2005.
[11] J. P. Gee, What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy.
Computers in Entertainment (CIE), 1(1), pp. 20-20, 2003.
[12] J. L. Plass, B. D. Homer, and C. K. Kinzer, Foundations of game-based
learning. Educational Psychologist, 50(4), pp. 258-283, 2015.
[13] K. Salen, K. S. Tekinbas¸, and E. Zimmerman, Rules of play: Game
design fundamentals. MIT press, 2004.
[14] S. Hidi and K. A. Renninger, The four-phase model of interest devel-
opment. Educational psychologist, 41(2), pp. 111-127, 2006.
[15] A. I. Abdul Jabbar and P. Felicia, Gameplay engagement and learning
in game-based learning: A systematic review. Review of educational
research, 85(4), pp. 740-779, 2015.
[16] R. Azevedo, J. G. Cromley, D. C. Moos, J. A. Greene, and F. I.
Winters, Adaptive content and process scaffolding: A key to facilitating
students’ self-regulated learning with hypermedia. Psychological Test
and Assessment Modeling, 53(1), 106, 2011.
[17] W.
Hoffman,
AI
and
the
Future
of
Cyber
Competi-
tion.
Center
for
Security
and
Emerging
Technology.
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ai-and-the-future-of-cyber-
competition, 2021.
[18] C. Y.Chang and G. J. Hwang, Trends in digital game-based learning in
the mobile era: a systematic review of journal publications from 2007 to
2016. International Journal of Mobile Learning and Organisation, 13(1),
pp. 68-90, 2019.
[19] A. Theodoropoulos, Framework for the effective implementation of
alternative teaching methods for informatics, PhD Thesis, Fac. of Econ-
omy, Management and Informatics, Dept. of Informatics and Telecom-
munications, 2017.
[20] A. Theodoropoulos, A. Antoniou, and G. Lepouras, How do different
cognitive styles affect learning programming? Insights from a game-
based approach in Greek schools. ACM Transactions on Computing
Education (TOCE), 17(1), pp. 1-25, 2016.
[21] I. Antonellis, C. Bouras, and V. Poulopoulos, Game based learning for
mobile users. In 6th International Conference on Computer Games: AI
and Mobile Systems, 2005.
[22] M. Ronimus, K. Eklund, L. Pesu, and H. Lyytinen, Supporting strug-
gling readers with digital game-based learning. Educational Technology
Research and Development, 67(3), 639-663, 2019.
[23] Gaming Horizons project. Alternative Framings for a new role of gaming
in education and society. GA 732332, https://www.gaminghorizons.eu/
(last accessed June 2022).
[24] Navigate EU project. Information Literacy: A Game-based Learning
Approach for Avoiding Fake Content. ERASMUS+ Project 2017-
1-BG01-KA203-036383, https://www.navigateproject.eu/ (last accessed
June 2022).
[25] Beaconing
EU
project
Breaking
Educational
Barriers
with
Contextualised,
Pervasive
and
Gameful
Learning.
GA
687676,
https://beaconing.eu/ (last accessed June 2022).
[26] ProActive EU Project. Fostering Teachers’ Creativity through Game-
Based Learning. Lifelong Learning Programme. 505469-LLP-1-2009-1-
ES-KA3-KA3MP
[27] I. Antonellis, C. Bouras, V. Kapoulas, and V. Poulopoulos, Enhancing
a web-based community: the case of SIG-GLUE. International Journal
of Web Based Communities, 2(1), pp. 112-130, 2006.
[28] Engage, Enhancing teachiNG And learninG English in a digital-
ized world https://www.euprojects.gr/en/portfolio-items/engage/ (last ac-
cessed June 2022).
[29] ID GAMES - Co-Create assistive games for people with Intellectual Dis-
ability to enhance their inclusion. https://www.euprojects.gr/en/portfolio-
items/id-games/ (last accessed June 2022).
[30] Skills-Up.
Online
education
focused
on
talent
development,
career
development
and
soft-skills
of
the
unemployed.
https://www.euprojects.gr/en/portfolio-items/skillsup/
(last
accessed
June 2022).
[31] DIGITART
-
Digital
Systems
for
a
Smart
Approach
to
ART
https://www.euprojects.gr/en/portfolio-items/digitart/ (last accessed June
2022).
[32] J. Tondeur, A. Forkosh-Baruch, S. Prestridge, P. Albion, and S. Ediris-
inghe, Responding to challenges in teacher professional development for
ICT integration in education. Journal of educational technology society,
19(3), pp. 110-120, 2016.
[33] R. Scherer, F. Siddiq, and J. Tondeur, The technology acceptance
model (TAM): A meta-analytic structural equation modeling approach
to explaining teachers’ adoption of digital technology in education.
Computers Education, 128, pp. 13-35 (2019).
[34] J. P. Gee, Good video games+ good learning: Collected essays on video
games, learning, and literacy. Peter Lang, 2007.
[35] Grifobot Main Engine Repository, https://github.com/vacilos/grifobot
(last accessed June 2022).
[36] R. D¨orner, S. G¨obel, W. Effelsberg, and J. Wiemeyer, Serious games.
Cham: Springer, 2016.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-020-9
SOCIETY TRENDS 2022 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences

