Measuring AI Education Performance with Flipped Learning  
Based on Bloom's Taxonomy Objectives 
 
Hyo-Jin Kim 
Institute of Artificial Intelligence 
POSTECH 
Pohang, South Korea 
e-mail: hyojinkim@postech.ac.kr 
Dongju Kim 
Institute of Artificial Intelligence 
POSTECH 
Pohang, South Korea 
e-mail: kkb0320@postech.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract— As the importance of Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
capabilities increases across industries, the demand for AI 
education for young job seekers is also increasing. However, 
non-majors in related fields face difficulties in learning due to 
the lack of specialized learning content and prior learning 
opportunities. This study aimed to implement an AI education 
program through flipped learning for young job seekers and 
evaluate its effectiveness. The study included 80 students from 
a South Korean university AI training program, randomly 
assigned into control and experimental groups with 40 majors 
and 40 non-majors in each. In the end, the experimental group 
achieved higher academic results than the control group, 
particularly on higher-level items. 
Keywords- 
Artificial 
intelligence; 
Education; 
Flipped 
learning; Young job seekers. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Currently, 
the 
demand 
for 
artificial 
intelligence 
manpower is exploding in various fields, but it is challenging 
to supply manpower through formal education within a short 
time. Although artificial intelligence can be classified as a 
computer science discipline, it has a wide range of fields and 
applications, so it is not just for science and engineering 
majors. Still, it is considered an essential literacy for modern 
people in the era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 
However, in order to learn AI, primary computer languages, 
basic mathematics, computer algorithms, and other essential 
learning contents are required in common. 
In the non-degree AI training program for young job 
seekers, a large number of trainees receive intensive training 
for a limited period of time. In addition, it is challenging to 
provide individual scaffolding for learners with varying 
levels of prior knowledge in the classroom, as AI education 
is conducted using the Project-Based Learning (PBL) 
method that combines theory and practice. In order to 
increase learner motivation and promote achievement, 
learner-centered education is necessary for individual 
learners in all majors [1]. Non-majors can repeatedly learn 
online video materials using the flipped learning method as 
scaffolding outside the classroom, based on individual 
capabilities and progress. It is possible to implement out-of-
classroom classes in which memory and understanding in 
Bloom's hierarchy of educational objectives [2] are learner-
driven. As a result, it is expected that efficient and effective 
learner-centered AI classes will be possible, as it will be 
possible to secure class time for complete learning and 
higher-level classes such as practical exercises and projects 
through summarizing and answering questions about core 
contents in the actual classroom.  
This study aimed to effectively implement AI education 
for both non-CS (Computer Science) majors and those who 
struggle to learn AI. To achieve this, an experimental study 
was conducted using a learner-centered approach by 
adopting the flipped learning method. The study measured 
academic achievement and the effectiveness of achieving 
learning goals in the higher dimensions of Bloom's 
Taxonomy. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The 
related works of flipped learning and Bloom's Taxonomy are 
presented in Section 2. The methodology of this study is 
explained in Section 3. Section 4 showcases the study's 
results. Finally, the paper concludes with Section 5.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we describe Flipped Learning and 
Bloom’s Taxonomy that are closely related to the topic of 
this paper. 
A. Flipped Learning 
Flipped learning is a learner-centered teaching method 
that allows instructors to utilize classroom time efficiently 
and effectively [3].  Baker used the term "The classroom 
flipped" [4], and Bergmann and Sams, teachers in Colorado, 
USA, created and provided online class videos for students 
who could not attend class and defined it as flipped learning 
[5]. Prior to that, there was a teaching method of learning the 
material in advance out of class and doing learner-centered 
activities in class. Still, with the development of technology 
and the advent of the information age, the role of the 
instructor has shifted from being a source of information to 
helping students learn how to handle information [6]. This 
phenomenon is expected to intensify with the rise of artificial 
intelligence and big data during the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution. As a result, the flipped learning teaching method 
is predicted to expand and advance. 
B. Bloom’s Taxonomy 
Bloom 
categorized 
the 
hierarchy 
of 
educational 
objectives 
as 
remembering, 
understanding, 
applying, 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

analyzing, evaluating, and creating [2]. Bergmann and Sams 
reversed Bloom's hierarchy of objectives for flipped learning, 
suggesting that memory and comprehension occur outside 
the classroom, while higher-order thinking of application, 
analysis, evaluation, and creation are promoted in the 
classroom [5].  
In Figure 1, Bloom's inverted pyramid [7] shows the 
application of Bloom's Taxonomy to the flipped learning 
model. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Bloom’s reversed taxonomy [7] 
Pre-learning lecture videos provided out of class are a good 
content delivery tool to achieve the lower levels of Bloom's 
taxonomy, namely remembering and understanding and in-
class learning can be valuable to foster higher-level learning, 
namely applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This study was conducted on 40 control and 40 
experimental group students enrolled in the artificial 
intelligence education program at a university in South 
Korea. Adopting a quasi-experimental research method with 
a non-identical control group before-and-after comparison, 
the control group received a traditional curriculum with only 
classroom lessons and no flipped learning. In contrast, the 
experimental group received flipped learning lessons using 
pre-learning video content created by the instructor and 
uploaded to the LMS (Learning Management System) as 
TABLE 1.  
TABLE I.  
FLIPPED LEARNING PLAN BASED ON BLOOM'S TAXONOMY 
Area 
Traditional Class  
(Control group) 
Flipped Class 
(Experimental group) 
Remember 
Face-to-face lecture 
Pre-learning lecture video 
(about 30 min.) 
Face-to-face lecture 
Understand 
Face-to-face lecture 
LMS, Padlet 
Face-to-face lecture 
Apply 
Hands-on programming 
training 
Hands-on programming 
training 
Analyze, 
Evaluate, 
Create 
Project work 
Project work 
For the experimental study, the control and experimental 
groups were given the same study time, content, test 
difficulty, assignment content, and number of assignments.  
IV. 
RESULT 
The academic achievement results of the lower and 
higher-level items of the test of the control group and the 
experimental group showed a statistical difference as 
indicated in TABLE 2.  
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 
Learni
ng 
level 
Group 
N 
Mean 
SD 
t 
p 
Lower-
level 
Control 
40 
27.00 
13.39 
2.108* 
.038 
Experime
ntal 
40 
32.27 
8.44 
Higher-
level 
Control 
40 
16.20 
11.66 
2.648* 
.010 
Experime
ntal 
40 
22.08 
7.81 
Total 
Control 
40 
43.20 
23.57 
2.581* 
.012 
Experime
ntal 
40 
54.35 
13.82 
* p<.05 
In particular, the scores of the experimental group were 
significantly higher in the higher-level items compared to the 
lower-level items, aligning with the goal of flipped learning, 
which is the achievement of higher-level learning objectives. 
As academic achievement significantly improved in the 
entire test and in all lower and higher-order items, it can be 
concluded that flipped learning-based AI education has a 
positive impact on enhancing academic achievement. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
This experimental study showed that the application of 
the flipped learning method in AI education for young job 
seekers improved academic achievement in both lower and 
higher-level items measured by the test. In a traditional 
classroom, lower-level learning, which corresponds to 
memory and comprehension in Bloom's Taxonomy, takes 
place face-to-face between the instructor and the learner, so 
the instructor can immediately identify the learner's level of 
understanding and adjust the difficulty and pace of the 
lecture to the learner. On the other hand, the memory and 
comprehension learning that occurs in flipped learning is 
replaced by pre-made videos, which makes it difficult for 
instructors to identify learners' needs in real time. Despite 
these disadvantages, flipped learning is a self-paced learning 
method that allows young adult learners with diverse 
backgrounds and prior knowledge to learn the basics of 
retention and comprehension at their own pace outside of the 
classroom. In addition, learners can engage in meta-learning, 
where they can learn at a higher level through online 
collaboration tools outside the classroom, group activities in 
the classroom, and questions and answers with the instructor, 
which is a strength of flipped learning that is difficult to 
achieve in traditional classrooms with limited class time.  
Since this study was conducted with a relatively small 
sample size, consisting of 40 individuals in each group 
(control and experimental) for both majors and non-majors, 
totaling 80 participants, it is essential to conduct multiple 
iterations of experimental research in the future. This will 
allow for the analysis of effectiveness based on results from 
a larger and more diverse population. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly supported by IITP grant funded by 
MSIT (No.2019-0-01906 and No.2021-0-01096). This 
research was supported by Basic Science Research Program 
through the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by 
the Ministry of Education (2022R1A6A1A03052954). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. L McCombs and J. S. Whisler, “The Learner-Centered 
Classroom and School: Strategies for Increasing Student 
Motivation and Achievement. The Jossey-Bass Education 
Series,” Jossey-Bass Inc., Publishers, 350 Sansome St., San 
Francisco, CA 94104, 1997. 
[2] L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, “A taxonomy for 
learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom's 
taxonomy of educational objectives: complete edition,” 
Addison Wesley Longman, Inc, 2001. 
[3] A. Nederveld and Z. L. Berge, “Flipped learning in the 
workplace,” Journal of Workplace Learning, 27.2. pp. 162-
172, 2015 
[4] J. W. Baker, “The origins of “the classroom flip””, The First 
Annual Higher Education Flipped Learning Conference, 
Greeley, Colorado. 2016. 
[5] J. Bergmann and A. Sams, “Flip your classroom: Reach every 
student in every class every day,” International Society for 
Technology in Education, 2012. 
[6] J. F. Strayer, “Designing instruction for flipped classrooms,” 
in Instructional-Design Theories and Models, vol. IV. 
Routledge, pp. 321-350, 2016. 
[7] J. Bergmann and A. Sams, “Flipped learning: Gateway to 
student engagement,” International Society for Technology in 
Education, 2014. 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-087-2
SOCIETY TRENDS 2023 : International Conference on Technical Advances and Human Consequences - 2023

