350
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
User-Centered Design of a COPD Remote Monitoring Application  
Experiences from the EU-project United4Health 
 
Berglind Smaradottir, Martin Gerdes and Rune Fensli 
Department of Information and Communication Technology 
University of Agder 
N-4604 Kristiansand, Norway 
{berglind.smaradottir, martin.gerdes, rune.fensli}@uia.no 
Santiago Martinez 
Department of Psychosocial Health 
University of Agder 
N-4604 Kristiansand, Norway 
santiago.martinez@uia.no
 
 
Abstract—Recent health reforms in Norway have produced 
changes at all levels of the health sector, bringing to light a 
need for technology solutions explicitly designed for enhancing 
end-user collaboration. Telemedicine technology can support 
in this context new services that enable communication across 
local borders, optimizing resources and increasing cost 
effectiveness. This study focuses on the user-centered design, 
iterative development and evaluation of the user interface of a 
mobile application for a new telemedicine service for remote 
monitoring of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. 
The tablet device application was developed based on 
information gathered in a workshop and group interviews 
where the end-users, e.g., patients and health professionals, 
described their preferred way of interacting with the 
telemedicine technology. User evaluations showed positive 
results on the ease of use and user satisfaction regarding the 
interaction with the application. Application’s user interface 
refinements were made iteratively through several end-users’ 
evaluations, resulting in a fully developed system suitable for 
remote monitoring of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
patients. Furthermore, the process led to the deployment of a 
telemedicine system, adopted by the partners of the project 
United4Health as part of the 7th Framework Programme for 
Research of the European Union. 
Keywords-user-centered 
design; 
telemedicine; 
software 
development; usability evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Health care services involve heterogeneous user groups, 
such as health professionals, administrative employees and 
patients. However, these groups share a common need: easy-
to-use systems that support collaboration and coordination 
between users. User-centered design (UCD) has proven to be 
an effective methodology to identify needs across different 
user groups and to include them in the implementation of 
information and communication technology (ICT) systems 
[1] while increasing the usability [2] [3] and user satisfaction 
of clinical systems.  
In Norway, a recent health reform [4] urged health 
organizations to implement structural changes and new 
pathways for citizens. Services that traditionally were offered 
by specialized national and regional health care institutions 
(e.g., follow-up of chronic diseases managed by hospitals) 
were transferred to primary health care managed by 
municipalities. This service responsibility shift brought to 
light the need for an effective coordination and improved 
communication across borders of health care services 
[5][6][7], where ICT could play an essential role.  
The prevalence of chronic diseases is increasing and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is predicted 
to be the fourth most fatal disease globally in 2030 [8]. 
COPD patients suffer from exacerbations with frequent 
admissions to hospital, leading to a reduced quality of life [9] 
and an increase of medical expenses for the society [10]. In 
this context, the 7th Framework Programme for Research of 
the European Union (EU FP7) funded the research project 
United4Health [11], to develop technology for remote 
monitoring of chronic diseases and communication across 
the different levels of health care services. In particular, the 
Norwegian contribution to the United4Health project 
focused on the development of telemedicine technology that 
supported remote monitoring of COPD patients after hospital 
discharge [12]. Research evidence showed that COPD 
patients are at an increased risk of readmission to hospital 
within 12 months [13][14] after hospital discharge. In the 
Norwegian health system, municipal health care services are 
responsible for patients after hospital discharge, which 
requires a close collaboration with general practitioners 
(GPs) and specialists at hospital to provide continuity of care 
for patients with chronic conditions. The aim of the project 
was then to evaluate the benefits of using ICT for monitoring 
COPD patients that traditionally have not had the possibility 
of reporting their symptoms and health status after 
hospitalization. The potential benefits would include 
reduction 
of 
hospital 
readmission 
rates 
with 
their 
correspondent diminution in cost and benefits on quality of 
life.  
Two developments were made connected with the U4H 
project: a mobile telemedicine application for continuous 
monitoring COPD patient’s symptoms and an information 
system (IS) for the new telemedicine centre through which 
health professionals would remotely attend the patients 
[1][15]. This paper presents the development of the mobile 
telemedicine application on a tablet device for remote 
monitoring of blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) and pulse 
measurements. In addition, the application included a 
questionnaire for daily self-evaluation of COPD symptoms. 
Through the application, patients were able to take 
measurements at home that were wirelessly transmitted to 

351
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the telemedicine centre. In order to achieve acceptable levels 
of effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction, a UCD process 
led by a multidisciplinary research group with ICT and 
health background was employed for the development and 
evaluation of the mobile telemedicine application. The 
application was designed with the active involvement of end-
users: patients from the patient’s union of cardiac and 
pulmonary patients and health professionals from the 
municipality and partner hospital. The results from the UCD 
and evaluation process of the mobile telemedicine 
application were validated from operational and qualitative 
usability perspectives. The following research questions 
(RQ) were addressed:   
RQ1: “How can a mobile telemedicine application for 
remote monitoring of COPD patients be developed with the 
contribution in the design process of patients and disease-
related health professionals?”  
RQ2: “What lessons from this study are transferable and 
applicable for the development of useful technology for other 
chronic disease clinical pathways?” 
Following this introduction, Section II gives an overview 
of the research background about UCD. Section III outlines 
the research methodology employed and Section IV 
describes the results of the mobile application development. 
In Section V, the results are discussed and, in Section VI, the 
conclusion and future work are presented. 
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
Telemedicine can be defined as a remote electronic 
clinical consultation using technology for the delivery of 
health care and the exchange of information across distance. 
Telemedicine covers a diverse spectrum of technologies and 
clinical applications [16][17][18]. Telemedicine has the 
potential to improve the equity of access to health care 
services and, therefore, the quality of the health care [17]. 
Mobile technology is used nowadays for multiple purposes 
in health, such as monitoring diseases and personalized 
management. Portable devices allow collection of data from 
patients and electronic data transmission over the Internet. 
Mobile networks support interactive communication between 
health care professionals and enable remote direct feedback 
to the patient. These uses are targeted at improving long-term 
cost-effectiveness, 
real 
time 
monitoring, 
shortening 
feedback’s time and reducing the number of hospital visits 
[19].  
Telemedicine systems often involve the interaction 
between multiple user groups through a digital system, e.g., a 
patient at home communicates using a device with nurse in a 
telemedicine or health centre, or with GP at their office. 
Communication in these use scenarios is usually multimodal, 
that 
is, 
synchronous 
(e.g., 
videoconference) 
and 
asynchronous (e.g., data transmission and dispatch); what 
makes it crucial to know between whom, how and when the 
information transmission and personal communication occur. 
Thus, an effective telemedicine application requires a 
detailed analysis of end-users’ needs to inform system 
designers and the usability is necessary for the continuous, 
efficient and satisfactory use of an application. In system 
development, the approach of UCD [20][21][22][23] 
involves end-users in all the stages and helps to understand 
users’ needs and the context of use, which are key elements 
for the construction of a system framed within a clinical 
workflow [24]. In addition, the usability evaluation allows to 
analyze user’s interaction and user satisfaction with the 
system [25][26][27].  
UCD has already been used in health contexts. For 
instance, Martínez-Alcalá et al. [28] presented a study of 
telemedicine systems’ development based on UCD. The aim 
was to develop two intuitive and efficient systems, with an 
optimized design of the user interface (UI) according to 
users’ needs. The eMental System and the e-Park System 
development was composed of four phases: analysis, design, 
implementation and evaluation. They concluded that 
researchers and system developers must work together to 
integrate the knowledge of UCD towards new systems 
customized to users’ specific needs. Further, they identified 4 
research lines: (1) deployment of other telemedicine systems 
based on their framework including other technology; (2) 
development of tailored versions of a telemedicine system 
for mobile devices; (3) implementation of their approach in 
the 
treatment 
and 
rehabilitation 
therapy 
file; 
(4) 
incorporation of intelligent agents in telemedicine systems to 
support the patient and medical staff.  
Ho et al. [29] described the application of a UCD process 
of a new remote consultation system for use in developing 
regions with methods such as semi-structured interviews, 
participant observation, and focus groups. Paper prototyping 
was used in the initial iterative design. De Vito Dabbs et al. 
[30] described the UCD of a Pocket PATH, a handheld PC 
that allowed lung transplant patients with data recording, 
messaging and decision-support to promote self-care and 
communication to their transplant team in hospital. The UCD 
process is described with the use of an interdisciplinary team 
in order to understand the patient users. Representative 
patients were recruited for meaningful selection of tasks and 
participation in platform for development. The evaluation 
was carried out in laboratory settings to measure usability, 
and afterwards, completed by an assessment of the 
functionality through a field study. Das et al. [31] used a co-
design approach to involve users in the design process. Users 
were COPD patients that explored mobile technologies to 
support their health condition and disease. The examples 
listed above show the importance of user participation from 
the early stage of designing a technological solution. 
However, many studies like these did not reach final 
deployment stage. The contribution of this paper is a case 
study with a UCD process of a COPD remote monitoring 
application describing all the stages of design, whose final 
result has been deployed in real settings. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Qualitative methods such as observations and group 
interviews were used for data collection and analysis during 
the UCD process of the telemedicine tablet application, 
which was framed within the research project United4Health 
[11][12]. The UCD process was executed in two phases with 
a total duration of 6 months during 2013 and 2014. The 
process is described in Figure 1: (A) workshop with 

352
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
representative end-users, such as patients and health 
professionals; (B) iterative design of the tablet application 
for COPD remote monitoring. Each sub-phase’s output 
informed the input of the next. The iterative system 
development included a sequence of four concatenated 
stages: design and implementation, functional test, user 
evaluation and field trial.  
The running commentary gathered during the two phases 
of the UCD process resulted in 18 hours of audio-visually 
recorded data, verbatim transcribed by the researchers. 
Transcripts were coded into categories through a qualitative 
content analysis [27] with the software QSR NVIVO v10 
[32].  
A. Workshop with End-users 
A one-day workshop with 7 end-user representatives 
(e.g., patients, health professionals and technicians) was 
hosted by the University of Agder, Norway. The aim was to 
understand the context of use and to work out the user 
requirements for the design of the tablet application for 
remote monitoring. In addition, the workshop was a source 
of information and familiarization for end-users with the 
research team and health professionals working in the 
project. The participants were 2 members of the union of 
cardiac and pulmonary patients, mean age of 69 years; 2 
nurses and 1 project-leader from the municipality and 
hospital, mean clinical experience of 6 years with COPD 
patients; and 2 technicians from hospital responsible for 
correct functioning and maintenance of the tablet devices, 
mean of 6 years of experience working with medical 
technical equipment.  
The workshop lasted 5 hours and was divided into two 
parts. In the first part of the workshop, participants were 
given an introduction to the research project United4Health. 
A prototype demonstration of wirelessly transmitted 
measurements of SpO2 and pulse was shown to end-users on 
a tablet device to facilitate the understanding of the context 
of use of the system. Additionally, a videoconference 
between a patient and a health care professional was tested. 
The members of the union of cardiac and pulmonary patients 
described their preferred way of interacting with the 
application at home and suggested ideas for the UI’s layout. 
The participants used colorful post-it notes and handmade 
sketches to describe application’s functionalities and design. 
In the second part of the workshop, participants described 
their suggestions for the procedure of remote monitoring of a 
COPD patient, such as taking measurements at home, 
transmitting measurements’ values through the system to the 
telemedicine centre and illustrating the feedback given from 
telemedicine centre to a COPD patient at home. 
B. Iterative Design 
The design of the application was carried out through the 
iterative execution of the following stages: design and 
implementation, functional test, user evaluation and field 
trial. A development team supervised by one of the 
researchers developed the system. An interaction designer 
hired by the team was in charge of the initial graphical user 
interface and interaction design. 
1) 
Design and Implementation: The results from the 
workshop led the initial design and implementation of a Java 
native application. Java includes libraries for several low-
level application program interfaces (APIs), in particular for 
the Bluetooth connectivity and communication with sensor 
devices. In addition, using Java allowed the application to be 
used across different tablet devices. The outcome of the 
subsequent 
sub-phases 
informed 
additional 
user 
requirements included in the implementation of the user 
interface design (UID) and system’s functionality. 
2) Functional Test: The facilities of the Centre for 
eHealth and Health Care Technology of the University of 
Agder, Norway, were used as a test bed for a functional test 
of the implemented application. It allowed verifying whether 
the system matched the requested functionality determined 
by users in the workshop and in user evaluations from other 
iterations. Performance and scalability of the system were 
not within the scope of the functional test.  
 
Figure 1.  The User-Centered Design Process.  

353
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
3) User 
Evaluation: 
Two 
evaluations 
of 
the 
application’s prototype were carried out with end-users in the 
Usability Laboratory at the Centre for eHealth and Health 
Care Technology. The facilities had two separate test rooms 
(referred to as “test room 1” and “test room 2”) and one 
observation room. The infrastructure is further described in 
[33]. The user evaluations had the aim to provide end-user’s 
feedback to the development team about system’s errors and 
potential refinements. They consisted of a series of tasks 
using a think aloud protocol [34][35][36]. Group interviews 
were made at the end of the evaluations to complete the 
feedback. 
a) 
Evaluation 1: In total 15 end-users participated in 
the first evaluation. They were: 13 nurses and physicians 
from municipality and hospital partner and 2 technicians 
from hospital partner. During the test, the participants were 
involved in a role-play scenario. In the patient’s home 
(represented by test room 1), health care professionals 
simulated the patient’s use of tablet application (see Figure 
2). At the same time, the telemedicine centre (represented by 
test room 2) contained the health care professionals that 
interacted with patient’s home. The functionalities tested at a 
patient’s home consisted of taking and sending patient’s 
measurements (i.e., SpO2 and pulse), filling and sending a 
questionnaire to the telemedicine centre. In addition, a 
videoconference session between the patient and the 
telemedicine centre was evaluated. There were three 
repetitions of the scenario with different users. The overall 
duration of the evaluation was 6 hours. 
b) Evaluation 2: The second evaluation included 
another role-play with the new telemedicine application. It 
was carried out two weeks after the first evaluation and 
included 9 end-users: 2 members of the patient’s union (who 
played the patient’s role), 3 nurses from municipality (who 
played telemedicine centre health professional’s role), 2 
nurses from hospital and 2 technicians from hospital. The 
test simulated the following interactions with the application: 
(1) user training of COPD patient in hospital with 
instructions from a hospital nurse; (2) COPD patient at home 
taking measurements, filling in symptom self-evaluation 
questionnaire and sending it to the telemedicine centre; (3) 
videoconference between COPD patient at home and a 
health professional at the telemedicine centre. There were 
two iterations of the user evaluation, with a total duration of 
5 hours. 
 
4) Field Trial: A field trial was carried out with 6 
diagnosed COPD patients (mean age 72.6 years). They tested 
the continuous functioning and interaction with the 
technology at home during a period of 7 days. The trial was 
performed across several weeks, lasting 5 weeks in total. 
Each participant was equipped with a suitcase including a 
pulse oximetry device (Nonin Onyx II, 2012) and a tablet 
device (Lenovo ThinkPad tablet 2, 2013, Windows 8.1) with 
the telemedicine application installed. In addition, an 
adjustable USB camera and a headset were included for the 
videoconference. Figure 3 shows the remote monitoring 
equipment. Every day, the participants used the tablet 
application for measurements with the pulse oximetry device 
filled in the symptoms’ self-evaluation questionnaire. The 
data were sent over the mobile network to the telemedicine 
centre. A videoconference session between the participant at 
home and a health professional at the telemedicine centre 
was tested in addition. 
All these tasks were performed using the tablet device. 
After each week of testing, the research team visited each 
 
Figure 2.   End-user testing the tablet application during the evaluation. 
 
Figure 3.   The remote monitoring equipment. 
 

354
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
participant at home and made a user evaluation of the 
application and an interview. The user evaluation entailed 
switching on tablet, logging in to the telemedicine 
application, taking measurements, filling in symptom self-
evaluation 
questionnaire, 
sending 
the 
data 
to 
the 
telemedicine centre and answering a videoconference call 
from the telemedicine centre. The interviews focused on the 
user experience and suggestions for further improvements. 
The users’ suggestions in the field trial were incorporated in 
the iterative refinements of the tablet application. More 
details on the field trial are presented in [37]. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results were obtained from the content analysis of 
the transcripts of the audio-visually recorded data and 
annotations and observations during the UCD process. To 
ease the reading, the results of each phase are separately 
presented. 
A. Workshop with End-users 
The contributions from end-users in the workshop are 
grouped in 3 different categories: context of use, user 
interface design and procedure for remote monitoring. 
1) Context of Use: Patient representatives explained that 
their individual’s level of physical energy was regularly low 
and even simple actions, such as using a tablet device, might 
become unachievable. This issue underlined the importance 
of designing an easy-to-use application that did not require 
much physical effort and mental workload to be successfully 
used. Therefore, it was suggested that user interaction with 
the system must be minimal, with only the few necessary 
actions. One participant stated: “Usability is extremely 
important for the interaction with this application since 
COPD patients have little energy left on bad days”. 
2) User Interface Design: Patients agreed with the 
authentication method through a personal identification 
number (PIN) mechanism, although they expressed having 
difficulties remembering numbers and they preferred to be 
able to choose their own PIN instead of using a pre-defined 
one. In addition, they requested to have the user’s name at 
the top of the home screen after each successful login. 
Patients required seeing the results of their own 
measurements on the device’s screen before sending them to 
the telemedicine centre. They asked for receiving immediate 
feedback when measurements were successfully delivered. A 
time-span visualization of several days of measurement 
results was also suggested where patients could see 
measurements from previous days. Another request was the 
possibility of seeing the health professional through a 
videoconference to simultaneously guide the patient through 
any of the tasks. 
For the interface’s layout, patients chose not to have 
nested menus (e.g., one patient representative said: “you 
cannot ask elderly people to remember what is inside each 
menu”) and instead, only one touch area per action. 
Suggestions included 6 squared big-size touch areas, with 
readable and appropriate function’s names. The 3 most 
important functions were placed at the top: “new 
measurements”, 
“daily 
questionnaire” 
and 
“videoconference”. The other 3 touch areas with less 
frequently used functions were placed at the bottom: 
“historical data”, “information about COPD”, and “user 
instructions”, see Figure 4. Further, it was concluded that the 
system was not to be used for emergency situations, so a 
written text was displayed that said “Call 113 for 
emergency” was suggested. 
For the questionnaire, end-users suggested multiple 
touchable selections for the daily self-evaluation of 
symptoms. Specifically, to have six questions visible on the 
screen at the same time because patients were afraid they 
would get tired of reading the questions one by one (see 
Figure 5). The button to navigate to the next step, labelled 
“Next”, had to visible at the bottom of the screen. The users 
requested to be able to review the questionnaire answers 
before sending the self-evaluation questionnaire.  
3) Procedure for Remote Monitoring: One of the most 
important findings of the workshop was the description of 
the procedure for the use of the telemedicine application for 
remote monitoring of COPD patients.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  User’s UI suggestions for the questionnaire for daily self-
evaluation of symptoms. 
 
Figure 4.   Users’ suggestions for the UI of the tablet application’s 
main screen. 

355
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6 shows the end users’ suggestion for the process 
and feedback in the remote monitoring scenario. In addition, 
instructions were required to be concise and to be 
additionally available on paper and through the system.  
It is a common practice in a given telemedicine centre to 
differentiate patient status by an easy-to-interpret color 
scheme, called triage. Triage color was represented in this 
case by a green color for measurement values within the pre-
defined cut-off values; yellow color for requiring attention 
and red one to trigger alert. Yellow and red colors were 
activated when measurement values were outside the 
predefined cut-off values. Patient representatives initially 
suggested that patients at home should be able to see the 
triage color related to their own measurements in order to 
have a feeling of control of their own health. However, a 
“false” red measurement (e.g., cold finger may alter 
measurement readings) could potentially increase patient’s 
anxiety. At the end, patient representatives agreed with the 
option that only health care professionals could see the 
triage’s color. 
B. Iterative Design 
The contributions from the iterative design are presented 
following the sub-phases of design and implementation, 
functional test, user evaluations and field trial.  
1) Design and Implementation: In the sub-phase design 
and 
implementation, 
the 
workshop’s 
results 
were 
transformed into user requirements. The initial graphical user 
interface (GUI) for the main screen of the tablet application 
was 
outlined 
including 
the 
two 
functions 
“New 
Measurement” and “Questionnaire”, which were placed at 
the top, see Figure 7.  
For the GUI of the daily self-evaluation questionnaire, 
three questions with touch areas for answers were displayed 
with a legible text on a tablet device, see Figure 8. Outcomes 
from further iterations’ sub-phases contributed to refine the 
user 
requirements 
and 
improve 
the 
application 
implementation.  
Based on the initial GUI, a first prototype version was 
created. Figure 9 shows the first prototype version of the 
measurements’ screen with the buttons “Measure Pulse” and 
“Send Pulse Value”. The readings of SpO2 and pulse are 
shown in the right column (e.g., pulse = 85 beats per minute, 
and SpO2 = 98%).  
Figure 10 shows the initial prototype version of the 
questionnaire’s UI, with one question per screen. The list of 
answers had to be touch-selected. A “Next” button to 
advance to the next question was placed under the list of 
answers. 
 
2) 
Functional Test: In each iteration during the 
development of the application, a functionality test was run 
by the development team. The identification of errors at this 
stage proved to be relatively cost-effective to fix in terms of 
time and effort compared with further sub-phases. 
3) 
User 
Evaluation: 
The 
user 
evaluations 
in 
laboratory settings comprised tasks to perform in the tablet 
application. An in-depth analysis of the observations 
revealed a number of usability issues. For the GUI, several 
problems were identified due to the insufficient text size in 
the UI of the measurement’s screen and related to the 
progress bar. Some spelling errors were found in the UI 
wording. For the functionality, there were some technical 
issues related to transmission of data from the tablet device. 
The videoconference sound quality was insufficient, but the 
use of headset improved the communication. Further, while 
the measurement reader device showed correct measured 
values, wrong ones were displayed in the tablet screen and 
sent to the telemedicine centre. User evaluation helped to 
identify these issues. 
 
 
Figure 6.   Procedure for remote monitoring. 
 
Figure 7.   GUI of tablet application main screen. 
 
Figure 8.   The GUI of the daily self-evaluation questionnaire 

356
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In the group interviews after the evaluations, user 
comments about the tablet use were overall positive. They 
refer to the usability of the application and its 
functionalities: “I think this will help us if we get worse; the 
tablet was easy to use with 5 or 6 functions and few things 
that should be touched to do measurements”. Comments 
also addressed the feeling of safety after using the system 
for few days in a row: “This is a fantastic procedure and a 
nice service for COPD patients. Initially I was skeptical 
because I was afraid this would be too technical and little 
human, but now I think this will give patients a feeling of 
safety, especially the first 14 days after hospital discharge”. 
Other comments referred to the need of user training: “With 
some user training I think most people could use this, it was 
not complicated. If you forget how to do it, you can contact 
telemedicine centre”. Patients also positively commented 
about the videoconference: “It was a good feeling to have 
the videoconference with telemedicine centre. I think it is 
good to see and hear the nurse for users at home”. About the 
interaction with the tablet device, one of the patients stated: 
“I assume finger interaction will work well for most elderly 
people”. 
The tablet application went through several iterative 
refinements to implement the findings from the user 
evaluations. These refinements included the display of the 
questionnaire with the adequate number of questions per 
screen, reduced from 3 in the initial GUI design to finally 1 
per screen in the final implementation to ease the individual 
reading A review of the questionnaire’s answers was 
included to allow patient to double check the filled-in 
answers before sending them in. Initially, a progress bar 
notified data transmission but it was unclear for 
distinguishing between successful and unsuccessful data 
delivery. A feedback notification pop-up window was 
shown, displaying a round face with an associated color code 
(i.e., green smiley face for successful delivery and red sad 
face for unsuccessful one). In addition, the user manual with 
intuitive images to guide step-by-step how to handle the 
measurement devices was requested. In this line, the GUI 
corresponding to the new measurement was improved by 
reducing the information load to perform tasks. 
4) Field Trial: The usability evaluations performed 
during the field comprised 4 tasks with associated sub-tasks 
and several usability problems were revealed. In the GUI of 
the measurements’ screen, the text “New Measurement” was 
used twice, as a heading but also as an action bar, creating 
confusion on which was one had to be selected to start the 
action. When choosing the action bar, a pop-up window 
opened over the instruction text, impeding its reading. The 
size of the touch area to answer the videoconference call was 
too small. Regarding the interface design, the text size was 
evaluated as sufficient and the choice of colors as 
appropriate. The interface of the main screen, measurement 
and the symptom self-evaluation questionnaire were easy to 
understand and had sufficient contrast between the elements. 
In the questionnaire, the size of boxes was sufficient and the 
overview of filled-in answers before sending was evaluated 
as a positive feature. For the application’s functionality, there 
was a lack of notification to the user when there was a data 
transmission error. For instance, a progress bar showed on 
the screen an ongoing transmission, but without notifying 
whether the transmission was successful or not. In addition, 
the videoconference had problems with sound and video 
quality. Initially, the quality was rated as satisfactory, but it 
presented some minor sound and video problems. Only one 
participant rated as satisfactory the videoconference quality 
during the whole test. The touch area to answer 
videoconference call was too small. 
Regarding users’ interactions with the tablet device, the 
double touch action was problematic because users had to 
apply the correct touch speed and pressure. A stylus was 
required in some cases. One user had forgotten the correct 
action for starting the application and found a way around by 
touching another UI area. When adjusting the camera in the 
videoconference, one user accidently switched off the 
application twice before succeeding.  
The interviews showed that all participants successfully 
connected the equipment by themselves at home. The 
instruction manual was evaluated as clear and instructive, but 
 
Figure 9.   First prototype version of the measurement screen 
 
Figure 10.   First prototype version of the questionnaire 

357
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
some mismatch between the content shown in the manual 
and the final text and layout shown in the system had to be 
resolved. The main frustration expressed by participants was 
the videoconference problem, which was related to mobile 
network coverage. For the interaction with the UI, most users 
stated that during one week they became familiar with the 
correct speed and pressure for touch actions.  
Based on findings from the field trial, several refinements 
were made in the tablet application, such as the automatic 
start of the application because of problems with touch 
initiation of the program icon (i.e., equivalent to mouse 
double-click). It was found that, ideally, the tablet 
application should report the battery level of the 
measurement device to the telemedicine centre and patient. 
The videoconference image and sound quality was improved 
through software configuration changes. The sound quality 
was improved by the selection of optimal headphones and 
microphone setup for the users.  
The participants’ overall rating of the application was 
satisfactory concerning all interactions with the tablet (e.g., 
equipment 
setup, 
device 
connection, 
measurements, 
questionnaire 
filling, 
data 
transmission, 
and 
videoconference). Comments referred to the design, 
understanding and usability of the system: “I think the 
application is very well designed so you do not 
misunderstand anything. I consider this system user-
friendly”; “This application was easy to use because even an 
old person like me without computer experience could use 
it”. 
C. Final Version 
The UCD process concluded the development of a final 
version of the tablet application, which was evaluated as 
“satisfactory” in all the sub-phases. Users started to operate 
the UI from the main screen of the application. The screen 
was divided into six differentiable touch areas with the daily 
functions 
at 
the 
top 
(e.g., 
“Questionnaire”, 
“New 
Measurement” and “COPD Assessment Test”. Figure 11 
shows the final UI of the tablet application.  
The series of steps related to the task of taking a new 
measurement is shown in Figure 12 and 13. The procedure 
included pressing the button “Start measurement” to start the 
operation (see Figure 12.1). When starting the measurement, 
a pop-up window opened and visually showed how to place 
the sensor on the finger (Figure 12.2). When successfully 
measured, the readings of SpO2 and pulse were shown in the 
two fields and the button with the label “Send” would 
become active to send the readings to the telemedicine centre 
(see Figure 12.3). When pressing the “Send” button, a 
progress bar showed the text “Sending”, representing the 
ongoing transmission of data (see Figure 12.4). When the 
data were transmitted, a feedback notification pop-up 
window opened to alternatively show successful or 
unsuccessful data delivery, see Figure 13.  
The questionnaire for the daily self-evaluation of 
symptoms consisted of a sequence of 9 screens, 7 for the 
questions and 2 for reviewing and reset the answers when 
necessary. The question screen showed the possible answers 
to be touch-selected and a button with the text “Next” to 
continue with the remaining questions, see Figure 14 left. 
The questionnaire review screen showed the answers 
selected and gave the possibility of resetting them when 
necessary. In addition, the button with the text “Send” would 
submit the answers to the telemedicine centre and the button 
labelled with “Cancel” would cancel the whole operation 
discarding the answers, see Figure 14 right. 
 
Figure 11. The final version of the UI’s main screen 
 
Figure 12.   (1) The final version UI’s of the New Measurement screen. 
(2) Pop-up window with instruction. (3) Readings of SpO2 and pulse. 
(4) Progress bar. 
 
Figure 13.   Notification window for successful sending (left) and for 
unsuccessful sending (right). 

358
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper has presented the UCD process for the 
development of a tablet device application for remote 
monitoring of COPD patients in home environment. 
Telemedicine applications typically involve multiple users in 
number and type, such as patients, health professionals and 
administrative officers. This is why the involvement of those 
groups of end-users in the design of a new technical 
application is crucial to understand the clinical workflow 
where the solution will be deployed, its context of use and 
the interactions involved. The two research questions (RQs) 
formulated at the beginning of this paper are answered below 
based on the results from the study. 
About the RQ1, which asked about the development of a 
telemedicine application for remote monitoring of COPD 
patients, it has been confirmed by end-users (i.e., COPD 
patients and health professionals) that the employed UCD 
approach included their needs in the development of the 
application. The workshop with end-users efficiently 
outlined user needs, context of use and helped the user 
groups involved to familiarize themselves with each other 
and the research team. Therefore, the workshop was the key 
to elicit users’ requirements of the application, taking on 
board 
different 
aspects 
of 
GUI, 
interaction 
and 
functionalities. 
The user evaluations were carried out both in a controlled 
laboratory environment and at COPD patients’ homes. The 
early evaluations in laboratory environment simulated a 
realistic user scenario based on constructed role-play 
scenario where the patients and health care professionals 
interacted with the technology. In addition, the laboratory 
provided a test environment allowing controlling the 
variables studied and enabled users to give feedback about 
GUI design and the interactions following the remote 
monitoring process. The laboratory test was a necessary step 
where to evaluate the iterations for the refinement of the 
application. Finally, the controlled test provided the 
necessary safety for, as seen in other studies, afterwards 
running the field trial in an optimal way [30]. 
The field trial allowed studying the long-term and real-
time usage of the technology by COPD patients at their 
home and provided useful information about the interactions 
between humans and technology, but also between the 
different technologies involved. This helped to address the 
common issues with interoperability [38], present nowadays 
in the deployment and use of telemedicine technologies 
[39][40]. 
Several lessons were learned during the study that can be 
transferable and applicable for technology development for 
other chronic clinical pathways (RQ2). In particular, 
intended solutions for medical environments necessarily 
need to firstly involve all the user groups in the creation of 
the solution. Secondly, the respective analysis of how this 
solution could best fit in an existing clinical workflow or, if 
non-existent, embedding the solution in a new workflow 
built up in collaboration with the end-user groups. Thirdly, 
the fact that chronic patients do not have the same levels of 
physical energy as healthy people underlines the importance 
of designing easy-to-use solutions that minimise physical 
effort and mental workload.  
The research study of the UCD process had also some 
limitations such as: patient role-play by health professionals, 
user-scenarios tested in a simulated environment and reduced 
number of end-users. The health professionals took the role 
of the patient in the user evaluation 1 due to the low 
legibility of interface wording (as it can be seen in Figure 9 
and 10). This was improved in the user evaluation 2, where 
real patients tested the interface. The simulated test 
environment allowed creating highly realistic scenarios 
under controlled conditions, and the field trial gave the 
opportunity to test the system in real-world settings. The 
number of users, despite low, meaningfully represented all 
the end-user groups involved [41][42].  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study has been developed including end-users’ (i.e., 
COPD patients and health professionals) needs, suggestions 
and preferences, in the design and evaluation of a COPD 
remote monitoring application. Positive results were reported 
after the evaluation in the laboratory settings, regarding ease 
of use of the telemedicine solution and user satisfaction. The 
methodology employed, UCD, transformed the end-user into 
a contributor of the telemedicine service design and allowing 
continuous refinement of the application to fully develop the 
system suitable for remote monitoring of COPD patients. 
The telemedicine service enabled COPD patients 
reporting 
their 
symptoms 
and 
health 
status 
after 
hospitalization. The system is interoperable with other 
concurrent systems, resolving the common issue of 
interoperability present in the deployment and use of 
telemedicine technologies. The continuous report of 
symptoms for chronic patients throughout the whole health 
service chain together with actively including patients in 
building the solution, are in line with the European Union 
(EU) Health Strategy, “putting patients at the heart of the 
system and encouraging them to be involved in managing 
their own healthcare needs” [43]. This EU strategy aims to 
help current health care systems placing the patient at the 
centre of new treatments for chronic conditions included in 
the projections of global mortality for 2030 [8], such as 
ischemic heart disease and diabetes. 
 
Figure 14.   The final version of the UI’s daily self-evaluation 
questionnaire,  question 1 (left, Q1) and answer review (right). 

359
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The simulation in high fidelity laboratory settings and the 
field trial are significant contributing factors to the ecological 
validity of the research here presented. In a world where 
human-computer interactions progressively increase in 
number and complexity, real-time evaluations in real-world 
settings become crucial to understand not only whether 
deployment is successful, but the efficient and continuous 
use of technological solutions. 
Finally, the proposed UCD process has been validated by 
the development of a telemedicine tablet application, 
successfully adopted by the EU FP7 project United4Health, 
which focused on technologies that support remote 
monitoring of COPD patients after hospital discharge. As a 
result, 3 telemedicine centers covering 23 municipalities in 
Norway are currently using the final version of the 
application. This represents a significant contribution 
compared with related scientific literature where many 
telemedicine studies do not reach final deployment stage. 
Future work will address research on appropriate 
identification and authentication methods for patients, more 
autonomous reasoning and decision support in the 
application, and integration of further devices to support 
other patient groups and clinical pathways associated with 
chronic diseases, such as hypertension and diabetes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank all participants and project partners for 
their contributions in the UCD process. They thank Joris-Jan 
van den Boom for the contribution in graphic and interaction 
design, and Baddam Sriramreddy, Mahdi Mahdavi Amjad, 
Navid Mokhtari, Saeed Zanderahimi, Volodymyr Shulgin 
and Yannick Schillinger in the development team.  
This work was supported by UNIversal solutions in 
Telemedicine Deployment for European HEALTH care, 
2013-2015 ICT PSP (call identifier CIP-ICT PSP-2012-3) 
and Point-of-Care Services Agder, sub-project financed by 
the Research Council of Norway, 2013-15, ref 227131/O70. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Smaradottir, M. Gerdes, R. Fensli, and S. Martinez, “User 
Interface Development of a COPD Remote Monitoring 
Application, A User-centred Design Process,” The Eighth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions (ACHI 2015) IARIA Feb 2015; pp. 57-62, ISSN: 
2308-4138, ISBN: 978-1-61208-382-7 
[2] Web 3C- Web Accessibility Initiative [retrieved: November 3, 
2015]. Available from: http://www.w3.org/WAI/redesign/ucd 
[3] J. Chan, K. G. Shojania, A. C. Easty, and E. E. Etchells, 
“Does user-centred design affect the efficiency, usability and 
safety of CPOE order sets?,” J Am Med Inform Assoc, 18, 
276e281, 2011, doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2010-000026.  
[4] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, “The 
Coordination Reform, Proper treatment – at the right place 
and right time,” Report No. 47 (2008-2009) to the Storting. 
[retrieved: 
November 
30, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/d4f0e16ad32e4bbd8
d8ab5c21445a5dc/en-
gb/pdfs/stm200820090047000en_pdfs.pdf 
[5] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, “The 
Health&Care21 
strategy,” 
(HelseOmsorg21 
Nasjonal 
forsknings- og innovasjonsstrategi for helse og omsorg) 
[retrieved: 
November 
30, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/8ab2fd5c4c7746dfb
51e3f64cd4d71aa/helseomsorg21_strategi_web.pdf?id=22667
05 
[6] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, “The Care 
of the Future,” (Morgendagens omsorg), Report No. 29 
(20012-2013) to the Storting. [retrieved: November 30, 2015]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/34c8183cc5cd43e2
bd341e34e326dbd8/no/pdfs/stm201220130029000dddpdfs.pd
f 
[7] Directorate of Health, “National strategy for e-ehealth (2014–
2016),” (Nasjonal handlingsplan for e-helse). [retrieved: 
November 
30, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
https://helsedirektoratet.no/Lists/Publikasjoner/Attachments/1
2/Nasjonal-handlingsplan-for-e-helse-2014-2016-IS-2179.pdf  
[8] C. D Mathers and D. Loncar, “Projections of global mortality 
and burden of disease from 2002 to 2030,” PLoS Med, vol. 
3(11), 
pp. 
2011-2030, 
Nov 
2006, 
doi: 
10.1371/journal.pmed.0030442. 
[9] T. A. Seemungal, G. C. Donaldson, E. A. Paul, J. C. Bestall, 
D. J. Jeffries, and J. A. Wedzicha, “Effect of exacerbation on 
quality of life in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease,” Am J Respir Crit Care Med, vol. 157, No.5, pp. 
1418-22, 1998, doi:10.1164/ajrccm.157.5.9709032. 
[10] S. D. Ramsey and S. D. Sullivan, “The burden of illness and 
economic evaluation for COPD,” Eur Respir J, 21: Suppl. 41 
29s–35s, 2003, doi:10.1183/09031936.03.00078203. 
[11] United4Health 2015, European Commission Competitiveness 
Innovation Programme, ICT Programme to Support Policy. 
[retrieved: 
November 
30, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.united4health.eu 
[12] United4Health 2015, The Norwegian project contribution. 
[retrieved: 
November 
30, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.united4health.no 
[13] G. Gudmundsson et al., ”Risk factors for rehospitalisation in 
COPD: role of health status, anxiety and depression,” Eur 
Respir 
J, 
vol. 
26, 
pp. 
414-419, 
2005, 
doi:10.1183/09031936.05.00078504. 
[14] I. M. Osman, D. J. Godden, J. A. Friend, J. S. Legge, and J. 
G. Douglas, ”Quality of life and hospital re-admission in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,” Thorax, 
vol. 52, pp. 67-71, Jan 1997, doi:10.1136/thx.52.1.67. 
[15] B. Smaradottir, M. Gerdes, S. Martinez, and R. Fensli, “The 
EU-project United4Health: user-centred design of an 
information system for a Norwegian telemedicine service,” J 
Telemed 
Telecare, 
5 
Nov 
2015, 
doi:10.1177/1357633X15615048. 
[16] D. A. Perednia and A. Allen, “Telemedicine technology and 
clinical applications,” JAMA, 273(6), pp.483-488, 1995, 
doi:10.1001/jama.1995.03520300057037. 
[17] J. Craig and V. Patterson, “Introduction to the practice of 
telemedicine,” J Telemed Telecare, 11(1), pp. 3-9, 2005. 
[18] R. L. Bashshur, “On the definition and evaluation of 
telemedicine,” 
Telemed 
J, 
1(1), 
p. 
19-30, 
1995, 
doi:10.1089/tmj.1.1995.1.19. 
[19] C. Bai, “Cell phone based telemedicine – brief introduction,” 
J of Transl Med, 10 (Suppl 2), pp. A47, 2012, 
doi:10.1186/1479-5876-10-S2-A47. 
[20] J. Gulliksen, B. Göransson, I. Boivie, S. Blomkvist, J. 
Persson, and Å. Cajander, “Key principles for user-centred 
systems design,” Behav Inf Technol, 22(6), pp. 397-409, 
2003, doi:10.1080/01449290310001624329. 
[21] K. Vredenburg, J. Mao, P. W. Smith, and T.Carey, “A survey 
of user-centered design practice,” Conference on Human 

360
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Factors in Computing Systems 2002 (SIGCHI 2002); p. 471-
478, doi:10.1145/503376.503460.  
[22] J. Lazar, Web Usability- a user-centered design approach. 
Pearson Education, 2006, ISBN-10 0321321359, ISBN-13 
9780321321350 
[23] J. Nielsen, Usability engineering. Elsevier, 1993. ISBN-13: 
978-0125184069, ISBN-10: 0125184069 
[24] L. Goldberg et al., “Usability and accessibility in consumer 
health informatics current trends and tuture challenges,” Am J 
Prev Med, Vol 40, Issue 5, Supplement 2, pp. S187–S197, 
May 2011, doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2011.01.009. 
[25] A. W. Kushniruk and W. L. Patel, “Cognitive and usability 
engineering methods for the evaluation of clinical information 
systems,” J Biomed Inform, vol. 37, pp. 56-76, Feb 2004, 
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2004.01.003. 
[26] M. W Jaspers, “A comparison of usability methods for testing 
interactive health technologies: methodological aspects and 
empirical evidence,” Int J Med Inform, vol. 78(5), pp. 340-
353, 2009, doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2008.10.002. 
[27] J. Lazar, J. H. Feng, and H. Hochheiser. Research methods in 
human-computer interaction. Chichester, United Kingdom, 
John Wiley & Sons, 2010, ISBN 978-0-470-72337-1. 
[28] C. I. Martínez-Alcalá, M. Muñoz, and J. Monguet-Fierro, 
“Design and customization of telemedicine systems,” Comput 
Math Methods Med, vol. 2013, doi:10.1155/2013/618025. 
[29] M. Ho, R. Luk, and P. M. Aoki, “Applying user-centered 
design to telemedicine in Africa,” Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems 2007 (CHI 2007) Workshop 
on User Centered Design for International Development. 
[30] A. De Vito Dabbs et al., “User-centered design and interactive 
health technologies for patients,” Comput Inform Nurs, vol. 
27(3), 
pp. 
175–183, 
May-June 
2009, 
doi: 
10.1097/NCN.0b013e31819f7c7c. 
[31] A. Das, S. Bøthun, J. Reitan, and Y. Dahl, “The Use of 
Generative Techniques in Co-design of mHealth Technology 
and Healthcare Services for COPD Patients,” Design, User 
Experience, and Usability: Interactive Experience Design, pp. 
587-595, Springer International Publishing, 2015. 
[32] QSR NVIVO v10. [retrieved: November 30, 2015]. Available 
from: http://www.qsrinternational.com/products_nvivo.aspx 
[33] M. Gerdes, B. Smaradottir, and R. Fensli, “End-to-end 
infrastructure for usability evaluation of eHealth applications 
and 
services,” 
Scandinavian 
Conference 
on 
Health 
Informatics (SHI 2014) Aug 2014; pp. 53-59, ISSN(print): 
1650-3686, ISSN(online): 1650-3740, ISBN: 978-91-7519-
241-3 
[34] J. Horsky et al., “Complementary methods of system usability 
evaluation: surveys and observations during software design 
and development cycles,” J Biomed Inform, 43(5), pp. 782-
790, 2010, doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.05.010. 
[35] K. A. Ericsson and H. A. Simon. “Verbal reports as data,” 
Psychol Rev 87, pp. 215-251, 1980. 
[36] J. Nielsen, T. Clemmensen, and C. Yssing, “Getting access to 
what goes on in people's heads?: reflections on the think-
aloud technique,” Nordic Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction (NordicCHI, 2002) Oct 2002; pp. 101-110, 
doi:10.1145/572020.572033. 
[37] B. Smaradottir, M. Gerdes, S. Martinez, and R. Fensli, 
“Usability Evaluation of a COPD Remote Monitoring 
Application,” Stud Health Technol Inform, vol. 210, p. 845-
849, 2015, doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-512-8-845. 
[38] A.Shaikh, “The impact of SOA on a system design for a 
telemedicine healthcare system,” Netw Model Anal Health 
Inform 
and 
Bioinforma, 
4(1), 
p.1-16, 
2015, 
doi:10.1007/s13721-015-0087-0. 
[39] R. L. Bashshur, “Guest editorial: Compelling issues in 
telemedicine,” Telemed E Health, 19(5), p. 330-332, 2013, 
doi:10.1089/tmj.2013.9998. 
[40] R. 
L. 
Craft, 
“Toward 
technical 
interoperability 
in 
telemedicine,” Telemed J E Health, 11(3), 384-404, 2005, 
doi: 10.1089/tmj.2005.11.384. 
[41] J. Nielsen, “Estimating the number of subjects needed for a 
thinking aloud test,” Int J Hum-Comput St, 41(3), 385-397, 
1994, doi:10.1006/ijhc.1994.1065. 
[42] J. Nielsen and T. K. Landauer, “A mathematical model of the 
finding of usability problems,” Conference on Human factors 
in computing systems (ACM INTERCHI'93) May 1993, pp. 
206-213, doi:10.1145/169059.169166. 
[43] European Union. Official Journal of the European Union, vol. 
C 146, 22 June 2006, ISSN 1725-2423. [retrieved: November 
30, 2015]. Available from: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1446552106801&uri=CELEX:52006
XG0622(01) 
 
 

