Challenges in Assessing Agile Methods in a Multisite Environment 
 
Harri Kaikkonen 
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
harri.kaikkonen@oulu.fi 
Pasi Kuvaja 
Department of Information Processing Sciences  
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
pasi.kuvaja@oulu.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Organizations utilize agile development methods in 
addition to multisite environments with the intent to reduce 
costs and development time. Assessment results and possible 
challenges of utilizing and adopting such methods are typically 
qualitative and lack concrete evidence of the challenges. An 
assessment survey instrument was used to analyze the 
transformation 
of 
a 
multisite 
software 
development 
organization from waterfall-type development into agile 
development. The transformation was done in two globally 
distributed sites in Finland and India. The assessment survey 
was conducted in the Finnish site 6 months after it had 
changed its working methods, and again 12 months later in 
both sites. The site in India had adopted similar methods after 
the previous assessment survey was conducted. The results of 
the assessment survey in the Finnish site indicated regression 
between the two assessment rounds, while the results in India 
appeared to be better compared to Finland in the second 
round. Analysis of the results suggests that cultural differences 
and time elapsed from the organizational transformation may 
influence the assessment results and should be taken into 
account when assessing the implementation of development 
methods. 
Keywords-organizational 
change; 
global 
software 
development; agile methods; Scrum; process assessment. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This article extends previous work in [1]. Adopting agile 
development methods such as Scrum [2] and extreme 
programming (XP) [3] have seen a great deal of interest in 
the software development community because of their 
claimed benefits of delivering working software and being 
more responsive to changes, among other reasons [4]. 
However, scaling agile methods into larger organizations 
than those with a single or a few teams has come with some 
difficulties yet there have been several descriptions to 
address the matter (e.g., [5][6]). 
As development organizations become larger, they often 
also spread out globally out of necessity or because of their 
business environments [7]. This, in turn, tends to cause a 
whole array of issues to be considered while managing the 
development work.  
This article describes selected results of a quantitative 
process assessment conducted at a medium-sized software 
development organization. The organization adopted a 
Scrum-based software development process in their 
multisite organization. The adoption and the assessment 
were conducted in two phases. First, the process was 
adopted by a smaller unit in Finland with approximately 30 
people. The unit was later assessed approximately six 
months after the adoption. With the experience gathered 
from the first site, similar processes were adopted in another 
site of about 50 people in India, within the same 
organization. The assessment was then repeated at both 
sites.  
The aim of this article is to provide evidence of issues in 
assessing the implementation of organizational changes 
such as new development processes in a global software 
development (GSD) organization, or other multisite 
organization. 
The remainder of the publication is organized as follows. 
Section II contains a description of related work as literature 
background of agile development methods and global 
software development. Section III presents a description of 
the assessment process and Section IV a description of the 
organization in which the assessment was conducted. 
Section V presents the relevant results of the assessments. 
Section VI includes discussion based on the results and the 
paper concludes in Section VII. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Several methodologies gained popularity in the late 
1980’s to early 1990’s to challenge the prevalent waterfall 
development processes. Early methodologies include the 
spiral model [8] and incremental development methods [9]. 
Later, these methodologies and their influence spawned the 
agile movement to give more practical descriptions of how 
to develop software. 
The agile movement gained publicity within the 
software development community during the 1990’s, and 
was later epitomized in the agile manifesto, published in 
2001 [4]. The manifesto was a collaborative agreement of 
what practitioners saw as the values and principles of agile 
software development. The original manifesto reads [4]: 
 
“We are uncovering better ways of developing software 
by doing it and helping others do it. Through this work we 
have come to value: 
 
Individuals and interactions over processes and tools 
Working software over comprehensive documentation 
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation 
136
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Responding to change over following a plan 
 
That is, while there is value in the items on the right, we 
value the items on the left more.”  
 
In addition to the actual manifesto, the authors also 
described twelve principles behind it [4]. These twelve 
principles were agreed as common to the agile practitioners, 
although agile methods had already been described and 
were in use in many different settings. ‘Agile methods’ is an 
umbrella term for a wide different set of approaches (e.g., 
Scrum, XP and Kanban [10]), that have challenged the 
traditional waterfall model of software development and 
introduced a more lightweight process of producing 
software [11].  
Today, Scrum can be viewed as the most widely used 
agile software development approach, but the first 
description of a ‘Scrum team’ was in an article about 
flexibility on traditional new product development [12]. In 
many ways, the software development waterfall model that 
Scrum challenges, can be characterized as similar to the 
stage-gate model [13] in physical product development - 
exactly what the Scrum-team was designed to challenge. 
There are several defined roles, meetings, practices and 
working methods in the Scrum methodology. One example 
of typical practices in Scrum is the sprint retrospective. The 
retrospective is a meeting held after each sprint for 
inspecting and adapting the process and environment of 
development [14].  
The main difference between Scrum and waterfall type 
of development is the iterative nature of development work. 
Key differences between all agile methods and traditional 
software development include iterative development and 
promoting empowered teamwork. However, a common 
misinterpretation of agile software development is that 
agility is achieved with practices and tools [11], although 
the focus should be on being agile, instead of doing it [4]. 
During the same time that agile methods started to 
become increasingly prevalent in software development, 
globalization of high-technology businesses have increased 
the need for GSD. Software and its use as both products and 
services has become a competitive weapon, which must be 
utilized efficiently to stay ahead in high-technology 
competition [7]. 
The factors that have accelerated this trend include [7]: 
 
 
the need to capitalize on the global resource pool to 
successfully and cost-competitively use scarce 
resources, wherever located; 
 
the business advantages of proximity to the market, 
including knowledge of customers and local 
conditions, as well as the good will engendered by 
local investment; 
 
the quick formation of virtual corporations and 
virtual teams to exploit market opportunities; 
 
severe pressure to improve time-to-market by using 
time 
zone 
differences 
in 
“round-the-clock”  
development; and 
 
the need for flexibility to capitalize on merger and 
acquisition opportunities wherever they present 
themselves. 
According to [15], the benefits of GSD include reduced 
development 
costs, 
cross-site 
modularization 
of 
development work, access to large skilled labor pool, and 
closer proximity to markets and customers. 
One of the most obvious benefits of GSD is reducing 
costs by moving development work into countries with 
lower wages. This is also the main driver for many 
companies to utilize GSD. However, distributing work 
among different locations reduces the cost savings by 
adding complexity to development projects with added 
communication interfaces [15]. 
Another benefit of GSD is the modularization of 
development work across sites, which is intended to reduce 
cycle-time of development. Modularization of work can 
cause integration issues since development work is 
separated and, therefore, needs to be addressed when 
designing modularization of work. Organizations have 
divided development work between sites based on features 
or development modules, but also created co-located or 
virtual teams that share the workload between sites [7][15]. 
It is also widely known that the skilled developers have 
a high impact on development speed and quality. Many 
organizations utilize GSD to access skilled labor pools in 
lower cost countries such as India or China when local 
resources are not abundant enough to fulfill the needs of 
organizations. Larger labor pools also provide for greater 
opportunities in scalability of the organization [7]. However, 
the attrition levels are higher in low-cost countries, which is 
a disadvantage in any development organization [15]. 
There are also benefits in locating developers closer to 
customers in some cases. By having developers with 
culturally and linguistically similar backgrounds as the 
customer, misunderstandings become rarer. Of course, the 
organization has to then find a balance between cultural 
divide internally and externally [15]. 
Although GSD is also intended to reduce time-to-market 
by utilizing “round the clock” development [7], as [15] has 
pointed out, the intended benefits of leveraging time-zone 
effectiveness and innovation and shared practice may not be 
that abundant in GSD. The differences in time-zones may 
not actually provide benefits for GSD and may, in fact, be a 
hindrance for development work. Time-zone separation 
reduces collaborative time window and may cause unusual 
working hours for both parties [15].  
Also, the sharing of innovation and best practices among 
different 
locations 
may 
be 
problematic 
in 
some 
organizations. Employees who feel threatened by their 
lower cost colleagues may not always be willing to share all 
of their knowledge, which reduce the benefits of having best 
practices shared among the organization [15]. 
137
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The challenges of GSD have been described in several 
sources (e.g., [15][16][17][18][19]). Issues range from 
strategic level issues such as how to divide work between 
different sites, to more tactical level problems like how to 
arrange effective daily communication channels, to more 
complex systems like cultural differences and their effect on 
project and process management [7]. It is clear that many 
types of issues become apparent when dividing any kind of 
work globally, and with development work that often 
realizes inside developers’ and designers’ heads, the 
problems can be all the more difficult. Methods have also 
been proposed to reduce the effects of the challenges 
involved with GSD. These methods range from the use of 
maturity models [20] to suggested practices and techniques 
[18]. 
As organizations try to improve their processes and 
products, they often turn to assessments to get further 
understanding of their processes. Some of these assessments 
have 
also 
been 
conducted 
in 
global 
development 
environments (e.g., [21]). Similarly to the identified 
challenges with GSD, analyzing assessment results from 
GSD organizations may also contain challenges that are 
unknown. This is true for assessment results in any multisite 
organization, not just for GSD organizations. 
The challenges that have been described on GSD and on 
agile adoption are often based on interview studies and are 
qualitative by nature. There is a lack of quantitative 
assessment data on GSD environments and the effect of the 
challenges in the assessment data. The following sections 
provide an example of the issues that are related to assessing 
the implementation of agile methods in a multisite 
environment. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
One of the challenging things in any organizational 
transformation towards a new way of working is how to 
assess the transition process and guide the next steps. This 
research was conducted using the Lean and Agile 
Deployment Survey, which is an assessment instrument 
developed by the University of Oulu in collaboration with 
industrial partners in the Cloud Software Program [22] in 
Finland. The instrument is specifically designed for 
enabling an effective transformation to a lean and agile way 
of working. The survey is based on a generic structure of 
three organizational levels; portfolio, program and project 
[6], and focuses on four main dimensions: organizational 
set-up, practices, outputs and culture/mindset. The survey 
was part of a larger effort that University of Oulu was 
performing in identifying the right agile practices to adopt 
and to determine whether organizations are ready for lean 
and agile. Additionally, the approach is meant to provide 
information for deciding what necessary preparations and 
potential difficulties may be faced during the adoption 
process.  
The 
conducted 
survey 
contained 
four 
context 
information questions for analyzing purposes, and over 70 
statements 
that 
described 
the 
organization’s 
agile 
development process as it had been planned and taken in use 
internally. The statements were tailored from general 
statements in the Lean and Agile Deployment Survey to 
correspond with the terminology and processes of the case 
organization. Some generic examples of the statements are 
presented below: 
 
 The product backlog prioritization is clear. 
 The product owner guides the Scrum team by 
prioritizing the user stories. 
 I understand when the user stories are complete 
and can be accepted within the sprint. 
IV. 
CASE ORGANIZATION 
The case organization designs software for network 
protocol analyzers. One of the organization’s sites in 
Finland started their agile transformation with pilots during 
the spring of 2010. They further changed that site’s 
organization of around 30 employees to an agile way of 
working in the beginning of fall of the same year by starting 
to follow the methods of Scrum development [2][14]. 
During 2011, after initial results and experiences in Finland, 
similar processes were taken in use at a development unit in 
India and were planned to be taken in use in other sites as 
well.  
The Lean and Agile Deployment Survey was conducted 
twice in the organization. The first survey took place about 
6 months after the agile methods had been adopted in 
Finland. The second survey was conducted 12 months later 
and was expanded to include the site in India, which had 
adopted similar agile practices during that time.  
The targets of the survey assessment were i) to review 
the current status of agile adoption at two of the case 
organization’s sites, ii) to see how the unit in Finland had 
been progressing with agile methods between the two 
survey rounds, iii) to identify focus areas for continuous 
improvement efforts and iv) to receive feedback on the 
impressions and assumptions on agile and Scrum processes 
in other sites of the organization. 
To obtain results for the last goal, the survey was also 
conducted in a third site, which had not yet fully adopted 
similar processes as the two case sites. The responses of the 
third site are omitted from the results presented in this 
publication.  
The total number of respondents for the first round in 
Finland was 25. For the second round, there were 62 
responses in total, 25 responses from Finland and 37 from 
India. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The survey was very successful in terms of response 
rate, which was a full 100 percent in the first round and 80.5 
percent in the second round. The high response rate was 
138
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

attributed to the close collaboration between the case 
organization and researchers and extensive communication 
to the survey participants. Personnel of the case organization 
also sponsored the survey noticeably, so it was well 
received. 
TABLE I.  
RESPONDENT EXPERIENCE 
 
How many years of experience in software 
industry do you have? 
Round 1 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(India) 
Round 2 
(Total) 
None 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Less than 2 
1 
0 
6 
6 
2-5 
4 
2 
13 
15 
5-10 
5 
5 
16 
21 
10-20 
13 
16 
2 
18 
More than 
20 
2 
2 
0 
2 
Total 
25 
25 
37 
62 
 
A comparison of the respondents’ experience shows that 
the personnel that participated in the survey were generally 
very experienced in software development (see Table I). 
There is also some difference between the experiences 
between the two sites. Many respondents in Finland had 
over a decade of experience in software development, which 
may amount to some opinions reflected in the survey 
results. The amount of experience in the Indian site is 
somewhat lower than in Finland, but, overall, the people in 
both sites had enough experience on software development 
to answer the survey.  
TABLE II.  
RESPONDENT ROLES 
 
Round 1 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(India) 
Round 2 
(Total) 
Developer 
13 
16 
18 
34 
Tester 
4 
1 
10 
11 
Product 
owner 
4 
4 
2 
6 
Scrum 
master 
3 
2 
6 
8 
Other 
1 
2 
1 
3 
Total 
25 
25 
37 
62 
 
Most of the responses in the survey came from 
developers and testers (see Table II). The other roles with 
significant number of responses were the product owner and 
Scrum master. As the focus of the survey was at the 
implementation of agile development process, the responses 
from these roles also provides a solid basis for the analysis 
of the results. The other roles that the respondents identified 
with were individual manager roles of the organization. 
Because of the case organization’s preference, the 
statements were evaluated by the respondents on a four-
point scale, with an additional option of ‘I don’t know’ 
instead of a 5-point Likert-type scale [23] usually utilized 
with the Lean and Agile Deployment Survey. The answering 
options with corresponding weights used in average 
calculation in the following results section were as follows 
(see Table III). 
TABLE III.  
SURVEY ANSWERING OPTIONS 
Option 
Option weight 
Disagree 
1 
Partially agree 
2 
Largely Agree 
3 
Fully Agree 
4 
I don’t know 
- 
 
The following tables and figures present selected 
findings from the survey, which may be interesting in the 
context of multi-site agile adoption. The results for 
individual statements (see Figures 1-10) are presented as the 
distribution of responses and an average result in the 
statements in four separate rows. The first row presents the 
results received in the first survey that was conducted 
around 6 months after the agile adoption had taken place in 
the Finnish unit. The second and third rows include 
responses 12 months later from the Finnish and Indian units, 
respectively. The final row shows the combined answers in 
the second survey round from both sites (Finland and India).  
Please note that the ‘I don’t know’ –answers are not 
included in the average calculations. However, in some 
statements the amount of ‘I don’t know’ –responses itself is 
significant.  
Firstly, a very interesting finding can be made by 
looking at the collective average of the overall responses 
between the two survey rounds (see Table IV). 
 
TABLE IV.  
SURVEY AVERAGE 
 
Round 1 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(India) 
Round 2 
(Total) 
Response 
average 
3,04 
2,76 
3,28 
3,07 
 
The fact that the average score in Finland in the second 
survey is lower than 12 months earlier is an alerting sign, as 
the statements were formed in a positive form in accordance 
with the case organization’s process description (i.e., 
respondent’s agreement with a statement would imply that 
the respondent feels that processes are followed as 
described). There was some indication from the case 
organization that they had not had sufficient resources to 
actively react to issues raised in the first survey and 
subsequent retrospectives during the 12 month period 
between the two surveys. One possible cause for the 
reduction in the average results may also be increased 
experience and awareness of the agile methods. This could 
139
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

affect the results as people became more aware of their 
processes and the issues concerning them than before.  
Perhaps surprisingly, the average score in India was 
much higher than it was in Finland as seen in the second 
round average scores. Several reasons may affect this 
difference, with cultural reasons perhaps being the most 
obvious explanation. The results of the first survey were 
also higher in Finland, although not as high as in Indian 
site’s first respective survey. Naturally, lessons learned from 
implementing the practices in Finland first could have 
improved the implementation in India, which would yield 
more positive results in the latter implementation.  
Reasons for the drop in score are evident in some survey 
results. One main improvement area for the case 
organization based on the first survey was the lack of 
identified value of continuous improvement activities (see 
Figures 1 and 2). Figure 1 shows how the respondents feel 
about the results of retrospectives. In the first survey round 
in Finland, it was identified that although the general view 
on retrospective results was positive, not all respondents felt 
that the teams were actually changing their ways of working 
based on retrospectives. The results of the same statement 
year after the first survey show actually even lower results, 
with none of the respondent’s fully agreeing with this 
statement. There is also a small drop in the Finnish site’s 
results on the statement “we reduce wasteful activities 
frequently” in the second survey round (see Figure 2). At 
the same time, the majority of Indian respondents show that 
the same practices are working well in their site. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Scrum teams change their ways of working based on 
retrospectives. 
 
Figure 2.  We reduce wasteful activities frequently. 
The lack of resources assigned for following up on this 
improvement area show as reduced results in the topic of 
improving working practices. The results on continuous 
improvement are significantly higher in the Indian site with 
results averages being much higher. 
A second major improvement area identified based on 
the first survey round was the lack of measured and 
communicated evidence of the benefits of the agile methods 
for the organization. This included the measuring and 
communication of benefits in productivity (see Figures 3 
and 4), product quality (see Figure 5) and development time 
(see Figure 6).  
 
 
Figure 3.  I am more productive with the agile way of working. 
 
Figure 4.  We are more productive as a Scrum team. 
In the first survey round in Finland, it was evident that 
there were at least some differences of opinion in individual 
productivity 
between 
previous 
waterfall 
type 
of 
development and newly introduced agile methods (see top 
of Figure 3). There were also respondents who were 
unaware of any productivity changes related to their 
individual performance. Surprisingly, there were no 
disagreeing opinions on the productivity increase for the 
entire team even though some felt that their individual 
performance had decreased at the same time. This would 
imply that even if some individuals were not convinced of 
increases to their individual productivity, they felt that as a 
team their performance had still improved. Even if this was 
the case in the first survey round in Finland, in the second 
survey round the results had also dropped dramatically in 
terms of team productivity. 
Again the results in this topic appear very high in India 
in relation to Finland. Especially in individual productivity 
(see Figure 3), the responses in India are overwhelmingly 
positive. Similar trend is evident also in the results of team 
productivity.  
 
140
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5.  Product quality has been improved by applying agile 
development. 
In Finland, similar trends are seen in the results of 
perceived 
improvements 
in 
product 
quality 
as 
in 
performance (see Figure 5). There are a lot of ‘I don’t 
know’ responses in Finland in the statement “Product 
quality has been improved by applying agile development”.  
This was the case in both survey rounds, but the results 
average in this statement also decreased between the survey 
rounds similarly to the previous statements about 
productivity. In India, the results are not as positive in terms 
of quality as they are in productivity, although the results 
are again much higher than they are in Finland. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Development time has decreased by applying agile 
development. 
Similar trends as with productivity and product quality 
changes are evident in yet another topic on development 
time (see Figure 6). In the first survey round, there was a lot 
of ‘I don’t know’ responses to the statement ‘Development 
time has decreased by applying agile development’. This 
was also the case in the second survey round, but many 
respondents also plainly disagreed with this statement. 
Actually, in the second survey round, only a handful of 
people showed any level of agreement to this statement and 
most of the respondents either disagreed with the statement 
or did not answer to it. 
In India, there were also some ‘I don’t know’ responses 
and disagreement with the above statement. However, a 
majority agreed with the statement saying that the 
development time has actually decreased with the 
introduction of agile methods. 
An action point after the first survey round was to 
provide the teams more information on the benefits of agile 
in comparison to earlier working methods. This issue had 
apparently not received enough attention because the second 
survey round indicated some decrease in all results on the 
matter as well as an increase in ‘I don’t know’ –responses in 
Finland. Another possibility for the results is that the quality 
and productivity have actually not been improved with the 
new methods. The measuring of the benefits of agile is a 
very interesting and difficult topic among all organizations 
implementing the methods, but high consideration should be 
used on how to provide teams more information on actual 
benefits of agile. 
Other findings of the survey showed that there were also 
possible needs for further training within the organization 
(see Figures 7 and 8). 
 
 
Figure 7.  I have received enough training for carrying out my work. 
In the responses of individual competence, there were 
small disagreement with the statement ‘I have received 
enough training for carrying out my work. Even though 
most of respondents appear to be satisfied with their 
training, it may be interesting to note that the results in 
Finland dropped between the two survey rounds to include 
more respondents disagreeing with this statement. As the 
nature of the work during the 12 months between the 
surveys did not change, this may be indication of “conscious 
incompetence”, where people become more aware of their 
own needs for more training with time. In contrast to the 
other findings, in this particular statement there were no 
major differences in the responses between Finland and 
India. 
Even though there were no significant differences in the 
statement about training needs, there were some differences 
between the sites in terms of individuals feeling confident 
about themselves with the agile way of working (see Figure 
8). In the first survey round in Finland, nearly all 
respondents largely or fully agreed with the statement ‘I feel 
confident with myself with the agile way of working’. In the 
second survey round, the results in this statement had 
dropped significantly even though the methods had been in 
use longer and, therefore, should be more familiar to the 
respondents. In India, the distribution of responses appear to 
be very similar than in Finland in its respective first round. 
The respondents in India feel very confident with 
themselves 
with 
the 
new 
working 
methods.
 
 
141
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 8.  I feel confident with myself with the agile way of working. 
When comparing the results between the sites in Finland 
and India, it can be seen that the training needs appear to be 
equally divided between the two sites. However, there is a 
noticeable difference between the sites in the confidence in 
individual capabilities. One possible explanation for this can 
be cultural differences in answering the survey, but as the 
results appear similar in both sites with their respective first 
implementation of the survey, this could imply that the 
results will reduce with time. 
Perhaps the most compelling evidence of bias in the 
survey results is evident in statements about the preference 
of team co-location between the sites (see Figures 9 and 10). 
There is a very noticeable difference in the answers between 
Finland and India. 
 
 
Figure 9.  I prefer to work in a multisite Scrum team. 
 
When asked about the preference of working in a 
multisite Scrum team (see Figure 9), the results in Finland 
remain similar between the two survey rounds. Most of the 
respondents disagree with the statement ‘I prefer to work in 
a multisite Scrum team’, and there are only individual 
respondents fully or largely agreeing with the statement. In 
the second survey round, the results have reduced even 
more with most of the agreeing responses being now only in 
the ‘partially agree’ –response. In India, the results in the 
same statement appear somewhat different with almost half 
of the respondents fully agreeing with this statement. There 
are also some disagreeing opinions to the statement and 
individual ‘I don’t know’ –responses. 
 
 
Figure 10.  I prefer to work in a local Scrum team. 
 
When asked about the preference of location the other 
way around, the responses show distinctive differences 
between the two sites (see Figure 10). In the statement ‘I 
prefer to work in a local Scrum team’, the responses in 
Finland appear to be very parallel to the previous statement 
on preferring to work in a multisite Scum team as expected. 
This was the case in both survey rounds, and the amount of 
‘fully agreeing’ responses to this statement formed the clear 
majority. 
On the contrary, in India the responses to this statement 
of local Scrum team preference were not parallel to the 
previous statement, or actually anywhere near it. The 
responses were mostly agreeing in both statements of team 
location preference, which in nature should be contrary with 
each other. The distribution of responses between these two 
statements is also very similar, with most respondents ‘fully 
agreeing’ in both statements.  
Differing from the answers in India, there seems to be a 
clear preference to co-location of team members in Finland. 
The co-location in generally viewed as an important part in 
Scrum processes and the results in Finland show the 
preference that has come by experience in that site. The 
conflictingly high results of India in both of the two above 
tables may involve cultural influences, but also some lack of 
experience since the agile methods had been in use there for 
a shorter period of time. 
It should be noted that the statements on team location 
preference (Figures 9 and 10) were asked next to each other. 
During the analysis, the results of these two statements also 
raised the question of whether some respondents did not 
bother reading the survey statements at all. The validity of 
these responses was ensured by looking at individual 
response sheets and there was no evidence of individuals not 
filling the survey purposefully. 
Although generalizing a large set of survey statements 
may be problematic, an additional interesting comparison 
was made between the two survey rounds in the overall 
amount of ‘I don’t know’ –answers (see Table V). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE V.  
PERCENTAGE OF ‘I DON’T KNOW’ RESPONSES IN ALL 
STATEMENTS 
Round 1 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(India) 
Round 2 
(Total) 
9,8% 
12,7% 
7,62 % 
9,8% 
 
In the second survey round, the amount of ‘I don’t know’ 
-answers in Finland is quite a lot higher than in India. When 
results between the two rounds are compared, we find that 
the percentage in Finland has increased between the two 
rounds and that the percentage in India is even lower than in 
Finland in the first round. There was a similar amount of 
time elapsed from the agile adoption in Finland in the first 
round and India in the second. This could indicate that the 
amount of knowledge acquired during the 12 months 
between the survey rounds in Finland had lead to an increase 
in awareness over issues.  
This can also be an indication of the cultural differences 
in the two locations. The total percentage of ‘I don’t know’ –
responses appeared to be identical between the two survey 
rounds at first, but the difference in the amount between the 
two sites is a clear indication that this type of analysis should 
be done to get a comprehensive image of survey results. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Generally speaking, the case organization was pleased 
with the results obtained by the adoption of agile methods in 
their development process. They felt that agile methods had 
increased communication and predictability of their 
software processes, even if there had been some difficulties 
in the adoption. The results highlighted in this publication 
did not diminish the organization’s commitment to the agile 
methods and the survey results were openly communicated 
throughout the assessed organizational units. 
Based on the survey results, the main improvement areas 
identified in the first survey round were not given enough 
attention after conducting the survey. This was also 
admitted by the case organization because of reduced 
resources for the improvement efforts. This is one of the 
main reasons why the results in the Finnish site appear 
lower in the second round.  
As an organization commits itself to new working 
methods, it also has to show and communicate this 
commitment. In this case organization, there was a clear 
lack of resources for improving the newly introduced 
methods, which shows as apparent lack of commitment 
from the employees as well as time passed. If an 
organization does not provide sufficient resources for 
change management and addressing possible issues that 
arise from organizational changes, the employees may lose 
confidence in the changes and start reverting to old working 
methods.  
Another main reason for the reduction in response 
averages in some statements is believed to be increased 
awareness on the topic of agile methods and possible issues 
related to them. The combined average result in all 
statements between Finland in round 1 and India in round 2 
are similar. The amount of time that these two sites had 
been using the agile development methods before their first 
respective survey rounds was also similar. This would 
indicate that as the adoption methods of the case 
organization were similar in the two sites, the results of the 
working practices appear to be the same in the beginning of 
the adoption for the most part. However, the increase in the 
amount of ‘I don’t know’ –responses in Finland over time 
may be indicative of increased awareness of the process and 
that it is not followed as it should.  
Based on the first survey results, the first important 
improvement suggestion for the case organization was to 
improve the resources currently utilized for change 
management and improvement efforts. It was suggested that 
the teams may need more support and resources for 
successful organizational transformation. The reduction in 
the results related to improvement efforts (see Figures 1 and 
2) shows that these suggestions were not followed 
sufficiently.  
The same suggestion was given to the case organization 
after the second survey round as well. It was noted that the 
reduction in the results regarding improvement efforts must 
be given higher priority in both sites. In Finland, more 
resources were to be made available to start addressing 
possible issues with the new working methods to ensure that 
the employees will stay committed to the changes. In India, 
same resources should be made available to prevent a 
similar reduction in the results, if possible. It may be that 
the previously mentioned notion of increased awareness and 
subsequent reduction of results will become evident 
anyway. However, this should not diminish the importance 
of the organization communicating its commitment to the 
organizational changes. 
The increased resources should include both support for 
continuous improvement activities and especially the follow 
up of these activities, since there were no definitive 
improvements that could be identified from the first 
assessment round. 
The identified decrease in results should be taken 
seriously to see what kind of improvement actions could be 
taken. This should also include very active participation 
from all members of the development organization, since 
they will be most aware of the issues regarding their daily 
work. The practices and processes that do not work should 
be adapted according to the organization- or unit-specific 
preferences while remembering to include the agile 
principles and mindset. 
Continuous improvement activities should have a strict 
process to follow, which includes communication to all 
interested stakeholders on the progress of the activities and 
responsible individuals who have allocated time to conduct 
the activity. [24] has also presented evidence of additional 
success factors that can support the sustainability of 
improvement activities as well, which should be kept in 
mind when implementing changes. 
143
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The follow-up of the activities should also include a 
larger scale follow-up of the adoption of agile methods. 
Some forms of quantitative or qualitative measurements of 
the possible benefits of agile (in productivity, quality, etc.) 
should be measured and communicated in all units, 
including the sites that may take the agile methods into use 
in the future. This shows that the organization is committed 
to the changes and that the activities that are requested of 
the members of the organization have justifications behind 
them. There was already some evidence of doubt in the agile 
methods in the first survey round and these doubts should be 
addressed properly through discussion. 
Measuring the benefits of organizational or process 
changes can be difficult, especially if these kinds of metrics 
are not introduced before the changes. The adoption of 
organizational changes will still have some motivation, and 
that motivation needs to be assessed after the changes have 
been done in order to make sure that the changes have been 
valid.  
In addition to the assessment results changing with time 
elapsed between the organizational change and the 
assessment, the results of the survey also indicate bias in the 
results based on cultural differences. When assessing the 
success of multisite organizational changes, it should be 
noted that the results may vary between locations for 
reasons that may not be possible to influence with any 
change management processes. Therefore, it may be useful 
in some cases to assess different global sites individually, 
instead of comparing the results of sites between each other. 
The cultural differences in this article have been 
identified on a national level. The differences can be also 
found on other levels of the organization as well. 
Differences between working cultures also appear on 
individual and team levels, and no individuals should be 
categorized only based on their nationality or other 
characteristic. However, based on this survey, there are 
cultural characteristics, which need to be taken into account 
when assessing organizational changes. Any assessment 
effort related to organizational changes should be made with 
the notion that there may be underlying differences between 
nationalities, sites, organizational levels or working cultures. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The managerial implication of this study is the 
importance of providing resources for following up on 
continuous improvement activities when they are expected 
from the employees.  If resources are not available for 
removing issues or attention is not given to the 
improvement tasks, employees may also start losing 
confidence in organizational changes. The other managerial 
implication is the high importance of measuring and 
communication of the benefits of organizational changes. 
Without clear communication about the possible benefits of 
organizational changes, employees will start to doubt their 
significance, which will hinder further improvement efforts 
as well. 
Scientific implications of this study is the importance of 
taking cultural factors into consideration when analyzing 
research results.  The evidence on the influence of cultural 
factors does is not limited to assessments such as [21], but 
also maturity models such as [20]. Cultural influences may 
cause issues in comparison between research results. 
The results of this research can be used by researchers 
and practitioners when assessing organizational changes. 
Assessment results between geographically distributed sites 
may not always be directly comparable between each other. 
Cultural differences in results and the difference in elapsed 
time from the organizational change may also affect 
assessment results and should be noted when analyzing data.  
It would also be beneficial to compare results of a 
similar assessment with a different scaling method like, e.g., 
the Likert-type scale. The scaling itself should not be a 
contributing factor in this study, but additional assessment 
cases with similar backgrounds could be used to validate the 
influence of the used survey scale. 
The assessment process could be repeated in the case 
organization for a third time to analyze further progress of 
the organizational change. The findings of this assessment 
were used to focus future improvement efforts in the case 
organization and to provide feedback on how they 
understand their agile transformation so far. The results 
were presented to all participants through an open 
discussion session by the researchers and a written report 
was communicated openly inside the organization. The 
report was also brought into general knowledge by giving 
access to it within the organization. 
The findings of this study related to cultural influences 
affecting assessment results should also be validated in 
other assessments. The results should be applicable in other 
types of assessments as well, but this would need further 
validation of the results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution 
of the Finnish Cloud Software Program [22] for the funding 
received for this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Kaikkonen, P. Rodriguez, and P. Kuvaja “On Some Challenges in 
Assessing the Implementation of Agile Methods in a Multisite 
Environment,” The Ninth International Conference on Software 
Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2014) IARIA pp. 179-184, 
ISBN:978-1-61208-367-4 
[2] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, “Agile Software Development with 
SCRUM,” Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[3] K. Beck, “Embracing change with extreme programming,” Computer, 
Volume 32, Issue 10, pp. 70-77, 1999. 
[4] K. Beck et al., “Principles behind the agile manifesto,” [Online] 
Available from: http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html 2014.08.12. 
[5] C. Larman and B. Vodde, “Scaling Lean & Agile development. 
Thinking and Organizational tools for Large-scale Scrum,“ Addison-
Wesley, USA. 2009. 
144
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[6] D. Leffingwell, “Scaling software agility: Best practices for large 
enterprises,” Pearson Education, USA, 2007. 
[7] J.D. Herbsleb and D. Moitra, “Global software development,” IEEE 
Software, Volume 12, Issue 2, pp. 16-20, 2001. 
[8] B.W. Boehm, “A spiral model of software development and 
enhancement,” Computer, Volume 21, Issue 5, pp. 61-72, 1988.  
[9] C. Larman and V. Basili, “Iterative and incremental development: a 
brief history,” Computer, Volume 36, Issue 6, pp. 47-56, 2003) 
[10] D. Anderson, “Kanban - Successful Evolutionary Change for your 
Technology Business,” Blue Hole Press, USA,  2010. 
[11] M. Poppendieck and M. Cusumano, “Lean software development: A 
Tutorial,” IEEE Software, Volume 29, Issue 5, pp. 26-32, 2012. 
[12] H. Takeuchi and I. Nonaka, “The new new product development 
game,” Harvard Business Review, January-February 1986, pp. 137-
146, 1986. 
[13] R.G. Cooper “Winning at new products,” Addison-Wesley, Mass., 
USA, 1986.  
[14] P. Deemer, G. Benefiend, C. Larman, and B. Vodde, “Scrum primer 
v2.0.  A lightweight guide to the theory and  practice of Scrum,” 
[Online] 
Available 
from 
http://www.infoq.com/resource/news/2013/02/scrum-primer-book-
download/en/resources/ , 2012. 2015.02.09 
[15] E.Ó. Conchúir, P. J. Ågerfalk, H.H. Olsson, and B. Fitzgerald, 
“Global 
Software 
development: 
Where 
are 
the 
benefits?,” 
Communications of the ACM, Volume 52, No. 8, 2009. 
[16] J. Bosch and P. Bosch-Sijtsema, “From integration to composition: 
On the impact of software product lines, global development and 
ecosystems,” The Journal of Systems and Software, Volume 83, Issue 
1, pp. 67-76, 2010. 
[17] P.J. Ågerfalk et al., “A framework for considering opportunities and 
threats in distributed software development,” Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Distributed Software Development, Paris, 
France. Computer Society, 2005. pp. 47-61 
[18] A. S. Alqahtani, J. D. Moore, D. Harrison, and B. Wood, “Distributed 
agile software development challenges and mitigation techniques: A 
case study,” The Eight International Conference on Sofware 
Engineering Advances, (ICSEA 2013) IARIA pp. 352-358, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-304-9. 
[19] A. Mockus and J. Herbsleb “Challenges of Global Software 
Development,” Proceedings of the Seventh International Software 
Metrics Symposium, (METRICS 2001, IEEE), pp. 182-184.  
[20] T. Oliveira and M. Silva, “Method for CMMI-DEV Implementation 
in Distributed Teams,” The Sixth International Conference on 
Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2011) IARIA pp. 312-317, 
ISBN:978-1-61208-165-6. 
[21] S. Misra and L. Fernández-Sanz, “Quality Issues in Global Software 
Development,” (ICSEA 2011) IARIA pp. 325-330, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-165-6. 
[22] Cloud 
Software 
Finland. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cloudsoftwareprogram.org/cloud-software-program 
2014.08.12. 
[23] R. Likert. "A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes," Archives 
of Psychology Volume 140, pp. 1–55, 1932. 
[24]  N. Nikitina and M. Kajko-Mattson, ”Success factors leading to the 
sustainability of software process improvement efforts,” The Sixth 
International Conference on Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA 
2011) IARIA pp. 581-588, ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6. 
 
 
 
145
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

