Towards a Modelling Language for Managing the Requirements of
ISO/IEC 27001 Standard
Daniel Ganji
Centre for Secure, Intelligent
and Usable Systems (CSIUS)
University of Brighton
Brighton, UK
d.ganji2@brighton.ac.uk
Haralambos Mouratidis
Centre for Secure, Intelligent
and Usable Systems (CSIUS)
University of Brighton
Brighton, UK
h.mouratidis@brighton.ac.uk
Saeed Malekshahi Gheytassi
Centre for Secure, Intelligent
and Usable Systems (CSIUS)
University of Brighton
Brighton, UK
m.s.malekshahi@brighton.ac.uk
Abstract—Security standards help organisations to continually
review and reﬁne the information security procedures to remain
safe and secure, however, organisations face difﬁculties and
are concerned about understanding the requirements of the
standards. The research to date from the industry and academia
tended to focus on the overall description of the standard and such
expositions are unsatisfactory because little is being contributed
to the practicality of the Information Security Management
System (ISMS) structure. The generalisability of much-published
research on the standard is insufﬁcient for organisations aiming
to implement the standard. An objective of this paper is to
offer a direction towards a new modelling language to assist
organisations to better understand the requirements of the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 27001 standard.
The methodological approach took in developing our proposed
research was found by systematically investigating the current
gap in the literature and to explore the underlying needs of
organisations to adopt the ISMS. This paper contributes a set of
original components and concepts to holistically capture, model,
and manage the requirements of the standard. Our modelling lan-
guage enables information security practitioners and interested
parties in organisations to develop an ISMS and promote their
corporate compliance with a well-established standard.
Keywords–information security management system; require-
ments engineering; ISO/IEC 27001; PDCA; ISMS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the new global economy, organisations face tougher
pressure in securing the information of their clients. Some of
these pressures are through mandatory rules and regulations,
such as complying with the European Union General Data
Protection Regulation (EU GDPR), the interested parties’
requirements, or their own requirements to safeguard their
trade secret from their competitors. Increasingly, regulations
demand software engineers to analyse, design and implement
responsible systems to comply with laws and regulations [1]. It
is an important task for organisations to meet their information
security requirements and take appropriate actions to satisfy
their expectations.
The number of information security breaches is getting
bigger and invaders are getting smarter in ways to exploit
security vulnerabilities [2] [3]. Conventional and outdated
management of security systems does not answer the needs
of the current structure. Improving security in an organisation
is not just about expenditure on new technologies but correctly
addressing the basics of information security and risk-related
elements such as threat and vulnerability management, log
management, backup and system hardening [4]. To date, there
has been no solid evidence to absolute security and protec-
tion, however, there are available frameworks and approaches
such as the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
27001 standard to promote the best practices in managing
information security. Organisations need to prepare towards
sophisticated approaches considering security techniques under
one interconnected application known as Information Security
Management System (ISMS) to preserve the conﬁdentiality,
integrity, and availability of information assets.
ISO/IEC 27001 is an international standard and applicable
to all organisations, regardless of their type, size, or nature [5].
It constitutes a certiﬁable standard and is widely used with
steady growth in a number of adoptions [6]. The standard is
composed of processes, policies, and resources that can be
used to systematise the security demands of an organisation.
The ISO/IEC 27000 family of standards helps organisations to
implement a robust approach to managing information security
and building resilience. By providing compliance to a globally
known standard, certiﬁcation signiﬁcantly reduces the need for
repeated client audits.
Understanding and applying the requirements of any stan-
dard into an organisation is not always a straightforward
process. From the review of the literature, it appears that
opportunities exist to evaluate the implementation and ef-
fectiveness of the standard in organisations, but academic
researchers as described in Section III have not taken the
challenge. Our research proposes a model-driven approach to
enable organisations to adopt the requirements of the standard
using requirements engineering concepts.
The remainder of the paper is thus set out as follows:
Current challenges are described in Section II, and the related
work in Section III. In Section IV, we present the mapping
methodology and mapping requirements for our proposed
framework. Our modelling language and its concepts are
described in Section V. Finally, our conclusions and future
work will be set out in Section VI.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-701-6
SOFTENG 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

II.
CURRENT CHALLENGES
IT Governance, a provider of IT compliance solutions to
organisations released an annual survey [7] centred around
the experience and implementation challenges of the ISO/IEC
27001 for organisations in 2016. The investigation of 250
information security professionals from 53 countries who
participated in the survey were mostly certiﬁed or working to-
wards certiﬁcation (80%). 71% of respondents received either
regular or occasional requests to provide the ISO/IEC 27001
certiﬁcation from clients or when proposing for new business.
By providing compliance to a globally known standard, certiﬁ-
cation signiﬁcantly reduces the need for repeated client audits.
The survey also found that a third of all respondents were
concerned about understanding the requirements of the stan-
dard and 28% considered the creation and managing the
standard documentation a challenging task. Other substantial
challenging tasks were conducting the information security risk
assessment and identifying the required controls for 22% and
14% of the respondents respectively.
Organisations understand that it is in their interest to follow
some type of internationally recognised reference framework to
create environments for ISMS rather than doing it ad hoc [8].
From the commercial aspect, it is rather difﬁcult and costly task
to identify the resource required to plan, implement, measure
information security management system.
From an academic perspective, ISMS has mostly drawn
from the views of practitioners [9] and the investigation of
the literature indicates that ISMS has not been particularly
attractive in academia with a lack of research and approaches
are egregious. Management systems on information security
have received very limited observation and research from the
academic community despite the high interest from organi-
sations in particular for IT, operational and compliance audits
[10]. There is a relative paucity of scientiﬁc literature focusing
speciﬁcally on the requirements of the standard; most of these
studies have been on the previous version of the standard
prior to 2013. In response to the real-world and academic
challenges, this research contributes a model-based approach
to organisations to identify and manage the requirements of
the standard.
III.
RELATED WORK
Mayer proposed Information System Security Risk Man-
agement (ISSRM) [11] [12], which provided a reference
conceptual model for security risk management. The author
proposed a model-based approach for ISSRM, applicable since
the early phases of IS development. The work focused on the
modelling support to such an approach, by proposing a domain
model for ISSRM. The work deﬁned a reference conceptual
model for security risk management and enhancement of
the domain model with the different metrics used in a risk
management method. Further, the authors developed a proposal
of the Secure Tropos language and a process to use the
extension in the frame of risk management.
Beckers et al. proposed PAttern-based method for estab-
lishing a Cloud speciﬁc informaTion Security management
system (PACTS) [13] [14]. An approach for creating an ISMS
methodology compliance to the ISO/IEC 27001 standard cloud
environment with a speciﬁc interest in legal compliance and
privacy. The overview of the methodology was leadership com-
mitment, asset identiﬁcation, threats analysis, risk assessment,
security policies and reasoning, ISMS speciﬁcation, identify
relevant laws and regulations, the deﬁnition of compliance
controls, instantiating privacy patterns, privacy threats analysis.
Beckers et al. proposed ISMS-CORAS [15] [16], an ex-
tension of the COROS method to support the establishment
of the ISO/IEC 27001 compliant ISMS. Authors proposed a
methodology following the CORAS method. CORAS is a risk
management methodology based on the ISO 31000 standard.
Susanto et al. proposed Integrated Solution Framework (I-
SolFramework) [17] [18] to assesses the readiness level of
an organisation towards the implementation of the ISO/IEC
27001. The framework offered e-assessment and e-monitoring
to analyse and perform an assessment of the readiness level
of the standard implementation. E-assessment measures the
standard parameters based on the framework, which is consist
of six components. It helps to validate the ISMS parameters
through an analytical interface such as histogram, charts and
graphs, provided by a framework.
The investigation of the related work indicates that far
too little attention has been paid to address all or most
requirements of the standard. Limited studies were found to
support most requirements of the standard. Restricted to no
evidence of some requirements were detected in the literature,
such as monitoring and evaluation of the information security
performance, internal audit, management review to consider
the effectiveness of the management system, nonconformity
and corrective action to identify and eliminate the root of non-
conformities, and continual improvement to improve the effec-
tiveness of the ISMS. Majority of the literature such as PACTS,
I-SolFramework, ISMS-CORAS mainly support the planning
stage of the standard, which is the pre-implementation of the
standard, therefore, the post-implementation is missing from
the current literature.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
The ISO/IEC 27001 standard is a set of requirements for
establishing, implementing, deploying, monitoring, reviewing,
maintaining, updating and improving an ISMS with regard to
an organisation’s overall risks and opportunities. The former
version of the standard was based on a process approach is
known as Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) model which each is
deﬁned below:
•
Plan: Establish the ISMS policy, objectives, processes
and procedures relevant to managing risk and improv-
ing information security.
•
Do: Implement and operate the ISMS policy, controls,
process and procedures.
•
Check: Assess and measure process performance
against ISMS policy.
•
Act: Maintain and improve the ISMS by taking cor-
rective actions where nonconformity occurs.
An organisation must identify and implement the standard
requirements in order to claim conformity with the standard.
It needs to be able to distinguish these requirements from
other recommendations where there is a certain freedom of
choice. The standard document consists of many clauses and
sub-clauses in the form of normative phrases. There is no
speciﬁc method in the interpretation of the ISO/IEC 27000
family of standards, however, an approach developed by the
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-701-6
SOFTENG 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

ISO to extract and interpret the clauses of the standard is
available. The interpretation rules are based on the provisions
of the ISO/IEC Directives, Part three, Rules for the structure
and drafting of international standards, Annex H.
The requirements set out in the standard are generic and
exclusions of any of the requirements speciﬁed in clause four
to ten are not allowed when an organisation claims conformity
to this international standard. Compliance with ISO/IEC 27001
can be formally assessed and certiﬁed by an external accredited
certiﬁcation body. A detailed descriptions of all requirements
used as part of this paper are summarised in Table I.
V.
PROPOSED MODELLING LANGUAGE
The requirements of the standard were described in the
previous section. Part of the aim of this paper is to introduce
a mapping between the requirements of the standard and
concepts taken from the requirements engineering to assist
with the implementation of the ISMS, the result of the mapping
is illustrated in Fig. 1. The top part of the ﬁgure shows the
requirements of the ISMS and the layers of the PDCA covering
the requirement. The bottom part of the ﬁgure represents the
concepts proposed in our modelling language indicating the
area of relevancy with the requirements of the standard.
In this section, we present our modelling language which
enables the expression of the relationships and concepts in
correspondence with the ISO/IEC 27001 standard. The rest of
this section focuses on presenting the various building blocks
of the proposed language. First, an overview of the language
components will be explained. Next, each concept will be
discussed in details. The concepts attributes and relationships
proposed in the modelling language are demonstrated in the
meta-model, provided in Fig. 2.
The four components used in the modelling process in-
clude:
•
Information security requirements elicitation: The ﬁrst
component captures the overall organisational struc-
ture in relation to information security.
•
Information security analysis: The second component
analyses the organisational standing in relation to
information security.
•
Management system requirements elicitation: The
third component develops management system posture
with the organisational structure.
•
Management system analysis: The fourth component
identiﬁes and analyses the processes of the manage-
ment system.
A. Information Security Requirements Elicitation
This component discusses each concept required to model
the organisational structure including Actor, Constraint, Goal,
Asset, and Dependency. A description of each concept and its
properties are discussed below.
Actor: A concept of actor represents a person or entity that
has intentionality and strategic goal relevant to the scope of
the ISMS. An actor could have a direct or indirect effect, be
affected by or perceive themselves to be affected by a decision
or activity within the scope of the ISMS. This concept has four
properties including Id, Description, Type, and Competency.
An actor is also known as a user or stakeholder, however,
this interpretation may isolate the full characteristics of an
actor, hence, types of actors were introduced to capture the
interest of an actor within the organisation. The two types of
actor are external or internal. An external actor is a person
or entity from the external environment of the organisation
who pays for a service or expects the level of principles
in relation to the external context of the organisation as a
whole, and not necessarily from the ISMS. This could be an
independent person(s) like a client or an entity like a national
or international authority such as governmental agencies and
regulatory bodies. An internal actor is a person or entity
from the internal environment of the organisation who beneﬁts
TABLE I. REQUIREMENTS OF ISO/IEC 27001:2013 STANDARD
Requirement
Description
Organisational context
Deﬁne the external and internal parameters and issues affecting the outcome of ISMS.
Interested parties
Identify the interested parties and their information security requirements relevant to the ISMS.
Determining the scope
Identify the logical or physical boundaries and applicability of the ISMS.
ISMS
Establish, implement, and continually improve an ISMS under the requirements of the standard.
Leadership
Top management to demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the ISMS that are compatible with the strategic direction of
the organisation.
Policy
Establish directions and making references to IS objectives and appropriate to the purpose and context of the organisation.
Roles
Top management to assign and communicate the responsibilities and authorities relevant to information security for reporting performance
of the ISMS within the organisation.
Risk and opportunities
Systematically determine the potential risks and opportunities that may be involved in a projected activity or undertaking.
Information security objectives
Deﬁne measurable information security objectives.
Resources
Identify the resources needs to manage the ISMS.
Competence
Identify the necessary ability of a persons knowledge and skills doing work under its control that affects information security performance.
Awareness
Persons working under the organisation’s control to be aware of the information security policy and their contribution to the effectiveness
of the ISMS.
Communication
Apply internal and external communication process relevant to the ISMS.
Documented information
Create, update, and control documented information required by the standard and necessary for the effectiveness of the ISMS.
Operational planning
Plan, implement and control the process needed to meet information security requirements including risk and opportunities, and information
security objectives.
IS risk assessment
Perform security risk assessment.
IS risk treatment
Implement information security risk treatment.
Monitoring & measurement
Evaluate the information security performance and its effectiveness.
Internal audit
Conduct regular internal audits and systematically evaluate the effectiveness of the implemented and maintained ISMS.
Management review
Top management to review the organisation ISMS at planned intervals to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness.
Nonconformity & corrective action
React and evaluate nonconformity occurrences, review and deal with appropriate corrective actions.
Continual improvement
Recurring activity to continually improve the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the ISMS.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-701-6
SOFTENG 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

Roles
Leadership
Interested Parties
Scope
Organisational
context
Policy
ISMS
Risk &
Opportunities
Security
Objectives
Communication
Awareness
Competence
Resources
Documented
Information
Operational
Planning
Risk Assessment
Risk Treatment
Monitoring &
Measurement
Internal Audit
Management
Review
Continual
Improvement
Nonconformity &
Corrective Action
Objectives
Constraint
Actor
Goal
Threat
Vulnerability
Dependency
Asset
Treatment
Monitoring &
Measurement
Internal Audit
Do
Check
Act
Plan
MS Requirement Elicitation
IS Requirement Elicitation
IS Analysis
MS Analysis
Nonconformity &
Corrective Action
Continual
Improvement
Management
Review
Figure 1. Language mapping to the requirements of the ISO/IEC 27001 standard
from the success of the ISMS or contribute to the success
of the ISMS. This could be an employee, a contractor who
works under the supervision of the organisation, or a group
of interested parties such as shareholders or owners who may
only have a ﬁnancial interest in the organisation.
The last property of an actor is the competency level,
which indicates the ability to apply knowledge to intended
goals within the scope of the ISMS. An actor must have the
necessary competence for doing work under his/her control
that affects its information security performances.
Constraint: A concept of constraint represents the restric-
tions that an actor may have within the scope of the ISMS.
A constraint could limit the operation of goals or access to
assets. Constraint represents boundaries that do not permit
speciﬁc action to be taken or prevent a certain goal from
being achieved. Constraints are often beyond the control of an
organisation, these are conditions or expectations that actors
wish to introduce and impose to the organisation. A constraint
concept has three properties including Id, Description, and
Type.
Consideration to all constraints are an important part of an
ISMS, however, not all constraints are equal in their nature
and an application of a constraint could be designated based
on relevance and priority. Some constraints may have speciﬁc
instructions on how they should be satisﬁed whilst some others
may be more ﬂexible and could be satisﬁed by a number
of means, therefore, it allows the organisation to prioritise
and effectively plan its resources. In the light of above, two
types of constraints were introduced, obligatory or advisory.
An obligatory constraint means the organisation has no control
or negotiation capability over the implementation or dismissing
such a constraint. An obligatory constraint could be introduced
by any types of an actor but it is likely to be instructed by
external actors such as governmental and regulatory bodies
or as part of a contractual obligation with another entity. An
advisory constraint means the organisation has some ﬂexibility
or negotiation capability to apply alternative means to satisfy
a constraint. An advisory constraint could be introduced by
both the internal and external types of actors.
Asset: A concept of asset refers to organisational assets and
anything that has value for the organisation. An asset includes
tangible or intangible items and not only refers to the monetary
value of an item. An asset concept has four properties including
Id, Description, Classiﬁcation, and Ownership.
Information assets should be classiﬁed in terms of legal
requirements, value, criticality and sensitivity to unauthorised
disclosure or modiﬁcation. Classiﬁcation property categorises
assets into three types of public, conﬁdential, restricted. An
organisation is responsible to deﬁne or extend the number of
categories in accordance with the information classiﬁcation
scheme and suitable to their needs.
The last property is asset ownership. Each asset owner
should be identiﬁed, this is an actor who owns an asset and
could be different from an actor who uses the asset in the
organisation. The owner is not necessarily a person but it could
be a number of people or an entity such as a department in
the organisation that owns an asset or group of assets.
Goal: This concept refers to the actor’s strategic interest
[19] or duty. Each actor could have a number of goals within
the scope of the ISMS. A goal could be initiated by an internal
actor such as an employee to being able to do their job such as
accessing customer’s account or from an external actor such
as clients to access their services provided by the organisation.
This concept has two properties including Id and Description.
A Goal could be divided into smaller goals known as sub-
goals. Goals are an important part of a management system and
they could lead the management system to success or failure
if not identiﬁed and addressed correctly.
Dependency: A concept of dependency derived from the
Secure-Tropos methodology [19], which express the relation-
ship between an actor with a goal depending on another actor,
goal or asset to accomplish its goal. The former actor called
the depender and the latter is called dependee. The types of the
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-701-6
SOFTENG 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

include
dependee
depender
Actor
 +id: String 
 +description: String 
 +type: ActorType 
 +competency: Boolean 
restrict
Constraint
 +id: String 
 +description: String 
 +type: ConstraintType 
conduct
satisfy
Objective
 +id: String 
 +description: String 
conduct
Task
 +id: String 
 +type: TaskType 
mitigate
define
Treatment
 +id: String 
 +type: TreatmentType 
 +ownership: Boolean 
include
Goal
 +id: String 
 +description: String 
include
Asset
 +id: String 
 +description: String 
 +classification: AssetClassification 
 +ownership: Actor 
Dependency
   
impact
impact
exploit
Threat
 +id: String 
 +description: String 
 +likelihood: Integer 
Vulnerability
 +id: String 
 +description: String 
 +Ease of exploit: Integer 
<<enumeration>>
TreatmentType
 accept 
 avoid 
 control 
 share 
<<enumeration>>
AssetClassification
 public 
 confidential 
 restricted 
<<enumeration>>
ActorType
 internal 
 external 
<<enumeration>>
ConstraintType
 advisory 
 obligatory 
0..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
0..*
1..*
0..*
0..*
1..*
1..*
0..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
0..*
0..*
0..*
0..*
<<enumeration>>
TaskType
 monitoring & measurement 
 internal audit 
 management review 
 nonconformity & corrective action 
 continual improvement 
Risk
Role
  
0..*
1..*
0..*
restrict
0..*
0..*
0..*
1..*
Figure 2. Proposed meta-model
dependency describe the nature of an object between dependee
and depender is refereed as dependum. A dependency concept
has no properties.
B. Information Security Analysis
This component exercises the concepts required to model
the analysis of the organisation in relation to information
security. The analysis is performed around a risk management
methodology which enables to better understand the impacts of
the information security risks on the organisational goals and
assets by introducing concepts such as Vulnerability, Threat,
and Treatment. A description of each concept and its properties
are discussed below.
Vulnerability: A concept of vulnerability refers to a weak-
ness of a goal, asset, or treatment which can be exploited by
one or more threats. A threat that does not have a correspond-
ing vulnerability may not result in risk. A vulnerability concept
has three properties including Id, Description, and Ease of
exploit. Ease of exploit determines a chance of vulnerability
to happen and will be the subject of a successful attack.
Threat: A concept of threat refers to the potential cause
of an unwanted incident, which may result in harm to a goal
or asset. A threat has the potential to harm assets such as
information, process, and systems and therefore organisation.
A threat concept has three properties including Id, Description,
and Likelihood. Threats may be of natural or human origin
and could be accidental or deliberate. Both accidental and
deliberate threat sources should be identiﬁed and assess their
likelihood. Likelihood or probability indicates the severity of
the cause of a threat.
Treatment: This concept refers to mitigate a risk arising
from the impact of threats to assets or goals by exploiting
a vulnerability. A treatment concept has three properties in-
cluding Id, Type, and Ownership approval. A treatment type
may involve one or more mitigating approach including accept,
avoid, transfer, and reduce. Ownership approval indicates that
a mitigating approach is approved by the responsible risk
owner. The risk owners’ approval for the information security
risk treatment plan and acceptance of the residual information
security risks is a mandatory requirement of the standard.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-701-6
SOFTENG 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

C. Management System Requirements Elicitation
This component utilises the concept to develop manage-
ment system posture along with the organisational structure
in relation to the information security. The description of the
Objective and its two properties are discussed below.
Objective: It refers to the achievement of a speciﬁc result
from the ISMS. Information security objective could be deﬁned
by targeting the aim of a treatment control or a policy to satisfy
a constraint raised from actors. An objective concept has two
properties including Id and Description.
D. Management System Analysis:
This component identiﬁes the mandatory processes of the
management system that involves the analysis of the outcomes
from the concepts developed in the previous components.
The structure of the ISMS is analysed and measured against
the requirements of the standard to ensure that the ISMS
is effective. The description of Task and its properties are
discussed below.
Task: A concept of task refers to general mandatory
requirements of the management system to ensures that pro-
cesses of the ISMS are developed, implemented and working
as expected. A task concept has two properties including Id and
Type. Type refers to speciﬁc constitutions of the management
system. Task types are monitoring and measurement, internal
audit, management review, nonconformity and corrective ac-
tion, and continual improvement.
The ﬁrst type of task is the monitoring and measurement,
a mandatory requirement for an organisation to evaluates
the information security performance and the effectiveness
of the ISMS. An example is to monitor the treatment con-
trols identiﬁed in the risk management and evaluate their
effectiveness with the expected target. This activity could be
automated using tools or physically observe and measure the
effectiveness of such treatment control. A role for performing
monitoring and measurement and an interval for measuring
and effectiveness should be identiﬁed. A person responsible for
evaluating the results of monitoring and measurement should
be identiﬁed.
The second type is the internal audit, a mandatory re-
quirement of the management system to ensures that the
organisation conforms to the requirements of the standard and
own requirements for its ISMS. Internal audit should be carried
out at a planned interval. The organisation should develop an
audit programme, including the frequency, methods, and re-
sponsibilities for delivering the audit. Suitable auditors should
be identiﬁed and the results of the internal audit to be reported
to the relevant management.
The third type is the management review, a mandatory
requirement for the top management to review and assess
the outcome of the management system at an interval period.
The management review should consider the status of the
previous management reviews, feedback from actors, results
of the internal audit, and monitoring and measurements. The
outcome of the management review should include decisions
related to continual improvement and any need for changes to
the ISMS should be noted.
The fourth type is the non-conformity and corrective action,
it is a task to model the cause of the non-conformities and
identify the root causes. It is a mandatory requirement for an
organisation to implement necessary corrective actions against
the cause of the non-conformities.
The last type of task is the continual improvement, a task
that requires an organisation developing ISMS to improve the
suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the ISMS.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The work proposed in this paper extends existing research
efforts in security requirements engineering, building upon
concepts from software engineering and deliver a language to
coherently model and capture the requirements of an informa-
tion security management system.
In this paper, we focus on bridging the gap in requirements
engineering with information security management system.
The intention is to align the development of secure systems
in organisations towards the requirements of the standard. We
presented a model-driven approach to employ a number of
requirements engineering concepts to holistically manage the
requirements of the standard under four inter-related compo-
nents. The work goes beyond the aim of the research in relation
to the security requirements engineering and it contributes in
understanding the key concepts in successfully preparing and
applying the ISMS and how it can be developed as a process
to address the speciﬁc needs of the normative standards like
ISO/IEC 27001 standard.
Further research to enhance all four components and ex-
pand a series of complete processes to work along with the
concepts of the language is required. In future investigations,
our proposed risk methodology will be evolved as well as the
introduction of new attributes to the task concept.
The present paper was limited by the absence of an
assessment example to better understand the effectiveness of
our research, however, our model-based language is currently
under evaluation by applying our approach to a UK health
insurance provider aiming to comply with the ISO/IEC 27001
standard. The preliminary feedback suggests that our approach
has been successful in capturing the requirements of the
standard and the experimentation from the top management
has shown positive results in understanding the importance of
the ISMS for the establishment. This has given conﬁdence to
the organisation that the implementation of the ISMS through
a structured process would enhance operational excellence and
reduce liabilities.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. D. Breaux and A. I. Anton, “Analyzing regulatory rules for privacy
and security requirements,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineer-
ing, vol. 34, no. 1, 2008, pp. 5–20.
[2]
E.
Targett,
“6
months,
945
data
breaches,
4.5
billion
records,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.cbronline.com/news/
global-data-breaches-2018
[3]
Breach Level Index, “Data breach database,” 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://breachlevelindex.com/data-breach-database
[4]
S. Moore, “Gartner Says Worldwide Information Security Spending
Will Grow 7 Percent to Reach $86.4 Billion in 2017,” 2017. [Online].
Available: https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3784965
[5]
ISO, “ISO/IEC 27001 Information security management.” [Online].
Available: https://www.iso.org/isoiec-27001-information-security.html
[6]
ISO, “The ISO survey of management system standard certiﬁcations
2017,” International Organisation for Standardisation, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[7]
IT Governance, “ISO 27001 global report,” IT Governance, Tech. Rep.,
2016.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-701-6
SOFTENG 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

[8]
B. Von Solms, “Information Security governance: COBIT or ISO 17799
or both?” Computers and Security, vol. 24, no. 2, 2005, pp. 99–104.
[9]
E. Coles-Kemp, “The anatomy of an information security management
system,” Ph.D. dissertation, King’s College London, 2008.
[10]
E. W. Bernroider and M. Ivanov, “IT project management control
and the Control Objectives for IT and related Technology (CobiT)
framework,” International Journal of Project Management, vol. 29,
no. 3, 2011, pp. 325–336.
[11]
N. Mayer, “Model-based management of information system security
risk,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Namur, 2008.
[12]
N. Mayer, “A cluster approach to security improvement according
to ISO/IEC 27001,” in 17th European Systems & Software Process
Improvement and Innovation Conference (EUROSPI’10), Grenoble,
France, 2010.
[13]
K. Beckers, I. Cote, S. Faßbender, M. Heisel, and S. Hofbauer, “A
pattern-based method for establishing a cloud-speciﬁc information se-
curity management system,” Requirements Engineering, vol. 18, no. 4,
2013, pp. 343–395.
[14]
K. Beckers, M. Heisel, I. Cˆot´e, L. Goeke, and S. G¨uler, “Structured
pattern-based security requirements elicitation for clouds,” Proceedings
- 2013 International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security,
ARES 2013, 2013, pp. 465–474.
[15]
K. Beckers, M. Heisel, B. Solhaug, and K. Stolen, “ISMS-CORAS : a
structured method for establishing an ISO 27001 compliant information
security management system,” Sintef, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[16]
K. Beckers, “Supporting iso 27001 establishment with CORAS,” Pat-
tern and Security Requirements: Engineering-Based Establishment of
Security Standards, 2015, pp. 1–474.
[17]
H. Susanto, M. N. Almunawar, and Y. C. Tuan, “Information security
challenge and breaches : novelty approach on measuring ISO 27001
readiness level,” International Journal of Engineering and Technology,
vol. 2, no. 1, 2012, pp. 67–75.
[18]
H. Susanto, M. N. Almunawar, Y. C. Tuan, and M. S. Aksoy, “I-
Solframework: an integrated solution framework six layers assessment
on ultimedia information security architecture policy compliance,” In-
ternational Journal of Electrical & Computer Sciences IJECS-IJENS,
vol. 12, no. 01, 2012, pp. 20–28.
[19]
H. Mouratidis and P. Giorgini, “Secure Tropos: a Security-Oriented Ex-
tension of the Tropos Methodology,” International Journal of Software
Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, vol. 17, no. 02, 2007, pp.
285–309.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-701-6
SOFTENG 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

