323
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Integrated Semantic Approach to Content Management in the Urban Resilience 
Domain 
 
Ilkka Niskanen, Mervi Murtonen 
Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Oulu/Tampere, Finland 
Ilkka.Niskanen@vtt.fi, Mervi.Murtonen@vtt.fi 
 
Fiona Browne, Peadar Davis 
School of Computing and Mathematics 
Ulster University 
Jordanstown, Northern Ireland, UK 
f.browne@ulster.ac.uk, pt.davis@ulster.ac.uk 
 
 
Francesco Pantisano 
Smart System Infrastructures 
Finmeccanica Company 
Genova, Italy 
francesco.pantisano@finmeccanica.com 
Ivan Palomares 
School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science 
Queen’s University  
Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK 
i.palomares@qub.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Content Management refers to the process of 
gaining control over the creation and distribution of 
information and functionality. Although there are several 
content management systems available they often fail in 
addressing the context specific needs of end-users. To enable 
more task specific and personalized support we present a 
content management solution developed for the domain of 
urban resilience. The introduced content management system 
is extended with a semantic layer that aims to support the 
management of heterogeneous and large content repository 
with 
domain 
specific 
annotation 
and 
categorization 
capabilities. In addition, the applied semantic intelligence 
allows better understanding of content items, linkages between 
unstructured information and tools, and provides more 
sophisticated answers to users’ various needs. 
Keywords- content management; semantic technologies; 
heterogeneous data repository 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The field of Content Management (CM) refers to the 
process of gaining control over the creation and distribution 
of information and functionality. Concisely, an effective 
Content Management System (CMS) aims at getting the 
right information to the right people in the right way. 
Usually, CM is divided into three main phases namely 
collecting, managing, and publishing of content. The 
collection phase encompasses the creating or acquiring 
information from an existing source. This is then aggregated 
into a CMS by editing it, segmenting it into components, and 
adding appropriate metadata. The managing phase includes 
creating a repository that consists of database containing 
content components and administrative data (data on the 
system’s users, for example). Finally, in the publishing stage 
the content is made available for the target audience by 
extracting components out of the repository and releasing the 
content for use in the most appropriate way [1] [2]. 
Currently, there are several commercial and open-source 
technologies available that are applied to address different 
content management needs across various industries 
including healthcare [3], and education [4], for example. 
However, the standard versions of the existing solutions are 
not always capable of supporting end-users in their specified 
context to reach their particular goals in an effective, 
efficient and satisfactory way [5]. For instance, the included 
content retrieval mechanisms are often implemented using 
traditional keyword based search engines that are not adapted 
to serve any task specific needs [6][7][8]. 
One of the main issues to be resolved is how to convert 
existing and new content that can be understood by humans 
into semantically-enriched content that can be understood by 
machines [9]. The human-readable and unstructured content 
is usually difficult to automatically process, relate and 
categorize, which hinders the ability to extract value from it 
[10]. Additionally, it results in the restriction of development 
of more intelligent search mechanisms [9]. To address some 
of the above described deficiencies, semantic technologies 
are being increasingly used in CM. In particular, the 
utilization of domain specific vocabularies and taxonomies 
in content analysis enables accurate extraction of meaningful 
information, and supports task-specific browsing and 
retrieval requirements compared to traditional approaches 
[9]. Furthermore, semantic technologies facilitate creating 
machine-readable content metadata descriptions, which 
allows, for example, software agents to automatically 
accomplish complex tasks using that data. Moreover, 
semantically enhanced metadata helps search engines to 
better understand what they are indexing and providing more 
accurate results to the users [11].   
In this paper, we introduce the HARMONISE platform, 
developed in the FP7 EU HARMONISE [12] project. This 
paper is an extended version of work published in [1], where 
a semantic layer implemented on top of the HARMONISE 

324
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
platform was introduced. We extend our previous work by 
providing more details about the technical realizations of the 
platform and the semantic layer. Moreover, an evaluation 
process carried out for the platform and the semantic layer is 
depicted in this paper.   
The HARMONISE platform is a domain specific CMS 
that provides information and tools for security-driven urban 
resilience in large-scale infrastructure offering a holistic 
view to urban resilience. A database contained by the system 
manages an extensive set of heterogeneous material that 
comes in different forms including tools, design guidance 
and specifications. The platform aims at serving as a ‘one-
stop-shop’ for resilience information and guidance and it 
contains a wealth of information and tools specifically 
designed to aid built environment professionals. While the 
platform and the hosted toolkit are aimed to be used by a 
variety of potential end-users from planners and urban 
designers to construction teams, building security personnel 
and service managers, the specialized problem domain and 
heterogeneous 
content 
repository 
poses 
significant 
challenges for users to effectively retrieve information to 
accomplish their tasks and goals.  
As earlier discussed, the HARMONISE platform is 
extended with a novel Semantic Layer for the HARMONISE 
(SLH) approach. The SLH is a semantic content 
management solution developed to address many of the 
above discussed challenges related to domain specific 
content management. It is implemented on top of the 
HARMONISE platform and it aims at offering more task 
specific and personalized content management support for 
end-users. Additionally, by utilizing domain specific 
annotation and categorization of content the SLH facilitates 
the management of heterogeneous and large content 
repository hosted by the HARMONISE platform.  
The semantic information modelling allows better 
understanding of platform content, linkages between 
unstructured information and tools, and more sophisticated 
answers to users’ various needs. Moreover, the semantic 
knowledge representations created by the layer help end-
users to combine different data fragments and produce new 
implicit knowledge from existing data sets. Finally, by 
utilizing Linked Data [13] technologies the SLH fosters 
interoperability and improves shared understanding of key 
information elements. The utilization of interconnected and 
multidisciplinary knowledge bases of the Linked Data cloud 
also enables applying the solution  in other problem areas 
such as health care or education. 
The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section II 
provides a through description of the HARMONISE 
platform and its application area. In Section III the 
architecture and different components of the SLH are 
described. Section IV provides a Use Case example 
demonstrating the functionality of the SLH. Finally, Section 
V concludes the paper. 
II. 
THE HARMONISE CONTENT MANAGEMENT 
PLATFORM 
At present, there exist a number of content management 
systems that enable publishing, managing and organizing 
electronic documents. For example, Drupal 1 [14] and 
WordPress 2  [15] are well-known, general-purpose CM 
solutions providing such basic CM features such as user 
profile management, database administration, metadata 
management, 
and 
content 
search 
and 
navigation 
functionalities [5]. These tools provide functionality to create 
and edit a website’s content often with easy-to-use templates 
for digital media content publishing.   
The HARMONISE platform is a web platform that 
provides information and tools specifically designed to aid 
urban decision makers in enhancing the resilience of large 
scale urban built infrastructure. The platform includes an 
innovative search process designed to promote holistic 
decision making at each stage of the resilience cycle, an 
automatic content recommendation mechanism to suggest 
most relevant contents for a user, educational elements that 
provide content and self-assessment tools that help end-users 
to assess the general resilience and security level of an 
existing or proposed large scale infrastructure. Moreover, the 
semantic layer developed within the platform enables better 
understanding of data, linkages between unstructured 
information and tools, and more sophisticated answers to 
users’ various needs. 
The platform is mainly composed by two macro-
components, the HARMONISE web site which represents 
the front-end of the platform to the user and the semantic 
layer that includes services for enhancing the overall 
functionality allowing more personalized user experience for 
stakeholders who utilize the platform their daily work. In 
Figure 1 the main elements of the HARMONISE platform 
are shown.  
  
 
 
Figure 1. The key elements of the HARMONISE platform 
 
As stated above, the HARMONISE platform is a CMS 
specifically tailored for the domain of urban resilience. The 
system provides information and tools for security-driven 
urban resilience in large-scale infrastructure and contains a 
variety of interactive elements allowing users to both import 
and export data to and from the platform and personalize the 
platform to their own needs. The core functionalities of the 
HARMONISE platform are implemented using ASP.NET 
                                                             
1 www.drupal.org 
2 https://wordpress.org/ 

325
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
web application framework and it utilizes Microsoft SQL 
2012 database to store content items. 
The main features and functionalities are divided 
between three user profile categories defined for the 
HARMONISE platform. To begin with, a standard registered 
user can navigate through the different sections of the 
platform excluding the upload section, use the search 
functionalities and view all the platform contents. However, 
he cannot upload or edit any content. In contrast, an uploader 
who has been granted permission by the administrator can 
access the upload section and upload contents in addition to 
the functionalities available for the standard user. Moreover, 
the uploader can edit/delete the content he has uploaded. In 
order to become an uploader user has to insert a special 
password (i.e., uploader password) provided by the platform 
administrator. Finally, the administrator of the platform can 
edit/delete the content uploaded by an uploader. Moreover, 
he can manage the user assignment to a specific group and 
generate the uploader passwords. The main functionalities 
enabled for each user category are depicted in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2. The user profiles and main features of the platform 
 
An important part of the HARMONISE content 
management platform is the Thematic Framework [16] that 
was created to structure information within the platform and 
to guide end-users through an innovative step-by-step search 
process. The Thematic Framework is set out in Figure 3. 
By unpacking resilience into a number of key layers the 
Thematic Framework provides the necessary taxonomy 
needed for realizing effective domain-specific content 
annotation 
and 
categorizing 
functionalities, 
as 
later 
discussed. The objective of the domain-specific annotation is 
to allow users to easily identify and access information and 
tools within the platform, and to search the platform 
according to their unique needs or interests. 
 
 
Figure 3. The Thematic Framework (adopted from [16]) 
 
III. 
THE SEMANTIC LAYER 
The HARMONISE content management platform hosts a 
large portfolio of urban resilience related content. However, 
finding relevant information and tools from such a 
knowledge base with conventional information retrieval 
methods is usually both tedious and time consuming, and 
tends to become a challenge as the amount of content 
increases [9]. Often users have difficulties in grouping 
together related material or finding the content that best 
serve their information needs, especially when content is 
stored in multiple formats [17].  
In general, the existing CMSs usually lack consistent and 
scalable content annotation mechanisms that allow them to 
deal with the highly heterogeneous domains that information 
architectures for the modern knowledge society demand 
[18]. The semantic layer described in this study aims at 
addressing the above mentioned challenges by integrating 
semantic data modelling and processing mechanisms to the 
core HARMONISE platform functionalities. For example, 
the application of semantic mark-up based tagging of web 
content enables expressively describing entities found in the 
content, and relations between them [9]. Moreover, by 
utilizing the Linked Data Cloud links can be set between 
different and heterogeneous content elements and therefore 
connect these elements into a single global data space, which 
further facilitates interoperability and machine-readable 
understanding of content [19]. 
The main features of the SLH are divided to four parts. 
First, the metadata enrichment part produces information-
rich metadata descriptions of the content by enhancing 
content with relevant semantic metadata. Second, the 
semantic metadata repository implements the necessary 
means for storing and accessing the created metadata. The 
third component of the SLH realizes a semantic search 
feature. In more detail the search service aims at returning 
more meaningful search results to the user by utilizing both 
keyword-based semantic search and “Search by theme” 
filtering algorithm that restricts the searchable space by 
enabling users to select certain categories from the Thematic 
Framework. The final part, content recommendation, 
combines information about users’ preferences and profile to 
find 
a 
target 
user 
neighborhood, 
and 
proactively 

326
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
recommends new urban resilience tools/resources that might 
be of potential interest to him/her. In Figure 4 the logical 
architecture of the SLH is represented. 
 
 
Figure 4. The logical architecture of the SLH 
 
The following sections describe the logical architecture 
in more detail.   
A. Semantic Layer REST API 
The Semantic Layer REST API provides the necessary 
interface for the HARMONISE Platform to interact with the 
SLH. It enables, for example, to transmit query requests 
from the platform to the SLH or retrieve content 
recommendations personalized for a particular user. 
B. Metadata Enrichment 
The purpose of the Metadata Enrichment service is to 
produce information-rich metadata descriptions of the 
content that is uploaded to the HARMONISE platform. 
Enhancing content with relevant semantic metadata can be 
very useful for handling large content databases [2]. A key 
issue in this context is improving the “findability” of content 
elements (e.g., documents, tools).  
The enrichment process is based on tagging. A tag 
associates semantics to a content item, usually helping the 
user searching or browsing through content. These tags can 
be used in order to identify the most important topics, 
entities, events and other information relevant to that content 
item. The tagging data is created by analyzing the uploaded 
content and the metadata manually entered by the user. This 
information 
consist 
e.g., 
title, 
keywords, 
Thematic 
Framework categories, topics, content types and phrases of 
natural language text.  
In the metadata analysis the following three technologies 
that provide tagging services are utilized: ONKI 3 [20], 
DBPedia 4 [21] and OpenCalais 5  [22]. The ONKI and 
DBPedia knowledge bases provide enrichment of the human 
defined keywords by utilizing Linked Data reference 
vocabularies and datasets. The Metadata Enrichment service 
utilizes the APIs of the above mentioned technologies to 
search terms that are somehow associated to the entities 
                                                             
3 http://onki.fi/ 
4 http://dbpedia.org/ 
5 http://www.opencalais.com/ 
defined by a user. The relationships between the enriched 
terms and the original entity are illustrated in Figure 5, in 
which examples of enriched concepts for the term ‘Building’ 
are represented. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The enrichment of the human defined keywords 
 
As shown in Figure 5, the enriched terms fall into three 
categories: similar, broader and narrower. The similar terms 
are synonyms to the original entities whereas broader terms 
can be considered as more general concepts. The narrower 
terms represent examples of more specific concepts 
compared to the original entity. Each of the acquired terms 
contains a Linked Data URI that can be accessed to get more 
extensive description of that term. By enriching the human 
defined keywords with additional concepts and Linked Data 
URIs 
more 
comprehensive 
and 
machine-readable 
information about uploaded content items can be generated. 
The uploaded content items are also examined using the 
OpenCalais text analyzer tool. Using such mechanisms as 
natural language processing and machine learning the tool 
allows analyzing different text fragments contained by the 
uploaded content item. As a result, OpenCalais discovers 
entities (Company, Person etc.), events or facts that are 
related to the uploaded content element. 
In the final part of the metadata enrichment process the 
metadata elements created by different tools are merged as a 
single RDF (Resource Description Framework) metadata 
description and stored to the metadata database. 
C. Semantic Metadata Repository 
The database technology used for storing the semantic 
metadata of content is OpenLink Virtuoso [23]. Virtuoso is a 
relational database solution that is optimized to store RDF 
data. It provides good performance and extensive query 
interfaces [24] and was thus selected as the metadata storage 
to be used in the SLH. 
D. Semantic Search 
The Semantic Search service aims at producing relevant 
search results for the user by effectively utilizing the 
machine-readable RDF metadata descriptions created by the 
Metadata Enrichment service. Unlike traditional search 
engines that return a large set of results that may or may not 
be relevant to the context of the search, the Semantic Search 
analyses the results and orders them based on their 
relevancy. Thus, users are emancipated from performing the 
time-consuming work of browsing through the retrieved 
results in order to find the content they are looking for. 

327
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Semantic Search service is implemented as a Java 
web application composed of three main components (see 
Figure 6): 
• 
RESTful Web Service: based on Apache CXF 
framework, it represents the semantic search service 
front-end. It receives the search queries from the 
HARMONISE platform and returns the list of search 
results provided by the underlying components; 
• 
Semantic Search Service Core (SSS Core): component 
based on Java/Maven project, customized to manage all 
the core processes (data indexing, content search, 
content retrieving, results formatting); 
• 
Semantic Search Engine: component based on Apache 
Solr [25] enterprise search platform, in charge of the 
indexing and the search processes. When a new content 
is uploaded to the HARMONISE platform it reads from 
the Virtuoso database the data produced by the semantic 
content enrichment service in order to create the index 
to query on. When a user submits a query the semantic 
search engine queries the index in order to find the 
documents that best match the user request parameters. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Logical architecture of the semantic search service 
 
The Semantic Search service relies on the Solr search 
engine [26] in order to search across large amount of content 
metadata and pull back the most relevant results in the fastest 
way. The Solr component is a web application developed in 
Java and provided by the Solr open source enterprise search 
platform from the Apache Lucene project [25]. Solr is a 
document storage and retrieval engine and every piece of 
data submitted to it for processing is a document composed 
by one or more fields. Internally Solr uses Lucene’s inverted 
index to implement its fast searching capabilities. Unlike a 
traditional database representation where multiple documents 
would contain a document ID mapped to some content fields 
containing all of the words in that document, an inverted 
index inverts this model and maps each word to all of the 
documents in which it appears. Solr stores information in its 
inverted index and queries that index to find matching 
documents. 
According to the data structure of the contents uploaded 
to the Virtuoso database by the Metadata Enrichment 
service, the document fields shown in Table I have been 
defined for the construction of the Solr index. 
TABLE I.  
SOLR INDEX FIELDS 
Field 
Description 
Id 
Content identifier on Virtuoso DB 
Upload 
date 
Date when the content has been uploaded 
Topics 
List of topics from the Thematic Framework 
Resilience 
Tasks 
List of Resilience Cycle tasks 
Permissions 
List of user groups allowed to view the 
document 
Title 
Title of the content 
Description 
Textual description of the content 
Keywords 
List of keywords (inserted by the uploader) 
Tags 
List of tags added by the metadata 
enhancement service. 
 
The search results provided by the Semantic Search 
service are ranked according to the relevancy scores that 
measure the similarity between the user query and all of the 
documents in the index. The results with highest relevancy 
scores appear first in the search results list. 
The scoring model is composed by the following scoring 
factors: 
• 
Term Frequency: is a measure of how often a particular 
term appears in a matching document. Given a search 
query, the greater the term frequency value, the higher 
the document score. 
• 
Inverse Document Frequency:  is a measure of how 
“rare” a search term is. The rarer a term is across all 
documents in the index, the higher its contribution to the 
score. 
• 
Coordination Factor: It is the frequency of the 
occurrence of query terms that match a document; the 
greater the occurrence, the higher is the score. 
• 
Field length: the shorter the matching field, the greater 
the document score. This factor penalizes documents 
with longer field values.    
• 
Boosting: is the mechanism that allows to assign 
different weights to those fields that are considered more 
(or less) important than others.    
E. Content Recommendation  
Similar 
to 
the 
Semantic 
Search, 
the 
Content 
Recommendation Service (CRS) is based on semantic 
modelling of content resources. The aim of the content 
recommendation service is to improve user experience in 
terms of the search functionality and the filtering of relevant 
information through the utilization of collaborative filtering. 
As the volume of content continues to increase, the 
development of recommendation systems (RS) have become 
essential to handle large volumes of data. They are widely 
used across diverse domains to predict, filter and extract 
content for users [27][28]. Examples of commercial 
applications of RS include Amazon, Twitter, Facebook and 
Ebay. A popular type of RS is collaborative filtering. This 

328
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
type of RS analyses information on users’ preferences and 
predicts content to present to users based on their similarity 
to other users of the system [29]. Due to the information 
stored for users in their user profile, collaborative filtering 
was a natural selection to predict content to users based on 
similarities in their profiles. The developed CRS utilizes user 
profiles which are created and maintained by the 
HARMONISE platform   
An overview of the CRS algorithm is provided in Figure 
7. Figure 7 illustrates how user preference and user profile 
similarity are fused together along with a weighted sum to 
provide a ranked list of recommendation tailored to the user. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Overview of the CRS Algorithm 
 
Figure 7 details the various stages of the recommendation 
process which includes the extraction of user details from the 
HARMONISE 
system 
through 
to 
the 
list 
of 
recommendations presented to the user at the end. A detailed 
overview of the CRS algorithm can be found in [30]. The 
user profiles contain information about user’s preferences 
and favorite content. It also includes the content item IDs 
that have been already recommended for that particular user. 
This 
information 
is 
then 
utilized 
when 
content 
recommendations are created for different users. The CRS is 
triggered by the HARMONISE platform through the ‘get 
recommendation’ method provided by the Semantic Layer 
REST API. The ID of the user is transmitted as a method 
parameter. Once the recommendation service receives the 
ID, it retrieves the user profile of the user from the database 
and analyses the information it contains. Various pieces of 
information are stored in the profiles such as topics of 
interest, group membership, languages, lines of investigation. 
Furthermore, content that the user has marked as favorite is 
stored as user preferences. The CRS then combines all the 
information about users’ preferences and profile information 
to find a target user neighborhood, and recommend new 
urban resilience tools/resources that might be of potential 
interest to him/her. To do this, firstly the ordered weighted 
average and uniform aggregation operators are applied to 
fuse user information and obtain global degrees of similarity 
between them using the formula below: 
𝑠𝑖𝑚!
!,! = 𝑂𝑊𝐴!(𝑠𝑖𝑚!
!,!, 𝑠𝑖𝑚!
!,!, 𝑠𝑖𝑚!
!,!)  profile between 
users 𝑖 and 𝑗 , and 𝑠𝑖𝑚!, 𝑠𝑖𝑚!, 𝑠𝑖𝑚! are the profiles line of 
investigation, interests and groups respectively which are 
aggregated using ordered weighted sum.  
The similarity between the preferences of users 𝑢! and 𝑢! 
as 𝑠𝑖𝑚!
!,! ∈ [0,1] is also calculated using the Jaccard index 
𝐽!
!,! = 𝐽(𝐹!, 𝐹!)  among the sets 𝐹!, 𝐹! ⊂ 𝐼  where 𝐼  are the 
items marked favorite by 𝑢! and 𝑢! .This is schematically 
presented in Figure 8 from [30] below. 
 
 
Figure 8. Schematic overview of User Preferences approach from [30] 
 
When the profile similarity and preference similarity 
between users have been calculated, these are then fused 
together resulting in a global degree of similarity between 
the target user 𝑢! and the rest of users in the system. We 
apply a uniform aggregation function to obtain the global 
similarity 𝑠𝑖𝑚!,! ∈ [0,1] between 𝑢! and 𝑢!.   
The actual recommendation generation process is carried 
out by comparing the user profile data with the semantic 
content metadata descriptions. Similarly as in the search 
algorithm described in the previous section, the content items 
whose metadata is associated with e.g., terms, topics or 
research areas as contained by the user profile are included to 
the initial recommendation results. Of course, the content 
items that have already been recommended for the user are 
excluded 
from 
the 
results 
list. 
Subsequently, 
the 
recommendation results are analyzed using the ranking 
model introduced by the Semantic Search. Using K-nearest 
neighbors, the content items that gets the highest score is 
returned to the platform as the most highly recommended 
content 
item. 
This 
involves 
the 
generation 
of 
a 
recommendation list 𝑅! = {𝐶!, … , 𝐶!} consisting of content 𝐶  
of size ℎ ∈ ℕ, ℎ ≪ 𝑛  is presented to users on the 
HARMONISE interface as illustrated in Figure 9. This list 
contains items 𝐶! = 𝑖! ∈ 𝐼  with the highest values for  
𝑝(𝑢!, 𝑖!). This results in the user receiving a list of content 
ordered by rating value.     
IV. 
USE CASE EXAMPLE 
The functionality of the SLH is demonstrated with a Use 
Case example in which a user uploads a document into the 
HARMONISE content management platform and tries to 
retrieve it with the search functionality. Additionally, the 
recommendation service is verified by creating a user profile 
that is interested in topics relevant to the uploaded content. 
The content item used in the Use Case example is an 
electronic manual that presents tools to help assess the 

329
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
performance of buildings and infrastructure against terrorist 
threats and to rank recommended protective measures. This 
kind of guidance document is a typical representative of a 
content item managed by the HARMONISE platform. 
Once the user has provided necessary input in the upload 
form the content description is transmitted to the Metadata 
Enrichment component that processes the collected data and 
forms an RDF metadata description of the content. It was 
noted that the returned semantic content metadata contained 
five keywords that are enriched with 81 broader or narrower 
and 26 similar terms. Moreover, the content is annotated 
with several categories defined by the Thematic Framework.  
Once the enriched metadata is stored to the Semantic 
Metadata Repository, and indexed by the Semantic Search 
service, it can be tried to be retrieved with the search 
functionality. The content retrieval is tested with the 
‘Resilience Search Wizard’ feature provided by the SLH. 
The wizard allows to define keywords and to select those 
categories from the Thematic Framework that are 
considered as relevant to the uploaded content. The utilized 
search parameters are shown in the search wizard screenshot 
illustrated in Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9. Search parameter definition 
 
As earlier explained, the search functionality is able to 
sort the results based on their relevancy. Figure 10 represents 
the most highly ranked search results returned by the search 
service. As can be seen, the applied ranking algorithm 
identified the uploaded electronic manual document as the 
second relevant search result for the given search query.  In 
total, the search functionality found 24 results with the 
defined search parameters. 
In the final phase of the use case example, the Content 
Recommendation service is tested by creating a user profile 
and obtaining personalized recommendations. The user 
profile was created with 6 topics of interests of interest from 
a total of 13 topics namely: Point of Intervention, 
Management and Operation, Infrastructure type, Commercial 
Center, Hazard Type and Man Made Hazard. The user then 
marked 10 items of favorite content from a total of 156 items 
in the database. 
 
 
Figure 10. The ranking of search results 
 
These included content such as “Tools of Regional 
Governance” and “Flood management in Linares Town”.  
For the first step in the recommendation algorithm, Jaccard 
index is utilized to compute the degree of similarity between 
the favourite content and profile information of the user 
entered and all the users of the HARMONISE system. In the 
second step, a KNN algorithm is applied to identify the 5 
most similar neighbors. Based on neighbor users, we 
compute for each item not marked as a favorite by the user, a 
predicted rating. This is used to construct an ordered 
recommendation list to the target user, which in this case 
study was a list of 5 recommendations including documents 
based on “Key issues of Urban Resilience”, “Building urban 
resilience Details” and “Resilience: how to build resilience in 
your people and your organization”. 
V. 
A REVIEW OF EQUIVALENT TOOLS AND APPROACHES 
As earlier discussed, at present there exist no similar 
content management tools that would address the special 
requirements set by the domain of urban resilience. 
However, over the past few years approaches that provide 
equivalent functionalities as the HARMONISE platform and 
the SLH have been delivered by research community. 
Although these tools are designed for different application 
areas, they have many similar end-user requirements and 
technological characteristics. In this chapter a selection of 
these tools are being reviewed and analyzed. 
To start with, [31] introduces a platform for curation 
technologies that is intended to enable human experts to get a 
grasp 
and 
understand 
the 
contents 
of 
large 
and 
heterogeneous document collections in an efficient way so 
that they can curate, process and further analyze the 
collection 
according 
to 
their 
sector-specific 
needs. 
Furthermore, the platform aims at automating such tasks as 
looking for information related to and relevant for the 
domain, learning the key concepts, selecting the most 
relevant parts and preparing the information to be used. As in 
the HARMONISE project, the platform is extended with a 
semantic web-layer that provides linguistic analysis and 
discourse information on top of digital content.   
The target audience of the platform for curation 
technologies is knowledge workers who conduct research in 
specific domains with the goal of, for example, preparing 
museum exhibitions or writing news articles. Currently, the 
focus in the platform is on written documents but in future 
the aim is to improve the platform by improving its abilities 

330
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to convert non-textual data into text. Similarly as in 
HARMONISE platform, the semantic layer of the platform 
for curation technologies facilitates semantic annotation, 
enables connecting interlinked representation to external 
information sources, implements a semantic triple store and 
provides search functionalities.   
As 
discussed 
above, 
the 
platform 
for 
curation 
technologies provides similar functionalities compared to the 
HARMONISE platform and the SLH. Moreover, the 
platform uses many of the same technologies. However, the 
platform for curation technologies is not as well optimized to 
address the needs of a special domain. For example, it does 
not provide an application area specific taxonomy that is 
often needed for realizing effective domain-specific content 
annotation and categorizing functionalities. Moreover, the 
HARMONISE platform and the semantic layer provide more 
comprehensive 
support 
for 
the 
management 
of 
heterogeneous content. However, the abilities of the platform 
for curation technologies to support natural language and 
multilingual text processing are more advanced compared to 
the HARMONISE platform and the SLH.  
A 
second 
approach 
providing 
similar 
content 
management functionalities as the HARMONISE platform 
and the SLH is the Ondigita platform [32] that is developed 
for the management and delivery of digital documents to 
students enrolled in bachelor’s courses within the field of 
engineering. The platform implements a cloud-based 
repository to allow educational organizations to create a 
digital collection of their educational materials and enable 
students to store and access these resources in their 
computers, tablets, or mobile phones. Moreover, the 
Ondigita platform supports the managing of heterogeneous 
learning material including books, audio and video, for 
example, and enables students to manually annotate content 
elements by highlighting important text passages and adding 
textual notes. The resulting annotations can be shared with 
others students.  
The main components of the Ondigita platform include a 
course materials repository, an application server and a web 
application to access the content repository. The platform 
also offers adapters that enable integrating the infrastructure 
with such external file hosting services as Dropbox or 
Google Docs. Additionally, a mobile application available 
for Android OS is provided. When comparing to the 
HARMONISE platform and the SLH it can be concluded 
that the search services provided by the Ondigita platform 
are more constricted. Moreover, the Ondigita platform does 
utilize semantic technologies or include any domain specific 
taxonomies or ontologies. Also, the manual annotation of 
content items can be considered as relatively time-
consuming and labour-intensive. However, the Ondigita 
platform offers better support for interoperability with 
widely used file hosting services and allows utilizing its 
services through a mobile application. Both of the 
aforementioned features are currently missing from the 
HARMONISE platform. 
The final approach to be reviewed here is Sentic Album 
[33]. Sentic Album is a content-, concept-, and context-based 
online personal photo management system that exploits both 
data and metadata of online personal pictures to annotate, 
organize, and retrieve them. Sentic Album utilizes a multi-
tier architecture that exploits semantic web techniques to 
process image data and metadata at content, concept, and 
context level, in order to grasp the salient features of online 
personal photos, and hence find intelligent ways of 
annotating, organizing, and retrieving them.  
Similar to the HARMONISE platform and the SLH, 
Sentic Album includes semantic databases, automatic 
annotation features and a search and retrieval module. The 
search functionality provides users an UI that allows them to 
manage, search and retrieve their personal pictures online. 
Moreover, users are able to assign multiple categories to an 
image object, enabling classifications to be ordered in 
multiple ways. This makes it possible to perform searches 
combining a textual approach with a navigational one. The 
combination of key-word based search and content 
classification based search is similar to the search feature 
provided by the SLH. However, in HARMONISE platform 
the classifications are based on pre-defined domain 
knowledge which enables addressing more task specific 
needs and requirements. In general, the main difference 
between Sentic Album and the HARMONISE platform is 
their targeted group of end-users. The HARMONISE 
platform aims at serving a specific group of end-users 
including planners, urban designers and building security 
personnel, whereas Sentic Album is targeted to more 
heterogeneous group of end-users. 
VI. 
SYSTEM EVALUATION 
In order to test and demonstrate the viability and 
effectiveness of the HARMONISE Platform and the SLH, 
the developed system was applied in five different case study 
contexts under the project activities. The selected case study 
cities are Dublin, Ireland; London, United Kingdom; Genoa, 
Italy; Bilbao, Spain and Vantaa, Finland. Each of these case 
studies incorporates a large scale urban built infrastructure 
project, at different scales and contexts. Moreover, the case 
studies 
incorporate 
a 
combination 
of 
urban 
built 
infrastructure systems at various stages from completed, 
operational projects, to as yet unrealized proposals at design 
and planning stage. 
The actual evaluation process was started by testing the 
platform and the SLH with a range of built environment 
professionals (including architects, urban designers and town 
planners) from the HARMONISE project consortium 
organisations. Subsequently, the developed system was 
demonstrated and assessed in case study specific workshops 
where the platform and the SLH were presented to the key 
stakeholders including various urban resilience professionals 
and policy makers. Moreover, the workshop participants 
were invited to experiment and criticize the system.  
The evaluation process also included creating a set of 
standardised questionnaires. The questionnaires were to be 
used when interacting with the end-users in the case studies. 
The purpose of the questionnaires was to elicit feedback 
from users and associated stakeholders as to the performance 
(actual or intended) of the HARMONISE platform and the 
SLH being tested. Overall, this task aimed to discover ‘what 

331
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
works’ on the ground in practice and learn about the user 
focussed process of implementation (what users want). 
The survey was designed to focus on both the technical 
aspects of the platform as well as on the usability of the 
system. Importantly, the adopted approach incorporated a 
balance between quantitative and qualitative feedback. The 
results from this survey were to be used as feedback to 
designers so that improvements can be made to the platform. 
The actual evaluation was divided into two phases: In 
phase 1 (between March and April 2015) a workshop was 
held in each case study area, led by the Case Study Leads 
(CSL’s). The purpose of these workshops was to present the 
HARMONISE concept and the platform to key stakeholders 
and to gather feedback on the work-in-progress version of 
the platform. Furthermore, the phase 2 (between mid-
October and early December 2015) a second workshop was 
held in each case study area. During these second 
workshops, an improved version of the platform was 
presented to stakeholders.  
For the first testing phase, the created questionnaires 
were circulated to each CSL’s in advance of the case study 
workshops as an online survey link. The survey was 
designed to be self-completed by the end user so each CSL 
then requested that all case study workshop participants 
complete this online questionnaire in their own time 
following the event. The survey was opened for responses 
for a period of one month following the workshop held in the 
case study location.  
However, in some cases more emphasis was placed on 
gathering feedback within the context of the stakeholder 
workshops (rather than using the online questionnaire after 
the workshop). As such, feedback was gathered in two ways:  
-­‐ 
During the stakeholder workshops only – In this 
case, some questions from the online questionnaire 
were used to stimulate discussion among the 
stakeholders. The discussion was then recorded by 
the HARMONISE facilitators in a manner which 
closely matched the format of the questionnaire (to 
ensure that feedback could be analyzed in a 
relatively consistent manner).  
- 
During the stakeholder workshops and using the 
online questionnaire – In this case, stakeholders 
reported their ‘first thoughts’ during the workshops, 
with some also choosing to report more detailed 
feedback after the event through the use of the 
online questionnaire 
Following the completion of phase 1 of the testing 
process, many CSL’s reported that they had received the 
richest feedback during discussions as part of the workshops, 
with less feedback provided through the online survey. 
Indeed, many CSL’s reported that some stakeholders felt that 
the online survey was too lengthy, a factor which 
discouraged them from inputting feedback in a detailed 
manner.  As a result, the testing approach for the second 
phase of testing was adjusted in two minor ways – 1. The 
questionnaire survey was further edited (with stakeholders 
encouraged to focus on providing qualitative comments) 2. A 
soft copy version of the survey was circulated to each 
workshop participant during the various workshops – with a 
request for them to complete the survey during the 
workshop. 
As discussed above, the evaluation was divided into two 
phases. In both parts questionnaires and end-user discussions 
were used to collect information about the abilities of the 
system to support urban resilience professionals and policy 
makers. The questionnaire included questions, for example, 
about perceived ease-of-use and perceived usefulness of the 
tool. Perceived usefulness that is defined as "the degree to 
which a person believes that using a particular system would 
enhance their job performance" and perceived ease-of-use 
that is defined as "the degree to which a person believes that 
using a particular system would be free from effort" were 
considered as important factors as they can determine 
whether people will accept or reject an emerging information 
technology [34].  
The questionnaire used a five-level grading system where 
“Strongly agree” was the best and “Strongly disagree” the 
worst grade, with “Neither agree nor disagree” being 
average. Figure 11 summarizes the feedback on the platform, 
as gathered during evaluation phase 1. 
 
 
Figure 11. Questionnaire results from the first evaluation stage.  
 
In general, the first evaluation was useful and revealed 
some extremely interesting points about the constructed 
system and enhanced the discovery of which features users 
find useful and easy to use, and which parts of the 
application still need to be improved. As depicted by the 
questionnaire results presented above, the usability and 
graphical user interface of the system was found to require 
improvements. Moreover, it was perceived as difficult to 
navigate through the platform. The search feature was also 
identified as deficient. In general, the first evaluation stage 
indicated that the platform and the SLH still require further 
development to reach its full potential. 
The knowledge and experience gained from the first 
evaluation stage was utilized in the subsequent development 
of the HARMONISE platform and the SLH. The major 
improvements included, for example, re-designing the visual 
appearance, user interface and navigation of the platform. 
Moreover, the metadata management services of the SLH 
were completely redeveloped and optimized to better support 
the requirements set by the search feature. Finally, the 

332
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
utilized search algorithm was improved and integrated with 
the Thematic Framework based content classification 
mechanism.  
The new versions of the HARMONISE platform and the 
SLH were tested in the second evaluation phase. Again, the 
actual testing was carried out in workshop sessions were 
end-users were allowed to test the system and fill in a 
questionnaire. Additionally, verbal feedback was collected 
from the workshop participants. Figure 12 summarizes the 
results from the second evaluation round.  
 
 
 
Figure 12. Questionnaire results from the second evaluation stage.  
 
It should be noted that the chart for testing period 2 is not 
directly comparable with the results of testing period 1 as 
most of the test participants were already somewhat familiar 
with the system in test period 2. Nevertheless, the chart for 
test period 2 provide a useful indication of progress in 
meeting stakeholder expectations of the platform, and in 
addressing some of the stakeholder concerns raised during 
testing stage 1. In more detail, the stakeholder feedback from 
testing stage 2 illustrates far greater user satisfaction with the 
various elements of the platform than was recorded during 
testing stage 1 – shown by the far higher percentage of 
stakeholders who ‘somewhat agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ 
with some of the key stated aims for the platform 
functionality.  
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
In this work, we introduce a content management 
platform for the domain of urban resilience. The platform 
aims at serving as a ‘one-stop-shop’ for resilience 
information and guidance offering a holistic view to urban 
resilience. Furthermore, the platform contains information 
and tools specifically designed to aid decision makers in 
enhancing the resilience of large scale urban built 
infrastructure. 
 The developed content management platform is 
extended with an additional information processing layer that 
utilizes semantic technologies to manage an extensive set of 
heterogeneous material that comes in different forms 
including tools, design guidance documentation and 
specifications. Moreover, the developed semantic layer 
enables the creation of machine-understandable and 
machine-process able descriptions of content items. This has 
resulted in an improved shared understanding of information 
elements and interoperability.  
With the effective utilization of Linked Data based 
analysis tools and domain specific content annotation 
mechanisms, the semantic layer offers task specific and 
personalized content management support for end-users. The 
enhanced intelligence has provided better understanding of 
urban resilience content, linkages between unstructured 
information and tools, and more sophisticated answers to 
users’ various needs. Furthermore, the recommendation 
service provides the functionality to predict relevant content 
to the user of the system using our collaborative filtering 
approach. This approach is able to avail of the rich user data 
available in terms of profile information and also content 
preference information resulting in a set of recommendations 
tailored to individual users.  
The developed HARMONISE platform and the SLH 
have been tested by HARMONISE project partners and other 
invited domain specialists. Additionally, several case study 
stakeholders have evaluated the system in terms of usability, 
perceived usefulness and the relevancy of received search 
and recommendation results. The performed evaluations 
have provided valuable information about the deficiencies 
and strengths of the HARMONISE platform and SLH. 
The 
future 
work 
includes 
further 
refining 
the 
HARMONISE platform and the SLH on the basis of the 
feedback received from the evaluation process. Additionally, 
the graphical appearance of the platform’s user interface as 
well as the usability of individual components will be 
improved. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Niskanen, M Murtonen, F Browne, P. Davis and F. 
Pantisano, "A Semantic Layer for Urban Resilience Content 
Management," 8th International Conference on Information, 
Process, and Knowledge Management (eKNOW 2016), 
Venice, Italy, April 24-28, 2016. 
[2] B. Boiko, Content management bible, John Wiley & Sons, 
2005. 
[3] S. Das, L. Girard, T. Green, L. Weitzman, A. Lewis-Bowen, 
and T. Clark,  “Building biomedical web communities using a 
semantically aware content management system,” Briefings in 
bioinformatics, 10(2), pp. 129-138, 2009. 
[4] N. W. Y Shao, S. J. H Yang, and A. Sue, "A content 
management system for adaptive learning environment," 
Multimedia 
Software 
Engineering, 
Proceedings. 
Fifth 
International Symposium on,  IEEE, 2003. 
[5] N. Mehta, Choosing an Open Source CMS: Beginner's Guide, 
Packt Publishing Ltd, 2009. 
[6] D. Dicheva and D. Christo, "Leveraging Domain Specificity 
to Improve Findability in OER Repositories," Research and 
Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 466-469, 2013. 
[7] S. K. Patel, V. R. Rathod, and S. Parikh, "Joomla, Drupal and 
WordPress-a 
statistical 
comparison 
of 
open 
source 
CMS," Trendz in Information Sciences and Computing 
(TISC), 3rd International Conference on. IEEE, 2011. 

333
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[8] C. Dorai and S. Venkatesh, "Bridging the semantic gap in 
content management systems," Media Computing. Springer 
US, pp. 1-9, 2002. 
[9] J. L. Navarro-Galindo and J. Samos, "The FLERSA tool: 
adding semantics to a web content management system," 
International Journal of Web Information Systems 8.1: pp. 73-
126, 2012. 
[10] A. Kohn, F. Bry, and A. Manta, "Semantic search on 
unstructured 
data: 
explicit 
knowledge 
through 
data 
recycling," Semantic-Enabled Advancements on the Web: 
Applications Across Industries, 194, 2012. 
[11] D. R. Karger and D. Quan, "What would it mean to blog on 
the semantic web?," The Semantic Web–ISWC 2004. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 214-228, 2004. 
[12] The 
HARMONISE 
project 
(Available 
online 
at: 
http://harmonise.eu/) [accessed: 13.4.2016] 
[13] Linked Data (Available online at: http://linkeddata.org/) 
[accessed: 13.4.2016] 
[14] Drupal 
(Available 
online 
at: 
https://www.drupal.org/) 
[accessed: 13.4.2016]  
[15] WordPress (Available online at: https://wordpress.org/) 
[accessed: 13.4.2016] 
[16] S. Purcell, W. Hynes, J. Coaffee, M. Murtonen, D. Davis, and 
F. Fiedrich, “The drive for holistic urban resilience,” 9th 
Future Security, Security Research Conference, Berlin Sep. 
16- 18, 2014. 
[17] A Vailaya, M. A. Figueiredo, A. K. Jain, and H. J. Zhang, 
“Image classification for content-based indexing,” Image 
Processing, IEEE Transactions on, 10(1), pp. 117-130, 2001. 
[18] R. García, J. M. Gimeno, F. Perdrix, R. Gil, and M. Oliva, 
“The rhizomer semantic content management system,” In 
Emerging Technologies and Information Systems for the 
Knowledge Society pp. 385-394, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2008. 
[19] M. Hausenblas, “Exploiting linked data to build web 
applications," IEEE Internet Computing 4, pp. 68-73, 2009. 
[20] ONKI - Finnish Ontology Library Service (Available online 
at: http://onki.fi/) [accessed: 13.4.2016] 
[21] DBpedia (Available online at: http://dbpedia.org/) [accessed: 
13.4.2016] 
[22] OpenCalais (Available online at: http://www.opencalais.com/) 
[accessed: 13.4.2016] 
[23] Virtuoso 
Universal 
Server 
(Available 
online 
at: 
http://semanticweb.org/wiki/Virtuoso) [accessed: 13.4.2016] 
[24] O. Erling and I. Mikhailov. "RDF Support in the Virtuoso 
DBMS," Networked Knowledge-Networked Media. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 7-24, 2009. 
[25] Solr (Available online at: http://lucene.apache.org/solr/) 
[accessed: 13.4.2016] 
[26] Apache 
Lucene 
Core 
(Available 
online 
at: 
https://lucene.apache.org/core/) [accessed: 13.4.2016] 
[27] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira, Introduction to 
recommender systems handbook, Springer, 2011. 
[28] G. Adomavicius and Y. Kwon, “New recommendation 
techniques formulticriteria rating systems,” IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 48–55, 2007. 
[29] M. Ekstrand, J. Riedl, and J. Konstan, “Collaborative filtering 
recommender systems,” Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 4, 
no. 2, pp. 81–173, 2010. 
[30] I. Palomares, F. Browne, H. Wang, and P. Davis, “A 
collaborative filtering recommender system model using owa 
and uninorm aggregation operators,” in Intelligent Systems 
and Knowledge Engineering (ISKE), 2015 10th International 
Conference on, 2015, pp. 382–388. 
[31] F. Sasaki and A. Srivastava, “Towards a Platform for 
Curation Technologies: Enriching Text Collections with a 
Semantic-Web Layer,” The Semantic Web: ESWC 2016 
Satellite Events, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, May 29–June 2, 
2016, Revised Selected Papers, 9989, 65. 
[32] R. Mazza, A. Baldassari and R. Guidi, “Ondigita: A Platform 
for the Management and Delivery of Digital Documents,” 
International Association for Development of the Information 
Society, 2013. 
[33] E. Cambria and A. Hussain, “Sentic album: content-, concept, 
and context-based online personal photo management 
system,” Cognitive Computation, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 477-496, 
2012. 
[34] F.D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and 
user acceptance of information technology,” MIS quarterly, 
13 (3), pp. 319-340, 1989. 

