 
 
Managing Patient Records in Complex Systems in Time of Epidemics 
The Predominence of Human Aspects for Quality of Processes
 
Eloria Vigouroux-Zugasti, Christian Bourret 
Laboratory of DICEN IDF  
University of East-Paris Marne-la-Vallée 
Val d’Europe / Serris, France 
Email: eloria.vigouroux-zugasti@univ-eiffel.fr, 
christian.bourret@unive-eiffel.fr 
 
 
 
 
 
Sylvie Parrini-Alemanno 
CNAM 
Paris, France 
Email: sylvie.parrini-alemanno@lecnam.net 
 
Abstract — With the recent promulgation of the General Data 
Protection Regulations, data management is becoming a 
crucial strategic issue in organizations. The quality of data 
dissemination is of utmost importance in the healthcare 
environment. Indeed, medical confidentiality is closely linked 
to the dissemination of personal information inherent in the 
patient's record. Yet, how can a complex system, composed of 
multiple multidisciplinary actors (medical, paramedical, 
administrative, etc.), deal with the potential disclosure of 
personal data? What steps can be taken to manage this risk? 
With the current health crisis of the COVID-19, those 
questions become essential. Medical confidentiality and crisis 
management has to deal with massive ethical issues related to 
the use of personal data. The interoperability of professionals 
and the quality of care are more crucial than ever, considering 
the need to limit the spread of the virus. To answer these 
questions, a case study was conducted in the Multidisciplinary 
Care House of Mimizan (France, Landes, New Aquitaine 
Region). The goal was to investigate the importance of human 
and data management for traceability of care and for crisis 
management. This medical organization is composed of 
medical and paramedical professionals, but also a relatively 
large administrative team for such an institution. The results 
highlight that this organization manages to set up, at the 
initiative of the professionals, both flexible and structured 
processes, allowing optimal follow-up of patients, while 
guaranteeing respect for their personal information. 
Keywords — Health; Data; Patient Records; Quality; Crisis; 
Human Relationship; COVID-19; Territory; Organization. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The management of personal data, with the recent 
promulgation of the General Data Protection Regulations 
(GDPR - May 2018), becomes a crucial and strategic issue 
for organizations. In the healthcare sector, respect for medical 
confidentiality is closely linked to the dissemination of 
patients' personal records. Data has to be managed with great 
care in order to limit the risk of unfortunate disclosure or data 
loss. Data management in health organizations depends on 
both technical and human factors, which are closely related to 
each other. Technical aspects (storage, access, sorting, etc.) 
would only be efficient if they are linked to a human data 
management policy (uses guidelines, access ethics, conditions 
of diffusion inside and outside the organization, etc.). 
However, the current French healthcare organization 
tends to evolve to a collaborative working method, as some 
researchers have been able to show in their studies [1]. For 
the past ten years, French health authorities have been 
witnessing the emergence of some new organizations of 
health professionals and the exponential growth of groups of 
(para)medical professionals, attesting the growing complexity 
of health organizations [2]. This is particularly the case for 
Multidisciplinary/Multiprofessional Health Houses (MCHs), 
with 910 establishments active in France in March 2017, 
compared to only 240 in 2013 [3]. These establishments are 
complex because of the number of interacting actors they 
involve. They also tend to rely on the notion of sharing and 
circulating data, especially health information about patients. 
In doing so, they tend to improve patients’ health care and 
health monitoring. 
The current health context tends to intensify the 
difficulties in the management of health in France - and a 
priori in the whole world also. This is why reflections and 
practices related to the management of personal records, 
especially from a human point of view, must be intensified. 
Indeed, health professionals are under intense pressure. Lack 
of trust in the organization, organizational misfunction, team 
tensions, exhaustion, stress and fear of being contaminated 
represent high risk factors that could lead to (un)voluntary 
misuse of personal records. For health organizations, it is 
critical to find solutions to preserve their quality. It is also 
critical to remain scrupulous with the protection of data crisis 
in order to guarantee the quality of care, while protecting 
patients' records and especially those who are contaminated. 
How could both technical and human processes guarantee 
medical confidentiality and manage the inherent risks linked 
to data disclosure, while ensuring the interoperability of 
professionals and the quality of care, in time of crisis? It 
seems that the challenge is mainly about the ability of the 
French health system to increase its level of performance [4]. 
The challenge also rests on the ability of collaborative 
organizations to hold their staff together, despite the pressure 
they have to work with. 
To answer this question, a first case study was conducted 
in the Multidisciplinary Care House of Mimizan (MCHM). 
To do so, an exploratory qualitative approach was conducted 
via focus groups with the whole team of the institution and 
252
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
via an interview with its two managers. The goal is to 
establish an inventory of practices, particularly in terms of 
data quality management in complex health institutions. The 
analytical approach presented here is based on the structural 
level of MCH actions, in which resources (human and 
material) are mobilized to ensure a good coordination for 
patients’ care and confidential data policy [5]. MCHs are a 
recent and emergent phenomenon, with heterogeneous ways 
of working. The goal of this article is to explore one of the 
biggest and formalized MCH, from an exploratory point of 
view, in order to understand its organization and its capacity 
to be considered as a model for other MCH. A second phase 
of the survey was conducted following the same 
methodology, when the French government declared the state 
of emergency to protect the population from the COVID-19 
epidemic, on March 12, 2020. The goal is to compare the 
ordinary processes to the crisis ones and to deepen the human 
aspects of data management. 
Section II is dedicated to the overall contextualization of 
the study. Section III presents the institution selected for the 
study, the MCHM to show how it is representative of the new 
healthcare institutions needed in fragile territory. In Section 
IV, the article analyzes the quality processes inherent in the 
management of this institution’s data. The Section V presents 
the specifications of the MCHM. Section VI provides details 
on the general lack of use of the national digital health record. 
Sections VII to IX are dedicated to the second phase of the 
survey, related to the adaptation of the MCHM to the 
COVID-19 health crisis. Section VII concerns the hypertelic 
aspects [6] of organizational processes in the field of public 
health – that is, organizational processes hyper-adaptive to 
their context but wich may become impossible to adapt if the 
context changes. In Section VIII, the evolution of 
organizational management is developed. Section IX presents 
the model of collaboration and interdisciplinary cooperation 
as a necessary step to succeed in time of crisis. We bring a 
conclusion of our analysis in Section X. 
II. 
STUDY BACKGROUND 
In this section, the study background is explained. The 
specific context of the current French public healthcare 
context and policy are also detailed for a better 
understanding of the study. 
A. Challenging health context 
In 2014, the population density of Landes department 
fluctuated between 2 and 45 inhabitants/km², with an aging 
index among the highest in the region [7]. In 2015, 31.5% of 
Landes’ population was over 60 years of age, a great 
increase compared to 2011 [8]. According to the Regional 
Health Authority – RHA (in French, Agence Régionale de 
Santé), in 2016, the rural population represented more than 
50% of the whole Landes population. In addition, this region 
also has a medical demography and a density of specialists 
lower than regional and national averages, as well as a small 
number of healthcare establishments. It also has few 
alternatives to the nursing homes for old people [7]. 
Therefore, old people’s loss of autonomy is more difficult to 
manage. According to RHA, 1/3 of liberal general 
practitioners were over 60 years old in 2017 [9]. This is a 
very problematic issue: combined with the difficulties of 
attractiveness of the territory, it becomes more and more 
difficult to maintain the number of practitioners in this area. 
The RHA demographic patterns of Landes health care show 
a highly unfavorable public health context: 
• 
White areas (towns located more than fifty 
kilometers away from a hospital emergency 
department), combined with an insufficient number 
of expert services (radiology, rheumatology, 
gynecology, 
allergology, 
pneumology, 
dermatology, etc.) 
• 
Medical desertification: unattractive territory for 
young 
(para)medical 
professionals 
(region’s 
remoteness from large cities, low internet coverage, 
few cultural offers, etc.). Doctors are struggling to 
find successors, despite administrative provisions 
and facilitations offered by health authorities. 
• 
Fragile areas: unequal distribution of health 
professionals in areas with an imbalance between 
the number of potential patients and the number of 
doctors, as well as areas where the advanced age of 
patients (or the doctor) would require urgent 
decisions. 
Facing these difficulties, some political representatives 
try to shed some light on the issue of medical deserts: in 
October 2018, the mayor of a small town called Ychoux 
proposed to prohibit, by municipal decree, his fellow citizens 
from falling ill, due to the lack of medical care in its 
surroundings. The study was conducted in this area for its 
relevance concerning the challenges France will have to face 
in the coming years. The main problem in France is getting 
young medical staff to settle in countryside areas, where 
living standards are less attractive than urban contexts. 
B. Management of de-materialized health data in a 
complex system 
Personal records, such as medical data, defined by the 
French Data Protection Act, called Loi informatique et 
liberté, (cf. paragraph 2, article 2 of the Act) as an 
information relating to a person who is physically identified 
or who can be identified, directly or indirectly, by reference 
to an identification number or to one or more elements 
specific to him/her [10]. In addition, this data must be 
processed in order to make sense. This process is defined by 
the same law (cf. paragraph 3, article 2 of the Act) as a 
transaction or set of transactions, whatever the process used 
[10]: 
collection, 
recording, 
organization, 
storage, 
modification, consultation, communication by transmission, 
etc. Data are also part of an exchange, characterized by the 
provision to several professionals, such as health staff, who 
are entitled to know everything about these data. Their goals 
are to insure the coordination and continuity of patients’ 
medical care [11]. 
However, the exploitation of personal records remains a 
sensitive subject. It directly affects the privacy of each 
individual [12], especially when it comes to medical data. In 
complex systems, such as MCH, there are several issues 
related to the management and to the protection of health 
253
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
data. From an organizational point of view, it is essential to 
set up procedures to secure access to data. Those procedures 
tend to limit the structural disorders that can affect the 
confidential standards of data, by establishing, for example, 
quality indicators. Measurement and management tools in 
health establishments are essential [4]. In addition, complex 
systems have a large number of stakeholders, but they do not 
have the same level of data access authorization. It increases 
the risks of fraudulent or accidental access to information. 
With the multiplication of MCHs, the French health 
sector must now face a multitude of risks related to data, 
which require close scrutiny of each elementary activity [2]. 
These establishments are the result of a clustering of health 
professionals who, until now, had been working alone. 
However, using common resources and administrative staff 
lead professionals to rethink their working methods, while 
insisting on control and rigour. The various stakeholders in 
the project have to develop fundamental procedures for 
collaborative work. This aims at reducing and optimizing 
work processes [2], while considering the topics of control 
and quality as the heart of these processes. Professionals, in 
this new context, must demonstrate that their services are 
delivered in a secure environment. This environment helps 
controlling the risks and meet the expectations/requirements 
of patients [4]. 
C. Multidisciplinary health centre: although need for a 
restructured health policy – from a political point of 
view 
MCHs are a model that catalyzes needs, from health 
professional, public decision makers and patient care points 
of view [5]. The creation of this type of institution represents 
the convergence of three complementary processes, 
identified by Autès and Dufay [13]: 
• 
Movement initiated by healthcare professionals to 
gather their activities within MCHs and health 
centers. 
• 
Reflection of local officials, concerned by the 
management of health in their districts, involved in 
logics of prevention, of permanence of care, of first 
aid and the continuum between outpatient services 
and hospitals. They also care about offering 
external and specialized consultations to the people 
living in areas where there is a shortage of health 
practitioners; 
• 
Necessary reorganization of the supply of care due, 
first, to the constraints of modern medicine and 
pathologies and, second, to the effects induced by 
the anticipated decline in medical demography. 
From a territorial point of view, the MCHM aims at 
meeting the four standards of public health action: 1) 
maintaining a local offer, 2) guaranteeing equal access to 
health for all, 3) ensuring continuity of care between the 
primary care offer and graduated hospital care 4) and, 
finally, strengthening health prevention policies. For local 
officials, the issue is to strengthen weakened health districts 
and care offer [13], by proposing long-term ways-out to 
solve the current problems. In addition, since MCHs are 
subjected to accreditation rules, by responding to quality 
indicators established by public health authorities [13], they 
contribute to an increased performance of districts’ medical 
management. 
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
In this section, the sampling and methodological 
procedures are presented. 
A. Why Study the MCHM? 
By definition, MCHs depend on specific contexts. It is 
important to identify the territory’s needs, to take into 
account the needs of its population and its state of supply.  
MCHM is considered as representative of this movement of 
territorial restructuring in the field of healthcare both in its 
conditions of implementation and in its daily functioning, 
structured around the interrelationships between territorial 
stakeholders [5]. Indeed, despite its recent implementation, it 
manages to meet the whole public health objectives, both 
mandatory and optional, imposed by the “RHA Inter-
professional Agreement” contract, particularly in terms of 
shared information systems, which are at the heart of the 
challenges related to data quality. The dynamic of the 
creation of the MCHM was, in the first place, launched by 
healthcare practitioners themselves, in reaction to the 
progressive desertification of their territory and the 
challenges it involves [13]. The project of creating the 
MCHM began in 2004. The district’s doctors wanted to 
cluster their activities in a single establishment, to pool their 
administrative tasks and to offer a better access to care for 
their patients. This approach is in line with the observations 
of some researchers, who state that medical desertification in 
rural areas has been the main motivation for the mobilization 
of health professionals [13]. One of the main problems lays 
in Landes’ unattractiveness for doctors.  The mere proximity 
of the beach and the “sweetness of life” are not enough to 
attract young professionals willing to settle down. It is 
necessary to provide health professionals with some 
attractive and secure professional conditions of practice. 
However, the notion of attractiveness of the project is 
very important here [5]. Offering a young professional an 
isolated practice in a small town does not have the same 
appeal as a long-term position in a MCH, in which he or she 
could 
be 
supervised, 
advised 
and 
supported 
by 
administrative services, surrounded by colleagues and 
supported by financial and material resources. Collegiality 
and plurality of perspectives make the medical practice both 
more reassuring and richer [13], especially at the beginning 
of a career. This is the appeal proposed, in general, by MCHs 
and, in particular, by the case studied in this article, which is 
one of the biggest and dynamic MCHs in France. Its 
professionals have been recently asked to present their 
institution in the next National French Congress of MCH. 
This type of organizational dynamism is a movement widely 
desired and claimed by the younger generations of medical 
and paramedical professionals [14]. 
Moreover, Landes is the largest region of France, with a 
mainly rural territory and offers most of the current and 
forthcoming public health services presented in the 
contextualization part of this article. Having such an 
254
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
innovative MCH in this kind of area is an example of how 
to deal with public health issues in other regions in France, 
especially concerning the rural ones. 
B. Methodological Approach and Sampling 
The survey was conducted from the 8th of December 
2018 to the 10th of March 2019. This period provides two 
main contexts: seasonal epidemics (the flue in January and 
spring allergies in March) and quiet period in December and 
February. It seemed relevant to investigate the MCHM in 
both these contexts in order to deepen all the aspects of its 
organizational data management. At the beginning of the 
survey, the goal was to identify the organizational model and 
rules implemented by the MCHM’s team, specially 
concerning working processes and data management. To do 
so, a qualitative approach has been chosen This method has 
been selected for its ability to investigate the practices and 
interpret the results. It considers that the “confrontation with 
the corpus is a necessary condition for the perception of 
social practices” [14]. The goal was also to confront the 
different points of view concerning the organizational 
processes. The potential divergences and discordances 
regarding the positions can be highlighted. Does a secretary 
think the same thing of the establishment than a doctor or 
paramedical worker? Concerning data privacy management, 
the heads of the MCHM in charge have been interviewed. 
They had to explain their choices in terms of data 
management policy, of coordination put in place and of 
emergency plans in case of unfortunate disclosure. 
Regarding the questions, all the members of the MHCM 
staff we asked about two common topics. The first was about 
the daily-work and its organization, both concerning the 
inner-group and the relationships with the other members of 
the MCHM (for example: secretary-secretary, secretary-
medical, etc.). The goal was to highlight relational and 
organizational dysfunctions. Secondly, all the staff members 
were asked about their own professional uses of patients’ 
health records, in terms of access of use and of transmission. 
The purpose was to identify good and problematic uses. 
The second questions asked for some more specific 
topics. The goal was to have a better understanding of each 
specific staff members (medical doctor, paramedical, 
administrative, etc.), to point out the benefits and the limits of 
their new work, management and organizational processes 
since they entered the MCHM. Four focus groups took place 
in December 2018 and February 2019, with the four specific 
staff members. Then, interviews were conducted in January 
2018 and March 2019, with the head of the administrative 
staff and the heads of the MCHM. They all were realized in 
the MCHM, in the meeting room. The goal was to make the 
people feel comfortable and to prevent conversations from 
being heard by the patients or the other staffs’ members. This 
approach seemed relevant, as it helped people to speak freely. 
A second phase of the survey was conducted during the 
COVID-19 crisis, from the 12th of March 2020 to the 11th of 
May 2020, in the same organization. This period corresponds 
to the riskiest period of the pandemic, from a public health 
point of view, when France reached its highest rates of virus 
spread. It also corresponds to the most difficult time for 
public health organizations, which have had to adapt urgently 
their processes to face this situation they never knew before. 
For the sake of homogeneity, it was decided to use the criteria 
and distribution initially used for the first phase of the survey 
in order to compare the results. It was also decided to conduct 
the interviews by teleconference. The goal was to limit the 
risk of exposure to the virus and to make the survey as 
smooth as possible for the MCHM staff.  
C. Health Records Management in the MCHM 
TABLE I.  
DISTRIBUTION OF THE INTERVIEWED SAMPLE 
Criteria 
Distribution 
Number 
% 
Gender 
Male 
14 
51.9 
Female 
13 
48.1 
Age 
25-35 
6 
22.2 
35-45 
7 
25.9 
45-55 
8 
29.7 
55-65 
6 
22.2 
Professional 
activity 
Medical doctors 
11 
40.7 
Paramedical staff 
8 
29.7 
Administrative staff 
5 
18.5 
Executive of 
administrative staff 
1 
3.7 
Executive of the 
MCHM 
(also doctors) 
2 
7.4 
 
As Table I shows, the MCHM brings together three main 
crews: doctors (8 + 2 regular substitutes + 1 trainee), 
paramedics 
(3 
nurses 
and 
their 
collaborators, 
2 
physiotherapists, 2 podiatrists, 1 psycho-motor therapists, 1 
dietician) and administrative staff (5 secretaries, only 
working for doctors, managed by an executive). Including 
trainee doctors and nursing staff, the sample is composed of 
thirty individuals involved in the daily operations of the 
MCHM. They are all subjected to the institution's collective 
agreement, in which respect for medical confidentiality is 
clearly enshrined. Data is managed and stored on a specific 
medical database software, Weda [15], which is also used by 
the 
surrounding 
external 
collaborators 
(pharmacies, 
specialists, hospitals, etc.). The choice to use the same 
software aims at facilitating the medical and administrative 
aspects concerning the caring continuum. Each member of 
the MCHM has secure access provided by the software. 
These codes are not stored on the institution's digital devices 
in order to limit the risk in case of theft or hacking. 
However, not all MCHM members have the same level 
of access to patients’ records. Doctors, as well as their 
secretaries, have full access to all the information 
concerning: files, auxiliary session schedules, secure 
messaging, etc. This is justified by the need for doctor/doctor 
255
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
and doctor/secretary interoperability, for the smooth 
functioning of the MCHM and good patient care. At the 
request of a patient or a staff member, restrictions may be 
applied to limit secretaries' or doctors' access to some 
records. All patients were asked about this sharing consent. 
Then come the paramedics, with a diffusion specific to 
each specialty. Their access is conditioned by the needs of 
their activity. A physiotherapist, for example, will have 
access to the patient's x-rays and related prescriptions; a 
nurse will have access to history, specialist contacts, blood 
test results or vaccines, depending on needs. These 
professionals do not have access to the content of visits, 
letters, prescriptions, unless some specific case discussed 
with the doctor. The accreditation of external professionals is 
aligned with the system applied within the institution, 
according to the needs of the patient, the activity or the 
specialty. Collaborative patient follow-up is governed by 
Multi-Professional 
Consultation 
Meetings 
(MPCMs), 
planned or impromptu, attended by all the professionals 
involved in the presented case. Each meeting is documented, 
stored via Weda and only accessible to the concerned 
professionals. Doctors and secretaries meet weekly to 
monitor performance and improve organizational quality 
processes. The doctors interviewed also associate these 
meetings with team management (trust, accountability, etc.), 
to ensure cohesion among all workers and to involve them in 
the administration of the MCHM. 
This institution is a motivated and voluntary grouping of 
health 
professionals, 
in 
a 
singular 
and 
innovative 
organizational form. As a result, this configuration will have 
to be closely observed in the years to come in order to 
evaluate its lean management in data management and its 
mode of transactional relations, perceived as co-constructive 
interactions. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF DATA MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
This section is dedicated to the analysis of MCHM data 
management concerning patients’ records. Thanks to the 
study, the main protagonists of this type of management 
tasks have been identified, such as the governance of the 
establishment, from a managerial point of view. 
A. Data Ethics and Dissemination Quality 
An organization can be defined as a set of recurring 
transactional programs that constitute transactional flows. 
They are driven by a set of conventions and rules in a given 
context [16]. For its proper functioning, given the complexity 
of its transactions, it is essential to give access to the right 
information, at the right people, at the right time, to make a 
selective transmission of users, in order to fight against 
misinformation, over-abundance and deviant uses [12]. The 
principle of data management is based on the ability of actors 
to select information and analyze it, in such a way that it is 
only disseminated to its legitimate recipients. The interest of 
this approach is twofold. On the one hand, it allows a smooth 
organization of sharing actions, making the institutional 
processes efficient. On the other hand, it makes it possible to 
limit the risks linked to the poor dissemination of data, thus 
guaranteeing respect for confidential medical records. 
The ethical processing of information seems to be the 
starting point of the MCHM's data management strategy. 
Béranger defines it as a mechanism for the interpretation of 
data, by a person or an organization, that will lead to give a 
specific meaning to data [12]. By giving attention to 
information, by analyzing it, the heads of MCHM tend to 
give meaning and value to data, as well as to determine the 
logistics of action to be applied: censorship, global 
dissemination, limited dissemination, etc. In the medical 
sector, it is fundamental to establish a reflection on personal 
health data through an ethical prism “in order to [remove] 
doubt and control uncertainties” [12] and to manage the risks 
inherent in the nature of patients’ records.  It leads to speak 
of the non-maleficence nature of the MCHM's information 
strategy: access to data is examined according to the profile 
and nature of the user [12]. Data sharing is conditioned by 
the profile of the information receiver, ranging from full 
sharing to very limited access, depending on activity and 
needs. This improves the security, confidentiality and 
protection of such data [12], as well as the performance of 
the information management system. By analyzing the data, 
determining the conditions for sharing and clearly 
identifying the receivers, the quality of access to patients' 
personal records is guaranteed. 
B. Informational Lean Management: no Unnecessary 
Information 
The data processing method leads us to analyze the 
notion of lean in quality management. Lean School is 
defined as “the search for process optimization by chasing 
down everything that is inappropriate or superfluous” 
guaranteeing “performance by eliminating waste” [2]. This 
method is usually applied to inventory management (0 
stock), document management (0 paper), or logistics (0 
unnecessary transport, 0 waiting, etc.). This can be relied to 
information management, in order to analyze the transaction 
rationalization activities [17]. 
Indeed, 
the 
info-ethical 
treatment 
as 
previously 
mentioned tends towards a very low entropy, i.e., a degree of 
almost nil disorder [12]. A system in which information is 
transmitted without analysis increases the level of confusion, 
as well as the slowness of decision-making and the risks of 
accidental dissemination of personal records. On the 
contrary, in a complex system such as the MCHM, the 
implementation of a hierarchy in information management 
(doctors analyze and choose the criteria before disseminating 
information) makes the actions of all team members easier 
and more fluid, by sending them only the data that will be 
useful to them in the exercise of their activity. This is a kind 
of lean management, applied to information management. 
This data dissemination method tends towards the goal of “0 
useless information", in order to guarantee both respect for 
medical confidentiality (0 information poorly disseminated), 
the quality of patient care (0 information missing) and the 
fluidity of actions (0 dysfunction linked to poor information 
dissemination). This information management method seems 
to be perfectly adapted to the performance requirements of 
MCHM's missions, while benefiting the daily tasks 
(administrative and patient care). 
256
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
V. 
ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES: GUARANTEEING THE 
QUALITY OF DATA MANAGEMENT 
In this section, the organizational processes observed 
during the survey will be discussed, which refers to data and 
patients’ records management. 
A. The Human Relations Theory as a Leading Light 
In the MCHM, the mobilization of the whole staff tends 
to improve the processes’ efficiency [2]. The MCHM’s 
management method is based on the involvement of all 
teams in improving the life of the institution: meetings, 
taking into account opinions, professional development, 
empowerment, etc. This method seems to be similar to the 
collaborative processes set up within the MCHM, although 
the institution does not claim any particular managerial 
method: unexpected discussions, weekly team meetings, 
festive group cohesion events, etc. This team management 
aims at analyzing defects and dysfunctions, and then seeking 
solutions [2]. This tends to improve the overall functioning 
of the establishment, where, according to Zacklad, all 
persons involved in the transaction are in the position of    
(co-)director, (co-)beneficiary, (co-)recipient (principal) and 
(co-)recipient [16]. Emphasis is placed on freedom of 
speech, professional responsibilities, skills of each individual 
and, above all, the necessary trust between employees, which 
is considered essential by all MCHM staff. 
As Doucet points out, it is essential for the direction of 
quality action to be collegial. This makes it possible [in 
particular] 
to 
respect 
responsibilities 
and 
involve 
departments: 
medical 
consultation, 
scheduling, 
data 
management, human resources, etc. [2]. As a large number 
of individuals have access to the institution's health data, the 
use of this collaborative and collegial approach is essential to 
the MCHM. The increase in performance can only be 
achieved through the collaboration with the departments 
involved in this approach. By soliciting and valuing all staff 
members, the MCHM ensures fine relationship management, 
but also encourages professionalism and accountability of 
each individual. They also do so by regularly reminding 
them of the need for secrecy and rigor (formally and 
informally), especially concerning the performance of their 
daily tasks relating to patient health records. Transactional 
relationships lead to overcome formal/informal oppositions 
by insisting on their complementarity [5]. 
B. Leadership: Team, Quality and Performance 
Management 
This managerial approach is in line with the objective of 
promoting confidentiality and trust with producers and 
suppliers of information, thus contributing to the control of 
risks and deviations of data [12]. However, for MCHM staff 
management to be effective, it must also deal with some 
leadership issues. Leadership and management of the 
institution must be provided by a person of influence who, 
thanks to his or her managerial skills is able to guarantee, 
effective cooperation and coordination, based on mutual trust 
[5]. The notions of cooperation and trust seem to be 
interdependent key resources for the management of 
complex systems. Cooperation relies on a clear commitment 
of each member of the group and is strengthened by trust and 
by the working contract [17]. In a complex system, each 
member of the team contributes to the success of the 
institution goals, so it is important for all team members to 
be aware of the values their work involves, such as secrecy, 
efficiency, empathy, etc. [18] It is up to the leader to make 
the team understand these fundamental values defended by 
the institution, from which ethics rules of behavior flow. To 
do so, in the MCHM, many meetings are held, with the 
whole staff or with some subgroups (doctors-doctors, 
doctors-secretaries, 
etc.). 
Managing 
does 
not 
mean 
dominating. It is rather knowing how to talk to teams and 
how to get them to work towards a common goal [19]. Even 
if some members sometimes complain about the high 
number of meetings, they seem essential for the good 
management of the institution. Those meetings allow the 
team to have some feedback on the work and outline all 
technical or relational issues. It helps the manager to resolve 
the disagreements before they worsen and help the team to 
work with fluency [19]. 
The operational management of the MCHM is based on 
the involvement of the two doctors, whom will here be called 
P. and T. Their influence is based on their legitimacy within 
the team, gained through their seniority, their involvement in 
the project and their ability to organize the run of the 
institution. The team trusts in them. Trust is built over time 
and in the relationships. It is a capital that the two doctors 
accumulated through years [18]. They are well known by all 
the team members, sometimes for more than twenty years. 
They are also known for their emotional competencies [19], 
that combines feeling with objective cooperation skills. The 
long-term trust of the team gives P. et T. the ability to engage 
and influence each member of the group, which helps the 
team to solve complex issues [20] and aim for an outstanding 
performance of their work. P. and T. are complementary, 
both in terms of relational aspects and in the conduct of data 
establishment and management. However, for a good 
cohabitation, the roles must be clear and non-antagonistic 
[2]. The risk associated is the disappearance of authority 
representatives. The smooth running of the institution is 
based on the clear identification of authority figures, to 
which the staff can refer. The figure of authority also allows 
to the control of practices, beyond the “self-control” by the 
operator himself, in which skills and responsibilities are 
assumed by himself/herself [2], but not objectified by an 
external point of view. Each member is a part of the system 
and they have to work toward the same goal for the 
institution to reach its goals and insure the quality of care 
[19]. 
However, this verification dimension, in order to ensure 
the quality of the tasks performed, is quite crucial when it 
comes to such sensitive data as those referred to in this 
article: respect for medical confidentiality, quality of 
transmission of information, management of the risks of 
records leakage, etc. Taking leadership within the MCHM 
then seems to represent an additional element in the 
performance of strategies to protect patient medical records. 
The leaders act here as an element of internal data protection 
control, which compliance must be assessed and objectified 
257
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
externally by a notational Data Protection Officer [2]. This 
perspective can also be considered by taking as a model the 
Zacklad 
cooperative 
transaction 
logic 
reading 
grid, 
framework for analyzing action and practice at the meso 
level [16]. 
VI. 
GENERAL LACK OF USE OF THE NATIONAL DIGITAL 
HEALTH RECORD 
The MCHM tends to present organizational processes in 
accordance with public health requirements, while following 
effective procedures for the management of patients' 
personal records. It should, however, be noted that the 
national digital Electronic Health Record (in French, Dossier 
Medical Partagé - DMP) is not integrated into any of the 
care management approaches within this institution. The 
study case tends to reveal an attitude of rejection of this 
instrument by MCHM staff members. They themselves state 
that this folder “is not designed for medical practice”, 
although they admit the promising nature of such a tool. 
“In 
case 
of 
emergency, 
the 
DMP 
becomes 
counterproductive. Of course, all the information about the 
patient is included, but it is not sorted or classified. It is up to 
us to find the right information and, in emergency situations, 
we have something more important to do than sorting 
information” says E., one of the MCHM doctors. They also 
confess that they are disturbed by the additional and time-
consuming actions required to update the patients' DMP, 
since this platform does not provide any automatic 
downloading add-ons for the software they use. It seems that 
the DMP system is in contradiction with the practices of 
MCHM professionals, with regard to their quality 
management processes. This notion is closely linked to the 
need for procedural rationality of the care action, namely an 
“orientation of the activity”. In this orientation, the action is 
justified by taking into account the way in which the tools 
contribute to performance. It is partly defined by the quality 
of the realization process [17]. Doctors highlight a logic 
“inherent in our relationship with objects and our 
environment, which we judge according to their adaptation 
to our expectations and needs” [2]. Applying this to Doucet 
reasoning, it would seem that doctors judge the use of the 
DMP in terms of its field operability and its ability to meet 
the needs imposed by their profession.  
However, according to their statements, data’s quality 
processing on the DMP is incompatible with their needs. 
Charlotte Maday, in her article [17], uses the image of deep-
sea fishing: throwing a net on the ocean floor, collecting 
information indiscriminately and presenting it to users. This 
image seems to be applicable to doctors' feeling towards the 
DMP. By presenting the “raw” data, the system is not in line 
with their requirements for efficient data management. It 
does not fit their ethical approaches or the “informational 
lean”, the main data management strategies used within the 
MCHM. More broadly, DMP raises the need for co-
production concerning innovation and the necessary 
collaboration between producers and users to guarantee the 
quality of a product or a service. Bringing together the 
documents and data, for process governance, requires 
mastering the notion of a system but, above all, acting in a 
spirit of active collaboration [17]. The main issues related to 
the DMP concern its digital features, ethical uses of data and 
the ability of professionals from various trades to collaborate 
on the same project. It represents a question to investigate, 
specially concerning the conception and the interoperability 
of various medical software. The goal is to ensure the 
performance of software and improve the quality of care. 
VII. MANAGING TEAMS AND DATA SECURITY IN TIMES OF 
CRISIS: AN HYPERTELIC CONTEXT 
The MCHM was severely damaged by the COVID-19 
crisis, placing its processes in a position that could be 
described as “hypertelic”. This concept, developed by 
Simondon, 
originally 
applied 
to 
technical 
objects, 
particularly industrial objects [6]. It develops the idea that a 
tool specifically developed for a technology or for a specific 
context becomes obsolete and inadequate if the technology 
or context evolves. The hyper-specialization of tools or, in 
other words, a marked hyper-adaptation between a context 
and an object, can therefore lead to the "de-adaptation" if 
the environment evolves. 
In the pre-COVID-19 context, the public health situation 
was relatively stable, which served as benchmarks for the 
development of the organizational processes of the MCHM: 
identification of very specific problems, seasonal epidemics 
management, stabilized external collaborations, rigor in data 
processing (technical and human), etc. The pandemic 
shattered these established paradigms as quickly as it did 
drastically. It put the institution's organizational processes to 
the test, particularly with regard to the protection of patients 
and data. There was an increasing risk of stress-induced 
errors, unintentional disclosure or a danger of a breakdown 
in organizational trust, which is a fundamental pillar of the 
organization of the MCHM. The pandemic highlighted the 
need for the institution to adapt to changes in its usual 
health context. It also highlighted its difficulty to do so. This 
difficult context contributed to the loss of adequacy of the 
organizational and operational processes of the MCHM. It 
led the organization to readapt itself profoundly and 
urgently, in less than a week. The crisis led to the 
emergence of what could be described as an organizational 
hypertelia, a “mismatch” of organizational processes with 
the context in which they are inserted. 
This context was completed by the lack of reference 
points that could help cope this unprecedented situation. The 
goal for the MCHM was twofold. The first was to maintain 
the level of quality of care and the second was to protect the 
identity of infected patients. In a climate of anxiety and 
marked suspicion, it was important for the organization to 
guarantee the safety of its patients and its staff. Tracking 
infected patients without disclosing confidential information 
does not only required organizational adjustments but also a 
significant amount of data management work. The bulk of 
the work was not so much based on the technical aspects of 
data storage as on the human and operational aspects. 
Human and operational issues were identified by the doctors 
as the two main objects mobilized to deal with the crisis. 
258
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
VIII. COVID-19: THE NECESSARY EVOLUTION OF 
ORGANIZATIONAL MANAGEMENT 
Within the MCHM, the crisis situation would have led to 
a certain degree of organizational fragmentation, resulting in 
a lack of team cohesion, a loss of coherence in decision-
making, and difficulties in establishing an action plan or 
prioritizing. There was also a high risk of a loss of 
organizational confidence and a backlash that could have 
put the organization in a position of failure. It seemed 
relevant, in this context, to appeal to the four organizational 
issues in times of crisis, defined by Le Cardinal [18]: risk, 
uncertainty, complexity and sense of values. The risks, 
especially before the peak of the epidemic, were multiple, 
whether individual, organizational or health-related. This 
leads to the notion of uncertainty. During the survey, 
MCHM practitioners said that none of them, including the 
most experienced, had ever, in their professional or personal 
life, faced such an emergency situation: “No matter how 
much I think about it, I can't find anything comparable to 
what is happening to us now. How should we deal with a 
pandemic whose magnitude and consequences stay 
unclear?”. The situation was particularly complex for the 
organization, as it required a hasty and profound redesign of 
its operations, while at the same time ensuring data and 
patient protection. From an operational point of view, while 
the substance of the work remained the same, the health 
necessity induced a change of working habits to which the 
staff had to adapt quickly. From a procedural point of view, 
the disinfection measures proved difficult to reconcile with 
the necessary pace of consultations. From a relational point 
of view, the staff had to manage a multitude of strong 
emotions to ensure the smooth running of the MCHM, 
which could have had quite detrimental effects on the 
cohesion of the group and the quality of service. Cohesion is 
an indispensable element for the solidity and the security of 
an organization. This brings us to the last point made by Le 
Cardinal, namely the sense of values [18]. While the first 
three points have sometimes been thorny or grueling for the 
MCHM staff, this notion of value has proven to be rich and 
redeeming, helping to strengthen the staff's confidence in 
the organization. 
A. Trust as an organizational key resource 
One of the main challenges was to protect confidential 
data from accidental or deliberate misuses (e.g., find out 
who is infected to protect oneself and one’s families). The 
team needed to emphasize strong group cohesion and deep 
trust to limit the perverse effects of fear and uncertainty. 
Many authors recognize the fundamental nature of trust in 
the consolidation of professional cooperation relationships 
[18] 22] [23]. They also insist on the importance of trust for 
good health of the organization. This notion is all the more 
important in times of crisis or in risky situations. It 
contributes to the fluidity of actions, exchanges and 
collaboration, by minimizing the costs induced by action 
control procedures [24]. Indeed, within organizations that 
doubt their own competences, control activities reduce the 
quality of procedures and decision-making. They also 
increase process times, not to mention the consequences in 
relational and psychosocial terms. Trust is all the more 
important as it plays a central role in times of crisis and in 
risk exposure, as it partly conditions their management [25] 
and their consequences. 
One of the pillars of the successful crisis management 
was the revaluation of the values defended by the MCHM: 
dedication, protocol rigor and competence. The young 
doctors took over the reorganization and the whole COVID-
19 medical consultations. This esprit de corps strongly 
contributed to the reinforcement of positive values within 
the team (solidarity, team spirit, devotion, commitment, 
etc.). Moreover, the young doctors not only established the 
new care protocol, but also expose themselves to the virus, 
by taking in charge the COVID-19 consultations. In doing 
so, they diminished the exposure of at-risk doctors to the 
COVID-19 (age, comorbidity factors, etc.). They took some 
risk to protect their colleagues. Within the new protocol, the 
main space of the MCHM was isolated from the space 
dedicated to COVID-19. The doctor’s goal was not only to 
limit staff exposure to the virus, but also to maintain patient 
anonymity. The aim was to protect the personal records of 
potential infected patients and to subtly inform the rest of 
the staff of the limits not to be crossed. 
The dedication of doctors to the organization of care and 
the protection of staff and patients was a decisive factor. It 
has a strong impact on the consolidation of trust during the 
riskiest moments of the crisis, according to the survey 
results. A hundred percent of the respondents agree that this 
was the event that marked them the most, that gave them 
enough confidence to stay united and that gave them a 
frame to follow for the rest of the crisis. This feeling has to 
do with the relationship between individual focus and 
collective focus, between profit and risk. By taking the risk 
of exposing themselves to protect their colleagues, the 
young doctors valued the notion of dedication and the 
confidence they had in their team's ability to deal with the 
crisis. Moreover, their attitude towards the protection of 
their infected patients' data was a reminder of the ethical 
conduct they expected from all the staff. 
B. Emotional intelligence: a pillar of crisis management 
The doctors expressed an esprit de corps, a withdrawal 
from individual benefit for the benefit of the collective, of 
the whole organization.  This strong decision helped to 
strengthen the commitment to the collective and clearly 
defined their role within the organization [2]. At this 
worrying and uncertain moment of the crisis, their 
involvement represented an organizational anchor point, a 
reference point for all staff, enabling them to become aware 
of the values at work in their work [19; 20]. From a meso 
point of view, this leads to a pronounced form of 
professional and emotional commitment of all staff. The 
doctors' action was both a translation and a reminder: it 
reflected the ethical conduct expected during the crisis, 
while reminding staff that they could trust the rigor of the 
organization. This attitude echoes to a communication 
studies approach, which considers emotions as a social 
performity [26]. According to this approach, emotions and 
259
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
affectivity are not considered as individual construction, but 
as a product of social interactions, forget by the socio-
cultural culture of the organization [26]. As the organization 
benefited from a long-term and strong affective and 
emotional bonding, it seemed evident to capitalize on it to 
manage the first days of the crisis. 
The stakes of this event were both rational and emotional. 
As Goleman reminds us, "emotional intelligence is based on 
self-control, ardor, perseverance and the ability to incite 
oneself to action" [19] [20]. It is based on fundamental 
ethical attitudes. The rational mind, of which we are most 
aware, is balanced and reflective, while the emotional mind 
is impulsive, powerful and sometimes illogical. The attitude 
of doctors has appealed to this dimension of the mind, 
acting against the deleterious effects of agitation, persuading 
- not convincing - the rest of the team to act to achieve a 
common goal. They acted on feelings rather than on 
reasoning, on the capacity for commitment and influence. 
Rational and emotional intelligence are inseparable from 
each other for the well-being of organizations. Alvarez, in 
2001, highlighted the constant need to combine the rules 
and procedures of formal systems with the emotional 
dimensions of the team. These are plural and circular 
relationships [27]. Within the MCHM, every action taken, 
every protocol established acts on the psychosocial 
determinants of the team. The use of masks and gloves, but 
above all of hats and gowns, which were not mandatory, had 
the effect of reflecting the organization's desire to protect its 
employees. The same is true of the protocols for receiving 
COVID-19 patients, as well as the systematic disinfection 
processes, which were intended to enhance staff protection. 
By acting on the operational and procedural level, the 
MCHM was also able to act on the affective dimensions of 
its team and enhance its interest in them. 
The collective action can be related to the ability of the 
organization to be resilient, e.g., to “absorb, respond to and 
also benefit from events that occur as a result of changes in 
the environment” [28]. The hypertelic context can lead the 
organization to a definitive failure. It was all the more 
crucial to reduce its effects during the crisis as such a failure 
could endanger the whole territorial healthcare network and 
the population. Resilience rests on a system of shared values 
and an ability to use owned resources in a creative and 
innovative way [29]. The MCHM was able to draw on its 
strengths, particularly its human and procedural strengths, 
and on its value system to stem the adverse effects of the 
crisis. As the organization could not benefit from any 
additional technical and human support, it intelligently 
reviewed its entire procedures, in order to make the best use 
of the resources at its disposal and to adapt as best as 
possible to the management of the crisis. 
C. The essential circularity between technical and human 
aspects 
An organization is not only based on these non-human 
and technical aspects, but on an alliance of these 
dispositions with the social and human space of which it is 
composed. Yet one of the staff members showed a 
contagious anxiety, despite this collective effort to face the 
situation calmly. It resulted in growing restlessness, errors 
in the management of patient data, difficulty communicating 
with others, and proven inefficiency in performing their 
tasks. Thus, both procedurally and humanly, the employee 
undermined the organizational stability and security of the 
MCHM. This was all the more worrisome since the 
psychosocial stability of the MCHM remained precarious, 
suspended from daily government announcements on the 
evolution of the epidemic. The decompensation of the 
employee 
risked 
causing 
internal 
dysfunction, 
the 
repercussions of which could be disastrous externally. 
Indeed, each individual is part of the system and each exerts 
an influence on all the others [19] [20]. The decision to 
allow this employee to work from home allowed the 
preservation of other staff members and the quality of 
service to patients. This example clearly shows that a 
system or network does not have an immutable durability, 
but on the contrary must be vigilant to each of its 
components to ensure their cohesion. 
Everything is thus equally important in the organization: 
organizational factors (procedural capacity), cognitive 
factors (interpretation by individuals), discursive factors 
(information exchanges), as well as non-human entities. 
This whole constitutes the organizational collective, the 
network. The stability of the network depends on the 
solidity of the components and their ability to anticipate and 
cope with future events. It is this anticipation of events that 
has been the lifeblood of the MCHM. By isolating the 
disruptive actor before it impacted the rest of the 
organizational components, they made it possible to 
safeguard the stability of the network and data security, 
while offering a benevolent and adapted solution. It is 
difficult for an organization to find a constant balance, 
especially when it comes to human components in a crisis 
situation. The strength and quality of a network is based on 
its ability to adapt to its social context (Callon, Latour, 
Akrich, etc.). The social dimension is understood as an 
effect caused by interactions between very different actors, 
who are continuously succeeding each other and who 
participate in the evolution and modification of the network. 
Within the MCHM, there were successive, progressive and 
necessary adaptations of the organizational processes, which 
reinforced its capacity for collective action and fought 
against its hypertelic dimension. 
IX. 
ORGANIZATIONAL HEALTHCARE NETWORK: A MODEL 
OF COLLABORATION AND INTERDISCIPLINARY COOPERATION 
The organizational "readjustment" solution chosen by 
the MCHM was interdisciplinary cooperation. The 
beginning of the pandemic was, according to the doctors 
interviewed, the most complex moment in their crisis 
management. Starting from scratch is one thing, making this 
new beginning efficient is another. According to Pesqueux, 
complexity, uncertainty of outcome and the dangers 
involved call for cooperation [24]. As soon as the state of 
emergency was made official, the objective was to 
collectively find the most satisfactory solution to ensure 
continuity of care, while avoiding antagonisms, paradoxes 
and contradictions. This explains the rejection of the action 
260
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
plan proposed by the leaders and the health framework. 
This, according to one of the young doctors, "was, in itself, 
not a bad idea. The substance seemed good to me, but there 
were too many contradictory elements in the procedures. 
There were also a lot of redundant steps, which wasted 
unnecessary time and were not relevant to the management 
of COVID-19 patients. We absolutely had to involve the 
surrounding health care system. Not only to refine our 
strategy, but also to ensure consistency. This excerpt 
illustrates a crucial point in crisis management. In a 
situation like this, it's not so much a matter of having 
experts on specific topics. Rather, it is a matter of 
consolidating a network of actors capable of collaborating 
and 
producing 
collective 
responses 
to 
problematic 
situations, while remaining united and solid to ensure an 
efficient and constructive organization [24]. 
In general, the organizational healthcare network 
constitutes a tool for improving professional practices and, 
more broadly, it contributes to maintaining or even 
improving the level of quality of service provided [10]. The 
network must act on three levels of collaboration, all of 
which are essential [5]: the operational (or clinical) level - 
where the acts of care are carried out -, the structural level - 
which mobilizes human and material resources to ensure 
continuous and comprehensive care - and the institutional 
level - representing the decision-makers and financers of the 
health system. 
With regard to the operational level, the MCHM relied 
on the interdisciplinary nature of the organizational health 
network, in particular the hospital institutions. The latter 
benefit from numerous plans and protocols specific to crisis 
management, 
which 
propose 
efficient 
and 
specific 
organizational processes to respond to the multiplicity of 
types of crisis. Thanks to the solidity of their professional 
network, MCHM doctors were able to quickly obtain the 
information needed to structure their care protocol. The 
latter represents a procedural hybridization. On the one 
hand, it is based on the principle of sectorization in the 
hospital environment, which was gradually implemented in 
all institutions. However, since hospitals were better adapted 
to procedures for isolating contagious patients, the MCHM 
team had to adapt the procedure to its own structural 
constraints. This required a collaborative reflection in order 
to find a solution that would be comfortable for patients, 
while limiting the risk of exposure for professionals. 
The operational cooperation of the MCHM local health 
network also developed a structural cooperation. As 
hospitals feared to be overwhelmed by the number of 
patients, MCHM doctors volunteered to replace hospital 
doctors during their days off to maintain the quality of care 
of the surrounding hospitals. Their objective was to 
maintain the quality of patient care, so that it would be 
comprehensive and continuous [30]. There seems to be, 
within this organizational health network, a certain 
conception of solidarity, which associates cooperation to the 
realization of a common work [24]. This case is in line with 
the organizational model known as "collaboration - 
cooperation" and corresponds to a plural level of 
relationship, 
which 
enriches 
and 
fleshes 
out 
the 
interdisciplinary relationships between institutions. This 
organizational principle tends to reject practices of non-
cooperation and domination and instead aims to promote 
relational exchanges. This inter-organizational alliance was, 
it seems, a determining factor within the Landes health 
territory. 
 
X. 
CONCLUSION 
During the first phase of the survey, the sharing 
procedures introduced at the MCHM raised questions about 
risk assessment. In this institution, different informational 
and managerial strategies were put in place to secure the 
exchange of personal records. However, during the first 
investigation, it seemed that the process of quality of care 
evaluation and “information crisis” management protocols 
(accidental or fraudulent disclosure, for example) were 
relatively minor. Before the COVID-19 crisis, the institution 
did not seem to have been confronted with any type of major 
crisis. Its youth and its efficient management could explain 
this situation. Emergency protocols to resolve this type of 
situation 
were 
non-existent 
in 
the 
MCHM. 
It 
is 
problematical, as this implementation is one the most 
important principles of evaluating the quality of care in 
France, since the publication of the law of 31 July 1991 [13]. 
It, therefore, seemed essential to study in great depth the 
involvement of the MCHM during the crisis and the change 
it had to conduct to brave it. The COVID-19 had been the 
real first challenge that could have put the MCHM in danger 
or even in total failure, especially concerning personal 
records management. During first month of the pandemic, 
the MCHM invested in a global reflexive stance to 
modernize its processes [30]. It questions its own modes of 
management to adapt to the crisis and so its capacity of 
resilience, as an ability of the organization to act in 
adequation to the reality, without taking any unthinking risk 
[29]. In the field of health, apparently minor errors or failures 
can have vital consequences [1] or endanger a health care 
institution and its staff. The management of the quality 
approach of such an institution cannot be done without a risk 
management component, nor a more global and formalized 
evaluation 
aspect. 
The 
measurement 
principles 
are 
inseparable from the principle of quality management [10]. It 
was necessary for the MCHM to proceed to this 
modernization and to develop its quality management 
procedures. 
The second part of the survey highlighted the importance 
of organizational trust and the mobilization of emotional 
intelligence. Quality and data management rely to some 
rational perspectives. However, the others aspects of the 
institution depend on human and emotional aspects, even 
considering data management. The price for the lack of 
emotional intelligence or trust could end up compromising 
the existence of the organization [19] and its efficiency 
during the crisis. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, problems 
were resolved with discretion and fluency, with clear and 
identified leaders. The case of the MCHM presents a very 
interesting duality. Indeed, despite the profound redesign of 
these 
organizational 
processes, 
its 
founding 
values 
261
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
(commitment, solidarity and trust) had been critical for its 
success [19] and had insured the stability and the fluency of 
the MCHM team. The survey could thus conclude to the 
predominance of trust and emotional intelligence over 
processes and management of technical devices. It also 
highlighted the necessity for healthcare institutions to be 
resilient and to develop a continuous adaption to its 
environment, to avoid hypertelia, and to learn from its crisis 
experiences to improve its processes [31]. 
It would be interesting to investigate, on a larger scale, 
other MCHs, in order to compare the results of this study 
with other territorial and technical contexts. Health care 
institutions were severely tested by the epidemic of the 
COVID-19 and some of them did not experience the success 
of the MCHM. Conducting a large-scale survey would test 
the hypothesis of the preponderance of emotional 
intelligence in crisis management. It could also help identify 
the key resources on which organizations should rely during 
crisis contexts. In a longer-term perspective, the results of 
such a study could formulating crisis management 
approaches dedicated to emerging and collaborative health 
organizations. The objective is also to consider the 
development of a single working model for all MCHs, 
specially concerning data privacy management. As each 
MCH has its own specifications (socioeconomical context, 
number of the staff members, equipment, competences, etc.) 
would it be possible and relevant to propose a single crisis 
management model and resilience capacity to all of them 
[32]? 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] E. Vigouroux-Zugasti, C. Bourret and S. Parrini-Alemanno, 
“From Theory to Reality – Health Data Management in a 
Complex System”, eTELEMED 2020, The Twenlfth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedecine, and 
Social Medicine, DigitalWorld 2020 Congress, November 21, 
2020 
to 
November 
25, 
2020. 
[Online]: 
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=instance&instanc
e=eTELEMED+2020 [Accessed: 10-November-2020]. 
[2] C. Doucet, Quality, University Press of France (Presses 
Universitaires de France), 2013. 
[3] The French Senate. Access to care: health innovation 
promoted 
in 
French 
territories, 
2017. 
[Online]: 
http://www.senat.fr/rap/r16-686/r16-68613.htm 
[Accessed: 
16-January-2020]. 
[4] C. Vilcot and H. Leclet, “Quality indicators in health: 
Certification and evaluation of professional practices”, 
Second release, French Association of normalization, 2006. 
[5] A. Bartoli and J. Sebai, “Multidisciplinary Care Houses 
facing territorial coordination”, Gestion 2000, no. 6, pp. 17-
37, 2015. 
[6] New Aquitaine Regional Health Authority, Population and its 
characteristics 
in 
New 
Aquitaine, 
2018. 
[Online]: 
http://www.nouvelleaquitaine.ars.sante.fr/la-population-et-
ses-caracteristiques-en-nouvelle-aquitaine 
[Retrieved: 
January, 2020]. 
[7] INSEE, Complete File – Landes (40), 2010. [Online]: 
https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/2011101?geo=DEP-
40#chiffre-cle-1 [Accessed: 23-October-2019]. 
[8] New Aquitaine Regional Health Authority, Key Metrics, 
2017. 
[Online]: 
https://www.calameo.com/read/003713143e21e889f9535?pag
e=3 [Accessed: 23-October-2019]. 
[9] French Data Protection Act. Loi informatique et liberté, Law 
no. 78-17 of January the 6th 1978 (Last modification: July 
27th 
2019). 
[Online]: 
https://www.cnil.fr/fr/la-loi-
informatique-et-libertes#article2 
[Accessed: 
23-October-
2019]. 
[10] L. Miguel-Chamion, “Protection of shared health data”, 
International Journal of Bioethics, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 63-80, 
2014.  
[11] J. Béranger, “Data ethical value of health big data”, Les 
Carnets du numérique, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 109-32, 2016. 
[12] C. Vilcot and H. Leclet, “Quality indicators in health: 
Certification and evaluation of professional practices”, 
Second release, French Association of normalization, 2006. 
[13] L. Monnoyer-Smith, “For a complex epistemology of 
information and communication sciences”, presented at the 
16th 
SFSIC 
Congress, 
Paris. 
2008 
[Online]: 
https://www.sfsic.org/congres_2008/spip.php?article78, 
[Accessed: 23-October-2019]. 
[14] M. Zacklad, “Management as a scoping activity in a context 
of cooperative transactions”, Activité, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 192-
200, 2013. 
[15] D. Maurel, “Sens-making: A model for the construction of 
reality and the apprehension of information by individuals and 
groups”. Communication Studies, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 31-46, 
2010. 
[16] G. Le Cardinal, “Federating and stimulating energies, 
building trust to face crisis situations”, Inflexions, vol. 2, no. 
3, pp. 153-168, 2006. 
[17] G. Le Cardinal, “Trust as a fundamental element of society”, 
Revue Projet, vol. 2, no. 293, pp. 65-71, 2006. 
[18] D. Goleman, Emotional intelligence, Bantam Books, 1996 
[19] D. 
Goleman, 
Working 
with 
emotional 
intelligence, 
Bloomsbury Publishing PLC, 1999. 
[20] C. Mayday, “Quality of data and Open data”, I2D 
Information, données documents, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 58-58, 
2016. 
[21] Software Weda. [On line]: https://www.weda.fr [Accessed: 
26-March-2020]. 
[22] D. Maurel and A. Chebbi, “The perception of informational 
trust. Impacts on informational behaviours and documentary 
practices in an organizational context”, Communication and 
Organization, vol. 42, pp. 73-90, 2012. 
[23] G. Simondon, On the Mode of Existence of Technical 
Objects, (ed. Aubier, 1958) University of Minnesota Press, 
2017. 
[24] P. Peretti-Watel, Risk society, La Decouverte, 2010. 
[25] F. Alavrez, The role of trust in the exchange of information: 
Study of control relationships in the hospital environment. 
Human Sciences and Society, Parix IX Dauphine University, 
2001. 
[On 
line]: 
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-
02545337/document [Accessed: 26-July-2020]. 
[26] C. Lengnick-Hall and T. Beck, “Adaptive fit versus robust 
transformation: how organizations respond to environmental 
change”, Journal of Management, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 738-757, 
2005.  
[27] A. Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity, Standford 
University Press, 1990. 
[28] L. Begin and D. Chabaud, “Organizational resilience: the case 
of a family business”, RFSIC, no. 200, pp. 127-142, 2010. 
[29] L.D. Coutu, “How resilience works”, Harvard Business 
Review, vol. 80, no. 5, pp. 46-55, 2002. 
[30] A. Dumas and F. Martin-Juchat, “A communicational 
approach to emotions in organizations: questions and 
262
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
methodological implications”, RFSIC, no. 9, 2016. [On line]: 
http://journals.openedition.org/rfsic/2103 [Accessed: 26-July-
2020]. 
[31] M.K. Christianson, Farkas M.T., K.M. Sutcliffe, K.E. Weick, 
“Learning through rare events: significant interruptions at the 
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Museum”, Organization Science, 
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 846-860, 2009. 
[32] J. Bauweraerts and O. Colot, “Organizational resilience in 
family business: myth or reality?”, Recherches en Sciences de 
Gestion, vol. 2, no. 101, pp. 197-215, 2014. 
 
263
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

