On the Development of a Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace
Susana Aguiar, Rui Pinto, Jo˜ao Reis, Gil Gonc¸alves
Department of Informatics Engineering
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Porto, Portugal
Email: {saguiar, rpinto, jpcreis, gil}@fe.up.pt
Abstract—In recent years, we have seen breathtaking technolog-
ical progress within Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), the Internet
of Things (IoT), Cloud computing, and intelligence and data
analytics. These advances are indeed moving from research to
the industrial shop ﬂoor and paving the way for the fourth
industrial revolution, the Industry 4.0. Industry 4.0 is putting
technology to work, disrupting conventional industrial processes
at every level and driving the industry into becoming digital. All
the technological progress has allow knowledge and information
to be virtually available everywhere to anyone, leading to the
emergence of new possibilities and business models. In a world
where competition is global, the industry must be able to respond
to unpredictable and rapid changes. The use of the Smart
Component concept, integrated into the Cyber-Physical System
architecture, allows for available data to be processed and used to
improve productivity and production planning as well as allow
for a better equipment use and better predictive maintenance
practices. All this available data must be stored and accessible,
which is where the Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace comes
into play, providing an interface for automatic update of the
industrial equipment technologies and functionalities on the ﬂy.
In this paper, an architecture for a Cyber-Physical Industrial
Marketplace is presented and explored. Having the ability to
collect data from the shop-ﬂoor equipment and update the
Smart Components in a safe, reliable, and secure way, is the
main goal of the proposed architecture. Creating an industrial
marketplace that goes beyond the concept of online stores, is
the next natural and logical step that will contribute to the
servitisation of industrial business models.
Keywords–Smart Factories; Intelligent Production Systems; In-
dustry 4.0; Cyber-Physical Systems; Marketplace.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Smart Factories, Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), Internet
of Things (IoT), and Cloud computing are popular terms that
are nowadays in the spotlight of current technology advances.
These technologies offer many advantages and are at the
core of the Industry 4.0 concept, which was at the basis
of the Marketplace for Cyber-Physical Production Systems
architecture presented in [1].
Industry 4.0: The term Industry 4.0, also recognized as
the fourth industrial revolution, originated in Germany, from a
project promoted by the German government with the goal of
digitizing the manufacturing industry [2]–[5]. The ﬁrst indus-
trial revolution began in England in the late 18th century with
the introduction of mechanical production equipment driven
by water and steam power. The second industrial revolution
started in the beginning of the 20th century and was based on
mass production enabled by the division of labour and the use
of electrical energy. In the beginning of the 1970’s, the third
industrial revolution was initiated with the use of electronics
and IT to further automate production. This lead to today’s
Figure 1. Industry 4.0
industrial revolution, the fourth industrial revolution - Industry
4.0, with the use of CPS. With the Industry 4.0 new concepts
and business models have emerged (Figure 1) [6]–[11].
There are several key factors that must be present in a
factory or in a system to be Industry 4.0 compliant: inter-
operability, information transparency, technical assistance, and
decentralized decision making. Interoperability gives devices,
machines, sensors, and humans the ability to connect and
communicate with each other. Information transparency is
achieved through the creation of a virtual copy of the physical
world using the sensor data in order to contextualize infor-
mation. Technical assistance has two main objectives: support
humans in decision making and problem solving, and assist
humans with tasks that are too difﬁcult or too dangerous for
humans. Decentralized decision making is reached through
passing simple decisions to the CPS level, which becomes as
autonomous as possible.
The Industry 4.0 has also created multiple challenges [12],
[13], such as security, reliability and stability, integrity of the
production system, loss of jobs, and fear of new technologies.
Data security, in any business, is always a concern that is
hugely increased when new systems and new ways of ac-
cessing the systems are introduced, which consequently also
creates new risks of losing proprietary information technology
107
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(IT) production knowledge. Although technology has come a
long way, there are still some limitations to overcome, and for
a CPS system to be successful, it must be reliable and stable,
which can sometimes be difﬁcult to achieve and to maintain.
Having a production system with less human supervision can
also be a barrier if integrity is not guaranteed, and less human
jobs always lead to concerns in the work environment.
The manufacturing industry has traditionally been a top-
down and centralized planning process. This way of working
is fast becoming insufﬁcient to respond to the constant changes
in the new high-mix low-volume production environments.
This is another reason for the strength that the Industry 4.0
concept has gain, and one of the ways to cope with these new
production environments is through reconﬁgurability, which is
facilitated by the technologies behind the Industry 4.0.
The concept of reconﬁgurability has been around for many
years. Generally, reconﬁgurability can be though as the ability
to repeatedly change and rearrange the components of a
system in a cost-effective way. Koren et al. in [14] deﬁned
reconﬁgurable manufacturing systems as being “[..] designed
at the outset for rapid change in structure, as well as in
hardware and software components, in order to quickly adjust
production capacity and functionality [..] in response to sudden
changes in market or in regulatory requirements”. Merhabi et
al. [15] complement this deﬁnition with the notion that “re-
conﬁguration allows adding, removing or modifying speciﬁc
process capabilities, controls, software, or machine structure
to adjust production capacity in response to changing market
demands or technologies [..] provides customised ﬂexibility [..]
so that it can be improved, upgraded and reconﬁgured, rather
than replaced”.
The equipment lifetime traditionally has several stages: it
starts with its incorporation onto the production line, followed
by its effective operation and maintenance phase, to its end
use and consequent removal. It is possible through these steps
to identify several critical points of intersection, which can po-
tentially cause equipment downtime and possibly downtime of
the production line, which ultimately is reﬂected in additional
costs.
To aid the reconﬁgurability in the manufacturing industry,
smart objects or smart components are being developed and
used. Smart Components are deﬁned as components that incor-
porate functions of self-description, communication, sensing,
and control in order to cooperate with other smart components,
analyse a situation, make decisions based on the available data,
and modify their behaviour through feedback [16], [17].
Cloud Services: All the sensors and CPS that are being
used and can be used in the industry, produce massive amounts
of data that can be used to further improve the manufacturing
process. The challenge is where and how to store all this data
and how to use it. One way of dealing with this challenge is to
use cloud based services [18]–[22]. The term ”cloud” started
to be used in the 1990’s in the telecommunications ﬁeld, when
providers began using virtual private network (VPN) services
for data communication [23], [24]. The National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) deﬁnes cloud computing as:
”a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network access
to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing resources (e.g.,
networks, servers, storage applications and services) that can
be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management
effort or service provider interaction.” [25].
Figure 2. Cloud Services Model
The cloud computing concept provides three types of
services that can be arranged as layers in a stack 2: the
Software as a Service (SaaS), the Platform as a Service
(PaaS), and the Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). SaaS provide
the user with the capability of running applications that are
hosted in the cloud instead of locally, which can be accessed
from various client devices. PaaS allow the user to deploy,
to the cloud, user-created or acquired applications created
using programming languages, libraries, services, and tools
supported by the provider. IaaS provide the capability to
provision processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental
computing resources where the user is able to deploy and run
arbitrary software, which can include operating systems and
applications [24], [26]–[28].
As mentioned before, new business models are emerging
in order to accommodate all these new concepts, technologies,
and changes. One of these business models is what can be
called of Industrial Marketplace. An Industrial Marketplace is
a Multi-sided platform (MSP), also known as virtual Market-
place, [29], [30]. There are several deﬁnitions of what a MSP
is, which are not always in accordance with each other [29],
but there are two key features that are always present: (1)
platforms, which provide the ability of direct interactions be-
tween two or more distinct sides, and (2) each side is afﬁliated
with the platform. Furthermore, in order for a platform to be
successful it must provide the ability of co-creation of value,
interdependency and complementarity of components, surplus
value for the whole system, and evolutionary growth [31].
Figure 3. ReBorn Vision
108
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ReBorn Project: As presented in [1], the architecture
described is the result of combining the outcomes of two
European projects: the Reborn project and the Selsus project.
The ReBorn - Innovative Reuse of modular knowledge Based
devices and technologies for Old, Renewed and New fac-
tories project [32], was a project funded under THEME
FoF.NMP.2013-2 - Innovative re-use of modular equipment
based on integrated factory design until August of 2016. The
vision of ReBorn was to demonstrate strategies and technolo-
gies that support a new paradigm for the re-use of production
equipment in factories (Figure 3). This re-use will give new
life to decommissioned production systems and equipment,
helping them to be “reborn” in new production lines. Such new
strategies will contribute to sustainable, resource-friendly and
green manufacturing and, at the same time, deliver economic
and competitive advantages for the manufacturing sector. The
developments made in ReBorn helped in the validation of
technologies that extends production equipment life cycle,
contributing to economic and environmental sustainability of
production systems [9], [33].
Figure 4. SelSus Vision
Selsus Project: The SelSus - Health Monitoring and Life-
Long Capability Management for SELf-SUStaining Manufac-
turing Systems project [34] was a project also funded by the
European Commission under the Seventh Framework Program
for Research and Technological Development until August of
2017. The vision of SelSus was to create a new paradigm for
highly effective, self-healing production resources and systems
to maximize their performance over longer life times through
highly targeted and timely repair, renovation and upgrading
through the use of the Smart Component concept as a SelComp
(Figure 4). These next generation machines, ﬁxtures and tools
with embed extended sensory capabilities and smart materials
combined with advanced Information and Communications
Technology (ICT) for self-diagnosis enabling them to become
self-aware and supporting self-healing production systems.
Distributed diagnostic and predictive repair and renovation
models will be embedded into smart devices to early prognosis
failure modes and component degradations. Self-aware devices
will built on synergetic relationships with their human opera-
tors and maintenance personnel through continuous pro-active
communication to achieve real self-healing systems. This will
drastically improve the resilience and long term sustainability
of highly complex manufacturing facilities to foreseen and
unforeseen disturbances and deteriorations thereby minimizing
energy and resource consumption and waste [17], [35]–[37].
In this paper, we propose an architecture for a Cyber-
Physical Industrial Marketplace that results from combining
the experience collected over the development of the ReBorn
Marketplace, the SelSus Dashboard, and the combination of
the functionalities of the Smart Components implemented on
both projects. The objective is to have an efﬁcient and easy
to use Industrial Marketplace that provide a route for the ﬂow
of information from the equipment at the shop-ﬂoor, up to the
Marketplace and back. Further, this proposed Cyber-Physical
Industrial Marketplace will allow us to take advantage of all
the current technological advances, and contributes for a safe
and reliable way of using all the available information. Section
II provides an overview of related work. Section III presents an
overview of an Industrial Marketplace concept and Section IV
describes the proposed Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace
concept. Finally, Section V concludes the paper by exposing
some ﬁnal remarks about the concept and work developed.
II.
RELATED WORK
A digital marketplace can be viewed as a collaborative
network that is formed in order to take advantage of new op-
portunities and explore new business models, as mentioned be-
fore. Nowadays, processing sensors and actuators have become
common, more affordable and available, which is driving the
wide adoption of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) solutions.
The WSNs can be found practically in all areas of everyday
life, in applications such as environmental monitoring, military,
or industrial ﬁelds, specially since data gathering is one of the
pillars for the implementation of the IoT concept. Since WSNs
typically contain small sensor devices, they have limitations on
the memory, computation, energy, and scalability [38]. In order
to fully use the potentialities of the WSNs, an infrastructure
that is powerful, scalable, and secure must be implemented.
Llanes et al. [39] presented a survey of the main approaches
that have been developed to deal with all the raw data collected
by sensors. Sensors continuously collect data regarding a given
event and send it to a gateway, which usually needs a speciﬁc
protocol to process the received raw data. The main problem
is that the various sensor manufacturers provide different
communication protocols that use different message formats.
This means that there is not a universal technology that can
receive raw sensor data and support every message type for all
the manufacturers. In the survey several solutions are described
as well as the strengths and limitations of each one. An
attempt to tackle this problem was made by Gonc¸alves et al.
[40], where a Universal Gateway is proposed and presented.
Shen et al. [41] provided an overview of recent developments
of agent technology applied to manufacturing enterprises,
which include enterprise collaboration regarding supply chain
management and virtual enterprises, manufacturing process
planning and scheduling, shop ﬂoor control, and also holonic
manufacturing as an implementation methodology.
There have been other studies on how to manage the
physical sensors. The Sensor Modelling Language (SensorML)
[42] intends to provide standard models in a XML encoding
for physical sensors’ description and measurement processes.
It is being used by the international non proﬁt organization
109
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) [43] which is committed
on making quality open standards for the global geospatial
community.
As mentioned before, sensors from different manufacturers
use different communication protocols, which makes sharing
sensors and its information between applications difﬁcult.
Shneidman et al. [44] presented an infrastructure called Hour-
glass, which addresses the need for a software infrastructure
that enables the rapid development and deployment of ap-
plications that use data from several, heterogeneous sensor
networks. Silva et al. in [35] presented a ﬂexible sensor
integration solution. This ﬂexible integration allows for a rapid
graphical development of interpreters of raw data packets in the
Cloud as well as its deployment for embedded execution at the
WSN gateway level, for automatic data acquisition. Yuriyama
& Kushida [45] proposed a new infrastructure called Sensor-
Cloud infrastructure which can manage physical sensors on
an IT infrastructure. The proposed Sensor-Cloud Infrastructure
virtualizes a physical sensor as a virtual entity in the Cloud.
Reis in [37] presented the implementation and use of the
Sensor Cloud concept developed in the scope of the SelSus
project. The goal was the easy integration, processing and
visualization of sensor information within the industrial ﬁeld.
The main functionalities are the easy integration of sensors
into a WSN regardless of their manufacturer, methods to pre-
process data to be used for further decision making, and
integration of new methods for statistical analysis.
This new paradigm of connecting and virtualizing sensors
in a cloud infrastructure for data processing, is an active
research ﬁeld that is being explored by several researchers. Yan
et al. [46], [47] proposed a cloud-based production system,
across distributed data centers, which integrates several web
and cloud computing technologies. A full connection model
of product design and manufacturing in an IoT-enabled Cloud
manufacturing environment, which uses the social networks
to enable the connection of multiple parties, is also proposed.
Zhang et al. [48] described a cloud manufacturing, deﬁned for
solving the bottlenecks in data and manufacturing applications.
Alam & Saddik [49] presented and described a digital twin ar-
chitecture reference model for cloud-based CPS, named C2PS.
Neto et al. [50] presented the ﬁrst steps in the development
of a framework that takes advantage of several technologies
like UPnP, OSGi, and iPOJO, which addresses some of the
challenges needed to enable a Sensor Cloud in the shop ﬂoor.
Chiang & Lee [51] proposed a smart manufacturing platform
that can be used by small enterprises and start-ups. The
heart of this platform is the communication pipeline, which
allows component providers, original equipment manufacturer
(OEM) factories, makers, and maker spaces that allow product
development, to connect.
With so many solutions proposed and with so many differ-
ent technologies that can be used, researchers have aggregate
some of the available information through surveys. Alamri
et al. [52] provided a survey of some of the most relevant
work related to Sensor-Cloud infrastructure, its deﬁnition,
architecture, and applications. Moc¸ano et al. [53] analysed
how the IoT can be used in the manufacturing industry, by
proposing a metamodel for integrating the Internet of Things,
Social Networks, Cloud, and Industry 4.0. Perera et al. [54]
presented a survey over one hundred IoT smart solutions in
the marketplace, identifying the technologies used, function-
alities, and applications. The idea was to provide a guideline
and a conceptual framework for future research in the IoT,
motivating further developments by suggesting a number of
potentially signiﬁcant research directions. Albrecht et al. [55]
examined the standards required for successful e-commerce
architectures, evaluated the strengths and limitations of these
type of systems and concluded, through the examination of the
major platforms that have been developed, that there is a lack
of a common or shared standard for marketplace architectures.
With the increase of the number of devices connected to
the Internet, having centralized Cloud services will become
unsustainable. This is leading to new paradigms such as Fog
or Edge computing [56], [57].
Security and data privacy is currently one of the biggest
restraints in the wide use of the technologies described pre-
viously. Many authors have addressed these issues of security
and privacy over the IoT [58]–[64] and have proposed new
approaches for securing and enabling reliability on sensor data
[38], [65]. Nevertheless, there is still a great deal of work
to be performed in areas such as cryptographic mechanisms,
data, identity, and privacy management, as well as deﬁning
trusted architectures. Taylor & Sharif in [66] presented the
main security threats faced by the industry as well as the main
approaches for counteracting those threats. Zahra et al. in [67]
also presented a concise survey on sensor network constraints,
security requirements, attacks, and defensive measures. A
RC5’s algorithm was proposed, which provides good security
against the four main types of attacks, even thought it is a
simple encryption algorithm that still needs further testing.
The most common type of industrial marketplaces that
can currently be found online are auction sites ([68], [69]) or
digital stores, which are sites where companies present their
products to be sold, like a normal store [70]–[72]. But there
are also some companies trying to change their marketplace
sites and make them more intelligent and take advantage of all
the new technology available. One example is the Intelligent
Plant company [73] that developed an app (App Store connect),
which allows users that use their services and software to
make their data available to the applications that are in their
Industrial App Store. Another example is Advantech, which
launched the WISE-PaaS Marketplace [74], an online IoT
software store that features Advantech’s exclusive software
services, including IoT cloud services, IoT security services,
and pre-packaged solution packages.
III.
INDUSTRIAL MARKETPLACE
Although there are several platforms proposed for industrial
marketplaces, there is still no truly intelligent, online, working
industrial marketplace. There are several reasons for the lack
of this type of Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace, which
include security issues, a common accepted platform, and a
common accepted communication mechanism. Another reason
is trust. Most of the businesses in the industrial ﬁeld are based
on relationships built over time and where there is a high trust
between the stakeholders [75].
The global marketplace has been evolving at a rapid pace
over the recent years. Reduced lot sizes, customization and
individualization in the product is the future of manufacturing.
The challenge for manufacturers in this new trend of manu-
facturing is that neither the traditional theories of production
planning and scheduling work in an Industry 4.0 environment.
110
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

One of the key elements that is at the base of a marketplace,
industrial or of other type, is a platform. Smedlund and
Faghankhani [31] deﬁne platform as ”Any physical or virtual
space where different participants compose a market and a
platform that participants orchestrate can be deﬁned as a
platform”.
Platforms are typically composed of multi-layered struc-
tures, where the technological core element provides support
for complementary technologies and software. Depending on
the type of interactions between the participants, it is possible
to identify different types of platforms such as: platforms that
bring sellers and buyers together, platforms that help members
of some group ﬁnd a match in another group, platforms
that measure transactions between participants, and platforms
where participants share their input with other participants.
Platforms can be classiﬁed as one-sided, two-sided, or multi-
sided, depending on the number of participating groups. In n-
sided platforms the users connect to each other, communicate
and co-create value for themselves and for the other users
and participants. The end-user must give something back to
the platform, in order to beneﬁt from the whole spectrum of
platform functionalities.
Chen et al. in [76] deﬁned online platforms, based on
the deﬁnition of the European Commission, as ”digital plat-
forms that enable consumers to ﬁnd online information and
businesses to exploit the advantages of e-commerce”. They
also classiﬁed online platforms into eight types according
to user groups and business models: E-Commerce, Resource
Sharing, Matching/Auction, Competitive Crowdsourcing, Non-
competitive Crowdsourcing, Crowdfunding, Search Platforms,
and Social Network Platforms. There are several factors for
the success of online platforms such as the development
costs, which are usually low for users because the main costs
are associated with the development of the platform itself;
the multi-sided revenue streams because on online platforms
there is value created for all user groups involved; the online
platforms have ﬂexible scalability and can easily scale up
operations; and online platforms are Widely accessible.
Nowadays there are two terms that often appear when
one is talking about online business and that are often in-
terchanged but that do have different meaning: e-commerce
and e-marketplace. E-commerce is a business model where a
given company buys products from several other companies
and, through its web site, directly sells them to clients. E-
marketplace is a different business model where the company
that owns the web site only provides a platform, it does not
directly buy or sell anything [77]–[80] (Figure 5).
Online businesses can be grouped into three big types of
models as shown in Figure 6 [77], [81]:
•
B2B - Business to Business is a type of transaction that
is performed between businesses, such as a company
buying materials or services needed for its production
process, or re-selling products or services produced by
others.
•
B2C - Business to Consumer is when the transaction
is between one business and its consumers who are
the end-users of the product.
•
C2C - Consumer to Consumer is a model where the
transactions are executed directly between costumers.
Figure 5. E-commerce vs E-marketplace
Figure 6. online Business Types
In order to properly deﬁne and establish the goals for
the Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace concept, a set of
requirements were collected and deﬁned. These set of require-
ments allowed for the development of a workable marketplace,
as well as provide a way of verifying the usefulness of the
marketplace. With the intent of ﬁnding a valid and robust
solution, it was necessary to validate all inherent functional
and non-functional requirements, which in turn enables a full
understanding of the customer needs and requirements. In
order to satisfy the requirements of a real life application,
some of the requirements were collected through a joint
work with the Harms&Wende Karlsruhe – Germany Software
Development team branch, which was part of the ReBorn
project. The functional requirements collected are shown in
Table I.
IV.
CYBER-PHYSICAL INDUSTRIAL MARKETPLACE
CONCEPT
As mentioned before, in [1] the concept of a Marketplace
for the cyber-physical production systems was presented. This
concept emerged from the results of two European projects:
the ReBorn project and the Selsus project.
Figure 7 presents what we consider to be the basic ideas
that must be present in a Industrial Marketplace, speciﬁcally
111
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. Functional Requirements
Feature
User Management
Allow the creation of user accounts in a reliable and ﬂexible way. User management functionalities
such as user validation and customer data base management, by the platform administrator
Access Control
Allow association of different roles to each user, which determines the type and amount of
information available for that speciﬁc user
Unlimited Products & Categories
Allow the unlimited creation of products and product categories
Multi-Language
Support multiple languages on which information is displayed
Gift Certiﬁcates
Allow gift certiﬁcates, which act as a key feature regarding platform growth, and inventory
management
Discount Coupons
Allow discount coupons to be generate at will, which is proven to be an important tool to product
marketing
Loyalty Program
Reward users which make multiple purchases on the marketplace, in order to increase the users
commitment to the online platform
Afﬁliates Program
Allow entities who are capable of selling and or promoting the marketplace products and services,
or directing customers to it, in exchange for a percentage of a sale
Search Optimization Tools
Search engine optimization in order to attempt to achieve the highest rank possible
Product Reviews
Allow users to review products that are currently supported by the online platform
Newsletters
Allow the platform administration the option to send bulk emails to existing customers, or customers
that subscribed to a newsletter program
Wish Lists
Offer the users the ability to create wish lists
Shipping
Shipping Filters
Display shipping costs according to product dimensions, weight, and delivery range of the items
ordered
Shipper Lookups
Offer a varied spectrum of courier delivery services regarding product shipping
Tax & Payment
Payment Options
Include built in support for payment gateways such as PayPal, and Authorize.net
Tax Filters
Be able to take into account the appropriate tax rate applied to the customers country and state
Application Management
Industrial Equipment Software Update
Provide the latest application software releases upon request from each industrial equipment
Full System Software Update
Allow, upon request by the client, a full system application software update up to the most recent
and stable software version in a fully automated manner
Speciﬁc Software Update
Allow individual update requests of each application
Software Restore
Allow for software restore in case of any malfunction or defect is detected a regarding a particular
software update
Industrial Equipment Software Install
Allow for individual application installation as long as long as the application is compatible with
the industrial equipment, and the industrial equipment owner possesses an available license for the
to be installed application
Industrial Equipment Software Uninstall
The industrial equipment upon uninstall of any application must notify the online platform
Figure 7. Proposed Solution Pillars
in a Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace. These basic ideas
are the pillars of a Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace that
is pointing toward the future:
•
Flexibility - any future Industrial Marketplace must be
ﬂexible. In [82] ﬂexibility is deﬁned as ”the ease with
which a system or component can be modiﬁed for use
in applications or environments other than those for
which it was speciﬁcally designed”. The marketplace
must allow for new products or services exchange,
and new protocols or technologies, through a seamless
easy manner.
•
Adaptability - is the way the marketplace internally
adjust to ﬂexibility. As time goes by and new tech-
nologies and applications emerge, an Industrial Mar-
ketplace must have the ability to adapt to new and
different applications, through new technologies and
protocols, without much effort.
•
Scalability - any marketplace must be scalable, which
means that it must be able to grow without losing
functionality and ﬂexibility. It must be able to deal
with the natural increase, over time, of information
and data ﬂows.
•
Security - is one of the most important aspects of these
112
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

type of businesses. For a marketplace to be intelligent
it needs to be able to access a huge amount of
information, ideally down to the equipment level. This
introduces possible security breaches. Considering that
in a marketplace many different kind of businesses
are present with different kinds of security needs,
the marketplace must be prepared to handle different
security protocols.
•
Privacy - walks hand in hand with security. For most
companies, their information records are one of the
most precious assets. This introduces the need for
privacy and authentication. As in security, the market-
place must also be able to handle different schemes
of privacy and authentication of users as well as of
information.
•
Resource Economy - in any business, small, medium,
or large, there is a common goal: be able to save
money to increase their proﬁts. One way of accom-
plishing this is through a better resource management.
Better resource management can be achieved through
several ways, one of the most common is through
cheaper materials or human force and by mass pro-
duction of a single product. But the price of materials
or workers can only decrease until a certain point, and
although there are still many types of products that can
be mass produce, customization is gaining strength.
This means that new ways of resource economy must
be found. The Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace
can facilitate the development of these new ways such
as new collaborations between different suppliers, re-
use and re-purpose of machines, and creation of new
services.
•
Time Economy - another way of saving money in a
business is by saving time. A well designed market-
place will allow for its users to save time through
quickly supplying relevant information. In an Cyber-
Physical Industrial Marketplace a user can ﬁnd suppli-
ers and partners easily and reach them with a simple
click or message. This contributes to a more efﬁcient
and fast product design and production.
A. Proposed solution
With all the new technology that is virtually available
everywhere to anyone, it is easy to imagine that everything
can eventually be connected. This connectivity brings new
information exchange channels, which leads to new business
possibilities. Creating a marketplace that is more encompassing
and with more functionalities than the current online stores, is
the next natural and logical step.
The Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace, at ﬁrst sight,
works as a common online store. Users can register and buy
products and sellers can also register and sell their products.
The Marketplace is able to manage all the user and sellers
accounts, as well as the shipping and payment services. This
Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace is based on the ReBorn
Marketplace [9], which is a multi-sided market, with service
providers on one end and service consumers on the other.
As Figure 8 presents, the Cyber-Physical Industrial Mar-
ketplace is composed of several elements, such as sellers,
equipment, services, buyers, platforms, and software. All these
Figure 8. Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace Participants
elements can have more than one role. For example, a buyer
can be a seller or service provider, or a service provider can
also provide software and equipment.
Figure 9. Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace Connection
Figure 9 provides a high level image of the proposed
solution. As it can be seen, there are four main blocks in the
proposed solution: the online marketplace, the cloud infras-
tructure, the digital twins, and the collaborative environment.
A key element in order to have an intelligent Cyber-
Physical Industrial Marketplace is information. The bigger
the amount of information available and the more precise
the information collected is, the better and more accurate the
management will be. Manufacturing equipment is becoming,
113
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

itself, more intelligent and able of providing relevant and
near real-time information. The problem is how to use this
information, where to store it, and who or what has access to
it. In the manufacturing world, information from the equipment
is a desirable and often priceless asset. The right equipment
conﬁguration can be the difference between a top quality
product and a medium or poor one. This has introduced a
standstill in the widespread of industrial marketplaces. Another
impasse on this type of business is that, although intelligent
equipment is available, there is still a great amount of older
equipment that has no sensors or any recent technology that
allows gathering information.
In order to overcome these drawbacks the Smart Object
concept was envisioned. The Smart Object can represent
any element of the shop-ﬂoor such as machines, sensors,
components, AGVs, smart-phones, and shop-ﬂoor operators
with wearable sensor devices. The Smart Object is a digital
representation of the shop-ﬂoor elements as shown in Figure
9, and it is based on the developments made in the ReBorn and
Selsus projects. Both projects deepen and enhanced the smart
component concept that was ﬁrst developed in the European
projects XPress [83], [84] and I-RAMP3 [40], [85]. The main
goal of these smart components was to enhance the equipment
with new capabilities and functionalities. The Smart Object
picks up on the results from these projects and takes it a step
further. The idea is that the Smart Object can be treated as a
black box. It can communicate with an equipment that already
has sensors and is gathering information or it can have sensors
added to it, in order to be used with older equipments that have
no intelligence incorporated.
Figure 10. Smart Object Characteristics
The Smart Objects have ﬁve essential characteristics, which
are presented in Figure 10 [17]. Smart Objects are recon-
ﬁgurable because they are able of reconﬁguring its internal
operation in runtime and modular because they are able of
extending its capabilities by adding new software modules,
also at runtime. Smart Objects also have data processing
capabilities, such as system state assessment and event and
alarm detection. Another essential characteristic of the Smart
Object is the omnidirectional communication and interface
capabilities, which allow the system to communicate with
Figure 11. Cloud Infrastructure
devices at any level: lower level, such as sensors and machines;
same level, such as other Smart Objects; or higher level,
such as cloud servers and manufacturing systems. The Smart
Objects are also able of processing events and of taking
actions with a certain degree of intelligence and autonomy.
The ﬁnal characteristic is the ability for real-time acquisition,
processing, and deliver of data collected.
The Smart Object can be considered as a bridge between
the shop-ﬂoor and the virtual world. All the information
collected and treated by the Smart Objects are sent to a
cloud infrastructure. This infrastructure can be as simple or
as complex as needed, depending on the type of business and
the treatment that is required for the information collected.
The Cloud Infrastructure is further detailed in Figure 11 and is
composed by the following elements: communication service,
storage, applications, and private marketplace.
The Communication Service is responsible for providing a
way of exchanging information between the possible different
platforms and software programs. This service has the capa-
bility of receiving and interpreting the requests to and from
the Smart Objects, which allows all communications between
the different levels of the system to be simple and clearly
deﬁned. In order for this communication the be easy and
simple a semantic was deﬁned [36]. There are two groups
of possible communication: communication with the Cloud
Infrastructure and communication with the Marketplace. In
the Cloud Infrastructure, in order to directly communicate
with the Smart Object three types of documents have been
deﬁned: the Smart Self Description (SSD), the Payload, and the
Recipe Adjustment. These three documents are XML based.
The SDD purpose is to allow the description of the shop-ﬂoor
equipment. It has two main parts: meta information of the
equipment, such as equipment manufacturer, serial number,
equipment model, Smart Object name, and Smart Object
unique identiﬁer; and operational related data, such as which
data needs to be collected and how, and to where it needs
to be sent. The Payload document is has a very lightweight
XML structure used to send operational process data to the
Cloud Infrastructure. The Recipe Adjustment document is also
114
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a lightweight XML structure used to reconﬁgure the Smart
Object processing process.
The Storage, as the name suggests, stores in form of a
database, all the structural representation and operational data
of the Smart Objects. This information will be accessible
through the communication service and can be conﬁgured
to determine what is stored, for how long, and who has
permission to access it.
The Applications element encompasses a group of soft-
ware applications that permits the easy interaction of the
user with the system. These applications enable the user to
control and reconﬁgure the system. Figure 11 presents some
of the applications already developed: the Dynamic Modular
Reconﬁguration (DMR) [17], the Sensor Integration [35], the
Workﬂow, and the Module Integrator [36]. The DMR purpose
is to enable an easy and quick way of reconﬁguring the Smart
Object code responsible for processing data, which facilitates
the reconﬁguration and sensor integration in the system. The
Sensor Integration is an application developed to aid the user
to easily, though a graphical interface, deﬁne interpreters of the
raw data packets. The purpose of this application is to allow
the addition of new sensors by simply deﬁning the type of
message used and connecting the sensor on the shop-ﬂoor. The
Workﬂow is also an application that intends to aid the user. The
goal here is to allow the conﬁguration of how data is process at
a higher level, also through a graphical interface by means of a
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) (Figure 12). The source nodes
(red nodes) represent devices available that generate data,
the intermediary nodes (blue nodes) are processing modules
available to process data from source nodes, and the sink nodes
(green nodes) that represent a higher level of processing. This
allows to process multiple data sources and multiple Smart
Objects, by simply drawing a DAG. The Module Integration
application accede the integration of internal and external
processing modules, which can be used in the DMR and in
the Workﬂow.
The ﬁnal element presented is the Private Marketplace.
The idea behind the private marketplace emerged from the
need of the industry to keep data private and local. The
Private Marketplace is intended to be a copy of the online
Marketplace, with all its features and services, but it is hosted
on a private network. This Private Marketplace will act as a
proxy between the online Marketplace and all the internal and
private system elements. This allows for all the information
collected by the Smart Objects to be sent and used by the
Private Marketplace. This information can be used in appli-
cations such as maintenance planning or stock management.
The Private Marketplace will allow to manage this information
and facilitate the management of what can be uploaded into the
online Marketplace. On the other hand, any software update or
new feature that becomes available on the online Marketplace,
can be downloaded to the Private Marketplace, through direct
connection or manual update, and then be used to update the
Smart Objects as needed.
Besides the three documents, described above, used by the
Cloud Infrastructure to communicate with the Smart Object,
there is also the need to communicate with the Marketplace, in
order to have the ability to update the Smart Object software
or to add new features, such as a security module or a
new data processing algorithm. The communication with the
Marketplace is performed through a RESTful Web Services,
Figure 12. Dynamic Modular Reconﬁguration Application
which is a Representational State Transfer (REST) web service
based architecture. The REST was chosen because it is a
web standard based architecture that uses the HTTP Protocol
for data communication. In the REST architecture, every
component is a resource and can be accessed by a common
interface using HTTP standard methods, such as GET (a read
only access to a resource), PUT (to create a new resource),
DELETE (to remove a resource), POST (to update an existing
resource or create a new resource), and OPTIONS (to get the
supported operations on a resource). From the possible text
representations that are supported the JSON and XML where
chosen.
The online Marketplace, as shown in Figure 9, provides
several services and functionalities. There are several func-
tionalities that are inherent to an online marketplace. These
inherent functionalities include all management related to
users, products, shipping, and payment as presented in Table I.
The management activity encompasses operations that include
adding, deleted, or changing information from users; adding,
deleting, changing information from products, and keeping
track of the products stocks; keeping track of shipment ac-
tivities; and manage all payments related activities. But aside
from all these regular activities, in order to be considered
intelligent and a Cyber-physical Industrial Marketplace, it must
provide other services that can aid users on their activities. For
example alert the user for equipments that are similar to what
the user is searching or provide updates on new software or
new complementary equipment compatible with what that the
user has acquired.
A key functionality for a Cyber-Physical Industrial Mar-
ketplace is the ability to manage the shop-ﬂoor equipment. As
mentioned before, a direct connection between the shop-ﬂoor
and the internet, is not desirable and most of the times not even
possible. This restriction was behind the concept of the Private
Marketplace. As mentioned before the Private Marketplace is
115
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a copy of the online Marketplace, which can execute all the
services, in a private setting with no online connection. But
this Private Marketplace can also synchronize with the online
Marketplace all the information collected by the Smart Objects
that has been deﬁned as not private, and also receive updates
from the online Marketplace.
One important feature is the Industrial Software Man-
ager. This manager is responsible for the management of
the application content of each Smart Object. This allows
the upgrade of the Smart Object software, in an easy and
simple way, facilitating the integration of new technologies
and functionalities in the industrial equipment on the ﬂy.
Figure 13. Practical example
The implementation of the Private/Public Marketplace con-
cept was tested at the Harms&Wende (HWH) Karlsruhe [86],
as part of the joint work collaboration within the ReBorn
project. HWH is a component supplier specialized in welding
control systems for various sectors, offering resistance welding
equipment in form of control devices as well as quality assur-
ance systems. HWH customers are often welding machines
manufacturers who use the HWH welding control units.
Figure 13 provides an overview of the implementation
of the Private/Public Marketplace concept presented. As it is
shown, there are three main components: the Smart Objects,
the Private Marketplace and the Public Marketplace. For the
test performed at the HWH, the Smart Object was implemented
on a dedicated hardware platform, a RaspBerry Pi SBC,
to enable an easy implementation and test of the concept.
Inside the Marketplace, as previously stated, there is the
Industrial Software Manager, which, in the case of the Private
Marketplace, locally manages the application content of each
equipment’s Smart Object, while the equipment is installed in a
production line. This Industrial Software Manager can receive
requests and update the Smart Object software, through a
REST based web service [9]. The Industrial Software Manager
in the Private Marketplace can synchronize its information as
well as receive updates from the Industrial Software Manager
in the Public Marketplace.
Another important and crucial feature is the Security Man-
ager. This manager facilitates the possibility of having a se-
curity layer over all the communications that occur within the
system, from the Smart Object up to the online Marketplace.
This manager will provide privacy and authentication modules,
that can be conﬁgured to use different algorithms, and which
can be added to every element of the system.
The purpose of the Maintenance Manager, as can be
inferred from the name, is to aid in the maintenance planning.
Using predictive algorithms based on the information collected
by the Smart Objects, the Maintenance Manager can aid in the
scheduling of the equipment’s maintenance, in order to mini-
mize the production down time. But this manager can also be
useful in a different scenario. Consider an equipment supplier
that wants to increase their business by adding maintenance
services to its portfolio. Many equipment suppliers sell across
the country and even to across countries. The Maintenance
Manager, based on the information collected by the Smart
Objects, can provide a maintenance or inspection schedule that
takes into account the geographical placing of the equipment
as well as the current state of the equipment. This will allow
the equipment supplier to minimize the travelling costs and
also provide a more active preventive maintenance service.
The Maintenance Manager will generate possible maintenance
routes, based on conﬁgurable variables, such as minimize costs
or travel time.
As mentioned before, one key functionality of this type
of systems is to be able to change, on the ﬂy, what is
being processed in the Smart Objects. With that in mind,
the Simulation Dashboard was deﬁned. As the Maintenance
Manager, this Simulation Dashboard can be used in two
distinct scenarios. It can be used privately by a company that
needs a new functionality for its Smart Objects or it can be
used by developers that want to sell new modules for the
Smart Objects on the Marketplace. The Simulation Dashboard
facilitates the design, implementation, and test of new features,
such as new metric calculations or a new form of processing
raw data in the Smart Objects. After the user implements
and tests, through simulation the new functionality developed,
it can be sent to the Smart Objects or stored in the online
Marketplace to be sold.
B. Advantages and disadvantages of a Cyber-Physical Indus-
trial Marketplace
With the digital revolution, business models have changed
and evolved. Online Marketplaces are growing at a fast pace.
They provide a way for companies to quickly and easily ﬁnd
new costumers and expand their business. They also provide
a way for new opportunities to establish partnerships between
traders and suppliers. Using online Marketplaces reduces mar-
keting costs compared to other sales channels. It also allows
for new opportunities for overseas sales, without the costs
of setting up stores across different countries. Being able to
operate a round-the-clock business reduces time constraints
and problems with international trading hours.
For buyers, online Marketplaces are also a quick way
to ﬁnd companies, design and produce prototypes, and buy
products easily. Online Marketplaces provide a convenient way
to compare prices and products from a single source. Using
116
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a credible online Marketplace contributes to the building of a
greater level of trust between the sellers and the buyers. It also
improves the level of transparency, through the availability of
prices and stock levels in an open environment.
The downfall of online Marketplaces is thrust or more
exactly the lack of trust. The online Marketplaces can provided
a venue for bad players to set up store-fronts and trafﬁc in
damaged, counterfeit, or falsely products. Another issue also
related with trust is the management of the information that
can be exchanged, how can privacy and security be guaranteed.
Credit card fraud is also a huge concern when dealing with
online Marketplaces businesses.
V.
CONCLUSION
Industry 4.0 has brought to light new concepts and tech-
nologies. Cyber-Physical Systems, the Internet of Things,
and Cloud computing pave the way for the Smart Factories
concept. Within the Smart Factories approach, a large amount
of data is available to be used. All the available data can be
processed using data analytic algorithms, which can then be
used to improve productivity and production planning as well
as allow for a better equipment predictive maintenance. In a
world where competition is global, the industry must be able
to respond to unpredictable and rapid market changes. Man-
ufacturing systems must become ﬂexible, easily upgradable,
and allow for new technologies and functions to be readily
integrated. This creates the need for novel manufacturing
control systems able to cope with the increased complexity
required to manage product and production variability in mass
customized manufacturing.
A solution for this challenge is through the Smart Compo-
nents concept, a logical encapsulation of the manufacturing
industrial equipment. To organise and store information of
industrial machines, not only for potential customers to check
and compare different devices, but also to provide an interface
that allows for automatic update of the industrial equipment
technologies and functionalities on the ﬂy, a Cyber-Physical
Industrial Marketplace is key.
In this paper an architecture for a Cyber-Physical Industrial
Marketplace is proposed. This work is the result of combining
some of the results and experience collected over two European
projects: the ReBorn and the Selsus project. Within these two
projects, the contributions produced, which are also at the basis
of this proposed architecture are the ReBorn Marketplace, the
SelSus Dashboard, and the combination of the functionalities
of the Smart Components implemented on both projects.
The ultimate goal of the proposed architecture is to provide
an efﬁcient and easy to use Industrial Marketplace that encom-
passes all the activities related to the manufacturing ﬁeld. The
objective is to provide a route for the ﬂow of information from
the equipment at the shop-ﬂoor, up to the Marketplace and
back. This proposed Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace
will not only provide a virtual shop for equipment but also
for smart components, software, and services. In order to
be truly intelligent, this marketplace must also be ﬂexible
and conﬁgurable in order to adjust to each user needs. The
proposed Cyber-Physical Industrial Marketplace allows to take
advantage of all the current technological advances, and con-
tributes for a safe and reliable way of using all the available
information.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Aguiar, R. Pinto, J. Reis, and G. Gonc¸alves, “A marketplace for
cyber-physical production systems: Architecture and key enablers,”
in INTELLI 2017, The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent
Systems and Applications.
IARIA, 2017, pp. 81–86.
[2]
K. Henning, “Recommendations for implementing the strategic initia-
tive industrie 4.0,” 2013.
[3]
M. R¨ußmann, M. Lorenz, P. Gerbert, M. Waldner, J. Justus, P. Engel,
and M. Harnisch, “Industry 4.0: The future of productivity and growth
in manufacturing industries,” 2015.
[4]
S. Weyer, M. Schmitt, M. Ohmer, and D. Gorecky, “Towards industry
4.0-standardization as the crucial challenge for highly modular, multi-
vendor production systems,” in Ifac - Papers online, vol. 48, no. 3.
Elsevier, 2015, pp. 579–584.
[5]
H. Lasi, P. Fettke, H.-G. Kemper, T. Feld, and M. Hoffmann, “Industry
4.0,” Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 6, no. 4, 2014,
pp. 239–242.
[6]
M. Wollschlaeger, T. Sauter, and J. Jasperneite, “The future of industrial
communication: Automation networks in the era of the internet of things
and industry 4.0,” IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine, vol. 11, no. 1,
2017, pp. 17–27.
[7]
Y. Liao, F. Deschamps, E. d. F. R. Loures, and L. F. P. Ramos,
“Past, present and future of industry 4.0-a systematic literature review
and research agenda proposal,” International Journal of Production
Research, vol. 55, no. 12, 2017, pp. 3609–3629.
[8]
E. Hofmann and M. R¨usch, “Industry 4.0 and the current status as well
as future prospects on logistics,” Computers in Industry, vol. 89, 2017,
pp. 23–34.
[9]
R. Fonseca, S. Aguiar, M. Peschl, and G. Gonc¸alves, “The reborn
marketplace: an application store for industrial smart components,”
in INTELLI 2016, The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent
Systems and Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 136–141.
[10]
F. Zezulka, P. Marcon, I. Vesely, and O. Sajdl, “Industry 4.0–an
introduction in the phenomenon,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 49, no. 25,
2016, pp. 8–12.
[11]
Y. Lu, “Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open
research issues,” Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 2017.
[12]
X. Li, D. Li, J. Wan, A. V. Vasilakos, C.-F. Lai, and S. Wang, “A review
of industrial wireless networks in the context of industry 4.0,” Wireless
networks, vol. 23, no. 1, 2017, pp. 23–41.
[13]
S. Wang, J. Wan, D. Li, and C. Zhang, “Implementing smart factory of
industrie 4.0: an outlook,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks, vol. 12, no. 1, 2016, p. 3159805.
[14]
Y. Koren, U. Heisel, F. Jovane, T. Moriwaki, G. Pritschow, G. Ulsoy,
and H. Van Brussel, “Reconﬁgurable manufacturing systems,” CIRP
Annals-Manufacturing Technology, vol. 48, no. 2, 1999, pp. 527–540.
[15]
M. G. Mehrabi, A. G. Ulsoy, Y. Koren, and P. Heytler, “Trends and
perspectives in ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable manufacturing systems,”
Journal of Intelligent manufacturing, vol. 13, no. 2, 2002, pp. 135–146.
[16]
“Review of standardization opportunities in smart industrial compo-
nents,” URL: http://publica.fraunhofer.de/starweb/servlet.starweb?
path=epub.web&search=N-413239 [accessed: 2017-11-27].
[17]
L. Neto, J. Reis, R. Silva, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Sensor selcomp, a smart
component for the industrial sensor cloud of the future,” in Industrial
Technology (ICIT), 2017 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE,
2017, pp. 1256–1261.
[18]
D. Wu, D. W. Rosen, L. Wang, and D. Schaefer, “Cloud-based design
and manufacturing: A new paradigm in digital manufacturing and design
innovation,” Computer-Aided Design, vol. 59, 2015, pp. 1–14.
[19]
X. Xu, “From cloud computing to cloud manufacturing,” Robotics and
computer-integrated manufacturing, vol. 28, no. 1, 2012, pp. 75–86.
[20]
P. Wang, R. X. Gao, and Z. Fan, “Cloud computing for cloud manu-
facturing: beneﬁts and limitations,” Journal of Manufacturing Science
and Engineering, vol. 137, no. 4, 2015, p. 040901.
[21]
F. Tao, L. Zhang, V. Venkatesh, Y. Luo, and Y. Cheng, “Cloud man-
ufacturing: a computing and service-oriented manufacturing model,”
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal
of Engineering Manufacture, vol. 225, no. 10, 2011, pp. 1969–1976.
117
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[22]
X. V. Wang and X. W. Xu, “An interoperable solution for cloud man-
ufacturing,” Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 29,
no. 4, 2013, pp. 232–247.
[23]
L. M. Kaufman, “Data security in the world of cloud computing,” IEEE
Security & Privacy, vol. 7, no. 4, 2009.
[24]
Y. Jadeja and K. Modi, “Cloud computing-concepts, architecture and
challenges,” in Computing, Electronics and Electrical Technologies
(ICCEET), 2012 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 877–
880.
[25]
P. Mell, T. Grance et al., “The nist deﬁnition of cloud computing,” 2011.
[26]
E. Luoma, M. R¨onkk¨o, and P. Tyrv¨ainen, “Current software-as-a-service
business models: Evidence from ﬁnland,” in International Conference
of Software Business.
Springer, 2012, pp. 181–194.
[27]
M. S¨a¨aksj¨arvi, A. Lassila, and H. Nordstr¨om, “Evaluating the software
as a service business model: From cpu time-sharing to online innovation
sharing,” in IADIS international conference e-society.
Qawra, Malta,
2005, pp. 177–186.
[28]
L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, “A break
in the clouds: towards a cloud deﬁnition,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review, vol. 39, no. 1, 2008, pp. 50–55.
[29]
A. Hagiu and J. Wright, “Multi-sided platforms,” International Journal
of Industrial Organization, vol. 43, 2015, pp. 162–174.
[30]
M. Cusumano, “Technology strategy and management the evolution of
platform thinking,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 1, 2010,
pp. 32–34.
[31]
A. Smedlund and H. Faghankhani, “Platform orchestration for efﬁ-
ciency, development, and innovation,” in System Sciences (HICSS),
2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on. IEEE, 2015, pp. 1380–
1388.
[32]
“ReBorn Project web site,” URL: http://www.reborn-eu-project.org/
[accessed: 2017-11-27].
[33]
S. Aguiar, R. Pinto, J. Reis, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Life-cycle approach
to extend equipment re-use in ﬂexible manufacturing,” in INTELLI
2016, The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and
Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 148–153.
[34]
“SelSus Project web site,” URL: http://www.selsus.eu/ [accessed: 2017-
11-27].
[35]
R. Silva, J. Reis, L. Neto, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Universal parser for
wireless sensor networks in industrial cyber physical production sys-
tems,” in Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 2017 IEEE 15th International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 633–638.
[36]
J. Reis, R. Pinto, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Human-centered application using
cyber-physical production system,” in 43rd Annual Conference of the
IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IECON).
IEEE, 2017.
[37]
J.
Reis,
“SelSus
-
White
paper
on
sensor
cloud,”
URL:
http://www.selsus.eu/ﬁleadmin/mount/documents/SelSus
-
D3.5
-
White paper on sensor clouds.pdf [accessed: 2018-01-03].
[38]
F. Banaie and S. A. H. Seno, “A cloud-based architecture for secure and
reliable service provisioning in wireless sensor network,” in Computer
and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE), 2014 4th International eConfer-
ence on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 96–101.
[39]
K. R. Llanes, M. A. Casanova, and N. M. Lemus, “From sensor data
streams to linked streaming data: a survey of main approaches,” Journal
of Information and Data Management, vol. 7, no. 2, 2017, p. 130.
[40]
G. Gonc¸alves, J. Reis, R. Pinto, M. Alves, and J. Correia, “A step
forward on intelligent factories: A smart sensor-oriented approach,” in
Emerging Technology and Factory Automation (ETFA), 2014 IEEE.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[41]
W. Shen, Q. Hao, H. J. Yoon, and D. H. Norrie, “Applications of
agent-based systems in intelligent manufacturing: An updated review,”
Advanced engineering INFORMATICS, vol. 20, no. 4, 2006, pp. 415–
431.
[42]
“Sensor ML,” URL: http://www.ogcnetwork.net/SensorML [accessed:
2017-01-01].
[43]
“Open Geospatial Consortium,” URL: http://www.opengeospatial.org/
[accessed: 2018-01-15].
[44]
J. Shneidman, P. Pietzuch, J. Ledlie, M. Roussopoulos, M. Seltzer, and
M. Welsh, “Hourglass: An infrastructure for connecting sensor networks
and applications,” Tech. Rep., 2004.
[45]
M. Yuriyama and T. Kushida, “Sensor-cloud infrastructure-physical
sensor management with virtualized sensors on cloud computing,” in
Network-Based Information Systems (NBiS), 2010 13th International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–8.
[46]
J. Yan, Y. Ma, L. Wang, K.-K. R. Choo, and W. Jie, “A cloud-based
remote sensing data production system,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, 2017.
[47]
C. Yang, S. Lan, W. Shen, G. Q. Huang, X. Wang, and T. Lin,
“Towards product customization and personalization in iot-enabled
cloud manufacturing,” Cluster Computing, 2017, pp. 1–14.
[48]
L. Zhang, Y. Luo, F. Tao, B. H. Li, L. Ren, X. Zhang, H. Guo, Y. Cheng,
A. Hu, and Y. Liu, “Cloud manufacturing: a new manufacturing
paradigm,” Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 8, no. 2, 2014, pp.
167–187.
[49]
K. M. Alam and A. El Saddik, “C2ps: A digital twin architecture
reference model for the cloud-based cyber-physical systems,” IEEE
Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 2050–2062.
[50]
L. Neto, J. Reis, D. Guimar˜aes, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Sensor cloud:
Smartcomponent framework for reconﬁgurable diagnostics in intelligent
manufacturing environments,” in Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 2015
IEEE 13th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1706–1711.
[51]
Y. Chiang and D. Lee, “Smart manufacturing with the internet of
makers,” Journal of the Chinese Institute of Engineers, vol. 40, no. 7,
2017, pp. 585–592.
[52]
A. Alamri, W. S. Ansari, M. M. Hassan, M. S. Hossain, A. Alelaiwi, and
M. A. Hossain, “A survey on sensor-cloud: architecture, applications,
and approaches,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks,
vol. 9, no. 2, 2013, p. 917923.
[53]
J. I. R. Molano, J. M. C. Lovelle, C. E. Montenegro, J. J. R. Granados,
and R. G. Crespo, “Metamodel for integration of internet of things,
social networks, the cloud and industry 4.0,” Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 2017, pp. 1–15.
[54]
C. Perera, C. H. Liu, and S. Jayawardena, “The emerging internet of
things marketplace from an industrial perspective: A survey,” IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 3, no. 4, 2015,
pp. 585–598.
[55]
C. C. Albrecht, D. L. Dean, and J. V. Hansen, “Marketplace and
technology standards for b2b e-commerce: progress, challenges, and
the state of the art,” Information & Management, vol. 42, no. 6, 2005,
pp. 865–875.
[56]
B. Varghese, N. Wang, D. S. Nikolopoulos, and R. Buyya, “Feasibility
of fog computing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.05451, 2017.
[57]
M. Satyanarayanan, “The emergence of edge computing,” Computer,
vol. 50, no. 1, 2017, pp. 30–39.
[58]
R. Roman, P. Najera, and J. Lopez, “Securing the internet of things,”
Computer, vol. 44, no. 9, 2011, pp. 51–58.
[59]
Q. Jing, A. V. Vasilakos, J. Wan, J. Lu, and D. Qiu, “Security of the
internet of things: perspectives and challenges,” Wireless Networks,
vol. 20, no. 8, 2014, pp. 2481–2501.
[60]
A. Sajid, H. Abbas, and K. Saleem, “Cloud-assisted iot-based scada
systems security: A review of the state of the art and future challenges,”
IEEE Access, vol. 4, 2016, pp. 1375–1384.
[61]
S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. A. Grieco, and A. Coen-Porisini, “Security,
privacy and trust in internet of things: The road ahead,” Computer
Networks, vol. 76, 2015, pp. 146–164.
[62]
X. Lu, Q. Li, Z. Qu, and P. Hui, “Privacy information security
classiﬁcation study in internet of things,” in Identiﬁcation, Information
and Knowledge in the Internet of Things (IIKI), 2014 International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 162–165.
[63]
A. Alcaide, E. Palomar, J. Montero-Castillo, and A. Ribagorda, “Anony-
mous authentication for privacy-preserving iot target-driven applica-
tions,” Computers & Security, vol. 37, 2013, pp. 111–123.
[64]
A. Puliaﬁto, A. Celesti, M. Villari, and M. Fazio, “Towards the
integration between iot and cloud computing: an approach for the
secure self-conﬁguration of embedded devices,” International Journal
of Distributed Sensor Networks, 2015.
[65]
J.-X. Hu, C.-L. Chen, C.-L. Fan, and K.-h. Wang, “An intelligent
and secure health monitoring scheme using iot sensor based on cloud
computing,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 2017, 2017.
118
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[66]
J. M. Taylor and H. R. Sharif, “Security challenges and methods for
protecting critical infrastructure cyber-physical systems,” in Selected
Topics in Mobile and Wireless Networking (MoWNeT), 2017 Interna-
tional Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[67]
A. Zahra, M. Nizamuddin, and Z. Jaffery, “Implementation & analysis
of security protocols for wireless sensor network,” International Journal
of Electronics Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, 2010, pp. 111–113.
[68]
“Material
Handling
Solutions,”
URL:
http://www.materialhandlingpub.com [accessed: 2018-01-18].
[69]
“Industrial Auctions and Liquidations,” URL: https://www.aucto.com/
[accessed: 2018-01-18].
[70]
“Global
Industrial
Online
Marketplace,”
URL:
http://www.materialhandlingpub.com/global-industrial-marketplace/
[accessed: 2018-01-16].
[71]
“Industrial Market Place,” URL: http://www.impmagazine.com/ [ac-
cessed: 2018-01-16].
[72]
“Global
Equipment
Company
Inc.”
URL:
http://www.globalindustrial.com/ [accessed: 2018-01-18].
[73]
“Intelligent Plant,” URL: https://www.intelligentplant.com/ [accessed:
2018-01-18].
[74]
“Advantech,” URL: http://wise-paas.advantech.com/en-us/marketplace
[accessed: 2018-01-18].
[75]
B. J. Corbitt, T. Thanasankit, and H. Yi, “Trust and e-commerce: a
study of consumer perceptions,” Electronic commerce research and
applications, vol. 2, no. 3, 2003, pp. 203–215.
[76]
Y.-J. Chen, T. Dai, C. G. Korpeoglu, E. K¨orpeo˘glu, O. Sahin, C. S. Tang,
and S. Xiao, “Innovative online platforms: Research opportunities,”
2018.
[77]
V. Kumar and E. G. Raheja, “Business to business (b2b) and business
to consumer (b2c) management,” International Journal of Computers &
Technology, vol. 3, no. 3b, 2012, pp. 447–451.
[78]
W. Raisch, The eMarketplace: Strategies for Success in B2B eCom-
merce.
New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 2002.
[79]
D. Chaffey, E-business and E-commerce Management: Strategy, Imple-
mentation and Practice.
Pearson Education, 2007.
[80]
R. T. Wigand, “Electronic commerce: Deﬁnition, theory, and context,”
The information society, vol. 13, no. 1, 1997, pp. 1–16.
[81]
S. Iankova, I. Davies, C. Archer-Brown, B. Marder, and A. Yau, “A
comparison of social media marketing between b2b, b2c and mixed
business models,” Industrial Marketing Management, 2018.
[82]
I. ISO, “Ieee, systems and software engineering–vocabulary,” IEEE
computer society, Piscataway, NJ, 2010.
[83]
“XPress
Project
web
site,”
URL:
https://www.steinbeis-
europa.de/en/sectors-projects/advanced-manufacturing-
technologies/xpress.html [accessed: 2017-11-27].
[84]
F. Almeida, P. Dias, G. Gonc¸alves, M. Peschl, and M. Hoffmeister,
“A proposition of a manufactronic network approach for intelligent
and ﬂexible manufacturing systems,” International Journal of Industrial
Engineering Computations, vol. 2, no. 4, 2011, pp. 873–890.
[85]
“IRAMP Project web site,” URL: http://www.i-ramp3.eu/ [accessed:
2017-11-27].
[86]
“Harms
&
Wende
Karslruhe,”
URL:
https://www.harms-
wende.de/en/others/contact/hwh-karlsruhe/ [accessed: 2018-01-18].
119
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

