Requirements Engineering in Healthcare:
Lessons Learned from Practice
Malak Baslyman
Information and Computer Science
King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
email: malak.baslyman@kfupm.edu.sa
Abstract—Healthcare systems are facing grand challenges in
improving current processes and meeting the high demand on
resources while maximizing the quality of delivered services.
Although technology is a key enabler of improvement, it still
fails, in healthcare, due to several reasons, such as poor ac-
ceptance by users/physicians, disturbance to existing practices,
and lack of comprehensive analysis prior to the implementation
of solutions. Hence, we found an opportunity to investigate the
effectiveness of some Requirement Engineering (RE) methods,
such as goal-oriented and process modeling, in capturing the
context of a process under improvement, collecting requirements,
and analyzing multiple views and conﬂicting opinions to support
decision-making in healthcare. In this paper, I’m reporting on the
challenges and opportunities that were learned while observing
and applying some RE modeling and analysis methods in ﬁve
real-world projects, over ﬁve years, in healthcare. In addition,
some future research directions are discussed.
Index Terms—Requirements Engineering; Healthcare; URN;
Goal-oriented modeling; Process modeling; Industry.
I. INTRODUCTION
These days, most healthcare systems are going through
different types of transformations such as changing the pur-
chasing system, from service-based to value-based, and digital
health transformation [1] [2]. The transformation aims to
deliver a high quality of services, provide patient-centered
solutions, and enable technology to improve and digitalize
current processes while controlling the budget [2] [3]. As a
result, many core changes may be introduced to the structure
of healthcare institutions, the role of physicians, healthcare
processes and workﬂow, and the deﬁnition of measures and
performance targets. Some changes in healthcare, which are
related to technological solutions, are still perceived as time-
consuming while preventing physicians from doing their jobs,
and are difﬁcult to use, with risk exposure and security
threats [2] [4] [5]. Thus, physicians, patients, and all stake-
holders who belong to the context under change have to be
fully engaged in the decision-making process where their goals
and concerns are addressed and analyzed adequately.
Requirements Engineering (RE) and its methods regroup
proven practices for the elicitation, modeling, analysis, and
validation of requirements. It gives a holistic view of the
context, including stakeholders, their goals and practices, and
enablers and threats. It also supports the evaluation of the
potential impact of solution alternatives on those goals and
practices in order to select the appropriate solution [6]. The
absence of sufﬁcient RE effort can lead to systems that result
in unsatisﬁed users, time/effort lost, low performance, or igno-
rance about impactful changes [7]. Hence, we were motivated
to investigate the use of RE modeling and analysis methods
in healthcare-related projects and assess its usefulness in
introducing changes and emerging technology effectively [8].
In this study, we report on lessons learned while prac-
ticing RE, over ﬁve years, in ﬁve healthcare projects. we
started by exploring RE practices in real-world cases (in
one project), then applying advanced RE-based methods to
integrate technology effectively into current processes (in three
projects) [7] [8]. User Requirements Notation (URN) and its
sub-languages Goal-oriented Requirements Language (GRL)
and Use Case Maps (UCM) were used for modeling and
analysis of stakeholder intentions, values, and processes [6]
[9]. In addition, jUCMNav was used for illustration and
analysis [10]. One of the major ﬁndings in this study is the
promising potential for RE methods to be used effectively in
healthcare; however, domain-speciﬁc solutions and appropriate
tool support are needed.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides background about the study motivation and the RE
methods used. Section III presents the lessons learned in
each project including challenges and opportunities. Lastly,
Section IV discusses some of future research opportunities
and Section V draws conclusions.
II. BACKGROUND
This section describes the projects and RE methods used.
A. Study Plan
Briand et al. argued that in a practical ﬁeld such as Soft-
ware Engineering, which relies intensively on customers and
industry, studies shall be driven by industry needs tailored to a
certain context [11]. Context-driven research makes clear as-
sumptions and a well-deﬁned context in addition to achievable
objectives and attainable results [11]. As we share the same
beliefs, we had planned to study RE practices in healthcare
over ﬁve years in multiple projects that belong to Canadian
and Saudi hospitals. In all projects, managers and their teams
were not familiar with most RE practices. In addition, their
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

RE practices did not go beyond requirements gathering, which
are technical, security and functional requirements. Microsoft
Excel and Word were used to document the requirements.
As illustrated in Figure 1, the study plan consists of three
main phases that are observation, design, and implementation.
The ﬁrst project (2015) was meant to investigate RE practices
in a real case and observe how the decision on technology
selection is made in practice (see Section III-A), which is the
observation phase. The investigation resulted in discovering
some technology selection and integration problems. Hence,
we designed an RE-based framework, which is described
in Section II-C, that integrates technology into healthcare
practices effectively. Lastly, the framework was implemented
successfully in four projects (2016 -2019) that are related
to technology integration and context modeling (see Sec-
tions III-B and III-C). The next section presents the RE
modeling language (URN) that was used to implement the
proposed RE-based framework, and to capture and analyze
requirements in the projects.
Fig. 1. The study plan of investigating and practicing RE in healthcare
B. User Requirements Notation
URN is the ﬁrst standardized modeling language that
supports requirements engineering activities in a graphical
representation way [6]. URN provides two complementary
sub-languages that are Goal-oriented Requirement Language
(GRL) and Use Case Maps (UCM) [6]. GRL has the capabil-
ities of capturing and modeling stakeholders and intentional
elements which include operation goals, softgoals, and tasks.
It has three types of relationships between the intentional
elements (decomposition, contribution, and correlation) that
show how intentional elements are linked to each other and
contribute to the satisfaction of stakeholders’ goals. GRL
also provides a trade-off analysis of design alternatives. The
analysis is enabled by the propagation mechanism that prop-
agates the initial evaluation values of goals and the weighted
contributions to the root goals to compute their satisfaction
values, and the satisfaction of stakeholders [10].
UCM is a causal graphical representation of functional
requirements and system behavior. A UCM model consists
of start and end points, responsibilities (activities), directions
and conditions to guard the transition from one responsibility
to another. GRL and UCM can be linked together through
URN links to provide a holistic view of the system quality
and stakeholder goals, and the system functionalities and
behavior. URN has a tool-support (jUCMNav) that enables
requirements analysts to model GRL and UCM effectively, and
apply appropriate analysis [12]. URN was used to implement
the AbPI framework that is presented in the next section.
C. Activity-based Process Integration (AbPI) Framework
The AbPI is a RE-based analysis framework that provides
technology integration alternatives into current processes. It
also provides a holistic and comprehensive analysis of the
impact those alternatives have on stakeholder needs and prac-
tices, long-term values, and healthcare urgent needs. The AbPI
takes the goal models and the process models of the context
under improvement and the new technology to be integrated
as inputs. Then, it applies to the main methods: the integration
and the evaluation.
In the integration method, the activities of the technology-
related process are integrated sequentially into current pro-
cesses where the relationship between the new activity, to be
integrated, and existing ones is captured. For example, a new
activity may eliminate, replace, or add to existing activities.
Having multiple relationships between new activities of the
technology-related process and existing activities of the current
process results in several integration alternatives. Hence, the
evaluation method analyzes the integration alternatives and
assesses the impact of each alternative on predeﬁned criteria.
The output of the AbPI framework is the best integration alter-
native that increases the satisfaction of stakeholders, achieves
performance targets, and satisﬁes selection criteria. The AbPI
proﬁled URN to model and analyze the integration context,
GRL was used to capture goal models and UCM to model
business and technology-related processes [1] [7] [8].
The AbPI is meant to overcome challenges identiﬁed in
practice (project 1), and to ﬁll the gap, found in literature,
of comprehensively analyzing technology integration in the
context of process improvement [7]. There were few RE-based
studies that were conducted speciﬁcally for the healthcare
domain. Most of those studies focus either on requirements
elicitation and system design [13]–[16] or process analysis
with regard to business objectives [17] [18].
III. LESSONS LEARNED
This section reports on observations, opportunities, and
challenges faced during the practice of RE in healthcare
projects.
A. Project 1: Technology Selection
The project was about selecting the most appropriate tech-
nology for physicians to communicate through. It was led
by the IT department. The tasks of the projects were to
meet physicians, identify the communication issues, gather
their requirements and needs, and map them to a set of off-
the-shelf technologies. According to the mapping results and
the analysis of the requirements/goals, we reported on the
technologies that could be used in this context. The following
are observations collected during our work.
1) Requirement analysis: collecting and analyzing require-
ments started after the business case was prepared. The
functional requirements were collected from some physicians;
meanwhile, technical and security requirements were identiﬁed
later by the IT team and the Security and Privacy Ofﬁce during
multiple meetings with service providers. It was observed
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

that little work was done to gather and analyze requirements,
especially user requirements, of all involved stakeholders/users
in different units, which led to a reluctance to change and an
unsatisﬁed group of users. In addition, there was a paucity
in considering non-functional requirements, such as usability,
safety, and regulatory compliance.
2) Premature solutions: the main issue was the premature
discussions of solutions before identifying current problems
and user needs. Also, the lack of an achievable vision, long-
term values, and convincing reasons for new changes did
not help to negotiate the changes successfully with some
groups. Resistance to change was a big obstacle due to the
different computer literacy levels, urgent needs, and current
goals of each unit. It was clear that the IT and the Security
and Privacy teams were in agreement on requirements and
the possible solutions; however, physicians were not. Some
physicians refused to collaborate at all as they did not see
the changes as reasonable; on the other hand, some were very
involved and welcoming to those changes.
3) Flexible integration: in a critical environment, such
as healthcare, where lives are saved, it is not feasible to
impose changes on physicians and obligate them to use certain
technology as it may cause delay or deterioration of the
quality of provided services. Hence, ﬂexible integration of new
changes into current processes is needed, where the current
situation, processes, and goals/needs of different stakeholders
of different units are captured and analyzed, resulting in inte-
gration alternatives. Each alternative, and the status quo, would
be evaluated against goals, long-term values, and performance
objectives to get a shared understanding of the best way to
achieve desired outcomes. This was absent and not thought
through in the project.
At the end of the project, the opportunity of using RE-
based methods to tackle some of the above-mentioned issues
was discussed with the IT manager and team, and caregivers
at the hospital. Both groups encouraged applying RE methods
as they would be able to have a holistic view of the situa-
tion, including the interests and concerns of other units and
stakeholders. Also, they emphasized the need for considering
long-term values, urgent needs, and sustainability of solutions
before implementing them. As a result, we developed the AbPI
framework (presented in Section II-C) that was used in the next
projects.
B. Projects 2, 3 & 4: Technology Integration
The AbPI framework, discussed in Section II, was applied
in three projects: two in Canadian hospitals and one in a
Saudi hospital (2016-2018). The three projects were about
emerging technologies to automate existing processes: patient
information documentation, real-time tracking of lab samples,
and real-time waiting estimation systems. Two projects were
led by the Security and Privacy Ofﬁce, and one by the
Quality and Patient Safety Department [8]. The tasks were
to model goals and processes of different stakeholders, design
integration alternatives, and recommend the best integration
alternative. Below are lessons drawn on using the AbPI and
the tool, where the effectiveness of the framework was proven
in practice and some important technical issues arose.
1) Effectiveness: the AbPI framework guided the integra-
tion process in the three projects effectively; in addition, the
results of the AbPI supported the project managers’ decisions.
In one project, the project manager decided to suspend the
project temporarily, based on the recommendation of the AbPI
framework, until a better solution was found. While in the
other two, managers chose to implement current solutions
partially to satisfy some urgent needs, even though the cost
was high, and some stakeholders were unsatisﬁed. In the
projects, one of the major challenges faced was the deﬁnition
of measures. The AbPI supported the deﬁnition of measures
and linked them to goals and activities of the processes for
analysis.
2) Tool support: it is challenging to use current RE tools
in industry. In the context of AbPI, there are many types of
relations within activities of processes, and between activities
and goals. In jUCMNav for example, the relations could only
be captured through URN links between UCM and GRL
models, which require many interactions and are not entirely
visible on diagrams. For analysis, tasks were used in the goal
model to represent the impact of activities on goal satisfaction.
Hence, there is a need for usable context-speciﬁc tools, as
in the integration, that provide appropriate support. The tool
shall automate the creation of models, especially alternatives,
and provide semantic correctness and consistency checking.
Also, the impact of activities of processes on goals shall be
illustrated automatically when appropriate data is available,
such as the time or cost of an activity.
3) Context-speciﬁc goals: urgent needs and long-term val-
ues are examples of special types of goals that are used in
healthcare [8]. Assessing potential solutions against urgent
needs was fairly straight forward. However, capturing and
analyzing long-term values by GRL intentional elements was
challenging. On one hand, healthcare always strives for max-
imizing values in delivered services. For example, would the
satisfaction level of a goal of long-term value type exceed
100 be considered positive or a desired outcome? What does
100 mean in long-term values evaluation? On the other hand,
most solutions evolve over time until long-term values are
achieved. Accordingly, some solutions may not fully satisfy
long-term values at a certain time; however, they build the
basis for more advanced solutions to be developed. Hence,
there should be a way to distinguish between low satisfaction
values resulting from poor solutions and low satisfaction
values which were produced due to the evolution of solutions
and current capabilities of hospitals; the former is negative,
while the latter is positive.
4) Conﬂicting opinions of stakeholders:
in healthcare,
physicians are a special type of stakeholder. They are the
owners and users of most of the processes and e-systems.
Hence, capturing all their requirements and opinions is es-
sential as it will inﬂuence greatly the selection of solutions.
The challenge faced was modeling the conﬂicting opinions
of stakeholders who belong to one group. For example, a
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

group of physicians may see system X as a facilitator, while
another group sees it as an obstacle on their way to save lives.
GRL does not give the ﬂexibility to model the conﬂicting
opinions of the same stakeholder (actor) in one model, which
happens always in healthcare. However, this could be solved
partially, in jUCMNav, using a contribution override option
in the strategy evaluation or having another actor of the same
stakeholder type but with a different name.
5) Scalability and effort:
one process may cut across
multiple units of an organization, or even across different
organizations (e.g., hospitals and clinics). Each unit has its
own processes, roles, goals, and quality criteria. Although
large URN models were created and analyzed in the past,
URN models may not scale well at modeling, analyzing, and
maintaining multiple large processes across the organization or
across organizations. Also, we modeled the context manually;
hence, automation will be required for a large set of processes
and wider contexts. A considerable amount of time was spent
to collect data and build the models as we had to build our
own domain expertise along the way; processes were not
documented anywhere.
6) Usability: the usability of AbPI was assessed by real
users in healthcare participating in a usability study [8]. The
participants were given a task of applying AbPI to design
integration alternatives and choose the best integration alterna-
tive. Even though the unit under analysis was the AbPI, direct
comments about GRL and UCM were received. Participants
perceived UCM as easy to understand and implement. They
described GRL to be a powerful analysis method as it includes
stakeholders, goals, and measures. However, GRL also was
considered complicated and difﬁcult to use, especially the
contribution and propagation mechanism. GRL and UCM
seemed to give a holistic vision and evaluation of the context
as participants reported. A comment was received to customize
GRL and UCM to the healthcare domain, or potentially de-
velop a domain-speciﬁc language for healthcare, and consider
the use of healthcare wording rather than using RE vocabulary.
7) Change Management: combining change management
methods, such as Lean management, and the AbPI led to
better analysis. The strongest points of Lean is deﬁning
measures and assigning performance targets. However, Lean
focuses only on customer (patient) value, while ignoring other
stakeholders. Hence, the AbPI was leveraged by the data
collected in the Lean approach; at the same time, AbPI was
used to capture other stakeholder goals and needs, and analyze
solutions designed by the Lean. Combining them both brought
another beneﬁt that is reducing the number of the integration
alternatives as the design of alternatives is guard, in the Lean,
by a condition such as add-value or non-added value activities.
Hence, this minimized the effort associated with designing and
evaluating all integration alternatives [19].
C. Project 5: Context Modeling and System Design
In a Canadian hospital, a department that was responsible
for managing research projects was facing issues of 1) moni-
toring the projects after the funding was granted, 2) unifying
the process for receiving and approving those projects, and
3) dealing with a high workload for staff. In addition, staff
did not use the system that was designed speciﬁcally to solve
some of those issues. Hence, in this project, we applied the
AbPI framework partially as there was no technology to be
integrated. First, we attempted to analyze the problem and
identify the opportunities and issues through several meetings
with stakeholders. Then, I prepared the input of the AbPI that
are the goal and the process models. Following that, a design
thinking session was conducted, which resulted in an initial
design of the system to be used to facilitate monitoring and
tracking the projects and the workload for staff. The initial
design of the system was the base point for several mod-
iﬁcations, features and additions that appeared in following
meetings and brainstorming sessions. The evaluation method
of the AbPI, later, was used to select the best system design
alternative based on stakeholders’ requirements and goals, and
other criteria deﬁned by the hospital.
The project manager found three major beneﬁts of the AbPI
framework that are:
1) Visualization: the UCM model helped in visualizing
the main obstacles in the process that prevented them from
achieving their goals. It was to the base point to agree and
disagree on the processes’ deﬁnitions and roles. In addition,
the UCM model became the ﬁrst source in which the process
was deﬁned completely and formally.
2) Goal model evaluation: the team, around seven stake-
holders, was interested in the capabilities of GRL and the
evaluation model. They all agreed that it reﬂected how far
they were from achieving their goals and how likely the new
solution may satisfy the goals. Moreover, it helped them to
focus on points of improvement rather than guessing what to
be improved and why.
3) Tool support: some comments were left also on jUCM-
Nav; they found it effective and very useful throughout the
project; however, it required technical expertise, and it was not
user friendly. It is worth mentioning that the designed solution
was implemented, later, in the hospital.
IV. DISCUSSION
As seen in the previous sections, RE methods were used
effectively in practice in the context of technology selection
and integration, and system design. The AbPI inﬂuenced the
decisions made on technology selection in the projects and
provided rationals. Also, it is obvious that stakeholders of
the projects agreed on the usefulness of the tool support
(jUCMNav) and its visualization capabilities, but also agreed
that it is unusable in practice and required special technical
skills. In addition, it was suggested, in the three projects,
that RE practices have to be customized and tailored to
the speciﬁc needs of healthcare, especially as stakeholders
have, almost, equal power of inﬂuencing decisions and have
conﬂicting opinions. Another reason is that, now, the domain
is going through major transformations, such as shifting from
service-based to value-based payment systems and digital
health transformation. The transformations expand the circle of
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

stakeholders and decision-makers to include patient and direct
community, leverage data-driven techniques, change the model
of care, and change the role of caregivers. In the following
sections, we discuss those grand changes and highlight some
future research opportunities.
1) Value-based Healthcare System (VBHC): aims to pro-
vide high-quality healthcare services for individuals and the
population while optimizing the distribution and allocation
of resources [20] [21]. It puts healthcare under pressure as
running processes, technologies, and stakeholder practices
always have to be questioned and reassessed for optimization
and improvements. Also, value-based healthcare system is
different from the traditional system as it brings a new model
of care along with new concepts and implementation, such
as segmentation of population based on healthcare needs,
moving from corrective to preventive model, better patient,
and provider experience, etc. [20] [22].
One of VBHC strategies is the Integrated Care Model
(ICM) which refers to having a multidisciplinary team, of
diverse views, (physicians of different specialties, policy-
makers, social workers, managers, etc.) to provide the best
services to patients while putting patients in control of their
health decisions. It is one the most agreed on, globally, care
models in VBHC [23]. There is a big opportunity for RE
to contribute greatly to this matter in different ways. For
example, having different perspectives on patient health, while
providing a high quality of service and optimizing resources
is a very interesting case to investigate for an informative and
evidence-based decision-making process. Also, it is interesting
to investigate the opportunity of providing domain-speciﬁc
modeling and analysis methods that speak healthcare language,
and model healthcare environment (processes, roles, units,
strategies, etc.) and characteristics of its entities. That is to
identify, quantify, and analyze value in delivered care services.
Adequate and usable tool support is needed that provides
automated analysis for the continued evaluation of current
solutions, identiﬁcation of improvements opportunities, and
synthesis of models. In addition, there are important aspects
to investigate and questions to answer, empirically, in this
context such as What is value in healthcare?, How do we
model and analyze value in healthcare?, How do we quantify
value in delivered care services?, Are current RE methods
sufﬁcient to capture and analyze value in healthcare?. An
interesting challenge in VBHC is deﬁning and using the right
measures. While the value deﬁnition is still not uniﬁed or
agreed on globally, there are too many measures of VBHC
that have been published by healthcare organizations. That
emphasizes the need to deﬁne value formally, as mentioned
before, support practitioners to identify appropriate goals and
measure, and align measures to those goals systematically.
Goal-measure alignment is important not only to quantify and
assess goals, but also to avoid wasting resources on using
too many irrelevant measures. In addition, pathway-measure
alignment is essential too because VBHC strategies, such as
the integrated care model, change the traditional pathways;
hence, it is important to ensure that measures’ deﬁnitions
are aligned with pathways’ deﬁnitions and correct observa-
tions/measurements will be collected from those pathways.
2) Digital Health Transformation:
is another essential
change that most healthcare will be going through intensively
in the coming decades. It is meant to emerge advanced tech-
nologies, such as AI and data-driven solutions, to minimize
the load on healthcare providers, and to ensure that services
are delivered to patients [24]. It aims, in the long term, to shift
the nature of healthcare services from being corrective, where
treatments are provided to patients, to preventive, where users
are treated and diagnosed before they become patients [24]. As
a result, dramatic changes will be brought to the structure of
hospitals, workﬂows, service delivery, and physician-patient
relationships. This creates a situation where culture change,
physician resistance, risks, ethics, privacy and security issues
become obvious [2]. Hence, RE could play a pivotal role in
many directions starting from assessing the healthcare system
readiness for such change, to the user acceptance of such a
model for delivering care. Moreover, it could be used effec-
tively to analyze associated risks, user acceptance, concerns,
and compliance. Also, RE-based methods could be used to
elicit domain knowledge, anticipate events, guide decisions
in the presence of uncertainty, and provide customized care
delivery processes that are speciﬁc to the needs of each pa-
tient [25]. Another interesting research dimension is personal-
ized care where RE can support in identifying opportunities for
personalization, trade-off analysis of conﬂicting interests and
preferences of patients, and optimizing the patient experience.
The pandemic of Covid-19 fostered the implementation
of healthcare digital transformation in some countries and
in many directions [26]. For example, in Saudi Arabia, the
Ministry of Health launched many healthcare applications to
minimize the number of cases in which patients need to go
to hospitals. One of the applications is Sehaty (My Health)
which provides virtual clinics where patients can see and
talk to caregivers online [27]. However, there is no available
literature or technical reports that assess the usability of
those applications and how users felt when they interacted
with the application (User Experience), especially, for elderly
and special needs users. The healthcare digital transformation
embraces patient-centric strategies. It leverages technology to
increase accessibility to healthcare services. Hence, some tech-
nologies are meant to be used directly by patients, such as self-
triage apps [28], virtual clinics [29], etc. In this context, we
believe more focus should be given to usability requirements
and user emotions because they affect patients’ perception of
the effectiveness of provided services directly [28]. Usability
requirements and user emotions should be treated as ﬁrst-class
citizen requirements and appropriate support to model and
analyze them (frameworks, modeling languages, and analysis
tools) is needed. Also, human values, privacy, and information
security should be given more attention and addressed formally
to avoid any harm for end-users and to preserve their rights.
3) Industry-Academia Collaboration: we want to empha-
size the need for more collaborations with the healthcare
sector. RE research is growing rapidly with many new methods
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

and algorithms; at the same time, the healthcare context is
changing quickly and facing grand challenges, which could
be resolved by RE support. we believe that RE research
should not be kept in the laboratory or, mainly, for academic
illustrations; it should be driven by real-world needs and its
solutions should be practical and used by end-users.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, it was shown that RE methods were used effec-
tively in ﬁve healthcare-related projects and brought real and
tangible positive results. The discussed lessons learned also
showed that it is essential for both researchers and practitioners
to continue investigating the applicability of requirements
engineering practices in healthcare, the gap between current
practices and desired outcomes, and the needed tools for the
RE to be an effective part of healthcare practices. In addition,
URN-GRL is perceived as powerful at analysis while URN-
UCM is easy to understand and follow. However, they need
to be customized to healthcare needs and to use healthcare
vocabulary.
Moreover, some grand challenges that healthcare is facing
these days are discussed too. The value-based healthcare
system brings many research opportunities and areas of im-
provement, such as deﬁning and analyzing value in delivered
care services, where RE-based methods can contribute greatly.
Also, the health digital transformation puts end-user (patients)
face to face with new technologies that they might not be
familiar with or not be conﬁdent dealing with it; hence,
user needs, emotions, values, and rights shall be addressed
adequately in RE research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Prof. Daniel Amyot for his ultimate
support and guidance in all projects. Also, we would like
to thank the University of Ottawa, Montfort Hospital, Dr. El
Mostafa Bouattane, Mr. Yasser Alshalahi, and Itqan initiative
for supporting this research. This research paper is supported
by King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Baslyman, B. Almoaber, D. Amyot, and E. M. Bouattane, “Using
goals and indicators for activity-based process integration in healthcare,”
in 7th Int. Conf. on Current and Future Trends of Information and
Communication Technologies in Healthcare (ICTH 2017), ser. Procedia
Computer Science, vol. 113.
Elsevier B.V., 2017, pp. 318 – 325.
[2] B. Mesk´o, “Digital health technologies and well-being in the future,” IT
Professional, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 20–23, 2020.
[3] C. Booker, A. Turbutt, and R. Fox, “Model of care for a changing
healthcare system: are there foundational pillars for design?” Australian
Health Review, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 136–140, 2016.
[4] R. J. Holden, “What stands in the way of technology-mediated patient
safety improvements? a study of facilitators and barriers to physicians’
use of electronic health records,” Journal of patient safety, vol. 7, no. 4,
p. 193, 2011.
[5] J. H. Weber-Jahnke, M. Price, and J. Williams, “Software engineering
in health care: Is it really different? and how to gain impact,” in
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Software Engineering
in Health Care.
IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 1–4.
[6] D. Amyot and G. Mussbacher, “User Requirements Notation: the ﬁrst
ten years, the next ten years,” Journal of Software (JSW), vol. 6, no. 5,
pp. 747–768, 2011.
[7] M. Baslyman, B. Almoaber, D. Amyot, and E. M. Bouattane, “Activity-
based process integration in healthcare with the user requirements
notation,” in E-Technologies: Embracing the Internet of Things. 7th
International Conference, MCETECH 2017.
Springer, Cham, 2017,
pp. 151–169.
[8] M. Baslyman, “Activity-based process integration framework to improve
user satisfaction and decision support in healthcare,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Ottawa, Canada, 2018.
[9] ITU-T, Recommendation Z.151 (10/12) User Requirements Notation
(URN) - Language deﬁnition, International Telecommunication Union
Std., 2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Z.151,
Retrieved: March, 2022
[10] D. Amyot, S. Ghanavati, J. Horkoff, G. Mussbacher, L. Peyton, and
E. Yu, “Evaluating goal models within the goal-oriented requirement
language,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems, vol. 25, no. 8,
pp. 841–877, 2010.
[11] L. Briand, D. Bianculli, S. Nejati, F. Pastore, and M. Sabetzadeh, “The
case for context-driven software engineering research: Generalizability
is overrated,” IEEE Software, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 72–75, 2017.
[12] G. Mussbacher and D. Amyot, “Goal and scenario modeling, analysis,
and transformation with jUCMNav,” in 31st Int. Conf. on Software
Engineering - Companion Volume.
IEEE CS, 2009, pp. 431–432.
[13] L. Teixeira, C. Ferreira, and B. S. Santos, “User-centered requirements
engineering in health information systems: a study in the hemophilia
ﬁeld,” Computer methods and programs in biomedicine, vol. 106, no. 3,
pp. 160–174, 2012.
[14] C. Weng et al., “An integrated model for patient care and clinical trials
(impact) to support clinical research visit scheduling workﬂow for future
learning health systems,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 46,
no. 4, pp. 642–652, 2013.
[15] S. AlHajHassan, M. Odeh, S. Green, and A. Mansour, “Goal-oriented
strategic modelling for cancer care in systems of systems context using
the i* framework,” in 2018 1st International Conference on Cancer Care
Informatics (CCI).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 100–109.
[16] N. Al Kilani, R. Tailakh, and A. Hanani, “Automatic classiﬁcation of
apps reviews for requirement engineering: Exploring the customers need
from healthcare applications,” in 2019 Sixth International Conference on
Social Networks Analysis, Management and Security (SNAMS).
IEEE,
2019, pp. 541–548.
[17] G. R. Hayes, C. P. Lee, and P. Dourish, “Organizational routines, inno-
vation, and ﬂexibility: The application of narrative networks to dynamic
workﬂow,” International journal of medical informatics, vol. 80, no. 8,
pp. e161–e177, 2011.
[18] C. Damas, B. Lambeau, and A. van Lamsweerde, “Transformation oper-
ators for easier engineering of medical process models,” in Proceedings
of the 5th International Workshop on Software Engineering in Health
Care.
IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 39–45.
[19] M. Baslyman, D. Amyot, and Y. Alshalahi, “Lean healthcare processes:
effective technology integration and comprehensive decision support
using requirements engineering methods,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 1st In-
ternational Workshop on Software Engineering for Healthcare (SEH).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 37–44.
[20] E. Teisberg, S. Wallace, and S. O’Hara, “Deﬁning and implementing
value-based health care: a strategic framework,” Academic Medicine,
vol. 95, no. 5, p. 682, 2020.
[21] M. E. Porter, “Value-based health care delivery,” Annals of surgery, vol.
248, no. 4, pp. 503–509, 2008.
[22] M. E. Porter et al., “What is value in health care,” N Engl J Med, vol.
363, no. 26, pp. 2477–2481, 2010.
[23] World
Health
Organization
-
Regional
Ofﬁce
for
Europe,
Integrated care models: an overview, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.euro.who.int, Retrieved: March, 2022
[24] B. Mesk´o, Z. Drobni, ´E. B´enyei, B. Gergely, and Z. Gy˝orffy, “Digital
health is a cultural transformation of traditional healthcare,” Mhealth,
vol. 3, 2017.
[25] A. Sutcliffe et al., “Known and unknown requirements in healthcare,”
Requirements engineering, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1–20, 2020.
[26] J. N. Olayiwola, C. Maga˜na, A. Harmon, S. Nair, E. Esposito, C. Harsh,
L. A. Forrest, and R. Wexler, “Telehealth as a bright spot of the covid-19
pandemic: Recommendations from the virtual frontlines (” frontweb”),”
JMIR public health and surveillance, vol. 6, no. 2, p. e19045, 2020.
[27] Omnia Health, “Saudi arabia’s evolving healthcare system: What’s new
in 2020.” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://insights.omnia-health.com,
Retrieved: March, 2022
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

[28] M. K. Ziabari, D. Amyot, W. Michalowski, E. M. Bouattane, and
N. Hafez, “Creating mobile self-triage applications: Requirements and
usability perspectives,” in 2021 IEEE 29th International Requirements
Engineering Conference Workshops (REW).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 268–277.
[29] Ministry of Health, “Moh news - moh: e-health application launched.”
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.moh.gov.sa, Retrieved: March,
2022
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

