1
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Approaches to Coherent Conceptual Knowledge Integration for
Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Humanities:
Information Science Based Computation of Structural Knowledge and Spatial Context Information
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU), Germany;
Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany;
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This
extended
paper
delivers
new
results
from
the long-term information science research on creation and
deployment of structure and cognostic addressing of structural
knowledge (‘nucleal cognstructure’) for problem solving. The
paper presents approaches towards the new methodological base
and methodology focussing on structure-based fusion solutions
and implementations for computational scenarios, especially
advanced knowledge-centric mining. The paper presents two
major cases of advanced multi-disciplinary coherent conceptual
knowledge
contextualisation
and
integration
for
prehistory,
namely structure-based fusion realisation and integrated spatial
context computation. Both cases include results on practical
implementation
components,
and
associated
advances
on
computation and processing of multi-disciplinary and multi-
lingual knowledge object entities and resources. The goal of this
fundamental research is to create structure-based methods for
efﬁcient problem solving. Case studies implement the methods
to consistently integrate knowledge context from prehistory and
archaeology disciplines with knowledge in natural sciences and
humanities. Previously unpublished insights on prehistoric cists
tombs, contexts, and methods are available with this publication.
Keywords–Prehistory; Speleology; Multi-disciplinary Knowledge
Integration;
Structure-based
Information
Science
Methods;
Computation and Processing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In information science, context is becoming increasingly
relevant for many kinds of knowledge integration. This paper
is an extended presentation of the research based on the pub-
lication and presentation at the INFOCOMP 2020 conference
in Lisbon, Portugal [1]. The long-term project addresses two
major challenges of coherent conceptual knowledge integration
for prehistory, archaeology, natural sciences, and humani-
ties: The integration of respective conceptual knowledge with
structural knowledge and spatial information. The major goal
is to create a framework of suitable long-term components
for multi-disciplinary knowledge complements. It has become
common practice during the last decades to tackle challenges
regarding knowledge and related content solely with procedu-
ral approaches, besides the fact that creation processes, han-
dling, and management may allow more effective and efﬁcient
measures in context of computation, processing, analysis, and
long-term development or resources. Common ways, imple-
menting procedural [2] approaches as plain technical solutions
are often neither effective nor efﬁcient. In addition, such
approaches often lack long-term adaptability and scalability.
Procedure-based approaches are largely not addressing
the knowledge and information content. Structure-based ap-
proaches can ﬁll the gap. This motivation is supported by
the experience that inefﬁciencies of procedural approaches
regarding their creation, development, and execution can often
be avoided by focussing on structure. Compared to procedure-
based approaches, structure-based approaches are in general
substantially different. Structure and formatting contain valu-
able information and closely correspond with logic, which
should not be lost in many cases, e.g., this is especially the
case for any sustainable long-term knowledge. That means, it
is not intended to convert structures or to change formatting of
resources. For information science and a universal knowledge
context, meaning knowledge complements including concep-
tual knowledge, we also require a consistent, advanced deﬁni-
tion of structure. It is important to understand what structure
and form mean in theory and practice. The fundaments will
be delivered before practical implementations are discussed.
The presented methodology addresses the shortcomings
of common procedure-based approaches. The new structure-
based fusion methodology and method implementations pre-
sented here are created as general purpose implementations,
which can be realised in any Turing complete machine pro-
gramming language, supporting creation and development of
resources as well as computation, processing, and analysis.
For the illustrative case studies, these approaches are used for
dealing with various aspects of knowledge management and
knowledge mining in information science context.
Knowledge resources’ structures are commonly set and have
proven long-term ﬂexibility and sustainability. They cover
content, context, consistency, and sustainability features for
millions of information content, references, and object entities
for long periods of time. Therefore, solutions for procedural
components have to be found, which do provide comparably
deﬁant long-term ﬂexibility and sustainability. In addition, the
procedural components require a very high level of knowledge-
centricity and may need to exploit resource features, which
are commonly not paid attention. When working with long-
term resources, structural knowledge on resources and entities
and their organisation has shown to provide a high potential.
Inherent structural information also promises to achieve a high
level of integration. Therefore, it might seem obvious to con-
sider structure-based approaches for advanced and challenging
tasks.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II
gives an overview of previous work and resources devel-
opment. Section III introduces to structure and addressing.
Section IV presents an implementation case for structure-based
methodology and method realisation. Section V discusses an
implementation case of spatial context computation. Section VI
summarises conclusions and future work.

2
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II.
PREVIOUS WORK, COMPONENTS, AND RESOURCES
A. Fundaments
The fundaments of terminology and understanding knowl-
edge are layed out by Aristotle [3], being an essential part of
‘Ethics’ [4] and can lead to an understanding of the knowl-
edge complements employed in the following approaches.
Information sciences can very much beneﬁt from Aristotle’s
fundaments and a knowledge-centric approach [2] but for
building holistic and sustainable solutions, supporting a mod-
ern deﬁnition of knowledge [5], they need to go beyond the
available technology-based approaches and hypothesis [6] as
analysed in Platon’s Phaidon. For the implementation of case
studies, the modules are built by support of a number of
major components and resources, which can be used for a
wide range of applications, e.g., creation of resources and
extraction of entities. Here, it is essential to regard the most
important fundaments of structural knowledge and information
of language and respective content.
The concept of meaning differs from the concept of signiﬁ-
cation. Semantic and syntactic structures do not sufﬁce to de-
termine the discursive meaning of an expression [7]. Discourse
means a way of speaking. On the one hand, grammatically
correct phrases may lack discursive meaning. On the other
hand, grammatically incorrect sentences may be discursively
meaningful. Knowledge and meaning are closely tied with
intrinsic and extrinsic properties. Therefore, understanding of
intrinsic and extrinsic properties of entities is signiﬁcant for
any context. This is nevertheless true for any case of natural
language, especially considering langage, langue, and parole
[8], especially when interpretation [9] and meaning [10] should
be considered, especially regarding cognition and insight [11].
B. Components, conceptual knowledge and structures
The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [12] is the
world’s foremost document indexing language in the form
of a multi-lingual classiﬁcation scheme covering all ﬁelds
of knowledge and constitutes a sophisticated indexing and
retrieval tool. The UDC is designed for subject description and
indexing of content of information resources irrespective of
the carrier, form, format, and language. UDC is an analytico-
synthetic and facetted classiﬁcation. UDC schedules are organ-
ised as a coherent system of knowledge with associative rela-
tionships and references between concepts and related ﬁelds.
UDC-based references in this publication are taken from the
multi-lingual UDC summary (UDCC Publication No. 088) [12]
released by the UDC Consortium under a Creative Commons
license [13]. Facets can be created with any auxiliary tables.
A means of choice to achieve overall efﬁcient realisations
even for complex scenarios is to use the principles of Superor-
dinate Knowledge, integrating arbitrary knowledge. The core
assembly elements of Superordinate Knowledge [14], e.g., for
practical mathematical-computational scenarios [15], are:
•
Methodology.
•
Implementation.
•
Realisation.
Comprehensive focussed subsets of conceptual knowledge can
also provide excellent modular and standardised complements
for information systems component implementations, e.g., for
environmental information management and computation [16].
The presented implementations strictly follow the fundamental
methodological algorithm base of the the Conceptual Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching (CKPM) methodology [17] providing
and accessing knowledge object patterns based on the Super-
ordinate Knowledge Methodology, which allows systematical
use and thorough processing. Core eager beaver procedure- and
structure-based implementation components, grep and join,
are written in C, as commonly known. Module examples
are employing Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE)
[18] syntax for specifying common string patterns. This is
independent from the procedural realisation using Shell and
Perl [19] for component wrapping purposes with case studies.
C. Prehistory long-term resources development
Several major Knowledge Resources (KR) and reference im-
plementations are used with this multi-disciplinary research in
prehistory, archaeology, natural sciences, and humanities and
in long-term development. In order to overcome shortcomings
of public ‘data collections’ the objects, entities, and respec-
tive conceptual knowledge references’ excerpts and examples
are taken from The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge
Archive (PAKA). PAKA has been in continuous development
for more than three decades [20] and is further developed
and released by DIMF [21]. A main reference implementation
in development, used in practice with ongoing long-term
research, applied for KR is the prehistory-protohistory and ar-
chaeology Conceptual Knowledge Reference Implementation
(CKRI) edition, including multi-disciplinary context references
of natural sciences and humanities (E.0.4.2) [22], [23].
III.
STRUCTURE AND INFORMATION
Structure is an organisation of interrelated entities in a
material or non-material object or system. Structure is essential
in logic as it carries unique information. The more, we have
to recognise the differences of structure and form. The case
of text is a good example. The structure of a text consists of
the particular text units and their context, in order to make the
text coherent. The form of a text is the arrangement of the text
units, which commonly has to follow predeﬁned rules.
A. Structure systematics, meaning, levels
As meaning can be understood in context of langage, langue,
and parole, the available rules of structure and form should be
used. If whatever non linguistic, artistic expression is primary
target then different structure and form could be used. Anyway
any linguistic parole context should be aware of the speciﬁc
conditions: Academic use should be aware of the speciﬁc aca-
demic context. Commercial use should be aware of the speciﬁc
commercial context. Marketing use should be aware of the
speciﬁc marketing context. There are rarely reasonable com-
promises ﬁtting diametrical approaches to form equally well.
Consequences of these fundaments are, especially: Structure is
not dependent on physical, non physical, analogous, digital or
comparable being and properties. Structure is not dependent on
same/uniform ways of structuring. Structure is not intrinsic to
a certain scale of information. Structure should not imagined
to be dependent of a location or dependent of management.
Instead, it is more likely to yield consistent results when we
follow a methodology regarding the systematics of structure.
In information science and context of knowledge resources we
can consider three major levels:

3
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
•
Object entity structure (entities as part of an object).
•
Object structure.
•
Supra-object structure (e.g., complexity or inconsistency
introduced by application or service scenario).
The methodological approach is beneﬁcial when expressing
disciplinary views and targeting purposes as it can
•
help to create a consistent understanding of structure,
•
address responsibility,
•
help to assure logical and consistent development and
management of structure, etc.
B. Structure and means of addressing
There are merely higher and lower facility levels of how
structures can be addressed, which result from structure levels.
For example, structure can be addressed by:
•
Logic.
•
Names.
•
References.
•
Address labels.
•
Pointers.
•
Fuzzy methods.
•
Phonetic methods. . . .
For example, ‘non-structures’ can be addressed by:
•
Locality.
•
Source.
•
Context.
•
Logic.
•
Attributes.
•
Size.
•
Quantity. . . .
Substantial differences of properties and facilities of different
levels of structure and non-structure do have multi-fold origin
and reason, especially:
•
Structure is associated with different formalisation levels
and respective consequences.
•
Less complementary knowledge realisation, less poten-
tial, e.g., for logic.
•
Less structure, less potential for approaches.
•
Intrinsic and extrinsic properties are not interchangeable.
•
Higher levels of structure mostly include tools usable
for lower levels.
•
Low level structures are limited to low level tools and
soft criteria, e.g.,
◦
Statistics.
◦
Heuristics.
◦
. . .
•
Potential from quality is different than from quantity.
With that background we should be aware that lower structure
levels can only be addressed on higher formalisation levels, in-
dependent of the fact that structure may either be not available
or not recognised. Substantial deﬁcits of lower level structured
data cannot be compensated by tools. In consequence, structure
is and especially reﬂects:
•
Knowledge (complements of factual, conceptual, proce-
dural, metacognitive, structural, . . .).
•
Context.
•
Experience.
•
Persistence.
•
Reusability.
•
Sustainability.
•
Value.
•
Formalisation (including abstraction and reduction). . . .
In result, it is structure that means features and facilities.
IV.
CASE: STRUCTURE-BASED REALISATION
The
implementation
strictly
follows
the
fundamental
methodological algorithm base, summarised in the following
passages.
A. Methodological algorithm base and resulting method
The structure-based fusion methodology targets on sup-
porting efﬁcient problem solving, providing and accessing
knowledge and knowledge object patterns. The methodology
for creating structure-based fusion methods can be summarised
on high level by:
•
Pre-processing of structures.
•
Option routines, for optional steps preparing fusion.
•
Structure-based fusion of knowledge complements.
•
Post-processing of structures.
This methodology is contrasting to plain procedure-based
approaches. Here, structures are adapted for solving prob-
lems mostly allowing minimising procedure-based efforts and
gaining higher efﬁciency and performance regarding creation
and realisation of solutions. A method based on the structure-
based fusion, implemented for knowledge mining context does
consist of the basic steps:
•
Pre-processing of knowledge mining structures.
•
Options’ routine, e.g., used for prioritisation and sorting.
May contain procedures outside the range of balanced
pre- and post-processing.
•
Structure-based fusion of object structures, objects rep-
resented by knowledge complements.
•
Post-processing of fusion result structures.
Besides the strictly structure-based fundament for the steps,
realisations can use the whole gamut working for knowl-
edge complements, e.g., comparisons, generic and standard
component implementations, and knowledge complements and
identiﬁcation. Table I shows the method implementation and
realisation of a structure-based fusion.
TABLE I. METHOD IMPLEMENTATION AND REALISATION: STEPS OF
STRUCTURE-BASED FUSION.
Method Implementation Steps
Realisation Example
Outer pre-processing
individual, out of scope here
Input
standard input, echo
Inner pre-processing of structures
perl
Options’ routines, prioritisation & sorting
perl & sort
Structure-based fusion
join
Inner post-processing of structures
perl
Output
standard output
Outer post-processing
individual, out of scope here
Any input and output can be intermediate, part of a complex
mining process. Pre- and post-processing are handling the in-
put and output for the options’ routines and consecutive fusion,
the central steps. For this implementation and demonstration
processing is done via Perl, options’ routines via Perl and sort,
and the fusion via join.
The following structure based fusion code illustrations of re-
alisations use inline GNU Bourne-Again SHell syntax, I/O and
naming features for ease of demonstration and reproducibility.

4
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Structure-based realisation: Simple case result
An instructive, simple case example implementation is a
comparison and ﬁlter process of groups of arbitrary numbers
of objects and object entities, which each can be of arbitrary
volume and length. A procedural approach would create a
procedure handling the structure and form of the entries as
they appear and create and call a grep function for each of all
the target entries or patterns. In advanced knowledge mining
and processing, we often have to deal with sequences of steps
creating intermediate results from previous results, all of which
may need to be compared, sorted, ﬁltered and so on. In that
context the following scenario works as a basic example.
1)
At a certain stage in a mining process we may have
two groups of different knowledge object line entities.
2)
We have to ﬁnd only those various different string
entries contained in one group and list those of the
entries, which are also contained in the other group and
produce combined object entities containing the content
of respective entries from both groups.
3)
We have to create an appropriate method and reali-
sation, which, ideally, works for arbitrary numbers of
objects with different sizes and content and which is
ﬂexible and knowledge-centric.
So, how can such ‘search, comparison, ﬁlter, and sort’ be
realised for large numbers of objects, avoiding to call a routine
or thread thousands or hundreds of thousand times per inter-
mediate step and deploying ‘structural information’ instead?
Figure 1 shows a structure-based solution. Its realisation is a
self-contained regular shell script containing object groups and
solution for ease of reconstructing the train of thought.
1
#
2
# Structure-based fusion sample -- (c) CPR, 2019, 2020
3
#
4
cnta="Natural Sciences collection entry 10:05:34 Volcano
5
Natural Sciences collection entry entities 10:05:35
Soufriere
6
Media attachment entry 10:06:34 Soufriere Photo
7
Addendum entry 10:05:30 References
8
Object entry compendium 10:06:37 comments"
9
cntb="Object entry 10:05:35 delivered
10
Excavation slide 10:05:34 updated
11
Object documentation update 10:06:34 request
12
System service no date
13
Object entity mining request 10:06:37 researcher id
DF98_007
14
Object collection status 10:05:28 no resources reference
15
Object entity documentation request 10:05:30 user id
database"
16
export cnta
17
export cntb
18
join -1 1 -2 1 <(echo "$cnta"|perl -pe ’s/ˆ(.*?)
([0-9][0-9]:[0-9][0-9]:[0-9][0-9])(.*?)$/$2 1_BEFORE{$1}
1_AFTER{$3}/’|sort) <(echo "$cntb"|perl -pe ’s/ˆ(.*?)
([0-9][0-9]:[0-9][0-9]:[0-9][0-9])(.*?)$/$2 2_BEFORE{$1}
2_AFTER{$3}/’|sort)
19
exit
Figure 1.
Structure-based fusion solution, working with arbitrary
one-lined object entities (excerpt), overcoming thousands of grep calls.
Here, two content groups of single line object instances are
used for demonstration, content “a” and content “b”. As can
be seen, the content groups are asymmetric regarding object
instances, content, and context aspects. For convenience of
demonstration an excerpt of the contents is embedded in the
code and represented by the exported variables named cnta
and cntb. This excerpt is doing a selection of objects by
fusion of arbitrary length and arbitrary number of objects by
criteria (time stamps), which are reﬂected by structure.
The solution for that purpose achieves that result explicitly
without the use of ‘grep’ (Global Regular Expression Parser),
‘search’, or comparable procedural routine instances. In order
to create a straightforward solution and to easily follow the
strategy, the steps are implemented using 5 external calls.
Figure 2 shows the result of the realisation (Figure 1).
1
10:05:30 1_BEFORE{Addendum entry} 1_AFTER{ References} 2_BEFORE{Object entity
documentation request} 2_AFTER{ user id database}
2
10:05:34 1_BEFORE{Natural Sciences collection entry} 1_AFTER{ Volcano} 2_BEFORE{
Excavation slide} 2_AFTER{ updated}
3
10:05:35 1_BEFORE{Natural Sciences collection entry entities} 1_AFTER{ Soufriere
} 2_BEFORE{Object entry} 2_AFTER{ delivered}
4
10:06:34 1_BEFORE{Media attachment entry} 1_AFTER{ Soufriere Photo} 2_BEFORE{
Object documentation update} 2_AFTER{ request}
5
10:06:37 1_BEFORE{Object entry compendium} 1_AFTER{ comments} 2_BEFORE{Object
entity mining request} 2_AFTER{ researcher id DF98_007}
Figure 2. Result of the structure-based approach, working with
arbitrary one-lined object entities (excerpt).
The result reﬂects the target task based on structure-based
fusion. The solution includes a sort of resulting object entities
by respective string entries and appropriate marking of content
from the groups for illustration.
C. Structure-based realisation: Multi-line case result
A different kind of complexity is what we commonly face
in context of knowledge resources, same task and still with
arbitrary length and arbitrary number of objects and entities
with multi-line formatting (Figure 3) to be preserved.
1
Nisyros
[Volcanology, Geology]:
2
Volcano, Type: Strato volcano, Island.
3
Status: Historical, Summit Elevation: 698\UD{m}. ...
4
VNUM: 0102-05=, ...,
5
Craters: ..., ...
6
%%IML: UDC:[550.3],[930.85],[911.2]
7
%%IML: media:...{UDC:[550.3+551.21],[911.2](4+38+23)}...jpg
8
Stefanos Crater, Nisyros, Greece.
9
LATLON: 36.578345,27.1680696
10
%%IML: GoogleMapsLocation: https://www.google.com/...@36
.578345,27.1680696,337m/...
11
Little Polyvotis Crater, Nisyros, Greece.
12
LATLON: 36.5834105,27.1660736 ...
Figure 3. Knowledge resources’ object (‘Nisyros’): Multi-line formatting,
conceptual knowledge, media object entities, and georeferences (excerpt).
Focus task is to ﬁnd only those arbitrary object instances,
which appear in one content context and also in another content
context and to combine the data of those instances in a result
object instance. It is preferable if the realisation allows a multi-
object fusion, meaning more than one object in a process.
A common procedure realisation would, e.g., have to call a
‘grep’ function (especially a Global Regular Expression Parser)
for every of the thousands of object instances in one context
for searches in another context
Figure 4 shows a more efﬁcient, structure-based realisation
for such objects. As with the previous example realisation
above, its realisation is presented as a self-contained regular
shell script for ease of demonstration. The excerpt fully con-
ﬁrms with a standard shell and Perl syntax and features and
is compact. In order to create a straightforward solution and
to easily follow the strategy, the steps are implemented using
10 external calls, which could still be further reduced. As can
be seen, these calls already include formatting cleanup with
pre- and post-processing, too. The solution targets contexts
for larger numbers of multi-line, multi-entity object instances
(thousands or hundreds of thousands). As common, results
should be considered intermediate for complex knowledge
mining procedures.

5
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
#
2
# Structure-based fusion mining -- (c) CPR, 2019, 2020
3
#
4
cnta="Nirgal
[Etymology]:
5
...
6
Nisyros
[Archaeology, Geology, Volcanology]:
7
Island, Volcano, Greece, Dodecanese Islands. ...
8
The island provides unique archaeological remains, esp. ...
9
History and mythology of the island and volcano are ...
10
%%IML: UDC:[902],[930.85],[911.2]"63"(4+38+23+24)=14
11
Nisyros_archive
[Archaeology]:
12
Media, Archaeology Digital Object Archive (ADOA). ...
13
NMR
[Archaeology]:
14
..."
15
cntb="Niggli
[Petrography, Mineralogy]:
16
...
17
Nisyros
[Volcanology, Geology]:
18
Volcano, Type: Strato volcano, Island, Greece.
19
Status: Historical, Summit Elevation: 698\UD{m}. ...
20
VNUM: 0102-05=, ..., Craters: ..., ...
21
%%IML: UDC:[550.3],[930.85],[911.2]
22
%%IML: media:...{UDC:[550.3+551.21],[911.2](4+38+23)}...jpg
23
Stefanos Crater, Nisyros, Greece.
24
LATLON: 36.578345,27.1680696
25
%%IML: GoogleMapsLocation: https://www.google.com/...@36
.578345,27.1680696,337m/...
26
Little Polyvotis Crater, Nisyros, Greece.
27
LATLON: 36.5834105,27.1660736 ...
28
Nisyros_archive
[Volcanology]:
29
Media, Geosciences Digital Object Archive (GDOA). ...
30
NLBR
[Platetectonics, Volcanology]:
31
...
32
N-MORB
[Platetectonics, Volcanology]:
33
..."
34
export cnta
35
export cntb
36
join -1 1 -2 1 -t" " \
37
<(echo "$cnta"|\
38
perl -pe ’s/ˆ(\S)/TMPBOL$1/;s/$/TMPEOL/;s/\n//;’|perl -pe ’s/TMPBOL//;s/
TMPBOL/\n/g’|\
39
perl -pe ’s/ˆ(.*?)(\[.*?\]:)(.*)$/$1$2$3/’|sort -k 1b,1)\
40
<(echo "$cntb"| \
41
perl -pe ’s/ˆ(\S)/TMPBOL$1/;s/$/TMPEOL/;s/\n//;’|perl -pe ’s/TMPBOL//;s/
TMPBOL/\n/g’|\
42
perl -pe ’s/ˆ(.*?)(\[.*?\]:)(.*)$/$1$2$3/’|sort -k 1b,1)|\
43
perl -pe ’s/TMPEOL$//g;s/TMPEOL/\n/g;’
44
exit
Figure 4.
Structure-based fusion solution, working with arbitrary
multi-line knowledge resources’ object entities (excerpt), overcoming grep.
With the above scenario the realisation should be fully
logical and self explanatory. The easiest way to comprehend
the implementation principle is to follow the sequence of
instructions and reproduce step by step, directly to the result.
The realised solution should be reasonably ﬂexible and robust.
Figure 5 shows the result of the realisation (Figure 4).
1
Nisyros
[Archaeology, Geology, Volcanology]:
2
Island, Volcano, Greece, Dodecanese Islands. ...
3
The island provides unique archaeological remains, esp. ...
4
History and mythology of the island and volcano are ...
5
%%IML: UDC:[902],[930.85],[911.2]63(4+38+23+24)=14
6
[Volcanology, Geology]:
7
Volcano, Type: Strato volcano, Island, Greece.
8
Status: Historical, Summit Elevation: 698\UD{m}. ...
9
VNUM: 0102-05=, ..., Craters: ..., ...
10
%%IML: UDC:[550.3],[930.85],[911.2]
11
%%IML: media:...{UDC:[550.3+551.21],[911.2](4+38+23)}...jpg
12
Stefanos Crater, Nisyros, Greece.
13
LATLON: 36.578345,27.1680696
14
%%IML: GoogleMapsLocation: https://www.google.com/...@36
.578345,27.1680696,337m/...
15
Little Polyvotis Crater, Nisyros, Greece.
16
LATLON: 36.5834105,27.1660736 ...
17
Nisyros_archive
[Archaeology]:
18
Media, Archaeology Digital Object Archive (ADOA). ...
19
[Volcanology]:
20
Media, Geosciences Digital Object Archive (GDOA). ...
Figure 5. Result of the structure-based approach, working with arbitrary
multi-line object entities, result shows the multi-object fusion (excerpt).
Objects (Nisyros and Nisyros_archive) have correctly
been identiﬁed (criteria name string) and uniﬁed. Entities have
been preserved and conceptual knowledge of instances have
been combined in a unique object instance each.
Even the indentation of the resulting content reﬂects the
operations and is exactly preserved. Besides valuable knowl-
edge content, conceptual knowledge integration is considered
a marker regarding the range of knowledge and efﬁciency of a
solution when working with knowledge resources. In this case
the knowledge resources use UDC references with millions of
object instances and entities. Universally consistent conceptual
knowledge, e.g., used for CKPM, is based on UDC references
for demonstration, spanning the main tables [24] shown in
Table II.
TABLE II. CKRI: IMPLEMENTED UDC CODE REFERENCES, MAIN TABLE
(E.0.4.2).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:0
Science and Knowledge. Organization. Computer Science.
Information. Documentation. Librarianship. Institutions.
Publications
UDC:1
Philosophy. Psychology
UDC:2
Religion. Theology
UDC:3
Social Sciences
UDC:5
Mathematics. Natural Sciences
UDC:6
Applied Sciences. Medicine, Technology
UDC:7
The Arts. Entertainment. Sport
UDC:8
Linguistics. Literature
UDC:9
Geography. Biography. History
Natural sciences related conceptual knowledge pattern enti-
ties are created based on UDC references [25] of mathematics
and natural sciences. An excerpt of the implementation is
shown in Table III.
TABLE III. CKRI: IMPLEMENTED UDC CODE REFERENCES OF
MATHEMATICS AND NATURAL SCIENCES (EXCERPT, E.0.4.2).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:51
Mathematics
UDC:53
Physics
UDC:535
Optics
UDC:535.6
Colours and their properties. Colour theory
UDC:539
Physical nature of matter
UDC:54
Chemistry. Crystallography. Mineralogy
UDC:55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC:550.3
Geophysics
UDC:551
General geology. Meteorology. Climatology.
UDC:551.21
Vulcanicity. Vulcanism. Volcanoes. Eruptive phenomena.
Eruptions
UDC:551.24
Geotectonics
UDC:551.4
Geomorphology. Study of the Earth’s physical forms
UDC:551.44
Speleology. Caves. Fissures. Underground waters
UDC:551.46
Physical oceanography. Submarine topography. Ocean ﬂoor
UDC:551.7
Historical geology. Stratigraphy. Palaeogeography
UDC:551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC:56
Palaeontology
UDC:57
Biological sciences in general
UDC:58
Botany
UDC:59
Zoology
Conceptual knowledge pattern entities of archaeology and
history are created based on UDC references [26] of geogra-
phy, biography, history (Table IV).
TABLE IV. CKRI: IMPLEMENTED UDC CODE REFERENCES OF
GEOGRAPHY, BIOGRAPHY, HISTORY (EXCERPT, E.0.4.2).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:902
Archaeology
UDC:903
Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
UDC:904
Cultural remains of historical times
UDC:908
Area studies. Study of a locality
UDC:91
Geography. Exploration of the Earth and of individual
countries. Travel. Regional geography
UDC:912
Nonliterary, nontextual representations of a region
UDC:92
Biographical studies. Genealogy. Heraldry. Flags
UDC:93/94
History
UDC:94
General history

6
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The geoscientiﬁc / prehistory / archaeology integration from
the case studies and implementations for geoscientiﬁc informa-
tion systems and application components is used for illustration
in the next sections. The example will show a tiny subset
of the comprehensive, universal conceptual knowledge used,
integrating UDC:902/908 (Archaeology. Prehistory. Cultural
remains. Area studies) and UDC:55 (Earth Sciences. Geolog-
ical sciences) and humanities (UDC main table trees).
D. Multi-line knowledge ranges and computation
As commonly we have to handle many objects, we can
illustrate how efﬁciency and performance scale with numbers
of objects. The examples use the above multi-line knowledge
case, as knowledge resources’ objects regulary have a high
variety of content, with different object volumes and lengths.
Therefore, this is more for practical experience than a bench-
mark. The overall number of object instances in the respective
primary knowledge ranges for the resources’ excerpt is shown
in the UDC references’ test environment (Table V).
TABLE V. PRIMARY KNOWLEDGE RANGES OF CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE
ENTITY REFERENCES IN THE TEST ENVIRONMENT (EXCERPT).
Knowledge Range
Entities’ Count
UDC:9 (incl. UDC:902/904)
930,000
UDC:5 (incl. UDC:55/56)
1,700,000
The ranges can be comprehended in all details by following
the publicly available online conceptual knowledge framework
already discussed above. Table VI shows an implementa-
tion excerpt and computational footprint for the different
approaches. The different case results were achieved on Intel R⃝
Xeon R⃝ CPU X5570 (2.933 GHz) systems under Linux.
TABLE VI. COMPUTATIONAL FOOTPRINT OF PROCEDURE-/STRUCTURE-
BASED SOLUTIONS, CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE REF. CASES (EXCERPT).
Knowledge Range
Entities’ Count
Context Calls’ Count and Wall Time
Procedure-based
Structure-based
UDC:902
48,000
≫48,000
2,440 s
10
32 s
UDC:55
54,000
≫54,000
3,938 s
10
45 s
UDC:902/904
107,000
≫107,000
24,775 s
10
198 s
UDC:55/56
295,000
≫295,000 189,100 s
10
945 s
The values allow to rate the discussed conventional ap-
proach (max. 1,000 loosely parallel pattern matching calls
‘practical’) using a procedure-based solution and the structure-
based approach. The two examples of the approaches to
challenging mining cases are using the same range of knowl-
edge/data content each, speciﬁed by ranges of referenced
conceptual knowledge. Requirements for the consideration of
wider knowledge ranges do show a major impact on the
procedure-based solution, resulting in relatively larger increase
of context calls and wall times. Even if more loosely parallel
calls would be logically possible with a mining algorithm
it is not practical to increase their number on the same
machine with procedure-based solutions. The counts of object
entries in the two content resources are of major impact for
the efﬁciency differences. The context calls’ count (10) for
structure-based fusion is based on the above presented multi-
line object solution and can be kept stable. The result of the
comparison of the computational footprint is clearly in favor
of the structure-based solution. This tendency even improves
with increasing numbers of objects involved.
V.
CASE: SPATIAL CONTEXT COMPUTATION
Contextualisation, besides prehistoric knowledge computa-
tion itself, often requires multi-disciplinary component integra-
tion, especially advanced spatial context computation, e.g., in-
tegration of Digital Elevation Models (DEM), processing, and
analysis. The case of structure-based realisation demonstrated
the efﬁciency of structure-based approaches. The structure-
based scenario of KR, e.g., employing PAKA, can further be
natively integrated with the realisations of cognostic addressing
of structure and structural knowledge (‘nucleal cognstruc-
ture’) [27], for contextualisation supported by standardised
components, especially efﬁcient and effective spatial context
computation and processing, as practically implemented and
realised for the methodological structure-based approach and
illustrated in exactly the above examples (Figures 3 and 5).
Efﬁcient computation and processing are relevant for many
contextualisation tasks, e.g., with chorological contexts in
prehistory and archaeology regarding
•
height reference computation,
•
resampling,
•
illumination,
•
spatial parametrisation,
•
spatial computation, and
•
symbolic representation.
The following components in the workﬂow enable a per
instance and per core parallelisation, e.g., chronological and/or
chorological slices and other conceptual knowledge. This al-
lows to create the required number of time slices, especially
series of images and other symbolic representation.
Each context may require different parametrisation with
respect to the state of the art of research, e.g., prehistori-
cal knowledge resources and chronological and chorological
object discretisation and quantiﬁcation on the one hand, and
geoscientiﬁc parametrisation for a relevant time interval on the
other hand.
A. Prehistory context relevant CKRI entity groups
The following passages excerpt relevant entity groups of the
prehistory-protohistory and archaeology Conceptual Knowl-
edge Reference Implementation (CKRI), including multi-
disciplinary contexts of natural sciences and humanities
(E.0.4.2) [28] [23]. Geodesy related conceptual knowledge
pattern entities are created based on UDC references [25], part
of the astronomy, astrophysics, space research, and geodesy
sections. An excerpt of the implementation is shown in Ta-
ble VII.
TABLE VII. CKRI: IMPLEMENTED UDC CODE REFERENCES OF GEODESY
(EXCERPT, E.0.4.2).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:52
Astronomy. Astrophysics. Space research. Geodesy
UDC:528
Geodesy. Surveying. Photogrammetry. Remote sensing.
Cartography
UDC:528.2
Figure of the Earth. Earth measurement. Mathematical
geodesy. Physical geodesy. Astronomical geodesy
UDC:528.3
Geodetic surveying
UDC:528.4
Field surveying. Land surveying. Cadastral survey.
Topography. Engineering survey. Special ﬁelds of surveying
UDC:528.5
Geodetic instruments and equipment
UDC:528.7
Photogrammetry: aerial, terrestrial
UDC:528.8
Remote sensing
UDC:528.9
Cartography. Mapping (textual documents)

7
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An excerpt of major references from the auxiliaries of time
[29] is shown in Table VIII.
TABLE VIII. CKRI: IMPLEMENTED UDC CODE REFERENCES,
AUXILIARIES OF TIME (EXCERPT, E.0.4.2).
Code / Sign Ref.
Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:“0”
First millennium CE
UDC:“1”
Second millennium CE
UDC:“2”
Third millennium CE
UDC:“3/7”
Time divisions other than dates in Christian (Gregorian)
reckoning
UDC:“3”
Conventional time divisions and subdivisions:
numbered, named, etc.
UDC:“32”
The year. Seasons and other divisions of the year
UDC:“321/324” Seasons
UDC:“321”
Spring
UDC:“322”
Summer
UDC:“323”
Autumn (fall)
UDC:“324”
Winter
UDC:“325”
Quarters (quarter years, trimesters)
UDC:“327”
Months
UDC:“328”
Weeks
UDC:“329”
Days
UDC:“34”
Day and night phenomena. Hours or times of day
UDC:“344”
Daytime. Daylight hours
UDC:“345”
Night-time. Hours of darkness or semi-darkness
UDC:“36”
Times of peace, war, danger, emergency, difﬁculties
UDC:“362”
Peacetime. Time of no danger
UDC:“363”
Time of danger, threat
UDC:“364”
Wartime
UDC:“367”
Times according to volume of use, load, demand
UDC:“37”
Time of work activity, occupation, production,
daily routine
UDC:“372”
Working hours. Service hours. Time of occupation
UDC:“377”
Rest and recreation time. Spare time. Free time.
Time outside working hours
UDC:“38”
Holidays. Festive and commemorative occasions
UDC:“382”
Religious holidays, festive and commemorative occasions
UDC:“383”
Public, national or regional holidays (other than religious)
UDC:“385”
Personal private holidays, vacation or leave time
UDC:“4”
Duration. Time-span. Period. Term. Ages and age-groups
UDC:“5”
Periodicity. Frequency. Recurrence at speciﬁed intervals.
UDC:“6”
Geological, archaeological and cultural time divisions
UDC:“61/62”
Geological (lithological / biological / palaeoecological)
time division
UDC:“61”
Precambrian to Mesozoic
(from more than 600 to 70 MYBP)
UDC:“62”
Cenozoic (Cainozoic). Neozoic (70 MYBP - present)
UDC:“63”
Archaeological, prehistoric, protohistoric periods and ages
UDC:“67/69”
Time reckonings: universal, secular, non-Christian religious
UDC:“67”
Universal time reckoning. Before Present
UDC:“68”
Secular time reckonings other than universal and the
Christian (Gregorian) calendar
UDC:“69”
Dates and time units in non-Christian (non-Gregorian)
religious time reckonings
UDC:“7”
Phenomena in time. Phenomenology of time
The auxiliaries of time can be used for creating arbitrary
facets, including arbitrary time concepts. Facets can be used
to integrate addressing different concepts, e.g., absolute and
relative time concepts used in prehistoric, archaeological, and
natural sciences contexts.
Table IX shows an excerpt of the implementation. Auxil-
iaries of spatial features/place (UDC (1/9) [30] Place and space
in general. Localization. Orientation
TABLE IX. CKRI: IMPLEMENTED UDC CODE REFERENCES OF SPATIAL
FEATURES / PLACE: AUXILIARIES OF PLACE, BOUNDARIES AND SPATIAL
FORMS (EXCERPT, E.0.4.2).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:(1)
Place and space in general. Localization. Orientation
UDC:(100)
Universal as to place. International. All countries in
general
UDC:(2)
Physiographic designation
UDC:(20)
Ecosphere
UDC:(21)
Surface of the Earth in general. Land areas in particular.
Natural zones and regions
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally.
Mountains
UDC:(24)
Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
UDC:(25)
Natural ﬂat ground (at, above or below sea level). The ground
in its natural condition, cultivated or inhabited
UDC:(26)
Oceans, seas and interconnections
UDC:(28)
Inland waters
UDC:(3/9)
Individual places of the ancient and modern world
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(31)
Ancient China and Japan
UDC:(32)
Ancient Egypt
UDC:(33)
Ancient Roman Province of Judaea. The Holy Land.
Region of the Israelites
UDC:(34)
Ancient India
UDC:(35)
Medo-Persia
UDC:(36)
Regions of the so-called barbarians
UDC:(37)
Italia. Ancient Rome and Italy
UDC:(38)
Ancient Greece
UDC:(399)
Other regions. Ancient geographical divisions other than
those of classical antiquity
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
UDC:(4)
Europe
UDC:(5)
Asia
UDC:(6)
Africa
UDC:(7/8)
America, North and South. The Americas
UDC:(7)
North and Central America
UDC:(8)
South America
UDC:(9)
States and regions of the South Paciﬁc and Australia.
Arctic. Antarctic
These entities can be used for arbitrary facets, including
orientation and relative position.
B. Prehistory context multi-disciplinary views
Table X shows an excerpt of UDC:903.. . .:2 ritual/burial
object and subgroup examples, and conceptual view groups
[12] for prehistory and protohistory (PAKA, [20] [21]).
TABLE X. PREHISTORY AND PROTOHISTORY RITUAL/BURIAL OBJECT AND
SUBGROUP EXAMPLES, AND CONCEPTUAL VIEW GROUPS [12] (EXCERPT).
Major Object Group
Selected Objects
Conceptual View Group
Ritual places, burials
yes
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cemetery
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Barrow
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
round
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
long
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cist
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Dolmen
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Tomb
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
chamber
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
court
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
portal
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
rock cut
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
wedge
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Pithos burial
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cave
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Body ﬁnding
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Urn
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
. . .
–
UDC:903.. . .:2

8
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
For this illustrative object scenario, the excerpt does not
show individual micro-groups. Besides different distributions
and different origins, object context can be referred, e.g.,
artiﬁcial origin and natural origins as well as relevant object
properties, materials, and soil contexts can be considered.
The components can be integrated via coherent conceptual
knowledge.
For illustration of this case, we want to discover the contexts
of a possible range of comparable tombs in a target area with
those for the suggested type and/or time of the Odyssey in the
respective region. Here, the target is the distribution of groups
of cist tombs in North-Rhine Westphalia and Lower Saxony,
Germany and The Netherlands in context with the distribution
of groups of cist tombs in the time of king Odysseus in the
Homeric Ithaca, Kefalonia (Cephalonia), Paliki region. The
result conﬁguration should provide homogeneous context to-
pography and context soil references and contain the respective
groups in the regions and the distribution of caves in the
respective countries.
C. Resulting coherent knowledge context integration
Enabled by coherent conceptual knowledge contexts, cist
tombs can be selected from PAKA (Table X) and prehistoric
caves in borders of today’s North-Rhine Westphalia and Lower
Saxony, Germany, The Netherlands, Greece.
Respective conceptual and symbolic representation criteria,
e.g., spatial criteria can be deployed the integrating knowledge
complements from available KR.
The available multi-disciplinary context components are
shown. The geodesic distance calculations based on the el-
lipsoidal parameters of Earth’s sphere select cist tombs in
association of the Kefalonia acropolis and sites like Tzanata.
In this case, considered cists are “Early Geometric cist tombs”.
Each conceptual space-time slice requires a number of
contributions, especially:
•
Resampling,
•
spatial computation (DEM),
•
intensity computation,
•
parametrisation,
•
colourisation palette creation,
•
spatial selection,
•
spatial computation (vector),
•
Point on Interest (POI), line, and polygon criteria selec-
tion.
•
soil context computation,
•
KR computation,
•
projection, and
•
computation of symbolic representation.
Figure 1 shows a generated, resulting coherent conceptual
knowledge integration sketch for the realisation based on the
KR. Selection criteria can be complex, a decent illustrative
example employing a workﬂows of spatial criteria, e.g.,
•
polygon criteria, e.g., in North-Rhine Westphalia and
Lower Saxony, Germany and The Netherlands,
•
spherical distance criteria, e.g., 100 km. For such criteria,
the calculation of distances on planetary bodies like
Earth depends on the ellipsoidal parameters of the body
and the respective method of computation.
Here, required geodesic distance calculations are based
on the ellipsoidal parameters of Earth’s sphere [31].
Context components, workﬂows, and procedures can be
standardised. Nevertheless, for considering any scientiﬁc task
and associated questions, a solid understanding of all the
algorithms and the consequences of integration should be
mandatory, especially regarding resulting analysis and inter-
pretation.
The sketch considers the major conceptual references for
illustration. Detailed research can further detail on prehis-
toric object groups, characteristics, and properties, topographic
properties, soil properties, and many more. Therefore, the
conceptual sketch view can result in levels of arbitrary num-
bers of different integrations of complements and associated
properties as resulting from the KR, which are discussed in the
following. The result integrates required KR components based
on coherent conceptual knowledge and systematical chorolog-
ical knowledge for multi-disciplinary contexts, e.g., arbitrary
group representations, classiﬁcation based representations, and
geospatial representations.
Knowledge objects and contexts are provided by The Pre-
history and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) [20]
[21]. The multi-disciplinary coherent contextualisation em-
ploys the base of a new soil system reference develop-
ment with soil types (UDC:631.4. . .) of the World Refer-
ence Base (WRB) standard, reference contexts, especially for
UDC:903.. . .:2,551.7+“628”.. . ., prehistorical, protohistorical
time spans and respective objects and artefacts for this case,
related to religion and rituals, geology, especially stratigraphy
and paleogeography, quaternary, especially late glacial and
Holocene.
The integrated natural sciences KR further provide infor-
mation on caves in the respective region. Contextualisation is
enabled by the Conceptual Knowledge Reference Implemen-
tation (CKRI), including multi-disciplinary contexts of natural
sciences and humanities (E.0.4.2) [23]. The conceptual knowl-
edge base is The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [12].
Associated information, e.g., on soil speciﬁcations and prop-
erties, can be found as reference in the WRB for soil resources
[32], [33] from the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO),
United Nations.
In this illustration plain Digital Chart of the World (DCW)
data are used [34]. The coastline database is the Global Self-
consistent Hierarchical High-resolution Geography (GSHHG)
[35] [36], which was mainly compiled from the World Vector
Shorelines (WVS) [37], the CIA World Data Bank II (WDBII)
[38], and the Atlas of the Cryosphere (AC).
An equal area projection (Eckert IV) is advised due to the
type of discipline knowledge representation. The compilation
uses the World Geodetic System (WGS). The symbolic repre-
sentation of the contextualisation is done via LX Professional
Scientiﬁc Content-Context-Suite (LX PSCC Suite) deploying
the Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) [39] for visualisation.
D. Prehistory context multi-disciplinary integration facets
Table XI shows the reference facets of a respective multi-
disciplinary target contextualisation.

9
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. Resulting coherent conceptual knowledge integration sketch diagram showing knowledge resources for a prehistoric, natural sciences, and spatial
contextualisation for excerpts of prehistoric cist tomb distributions, remote sensing data, and soil properties with respective knowledge references.
TABLE XI. REFERENCE FACETS OF A MULTI-DISCIPLINARY TARGET
CONTEXTUALISATION OF PREHISTORY CONTEXT, BASED ON CKRI
(E.0.4.2), IMPLEMENTED USING UDC CODE REFERENCES (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref.
Verbal Description (EN)
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:903.. . .
Prehistory, prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
. . .:2. . .CIST
referring to religion and rituals . . . cist tomb
. . .,“62. . .”
from Holocene
. . .,(4. . .DENW) . . . in North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany
. . .,(4. . .DENI)
. . . in Lower Saxony, Germany
. . .,(4. . .NL)
. . . in The Netherlands
. . .,(38):
Ancient Greece
. . .,(495)
Greece. Hellenic Republic. Elliniki Dimokratia
Earth sciences, geological sciences
UDC:551.44
Speleology, caves, ﬁssures, underground waters
Applied sciences, agriculture in general
UDC:631.4
Soil research data
Geodesy. Photogrammetry
UDC:52. . .,(23)
Remote sensing data, above sea level
UDC:52. . .,(24)
Remote sensing data, below sea level
Contextualisation Place
UDC:(4)
Europe
The contextualisation uses coherent conceptual knowledge
and refers to the chorological references for consequent knowl-
edge integration and symbolic representation. Respecting the
principles of formalisation, methodology, research focus, and
the integrated context components, this implementation result
allows numerous individual solution facilities for further in-
vestigation.
E. Components’ spatial contexts and computation
This case can employ the structure-based fusion for the
respective KR computation and processing. The integrated
spatial components’ computation and processing can deploy
parallelisation, e.g., for creation of slices.
Table XII shows an implementation excerpt and compu-
tational footprint for the components in the given case. For
comparison to the above values, the results are given for an
Intel R⃝ Xeon R⃝ CPU X5570 (2.933 GHz) systems under Linux.
TABLE XII. COMPUTATIONAL FOOTPRINT OF PROCESSING AND
COMPUTATION FOR COMPONENTS WITH PARALLEL SUPPORT (EXCERPT).
Contributing Components
Description / Resources
Wall Time
Preprocessing
DEM, KR, PAKA
280 s
Slice (parallelised instance)
52 s
UDC:52.. . .
DEM, raster, vector, KR
38 s
UDC:903.. . .:. . .
Entities, KR, PAKA
5 s
UDC:551.44
Entities, KR
3 s
UDC:631.4
Entities, soil context, KR
6 s
Postprocessing
[Symbolic representation]
350 s
The number of slices can range from one to n, commonly
many thousands for standard applications. The respective over-

10
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
all wall clock times are about n-times of parallelised instances
for slices and beneﬁt from the parallelisation, e.g., via OpenMP
[40], [41], [42]. In this case the wall times for even small
numbers of slices, e.g., 360 slices result in 360·52 s=18,720 s
versus 52 s for parallel instances. Therefore, pre- and postpro-
cessing do not contribute signiﬁcantly in demanding cases.
The contributing components allow for prehistory and ar-
chaeology to consider the knowledge processing, parametrisa-
tion, and the required chorological contexts, e.g., height refer-
ence computation, resampling, illumination, spatial parametri-
sation, spatial computation, and symbolic representation during
preprocessing, spatial context integration, and postprocessing
in an efﬁcient and scalable way.
VI.
CONCLUSION
It is generally preferable to integrate multi-disciplinary
knowledge with the expertise of the respective participated
disciplines. This research has shown to allow a coherent
integration of multi-disciplinary knowledge with the respective
backgrounds.
This paper presented two successful cases of prehistory-
protohistory contextualisation, structure-based fusion realisa-
tion (prehistory-archaeology knowledge resources and vol-
canology contexts) and integrated spatial context computation
(cist tombs, speleology, spatial, and soil contexts).
This research achieved the goal to create performant meth-
ods for efﬁcient problem solving deploying the new structure-
based fusion methodology and spatial context computation.
Structure-based fusion can provide a valuable, scalable op-
tion alternative to procedure-based approaches. The presented
case realisation successfully considered conceptual knowledge,
especially the core component of UDC references, which is
most important in context of handling advanced structures
for universal, multi-disciplinary, and multi-lingual knowledge
for many objects. The case implementations illustrated that
even complex scenarios with computational challenges and
large numbers of involved objects can be efﬁciently created
and realised. Structure-based methods increase the means to
address structure and to beneﬁcially use structural knowledge
and information, which are otherwise not easily deployable
by procedure-based approaches. The solutions showed the
ﬂexibility of knowledge- and data-centricity. The implemen-
tations of the methods proved being able to minimise the
number of calls and threads. The methodology and efﬁciency
in creating and adapting implementations that way can have
signiﬁcant impact on sustainability and consistency of long-
term solutions.
The structure-based fusion solutions not just provide facili-
ties for fast, resource efﬁcient operation, even if not optimised
as the shown realisations. They are modular, long-term sus-
tainable, and widely programming / language implementation
independent. Realisations can be easily adapted to different
environments (programming languages / shells and operating
systems). For the research group and partners the solutions
proved adaptability and efﬁciency in many practical realisation,
for years, new and rewritten, in context of resources develop-
ment and knowledge mining and many solutions beyond.
The coherent conceptual knowledge integration of compo-
nents also showed the vast potential for understanding multi-
disciplinary contexts and processes – not only for prehistory,
archaeology, natural sciences, and humanities.
Future research will continue creating structure-based fusion
solutions for knowledge mining and day-to-day challenges.
Further research will be done on multi-disciplinary and spatial
context computation for enabling an ongoing analysis reﬁne-
ment with the continuous development of integrated compo-
nents contributed by many disciplines, especially taking new
ﬁndings and context integration in prehistory and archaeology
into account.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the “Knowledge in Motion” (KiM)
long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for partially funding this re-
search, implementation, case studies, and publication under
grants D2012F1P04497, D2014F2P04562, D2018F1P04962
and D2020F1P05228 and to its senior scientiﬁc members
and members of the permanent commission of the sci-
ence council, especially to Dr. Friedrich H¨ulsmann, Got-
tfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB) Hannover, to
Dipl.-Biol. Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universit¨at
Hannover, to Dipl.-Ing. Martin Hofmeister, Hannover, and
to Olaf Lau, Hannover, Germany, for fruitful discussion,
inspiration, practical multi-disciplinary case studies, and the
analysis of advanced concepts. We are grateful to Dipl.-Geogr.
Burkhard Hentzschel and Dipl.-Ing. Eckhard Dunkhorst, Min-
den, Germany, for proliﬁc discussion and exchange of prac-
tical spatial and drone case scenarios. We are grateful to
Dipl.-Ing. Hans-G¨unther M¨uller, G¨ottingen, Germany, for pro-
viding specialised, manufactured high end computation and
storage solutions. We are grateful to the members of the
Eastern Mediterranean research and studies campaign 2018–
2020, DIMF, and all national and international partners in
the Geo Exploration and Information cooperations for their
constructive and trans-disciplinary support. We are grateful
to The Science and High Performance Supercomputing Cen-
tre (SHPSC) for long-term support. / DIMF-PIID-DF98 007;
URL: https://scienceparagon.de/cpr .
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Impact of Information Science Accompanied
Structural Information on Computation of Knowledge Pattern Matching
and Processing: A Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and
Humanities Conceptual Integration Perspective,” in Proceedings of The
Tenth International Conference on Advanced Communications and
Computation (INFOCOMP 2020), September 27 - October 1, 2020,
Lisbon, Portugal.
XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2020,
ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN: 978-1-61208-807-5.
[2]
L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, Eds., A Taxonomy for Learning,
Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educa-
tional Objectives.
Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA (Pearson Education
Group), USA, 2001, ISBN: 978-0801319037.
[3]
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, Volume 1, 2009, Project Gutenberg,
eBook, EBook-No.: 28626, Release Date: April 27, 2009, Digitised
Version of the Original Publication, Produced by Sophia Canoni, Book
provided by Iason Konstantinidis, Translator: Kyriakos Zambas, URL:
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/12699 [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[4]
Aristotle, The Ethics of Aristotle, 2005, Project Gutenberg, eBook,
EBook-No.: 8438, Rel. Date: Jul., 2005, Digit. Vers. of the Orig. Publ.,
Produced by Ted Garvin, David Widger, and the DP Team, Edition 10,
URL: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8438 [accessed: 2021-11-27].

11
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[5]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, F. H¨ulsmann, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, P. Skurowski,
and M. Staniszewski, Knowledge and Computing.
Post-Summit Re-
sults, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and Deﬁnitions of Knowledge
and Computing, Sept. 23, 2015, The Fifth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and
Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 13th Int. Conf.
of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–29, 2015,
Rhodes, Greece, 2015, pp. 1–7, DOI: 10.15488/3409.
[6]
Plato, Phaedo, 2008, (Written 360 B.C.E.), Translated by Benjamin
Jowett, Provided by The Internet Classics Archive, URL: http://classics.
mit.edu/Plato/phaedo.html [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[7]
M. Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge.
Routledge Classics,
2002, ISBN: 978-0-415-28752-4, Translated by A. M. Sheridan Smith.
[8]
F. de Saussure, Cours de linguistique g´en´erale, 1916, (title in English:
Course in General Linguistics), C. Bally and A. Sechehaye (eds.).
[9]
Aristotle, On Interpretation, 2008, Peri Hermeneias, Organon, (Written
350 B.C.E.), Translated by E. M. Edghill Provided by The Internet Clas-
sics Archive, URL: http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/interpretation.html
[accessed: 2021-11-27].
[10]
C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards, The Meaning of Meaning: A Study
of the Inﬂuence of Language upon Thought and of the Science of
Symbolism, 1923.
[11]
R. Gleser, Rekonstruktion der Vergangenheit: Zur methodischen Eige-
nart pr¨ahistorischen Erkennens. mentis, Paderborn, 2018, pp. 199–237,
(title in English: Reconstruction of the Past: On the Methodical Pecu-
liarity of Prehistorical Cognition), in: A.-S. Naujoks, J. Stelling, and
O. R. Scholz (eds.), Von der Quelle zur Theorie. Vom Verh¨altnis zwis-
chen Objektivit¨at und Subjektivit¨at in den historischen Wissenschaften,
ISBN: 978-3-95743-136-3.
[12]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[13]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2021-11-27],
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
[14]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Principles of Superordinate Knowledge: Separation
of Methodology, Implementation, and Realisation,” in The Eighth
Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences
(SACINAS), Proceedings of The 16th Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and
Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 13–18, 2018, Rhodes, Greece, American
Institute of Physics Conference Proceedings, Vol. 2116.
AIP Press,
Melville, New York, USA, 2019, ISBN: 978-0-7354-1854-7, ISSN:
0094-243X (AIP CP, print), DOI: 10.1063/1.5114033.
[15]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Superordinate Knowledge Based Comprehen-
sive Subset of Conceptual Knowledge for Practical Mathematical-
Computational Scenarios,” in The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf.
in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), Proceedings of The 17th
Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28,
2019, Rhodes, Greece, American Inst. of Physics Conf. Proc.
AIP
Press, Melville, New York, USA, 2020, ISSN: 0094-243X, (to appear).
[16]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Sustainable Knowledge and Resources Management
for Environmental Information and Computation.
Business Expert
Press, Manhattan, New York, USA, Mar. 2018, Ch. 3, pp. 45–88, in:
Huong Ha (ed.), Climate Change Management: Special Topics in the
Context of Asia, ISBN: 978-1-94784-327-1, in: Robert Sroufe (ed.),
Business Expert Press Environmental and Social Sustainability for
Business Advantage Collection, ISSN: 2327-333X (collection, print).
[17]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “From Knowledge and Meaning Towards Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching: Processing and Developing Knowledge Ob-
jects Targeting Geoscientiﬁc Context and Georeferencing,” in Proc.
of The Twelfth Internat. Conf. on Advanced Geographic Information
Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2020), November
21–25, 2020, Valencia, Spain.
XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware,
USA, 2020, pp. 36–41, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-762-
7, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
geoprocessing 2020 3 10 30035 [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[18]
“Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE),” 2021, URL: https://
www.pcre.org/ [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[19]
“The Perl Programming Language,” 2021, URL: https://www.perl.org/
[accessed: 2021-11-27].
[20]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Information Science and Inter-disciplinary Long-
term Strategies – Key to Insight, Consistency, and Sustainabil-
ity: Conceptual Knowledge Reference Methodology Spanning Pre-
history, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Humanities,” Interna-
tional Tutorial, DataSys Congress 2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020,
Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2020/
ProgramINFOCOMP20.html [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[21]
“The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) license,”
2021, (release 2021), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): All rights reserved. Rights retain to
the contributing creators. URL: http://scienceparagon.de/cpr/x/rprojs/en/
rprojs.html#PAKA [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[22]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Keynote Lecture: The Information Science Paragon:
Allow Knowledge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches
to Universality, Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” October
20, 2020, Informational Modeling – Theory and Practice, Institute of
Mathematics and Informatics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, October
20–21, 2020, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, URL: http://math.bas.bg [accessed: 2021-
11-27], 2020.
[23]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Information Science Paragon: Allow Knowl-
edge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches to Universality,
Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” The International Journal
“Information Models and Analyses” (IJ IMA), vol. 9, no. 3, 2020,
pp. 203–226, Markov, K. (ed.), ISSN: 1314-6416 (print), Submitted
accepted article: November 18, 2020, Publication date: August 17, 2021,
URL: http://www.foibg.com/ijima/vol09/ijima09-03-p01.pdf [accessed:
2021-11-27].
[24]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Main Tables,” 2021, URL: https://
udcdata.info/078887 [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[25]
“UDC 5: Mathematics. Natural sciences,” 2021, URL: http://udcdata.
info/025403 [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[26]
“UDC 9: Geography. Biography. History,” 2021, URL: http://udcdata.
info/068076 [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[27]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, Z. Kovacheva, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz,
F. H¨ulsmann, and I. Naydenova, Best Practice and Deﬁnitions –
Concepts of Cognostic Addressing Structured and Non-structured Data.
Post-Summit Results, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and Deﬁnitions
– Concepts of Cognostic Addressing Structured and Non-structured
Data, The Eleventh Symposium on Advanced Computation and In-
formation in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 19th
International Conference of Numerical Analysis and Applied Mathe-
matics (ICNAAM), September 20–26, 2021, Rhodes, Greece, 2021, (to
appear).
[28]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Coherent Knowledge Solutions From Prehistory to
Future – Towards Coherent Multi-disciplinary Knowledge Reference
Implementation Blueprints for Industrial Learning: Insight from Consis-
tent Coherent Conceptual Integration of Prehistory, Archaeology, Natu-
ral Sciences, and Humanities,” ML4I – Machine Learning for Industry
Forum 2021; hosted by the High-Performance Computing Innovation
Center (HPCIC) and Data Science Institute (DSI), at the Lawrence Liv-
ermore National Laboratory (LLNL), August 10–12, 2021, Livermore,
California, U.S.A., (Invited Speech), URL: http://www.llnl.gov, 2021.
[29]
“UDC “. . .”: Common auxiliaries of time,” 2021, Universal Deci-
mal Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: http://udcdata.info/
011472 [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[30]
“UDC (1): Place and space in general. Localization. Orientation,” 2021,
Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: http:
//udcdata.info/001952 [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[31]
T. Vincenty, “Direct and inverse solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid
with application of nested equations,” Surv. Rev., vol. XXII, no. 176,
1975, pp. 88–93.
[32]
“World reference base for soil resources,” 1998, World Soil Resources
Report No. 84, ISSS-ISRIC-FAO, Rome.
[33]
“World reference base for soil resources,” 2006, World Soil Resources
Report No. 103, ISSS-ISRIC-FAO, Rome.
[34]
P. Wessel, “The Digital Chart of the World for GMT 5 or later,” 2018,
URL: ftp://ftp.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2021-11-27], URL: http:
//www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/dcw/ [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[35]
P. Wessel, “Global Self-consistent Hierarchical High-resolution Geogra-

12
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
phy,” 2016, URL: ftp://ftp.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2021-11-27],
URL: http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/gshhg/ [accessed: 2021-11-
27].
[36]
P. Wessel and W. H. F. Smith, “A global, self-consistent, hierarchical,
high-resolution shoreline database,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 101, no. B4,
1996, pp. 8741–8743.
[37]
E. A. Soluri and V. A. Woodson, “World Vector Shoreline,” Int.
Hydrograph. Rev., vol. LXVII, no. 1, 1990, pp. 27–35.
[38]
A. J. Gorny, “World Data Bank II General User Guide,” 1977.
[39]
P. Wessel, W. H. F. Smith, R. Scharroo, J. Luis, and F. Wobbe,
“The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT),” 2020, URL: http://www.
generic-mapping-tools.org/ [accessed: 2021-11-27], URL: http://gmt.
soest.hawaii.edu/ [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[40]
L. Dagum and R. Menon, “OpenMP: an industry standard API for
shared-memory programming,” Computational Science & Engineering,
(IEEE), vol. 5, no. 1, 1998, pp. 46–55.
[41]
OpenMP Architecture Review Board, “OpenMP application program
interface version 3.0,” May 2008, URL: http://www.openmp.org/mp-
documents/spec30.pdf [accessed: 2021-11-27].
[42]
OpenMP Architecture Review Board, “OpenMP API 5.1 Speciﬁca-
tion,” Nov. 2020, URL: https://www.openmp.org/wp-content/uploads/
OpenMP-API-Speciﬁcation-5-1.pdf [accessed: 2021-11-27].

