334
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Four Public Self-Service Applications: A Study of the Development Process, User Involvement
and Usability in Danish Public Self-Service Applications
Jane Billestrup, Jan Stage
Institute of Computer Science
Aalborg University
Aalborg, Denmark
{jane,jans}@cs.aau.dk
Marta Larusdottir
School of Computer Science
Reykjavik University
Reykjavik, Iceland
marta@ru.is
Abstract—  This paper presents a case study of four software
companies in Denmark developing self-service applications for
the same self-service area. This study outlines the process of
how  the  four  companies  developed  their  self-service
applications and a usability study of the completed software
solutions. In this study, we have analysed the customer and
end-user involvement and compared these results to the results
of the usability evaluations. The main findings show that the
usability varied in the four cases, and the ones who had the
most  customer involvement  from  case  workers  showed  the
highest  number  of  usability  problems  in  the  self-service
solutions for the citizens. We discuss the user-centred design
approaches used, the drawbacks and benefits of customer and
user  involvement,  and  case  workers  acting  as  citizen
representation during the development process of the software.
Keywords-Case  Study;  Self-Service  Applications;  Usability;
Development  Process;  User-Centred  Design;  Software
Development
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extended version of the paper “A case
study of four IT companies developing usable public self-
service solutions” [1]. 
European countries are currently developing digital self-
service solutions for their citizens. These efforts are being
launched to improve citizens' self-services and to reduce
costs [2].  Though public  self-services  have  been  on  the
agenda in many countries for years, getting the end-users to
use these applications is not easily achieved. For citizens to
accept public digital services and websites, these sites need
to have a high degree of usability for the citizens to accept
the public digital services and websites [3]. Wangpipatwong
et al. found that public digital websites in Thailand lack
usability due to poor design and they recommend focusing
more on the needs of the citizens to ensure that they will use
these websites continuously [4]. 
The  Digital  Economy  and  Society  Index  (DESI)
describes the level of digitalisation of the countries in EU
[2].  The  digitalisation  level  is  measured  in  five  areas,
connectivity, human capital, use of the Internet, integration
of digital technology, and digital public services, respectively
[2]. The level of digitalisation varies in the countries in EU,
from  Romania,  Bulgaria  and  Greece  at  the  bottom  to
Sweden, Finland, and Denmark at the top [2]. Denmark is
one of the top 3 countries in regards to all digitalisation areas
in EU and is one of the leading countries in the world in
regards to the level of digitalisation [2]. 
Denmark has a population of 5.6 million people and is
divided into 98 municipalities as a single point of contact for
citizens  in  regards  to  the  public  sector  [5].  In  2012,  a
digitalisation process was launched with the goal that by the
end of 2015, 80% of all communication between citizens and
the  municipalities  should  be  conducted  digitally.  This
digitalisation  also  included  digital  public  self-service
applications [6]. 
Until  2012,  a  contract  based  approach  was  used  for
developing  digital  public  services,  where  the  software
companies competed by bidding. As of 2012, the software
companies no longer had to put in a bid. Instead, they have
to compete with other companies about selling their self-
service applications to the municipalities. For the individual
municipalities,  it  means  that  they  can  choose  between
competing designs for each digitalisation area for the citizen
self-service applications.
To support the Danish initiative, the joint IT organisation
of the municipalities in Denmark developed two set of user
centred guidance materials in 2012, to help the self-service
providers  in  developing  user-friendly  self-service
applications for the citizens [7]. Similar initiatives have been
taken  in  other  countries  like  the  United  States,  United
Kingdom, and South Africa [8] [9] [10].
Development of self-service applications for all citizens
involves a broad array of different stakeholders, including
citizens, public institutions such as municipalities, support
organisations  like  the  joint  IT  organisation  of  the
municipalities, IT companies that produce the applications
and third party purveyors that the public institutions use to
provide services to the citizens. In Denmark, the joint IT
organisation of the municipalities has created guidelines to
ensure  that  public  digital  self-service  applications  and
websites are usable for all citizens [6]. 
From the self-service providers' point of view, focus on
usability will increase the price of the product, making the
developed solution harder to sell [11]. But studies show that
the quality of the software and the cost are complementary,
e.g., [12] [13]. To get public self-service providers to focus
on usability, it has to be made a requirement. Both Jokela et
al. [14] and Mastrangelo [15] describe the importance of
usability being specified in the requirements specification
document. Mastrangelo describes that public administration
needs guidelines and guidance to get usability placed in the
requirements to get the intended impact [15]. 

335
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Jokela et al. found that to acquire usable digital self-
service solutions the specified usability requirements have to
be performance-based, as only these types of requirements
would  be  verifiable,  valid  and  comprehensive  [11].
Additionally, the usability of digital self-service solutions
should be validated before  the solutions are sold to the
municipalities [11]. 
According  to  Tarkkanen  et  al.,  formal  and  detailed
criteria for validation will cause usability workarounds by
the self-service providers as they will focus only on the
verification of their applications in regards to what is stated
in the usability requirements, instead of focusing on getting
the usability of the digital self-service solutions optimised
and, finding and fixing usability issues [16]. 
In  this  study, we  have  focused  on  analysing  the
development of public self-service applications, based on
analysing each case based on the following four themes

the development process used

the customer involvement (case workers)

the end-user focus (citizens)

the characteristics of the products developed
These  four  themes  were  found  by  conducting  a
descriptive  coding  on  all  collected  data  as  proposed  by
Saldana [17]. 
Additionally, we have analysed the number of usability
problems found in each of the self-service solutions and
compared it to the findings related to the four themes stated
above. 
In this paper, we have focused on analysing the customer
and  user  involvement  during  the  software  development
process. We discuss the user-centred design approaches used,
the  drawbacks  and  benefits  of  customer  and  user
involvement  found in these four cases, and describe the
quality of each of the four self-service applications based on
the analysis and the conducted usability evaluation. 
 Section  II  describes  the  background  of  this  study.
Section III presents the method of this case study. Section IV
presents the results. Section V provides the discussion and
finally, Section VI presents the conclusion. 
II.
BACKGROUND
In  opposition  to  the  traditional  development  process
based on a set of requirements and a fixed contract the joint
IT organisation of the municipalities in Denmark decided on
a new approach in 2012. According to the project manager at
the joint IT organisation of the municipalities, the goal of
conducting this change was to ensure that the developed self-
service applications had a high degree of usability and that
all relevant stakeholders were involved in the development
process. The first wave was deployed in December 2012 and
the last wave in 2015.  Each wave released a new set of
digital self-service applications. Table I shows the plan for
the deployment of the four waves. 
This study was conducted in 2013-14 mainly focusing on
the development of one application for the second wave. 
Since  2012  approximately  30  different  public  self-
service application areas have been made mandatory for
citizens to use. Across these self-service areas, around 100
different  self-service  applications  have  been  sold  to  the
municipalities from more than twenty self-service providers
[18].
Table I.
Plan for deployment of self-service applications [18]
Public self-service applications area
Wave 1
2012
- Address change
- National health service medical card
- European health insurance card
- Daycare 
- After school care 
- School registration
Wave 2
2013
- Aid for burial
- Free day care
- Assistive technologies for handicapped or elderly 
- Exit visa
- Unlisted name or address
- Reporting of rats
- Loan for real estate tax
- Letting out facilities 
- Changing medical practitioner
- Marriage certificate
- Passport
- Drivers license
Wave 3
2014
- Garbage handling for citizens
- Garbage handling for organisations
- Construction work
- Building permission
- Loan for deposit
- Registration in CPR
- Services in roads and traffic areas
- Notification of digging or work on pipelines
- Certificates for Lodging
- Parking permits
Wave 4
2015
- Personal supplement
- Sickness benefits
- Sickness supplement
- Extended sickness supplement
The municipalities' joint IT organisation developed two
sets  of  guidance  materials  supporting  a  user-centred
approach  in  the  development  of  public  self-service
applications [19]  [21]. A User  Journey  and  a  set  of  24
Usability Criteria, respectively. 
The user journeys can be described as a person in a use
situation  described  in  a  scenario  [20]  using  graphical
illustrations. An illustration showing six pictures from one
user journey is presented in Figure 1. The usability criteria
are a set of guidelines listing requirements for all developed
self-service  applications.  An  overview  of  the  usability
criteria  for  the  development  of  public  self-service
applications can be seen in Table II.

336
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1.
Six pictures from one user journey [19]
Table II.
24 usability criteria [21]
Language and text
1
Texts should be short and precise without containing legalised or technical 
terms
2
Text should be action-oriented and guide the citizens to fill out the form
3
Citizens should be informed of which information will be needed, before 
filling out the form
4
Citizens can access additional information if needed when filling out the 
form
5
If an error is made it should be made very clear to the citizens what they did 
wrong
6
Error messages should be in Danish
Progress and flow
7
The form should be organised in logical steps 
8
Before filling out the form, the extent of the form should be clear to the 
citizens
9
When filling out the form, the citizen knows the progress made and how 
many steps are left
10
A receipt should be made after finishing filling out the form
11
The receipt should also be sent by email to the citizens
12
After submitting the form, the next steps should be clear to the citizen 
Data and information
13
If login is required, NemLogin (National Danish Identity Service) should be 
used
14
Existing data should be reused as much as possible; citizens should not 
provide the same information more than once
15
A summary is shown before submitting the form
16
Submitting a form should only be possible if all required information is 
provided
17
The solution should validate the information provided by the citizens when 
possible 
18
The solution should adapt questions to prior answers given, when possible 
Design and accessibility
19
It should be made clear to the citizens when are beginning to fill out a form
20
There should be a clear distinction between buttons like yes/no, 
forward/backwards, and the positioning should be continuous through the 
form
21
The authority behind the form should be clear
22
Navigating in the form should be possible both using mouse and keyboard
23
The form should be filled out by citizens who does not possess a high degree
of IT skills 
24
The solution meet relevant accessibility criteria for self-service solutions
The overall purpose of these materials was to provide the
IT self-service providers with tools to keep a focus on the
citizens and their needs to ensure that the developed self-
service applications were usable for all citizens. The joint IT
organisation of the municipalities functioned in a supporting
role  during  the  development  process.  All  interested  IT
companies could decide which specific services they wanted
to develop. The services were developed and made available
for  all  of  the  98  municipalities  in  Denmark.  The
municipalities buy individual solutions and are not bound by
one self-service provider but can choose freely between all
developed solutions in each area.  
III.
METHOD
We have conducted an empirical study of four competing
IT development companies implementing usable digital self-
service solutions for the same application area. Next, the four
cases are presented, and the data collection and analysis are
described in more detail.
A.
The Cases
Below, the four companies are described. The companies
have  developed  similar  solutions  and  are  competitors
regarding the 98 municipalities in Denmark who are the
potential  customers.  The SME scale  (small  and  medium
scale enterprise) [22] has been used to categorise the size of
the four companies involved in this case study, in regards to
the number of employees and turnover. The SME scale is
shown in Table III.
Table III. SME Scale [22]
The four companies were chosen because they were the
only companies developing applications for this particular
self-service area, and the companies and their developed
self-service solutions were different in terms of maturity of
the company and if the company was developing a new
solution  or  was  optimising  an  existing  solution.  The
applications for this self-service area had some degree of
complexity, and the self-service area would be relevant to all
types of citizens, though mainly older citizens. Next, the four
companies are categorised. 
Case A is a micro/small company in regards to the SME
scale  and  the  turnover  and  number  of  employees.  The
company has not previously developed other public digital
self-service solutions, so it is categorised as immature. Their
digital self-service solution is categorised as new for the
same reason. This company is an independent consulting and
software company. 
Case B is a large company in regards to the SME scale.
The company is categorised as mature in regards to digital
self-service  solutions  in  general  as  they  have  developed
several public digital self-service solutions previously. This

337
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
self-service  solution  is  categorised  as  new,  though  they
already have an existing solution, as they redid both the
analysis and design phase, before developing this solution.
This company has departments all over Scandinavia and
creates  and  sells  software  solutions  to  several  different
markets.
Case  C  is  a large  company  on the  SME  scale.  The
company  is  described  as  both  immature  and  mature  in
regards  to  digital  self-service  solutions,  as  they  are
experienced  in  regards  to  developing  self-service
applications. This area of application is relatively new to
them, though having an existing solution in this self-service
area. This company has departments all over Scandinavia
and creates and sells software solutions to different markets.
Case D is a large company on the SME scale. The company
is  described  as  mature  in  regards  to  digital  self-service
solutions and has developed digital self-service applications
for years. For this self-service area, their self-service solution
is an optimisation of an existing self-service application. This
company  is  an  independent  consulting  and  software
company. Table IV shows the placement of the four cases in
regards to maturity and if the digital self-service solution was
new or an optimisation of an existing solution. 
Table IV.
Categorisation of the four companies and self-solutions in
regards to maturity of the company and if the self-service solution is new or
an optimisation
We have defined the organisation's maturity according to
their  experience  developing  self-service  applications  in
general. We defined the self-service application as new if the
organisation had no existing self-service solution in this area
or had an existing solution, but the problem area was re-
analysed before redesigning the system. Otherwise, the self-
service solution was defined as an optimisation of an existing
self-service application. 
The data used for this categorisation was collected from
each of the companies by the conducted interviews described
in the following section. 
B.
Data Collection
This section describes the process of the data collection.
The first sub-section describes how we collected the data that
was analysed to determine the scope of this study in regards
to which self-service area to focus on, and which companies
it would be relevant to include in the study. The second sub-
section describes the data collection for this study, which is
the results documented in this paper. 
1)
Exploratory Preparation
All  data  was  gathered  over  a  period  of  one  year.
Qualitative interviews were conducted by phone with project
managers  from  11  of  12  identified  digital  self-service
providers  for  all  self-service  providers  identified  for  the
second wave at this time. The primary objective was to learn
how self-service  providers were  accepting  and using the
user-centred materials and learn about each company and
their  development  approach  [23].  Additional  data  was
gathered on how the user-centred requirements were used,
and how existing requirements were redesigned [24]. All
interviews were transcribed and analysed by coding, using
Dedoose [25]. 
This analysis leads to narrowing the focus on one public
self-service area with four identified self-service providers.  
2)
Gathering the Data
For this case study, we had one half-day meeting with
each of the four companies. The people present at the first
meeting had  the  following job  titles;  for  case  A;  CEO,
Project Manager, and Usability Expert. For case B; Product
Owner.  For  case  C,  Business  Developer  and,  Senior
Manager. For case D; Chief Consultant and, Chief Product
Owner. The agenda for these meetings was an introduction to
this  study  including  a  discussion  of  their  gain  of
participating,  as  we  offered  inputs  on  their  self-service
solution and conducting a usability evaluation at the end of
the process. The results of these activities would be usable to
improve the four companies self-service applications. 
Before the meetings, we had identified the roles of the
people we would like to interview, as these functions were
named differently in each company and some people would
have more than one of these roles. The identified roles were
the following; project manager, developer, interface designer,
and  the  person  responsible  for  the  user  experience  and
usability of the public self-service application. These roles
were  chosen  to  ensure  to  get  different  views  of  the
development process and end-product, in relation to the user
focus and involvement. 
After the introduction the interviewee presented his/her
company  overall  and,  more  specifically,  how  the
practitioners  were  developing  this  chosen  self-service
application, including describing the development process
and method, collaboration with stakeholders and end-user
involvement. The product owner or project manager also
gave a demonstration of the self-service application in its
current state and handed over relevant internal documents
describing their development process and showing design
documents.  Lastly,  it  was  discussed  which  people  they
suggested for further interviews in the next part of our study
to ensure we would cover all perspectives. At the meetings,
we conducted a list of people covering the following roles
previously described. We interviewed 14 people distributed
across the four companies. 
The purpose of the interviews was to determine current
practice at each of the four companies in regards to customer
and citizen involvement, and how the end-users were taken
into  consideration  during  the  design  and  development
process.  We found that interviewing people with different
roles and responsibilities would provide us with more data
on different perspectives and areas of expertise inside each
company. All interviews were conducted as semi-structured
qualitative  interviews  as  described  by  Kvale  [26].  The
interviews  were  conducted  by  phone  and  transcribed
afterwards. 

338
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table V shows the number of people involved in this
study, from each of the four companies. 
Table V. Number of participants from each company in each phase
The number of participants from each company is shown
for all phases of this study.  The number in () represents new
people, who were not part of the previous step, e.g., case D
had two people present at the preparation meeting, and five
employees were interviewed.  Of these five people, three
were not present at the preparation meeting. At the workshop
with case D, two people were present, of these two, one had
not been present at the preparation meeting and was not
interviewed. 
Table VI. Shows the data collection process of the exploratory preparation 
and for this study
The workshops were used to discuss the results from the
interviews in regards to their user-centred approach and how
the user-centred materials developed materials from the joint
IT organisation of the municipalities were used during the
development process, and to clarify our results from the
interviews and preparation meetings. 
3)
Usability Evaluation of Products
To evaluate if the development process had resulted in
usable self-service applications for the citizens, a usability
evaluation  of  these  four  self-service  solutions  was
conducted. This evaluation was conducted as a think-aloud
usability evaluation in a usability laboratory, with eight test
persons. For the evaluations, all test persons received the
same instructions explaining what they were meant to do
during the evaluation, e.g., conduct a set of tasks and think
aloud during the evaluation. All participants received the
same tasks, and evaluated all four systems, but evaluated
them in a different order to even out any bias.
The test persons were chosen to represent a user segment
as large as possible. Our test persons ranged in age and had
different educational backgrounds. The test persons varied
in skill level and experience with computers, though all use
the  Internet  on  a  regular  basis.  Most  test  persons  had
experience with other public digital self-service areas but
not this specific area. An overview of the test persons can be
found in Table VII. 
All test persons received a small gift after participating in
the evaluation. After conducting the evaluations, the data was
analysed using the method Instant Data Analysis, as this
method  is  also  used  på  practitioners  (IDA)  [27].  The
usability  problems  were  categorised  after  the  criteria
described  in Table  8. The problems were  categorised  in
regards  to  levels  of  confusion  and  frustration  of  the
participants, and whether they were able to fill out the forms
correctly.  These criteria and categorisations were described
further by Skov and Stage [28]. 
Table VII.    Overview of the demography of the test persons
Test
person
Gender
Age
Education
Experience with
public services
TP1
F
44
High school degree
(early retirement 
because of health 
issues)
Yes, also for this 
application type, and 
done digitally
TP2
F
31
PhD-student in
Social science
Yes, for other service 
areas, and done digitally
TP3
M
52
Accountant
Yes, for other service 
areas, and done digitally
TP4
F
64
Retired school 
teacher
Yes, for other service 
areas, but not digitally
TP5
F
66
Technical Assistant
Yes, also for this service
area, and done digitally
TP6
M
30
Msc. Engineering
Yes, for other service 
areas, and done digitally
TP7
M
65
Retired computer 
assistant
Yes, for other service 
areas, and done digitally
TP8
M
22
Bachelor student in 
computer science
No experience
Table VIII.  Defining the Severity of the Usability Problems in the Digital
Self-Service Solutions [28]
Slowed 
down
Understanding
Frustration or 
confusion
Test monitor
Critical
Hindered 
in solving 
the task
Does not 
understand how 
the information 
in the system 
can be used for 
solving the task
Extensive level
of frustration or
confusion – can
lead to a full 
stop
Receives 
substantial 
assistance, 
could not have 
solved the task 
without it
Serious
Delayed 
in solving 
the task
Does not 
understand how 
a specific 
functionality 
operates or is 
activated
Is clearly 
annoyed by 
something that 
cannot be done 
or remembered 
or something 
illogical that 
one must do
Receives a hint,
and can solve 
the task 
afterwards
Cosmetic
Delayed 
slightly in 
solving 
the task
Do actions 
without being 
able to explain 
why (you just 
have to do it)
Only small 
signs of 
frustration or 
confusion
Is asked a 
question that 
makes him 
come up with 
the solution

339
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C.
Data Analysis
The  data  was  analysed  with  regard  to  the  different
perspectives of each interviewee and their job function to get
an idea of what each company did during the development
process. 
The aim of these activities was to study the development
process of the four companies developing the digital self-
service solutions in this specific self-service area, into more
detail. The cases were analysed exploratively.
We completed a content analysis of relevant documents
from the companies. Both, interviews and documents were
analysed using descriptive coding [17], and Dedoose [25] as
a tool.   All coding was conducted by one researcher and
categories were discussed and verified by another researcher.
IV.
RESULTS
In this section, we present our results. Our findings are
divided into four subsections for each case, focusing on the
development process, customer involvement, end-user focus
and the final product, then the results are compared between
the four cases for each focus area. All results are reported
from the perspectives of the companies and their interviewed
employees and the documents we got from them.   
A.
Case A 
1)
Development Process
Company  A uses  an  agile  development  method  and
primarily in accordance with Scrum [29]. They describe their
development process as flexible. “Our development method
is agile, primarily Scrum. We use a pragmatic approach and
a flexible model, meaning we can add features quite late in
the process.”  They describe choosing this approach as it
makes the development process easier and more dynamic,
also, needing fewer people working on each project, e.g.,
they  primarily  have  a  project  manager  involved  in  the
development  process,  who  is  also  the  designer  and  the
developer. This is doable because they can make changes
quite late in the process and they feel that correcting errors
are not a big deal. “We are not afraid of making mistakes; we
don't have a great need to get everything right the first
time”. One municipality was involved giving the company a
greater understanding of the entire field of application.
2)
Customer Involvement
The company collaborated with one municipality as a
customer and stakeholder. It was insisted that the involved
personnel should be case workers who understood their own
and the citizens' needs and not necessarily people with IT
skills. From the case workers, they have learned about the
field of application. “We held a new workshop with the
municipality every couple of weeks; here we created mock-
ups that we used to design a new prototype, which was
evaluated and redesigned at the next workshop, [...] until we
were satisfied with the final prototype”.  The Interviewees
were confident that they had developed a solution that lives
up to the wishes and needs of their on-site customer but is
less confident that their solution is covering the needs of
other municipalities. “We have discussed if we should have
created a standardised solution covering the needs of as
many  municipalities  as  possible.”  It  was  described  as  a
problem  as  they  were  not  aware  of  the  fact  that  the
interpretations  of  legislation  are  not  the  same  in  all
municipalities. 
3)
End-User Focus
The citizens are not involved in the development process,
but the company describes taking them into consideration by
ensuring that the procedures for sending an application are as
simple as possible.  “We have created the solution so it
should be understandable for all types of people. We have a
good feeling here and our self-service application have been
verified several times (by case workers)”. They have built an
application that in the simple cases can send a decision back
to the applicant right away without a case worker having to
go  through  the  application  first.  One  interviewee  also
described that their primary focus is on the customer and not
the citizens.  “We have been focusing on the customers'
needs and work procedures; it has been important for us to
understand  what  they  wanted  the  citizens  to  do”.  This
perspective was chosen because the municipalities are the
paying customers and not the citizens. 
4)
Products
It was perceived as a strength that they have developed a
“whole solution” covering both the necessities for the case
workers and the citizens. “Our solution has a good flow for
the citizens with understandable screen displays. It is not
heavy on wording, and we only ask for information that is
relevant for the municipalities to keep things as simple as
possible.”
The company also identified some weaknesses in regards
to their digital self-service application. They described that
the fact that they only collaborated with one municipality
might have been an issue, although they did not see it as a
real option for them to have involved 3-5 municipalities in
the development process. The company also recognises that
there might be usability issues in the digital self-service
application but argues that this is substantiated in what the
municipalities are willing to pay for. “Reality is just different
than theory. If you want to pay for it, you can get the great
solutions  focused  on  usability,  but  that  is  not  what  the
municipalities want to pay for”. One interviewee described
that if the customers do not care about usability they will not
focus on that either.  
B.
Case B
1)
Development Process
Company  B  uses  Scrum  [29]  as  their  development
method, and they use an adjusted version of the project
management method PRINCE2 [30]. 
One interviewee described that the company develops
one solution to fit all municipalities.  “Our aim is to make
one solution to fit all,  [...] We only create products were we
keep the property rights [...], so we can sell the same product
to several customers”.  All digital self-service applications
are  built  in  a  module-based  platform.  This  approach  is
chosen to give a certain amount of flexibility in regards to
changing the design during the development process or when
the system is tested by municipalities. Municipalities are
involved early in the process.

340
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2)
Customer Involvement
The primary focus of the digital self-service application is
on the back-end of the system, and to ease the workload of
the case workers.  “Our primary focus is to simplify the
working procedures for the case workers. Otherwise, this
would never be a priority for the municipalities”. Before
developing  this solution, the  company hosted workshops
with five municipalities that are already customers, with the
purpose  of  analysing  the  working  procedures,  used  for
creating a specification of requirements and a business case.
“On the first  workshop we are not  presenting anything,
typically we say – we don't know anything, tell us about your
work […] we use these workshops to learn how we digitally
can support the digital workflow.” This information is used
in  the  development  phase,  where  the  first  iteration  is
developed, and a prototype is created. The prototype was
presented at the next workshop to case workers from the
municipalities  involved  in  the  development  process.  The
prototype shows the mapping when a citizen fills in a form
and until it lands with the case worker. One interviewee also
described  sending  emails  to  all  municipalities  that  are
existing  customers,  asking  the  case  workers  to  answer
questions in regards to their workflow. 
3)
End-User Focus
The  company  does  not  involve  citizens  in  the
development  process,  but  two  interviewees  described
involving  the  municipalities  and  case  workers  as  a
representation of the citizens' needs.  “The municipalities
give us feedback in regards to what is not working for the
citizens,  e.g.,  parts  of  the  application  that  citizens
consistently fill out wrong”. Though the focus is not directly
on the citizens, it was stated by one interviewee that an
optimisation of the back-end also brings value to the citizens
as this will give a better flow with the handling of their
applications. It was stated that focusing on accessibility of
the system is more important than focusing on usability for
the citizens. 
Two interviewees  did describe  testing the application
with  users  before  launching  the  digital  self-service
application.  “We have some pilot municipalities […] they
are  part  of  a  test  phase  where  we  assemble  data  for
statistics”.  For  the  municipalities  and  case  workers,  the
focus is on improving the efficiency of the workflows. 
4)
Products
The company perceives it as a strength of their digital
self-service application that different kinds of professionals
were involved in the development process. It was stated that
the role of the product owner creates more value as he or she
also has to ensure that the digital self-service application
follows the legislations even if it changes. Two interviewees
showed confidence in that they were ensuring to develop
usable and intuitive digital self-service applications.
Late changes are described as being possible because the
application  is  built  in  modules  making  changes  less
expensive. A perceived weakness is creating one solution to
fit all needs. This approach was chosen as updating or testing
would be too expensive if municipalities wanted something
changed. 
C.
Case C
1)
Development Process
Company C uses its own process, which is not a name
given development method. “We use our own method which
is built on several different methods. It also varies if we work
agile, it depends on the project and the customers and if they
wish  to  be  and  have  the  skills  to  be  involved  in  the
development process. In regards to the public self-service
solutions, we are not working agile”. The digital self-service
applications are developed by the company without text and
descriptions  in  the  form  the  citizens  are  filling  in.  The
municipalities have to write that information themselves.
This approach was chosen to give the case workers at the
municipalities the flexibility to get the information they think
they need in a digital self-service application from their
citizens  and  to be  able to sell  the  same solution to all
municipalities.  The  thought  behind  this  is  that  all
municipalities  have  different  needs.“There  is  a  great
difference  between  designing  a  solution  for  a  large
municipality or if it is a very small one. There is a great
difference  in  usage  and  working  procedures”.  One
interviewee described that providing each municipality with
the flexibility for adjusting as a key element in regards to the
digital self-service applications they are developing.
2)
Customer Involvement
The focus of the company is creating a solution that all
municipalities can use. “It makes a very big difference if you
are designing something for a large or small municipality.
There is a very big difference in relation to how things are
done or used.”  One interviewee described developing an
application that fits all types of municipalities, by developing
a blank form that the municipalities can set up as they wish
to get the citizens' to provide the information that  each
municipality  finds  important.  This  also  means  that  each
municipality buying this solution has to write all the text
going into this digital self-service application. 
Case workers at the municipalities are involved in the
development  process  by  a  forum  for  the  exchange  of
experience that the company is hosting for the municipalities
that are existing customers. These workshops are hosted
several times a year. “In regards to this specific solution we
already have a solution that the citizens can access to fill out
other  applications  or  to  get  an  overview  of  their  own
records, so this new application will be developed to be part
of  this  existing  system.”  Existing  customers  have  been
involved through these previously held workshops, but no
customers are directly involved in the development of this
digital self-service application. 
3)
End-User Focus
The  company  does  not  involve  citizens  in  the
development process. Two interviewees described creating a
system that the municipalities can change to fit their needs.
“We  have  structured  it  so  the  municipalities  can  make
adjustments where and if they see fit, e.g., in regards to
rewriting  phrasings  or  functions  that  can  be  added  or
removed”.  The  municipalities  and  case  workers  were
involved  before  the  design and  development  phase.  The
design  and  workflow  were  designed  at  workshops  held

341
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
before the redesign of this digital self-service application.
The  company  focuses  on  usability  by  having  usability
specialists hired.
4)
Products
It is perceived as a strength of their digital self-service
application that they have developed a solution where the
citizens can do everything in one place. “The citizens never
leave their medical file when they need to fill in the self-
service application”. Two interviewees also perceive it as a
strength that they have tried to cover all aspects of the needs
that both citizens and case workers have. 
A perceived weakness is that an interviewee feels they might
not have spent enough time on usability when developing the
digital self-service application for the citizens.  “The self-
service application might be kind of crude. People need to
have prior knowledge to be able to use it.” The interviewees
also raised a concern about if less IT skilled citizens would
be able to fill out the application. 
D.
Case D
1)
Development Process
Company D use a staged development method but have
implemented some agile techniques in the past years. They
described involving customers as much as possible in the
development  process.  “We  use  agile  processes  evolving
around the customers. If we involve customers earlier in the
process, we will learn earlier if there are processes we
haven't understood”. One interviewee did describe that this
approach has been implemented in recent years and that the
company  earlier  had  the  philosophy  that  they  were  the
experts and not the customers. 
The company have a department  of User Experience
Designers who are involved in designing and testing the
front-end of the systems. Though they are isolated from the
development teams and are mainly involved at the end of the
development  process  by  conducting  summative  usability
evaluations. 
The municipalities are involved several times during the
development  process,  by  conducting  online  meetings
discussing prototypes. Two interviewees find this valuable as
the company are developing one solution to fit all. The data
collected  from  involving  the  municipalities  are  used  for
creating user-stories.  “We always start by creating user-
stories. [...] The user-stories are primarily used when the
system has been developed”. The company described using
the user-stories to check if the developed system lives up to
the needs specified in the user-stories.  
2)
Customer Involvement
The primary focus of this company is on the back-end of
the  digital  self-service  application.  The  company  has
involved  municipalities  by  conducting  a  workshop  with
people  from  municipalities  who  are  already  customers.
Representatives from six municipalities participated as on-
site customers. The company hosted a workshop to learn
about the number of applications and generating of ideas. At
the end of this workshop, a specification of requirements was
generated. 
The case workers from the municipalities were involved
several times during the development process but mainly
through online meetings or email. This approach was chosen
as a consideration for the employees. “Every time we have to
pull the employees away from doing their regular job in the
municipalities  [...]  Online  meetings  still  gives  them  the
ability to provide inputs. [...] Whenever we have a question
we send an email asking if we are doing the right thing.”
One  interviewee  described  that  involving  the  customers
during the development process is a relatively new procedure
and that they now see this as best practice as it means they
can do changes during the development process as changes
late in the process are expensive and complicated. 
3)
End-User Focus
For this digital self-service solution, two interviewees
described  focusing on the citizens'  needs and their flow
through  the  application.  “We  know  that  this  system  is
developed  mainly  for  senior  citizens,  meaning  that  this
system needs to be as simple as possible. This includes that
all  descriptions  and  wordings  need  to  be  easily
understandable”. One interviewee described that there had
been a discussion about if they spent too much time on the
citizen  angle.  “The  end-user  is not  the one buying our
product, it is the municipalities, [...] what matters is if they
think our self-service solution is good”.  The digital self-
service application is described as being part of a larger
health care system, where citizens will have access to, e.g.,
former  applications  and  the  municipality  will  have
everything in regards to one citizen in one record. For this
digital self-service application, senior citizens without much
experience with computers, have been involved in filling out
a  digital  self-service  application.  In  regards  to  the  case
workers and municipalities, they described focusing on full
automatic digital self-service applications when possible.
4) Products
It was described as a perceived strength that they had
integrated this application in their general healthcare record
solution. “The citizens can see the full catalogue of the
services the municipality offers and, after they have applied
for something once, it is possible to make a reorder without
starting  over  with  the  application.”  One  interviewee
described that they have simplified processes that otherwise
might be difficult for less IT skilled citizens. For the case
workers the solution is perceived as a strength in regards to,
when  an  application  ends  up  with  the  case  worker,  the
system has already validated that the citizens are entitled to
what they have applied for. 
It is perceived as both a strength and weakness that they
always make applications that follow the legislation though
some  municipalities  might  have  other  requests.  It  is
perceived as a weakness that they have been bound by an
existing design on the general healthcare record solution.
They feel this application might lack usability and that some
written information might be too small for the application. 
E.
Summary of Results
1)
Development Process
Case A and B describes using a module-based platform as
this provides flexibility to make changes, also late in the
development process. Case D tries to avoid late changes by
involving the customers early in the process. The cases A, B,

342
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and D finds customer involvement to be a key element. Case
C only work agile and involve customers if they find it
relevant. Case B, C, and D describe making one solution to
fit all municipalities, though case C describes developing a
solution that is flexible so the municipalities can set it up as
they  wish,  in  regards  to  getting  the  information  each
municipality needs from the citizens.
2)
Customer Involvement
Cases A, B and D asked on-site customers to participate
during both design and development process. Cases A and B
held continuously design workshops, where case D held one
at the beginning and later primarily had remote access to the
involved municipalities. Case C gathered information from
workshops before the design phase but had no customer
involvement besides that.  Cases B and D stated that they
mainly focused on the back-end of the system to be used by
the case workers. Cases B, C, and D all stated that they were
aware of that the municipalities have different needs as it
depends  on  the  size  of  the  municipality  and  their
interpretation  of  legislation.  Case A described  that  they
learned  eventually  that  the  municipalities  have  different
needs, though learning this quite late in the process. 
3)
End-User Involvement
Neither of the companies has citizens directly involved in
the design or development process, although cases B and D
described  testing  their  developed  public  self-service
application  on  citizens  after  the  development  has  been
completed. Cases A and D implemented automatic decisions
when possible, benefiting for both citizens and case workers.
Cases A, B, C, and D all described that focusing on the needs
of the citizens has not been made a priority, only the needs of
the municipalities as customers. Case D described that they
needed  to  focus  less  on  the  citizens  and  more  on  the
municipalities as customers.
Cases A and D have mainly focused on the target user-
group  in  regards  to  keeping  the  design  simple  for  the
citizens. Case B focused primarily on the flow of the end-
users  in  their  solution,  and  case C  has  used  usability
specialists to check if the design was usable for the citizens. 
4)
Products
Cases A and D highlight simplified processes as strengths
in regards to their public self-service applications. Cases B
and  D  find  the  fact  that  they  focus  on  developing
applications that follow the legislation as a strength. Cases C
and D both describe it as a strength that the self-service
application is integrated into one healthcare solution for all
public healthcare applications.  Cases A, C, and D believe
that  a  weakness  of  the  citizen-centred  self-service
applications is lacking usability. Usability has not been made
a priority by the companies as it was not a priority for the
municipalities.
The applications from Case C and to some extent Case D
were  significantly  smaller  and  less  complex  than  the
applications  developed  by  cases A  and  B,  e.g.,  the
application from case C was created as a paper application.
F.
Usability of the self-service Solutions
In the previous sections, we have focused on how the
four self-service applications have been developed and how
it was ensured that these applications were usable for the
citizens, and would save time for the caseworkers. In this
section  we  look  at  the  state  of  the  finished  self-service
applications and whether these applications are usable for
citizens. 
Of the identified problems, 11 were found across all four
digital public self-solutions. Among these general problems
was a lack of understanding of the purpose and flow of the
self-service solutions, problems with attaching files. Also,
test persons getting annoyed or confused by not being able to
understand helping texts and the descriptions of the rules and
regulations of the application area, leading to test persons
filling in the wrong information in the text  fields. And,
misunderstanding data fields, also leading to the test persons
filling  in  the  wrong  information  in  the  text  fields. An
overview of the usability problems is shown in Table IX. 
Table IX. Usability Problems in Each Digital Self-Service Solution
Company A
Company B
Company C
Company D
Critical
2
5
0
1
Serious
17
18
11
15
Cosmetic
17
14
6
13
Total
36
37
17
29
The self-service applications developed by case A and B
were  much  more  comprehensive  than  the  applications
develop by cases C and D. The self-service applications from
cases C and D were both part of a larger healthcare system,
meaning that less information had to be filled out manually
by the participants. Especially the self-service application
from case C was very simple compared to the self-service
applications developed by cases A and B. 
Two critical  problems were  found in the  self-service
application from case A. one was about test persons not
understanding which information to put in where and ending
up writing the wrong information at the wrong place. The
other critical problem was about file attachment. The test
persons experienced problems because the helping text was
not optimised for the browser and when they tried following
the written steps the test persons got confused and stopped as
what they read did not match the options they had. 
Five critical  problems were  found in the self-service
application from case B. Examples of these problems could
be in regards to file attachment, as the test persons do not
realise when a file has been attached. Another problem is
about test persons not understanding the search function and
how to enter search parameters.
No  critical  problems  were  found  in  the  self-service
application from case C, and one critical problem was found
in the public self-service application from case D. With this
problem the test persons got into a full stop. They had to
click a drop-down menu on the left side of the screen at all
test persons experienced a lot of trouble trying to figure out
what to do. Test persons mainly figured out what to do when
they started clicking different menu options and then got the
right one. 

343
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V.
DISCUSSION
In this section, the results are discussed. First, the results
are  discussed  for  each  case,  and  then  the  user-centred
approach is discussed.
A.
Discussing the results for each case
For supporting the discussion of the results from each
case, we have made an overview of the results from the four
cases in Table X. 
1)
Case A
In  case  A,  the  company  is  micro/small  in  the  SME
classification and considered immature, since this is the first
time they developed public self-service  applications. The
product is classified as new since the company does not have
other existing products to base this product on. Their product
is module based, so it is easy to make changes quite quickly
to the product if needed. Their key features are that they
frequently  collaborated  with  one  municipality  through
workshops and evaluating prototypes gathering information
on the needs and getting feedback from case workers (the
customer), but not the citizens (the end-users). The result of
the usability evaluation showed 36 usability problems, but
only two serious problems.  
The high number of usability problems could be because
the  development  team  has  not  gained  experience  in
developing products for this kind of customers. Another
issue  could  be  that  they  only  involved  one  single
municipality  in  their  process,  though  having  98
municipalities as potential customers. 
Table X. An overview of the four companies in regards to the focus areas.
The company focused on easing the work process of the
case workers and therefore involved the caseworkers as
much as possible in the development process. This was done
under the assumption that the caseworkers understood the
citizens and their needs, but the high number of usability
problems indicate that this is not the case, which means that
citizens have to be involved in the development process to
represent themselves and their own needs. 
2)
Case B
In contrast, to case A, case B is a large company and
mature in developing public self-service applications, though
this application is classified as new. Their product is module
based on making it easy to conduct changes quite quickly to
the product if needed. In case B, the developers collaborated
with five municipalities through workshops, prototypes and
emails, but did not collaborate with the citizens, although
testing was done with citizens in pilot releases. The self-
service application from case B had 37 usability problems,
which was the highest amount of usability problems found in
each of the four self-service applications. This self-service
application also had the highest number of critical usability
problems.  This  is  surprising  since  it  is  a  large,  mature
company and collaborated with several municipalities. Like
in case A, case B also developed a solution focused on
making the case workers activities more efficient. The fact
that  case  B  collaborated  with  five  municipalities  and
experienced  approximately  the  same amount  of usability
problems in their self-service application indicate that it is
not the number of municipalities, and case workers involved
that makes a difference. 

344
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
It also indicates that citizens should be involved in the
development process, as stated in the previous section. 
3)
Case C
Case C is a large company developing a solution that is
an optimisation of existing software. They are grouped as
mature  since  they  have  been  developing  self-service
applications,  but  also  as  immature  since  this  area  of
application  is  new  to  them.  They  involved  all  existing
customers  while  developing  this  solution  but  also  hired
specialists for gathering feedback on their solution. Their
solution showed 17 usability problems, which was the lowest
of the four evaluated self-service applications. None of the
usability problems were critical problems. The reason could
be the specialist's advice, and involvement made the solution
usable. Another reason could be that the solution is more
limited  than  the  solution  from  case  A  and  B  as  this
application is part of a larger healthcare system, meaning that
much less information has to be put in when filling in this
application. Also, it was decided to make the solution from
case  C  very  simple,  with  actually  little  support  for  the
caseworkers, so they still had to do some activities manually.
Where case A and B are trying to optimise workflows and
activities,  which  also makes  the  self-service  applications
more complex for the citizens and raises the risk of usability
problems than transforming paper applications into digital
self-service applications.
4)
Case D
Case D is also a large company developing a solution
that is an optimisation of existing software. It is grouped as
mature since the company has been developing public self-
service  applications  for  years.  They  involved  six
municipalities in the development, did some testing with
citizens and hired specialists to give advice. Still, there were
29 usability problems found, but only one critical problem.
This might be the biggest surprise in the results since this
company  is  using  user-centred  design  processes  and  is
experienced.  This  system  is  part  of  a  larger  healthcare
system, meaning that much less information has to be filled
in when filling in this application. So the solution is rather
limited, but still, contains many usability problems. In case D
usability  professionals  are  a  bit  isolated  from  the
development team and are mostly involved in a summative
evaluation at the end of the development. This approach
could have resulted in higher number of usability problems
in the solution than if the usability professionals had been
more integrated into the development process. But this also
indicate that it is not a matter of how many municipalities,
caseworkers or usability specialist's that is involved in the
development  process,  but  it  might  make  a  difference  if
citizens are involved in the development process. 
B.
Discussing the User-Centred Approaches used 
The Danish digitalisation effort has been launched to
support  the  development  process  and  provide  each
municipality  with  more  digital  self-service  solutions  to
choose from, and enhancing usability in these solutions. For
this purpose, two sets of guidance materials were created, a
user journey and a set of 24 usability criteria, respectively.
The aim was that this approach would facilitate competition
between the self-service providers, resulting in better and
more user-centred self-service applications for the citizens.
All four companies involved the municipalities in the design
process both in regards to the back-end of the system meant
for  the  case  workers  and  in  regards  to  the  self-service
applications meant for the citizens. Two of the companies
described involving citizens quite late in the process for
testing of the features, either by going live in a few “pilot-
municipalities” or conducting a usability evaluation. 
Though a user-centred approach has been taken, our
results correspond with the findings of Wangpipatwong et
al.  who  found  that  e-government  websites  are  lacking
usability due to poor design and non-employment of user-
centred design methodologies [7]. The reason for this is that
the  municipalities  according  to  the  companies  are  only
focusing on this to a small extent and are not willing to pay
more  than  the  bare  minimum.  This  shows  a  mismatch
between what the joint IT organisation of the municipalities
and the municipalities are trying to achieve. The public self-
service providers are focusing on what the municipalities
are willing to pay for and want the citizens to do and not
taking the user-centred approach with a citizens' perspective
unless this is being requested by the municipalities. If the
user-centred approach should be a success, it is important to
involve the municipalities as well. They need to understand
that quality and cost are complementary [12][13] and why
usability needs to be a focus area and why a usable system
will be a sound investment though it might be a bit more
expensive to develop. Bruun and Stage have found that
redesigning a digital self-service application focusing on
usability, can reduce the amount of time the case worker has
to spend on each application, with more than 50% [31]. 
Jokela  et  al. [11] and Mastrangelo [15] describe the
importance of usability being specified in the requirements.
It is questionable whether this approach will be successful
unless  the  municipalities  learn  the  values  of  these
requirements and get the understanding that focusing on
usability will reduce cost over time. The municipalities have
some responsibility in this whole process also. If they are
demanding that their solutions are assisting caseworkers in
doing their job digitally in a fast and easy process, the
software companies have more motivation for focusing on
usability. The companies will not focus much on usability
unless the municipalities are demanding usable products.
As  described  in  Section  IV.f  we  found  11  usability
problems  across  self-service  applications  from  different
companies;  this  shows  that  self-service  providers  have
problems  understanding  the  end-users  needs  in  general,
though usability has been on the agenda for more than
twenty years. If we compare the general problems we found
with Nielsen's usability heuristics from 1995, we found that
the  self-service  providers  have  violated  three  of  these
heuristics. Number 2, Match between the system and the
real world. Number 6, Recognition rather than recall. And,
number  10,  Help  and  documentation  [32].  This lack  of
understanding shows that the self-service providers have
trouble understanding the basics of usability theory, and
even more trouble understanding the needs of the end-users
in general. 

345
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C.
Benefits and Drawbacks of Customer and User 
Involvement
This paper documents the development process of four
different self-service solutions and shows the use of three
different approaches to digitalise self-service applications. 
One approach used by case A and B was having case
workers  from  the  municipalities  as  onsite  customers  to
represent both their own and the citizen's needs. This lead to
self-service solutions that tried to simplify the caseworkers
work processes and thereby ease their workload. 
The second approach used by case C was not having an
onsite  customer  but  involving  the  caseworkers  before
starting the development process. This lead to a self-service
solution less focused on easing the workload of the case
workers, and this self-service application was closer to being
a simple digitalised version of the paper applications used in
the past. 
The third approach used by case D was not having a
direct onsite customer but involving caseworkers when it
was felt to be needed. This approach leads to a self-service
solution that was simple in some aspects but also trying to
solve some tasks to ease the workload of the caseworkers. 
From a citizen's point of view, the self-service solution
from case C would be the most usable of these four, with 17
documented  usability  problems.  Where  the  self-service
solutions  from  case  D  had  29  documented  usability
problems, and the self-service solutions from case A and B
had 36 and 37 usability problems, respectively. But looking
at this from a caseworkers point of view, the self-service
solution from case C would not be the optimal choice as this
will not in any way ease their work processes or workload.
Though it can be an argument that neither does the self-
service solutions from case A, B or D at this time, as citizens
experiencing problems filling out, self-service applications
will mean that they are making mistakes. These mistakes will
have to be corrected by the caseworkers later in the process,
as documented by Bruun and Stage [31]. 
Both  case  A  and  B,  and,  partly  case  D  all  used
caseworkers as onsite customers. Our results show that this
approach  is  not  sufficient  when  developing  self-service
solutions for the citizens, with the purpose of easing the
workload of the caseworkers. The caseworkers simply do not
understand the needs of the citizens to a degree where this
approach would be sufficient. This means that to get an
understanding  of  citizen's  needs,  citizen's  have  to  be
involved. 
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we focused on analysing the customer and
user involvement during the software development process,
and the characteristics of the four products developed, and
the  results  of  usability  evaluations  thereof.  We  have
discussed  user-centred  design  approaches  used,  the
drawbacks and benefits of customer and user involvement
found in these four cases. 
Our results show that citizens were not involved in the
development process and that case workers were expected
to  represent  and  understand  the  citizen's  interests.  We
conclude that this approach has not been successful as our
usability  evaluation  of  the  four  self-service  application
showed 17 – 37 usability problems experienced by the test
persons. Several problems leading to a full stop or a high
level of frustration for the test persons. 
This  lead  us  to  conclude  that  case  workers  are  not
suitable for citizen's representation and if the goal is to ease
the  workload  of  the  case  workers,  citizens  have  to  be
involved in the development process too.  
We recognise that it is a limitation that four companies
were involved,  in regards to drawing conclusions in a broad
term about the entire development process of self-service
solutions. As future work, it would be interesting to learn
the perspectives of the municipalities from themselves, and
not only through the self-service providers. And if the focus
was contrasted to more structured opinions coming from
developers side. As future work, accessibility could also be
a focus area. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We  would  like  to  thank  the  four  companies  who
participated in this study and the joint IT organisation of the
municipalities.  We  would  also  like  to  thank  Infinit,  for
supporting this research, and the test persons participating in
the usability evaluations.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Billestrup, J. Stage, and M. Larusdottir,  “A case study of
four  IT  companies  developing  usable  public  self-service
solutions,” Proceedings of ACHI, 2016.
[2]
DESI Index,https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/scoreboard/
[retrieved: November, 2016]
[3]
T.  Clemmensen  and  D.  Katre,  “Adapting  e-gov  usability
evaluation to cultural contexts,” Usability of e-government
systems, Boston: Morgan Kaufmann, 2012, pp. 331-344.
[4]
S. Wangpipatwong, W. Chutimaskul, and, B. Papastratorn,
“Understanding  citizen's  continuance  intention  to  use  e-
government  website:  A  composite  view  of  technology
acceptance  model  and  computer  self-efficiency,”  The
Electronic Journal of e-Government, vol. 6, nr. 1 2008, pp.
55-64
[5]
The Danish ministry of health. Reform of the municipalities.
http://www.sum.dk/Aktuelt/Publikationer/Publikationer_IN/~/
media/FilerPublikationerIN/Kommunalreformen/2005/Kom
munalreformenkortfortalt/kommunalreformenkortforta lt.ashx
[retrieved: November, 2016]
[6]
Organisation of the Municipalities in Denmark,  http://www.
kl.dk/Administration-og-digitalisering/Lov-om-obligatorisk-
digital-selvbetjening-og-digital-post-er-vedtaget-id105354/
[retrieved: November, 2016]
[7]
Kombit,  For  self-service  providers,  http://www.kombit.dk/
indhold/leverand%C3%B8rer [retrieved: November, 2016]
[8]
M.  Pretorius  and  A.  Calitz,  “The  South  African  user
experience maturity status for website design in provincial
governments,” Proceedings of the 12th European Conference
on eGovernment, 2012 pp. 589-599, 
[9]
B. Soufi and M. Maguire, “Achieving usability within e-
government websites illustrated by a case study evaluation,”
Proceedings of Human Interface, Springer-Verlag, 2007 part
II, pp. 777-784.

346
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[10] Z. Huang and M. Benyoucef, “Usability and credibility of e-
government  websites,”  Government  Information  Quarterly,
2014, pp. 584-595.
[11] T. Jokela, L. Juja, and M. Nieminen, “Usability in RFP's: The
Current Practice and Outline for the Future,” Proceedings of
HCI International, 2013, pp. 101-106.
[12] P.  B.  Crosby,  “Quality is  free,”  Mcgraw-Hill, New  York,
1979.
[13] D. E. Harter, M. S. Krishnan, and S. A. Slaughter, “Effects of
process maturity on quality, cycle time, and effort in software
product development,” Management Science, vol. 46 nr. 4
2000, pp. 451-466.
[14] T. Jokela, “Determining Usability Requirements Into a Call-
for-Tenders.  A  Case  Study  on  the  Development  of  a
Healthcare System,” Proceedings of NordiCHI 2010, 256-
265.
[15] S. Mastrangelo, R. Lanzilotti, M. Boscarol, and C. Ardito,
“Guidelines to Specify HCD Activities in the Call for Tender
for  Public  Administration  Websites,”  Proceedings  of
INTERACT 2015 pp. 497-513. 
[16] K. Tarkkanen and V. Harkke, “From Usability Workarounds
to Usability Around Work,” Proceedings of INTERACT 2015.
pp. 513-520
[17] Saldaña, J. The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers,
Sage, 2015.
[18] Organisations  of  the  Municipalities,  http://www.kl.dk
/ImageVaultFiles/id_76493/cf_202/Afslutning_af_Effektiv_di
gital_selvbetjening_1.PDF [retrieved: November, 2016]
[19] Kombit, User Journey for applying for a marriage certificate,
December 2014  http://www.kl.dk/ImageVaultFiles/id_60480/
cf_202/Illu.PDF [retrieved: November, 2016]
[20] L.  Nielsen.  ”Engaging  personas  and  narrative  scenarios,”
Handelshøjskolen, 2004. 
[21] The  government  agency  for  digitalisation  in  Denmark.
Criteria  for  usability  in  self-service  solutions.
http://www.kl.dk/ImageVault/Images/id_56064/scope_0/Imag
eVault Handler.aspx [retrieved: November, 2016]
[22] SME  definition.  http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/
facts-figures-analysis/sme-definition/index_en.htm [retrieved:
November, 2016]
[23] J. Billestrup and J. Stage, “E-government and the Digital
Agenda for Europe,” Proceedings of DUXU, Design, User
Experience,  and  Usability.  User  Experience  Design  for
Diverse  Interaction  Platforms  and  Environments.  Springer
International Publishing, 2014. pp. 71-80. 
[24] J. Billestrup, A. Bruun, and J. Stage, “UX Requirements to
Public  Systems  for  All:  Formalisation  or  Innovation,”
Workshop on Formalizing UX Requirements, Proceedings of
Interact, 2015. pp. 407-427.
[25] Dedoose, www.dedoose.com [retrieved: November, 2016]
[26] S. Kvale, “Interview”, København: Hans Reitzel, (1997)
[27] J.  Kjeldskov,  M.  B.  Skov,  and  J.  Stage,  “Instant  Data
Analysis:  Conducting  Usability  Evaluations  in  a  Day,”
Proceedings of NordiCHI, 2004 pp. 233-240. 
[28] M. B. Skov and J. Stage, “Supporting Problem Identification
in usability Evaluations,” Proceedings of OzCHI, 2005, pp. 1-
9.
[29] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle. “Agilè Software Development
with Scrum,” Prentice Hall, 2001.
[30] Colin Bentley, “Prince2: a Practical Handbook,” Routledge,
2010.
[31] A.  Bruun  and  J.  Stage,  “Supporting  Diverse  Users:
Implementing Usability Improvements of an E-Government
Data Entry Website,” white paper, 2014.
[32] J.  Nielsen,  “10  Usability  Heuristics  for  User  Interface
Design”, (1995).

