State of Affair in Terms of Big Data Utilization in
Complex System Engineering Organizations: A
Case Study in the Context of Norwegian Industry
Fahim A. Salim
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: fahim.a.salim@usn.no
Haytham B. Ali
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: haytham.ali@usn.no
Tommy Langen
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: tommy.langen@usn.no
Pragna Labony Deb
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: pragnalabony.sust@gmail.com
Andreas Wettre
Centre for Design Research
Oslo School of Architecture and Design
email: andreas.wettre@aho.no
Gerrit Muller
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: gerrit.muller@gmail.com
Kristin Falk
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: kristin.falk@usn.no
Abstract—Effective utilization of big data is still an open
question for most organizations. In the presented case study,
we attempted to get a nuanced understanding of the state
of affairs regarding big data utilization in Norwegian high-
tech industries. This case study uses research methods like
questionnaires, semi-structured interviews, observations, and co-
creation sessions. These methods explore the data utilization
processes at partner organizations of the H-SEIF2 consortium
or lack thereof to systematically utilize big data in their projects
from the perspective of employee perception. The presented case
study provided insights into the case study organizations. For
example, organizations still heavily rely on inconsistent manual
data logging and our survey found that the Project Managers
have a more optimistic perception of their usage of big data.
In contrast, upper management has a more modest opinion of
their current state. The presented case study also provided a
more in-depth analysis of challenges that hinders data utilization
and identified opportunities to enhance the value of ongoing and
potential digitalization initiatives at the organizations.
Index Terms—Questionnaire; Big data; Early Phase Decisions.
I. INTRODUCTION
The paper is an extended version of the article presented
at the Modern Systems Conference 2022, aiming to get a
nuanced understanding of big data usage in the context of
Norwegian Industry [1].
Big data analytics (BDA) and digitalization is a trending
topic and is expected to be a big asset and an engine for
innovation that has the potential to propel new technological
revolutions [2]. The benefits of using big data in enhancing
This research is part of the H-SEIF 2 project and is funded by the Research
Council of Norway through the innovation project (IPN project no.: 317862).
operations in general and in project life cycle management are
well understood by organizations of all types and sizes [3]–[6].
However, how to do so effectively is still an open questions
for most organizations [4] [7] [8]. For example, a study by
Qlik and Accenture states that over 74% of employees feel
anxiety with when working with data [9]. Similarly, a recent
study by Rackspace Technology [3] reported that organizations
perceived a rise in difficulty in terms of utilizing Big Data
Analytics (BDA) and specifically Artificial Intelligence (AI)
and Machine Learning (ML).
Researchers have identified multiple challenges that limit
organizations’ ability to enhance big data utilization. These
challenges include a lack of common language among engi-
neers, ineffective knowledge sharing, and difficulty in finding
system information, to name of few [10]–[13]. The presented
paper focused on the users of big data, specifically the internal
users such as employees working on projects.
The presented case study in the context of the Norwegian
high-tech industry is part of the H-SEIF2 [14] project. The
case study and the analyses are being performed in close
collaboration with the H-SEIF2 consortium industry partners
to provide a nuanced understanding of the state of affairs
at Norwegian high-tech companies in terms of big data uti-
lization. The case study is designed using a combination of
techniques such as industry as a laboratory [15], Co-creation
[16], questionnaires and semi-structured interviews [17]–[19].
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The
following section (section II) describes the related work. We
describe the design of the case study in section III. This is
followed by results from analysis and observations (section

IV) and concluding remarks (section V).
II. RELATED WORK
Related work describes the notion of big data as described
in systems engineering. It further discusses related surveys
conducted by other researchers.
A. Big Data and Complex System Engineering
Regarding the notion of big data utilization in complex
systems environments, there are many definitions for data,
also called big data. Many authors and practitioners have
defined big data as the notion of (Vs). Some authors [20]–[22]
have defined big data in terms of the 3Vs: Volume, Velocity,
and Variety. Others [23]–[25] have extended the definition by
adding value as the fourth V (4Vs).
In addition, M. White [26] suggested adding Veracity as
the fifth V (5Vs). In this context, “Volume” refers to the vast
amount of data. “Velocity” refers to the speed at which new
data is generated, whereas “Variety” represents different data
types. The fourth V, “Value,” refers to how we can benefit from
big data by turning it into value. “Veracity” includes biases in
the data and strives to encompass the level of sufficiency or
insufficiency of the data [27].
The elements in our world are connected and dependent
on each other. The complexity is higher than ever and is
continuing to be more complex. Products are linked in an
intertwined network of dependencies, and services rapidly
develop to satisfy demanding customers. Fig. 1 shows an
example of an intertwined network of dependencies.
It visualizes an elaboration of the characteristics of what
Sch¨atzet et al. call CPS (Cyber-Physical Systems) [28]. CPS
is closely related to several concepts such as (Big) data and
its analysis, the Internet of Things (IoT), Systems of Systems
(SoS), Mechatronics, and Embedded Systems. We also add the
sociotechnical aspects within the other three circles: Human
Social Organizational, Innovation Ecosystems, and Political
aspect.
Systems are also adapting in a dynamic behavior to techni-
cal and social factors. Thus, there is a need for companies to
explore new ways to maintain competitiveness. It is crucial for
these companies to use the most effective methods and that
these are sufficiently founded. A solution is to utilize data
early in product and service development.
Organizations and their employees recognize that big data
analytics will be a significant source of competitive advantage
in the future. Still, several impediments inhibit them from
fully utilizing big data’s benefits. Most technologies were
not developed to satisfy the expanding demands of big data
analytics [29]. Employees who want to exploit the power of
big data may run into significant issues due to data complexity
and inherent messiness. Moreover, digital data is often stored
in various forms, such as unstructured databases and discrete
different text files [30].
Lack of data analytics skills among current employees may
increase data entry mistakes, resulting in misinterpretation
and loss of important information and ultimately reducing the
value of the data [31]. Ethical considerations like privacy and
cultural barriers are also hurdles regarding big data usage. For
example, some businesses know how big data might help them
improve their operations. Still, cultural or technological limi-
tations prevent employees from using big data in production.
B. Survey Questionnaires Regarding Big Data Utilization
Questionnaires and surveys are widely used for different
purposes, e.g., comparing two products or services or both
[8] [32]. They are often used to understand the needs of
perspective users of future products and services, or as part of
user-centric design [19] [17], or to collect data on customer,
employee, or student satisfaction, [33]–[35].
Regarding the utilization of big data in the operations of
organizations, Qlik and Accenture [9] conducted a survey to
understand big data utilization in enterprises. They found that
60 to 70% of the collected data in an enterprise is never
used and a vast majority of about 74% of employees feel
overwhelmed or simply unhappy working with data. They also
found that only 37% of employees trust their decisions more
when they are based on data, while 48% preferred gut feeling
over data-driven decision-making [9].
Focusing on high-level decision makers, a survey by
Rackspace Technology [3] found that employees perceived
difficulty with ML and big data has been increasing. The
survey [3] also found that employees considered data dispersed
across many different systems to be one of the most significant
barriers to drawing insights from it. Lack of skillset and
talented employees is perceived as a considerable concern
and limitation in fully utilizing big data in enterprise decision
making [3] [9] [36].
Raguseo [7] focused on the CIOs of French medium and
large enterprises to understand differences across industries
and the size of organizations. Analysis of the questionnaire
found that the organization’s size influences investments in
technologies like ML software tools. The author did not find
any statistical differences across different industries.
While employees often appear in the discourse and are
considered a crucial element in utilizing big data systems, they
are often the ones most neglected [37]. Moreover, most of
the research mentioned above focused on high-level decision
makers, not a cross-section of employees, departments, and
job roles.
The presented paper is part of the H-SEIF2 [14] research
project that aims to develop a human-centered framework
for utilizing big data during early phase decision-making in
the product development process. By focusing on Norwegian
industry partners, the presented work extends the related work
by focusing on a cross-section of employees to understand
better the differences among different departments, employee
profiles, and across various industries.
III. CASE STUDY DESIGN
The primary goal of the case study is to understand the
current state of affairs in terms of big data utilization at the
partner organizations in the H-SEIF2 [14] project. The H-SEIF

Fig. 1. Complex Interlinks
2 project aims to harvest the value of big- data to enhance the
experience of stakeholders during complex system engineering
projects by collaborating with industry partners to improve
their digitalization efforts. The goal is to design data-driven
frameworks and methodologies to allow the industry partners
in data-supported early-phase product development decisions.
The presented case study, following the aims of the H-SEIF2
project of harvesting the value of big data for industry partners;
evaluates the question: How are the different industry partners
utilizing big data in their operations?
1) What are the gaps, opportunities, and barriers to enhanc-
ing the utilization?
2) Are there any differences in different organizations and
departments within an organization, and what can the
partners learn from each other’s experiences?
3) What can partner organizations do to maximize the value
of ongoing or potential digitization initiatives?
A. Methodology
We used a combination of workshops, interviews, surveys,
on-site observations, and subject-matter expert feedback from
the industry and academia to design the questions for the sur-
vey. An adapted version of the Applied Research Framework
was used as the research method to design this survey [38],
[39]. The framework consists of the following steps:
Step 1: Shape the line-of-reasoning. In this step, the line of
reasoning is expressed by following the structure of Problem-
goal-solution-rationale. Additionally, the research questions
we formulated more specifically based on the broad problem
statement we expressed within the line of reasoning. The main
research question was establishing a baseline for the H-SEIF
2 research project consortium.
Step 2: Explore literature. In this step related studies from
literature to aid in designing the questionnaire (see section II-B
for details).
Step 3: Elicit expert opinions. Expert’s views, in this
context, refer to the domain expert among the scholars within
the research methods. Semi-formal discussions with different
experts were conducted. For example, two of the co-authors
have decades of consultancy experience. Several workshops
were conducted with experts from academia and industry
to gather their feedback regarding good, best, and emergent
practices regarding the survey’s design and questions.
Step 4: Determine the research design. Notes were kept
from the workshops and related literature using a shared plat-
form. Furthermore, steps 2 and 3 were performed iteratively.
A total of 6 companies participated in the presented study.
In the first stage, a survey was conducted with a cross-
section of employees at different industry partners. A total
of 5 companies from the H-SEIF2 consortium participated
in the survey. This included a technology consultancy, an
autonomous transportation solutions provider, an oil and gas
company, a Data Agency and an Industrial conglomerate (3
divisions/subsidiaries). Further, we conducted semi-structured
interviews at the technology consultancy and co-creation and
observation sessions with different partners (Automated Park-
ing System (APS), the oil and gas company, and an industrial
conglomerate’s defense division) to better understand the state
of affairs at the individual organization.
The partner organizations vary in size and they work in
different sectors; in the second phase, we had more direct
interactions with some of the individual partners to better
understand the state of affairs at the company. We customized
the approach per partner organization based on factors such
as the size and time commitment of the organization, the type
and duration of projects organizations are involved in, the
industry sector to which the organization belongs to and the
level of access granted to researchers by each organization.
For example, some co-authors work closely with partner

organizations, allowing them more opportunities to observe
and hold co-creation sessions. While at some partners, semi-
structured interviews were conducted as co-creation sessions
were not feasible due to the limited availability of the involved
personnel.
B. Survey Questionnaire
Based on the methodology described above (section III-A)
the finalized version of the survey questionnaire consisted
of 24 questions in 5 categories. We incrementally developed
the survey’s language, style, and structure with continuous
feedback from participating subject-matter experts and practi-
tioners from industry and academia.
We wanted to cover many aspects in our survey. We formed
questions about the data availability; if the data is challenging
to find, it is also difficult to utilize. This category also goes
to data ownership, as external organizations own the data, and
there might be obstacles to utilize.
Then if you have the data, the data needs to be usable,
contextualized so that it is possible to transform to value and
use the analyses in the decision-making process focusing on
early phase product development.
We wanted to know about data integrity. Suppose users do
not trust the data, thinking it is extracted from sources or
through a process that reduces the reliability or presented in
ways that make you doubt what the data is saying. In that
case, it will most likely not be utilized.
Then even if the datasets are reasonable, there might be
processes, politics, habits, time or a lack of competence
that prevents the organization from using the data for decision
making. Sometimes, the essential decisions are made on gut
feelings, emotions or based on older experiences from similar
projects.
We asked the participants to rate the extent to which they
agreed or disagreed with the statements on a 5-point Likert
scale. In the initial phase, we collected 40 responses from
employees at partner organizations.
C. Semi-structure Interviews
The survey was followed by semi-structured interviews
with employees working in the technology consultancy. The
consultancy works on different project types with variable
duration and activities they performed on those projects. For
this research, we focused on the personnel working on one
project the consultancy did for one of its clients.
The interviews focused on how the consultancy acquired
insight about how they utilized big data in their previous and
current projects considering the project team as an example.
The in-depth interviews allowed us to achieve a broader
understanding of the point of view of the engineers and
managers at the consultancy, which facilitated a qualitative
analysis [40]. We designed the semi-structured interviews for
eliciting information about specific topics [41], [42]. The
interview guide consisted of 20 main open-ended questions
that reflected the stakeholder needs while using big data. Fig.
9 shows the interview guide.
We conducted all the interviews using Microsoft Teams,
a teleconference tool widely used for video conferences and
taking interviews. We recorded each interview using the
built-in mobile recording feature, and transcripts of these
recordings were generated by Office Dictation, powered by
Microsoft speech services, and embedded in Microsoft Word.
We analyzed the data later by following thematic analysis, a
commonly used approach for qualitative studies.
The details about the thematic analysis and its outcomes are
described in section IV-B.
D. Co-creation and Observations
We conducted multiple co-creation and observation sessions
with industry partners at the Automated Parking System
(APS), the oil and gas company, and an industrial conglomer-
ate’s defense division.
The APS provider is a medium-sized company. It delivers
APSs and provides maintenance services in operation. The
company has around 35 parking installations throughout Nor-
way.
The energy services (oil and gas) company is a multinational
corporation that provides life cycle services for the energy
industry. We conducted multiple workshops and observation
sessions to understand the real-life context of the company
involved in complex engineering projects.
The industrial conglomerate have divisions in areas such as
Shipping, Defence, and financing, to name a few. We focused
on the defense and aerospace division’s employees for the
presented paper.
IV. RESULTS AND OBSERVATIONS
This section details results and observations from the survey
analysis.
A. Analysis of survey responses
The questionnaire results (see Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6) show
that internal stakeholders (employees) feel dissatisfied by the
utilization of big data in their projects, especially in early
phase decision making as the Net Promoter Score (NPS) is
negative across the board.
Regarding data availability, the respondents either agree or
are partial to the availability of data they need (see Fig. 2 Q1
to Q3) although they do think there is room for improvement
as the NPS is negative. However, the availability of the right
tools to explore and process the data is a more significant
issue for them; as they mostly disagree or have a neutral
response to the questions regarding the availability of such
tools (see Fig. 2 Q4 to 6). One notable surprise, however, is
question# 7 (see 2), which asks the respondents if data is being
held back from them for confidentiality reasons, to which the
respondents disagreed. In this case, it is a positive outcome
and runs counter to our earlier assumptions [43].
The respondents expressed more dissatisfaction with the
usability of data compared to its availability (see Fig. 3).
For example, respondents largely disagree with whether they
spend sufficient time analyzing past data in the beginning

Fig. 2. Responses to Questions about Data Availability. NPS stands for Net Promoter Score
phases of their projects (Q# 8). They also think the procedures
for sharing data at their organizations are insufficient (Q#
13). The respondents also have negative or neutral sentiments
regarding utilizing past (historical) data as lessons learned for
new projects (Q#14).
In cases when data is available to them, the respondents
expressed trust in the integrity and correctness as the responses
to Q# 15 are positive or neutral (see Fig. 4).
The respondents are somewhat divided on the competence
of using (big) data. Respondents avoided this category of
questions more often than other questions, and responses have
a relatively even split (see Fig. 5).
Respondents believe their organizations have a long way
to go when utilizing big data in their operations and project
development. Respondents mostly disagreed with the question
related to organization behavior (see Fig. 6).
For the most part, the survey results are not surprising, as it
is not only the finding of our initial conversations with industry
partners, but other surveys reached the same conclusion [3],
[9]. However, there are some interesting findings as well.
For example, one interesting outcome is that engineers and
personnel involved with the technical aspect of projects gave
lower scores than project managers and upper management.
Project managers seem to have a rosier perception than others
(see Fig. 7). There is a need for more outstanding com-
munication among project managers and other non-technical
stakeholders, engineers, and technical personnel. While the
more positive responses are somewhat in line with [9], there
are notable differences compared to [9]. For example, in our
survey, the upper management seemed less optimistic than the
project managers.
Another notable exception is the “Competency” section of
the questionnaire. For example, the report [9] stated that busi-
ness leaders overestimate the capabilities of their workforce.
In contrast, our survey showed that engineers and project
managers gave higher responses than upper management (see
Fig. 7).
In terms of age groups, employees in younger and older age
groups overall gave higher scores compared to the middle (35-
44) age group, while the middle age group reported the most
confidence in their competency compared to the others (see
Fig. 8). Also, regarding the organization behavior category,
younger and senior employees express greater optimism than
the 35-44 age group. Question# 21 was an exception, which
asks about taking full advantage of operational data in early
phase decision making, to which the 35-44 age group gave a
higher score than the others.
B. Thematic analysis of semi-structured interviews
To extract themes from the interviews, we used a technique
known as thematic analysis [44] for finding, analyzing, or-
ganizing, summarizing, and reporting the outcomes from the
data collected [45]–[47]. Fig. 9 outlines the utilized approach.
Interviews transcripts comprised of 26 pages, and we added
them as input for the NVivo, a qualitative data analysis
software. In the first step, we read the transcripts to get a

Fig. 3. Responses to Questions about Data Usability. NPS stands for Net Promoter Score
Fig. 4. Responses to Questions about Data Integrity. NPS stands for Net Promoter Score
broad picture of the collected data and familiarize ourselves
with the text. Important phrases and words were identified
that were repeatedly used by participants and assigned codes.
Then, in order to facilitate analysis, the codes were grouped
together into larger categories based on their shared qualities
such as personal beliefs or professional progress [48]. In the
second stage, we used NVivo software to create a hierarchical
category system based on the linkages or ties between codes
and categories. We searched and identified patterns across the
data. These patterns were considered themes. We identified and
iterated several times over potential themes that we identified
from the codes and categories. These iterations ensure that we
included all relevant data from the interviews.
In qualitative research a code refers to a word or phrase that
captures the meaning or essence of a piece of data. Codes
can be organized in to categories to further get a nuance
understanding of the data in this case the interview transcripts.
Using a tool such as NVivo, certain themes can be extracted
from that. In NVivo, a theme is a topic that is found within
the data.
We spotted the crucial statements based on the themes,
including codes and categories with descriptions, using the

Fig. 5. Responses to Questions about Competency. NPS stands for Net Promoter Score
Fig. 6. Responses to Questions about Organization Behavior. NPS stands for Net Promoter Score
NVivo software tool. Furthermore, we calculated the frequency
of the categories and sub-categories. Ultimately, we visualized
the results to highlight the most frequently referred categories
that emerged from the interview data.
We identified 11 codes in four categories. These categories
(and codes) further belong to three themes. Fig. 10 visualizes
the generated code-book with descriptions. Fig. 12 depicts the
codes, categories, and themes and their relation.
Calculation of relative frequencies of the identified codes
and categories demonstrated that the most cited categories
are data handling in projects (49.1%), data types and tools
(17.6%), and professional development (17.6%). Focusing
solely on the codes, we can see that access to past data is
the most cited, with 18.5%, followed by data storage (14.8%),
presence of analysis tools (11.1%), detect certain data (10.2%);
those four sub-categories totaled 54.6% of all occurrences. The
other 7 subcategories total 45.4% (Fig. 11 ).
We identified three main themes from the categories (Fig.
12):
• Reflection on big data usage.
• Utilization of big data in projects.
• Approaches to establishing the data-driven culture.
Theme 1: Reflection on Big Data is a significant theme
that reflects the experiences and feelings of the employees on
big data usage at work. The theme portrays the whole story of
the stakeholders’ viewpoints on this project and is depicted in

Fig. 7. Average responses per job roles.
Fig. 8. Average responses per age group.
codes and categories. The most common words in this category
were important, useful, better, and right (Fig. 13).
Theme 2: Utilization of Big Data in Projects depicts how
the employees use big data and what issues they face in the or-
ganization. Codes and categories also illustrate data tools and
the data usability process. For instance, when we asked about
access to the relevant data from past projects, the respondents
revealed they don’t have access to past (historical) data due
to a lack of a central storage system and privacy. In the final
analysis, we used this theme to identify employees’ current
main issues. However, one respondent noted it differently:
“The case is also that we don’t have some that much data
from the other projects. We have not been good enough at
collecting data and storing the data, so even if it were relevant,
we wouldn’t have access to a lot of it. But if I want to
answer the question, it could be relevant if we spend more time
analyzing and understanding how we can use data between
projects.”
The replies from the employees suggested that the consul-
tancy lacks essential data access and storage facilities and the
ability to comprehend and devote time to data analysis.
Theme 3: Approaches to Establish the Data-Driven
Culture conveys the approaches the organization is taking to
create a data-driven environment and the competency level of
the company’s employees. Employees feel the need to develop
their skills in data analysis more, although the management
appears to be interested in such affairs of the organization.
We know from in-depth interviews that the users have knowl-
edge about data analysis, but the organization also need to
emphasize more workshop or courses regarding on big data
or digitalization skills to improve their data literacy.
C. Observations from co-creation sessions
This section details the observations from co-creation ses-
sions at the APS provider, the Oil and Gas company and an
Industrial Conglomerate.
1) Observations at the Automated Parking Systems (APSs)
Provider: The co-creation and observation sessions revealed
that the APS provider has mostly unstructured data with many
variations. One primary source of this data is maintenance
log data, also called failure data. Maintenance personnel are
logging failure data manually using an Excel file. Failure
data includes a description of the failure events, its possible
cause, and a possible implemented solution to the failure called
the reason parameter (column) in the company’s failure data.
In addition, the failure data include, among others, the fol-
lowing parameters (columns): date (for a maintenance/failure
event), time, telephone number (for the maintenance personnel
who investigated the failure event), place number (for which
parking lot the failure event occurred), invoiced yes/no (if
the failure event is invoiced as it is not included within the
maintenance agreement with the company, or not).
However, the company also has some in-system data. This
in-system data is logging data that the System of Interest
(SOI), i.e., APS stores automatically. This logging data in-
cludes the status of each subsystem, its position, and the date
and time for this status. The in-system data also includes
alarm log data. The alarm log data register only the abnormal
situation of subsystems, with its position, date, and time.
This abnormal status or operation can be a gate not closed,
or a motor may have stopped during the operation. The
company has different installations for the APSs and storing
mechanisms for each system; some are similar, and others
differ. The APS Company cooperates with a third party for
their in-system data, as this third party is responsible for this
data. Unfortunately, this data can be saved daily or for a
few days from only one system. However, the company is
investigating if this data can be extracted from some of its
systems for a more extended period with the third party. The
company has more than 36 installations. The company uses
a sheet in the excel file for each system or installation to
store their failure events (data). The template for each sheet
differs between sheets. This difference includes rearranging
the parameters (columns) and describing the same issue using
different terminology.
2) Observations at the Oil and Gas Company: : Observa-
tions, interviews, and co-creation sessions at the oil and gas
company also revealed that they also have unstructured data
with some variations of structured data. The unstructured data

Fig. 9. Interview Guide.
Fig. 10. Thematic Categories

Fig. 11. Visual representations of the categories identified from the interviews. The relative frequencies of the categories and subcategories are also shown
in the illustration.
is mainly in event log. The test personnel are logging manually
using Excel. The central part of this log is a description of the
unexpected events/issues/problems (also called emergent be-
havior) during the test process, such as the System Integration
Test (SIT).
The event log also contains other parameters (columns) such
as data about the equipment and its serial number, information
about the project, e.g., work package and product responsible
department or supplier, and other project-specific information.
The company uses an Excel file for each project. However,
the template varies for each project. This variation can be
rearranging some columns (parameters) and having some rows
in the middle of the Excel file. In some Excel files, different
terms describe the same issue. There are some errors in the
titles of some parameters.
3) Observations at Industrial Conglomerate (Defence Di-
vision): We have observed that the defense division struggles
with adopting suitable methods for harvesting and utilizing
data relevant to Human Systems Integration in unmanned
vehicles. A particular area is generating enough appropri-
ate data for supporting designers in exploring and testing
various Human Machine Interactions (HMI) solutions. Their
decision-making is primarily based on customer requirements,
standards, in-house expertise, and subjective opinions from
multiple developers. However, they wish to put more emphasis
and weight on objective data in their decision-making process.
Best practices, such as the Design Thinking process, highlights
the need for gaining grounded understanding from relevant
users, obtained through prototyping and testing.
The data they need are sourced from the end-users, the
components of the SOI, and the system’s use. The data
can be accessed from the technical system, which is being
developed and tested in-house. The defense division also has
access to general information on how the system should be
used. However, the procedure of how the system should be
used is not necessarily the way the system will be used
in the field. The organization cannot generate enough data
for making objective data based decisions as they have an
incomplete picture of the system context, specifically the data
from the end-users. As they lack access to all system context
information, they can only measure and analyze their data, not
necessarily the data they should analyze.
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
The case study gave us a deeper understanding of the state
of affairs at some of the industry partners. It provided a
glimpse at the disparity of different organizations regarding
their utilization of big data in their operations and decision-
making process, focusing on the early phase product develop-
ment process. Overall, the case study concluded that employ-

Fig. 12. Themes used for the thematic analysis of the conversation with employees.
Fig. 13. Word cloud showing the most common words appears in the “Reflection on Big Data Usage” theme.

ees at the H-SEIF2 industry partners understand the need to
use big data in their projects to enhance their operations.
The employees at the technology consultancy reported that
a considerable amount of data generated after every project
is often stored only locally by the personnel instead of stored
in an accessible database of the company. The company lacks
sophisticated big data analysis tools to understand a complex
project thoroughly. Currently, the company uses Python, Excel,
and similar common tools for simple data analysis.
Similarly, in the observations at both Automated Parking
System and oil and gas provider, we observed that both com-
panies use Excel files that either maintenance or test personnel
log manually. However, the template for the Excel file differs
slightly for each system or project. This difference makes
it cumbersome to automate the pre-processing in different
degrees depending on the data, especially when gathering
historical data for an extended period, e.g., five or ten years.
Thus, manual pre-precessing is needed. In other words, we
must pre-process the data manually by generating a template
called frame around the data. This manual pre-processing
consumes almost 80% of the analysis period.
However, manual pre-precessing is time-consuming and
may result in some errors when doing it manually. Therefore,
we recommend that the company unify the template and
use a not-editing version. Also, only certain manager-level
employees should change the template, not everyone in the
test or maintenance department. In [49], we suggested a
template that integrates the needed data and information on
one platform using one tool.
For the defense division, the main limitation is a lack of end-
user data. There are primarily two reasons for such lacking.
Firstly, they have no access to the end-users usage in field
operations due to security reasons. They are building simula-
tors to combat limited access to end-users and end-user data.
Secondly, they lack integrated and developed test procedures
for simulator testing to generate and collect human factors
data. The human factor data include physiological, mental,
and operational data. These data can be collected through,
for example, eye tracking, heart and galvanic skin response
measurement data to measure the stress of the end-users,
interviews and test questions, and performance data. These
data aim is to understand the HMI influence on situational
awareness during operations.
The presented case study provided the current state of
big data usage scenarios using different research methods at
Norwegian high-tech companies and identified issues hinder-
ing big data’s full potential. The observations from the case
study can be used for future research on similar business
organizations in addressing the internal stakeholders’ needs
regarding big data usage.
REFERENCES
[1] F. A. Salim, H. B. Ali, T. Langen, A. Wettre, G. Muller, and K. Falk,
“State of Affair in Terms of Big Data Utilization in Complex System
Engineering Organizations,” in MODERN SYSTEMS 2022: International
Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions, no. c, Nice,
France, 2022, pp. 45–49.
[2] R. K. Perrons and J. W. Jensen, “Data as an asset: What the oil
and gas sector can learn from other industries about ”Big Data”,”
Energy Policy, vol. 81, pp. 117–121, 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2015.02.020
[3] R. Technology, “AI / ML Annual Research Report 2022,” 2022, (last
accessed 05-Dec-2022). [Online]. Available: https://mikenashtech.com/
2022/02/ai-ml-annual-research-report-2022-analysis/
[4] K. Falk, A. K. Kamara, E. P. Brathen, K. Helle, P. T. Moe, and
S. Kokkula, “Digitizing the Maintenance Documentation; A System of
Systems in Oil and Gas Industry,” SOSE 2020 - IEEE 15th International
Conference of System of Systems Engineering, Proceedings, pp. 493–
499, 2020.
[5] H. B. Ali and F. A. Salim, “Transferring Tacit Knowledge into Explicit:
A Case Study in a Fully (Semi) Automated Parking Garage,” in
PROCEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, 2021.
[6] F. A. Salim, H. B. Ali, and K. Falk, “Towards a Data Processing
Framework for Enhanced User Centric System Engineering,” in PRO-
CEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, Workshop
on Smart Pervasive Computing, 2021.
[7] E. Raguseo, “Big data technologies: An empirical investigation on their
adoption, benefits and risks for companies,” International Journal of
Information Management, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 187–195, 2018.
[8] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, S. Luz, and O. Conlan, “Automatic transformation
of a video using multimodal information for an engaging exploration
experience,” Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 10, no. 9, 2020.
[9] Qlik
and
Accenture,
“The
Human
Impact
of
Data
Literacy,”
Tech. Rep., 2020, (last accessed 05-Dec-2022). [Online]. Available:
https://thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact
[10] B. A. Delicado, A. Salado, and R. Momp´o, “Conceptualization of a T-
Shaped engineering competency model in collaborative organizational
settings: Problem and status in the Spanish aircraft industry,” Systems
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 534–554, 2018.
[11] S. Engen, K. Falk, and G. Muller, “The need for systems awareness
to support early-phase decision-making—a study from the norwegian
energy industry,” Systems, vol. 9, no. 3, 2021.
[12] Juzgado P.D. Borches, “A3 Architecture overviews. A tool for effective
communication in product evolution,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Twente, 2010.
[13] T. Tomiyama, V. D’Amelio, J. Urbanic, and W. Eimaraghy, “Complexity
of multi-disciplinary design,” CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology,
vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 185–188, 2007.
[14] U. NISE, “H-SEIF 2 Project,” (last accessed 05-Dec-2022). [Online].
Available: https://www.usn.no/hseif
[15] C. Potts, “Software-engineering research revisited,” IEEE Software,
vol. 10, pp. 19–28, 1993.
[16] M. Guntveit, M. Kjrstad, and B. Sevaldson, “Early Validation of Stake-
holder Needs by Applying Co-creation Sessions,” INCOSE International
Symposium, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1398–1415, 2020.
[17] G. Gravier, M. Ragot, A. Laurent, R. Bois, G. Jadi, E. Jamet, and
L. Monceaux, “Shaping-Up Multimedia Analytics: Needs and Expec-
tations of Media Professionals,” in The 22nd International Conference
on Multimedia Modelling, vol. 9516, Miami, 2016, pp. 303–314.
[18] M. Haesen, J. Meskens, K. Luyten, K. Coninx, J. H. Becker, T. Tuyte-
laars, G. J. Poulisse, P. T. Pham, and M. F. Moens, “Finding a needle
in a haystack: An interactive video archive explorer for professional
video searchers,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 63, no. 2, pp.
331–356, 2013.
[19] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, O. Conlan, and S. Luz, “An approach for ex-
ploring a video via multimodal feature extraction and user interactions,”
Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, no. October 2017, 2018.
[20] O. Kwon and J. Sim, “Effects of data set features on the performances
of classification algorithms,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 40,
no. 5, pp. 1847–1857, 2013.
[21] P. Russom, “Big data analytics,” TDWI best practices report, vol. 19,
no. 4, pp. 1–34, 2011.
[22] D. Laney, “3D data management: Controlling data volume, velocity and
variety,” META group research note, vol. 6, no. 70, 2001.
[23] J. Gantz and D. Reinsel, “The digital universe in 2020: Big data, bigger
digital shadows, and biggest growth in the far east,” IDC iView: IDC
Analyze the future, vol. 2007, pp. 1–16, 2012.
[24] J. Dijcks, “Oracle: Big data for the enterprise,” Oracle, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[25] S.
Gogia,
M.
Barnes,
B.
Evelson,
B.
Hopkins,
N.
Yuhanna,
D. Anderson, and H. Kisker, “The Big Deal About Big Data For
Customer Engagement,” Forrester, Tech. Rep., 2012, (last accessed

05-Dec-2022). [Online]. Available: https://www.forrester.com/report/
The-Big-Deal-About-Big-Data-For-Customer-Engagement/RES72241
[26] M. White, “Digital workplaces: Vision and reality,” Business information
review, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 205–214, 2012.
[27] H. B. Ali, F. H. Helgesen, and K. Falk, “Unlocking the power of big data
within the early design phase of the new product development process,”
INCOSE International Symposium, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 434–452, 2021.
[28] B. Sch¨atz, M. T¨orngren, R. Passerone, S. Bensalem, A. Sangiovanni-
Vincentelli, J. McDermid, H. Pfeifer, and M. Cengarle, “CyPhERS-
cyber-physical European roadmap and strategy,” fortiss GmbH, Munich,
Tech. Rep., 2014.
[29] A. Alharthi, V. Krotov, and M. Bowman, “Addressing barriers to big
data.” Business Horizons, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 285–292, 2017.
[30] M. Douglas, “Big data raises big questions,” Government Technology,
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 12–16, 2013.
[31] S. Hoffman and A. Podgurski, “Big bad data: law, public health, and
biomedical databases,” Journal of Law, Medicine Ethics, vol. 41, no. 1,
pp. 56–60, 2013.
[32] B. Laugwitz, T. Held, and M. Schrepp, “Construction and Evaluation
of a User Experience Questionnaire,” HCI and Usability for Education
and Work, pp. 63–76, 2008.
[33] G. Nicolini and L. D. Valle, “Errors in Customer Satisfaction Surveys
and Methods to Correct Self-Selection Bias,” Quality Technology Quan-
titative Management, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 167–181, 2011.
[34] B. Popovic, R. Maletic, and T. Paunovic, “Employee Satisfaction Survey
in Function of Business Improvement,” Management - Journal for theory
and practice of management, vol. 20, no. 76, pp. 31–40, 2015.
[35] L. She, L. Ma, A. Jan, H. Sharif Nia, and P. Rahmatpour, “Online
Learning Satisfaction During COVID-19 Pandemic Among Chinese Uni-
versity Students: The Serial Mediation Model,” Frontiers in Psychology,
vol. 12, no. October, 2021.
[36] B. Dudley, “Digital Transformation Initiative: Oil and Gas Industry
In
collaboration
with
Accenture,”
World
Economic
Forum,
no.
January, p. 32, 2017, (last accessed 05-Dec-2022). [Online]. Available:
www.weforum.org
[37] D. H. Shin, “Demystifying big data: Anatomy of big data developmental
process,” Telecommunications Policy, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 837–854, 2016.
[38] G. Muller, “Systems engineering research methods,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 16, pp. 1092–1101, 2013. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2013.01.115
[39] ——,
“Tutorial
Architectural
Reasoning
Using
Conceptual
Modeling,”
University
of
South-Eastern
Norway,
Kongsberg,
Tech.
Rep.,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.gaudisite.nl/
TutorialARconceptualModelingSlides.pdf
[40] I. Seidman, Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers
in education and the social sciences:, 3rd ed.
Teachers college press,
2006.
[41] R. Berry, “Collecting data by in-depth interviewing,” in British Educa-
tional Research Association Annual Conference, Brighton, 1999.
[42] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research methods for business
students.
Pearson education, 2009.
[43] N. M. Sjøkvist and M. Kjørstad, “Eliciting Human Values by Applying
Design Thinking Techniques in Systems Engineering,” INCOSE Inter-
national Symposium, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 478–499, 2019.
[44] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in psychology.”
Qualitative research in psychology, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, 2006.
[45] J.
Anuradha,
“What
is
the
Difference
Between
Thematic
and
Content
Analysis,”
2022,
(last
ac-
cessed
05-Dec-2022).
[Online].
Available:
https://pediaa.com/
what-is-the-difference-between-thematic-and-content-analysis/
[46] A. Bogetz, E. Abramson, H. Haftel, and M. Klein, “Codes, concepts
and categories, oh my! Building your skills in qualitative data
analysis,” Association of Pediatric Program Directors, Anaheim, Tech.
Rep., 2017. [Online]. Available: https://appd.s3.amazonaws.com/docs/
meetings/2017SpringPresentations/WS10Slides.pdf
[47] G. Gibbs, “Thematic coding and categorizing,” in Analyzing qualitative
data.
SAGE Publications, Ltd, 2007, ch. 4, pp. 38–56.
[48] J. Corbin and A. Strauss, Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques
and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory, 4th ed.
SAGE
Publications, Ltd, 2014.
[49] F. A. Salim, H. B. Ali, G. Muller, and K. Falk, “User-centered Data
Driven Approach to Enhance Information Exploration, Communication
and Traceability in a Complex Systems Engineering Environment,” in
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022: International Conference of Modern Systems
Engineering Solutions, no. c, 2022, pp. 37–42.

