329
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Public Healthcare and Epidemiology with Dr Warehouse  
 
 
Vladimir Ivančević, Marko Knežević,  
Miloš Simić, Ivan Luković 
University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Technical Sciences 
Novi Sad, Serbia 
e-mail: dragoman@uns.ac.rs, 
marko.knezevic@uns.ac.rs, 
milossimicsimo@gmail.com, ivan@uns.ac.rs 
Danica Mandić 
Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases of Vojvodina, 
Clinic of Cardiology 
Sremska Kamenica, Serbia 
e-mail: mandiceva88@yahoo.com
 
 
Abstract—The need for the systematic collection and use of 
epidemiological 
data, 
together 
with 
the 
undergoing 
modernization of the public healthcare system in Serbia, has 
motivated us to develop Dr Warehouse, an extensible 
intelligent software system for the collection, presentation, and 
analysis of data from epidemiological and public healthcare 
sources. The central point of the system is a data warehouse 
where medical data about registered disease cases and relevant 
demographic data are being collected. Through a web 
application and mobile device client, different categories of 
users may access data that are of interest to them, perform 
built-in analyses, or test their own epidemiological hypotheses. 
Dr Warehouse is expected to provide intuitive visualization of 
epidemiological data, facilitate discovery of epidemiological 
knowledge, and support modelling of epidemic dynamics. We 
discuss our motives for building such a system, the architecture 
of the system, our choices regarding data modelling, and the 
built-in functionalities. We implemented a foundation for 
different analyses that are expected to provide valuable 
insights if properly adapted and used in practice: investigation 
of diagnosis change over time, forecasts based on data mining, 
and compartmental models of disease dynamics. 
Keywords-business 
intelligence, 
public 
healthcare, 
epidemiological 
analysis, 
absenteeism, 
disease 
outbreak 
prediction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As a result of combining the latest advancements in 
business intelligence and data analysis to the domains of 
public healthcare and epidemiology, we present an extended 
version of the previously published overview of Dr 
Warehouse [1] – a closed source software system that 
supports storing of medical and epidemiological data, while 
offering descriptive, as well as predictive, analyses of disease 
cases and epidemics. There are several key issues that 
motivated us to develop such a solution. Despite numerous 
medical discoveries, lifestyle improvements, and strategies to 
battle epidemics, disease elimination and eradication remain 
as the probably most important goals in disease control [2]. 
Epidemiologists continue to collect outbreak data and 
analyse the dynamics of various ever-changing diseases in 
order to better understand their nature and, consequently, 
devise new effective countermeasures. With the proliferation 
of information technology, public healthcare has entered a 
new era with its own set of opportunities and challenges [3]. 
However, the increased possibilities in data collection and 
analysis have led to problems with the systematic treatment 
and use of available data [4][5]. On the other hand, the 
modernization of the public healthcare system in Serbia 
includes, among many tasks, a switch to electronic records 
and increase of the availability of medical information to all 
people involved in public healthcare. In a situation where 
many institutions of public healthcare conduct research 
separately using their in-house devised approaches, having a 
common point where epidemiological data could be stored 
could promote cooperation of these institutions and 
publishing of up-to-date epidemiological information to 
general public. As a response to these issues, we provide a 
potential solution in the areas of public health and 
epidemiology by building a software system that could help 
in the prevention and control of epidemics. This could be 
achieved by providing many procedures for different types 
of epidemiological research and a single data source that is 
tailored to the need for frequent analyses. 
Within Dr Warehouse, all medical and epidemical data 
are stored in one such central data source, a specially 
designed data warehouse. Supported analyses include 
various data visualization techniques, statistical methods, 
analysis of absenteeism data, data mining algorithms, and 
compartmental epidemic models. Results of the analyses 
may be accessed through a rich web client application, which 
offers all of the analyses included in the system, or a mobile 
device client, which offers a subset of analyses primarily 
tailored to the needs of non-experts. Given the rapid rate of 
discovery of new analysis methods and epidemic models, we 
made the system extensible and ensured that new types of 
analyses and data visualization may be easily added. 
The paper is organized in six sections, including 
Introduction. Section II offers a review of similar software 
systems and a comparison of their capabilities to those 
featured in Dr Warehouse. Section III presents our motives 
for building the Dr Warehouse system. In Section IV, there is 
an overview of the system, its architecture, featured data 
warehouse, and functionalities of client applications. Some 

330
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of the descriptive and predictive analyses supported by the 
system are presented together with sample results in Section 
V. Section VI includes concluding remarks and ideas for 
further research. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There 
are 
numerous 
software 
systems 
for 
epidemiological analyses and monitoring. One group of such 
systems provides mostly statistical procedures that are often 
used in epidemiology. Open Source Epidemiologic Statistics 
for Public Health (OpenEpi) [6] is an example of a freely 
available system that may be run in a web browser [7] 
because it is implemented in HyperText Markup Language 
(HTML) and JavaScript. It focuses on statistical calculations: 
calculation of confidence interval and sample size, 
estimation of power for different types of studies, execution 
of various statistical tests, etc. Another free solution is 
WinPepi [8], which is a set of desktop applications that are 
similar to OpenEpi and offer many statistical procedures that 
are useful in epidemiology. When compared to Dr 
Warehouse, both OpenEpi and WinPepi are projects of a 
narrower scope because they ignore data storage and 
management. Furthermore, they put emphasis on statistics 
and a large number of calculation modules whose input is 
mostly a small set of summarized values. Unlike Dr 
Warehouse, they do not support data mining, visual 
representation of data, epidemiological maps, nor user 
extensions. However, the source code of OpenEpi may be 
directly modified to include new procedures. 
The second group of epidemiological systems includes 
data storing and manipulation capabilities in addition to 
analysis procedures. Epi Info [9] is one such example of a 
desktop software application with a wider range of 
functionalities than OpenEpi and WinPepi. What sets it apart 
from other software systems for epidemiology is support for 
form creation. A user may design custom forms through an 
integrated editor and later use them for data entry. Besides 
basic and advanced statistical procedures, this system 
supports data import and export, as well as basic data 
selection and transformation. It has good data visualization 
capabilities and offers various types of charts, tables, and 
even map overlay. Its main strengths with respect to Dr 
Warehouse are support for form creation, direct data entry, 
data transformation and data import/export for various types 
of data sources. However, there is a conceptual difference 
between these two systems regarding data storage. Epi Info 
is a tool that may be used over any data (in the supported file 
or database format) and, therefore, provides transformation 
functions, which a user utilizes in order to prepare data for 
analyses. On the other hand, Dr Warehouse features a data 
warehouse with a fixed set of facts and dimensions, and a 
carefully designed ECTL process, which is automatically 
executed. Therefore, there is generally no need for manual 
data import and transformation because data preparation is 
done automatically. In other words, Dr Warehouse may be 
seen as a more specialized and more automated solution in 
which the data warehouse has a prominent role. Our system 
relies on a strong dependency between the data warehouse 
schema and analyses, which helps to simplify the analysis 
process. This, in turn, alleviates much of the burden 
concerning data preparation, which is usually the longest 
activity in analysis projects. Some of the main features of Dr 
Warehouse that Epi Info lacks are data mining procedures 
and the support for adding user extensions. We consider data 
mining to be an essential part of the system because, unlike 
most statistical procedures, it is well suited for analysing 
large quantities of data that are efficiently stored in a data 
warehouse. We may summarize this comparison by 
generally classifying Epi Info as a solution that offers a fixed 
set of analyses for any set of data attributes and Dr 
Warehouse as a solution that features a fixed set of data 
variables but an extensible set of techniques for data 
presentation and analysis. 
The third group consists of typically web-based systems 
that focus on epidemiological monitoring and publicly 
presenting latest disease outbreak data for different regions 
throughout the world. They primarily rely on data from 
numerous Internet-related sources, which may be informal or 
official. HealthMap [10] provides a world map with the latest 
information on outbreaks by automatically collecting and 
integrating data mostly from several online news sources and 
reports from eyewitnesses and officials. There is also a 
mobile version of the system with similar functionalities.  
Another web system with a support for mobile devices is 
Outbreak Watch [11]. It does real-time analyses of data in 
social networks by evaluating keywords that are considered 
to be indicators of outbreaks. In this manner, the system 
tracks changes in the number of reports concerning relevant 
diseases. Google Flu Trends [12] was created as an attempt 
to estimate actual flu activity in various countries by 
analysing aggregated Google search queries that are related 
to flu. Since there is a relationship between an actual number 
of flu cases and search queries about flu, as confirmed by the 
overall match between the official surveillance data and the 
calculated estimates, this service offers near real-time results, 
which may help in preparing a response to a flu outbreak. Dr 
Warehouse is similar to these systems, as it may offer latest 
epidemiological data and forecasts in the form of charts, 
tables, and maps. In addition to supporting web access, it 
also features a mobile version with a selected set of services. 
On the other hand, the principle difference lies in the 
selection of data sources. The three monitoring systems use 
data that are available on the Internet (HealthMap and 
Outbreak Watch) or from web search queries (Google Flu 
Trends), while Dr Warehouse displays only data present in 
the data warehouse, which was planned to include credible 
data collected in healthcare institutions. However, the ECTL 
process in Dr Warehouse may be extended in the future to 
include data from public web sources. 
When compared to the three aforementioned groups of 
epidemiological software, Dr Warehouse is a complex 
system that possesses traits typical of all three because: (i) it 
may offer any statistical procedure that has been added as an 
extension; (ii) data management is one of the key segments 
of the system; and (iii) collected data are constantly available 
to users via web and mobile client, which makes the system 
suitable for epidemiological monitoring. As a result, we 
consider the following two characteristics to be its major 

331
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
advantages over the other solutions: (i) versatility, i.e., 
suitability for healthcare institutions, epidemiologists and 
general public; and (ii) comprehensiveness, i.e., support for 
data collection and storage, epidemiological analysis, data 
presentation, and functionality extension. 
III. 
MOTIVATION 
In addition to the prediction of epidemics and 
understanding of disease dynamics, we are motivated by two 
more specific reasons: modernization of the healthcare 
system in Serbia and impact of absenteeism on the economy.  
As outlined in the national development strategy [13], the 
Serbian healthcare system is undergoing a significant 
transformation. Many segments of that system are being 
modernized to rely more on electronic records as opposed to 
traditional 
paper 
records. 
Moreover, 
the 
expected 
interconnection of healthcare centres would allow a better 
electronic access to medical data and consequently better 
conditions for data analyses, as in the case of the health 
information system (HIS) for the Serbian Ministry of 
Defence [14]. In such circumstances, Dr Warehouse could be 
integrated into the main healthcare system, which would act 
as a data source. After several processing steps, these data 
would be stored in the data warehouse within the Dr 
Warehouse system. Dr Warehouse has been developed also 
as a pilot solution that should demonstrate advantages of 
using a business intelligence (BI) system in the healthcare 
domain. It is primarily applicable within institutions that deal 
with disease prevention, such as institutes of public health.  
Absenteeism is defined as “failing to report for scheduled 
work” [15]. High absenteeism has negative impact not only 
on colleagues and superiors, who must cope with greater 
workloads, but also on the profit. According to the 2009 
research by the Chartered Institute of Personnel and 
Development (CIPD) from Great Britain [16], the most 
important reasons for the short-term work absence (up to 
four weeks) are: colds, influenza, stomach problems, 
headaches, migraines, injuries of the muscular and skeletal 
system, and pain in the lower back part. Most of these 
conditions, which are also a major health problem in Serbia, 
are 
preventable 
non-communicable 
diseases 
(NCDs). 
However, there is no adequate prevention and control of 
NCDs in Serbia [17]. We hope that, by using Dr Warehouse, 
valuable absenteeism patterns could be uncovered. 
There are three primary groups of users who might 
benefit from the developed system: employees in public 
healthcare institutions, researchers in epidemiology, and non-
experts interested in epidemiological information. Users in 
public healthcare institutions that are dealing with 
epidemiological data could utilize our software system, 
which is specially tailored to the epidemiological domain, 
instead of relying on solutions that are intended for generic 
statistical analyses. An expected advantage of having a 
domain-specific system would be an increase in user 
productivity. Large amounts of data that are typical of 
modern HISs may be well utilized owing to the well-tried 
approach incorporated into our system – a data warehouse 
for data storing and data mining for efficient analyses. The 
main system load may be reduced by running analyses 
primarily on data stored in Dr Warehouse. The second group 
of users are scientists whose research is related to 
epidemiology. By utilizing Dr Warehouse, they may create, 
test, and improve epidemic models through adding, running, 
and modifying new extensions. New visualization techniques 
for epidemiological data may also be employed and 
evaluated. Furthermore, the system may also target users 
who are not medical experts but are interested in latest 
disease trends, forecasts, or results of some specific analysis.  
Owing to the adverse health of the population in Serbia 
and the “white space” in terms of medical services aimed at 
predicting disease occurrence, our decision to develop a 
system that would allow the use of BI technologies in such a 
context should be both socially and economically justified. 
IV. 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
In this section, we present the system and give an 
overview of its architecture and functionalities. Public 
resources concerning  the system are available at [18]. The 
featured data warehouse, which represents a foundation for 
data analyses, is explained in more detail. We also elaborate 
on the featured web application, mobile application, and 
built-in support for adding new functionalities. 
A. System Architecture 
There are four principal components in the system: (i) 
database server, (ii) application server, (iii) web client 
application, and (iv) mobile device client application. The 
overview of the system is given in Fig. 1.  
The database server is depicted as a rounded rectangle 
titled SQL Server (in the left portion of Fig. 1). It consists of 
a relational database management system (SQL Server 
RDBMS), which hosts a data warehouse containing 
epidemiological and medical data; services for data analyses 
that focus on data mining and OLAP cube analytics (SQL 
Server Analysis Services); and data integration services (SQL 
Server 
Integration 
Services) 
for 
data 
extraction, 
transformation, and loading (the ETL process) from the 
supported types of data sources (Excel files, various 
relational databases, data files, or some other external 
sources). 
The application server is depicted as a rounded rectangle 
titled Dr. Warehouse Server (in the central portion of Fig. 1). 
It acts as an intermediary between the database server and 
the two client applications. This component communicates 
with 
the 
database 
server 
using 
the 
ADOMD.NET 
subcomponent, which is responsible for providing access to 
analytical data sources. On the other hand, web services 
(WCF Services) are used to exchange information between 
the application server and the two client applications.  New 
functionalities (Extensions) may be added to the application 
server using the MEF subcomponent.  
The web client application, which is depicted in Fig. 1 as 
a rounded rectangle titled Silverlight Client Application, may 
be extended in the similar manner using its own MEF 
subcomponent. It also supports reading of Serbian identity 
cards (ID cards) using the Smart Card Reader module. The 
mobile device client is depicted in Fig. 1 as a rounded 
rectangle titled Windows Phone 7. 

332
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 1.  System overview.  
The system may fit into existing HISs and provide 
various services to other similar solutions. This architecture 
allows the possibility of having the database server and 
application server reside at different physical locations. 
Furthermore, in order to increase the scalability and 
performance of the system, the data mining and analysis 
services (currently implemented using Microsoft SQL Server 
Analysis Services [19]) may be located separately from the 
database server. In future versions of the system, the 
architecture may be extended to include terminals that would 
be publicly available and offer a set of functionalities similar 
to those in the existing web client application. 
B. Data Warehouse 
The data warehouse is modelled using a star schema, 
which consists of eight dimensions, two of which are role-
playing dimensions, and one fact table (Fig. 2). The fact 
table keeps track of events that lead to absenteeism, disease 
occurrences and time measured in days that person spent 
away from duty or workplace. Each dimension represents the 
context of disease occurrence and absence. Therefore, we 
can observe these events in the context of time (when an 
event occurred or ended), gender of the person involved, 
place where it happened, person’s profession, data source, 
absence cause, person’s age, and diagnosis that was 
established. 
Dimensions concerning diagnosis, place, and time have 
several hierarchical levels modelled as a fully denormalized 
structure, which enables multi-level classification of factual 
data. In the time dimension, we have two hierarchies: one 
defined as calendar year, quarter, month, and day, and the 
other one as calendar year, week, and day.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The star schema of the data warehouse.  

333
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The diagnosis dimension has three levels of hierarchy for 
diagnosis, disease subcategory, and disease category. Within 
the community (place) dimension, there are four levels of 
hierarchy for community, state, region, and continent.  
Although the normalization of our schema would remove 
redundant data, which in turn would make the schema easier 
to maintain and change, our initial considerations of the 
schema type led us to choose the star schema. 
Denormalization, which is typical for the star schema, helped 
us to reduce the number of foreign keys and to reduce the 
query execution time. As the system was designed to be used 
by a wide variety of users, ease of use was one of our 
priorities. For end users, the star schema is more 
comprehensible than snowflake schema and less complex 
queries are needed to satisfy their information needs. Since 
this is a pilot project, advanced cost-benefit analysis of 
normalizing our star schema into the showflake schema is a 
matter of our future work. The unavailability of a larger and 
more complex absenteeism data set was a major reason for 
simplifying the initial schema design and focusing on the 
aforementioned fact and dimensions. 
The data warehouse was implemented using Microsoft 
SQL Server 2008 [20]. It includes the following dimensions: 
DimCause, DimDiagnosis, DimGender, DimProfession, 
DimCommunity, DimDataSource, DimTime, and DimAge. 
DiseasePresence is the only fact table in the system. Each of 
these tables contains a surrogate primary key, which allows 
us to deal with changes in natural key in a more convenient 
way and track slowly changing dimensions. 
Taking into consideration that the data in the system are 
expected to reflect the actual state of the health of a 
population, it is necessary to support acquisition and 
integration of medical data from multiple sources. We 
developed a solution within Microsoft Integration Services 
[21], which allows us to extract, clean, transform, and load 
(ECTL) the necessary data. The ECTL process is divided in 
six SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS) packages each of 
which covers control and data flow between sources (Excel 
files or databases) and corresponding fact or dimension table. 
Furthermore, for each package, set of actions is specified 
within SQL Server Agent [22] jobs. Those actions involve 
preparing source files, configuring connections to data flow 
sources and destination, executing the packages and backing 
up old source files. Moreover, the execution of SSIS 
packages is logged and completion status is emailed to an 
administrator.  
We perform incremental extraction, i.e., we consider only 
data that were added to the HIS of a public health institute or 
uploaded to application sever after the previous extraction. 
Extracted data serve as an input for a series of 
transformations in which we detect and eliminate errors and 
inconsistencies: (i) different domains of semantically 
equivalent attributes (as in the case of the attribute 
GenderName); (ii) different encodings of textual data 
(ProfessionTitle); (iii) different granularity of semantically 
equivalent attributes (DiagnosisCode). Diagnosis codes that 
are used in the source HIS are shorter versions of the codes 
that are featured in the 10th revision of International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD 10) [23]. We created a 
transformation that relies on regular expressions to resolve 
this issue. In this manner, we extended disease information 
with the disease name, subcategory and category. 
Dimensions DimGender, DimTime, and DimAge, which are 
static dimensions, are not extracted from data source. They 
are created within the context of the data warehouse and their 
records are either loaded manually or generated by a custom 
procedure.  
At the moment, there is only support for data insertion. 
Since the data set in the current version of the system is only 
a sample taken from a HIS, we decided to keep all data in the 
data warehouse, while leaving the implementation of a 
deletion policy for obsolete data and data that have little or 
no impact on the system output, to be included in the future 
version.  
In order to meet the needs for efficient and flexible 
consumption of valuable information produced by the 
system, we developed an online analytical processing 
(OLAP) database, which contains rich metadata. The OLAP 
cube makes our data organized in a way that facilitates non-
predetermined queries for aggregated information. As we 
used Kimball Method [24] to implement the dimensional 
model in the relational database, the OLAP design step was a 
straightforward translation from the existing design. The 
relational database serves as the permanent storage of the 
cleaned and conformed data, and feeds data to the OLAP 
database. Data mining structures and models are stored in the 
third database, which, together with the OLAP database, 
resides at the Analysis Server – the primary query server in 
the system. 
C. Web Application 
The majority of the functionalities that are available to 
expert users are incorporated into a web application, which is 
implemented 
in 
Microsoft 
Silverlight 
[25]. 
The 
communication between the application server and the web 
client is done via web services using Microsoft Windows 
Communication Foundation (WCF) [26]. At present, the 
client application possesses functionalities concerning: 
access to medical records stored in the data warehouse; 
upload of data files containing medical records; access to the 
data cube and use of some of the cube’s advanced analytical 
operations; execution of advanced analyses and forecasts, as 
well as result retrieval; upload of extensions; and their 
invocation. 
The contents of the web application are organized as a set 
of Silverlight pages, where each page groups a number of 
similar functionalities. Within the Home page, users may 
access a chart about the most common causes of absenteeism 
for the current month. Moreover, in order to fulfil the needs 
of more experienced users accustomed to traditional reports, 
we created various operational reports within the server-
based reporting platform, SQL Server Reporting Services 
(SSRS) [27]. Besides data sheets, these reports include rich 
data visualization in form of 3D charts. Users may access 
reports on-demand through a web browser. After they run a 
report, they can export it to another format, such as Excel 
spreadsheet or PDF. The functionalities of other pages are 
presented in the remainder of the subsection. 

334
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1) General Predictions 
The Analysis page contains functionalities regarding the 
execution of advanced analysis and forecasts that identify the 
most probable diseases (or causes of work absence) and the 
most frequent diagnosis mismatches. Through this page, a 
user is able to generate basic predictions concerning a 
selected subpopulation for a particular quarter of a year. The 
subpopulation may be specified by selecting an age group, 
gender, and municipality (Fig. 3). More information about 
these predictions may be found in Section IV-C. 
2) Personalized Predictions 
The What about me? page is a location from which it is 
possible to generate and retrieve results of the personalized 
predictions concerning the most probable diseases (or causes 
of work absence). In order to generate these predictions, a 
user is required to insert his or her ID card into the attached 
smart card reader and a report is automatically generated. 
Card data are read with the help of the Čelik API [28], 
which is primarily intended for integration of ID cards into 
business systems. In order to access the smart card reader 
from a web browser, we had to enable trusted applications to 
run inside the browser. Moreover, as soon as health smart 
cards become publicly available in Serbia, we intend to adapt 
the system to allow data reading from these cards as well.  
3) Analytical Operations 
The execution of analytical operations and access to 
historical data is provided within the Health Reports page. 
Users may perform operations such as dice and slice in order 
to analytically process the available data. The PivotViewer 
control [29], which is an integral part of the page, helps users 
to interact with thousands of items at once and see trends and 
patterns that would be hidden when looking at one item at a 
time. Fig. 4 shows the PivotViewer control in which green 
squares represent diagnoses and the numbers of their 
occurrences among males of a certain age. The user is able to 
zoom in and select squares in order to retrieve more 
information on the corresponding diagnosis such as 
description and number of occurrences.  
4) Upload of New Data and Functionalities 
The Upload page offers functionalities regarding uploading 
of server and client extensions. Within the Extensions page 
users 
may 
activate 
and 
run 
uploaded 
extensions. 
Furthermore, through the Upload page users may upload 
Excel files containing medical records. As most HISs 
support exporting data in the form of Excel files, we 
considered it to be most suitable format for the task. Every 
uploaded file is stored with a unique name, which prevents 
file name collisions. In order to minimize the impact of the 
intense ECTL activity on user experience, we scheduled a 
server job that executes SSIS package every day at 12:00 
pm. 
However, we are going to reconsider this decision once 
we gather concrete data on the frequency of data upload and 
user activity within the web application. The first step in the 
job is reserved for preparing the uploaded file for the ECTL 
process and the last step for backing up the file. All steps 
within the job are repeated until there are no more files in a 
directory on the server where uploaded files are stored. 
5) Diagnosis Discovery Support  
The Symptoms Checker page is part of our more recent 
research, which resulted in the functionality that supports 
medical diagnosis discovery. The diagnostic process is based 
on symptom matching in a way that is sensitive to the 
diagnoses that are dominant in the population to which the 
patient/user belongs. This functionality, which is presented 
in more detail in [30], utilizes data sets presented in Section 
IV-A, and a two-phase algorithm that is based on the 
differential diagnosis method from medical diagnostics and 
predictive models for disease occurrence in a subpopulation. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Section from the Analysis page in the web client. 

335
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 4.  Data visualization using PivotViewer.  
D. Mobile Application 
Dr Warehouse Mobile is a mobile client for the Dr 
Warehouse system. It is an application designed for 
smartphones and implemented only for the Microsoft 
Windows Phone platform [31]. However, porting the mobile 
application to other platforms such as Android and iOS is a 
matter of future work. Given the fact that smartphones are 
widely used, we have chosen to offer a mobile application 
as a way of integrating the collected medical information 
and predictions from Dr Warehouse into regular activities of 
potential users. 
The mobile application has functionalities similar to 
those offered through the web client. However, it has a 
narrower set of features that are customized for mobile 
users. Its functionalities are organized into several 
segments: Login Process, Registration Process, Current 
Position, Position Information, Personal Information, and 
Symptoms. In order to exchange data between the mobile 
client and application server, we developed WCF web 
services tailored for the mobile client. The methods for 
determining the common diseases and potential diagnoses 
are the slightly modified versions of the corresponding 
methods available through the web application. 
Once started, the mobile application presents a login 
screen (Login Process) with the option to navigate to the 
user registration form. When registering in the system 
(Registration Process), a user provides personal information 
such as age, gender, profession, and place of residence. The 
provided 
information 
is 
used 
when 
performing 
a 
personalized analysis similar to that featured in the What 
about me? page in the web client. 
After a successful login, the user is provided with the 
position (Current Position) obtained via the GPS receiver of 
the phone and Microsoft TerraService [32]. With this 
information, the user may inquire about the most common 
diseases at the current location (Position Information). For 
this purpose, the client issues an asynchronous call to a web 
service. Once the response is received, the user is informed 
via the toast pop-up notification and information about the 
most common diseases is shown on a map. Moreover, the 
same information, in the textual or chart form, may be 
obtained for any location that is designated by the user. 
In the similar manner, the user may retrieve a list of 
diseases that are most probable for the subpopulation to 
which the user belongs, where the subpopulation is 
determined using the personal information provided during 
the registration, or for any other specified subpopulation, 
where the user needs to specify the required information: 
age, gender, profession, and location. The scenario of 
obtaining prediction according to the personal information 
(Personal Information) is illustrated in Fig. 5. 
The last segment of the mobile application is devoted to 
providing potential diagnoses for a list of symptoms 
exhibited by the user (Symptoms). The user may create a 
personal symptom list by adding observed symptoms from a 
list of the common symptoms, which is regularly updated 
from the server, or by manually entering the name of a less 
common symptom. After the symptom list is submitted for 
the evaluation, the list of potential diagnoses is retrieved 
from the server. For each diagnosis, there is additional 
information such as risk factors, treatments, and aliases (Fig. 
6). Furthermore, the user may access a separate description 
of a potential diagnosis. For each provided piece of 
information about a diagnosis, there is a hyperlink to a 
relevant resource with a more detailed description. 
 

336
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5.  Personalized predictions within the mobile client.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Description of a potential diagnosis within the mobile client.  
 
E. Extensibility 
New functionalities may be added to the system in the 
form of extensions. The support for extensibility was 
implemented using Managed Extensibility Framework 
(MEF) [33]. A user may upload an extension, which then 
becomes immediately available for use without a need to 
restart the system. There are two types of extensions: (web) 
client extensions and (application) server extensions. Both 
may be uploaded to the application server through the web 
client. A web client extension is automatically downloaded 
from the application server to a web client machine, where it 
is then executed. This is done upon the first invocation of the 
extension at the client side. Such extension is actually a 
Silverlight web page that is embedded within the Extensions 
page in the web application. It is generally expected to act as 
a user interface to the built-in or user-added (via server 
extensions) queries and analyses. On the other hand, server 
extensions reside on the application server, where they are 
also executed upon the invocation initiated at the client side. 
These extensions are functions generally responsible for data 
operations, analyses, and epidemic models. 
V. 
FEATURED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ANALYSES 
In this section, we present three types of epidemiological 
analyses that are available in Dr Warehouse: an analysis 
about the difference between the initial and final diagnosis 
during work absence, epidemiological forecasts that rely on 
data mining and epidemiological forecasts that rely on 
compartmental models. In addition to describing a data set 
that was used, we offer exemplary results of these analyses. 
These results primarily illustrate what kind of valuable 
information may be obtained from Dr Warehouse. Their 
validity is tightly coupled with the quality of available 
epidemiological data and the precise tuning of procedure 
parameters. 
A. Data – Sample, Quality, and Security 
Data set used in the testing of the system during the 
development was acquired from the HIS of The Institute of 
Public Health of Vojvodina in Novi Sad, Serbia. The 
obtained sample (an excerpt is featured in Fig. 7) has 
approximately 8,500 records about workplace absences that 
ended in 2009. It contains depersonalized information 
including: gender (represented by the variable pol), age 
(starost), municipality code (opstina), absence cause (uzrok), 
start (prvidan) and end date (krajdan) of absence, disease 
codes for initial (pdijag) and final (zdijag) diagnosis, and 
business activity code (delatn) of a person involved.  
Gender is represented by numbers 1 and 2 referring to the 
male or female respectively. Business activity code is 
represented by a five-digit code indicating sector, division, 
branch and group of a business activity in accordance with 
the 
classification 
of 
activities 
as 
defined 
by 
the 
corresponding law of the Republic of Serbia. Municipality 
code is a unique identifier of the municipality in which an 
absence was recorded.  
The cause of the absence is denoted by numbers from 1 
to 12 that respectively correspond to: disease, isolation, 
accompanying sick person, maintenance of pregnancy, tissue 
and organ donor, injury at workplace, injury outside of 
workplace, occupational disease, nursing a child under 3 
years, nursing a child over 3 years, care of other sick person, 
and maternity leave. Initial and final diagnosis codes are 
obtained by reducing the appropriate diagnosis codes defined 
by the 10th revision of International Classification of 
Diseases (ICD 10) to four characters. Codebooks of diseases, 
business activities, causes and municipalities may be 
gathered from official Internet sites of organizations that are 
responsible for their maintenance and distribution.  

337
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 7.  Excerpt from a data set used in the generation of predictions. 
Credibility of the data depends largely on the credibility 
of data sources. Therefore, we rely on sources that can 
guarantee the integrity and validity of provided data. 
Within the system, we provided different ways of 
presenting and making use of existing data. Dr Warehouse is 
not only conducive to making decisions for medical experts 
by means of its data rich reports, but also favourable to 
general population because of its easy to use components. In 
such way we tended to satisfy some of the secondary data 
quality criteria such as reliability, credibility, usefulness, 
added value, ease to use, and accessibility. However, the 
conception and measurements according to these criteria are 
established on primary or secondary quality properties which 
are mainly assessed by subjective methods [34]. The 
denormalization of the data warehouse schema, which is 
described in Section III-B, affects some of the properties 
corresponding to the primary data quality criteria such as 
efficient use of storage and response time. Although it entails 
the generation of redundant data, we consider it beneficial 
because it optimizes read performance and makes the 
schema more comprehensible to users. 
Security in software systems that contain medical data is 
generally one of the top concerns of software designers. In 
the current version of Dr Warehouse, the featured data 
warehouse supports storage only of depersonalized medical 
records. In such design, there are generally no standard 
issues with patient privacy and confidentiality of patient 
health records. Moreover, Dr Warehouse was developed to 
give wide access to epidemiological data to different 
categories of users. However, future versions may support 
distinct user roles that include specific functionalities and 
access to different portions of contained data.  The future 
access control is expected to follow the role-based access 
control (RBAC) model [35]. 
In the more recent development of the system, we 
extended our solution with a data set acquired from Freebase, 
an open repository of structured data [36]. We were able to 
downloaded JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) [37] files 
that contain structured information on findings consistent 
with diagnoses. After parsing those files, we obtained 
records about diagnoses, corresponding symptoms, risk 
factors, disease causes, treatments, and medical specialties. 
Those records were stored in a specially designed relational 
database which is presented in more detail in [30]. 
B. Changes in Diagnosis 
The situation when the final diagnosis in an absence case 
differs from the initial one may be of special interest to 
medical experts. Analysing cases in which complications 
lead to a change in diagnosis or finding often misdiagnosed 
cases could help experts to devise strategies for the 
prevention or control of such situations. 
For these reasons, we added support for the comparison 
between the initial and final diagnosis associated with a 
single workplace absence. For each pair of the initial (L) and 
final (R) diagnosis that appears in the available data set, we 
automatically calculate the number of matching absence 
cases (Support), their share in the whole data set (Support 
%), the percentage of cases with the initial diagnosis L that 
also feature the final diagnosis R (Prob_LR), and the 
percentage of cases with the final diagnosis R that also 
feature the initial diagnosis L (Prob-RL). A user may choose 
to view only the specified number of the most frequent 
diagnosis changes, and further select either the initial or final 
diagnosis to investigate which diagnosis changes are 
associated with the selected diagnosis.  
An excerpt from the results of an analysis about 
diagnosis change is given in Fig. 8.  The majority of changes 
between the initial and final diagnosis is observed when the 
supervision of normal pregnancy was substituted with the 
health supervision and care of other healthy infant and child. 
This scenario happened in 258 cases, which make up 99.61% 
of normal pregnancy cases. A similar trend is noticed when 
the initial diagnosis was officially recorded as the 
supervision of normal first pregnancy (50 cases). Such 
diagnosis changes could be considered trivial as they are 
numerous and do not have much informational value.  
On the other hand, the diagnosis changes with lower 
support value could better demonstrate in what ways a 
diagnosis may change. In 43 cases with an unspecified 
abdominal pain as the initial diagnosis, there were six 
different outcomes (Fig. 9). In the majority of such cases 
(83.72%), the diagnosis remained the same. The most 
common change was the one to dyspepsia, which happened 
in 3 cases (6.98%). The remaining cases further illustrate 
how a set of unrelated diagnoses, such as cholelithiasis, 
lumbago, 
haemorrhoids, 
and 
gastroduodenitis, 
could 
substitute an imprecise initial diagnosis. As a result, the 
discovered information might indicate for which common 
alternative diagnoses a more thorough test could be 
administered in order to reduce the chance of making a 
wrong diagnosis. 
C. Forecasts based on Data Mining 
In Dr Warehouse, we utilize three classification 
algorithms that are supported by Microsoft SQL Server 2008 
R2 Analysis Services: decision trees, naive Bayes, and neural 
network classifier. These classifiers are trained to estimate 
the individual share of each disease in all work absences 
attributed to the 15 most common diseases, as determined by 
examining the available data set, for a selected year quarter 
and subpopulation, as defined by age group and gender, in a 
selected municipality.  
 

338
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 8.  Some of the most frequent changes in diagnosis. 
 
Figure 9.  Cases with an unspecified abdominal pain as the initial diagnosis. 
 
 
In this manner, we may form coarse predictions of the 
distribution of the most common diseases in a selected 
subpopulation. In Fig. 10, we give a set of predictions for 
male employees in the city of Novi Sad who are between 40 
and 61 years old. This example demonstrates how a share of 
some common diseases in that subpopulation may change 
throughout a year. These estimates are generated using the 
naive Bayes classification algorithm for Novi Sad. 
Predicted shares indicate that essential hypertension, 
dorsalgia (thoracic region), and lumbago with sciatica may 
be causes of a larger percentage of absence in quarters 2 and 
3 (spring and summer), while their share substantially 
decreases during quarters 1 and 4 (winter and autumn). On 
the other hand, viral infection is most responsible for 
absences in quarter 4 (autumn). 
D. Forecasts based on Compartmental Models 
Compartmental models are a group of epidemic models 
that are used to predict dynamics of an epidemic by dividing 
an 
analysed 
population 
into 
several 
compartments 
(subpopulations) and calculating the changes in compartment 
sizes given some initial conditions [38][39][40]. These 
conditions include sizes of compartments (generally 
expressed as percentages of a whole population) at a single 
moment in time.  
Population compartments correspond to susceptible, 
infectious, recovered, or some other group of individuals in a 
population. Furthermore, there are disease-related parameters 
that are needed in the calculation of changes in 
compartments sizes: contact rate, recovery rate, birth/death 
rate, etc. Different models from this family feature different 
compartments and may be used to obtain forecasts for 
different diseases. The actual spread of a disease (transition 
of individuals between different compartments) is modelled 
by a system of differential equations. 
Compartmental models may be used to predict 
epidemics. However, the modelling of a disease offers 
additional benefits. Compartmental models are typically used 
to analyse the state of equilibrium for a particular disease, 
i.e., the point when there are practically no more changes in 
the 
size 
of 
featured 
compartments. 
Moreover, 
the 
information from such models may be applied to control or 
even prevent outbreaks by using it to define an adequate 
vaccination strategy. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Example of percentage disease shares for male employees in 
Novi Sad aged between 40 and 61 years, as predicted using a naive Bayes 
classifier. 

339
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
As an example of how Dr Warehouse may support 
standard 
epidemic 
models, 
we 
implemented 
five 
compartmental models based on the information from [41]. 
With these models, it is possible to describe some common 
diseases such as influenza, measles, and sexually transmitted 
diseases. Moreover, they describe with different levels of 
detail the nature of infection and potential immunity, which 
is suitable for a broad range of diseases. Both the short-term 
and long-term forecasts may be made owing to possibility to 
include basic demographic processes in these models. 
The implemented models are added to the system in the 
form of extensions. For each model, there is a separate client 
extension. Each client extension is a Silverlight page within 
the web application. These pages are used for actions such as 
setting 
parameters, 
invoking 
model 
execution, 
and 
presenting results. In addition to client extensions, there is a 
single server extension for all implemented models. This 
extension contains functions that are responsible for 
numerically solving systems of equations which correspond 
to compartmental models. Our implementation approximates 
the solution by using the 4th order Runge-Kutta method for 
solving a system of ordinary differential equations. It is 
invoked from a client extension and provides results for the 
client side.  
Various compartmental models may be implemented in a 
similar manner. The major differences in the implementation 
would be a change in the set of differential equations that 
model a disease and addition of new parameters or 
compartments. By adding the support for several different 
compartmental models in the form of system extensions, we 
have demonstrated that Dr Warehouse may be used to 
predict the rate of spread of any disease for which there is an 
adequate compartmental model. Given the fact that 
alterations of the basic models are constantly created and 
evaluated, the extension mechanism in the system is suitable 
for the timely testing of a model for a new disease or variant. 
In the remainder of the subsection, we give an overview of 
the supported models. 
1) Simple SIR Model  
The simple SIR (Susceptible/Infected/Recovered) model 
derives its name from the three compartments that are used 
to model a population struck by a disease: susceptible (S), 
infectious (I), and recovered (R). A susceptible individual 
from the S compartment may become infectious through 
contact 
with 
an 
infectious 
individual 
from 
the 
I 
compartment, while an infectious individual becomes a 
member of the R compartment after a recovery period and 
develops a lasting immunity. The rate at which a disease is 
transmitted from an infectious to a susceptible individual is 
the contact rate β, while a rate at which an infectious 
individual recovers is the recovery rate γ. Actual values for 
the rates β and γ depend on the disease that is being 
modelled. Some of the diseases that may be described by this 
model are influenza, measles, and acute hepatitis C. Three 
ordinary differential equations describe the dynamics: 

 

dSdt– I S


dIdtI S – γI


dRdt γI.

In order to analyse the dynamics of a disease within a 
population, a user of the Dr Warehouse system has to specify 
the necessary parameters: S, I, R, β and γ. As an aid in this 
process, the extension may automatically provide the 
recommended values of β and γ for a disease that has been 
selected by the user from the list of the disease supported by 
the extension. The compartment sizes (S, I, and R) may be 
automatically estimated from the previous disease cases once 
the user specifies the coefficient describing the share of the 
available data set with cases in the complete population, and 
the periods from which the number of infected and recovered 
individuals should be determined 
In Fig. 11, we give an example of a prediction that was 
generated by a chronological simulation for influenza using 
our implementation of the simple SIR model. The presented 
chart demonstrates a typical situation when equilibrium in a 
population is gradually reached after a peak in the number of 
infected individuals.  
2) Generalized SIR Model  
The generalized SIR model is an extension of the simple 
SIR 
model, 
in 
which 
demographic 
processes 
are 
acknowledged: 
the 
appearance 
of 
new 
susceptible 
individuals through birth and the disappearance of 
individuals from all three compartments (S, I, and R) 
because of death. The inclusion of these processes in the 
model is especially suitable when analysing the dynamics of 
a disease over a longer period. In addition to the parameters 
of the simple SIR model, there is the mortality rate , whose 
value is often used for the birth rate as well. The equations 
used in this model are slightly more complex from those in 
the simple SIR model owing to the terms with the  rate: 

dSdt– I S – S


dIdtI S – γI – I


dRdt γI – R.

 
 
Figure 11.  Example of a disease forecast obtained using the simple SIR 
model. 
 
 

340
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
3) SIS Model  
The SIS model could be considered a narrower version of 
the simple SIR model owing to the absence of the 
compartment containing recovered individuals. In this 
model, once an individual stops being infectious, there is no 
immunity period. As a result, this individual immediately 
becomes susceptible to the modelled disease. This scenario is 
typical of many sexually transmitted infections. There are 
two equations modelling such diseases: 

dSdtγI– I S


dIdtI S – γI

In Fig. 12, there is an example of a prediction obtained 
from using the SIS model.  
4) SIRS Model  
The SIRS model is another variation of the SIR models, 
in which immunity to the modelled disease is lost after a 
limited period, i.e., a recovered individual eventually 
becomes susceptible. Because of this addition, there is a new 
parameter  - the rate at which the immunity is waning. A 
system of equations that take into account these events and 
basic demographic processes include: 

dSdt + R– I S – S


dIdtI S – γI – I


dRdt γI – R – R.

5) SEIR Model  
The 
SEIR 
model 
is 
more 
complex 
than 
the 
aforementioned models as it features additional compartment 
E, which contains exposed individuals. A susceptible 
individual may become first exposed and only then 
infectious. Exposed individuals are infected but not 
infectious, i.e., they cannot transmit the disease for a certain 
period that may be expressed using the  rate. The equations 
that model such dynamics include: 

dSdt– I S – S


dEdtI S – E – E


dIdtE – γI – I


dRdt γI – R.

 
 
Figure 12.  Example of a disease forecast obtained using the SIS model. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We provided an extended overview of a software system 
that may be used in public healthcare and epidemiology for 
data collection, data mining, analyses, monitoring, and 
research. The main contribution is the construction of a 
versatile 
and 
comprehensive 
software 
solution 
for 
epidemiology, as opposed to the similar existing solutions. It 
should act as a central point for the collection of 
epidemiological data, their analysis, and presentation tailored 
to different groups of intended users: public healthcare 
professionals, epidemiologists and general public. We expect 
that this system may have an important role in the activities 
concerned with epidemic control owing to the several 
already implemented compartmental models for the 
prediction of disease dynamics. The provided data 
visualization and reporting controls should offer better 
understanding of temporal and spatial disease patterns. In 
addition to a general description of the system’s architecture, 
data source, and client applications, a special attention was 
given to the implementation of the data warehouse and data 
analyses. The presented examples of analyses illustrate some 
of the results that may be obtained through the system using 
the available data sample. In order to support application of 
the latest epidemic models and their evaluation in the context 
of the collected data, we incorporated an extensibility 
mechanism that allows addition of new functionalities to the 
system. 
We demonstrated through various examples that the 
developed 
solution 
is 
operational 
and 
supports 
epidemiological monitoring, research, and prediction. These 
capabilities are illustrated on a data sample from an 
institution of public healthcare. However, the actual value 
brought by this solution could only be determined after its 
prolonged use. During that period, epidemiological data 
should be collected within the featured data warehouse. 
Since many epidemiological analyses require data sets 
covering large time spans, the system should be running for 
at least several years before it could be systematically 
evaluated. By creating Dr Warehouse, we have provided a 
software foundation for epidemiological forecasting through 
two predictive approaches that have been extensively and 
successfully used in practice: mathematical modelling of 
disease dynamics and data mining of epidemiological data. 
In addition to using available implementations of predictive 
procedures, epidemiologists may make customizations and 
even add completely new procedures to the system. This is a 
more probable research scenario because epidemiological 
characteristics of many diseases are region-dependent and 
may change over time, which in turn requires new ways of 
predicting epidemics and disease dynamics. For these 
reasons, the actual potential of the system may only be 
achieved if the system is adopted and readily used by the 
domain experts. 
There are numerous ideas for future work and research 
on the presented system. We may modify the existing 
analyses and make them more generic so that they could 
support a greater number of queries. Moreover, we intend to 
implement and test several models that are based on cellular 

341
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
automata. The data warehouse schema may be altered and 
extended in order to support additional analyses. Since low 
quality data within such solutions may cause “unnecessary 
anxiety, investment of time, and expensive engagements 
with healthcare professionals” [42], we plan a more elaborate 
assessment of data quality as part of future work. 
Furthermore, based on these assessments, we intend to 
improve the ETL process as it is considered a key data 
quality factor. Given the fact that data quality varies 
according to user experience, among other factors, we intend 
to utilize the assessment method for subjective quality 
properties and the Data Quality Manager (DQM) Prototype 
presented in [34]. The presented DQM is a prototype for the 
assessment of data quality within heterogeneous databases 
that incorporates a data quality assessment framework based 
on extensions of the Reference Model, Measurement Model, 
and Assessment Model. Moreover, it takes into account the 
type of information system when assessing data quality. We 
consider such property important because of the high data 
quality requirements associated with the application area. 
We may also enforce a strict security policy by 
introducing 
user 
roles 
and 
separating 
the 
set 
of 
functionalities into subsets better suited for various user 
categories. A new version of the system could be 
implemented using open (and free) technologies, which 
could lead to a creation of a completely open version of the 
system. Due to the prominence of spatio-temporal and 
epidemiological data in Dr Warehouse, best practices from 
geographic information systems and constraint databases are 
topics also worth exploring in the future. Furthermore, 
significant additions to the system would be the construction 
of an epidemiological knowledge base, which could be 
regularly updated or consulted during data analyses, together 
with the inclusion of a convenient ontology. We have 
already undertaken some of these activities by integrating 
information from Freebase into Dr Warehouse. With such 
enhancements, the semantics may be expressed and the new 
version of the system could communicate with other systems 
that follow the idea of the Semantic Web. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The research was supported by Ministry of Education 
and Science of Republic of Serbia, Grant III-44010. The 
authors are most grateful to The Institute of Public Health of 
Vojvodina in Novi Sad for the provided absenteeism data 
sample and valuable comments.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Ivančević, M. Knežević, M. Simić, I. Luković, and D. 
Mandić, “Dr Warehouse - An Intelligent Software System for 
Epidemiological Monitoring, Prediction, and Research,” 
Proceedings of the 5th IARIA International Conference on 
Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications 
(DBKDA 2013), Jan.-Feb. 2013, pp. 204-210. 
[2] W. R. Dowdle, "The Principles of Disease Elimination and 
Eradication," Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 
76, Suppl 2, 1998, pp. 22-25. 
[3] T. G. Savel and S. Foldy, "The Role of Public Health 
Informatics in Enhancing Public Health Surveillance," CDC 
MMWR – CDC’s Vision for Public Health Surveillance in the 
21st Century, vol. 61, 2012, pp. 20-24.  
[4] A. B. Bernstein and M. H. Sweeney, "Public Health 
Surveillance Data: Legal, Policy, Ethical, Regulatory, and 
Practical Issues," CDC MMWR – CDC’s Vision for Public 
Health Surveillance in the 21st Century, vol. 61, 2012, pp. 30-
34. 
[5] H. Rolka, D. W. Walker, R. English, M. J. Katzoff, G. 
Scogin, and E. Neuhaus, "Analytical Challenges for Emerging 
Public Health Surveillance," CDC MMWR – CDC’s Vision 
for Public Health Surveillance in the 21st Century, vol. 61, 
2012,  pp. 35-39. 
[6] K.M. Sullivan, A. Dean, and M.M. Soe, “OpenEpi - a web-
based epidemiologic and statistical calculator for public 
health,” Public Health Reports, vol. 124, no. 3, May-June 
2009, pp. 471-474. 
[7] “Open Source Epidemiologic Statistics for Public Health,” 
http://www.openepi.com/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[8] J.H. Abramson, “WINPEPI updated: computer programs for 
epidemiologists, and their teaching potential,” Epidemiologic 
Perspectives & Innovations, vol. 8, no. 1, February 2011, pp. 
1-9. 
[9] “Epi Info™ - Community Edition,” http://epiinfo.codeplex. 
com/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[10] “HealthMap,” http://www.healthmap.org/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[11] “Outbreak 
Watch 
Social 
Biosurveillance 
Network,” 
http://www.outbreakwatch.com/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[12] “Google Flu Trends,” http://www.google.org/flutrends/ [Dec. 
15, 2013]. 
[13] Strategija razvoja informacionog društva u Republici Srbiji do 
2020. godine [The Strategy for the Development of 
Information Society in the Republic of Serbia until the Year 
2020], (in Serbian), Službeni glasnik Republike Srbije, vol. 
51, 2010. 
[14] M. Fimić, M. Radulović, I. Vulić, and S. Atanasijević, 
“Zdravstveni informacioni sistem Ministarstva odbrane 
Republike Srbije – generičko rešenje za integraciju 
institucija” [The Health Information System of the Ministry of 
Defense of the Republic of Serbia – A Generic Solution for 
Institution Integration], (in Serbian), Proceedings of YU 
INFO 2012, pp. 511-516. 
[15] G. Johns, “absenteeism,” in The Blackwell Encyclopedia of 
Sociology, G. Ritzer, Ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 
2007, pp. 4-7.  
[16] “Absence management, Annual Survey Report 2009 - CIPD,” 
http://www.cipd.co.uk/NR/rdonlyres/45894199-81E7-4FDF-
9E16-2C7339A4AAAA/0/4926AbsenceSRWEB.pdf 
[Dec. 
15, 2013]. 
[17] Đ. Jakovljević and P. Mićović, Zdravstveno stanje i 
zdravstvene potrebe stanovništva Srbije [Health Status and 
Health Needs of the Population of Serbia], (in Serbian), 
http://www.palgo.org/files/leaflet/brosura_zdravstvo.pdf 
[Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[18] “Dr 
Warehouse,” 
http://www.acs.uns.ac.rs/sr/node/237/ 
1429892 [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[19] “SQL Server Analysis Services,” http://technet.microsoft. 
com/en-us/sqlserver/cc510300.aspx [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[20] “Microsoft 
SQL 
Server,” 
http://www.microsoft.com/ 
sqlserver/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[21] “Microsoft Integration Services,” http://msdn.microsoft.com/ 
en-us/library/ms141026%28v=sql.105%29.aspx 
[Dec. 
15, 
2013]. 
[22] “SQL 
Server 
Agent,” 
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/ms189089.aspx [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[23] “International Classification of Diseases,” http://www.cdc. 
gov/nchs/icd/icd10cm.htm [Dec. 15, 2013]. 

342
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[24] J. Mundy, W. Thornthwaite, and R. Kimball, The Microsoft 
Data Warehouse Toolkit: With SQL Server 2008 R2 and the 
Microsoft 
Business 
Intelligence 
Toolset, 
2nd 
ed., 
Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, Inc., 2011. 
[25] “Microsoft 
Silverlight,” 
http://www.microsoft.com/ 
silverlight/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[26] “Microsoft WCF Services,” http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/dd456779.aspx [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[27] “SQL Server Reporting Services,” http://msdn.microsoft. 
com/en-us/data/ff660783.aspx [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[28] “Celik API,” http://ca.mup.gov.rs/Celik%20api%20Windows 
%20v1.1.pdf [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[29] “PivotViewer,” 
http://www.microsoft.com/silverlight/ 
pivotviewer/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[30] M. Knežević, V. Ivančević, and I. Luković, “A context-
sensitive support system for medical diagnosis discovery 
based on symptom matching,” Proceedings of the 5th KES 
International 
Conference 
on 
Intelligent 
Decision 
Technologies (IDT 2013), vol. 255, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 
Jun. 2013, pp. 1-10. 
[31] “Microsoft Windows Phone,” http://www.microsoft.com/ 
windowsphone/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[32] “TerraService.NET: An Introduction to Web Services,”  
http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/?id=64154 [Dec. 15, 
2013]. 
[33] “Managed Extensibility Framework,” http://msdn.microsoft. 
com/en-us/library/dd460648.aspx [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[34] M. d. P. Angeles and F. J. García-Ugalde, "Subjective 
Assessment 
of 
Data 
Quality 
considering 
their 
Interdependencies and Relevance according to the Type of 
Information Systems," International Journal On Advances in 
Software, vol. 5, 2012, pp. 389-400. 
[35] R. S. Sandhu, "Role-based Access Control," Advances in 
Computers, vol. 46, 1998, pp. 237-286. 
[36] “Freebase,” http://www.freebase.com/ [Dec. 15, 2013]. 
[37] “JavaScript Object Notation,” http://www.json.org/ [Dec. 15, 
2013]. 
[38] W.O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “A contribution to the 
mathematical theory of epidemics,” Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London, vol. 115, no. 772, pp. 700-721, August 
1927. 
[39] R.M. Anderson and R.M. May, “Population biology of 
infectious diseases: Part I,” Nature, vol. 280, no. 5721, 
August 1979, pp. 361–367. 
[40] R.M. May and R.M. Anderson, “Population biology of 
infectious diseases: Part II,” Nature, vol. 280, no. 5722, 
August 1979, pp. 455–461. 
[41] M.J. Keeling and P. Rohani, Modeling Infectious Diseases in 
Humans and Animals, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2007. 
[42] R.W. White and E. Horvitz, “Cyberchondria: Studies of the 
escalation of medical concerns in Web search,” ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 
23:1–23:37, 2009. 
 
 

