Long-term Sustainable Knowledge Classiﬁcation with Scientiﬁc Computing:
The Multi-disciplinary View on Natural Sciences and Humanities
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU),
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover,
North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN), Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents the methodological and technical
results of creating long-term sustainable knowledge resources,
which can be used for documentation, classiﬁcation, and struc-
turing as well as with scientiﬁc discovery and deployment of
supercomputing resources for advanced information systems. The
focus is on the multi-disciplinary knowledge view on disciplines
from natural sciences and humanities. The basic requirements
resulting from the long-years’ cases studies are long-term knowl-
edge resources providing structure and universal classiﬁcation
features. The paper discusses the state-of-the-art implementation
of information structures and object representations used with
universal classiﬁcation and computation algorithms for multi-
disciplinary, dynamical knowledge discovery. The combination
of universal knowledge resources and computational workﬂows
based on High End Computing (HEC) resources and Universal
Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) have been successfully used for
the goal of creating efﬁcient long-term sustainable Integrated
Information and Computing System components. The paper
presents practical implementation examples from a range of
disciplines with references to natural sciences and humanities,
e.g., geosciences, astrophysics, and archaeology. The long-term
results show that the overall sustainability principally depends
on the methodological and systematical creation of content,
structure, and classiﬁcation with the knowledge resources.
Keywords–Scientiﬁc
Computing;
Sustainability;
Knowledge
Resources; Multi-disciplinarity; Integrated Systems; Information
Systems; Classiﬁcation; UDC; Natural Sciences; Humanities.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper presents the results and development of appli-
cations from long-term sustainable knowledge classiﬁcation
focussing on the multi-disciplinary aspects of natural sciences
and humanities. The work and implementation are based on
the creation of sustainable knowledge resources supporting
structure, classiﬁcation, and scientiﬁc supercomputing for any
object and discipline [1]. Systematical and methodological
developments are the major sources of contributions for long-
term sustainable infrastructures. Technical developments com-
plement the sustainability efforts, contributing to short- and
medium-term success. With this context the amount of data as
well as the complexity of information keeps steadily increas-
ing. The developments of the last decades have shown that for
a continuous positive progress not only the efﬁciency must
increase, the more, developments must be made long-term
sustainable, too. As the knowledge gathered during generations
should be considered the most important component to the
overall success we need universal knowledge resources that
can handle documentation as well as universal classiﬁcation
and structuring. As being consent with most contributing
disciplines and claimed by scientiﬁc councils, the knowl-
edge resources should not only be traditional collections as
with digital libraries [2] and isolated content [3] but, despite
any challenges be accessible with scientiﬁc supercomputing
resources in order to create advanced information systems
and implement and improve workﬂows and recommended
operation [4], [5].
The created features of the knowledge resources presented
for the ﬁrst time in this paper contain new practical con-
cepts for information structures and object representations.
The objects and derivatives, described in this paper, can be
used with universal classiﬁcation and computation algorithms
for multi-disciplinary, dynamical knowledge discovery. This
paper presents examples from archaeology and geosciences
disciplines, resulting from practical case studies on structure
and workﬂow modularisation, within the GEXI collaborations
[6]. These are part of a multi-disciplinary knowledge struc-
ture. Further, the implementation of the knowledge objects is
suitable to be used very ﬂexibly with workﬂows on HEC re-
sources, e.g., with IICS components [7], [8]. Multi-disciplinary
knowledge resources are used to resemble and document of any
information available. The requirements for complexity can
become arbitrary high so that performant compute resources
have to be used for any more advanced applications. The
applicability for parallelisation of the contributing algorithms
with the complex knowledge trees has therefore been analysed
with the case studies. The motivation for investigating in the
efﬁciency and modularisation of the knowledge trees is the
increased potential for drastical improvements of the Quality
of Data (QoD) with the result matrix, which contributes to
advanced cognition within the multi-disciplinary context.
This paper is organised as follows. Sections II and III
introduce with sustainability and vitality of knowledge-based
architectures and main issues of complexity. Sections IV
and V discuss the complexity and present a practically used
classiﬁcation approach to the challenges. Sections VI and VII
describe the structure and challenges. Sections VIII and IX
introduce the new concept of object carousels, the discovery
of “missing links”, workﬂows, references chains, and computa-
tional demands. Sections X and XI discuss the lessons learned
and summarise conclusions and future work.
302
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II.
PREVIOUS WORK
Knowledge creation and knowledge management [9], [10]
have been studied for more than twenty years now. Anyhow,
so far long-term and sustainability issues have not really
been considered in practice, especially in universal multi-
disciplinary knowledge context. For example, there have been
numberless approaches on knowledge management consider-
ing small isolated ranges of classical disciplines or deﬁned
purposes but not with multi-disciplinary approaches. Knowl-
edge management (UDC:005.94 Knowledge management) is
obvious to be only one of the many aspects of knowledge
(UDC:0 Science and knowledge), from creation to organisation
and universal and long-term sustainable development and use
[11].
For all components presented in this paper, the main
information, data, and algorithms are provided by the LX
Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources [12], e.g., the volcanological
data, the meteorite crater data, and archaeological data.
Information about the following data sources has been
integrated and deployed with the knowledge resources for the
previous basic case studies and developments. So, the creation
of long-term knowledge resources decisively contributes to the
goal of a successful creation of long-term sustainable Inte-
grated Information and Computing System (IICS) components.
The referred “Leibniz” data (see the following references on
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, 1646–1716) has been included into
the workﬂow chains, e.g., creating historical associations with
the the content of archaeology and geosciences will otherwise
not be accessible. An example is the communication regarding
volcanoes, earthquakes, and caves in manuscripts and letters
or content of pictorial realia objects, which are not available
via search engines. From the Leibniz sources there is a rich
contribution for the result matrix on volcanism, volcanology,
and geology by various historical objects, references, and
sources, especially for volcanism, Vesuvius [13], as well as
earthquake related context [14], even from concept glossaries
[15], manuscript collections and catalogues [16], [17] as, e.g.,
[18], [19], or Leibniz related copperplates [20]. For example,
the “praehistoric unicorn” reconstruction [21], as well as mate-
rial on geological context has not been referenced before from
knowledge resources’ objects and is not freely and publicly
available as a direct reference, media or veriﬁcation [22].
Material in specialised collections, for example in the Eu-
ropean Cultural Heritage Online [23] would not be easily
accessible due to the type and context of the material.
Further data being publicly available can be incorporated in
any way under the premise that the data formats are accessible
and interfaces have been provided. An example is the CLIma-
tological database for the World’s OCeans (CLIWOC) [24],
a climatological database for the world’s oceans from 1750–
1850, containing digitized data from logbooks of pre 1854
voyages of English, Spanish, Dutch, and French ships.
III.
SUSTAINABILITY AND VITALITY
In the context of this research, the goal for “long-term”
means > 50 years. The long-term strategy has been discussed
in detail with previous implementations [25]. Data mining is
not only an analysis step of knowledge discovery in databases
based on informatics but much more general in data pools.
It is an inter-disciplinary as well as multi-disciplinary ﬁeld
of many sciences and computer science. It means discovering
patterns in data pools using methods implementing statistics,
classiﬁcation, artiﬁcial intelligence, learning and many more
based on knowledge resources. The process targets to extract
information from knowledge resources and gaining content and
context, e.g., based on structure and references, in order to
prepare for further use. Sustainable long-term strategies have
to combine operation, services, and especially the knowledge
resources [26], [1]. With the available systems components,
we have Resources Oriented Architectures (ROA), Services
Oriented Architectures (SOA), and “Knowledge Oriented Ar-
chitectures” (KOA) in addition [27]. For long-term operation,
all three must be obtained from the creation and operation.
Considering the entirety of aspects necessary for a successful
long-term change management with future information tech-
nology structures. Nevertheless, the KOA is the most important
complement as it contains the highest percentage of the overall
investments for the results and the data that may even not be
reproducible later on.
IV.
COMPLEX KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CASE
Central aspects for uses cases are the deﬁnition of knowl-
edge and the features of the knowledge resources.
A. Knowledge deﬁnition
In general, we can have an understanding, where knowledge
is: Knowledge is created from a subjective combination of
different attainments as there are intuition, experience, infor-
mation, education, decision, power of persuasion and so on,
which are selected, compared and balanced against each other,
which are transformed and interpreted.
The consequences are: Authentic knowledge therefore does
not exist, it always has to be enlived again. Knowledge must
not be confused with information or data which can be stored.
Knowledge cannot be stored nor can it simply exist, neither in
the Internet, nor in computers, databases, programs or books.
Therefore, the demands for knowledge resources in support of
the knowledge creation process are complex and multifold.
There is no universal deﬁnition of the term “knowledge”,
but UDC provides a good overview of the possible facets. For
this research the classiﬁcation references of UDC:0 (Science
and knowledge) deﬁne the view on universal knowledge.
B. Knowledge resources
The knowledge resources created can integrate any object.
These objects can be described with universal classiﬁcation,
handled with phonetic algorithms [28], [29], and can refer to
external resources. The structure of the knowledge objects has
to support the modularisation for application scenarios where
the workﬂow has to allow highly efﬁcient implementations
itself. Creating workﬂows based on the multi-disciplinary
knowledge matrices therefore requires highly performant re-
sources. The overall big data challenges, data intensive volume,
303
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

variability, velocity and for future scenarios especially data
vitality, meaning long-term documentation, usability, and ac-
cessibility can be handled in a scalable, modular way. Further,
the components created are considered to become objects of
sustainable knowledge resources, for long-term persistent big
data vitality of documentation, processing, analysis, and eval-
uation. The created solution for long-term use meets a number
of attributes, e.g., it should be generic, superior, adaptable,
ﬂexible, seminal sustainable. In summary, these combined vital
features are called “eonic”.
V.
KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CLASSIFICATION SUPPORT
The operated knowledge resources, based on the LX Foun-
dation Scientiﬁc Resources [28], incorporate UDC classiﬁca-
tion support for any discipline and purpose, e.g., for knowledge
discovery and workﬂows. Practical summarising excerpt sub-
sets for speciﬁc disciplines used with the case studies presented
here are given in Tables I, II, III, and IV. These subsets are
use with the knowledge resources on classiﬁcation regarding
archaeology, volcanoes, impact events, and sinkholes.
Table I.
ARCHAEOLOGY KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CLASSIFICATION.
UDC Code
Description
UDC:902
Archaeology
UDC:903
Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
UDC:904
Cultural remains of historical times
UDC:930.85
History of civilization. Cultural history
UDC:”63”
Archaeological, prehistoric, protohistoric periods, ages
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally.
UDC:(24)
Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
UDC:=14
Greek (Hellenic)
UDC:56
Palaeontology
UDC:55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC:711.42
Kinds of town, locality, settlement
UDC:720.2
Architecture techniques and methods
UDC:720.31
Prehistoric architecture
UDC:720.32
Ancient architecture
Table II.
VOLCANOES KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CLASSIFICATION.
UDC Code
Description
UDC:532
Fluid mechanics in general.
UDC:550.8
Applied geology and geophysics. . . .
UDC:550.93
Geochronology. Geological dating. . . .
UDC:551
General geology. Meteorology.
UDC:551.1
General structure of the Earth
UDC:551.2
Internal geodynamics (endogenous processes)
UDC:551.21
Vulcanicity. Vulcanism. Volcanoes. Eruptive phenomena.
UDC:551.23
Fumaroles. Solfataras. Geysers. Hot springs. Mofettes.
UDC:551.24
Geotectonics
UDC:551.26
Structural-formative zones and geological formations
UDC:551.4
Geomorphology. Study of the Earth’s physical forms
UDC:551.44
Speleology. Caves. Fissures. Underground waters
UDC:551.462
Submarine topography. Sea-ﬂoor features
UDC:551.5
Meteorology
UDC:551.588
Inﬂuence of environment on climate
UDC:551.7
Historical geology. Stratigraphy
UDC:551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC:552.2
General petrography. Classiﬁcation of rocks
UDC:552.6
Meteorites
UDC:631
Agriculture in general
UDC:631.4
Soil science. Pedology. Soil research
Tables III and IV show the excerpts used for basic impact
events and sinkholes classiﬁcation.
Table III.
IMPACT EVENTS KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CLASSIFICATION.
UDC Code
Description
UDC:5
Mathematics and natural sciences
UDC:500
Natural sciences
UDC:539
Physical nature of matter
UDC:539.63
Impact effects
UDC:539.8
Other physico-mechanical effects
Table IV.
SINKHOLES KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CLASSIFICATION.
UDC Code
Description
UDC:519.2
Probability. Mathematical Statistics
UDC:556.34
Groundwater ﬂow. Well hydraulics
UDC:624
Civil and structural engineering
UDC:624.151
Foundations. Foundation bed
UDC:699
Protection of and in buildings. Emergency measures
UDC:930.85
History of civilization. Cultural history
UDC:528.9
Cartography. Mapping (textual documents)
UDC:726.6
Cathedrals. Basilicas. Domes
The small unsorted excerpts of the knowledge resources
objects only refer to main UDC-based classes, which for this
part of the publication are taken from the Multilingual Univer-
sal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCC Publication No.
088) [30] released by the UDC Consortium under the Creative
Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license [31] (ﬁrst release
2009, subsequent update 2012).
As one of the elementary qualities, the LX Foundation
Knowledge Resources allow to refer to any kind of references,
therefore they also allow to refer to any kind of classiﬁcation.
If nothing special is mentioned then all the basic classiﬁcation
codes are used in an unaltered way. If any classiﬁcation refers
to a modiﬁed code then the authors of contributions have
to notice and document the modiﬁcations explicitely. The
classiﬁcation sets have been referred to and used with the
presented computation. UDC [32] currently provides around
70,000 entries in about 100 top classes, whereas the UDC Sum-
mary [33] provides a selection of more than 2,000 classes. The
multi-lingual support lists translations in about ﬁfty languages
[34], [35]. UDC classiﬁcations have been integrated with tens
of thousands of knowledge objects [29], which are a base for
each computation [34], [36], [11].
VI.
STRUCTURE RELATED SUPPORT
For the components shown here, the structuring capabilities
of the the LX Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources [12] have
been deployed. Mostly any external information and types of
objects can be integrated into this structure. The ﬁgures, object
entries, and photo media samples shown in the passages of the
following case study examples are computed from the content
of the LX Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources. Figures, object
entries, and photo media samples c⃝ C.-P. R¨uckemann, 2011,
2012, 2013, 2014).
Structuring information requires a hierarchical, multi-lingual
and already widely established classiﬁcation implementing
304
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

faceted analysis with enumerative scheme features, allowing
to build new classes by using relations and grouping. This is
synonym to the Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [37].
In multi-disciplinary object context a faceted classiﬁcation
does provide advantages over enumerative concepts. Com-
position/decomposition and search strategies do beneﬁt from
faceted analysis. It is comprehensive, and ﬂexible extendable.
A classiﬁcation like UDC is necessarily complex but it has
proved to be the only means being able to cope with classifying
and referring to any kind of object.
Copies of referred objects can be conserved and it enables
searchable relations, e.g., for comparable items regarding spe-
cial object item tags. The UDC enables to use references like
for object sources, may these be metadata, media, BIBTEX
sources or Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI) [38] as well as
for static sources. With interactive and dynamical use for
interdisciplinary research the referenced objects must be made
practically available in an generally accessible, reliable, and
persistant way. A DOI-like service with appropriate infras-
tructure for real life object services, certiﬁcation, policies
and standards in Quality of Service, for reliable long-term
availability object, persistency policies should be available.
Therefore, for any complex application, these services must
be free of costs for application users It would not be sufﬁcient
to build knowledge machines based only on time-limited
contracts with participating institutions. These requirements
include the infrastructure and operation so data availability
for this long-term purpose must not be depending on support
from data centers providing the physical data as a “single point
of storage”. Unstructured information, the data variety, is one
major complexity. For relational databases, a lot of players
providing offerings in this space go through the cycle of what
the needs are for structured data. As one can imagine, a lot of
that work is also starting for unstructured or semi-structured
data with Integrated Systems. Data access and transfer for
structured data, unstructured data, and semi structured data
may be different and may to a certain extend need different
solutions for being effective and economic [39].
The long-term objects must be able to contain the essential
knowledge, even as medium- and short-term objects cannot
be preserved or made persistent as, e.g., DOI (Digital Object
Identiﬁer), URN (Uniform Resource Name), URL (Uniform
Resource Locator), and PURL (Persistent Uniform Resource
Locator) will vanish and context and sources may fade away
as well as OS (Operating System) features used. Therefore, we
have to distinct between the real instance of a DOI and URL or
a context situation and a descriptive reference of these objects.
These descriptive references can contain as much information
and knowledge as possible (for example DOI, URL, context
description, sources).
VII.
COPING WITH THE CHALLENGES
A. Modular components for geoscientiﬁc applications
Complex geophysical exploration is an explicit big data
problem. Data locality and data movements are of essential
importance. Therefore, data handling does take longer a time
than the compute intervals. Due to the short intervals for
licensing and the high costs even the time efﬁciency has to be
increased. This can be supported by parallel techniques [40],
[41], [42]. In many multi-disciplinary cases, e.g., explicitely
shown with the case studies [7], [28], the more with growing
importance of evaluation processes, the task- and thread-
parallelity has to be increased both. The data in geosciences
and in associated natural sciences contains the most valuable
information because many of these natural processes change
in geological time intervals. Imaging for oil and gas is one
of the most demanding tasks in computational sciences. It
requires scale-out architectures, the processing and simulation
are computation intensive as well as data intensive. The data
provides long-term challenges on knowledge and resources to
researchers and industry because of expenses on data collection
and long-term usability.
B. Rising requirements on quantity and computation
As soon as even a selected subset of the available clas-
siﬁcation is integrated with a subset of detailed knowledge
resources, the requirements for computing and interfaces are
rising drastically. The increasing demands for advanced scien-
tiﬁc computing are resulting from the huge number of relations
within the knowledge resources as well as a consequence of
the workﬂows, dynamical interaction, presentation, and visu-
alisation of results. The conditions for the optimal computing
architecture are deﬁned by the application scenario, not by the
knowledge resources themselves.
C. Quality for Quantity
For the discovery of a result matrix from a large quantity
of data, additional high quality resources can be used for
improving the quality of results deduced. The premise is that
appropriate workﬂows and algorithms will be applied. The
high quality knowledge resources have been used as “Quality
for Quantity” (Q4Q), in order to build any additional missing
references in the quantity data. With these HEC and discovery
processes, big data means volume regarding storage, means
variability regarding workﬂow processes, means velocity re-
garding instances, and vitality regarding knowledge resources.
VIII.
OBJECT CAROUSELS
The organisation of the knowledge objects can be arbitrary
complex. Many cases can be described in a simpliﬁed way like
a mindmap, which has been used for introducing a new sym-
bolic representation named “object carousels”. The knowledge
objects build a kind of dynamical molecules. These molecules
have connectors and references. These connectors can connect
with other knowledge objects by computing references from
any number of directions. The process reminds of rotating
branches of trees, rings, and multi-dimensional objects for
ﬁnding pluggable connections. The creation of object carousels
does have the beneﬁt, that knowledge discovery workﬂows can
be implemented very scalable, using various algorithms for
connecting trees. For example, full text references can be used
between any carousels in order to compute a result matrix.
305
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Object mapping
The mapping in Figure 1 shows an excerpt for the vol-
canology context on terrestrial volcanism calculated from the
knowledge resources. These allow to calculate relations via
ﬂexible, user-deﬁned algorithms.
Volcanism
Volcano
Campi
Flegrei
Samples
Vesuvius
Samples
La
Soufri`ere
Samples
Mt. Scenery
Samples
Plate tectonics
Lava
1st level:
Volcano
1st level: Plate tectonics
2nd level: Mt. Scenery
3rd level:
Samples
(Realia)
Figure 1.
Object carousel for terrestrial “volcanism” context with subset of
computed volcano references and examples of levels object relations.
The ﬁgure shows an excerpt of the direct relations by quality
of relations and quality of objects. The colours visualise object
groups or attributes within each ﬁgure. Any object or attribute
can dock-in at any placed deﬁned by the workﬂows, not
depending on the grouping. Nevertheless, the decision within
the workﬂow maybe assisted by the group information. The
knowledge resources can contain objects and relations as well
as classiﬁcation entries. The case study example being the base
for illustrating the different aspects in all the next sections
follows a discovery path (3D), starting discovery on object
and realia references in the volcanology dimension.
B. Information and object usage
In a non-promoted environment, a knowledge search engine
showed signiﬁcant requirements with up to over 500,000
application- and several million object-requests per day. The
study on object usage from international public interest groups
done in a time interval from 1994 to 2012 [6] revealed com-
parable large numbers of accesses and complexity. The object
mapping is a basic part, whereas the algorithmic workﬂow
for improving the quality can be as expendable as using every
information available with each step recursively and iteratively.
The computation share can increase to hours per discovery
instance but computation can be done for any number of
carousels in parallel. The KOA opens ﬂexible support for task
and process parallelity for using objects and object groups or
clusters.
C. Case study views
Suitable views for volcanoes are: Type (of volcano, coarse
categories), date on timeline, size (height). For craters respec-
tive views are: Type (of crater, fragmentary), date on timeline,
size (diameter). An object carousel generated for volcano
types, shows the knowledge resources groups (Figure 2).
Volcano
type
Complex
volcano
Compound
volcano
Somma
volcano
Submarine
volcano
Subglacial
volcano
Unspeciﬁed
type
Strato
volcano
Shield
volcano
Explosion
crater
Caldera
Tuff cone
Scoria
cone
Pyroclastic
cone
Cinder
cone
Lava dome
Volcanic
ﬁeld
Hydroth.
ﬁeld
Fumarole
ﬁeld
Maar
Fissure
vent
Figure 2.
Object carousel for volcano and type references computed for
terrestrial volcanism, providing volcano type references.
An object carousel generated for impact craters, shows the
different types present in the knowledge resources groups and
their crater categories (Figure 3).
Impact
crater type
Micro
crater
Simple
crater
Complex
crater
Elongate
crater
Multi-ring
basin
Figure 3.
Object carousel computed for impact crater categories.
Criteria for impact crater classiﬁcation are:
•
Size of the impacting object,
•
Speed of the impacting object,
•
Material of the impacting object,
306
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

•
Composition and structure of the target rock,
•
Angle that the impacting object hits the target,
•
Gravity of the target object respective planet,
•
Porosity and other attributes of the impacting object,
•
Age of the impact,
•
Size of the impact,
•
Structure of the crater.
Impact crater indicators, for example:
•
Planar fractures in quartz,
•
Shocked quartz,
•
Glass fragments.
If approaching from the “catastrophe” view it has shown
that the most prominent relation is the “size”. This mostly
correlates with “diameter” and still mapping and timelining
will come natural.
A comparable object carousel for impact crater types and
geological period references is provided in Figure 4.
Object type
Quarternary
Tertiary
Cretacious
Jurassic
Trias
Permian
Carbon
Devonian
Silurium
Ordovicium
Cambrium
Precambrium
Figure 4.
Object carousel object type for computed period references
(terrestrial volcanoes, impact craters, and geological processes).
An evaluation of the association that users have, showed
that the criteria “date” and “location” are most prominent with
objects if the workﬂow approaches from the “surface (of the
earth)” view. Therefore, mapping and timelining will be the
natural result.
D. Improving quality within the workﬂow
The resources, workﬂow, and classiﬁcation are essential
for a high level of usability quality of results. The elaborate
workﬂow process for improving the quality of results when
calculating a result matrix from a knowledge base is:
a)
Calculate associator attributes and classes,
b)
Compute on a base with large numbers of objects,
c)
Evaluate detailed classiﬁcation information,
d)
Compute for a reduction of numbers of objects,
e)
Create suggestions and recommendations.
The ﬁrst computation block (b) is needed for considering more
objects when applying the further steps afterwards. Here, the
classiﬁcation is essential for improving the quality for the
respective selection process. The second computation block
(d) is necessary for improving a selection process for the
target audience or services. The selection processes can be
signiﬁcantly supported by high quality knowledge resources
(Q4Q), e.g., via the authored, classiﬁed, and audited content,
with regular expression search, and phonetical algorithms.
E. Improving coverage: Dark data
In analogy to “dark matter” and “dark energy”, there exists
“dark information” and to an uncertain extent an unknown
driving force in knowledge creation, even building “dark
service” provided via “dark resources”. Those information re-
sources are not wider accessible and it is not known where the
intention of gathering and creation. Anyway, this information
must be considered for any holistic long-term concept as it
provides an important factor for the overall knowledge and
will stay in existance despite of any development. With the
concept of long-term knowledge resources the information
has been integrated in order to extend the base for any
knowledge discovery. Considered methods for integration of
resources are, e.g., references, description or caches. This
further includes seamless updating of information, licensing
of resources, dynamical use of data as well as provisioning of
deﬁned quality and reliability for sources and complements.
IX.
DISCOVERY OF MISSING LINKS
From the disciplines of humanities and archaeology, the
directed tree spanning from settlements to used materials
will show up with a practically deﬁned depth. On the other
hand, starting from natural sciences a directed tree spanning
to materials associated with processes will deliver a natural
sciences path. Along with the different paths, the genetic
connectors of both carousels will show up with links from
both directions. The connecting links, or short “connections”
from the directed search do open new associations that can be
used to discover the overall knowledge much deeper with new
facets and quality, which provide multi-disciplinary links that
have been missing in non-genetic discovery.
In general, any kind of tree path can be generated from
the knowledge resources using a workﬂow and any number
of carousels can be discovered for connections. The follow-
ing example shows a simple two-carousel case (Figure 5).
Computing the object carousels connections is shown for a
historical city carousel and an environment object carousel.
The trees show a subset of computed references computed by
the workﬂow within the knowledge resources. The depth of the
trees may by different for the computation. The connections are
considered as soon as they lead to a deﬁned conformity. In that
case, deﬁned conformity can mean comparable or identical.
The example shows two trees, one from archaeology and one
307
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

from natural sciences disciplines. For both, at a certain branch
leading to object referring to stone material, which is shown
by the highlighted red bullets.
A. Computing connections on modular objects
Figure 5 shows the principle used for computing connections
with object carousels. It depicts one ﬁtting branch, within
archaeology and geosciences associated objects. Starting
with
the
objects
Historical City
and
Environment
(identiﬁed by large golden bullets) and the linking objects
“stone” the computed carousels show trees with a subset
of references. The workﬂow attributes have been choosen
to provide no tree depth restriction for computation. The
two ﬁtting connection lines within the object carousels
of this example are highlighted in a three-dimensional
representation: Roman : Pompeji : Napoli : Architecture
: Volcanic stone
and
Volcanology : Catastrophe :
: Volcanic stone. In the sample workﬂow, the carousel
connections are calculated via non-explicit references of
comparable objects (red objects) from knowledge resources
within trees. In addition, the red circle does mark those
objects at the same depth level, including the ﬁtting object
term for historical city and environment Volcanic stone.
The excerpt of associated multi-disciplinary branch level
objects are Limestone, Impact feature, and Climate
change.The method for creation of non-explicit references
can be deﬁned in the workﬂow. Here, full text mining
and evaluation (red objects) has been used. For derivated
associations additional objects can be computed and extracted
in every branch as well as on all levels.
B. Connecting knowledge
Objects can be connected by various attributes. These may
be attributes associated with content as well as with context.
For example, relations for a volcano object can be connected
and triggered by a large variety of attributes. Table V shows
an excerpt of attributes and examples.
Table V.
ATTRIBUTES LINKING AND TRIGGERING VOLCANO OBJECTS
AND SELECTED EXAMPLES (EXCERPT).
Attribute
Example in Archaeology / Geosciences
Time
Events on timeline
Location
Volcano-impact-settlement locations
Physics
Earthquakes
Chemistry
Volcanic SO2 ejection
Geology
Earth crust, petrography
Catastrophes
Volcanic eruptions, Tsunamis
Etymology
Phlegra, Vesuvius
Cults, religions
Volcano gods
Artefacts
Archaeological objects, “Pompeji” events
Historic events
Volcano, climate, economy, revolution
Relations can refer to any multi-disciplinary topic, building
results from combination of information and generation of new
objects and references, e.g., visualisations and views.
Selecting “catastrophe” categorised objects from the knowl-
edge resources results in a matrix including groups of key-
words, for example:
1)
Meteorite, impact, Yucatan, Mexico,
dinosaurs, extinct, Cretaceous, CT
boundary, catastrophe.
2)
Volcano, eruption, Santorini, Thera,
crete, Minoan civilisation, culture,
Mycenae, culture, fleet, volcanic
ash, vanish, rise, historical city,
catastrophe.
3)
Volcano, Vesuvius, Campi Flegrei,
phlegra, scene of fire, Pompeji,
Herculaneum, volcanic ash, lapilli,
catastrophe.
4)
Solfatara, volcano, Vesuvius, Campi
Flegrei, phlegra, scene of fire, Pompeji,
Herculaneum, volcanic ash, lapilli,
catastrophe.
For example, following an etymological tree leads from ‘Vesu-
vius — Campi Flegrei’ to “phlegra” greek for ‘scene of
ﬁre’. The above keyword groups resolve to object entries, for
example
1)
Chicxulub,
2)
Thera, Santorini,
3)
Vesuvius, Pompeji,
4)
Solfatara.
. These objects refer to media samples as shown with some
examples for Vesuvius, Pompeji, and Solfatara.
The following excerpt contains some structure, UDC clas-
siﬁcation, keywords, references, and satellite image reference.
The references for the geopositioning are created via classi-
ﬁcation and can be used for any purpose. Listing 1 shows
an excerpt of an LX Resources object entry [43], “Vesuvius”
volcano.
1
Vesuvius [Volcanology, Geology, Archaeology]:
2
(lat.) Mons Vesuvius.
3
(ital.) Vesuvio.
4
(deutsch.) Vesuv.
5
Volcano, Gulf of Naples, Italy.
6
Complex volcano (compound volcano).
7
Stratovolcano, large cone (Gran Cono).
8
Volcano Type: Somma volcano,
9
VNUM: 0101-02=,
10
Summit Elevation: 1281\UD{m}.
11
The volcanic activity in the region is observed
by the Oservatorio
12
Vesuviano. The Vesuvius area has been declared a
national park on
13
\isodate{1995}{06}{05}. The most known antique
settlements at the
14
Vesuvius are Pompeji and Herculaneum.
15
Syn.: Vesaevus, Vesevus, Vesbius, Vesvius
16
s. volcano, super volcano, compound volcano
17
s. also Pompeji, Herculaneum, seismology
18
compare La Soufri`ere, Mt. Scenery, Soufriere
19
%%IML: UDC
:[911.2+55]:[57+930.85]:[902]"63"(4+23+24)
=12=14
20
%%IML: GoogleMapsLocation: http://maps.google.de
/maps?hl=de&gl=de&vpsrc=0&ie=UTF8&ll
=40.821961,14.428868&spn=0.018804,0.028238&t=h&
z=15
Listing 1.
Knowledge resources – object entry “Vesuvius” volcano.
308
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Volcanology contexti
Non-explicit references
Full text mining and evaluation:
Classiﬁcation, keywords, synonyms, phonetic algorithms,
homophones, category lists, . . .
Historical City
Greek
Antipolis
Antibes
Athens
Athens
. . .
Roman
Altinum
Altino
Venice
Pompeji
Napoli
Pottery
Archit.
Volcanic
stone
Limestone
Geology
. . .
. . .
Environment
Geophysics
Catastrophe
Impact
feature
Volcanology
Catastrophe
Volcanic
stone
Climatology
Catastrophe
Climate
change
Figure 5.
Computing object carousel connections: Historical city and environment object carousels showing trees with a subset of computed references. In this
sample workﬂow the carousel links are calculated via non-explicit references of comparable objects (red) from knowledge resources within trees.
The example contains a reference and VNUM for the Vesu-
vius volcano, various secondary objects, UDC classiﬁcation,
satellite image reference and, e.g., refers to “Soufriere”, “La
Soufri`ere”, and “Mt. Scenery”.
Listing 2 lists an entry excerpt for realia material associated
with the Vesuvius volcano.
1
Object:
Volcanic material.
2
Object-Type:
Realia object.
3
Object-Location:
Vesuvius, Italy.
4
Object-FindDate:
2013-10-00
5
Object-Discoverer:
Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Hannover,
Germany.
6
Object-Photo:
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann, Minden,
Germany.
7
Object-Relocation:
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann, Minden,
Germany.
8
%%IML: media: ... img_2402.jpg
9
%%IML: media: ... img_3823.jpg
10
%%IML: media: ... img_3824.jpg
11
%%IML: UDC-Object:[551.21+55]:[911.2](37+4+23)=12
12
%%IML: UDC-Relocation:069.51+(430)+(23)
13
%%IML: cite: YES 20130000 {LXK:High End Computing;
Knowledge resources; Objects; Archaeology; Geosciences;
Vesuvius; Pompeji} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Rueckemann:2013:Computing_Objects
14
%%IML: cite: YES 20140000 {LXK:Nature; History; Napoli;
Vesuvius; Pompeji} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Gersbeck:2014:Vesuvius
Listing 2.
Knowledge resources – Entries for Vesuvius material.
Besides the UDC object and relocation data the excerpt carries
the media references and citations and originating sources,
researchers, and relocation for the realia objects.
Figure 6 illustrates the computed objects (Topicview), here
the latest available volcanic samples for Vesuvius, after pro-
cessing showing the variety of material from the Vesuvius
volcano.
Figure 6.
Topicview result matrix – Vesuvius realia objects (excerpt): Range
of volcanic ashes and lapilli (Vesuvius, 2013).
Any of these objects being part of the resulting matrix for a
request, e.g., photos for object entries as well as media data for
physically available samples, have been found via references
and UDC from the knowledge base (UDC:551.21. . .). The
realia references for the objects refer to a collection where the
samples are stored. Further analysis for the samples is available
via the knowledge resources.
Figure 7 illustrates the computed objects (Topicview) of
realia objects associated with “Vesuvius”.
Figure 7.
Topicview result matrix – “Vesuvius” associated realia objects
(excerpt, from left to right): Solfatara sample (2013), Pompeji lapilli (2013),
Pompeji plaster sample (2013).
309
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The selection criteria are “archaeology, artefacts, cultural re-
mains of historical times, architecture techniques and methods,
ancient architecture” (UDC:902, UDC:903.2, UDC:904,
UDC:720.2, UDC:720.32). The associated views show a
sample from the Solfatara (sample front side and sample rear
side) near Vesuvius and a sample of a Pompeji plaster (Pompeji
style I, incrustation style).
Figure 8 illustrates a speciﬁc selection (Topicview) of “Vesu-
vius” realia objects.
Figure 8.
Topicview result matrix – “Vesuvius” and associated realia objects
with measure (excerpt, from left to right): Vesuvius lapilli (2013), Solfatara
sample (2013), Pompeji plaster sample (2013).
The associated views show a sample from the Solfatara
(sample front side and sample rear side) near Vesuvius and
a sample of a Pompeji plaster (Pompeji style I, incrustation
style). The media samples shown are part of comprehensive
classiﬁed object entry descriptions and the citations refer to
[44]. Respective object entries have been shown and discussed
in detail in the context of the component implementations [25].
C. Generation and combination of knowledge
The following visualisations paradigmatically illustrate re-
sults from the compute requests based on the content of
the implemented content. An on-location attribute has been
choosen for the relations in order to compute a distribution map
for volcanological features using the lxlocation workﬂow.
The location attribute is suitable for referring to an unlimited
number of further multi-disciplinary information in this case.
A sample distribution of classiﬁed terrestrial volcanological
features is depicted in Figure 9.
Figure 9.
Volcanomap – worldmap for classiﬁed volcanological features.
The map is computed from the related object context con-
tained in a volcanological features research database of the
knowledge resources. The volcanological features are classiﬁed
and several classiﬁcation groups have been choosen for the
result. The map shows the present situation according to the
available volcanological data. The associated sample distribu-
tion of terrestrial impact features (meteorite) is depicted in
Figure 10.
Figure 10.
Impactmap – worldmap for impact features (meteorite).
The map is computed from the related object context
(lxlocation workﬂow) contained in a meteorite impacts
features research database of the knowledge resources.
The visualisations are based on the results gathered in the
knowledge resources, several thousands of objects from re-
search and documentation, with several ten thousand attributes
and references. It is possible to combine any information, for
example, computing a map animation varying in time, showing
the development of volcanological or impact features.
D. Case lessons learned
•
Impact features have been reduced by morphological
processes and are mostly only available above sea-level.
•
Volcanic features are well known above and below sea-
level and are more often long-term processes.
•
Known impact features show a concentration in highly
populated and industrialised areas.
•
Both impact and volcanological features are related to
social and archaeological ﬁndings.
•
Both impact and volcanological features are publicly
known.
•
Compared with impacts and volcanological features,
archaeological sites and results are not known to the
same amount in order to protect the sites.
E. Classiﬁcation groups
Inserting an additional object classiﬁcation can extend the
range of objects and disciplines. Two small examples from the
context of volcanology and meteorites will show the effect on
terrestrial to extra-terrestrial result matrices.
Including non-terrestrial volcanism will further lead to spe-
cial object carousels. The references on “classiﬁcation” of
310
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

volcanological features and distribution also explicitely leads
to extraterrestrial volcanism [45]. Therefore, volcanological
features on Venus from Magellan data provided from this
source holds additional objects: Shield ﬁelds, intermediate vol-
canoes, large volcanoes, calderas, coronae, arachnoids, novae,
lava ﬂoods, lava channels. Besides the above features, the
volcanological and magmatic features further create references
to: Vents, ﬁelds, intermediate volcanoes, steep-sided domes,
tadpoles, sinuous channels, lava ﬂows, amoeboids, festoons,
and so on.
Comparable, including non-terrestrial meteorites will further
lead to special object carousels, e.g., delivering data for craters
on Moon and Mars.
F. Reference chains and historical knowledge
It is well known that publication references and citations
are important. Besides publications, why are secondary and
tertiary references on knowledge objects important? Secondary
and tertiary references are as well a reliable and stable means
of documentation and as well a dynamical means of optimising
knowledge discovery workﬂows.
In this context, secondary references are links and direct
references to other objects. Tertiary references are explicit or
non explicit references within sets of objects.
These references are stable because they document a certain
state within space and time. At the same time these references
have dynamical features because their content and context can
be used dynamically with workﬂows as well as they can refer
to dynamically handled content and context.
A practical example workﬂow using the information on
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) in different context
shows how to integrate certain historical knowledge with the
knowledge resources on natural sciences in order to extend
the range of discovery. The following is not a simple ‘search
example’ but a successful integration of valuable but weakly
structured knowledge data and information into advanced
knowledge resources. The results are advanced discovery and
research facilities.
Data referring to the “Leibniz archives” [46] has been used
for extending the reference chain. The archives are a valuable
source of information, which can be used to extend workﬂows
based on knowledge resources in the future. The result matrix
for “Saturn” has been computed via the workﬂow chain
including the “Leibniz” objects including link and keyword
context for creating intermediate result matrices. This includes
references from concept glossaries [15] with transcriptions and
scans as well as the LeibnizCentral manuscript collections and
catalogues [17].
In this example, the “Saturn Rings”, Leibniz, and early
discoverers and scientists have up to now not been interlinked
by any other available knowledge resource or referenced by
any published documentation. The following methodology has
been used for creating a result matrix. Links have been created
by selecting the maximum time range of Leibniz dates and
possible research topics and searching for research topics of
other researchers in that time interval.
An algorithm supports UDC classiﬁcation, building groups
of pseudonyms, translations, corrections, and phonetic support
based on computed LX Soundex codes for name selection used
in context with Leibniz.
The result matrix contains references and associations to
topics and researchers at the time of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
who were involved or engaged in research on comparable or
even different topics. This allows to suggest which topics have
been present and Leibniz may have been recognised or even
which he might not have known of. Listing 3 shows an excerpt
from the keyword context data of a ‘Leibniz’-object “Saturn”.
1
...
2
link-Context: LNK :: http://www.uni-muenster.de/Leibniz/
DatenII2/II2_B.pdf
3
keyword-Context: KYW :: planetae (Planeten), Venus
4
...
5
link-Context: LNK :: http://www.uni-muenster.de/Leibniz/
DatenII2/II2_B.pdf
6
keyword-Context: KYW :: planetae (Planeten), Saturn
7
...
8
link-Context: LNK :: http://www.uni-muenster.de/Leibniz/
DatenII3/II3_B.pdf
9
keyword-Context: KYW :: planetae (Planeten), Saturn
10
...
11
link-Context: LNK :: http://www.bbaw.de/bbaw/Forschung/
Forschungsprojekte/leibniz_potsdam/bilder/IV6text.pdf
12
link-Context: LNK :: http://www.nlb-hannover.de/Leibniz/
Leibnizarchiv/Veroeffentlichungen/III7A.pdf
13
keyword-Context: KYW :: Saturn, Ring
14
...
Listing 3.
Keyword context data from ‘Leibniz’-object “Saturn” (excerpt).
The references resolve to the secondary data at the TELOTA
service [47], using the terms “Saturn” [48] and “Planet” [49].
The links to the references are provided by different institution
or respective domains [50], [51], [52]. The II3_B link fails as
this information is not available, which is true for more than
20 other links, too, referring to this resource from this request.
Even the other references from this service require additional
support as they differ essentially regarding their bibliographic
data, which is missing in some cases, as well as their scheme
is not consistent.
Anyhow, with the correction, classiﬁcation, and context
support of the knowledge resources an interesting example,
which has been resolved from the LX Foundation Scientiﬁc
Resources is the discovery of the separation of the rings of
the planet Saturn, for which sources exist documenting that
the separation has been detected and recognised by Guiseppe
Campani in the year 1664, about ten years before it has been
published by Giovanni Domenico Cassini.
Listing 4 shows an excerpt of a secondary citation reference
set used with UDC classiﬁed knowledge objects.
1
Saturn
[Astronomie, ...]:
2
Sixth planet from the sun, a gas
giant or Jovian planet.
3
Saturns’ most prominent feature is
the Saturn ring system.
4
Guiseppe Campani detected and
recognised the separation of the Saturn rings in the
year \isodate{1664}{}{}.
5
%%IML: cite: NO
16640000 {
LXK:Saturn; Saturn ring system; solar system; planets;
discovery} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Campani:1664:Saturn
6
%%IML: cite: NO
20070000 {
LXK:Saturn; Saturn ring system; solar system; planets;
discovery} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Oberschelp:2007:Campani
311
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

7
%%IML: cite: NO
20110000 {
LXK:Saturn; Saturn ring system; solar system; planets;
discovery} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Oberschelp:2011:Campani
8
Giovanni Domenico Cassini later
described the separation of the Saturn rings.
9
%%IML: cite: NO
16740000 {
LXK:Saturn; Saturn ring system; solar system; planets;
description} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Cassini:1674:Saturn
10
%%IML: cite: NO
20070000 {
LXK:Saturn; Saturn ring system; solar system; planets;
description} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Oberschelp:2007:Campani
11
%%IML: cite: NO
20110000 {
LXK:Saturn; Saturn ring system; solar system; planets;
description} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Oberschelp:2011:Campani
Listing 4.
Secondary citation reference set excerpt used with the UDC
classiﬁed knowledge object “Saturn” (LX resources).
The secondary references from the knowledge resources refer
to bibliographic objects, which resolve to [53] and [54]. From
these references the tertiary references, in this case non-explicit
references, refer to the knowledge resources documentation on
Guiseppe Campani.
As shown, using the available features, e.g., the context
categorisation from the knowledge resources it is possible to
catch this information and to drastically increase the spec-
trum of gathering information and complementing the result
matrix. The workﬂows and algorithms presented here can be
used in order to overcome missing links in between different
information pools and complement knowledge resources and
workﬂows.
For a sustainable use of external “secondary” information
any localisation and references data have to be long-term or
medium-term persistent.
Currently, at least medium-term available methods have
to be provided for consistent and reliable resources. This
includes that the secondary data providers have to support at
least concepts like URN (Uniform Resource Name), PURL
(Persistent Uniform Resource Locator), DOI (Digital Object
Identiﬁer) instead of pure URL (Uniform Resource Locator).
In addition, for enabling citations and references, biblio-
graphical data must be explicitly available as such with each
reference. For long-term use this data it must be automatable,
machine readable, and documented.
The current structure of the Leibniz archives’ resources
is explicitly not suitable for automated citation, referencing,
and reuse. The sources themselves are currently distributed at
several hosting institutions (e.g., Berlin, Hannover, G¨ottingen,
M¨unster). For cases like these, it is recommended to implement
a sustainable structure consistently over all the participated
sources and to provide persistent references. Failures on the
generated or provides references as shown above should be
avoided in any case. All these aspects are issues, which should
be seriously worked on by the Leibniz archives in order to
create a sustainable future solution.
G. Flexible support for HEC and dynamical discovery
The KOA architecture is based on a ﬂexible documentation
and development architecture [29] and integrated with the
case study implementations based on the Collaboration house
framework for disciplines, services, and resources [28]. For
the various HEC scenarios a ﬂexible, scalable, and dynamical
network solution, e.g., Software Deﬁned Networks (SDN) is
highly recommendable [55]. Building the tree paths as well as
the discovery of connections in the carousels can be done in
parallel, comparable to a modelling process. This way, while
computing one tree it is possible to follow connections into
other disciplines’ branches interesting for a workﬂow. The task
parallel processes can be computed to look ahead, dynamically
discovering ﬁtting relations. On the other hand, it is possible to
compute multiple trees and create intermediate result matrices,
which can be used for building multi-disciplinary results from
a large number of trees.
H. Dynamical referencing
Referring objects for publicly available information can
be integrated by dynamically building associations from the
knowledge resources as has currently been done with search
engine content, e.g., results from Google or other dynamical
sources. Table VI shows the results of a Google search [56]
done for the keywords “volcano, udc, classiﬁcation”. The
results contain the UDC classiﬁcation found with the request
as well as the terms associated with this in the text.
Table VI.
VOLCANO RESULTS FROM PUBLICLY AVAILABLE
INFORMATION, GOOGLE SEARCH, STATUS OF JANUARY 2013 (EXCERPT).
UDC Classiﬁcation
In-text Terms
551.442(437.6)
Volcano, phreatic
631.4
Volcano
553.405
Uranium, deposit, volcano
551.31:551.44(532)
Volcano
(*764)
Volcano
(*7)
Volcano
Table VII shows the results of a Google search done for the
keywords “cenote, udc, classiﬁcation”.
Table VII.
CENOTE RESULTS FROM PUBLICLY AVAILABLE
INFORMATION, GOOGLE SEARCH, STATUS OF JANUARY 2013 (EXCERPT).
UDC Classiﬁcation
In-text Terms
930.85(726.6) 551.435.8:528.9
Sinkhole cenote maya
551.44
Doline, sinkhole
556.34:519.216
Sinkhole, drainage
551.435.82(234.41)
Sinkhole, collapse
624.153.6:699.8:551.448
Sinkhole, collapse
551.44(450.75)
Karst, sinkhole, collapse
551.44(045)=20
Groundwater, surfacewater
551.44:001.4
Grotte, H¨ohle
551.44(450.75)
Karst, Apulia
551.44(437.2)
Geology, karst
All documents found from public external sources in this
context have been identiﬁed to contain academical and sci-
entiﬁc content. Even as this example is intended to provide
a lower depth of knowledge mapping than available in spe-
cialised knowledge resources, it provides an excellent spectrum
of related information for the respective disciplines. There
312
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

should be emphasis on the fact that this kind of classiﬁcation
on material in manually added to the content by the creator.
After considering material of this kind for a knowledge dis-
covery process an automated classiﬁcation can be computed
from the content independently by any service. Both types of
classiﬁcation can contribute in order to obtain a case-optimised
result matrix at any step within the discovery workﬂow.
I.
Workﬂow and computation demands
Table VIII shows the resulting computation times (wall
clock) for straight and broadened application qualities. per
workﬂow instance and request. Requests are restricted to
three initial terms. Straight means calculating the result ma-
trix directly from the plain data available, including ranking.
Broadened means using full text, references, and available
secondary context information, with a wide spectrum of topics.
It is possible to ﬂexibly support the knowledge discovery
workﬂow by any number and kind of algorithms and com-
munication. In this case classiﬁcation, keywords, synonyms,
phonetic algorithms, homophones, and category lists have been
used.
Table VIII.
STRAIGHT AND BROADENED (SERIAL) APPLICATION
QUALITIES AND COMPUTATION TIMES PER WORKFLOW INSTANCE AND
REQUEST (RESTRICTED TO THREE INITIAL TERMS).
Item
Straight
Broadened
Number of terms (restricted for demo.)
3
3
Comparisons
≈ 90, 000
≈ 1, 090, 000
Selection processes
1,540
16,700
Intermediate results
420
5,100
Final results (selected top 10)
10
10
Classiﬁcation evaluation time share
3 s
30 s
Keyword extraction time share
2 s
4 s
Fulltext support time share
4 s
22 s
Reference support time share
1 s
3 s
Phonetic support time share
3 s
8 s
Instance computation time
3 s
120 s
The example demonstrates the principle and tendency. Start-
ing a single workﬂow instance with a small number of 3 object
terms (Figure 5), this statistically results in:
a)
Straight: Retrieval followed by 90,000 comparisons,
delivers 30,000 results, ranked to create a top 10.
b)
Broadened: This requires an additional 1 million com-
parisons per term and some 10,000 comparisons on more
than one term as well as on subterms, it delivers 90,000
results, which are ranked to create a top 10.
In an average of terms, b) results in 3 new top terms better
reﬂecting the context, which means a signiﬁcant improvement
of the quality of the result matrix. As Table VIII shows, when
improving the quality, the compute time increases from about
3 seconds to 2 minutes. Over the time the resource usage
increases by about a factor of 50. Due to the structure of the
compute algorithms a part of the workﬂow processes can be
done in parallel before the ﬁnal result matrix is created. Other
advanced workﬂow processes, e.g., those processes where all
the intermediate results must be available before any decision
on the next step can be done, have to be chained for the
purpose of improving the quality. With parallel processing in
the above example the overall time can be reduced to about 30 s
on the same architecture if an increased number of resources
is available. Increasing the number of comparisons by adding
further sources for improving the quality of results increases
the requirements on resources more than linear referring to the
compute time. This is going ahead with a smaller amount of
numerical improvement for the top results. The knowledge re-
sources fully support this procedure. The broadened serial and
task parallel (dual-core processors) application qualities per
workﬂow instance and request are summarised in Table IX.
Table IX.
BROADENED SERIAL AND PARALLEL APPLICATION
QUALITIES PER WORKFLOW INSTANCE AND REQUEST (AS ABOVE).
Workﬂow
Broadened
Broadened
Item
Serial
Parallel
Number of terms (restricted for demo.)
3
3
Parallel resources (nodes)
1
10
Instance computation time
120 s
20 s
The resulting computation times per instance can be efﬁ-
ciently reduced exploiting parallelity of resources. Modular-
ising the knowledge resources into dynamical entity groups
of objects is very efﬁcient for a large number of requests
and resources available. This is especially interesting for any
wider economical and practical interactive use. The higher the
complexity of the single, even non-linear, workﬂow is, the less
efﬁcient are todays resources architectures.
X.
EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
The results from the work and case studies presented in
this paper have shown that for a higher understanding of the
contributions the various implementations cannot be separated
but should be considered complementary. The implemented
. . .
concepts and structures correspond with the methodol-
ogy and systematics.
. . .
content presents the results achieved by precise sciences
and their application.
. . .
means for documentation, discovery, and computation
are done exemplarily for the knowledge resources.
. . .
universal classiﬁcation views and references show the
logical integration.
. . .
components show the ﬂexibility and extendability.
. . .
case studies show the practical use.
The long-term multi-disciplinary focus has been sustainabil-
ity, expenses and beneﬁts, and complementary results.
A. Sustainability
Regarding the sustainability of the knowledge resources
support it has been practical to consider three main aspects
for creating sustainable KOA architectures.
1)
Scalability and efﬁciency: The workﬂow process can
be modularised and therefore can be implemented as
scalable and parallelised algorithms.
313
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2)
Discovery
and
content:
Big
amounts
of
multi-
disciplinary information will always have to consider
inhomogeneous groups of information. With the de-
scribed method the barrier between the inhomogeneous
content, for example, between different disciplines can
be overcome. The knowledge resources support struc-
turing and modularising the workﬂows to a deﬁned
level. Any references that might not already exist ex-
plicitely in the knowledge resources can be suggested
by a non-tree link. An example is, computing full text
comparisons between the carousels from the available
plain content of the knowledge resources.
3)
Universal
multi-disciplinarity:
The
knowledge
re-
sources allow any number of dimensional space. Be-
sides that, the knowledge resources allow to use multi-
disciplinary clustering of objects, e.g., clustering of
stones for an archaeological view as well as for a
petrographical view.
These features can be used for a ﬂexible dynamically guided
discovery. Besides the beneﬁts of very ﬂexible classiﬁcation
support, e.g., via UDC, expenses are that the creation and
operation do require intensive work.
B. Expenses and beneﬁts
Classiﬁcation support, e.g., via UDC, does require intensive
work, is expensive, and very much proﬁts from professional
experiences. The application of UDC with complex knowledge
needs ﬂexibility of the resources as wells as a ﬂexible handling
in extendability. The challenges with the distributed use of
UDC are, e.g., the use of private catalogues, like external
codes or author abbreviations. In addition, the sustainability
of knowledge objects will beneﬁt from the use of methods
like facetted versioning, universal dates (e.g., ISO dates), and
georeferencing.
C. Complementary results
With the presented object carousels an undeﬁned number of
practical workﬂows can be created on the knowledge resources.
Examples, which have been investigated for gathering com-
plementary results are regular expression and string search,
classiﬁcation search (UDC), keyword search, sort support
search, references search or phonetic search (Soundex).
D. Information and classiﬁcation
Text information and classiﬁcation information are comple-
mentary. This is important for knowledge resources as well
a for application scenarios, e.g., search algorithms. Using
classiﬁcation supported search algorithms can improve the
result drastically. The quality of results improves from below
ﬁve percent to up to over ninety percent.
XI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Structuring and classiﬁcation with long-term knowledge re-
sources and UDC support have successfully provided efﬁcient
and economic base for an integration of multi-disciplinary
knowledge and IICS components, supporting archaeological
and geoscientiﬁc information systems. With these, the solution
is scalable, e.g., regarding references, resolution, and view
arrangements. The concept can be transferred to numerous
applications in a very ﬂexible way. The overall results on object
carousels and Q4Q workﬂows from the implementation and
case studies are:
•
The quality of data can be most efﬁciently improved at
the knowledge resources components.
•
The quantity of data can be increased by referencing and
intelligent discovery workﬂow algorithms.
•
The quantity of compute and storage resources is both
tightly linked with the quality of data and the quantity
of data and resources requirements.
The knowledge resources can be integrated into a steadily
improving system architecture storing data for successful
creation of sustainable workﬂow deﬁnitions, meaning that
the result matrix of requests can be stored for future use
and evaluation. This can be done in a non-incremental way,
depending on the environment of communication, computa-
tion, and storage resources in order to provide an efﬁcient
solution. Separate snapshots of the knowledge resources al-
low to consider developments within time. Nevertheless, for
service operation this can result in very high computational
requirements for resources.
Integration of external information resources has shown
huge beneﬁts on the quantity of data. The quantity can be
used for creating higher quality result matrices and improve the
discovery. A number of recommendations have been given for
integrating external data into advanced knowledge resources.
Future developments of the external resources should consider
to comply with a systematic, consistent, and well structured
base for their data, interfaces, and publications.
With the presented object carousels an undeﬁned number of
practical workﬂows can be created on the knowledge resources.
The object carousels concept is part of the “tooth system” for
long-term documentation and algorithms and the exploitation
of supercomputing resources for use with future IICS. Work
has been done [57], [58] in order to facilitate that future
architectures and components will support intelligent system
components and processing modelling of complex environ-
ments.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to all national and international partners in
the GEXI cooperations for the innovative constructive work.
We thank the Science and High Performance Supercomput-
ing Centre (SHPSC) for long-term support of collaborative
research since 1997, including the GEXI developments and
case studies on archaeological and geoscientiﬁc information
systems. Special thanks go to the scientiﬁc colleagues at the
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB) Hannover, es-
pecially Dr. Friedrich H¨ulsmann, for proliﬁc discussion within
the “Knowledge in Motion” project, for inspiration, and prac-
tical case studies. Many thanks go to the scientiﬁc colleagues
at the Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, especially Mrs. Birgit
Gersbeck-Schierholz, to the Institute for Legal Informatics
314
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(IRI), Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, and to the Westf¨alische
Wilhelms-Universit¨at (WWU), for discussion, support, and
sharing experiences on collaborative computing and knowledge
resources and for participating in fruitful case studies as well
as to the participants of the postgraduate European Legal
Informatics Study Programme (EULISP) for proliﬁc discussion
of scientiﬁc, legal, and technical aspects over the last years.
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Sustainable Knowledge Resources Supporting Sci-
entiﬁc Supercomputing for Archaeological and Geoscientiﬁc Infor-
mation Systems,” in Proceedings of The Third International Con-
ference on Advanced Communications and Computation (INFO-
COMP 2013), November 17–22, 2013, Lisbon, Portugal.
XPS
Press, 2013, pp. 55–60, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN: 978-1-61208-310-
0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=infocomp
2013 3 20 10034 [accessed: 2014-01-01].
[2]
“WDL, World Digital Library,” 2014, URL: http://www.wdl.org [ac-
cessed: 2014-01-12].
[3]
“The Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR),” 2014, URL: http://www.
tdar.org [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[4]
Wissenschaftsrat, “ ¨Ubergreifende Empfehlungen zu Informationsinfra-
strukturen, (English: Spanning Recommendations for Information Infra-
structures),” Wissenschaftsrat, Deutschland, (English: Science Council,
Germany), Drs. 10466-11, Berlin, 28.01.2011, 2011, URL: http://www.
wissenschaftsrat.de/download/archiv/10466-11.pdf [accessed: 2013-08-
09].
[5]
di Maio, P., “A Global Vision: Integrating Community Networks
Knowledge,” Community Wireless Symposium, European Community,
EC Infoday, Barcelona, 5th October 2012, 2012, URL: http://people.ac.
upc.edu/leandro/misc/CAPS Paola.pdf [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[6]
“Geo Exploration and Information (GEXI),” 1996, 1999, 2010,
2013,
2014,
URL:
http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/rprojs/en/
index.html#GEXI [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[7]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Queueing Aspects of Integrated Information and
Computing Systems in Geosciences and Natural Sciences.
InTech,
2011, pp. 1–26, Chapter 1, in: Advances in Data, Methods, Models
and Their Applications in Geoscience, 336 pages, ISBN-13: 978-
953-307-737-6, DOI: 10.5772/29337, OCLC: 793915638, DOI: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.5772/29337 [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[8]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Implementation of Integrated Systems and Re-
sources for Information and Computing,” in Proceedings of The Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
(INFOCOMP 2011), October 23–29, 2011, Barcelona, Spain, 2011,
pp. 1–7, ISBN: 978-1-61208-009-3, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/
download.php?articleid=infocomp 2011 1 10 10002 [accessed: 2014-
01-12].
[9]
I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, The Knowledge-Creating Company: How
Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation.
Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1995, ISBN: 0195092694.
[10]
C. W. Holsapple and K. D. Joshi, “Knowledge Management Support
of Decision Making, Organizational knowledge resources,” Decision
Support Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, May 2001, pp. 39–54, ISSN: 0167-
9236, Elsevier, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9236(00)00118-
4 [accessed: 2013-08-10].
[11]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCS) Linked Data,”
2014, URL: http://udcdata.info [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[12]
“LX-Project,”
2014,
URL:
http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/
rprojs/en/#LX (Information) [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[13]
E. W. von Tschirnhaus, “Brief (Letter), Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirn-
haus an Leibniz 17.IV.1677,” pp. 59–73, 1987, Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz, S¨amtliche Schriften und Briefe, Mathematischer, naturwis-
senschaftlicher und technischer Briefwechsel dritte Reihe, zweiter Band,
1667 – 1679, Leibniz-Archiv der Nieders¨achsischen Landesbibliothek
Hannover, Akademie-Verlag Berlin, 1987, herausgegeben unter Auf-
sicht der Akademie der Wissenschaften in G¨ottingen; Akademie der
Wissenschaften der DDR.
[14]
G. F. von Franckenau, “Brief (Letter), Georg Franck von Franck-
enau an Leibniz 18. (28.) September 1697, Schloss Frederiksborg,
18. (28.) September 1697,” pp. 568–569, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Bibliothek (GWLB), Leibniz-Archiv der Nieders¨achsischen Landes-
bibliothek Hannover, URL: http://www.gwlb.de/Leibniz/Leibnizarchiv/
Veroeffentlichungen/III7B.pdf [accessed: 2013-05-26] .
[15]
Berlin-Brandenburgische
Akademie
der
Wissenschaften,
“Leibniz
Reihe
VIII,”
2014,
Glossary,
Concepts,
BBAW,
Berlin,
URL:
http://leibnizviii.bbaw.de/glossary/concepts/
[accessed:
2014-01-
12]
(concepts
glossary),
URL:
http://leibnizviii.bbaw.de/Leibniz
Reihe 8/Aus+Otto+von+Guericke,+Experimenta+nova/LH035,14,
02 091v/index.html
[accessed:
2014-01-12]
(transcription),
URL:
http://leibnizviii.bbaw.de/pdf/Aus+Otto+von+Guericke,+Experimenta+
nova/LH035.14,02 091v/LH035,14!02 091+va.png [accessed: 2014-
01-12] (scan).
[16]
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB), Nieders¨achsische Lan-
desbibliothek, “GWLB Handschriften,” 2014, hannover, URL: http:
//www.leibnizcentral.de [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[17]
“LeibnizCentral,”
2014,
URL:
http://www.leibnizcentral.com/
[ac-
cessed: 2014-01-12].
[18]
M. Fogel, “Brieffragmente (Letter fragments) about 16xx, Historici
Pragmatici universal, Terrae motus, Physica,” manuscript ID: 00016293,
Source: Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB), Nieders¨achsis-
che Landesbibliothek, GWLB Handschriften, Hannover, URL: http:
//www.leibnizcentral.de [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[19]
M. Fogel, “Brieffragmente (Letter fragments) about 16xx, Terrae Motus
in Nova Francia,” manuscript ID: 00016278, Source: Gottfried Wil-
helm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB), Nieders¨achsische Landesbibliothek,
GWLB Handschriften, Hannover, URL: http://www.leibnizcentral.de
[accessed: 2014-01-12].
[20]
Gottfried
Wilhelm
Leibniz
Bibliothek
Hannover,
“Collection
of
Copperplates,” 2014, URL: http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/content/
copperplates [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[21]
N. Seel¨ander, “Dens animalis marini Tidae prope Stederburgum e colle
limoso effossi, Figura Sceleti prope Qvedlinburgum effossi,” about
1716, Copperplate, (Kupferstichplatten), printed in “Leibniz, Protogaea,
Tab. XII”, re-printed in “Leibniz, Opera omnia, studio L. Dutens,
1768 – Wallmann, Abhandlung von den sch¨atzbaren Alterth¨umern zu
Quedlinburg, 1776, Tafel S. 39”, URL: http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.
de/ECHOdocuView?url=/mpiwg/online/permanent/echo/copperplates/
Leibniz cup4/pageimg&start=41&pn=73&mode=imagepath [accessed:
2013-05-26].
[22]
C.-P. R¨uckemann and B. F. S. Gersbeck-Schierholz, “Object Security
and Veriﬁcation for Integrated Information and Computing Systems,” in
Proceedings of The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
(ICDS 2011), Proceedings of The International Conference on Technical
and Legal Aspects of the e-Society (CYBERLAWS 2011), February 23–
28, 2011, Gosier, Guadeloupe, France / DigitalWorld 2011. XPS, 2011,
pp. 1–6, ISBN: 978-1-61208-003-1, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/
download.php?articleid=cyberlaws 2011 1 10 70008 [accessed: 2013-
05-26].
[23]
Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, Max-Planck Insti-
tut f¨ur Wissenschaftsgeschichte, “European Cultural Heritage Online
(ECHO),” 2014, Berlin, URL: http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/ [ac-
cessed: 2014-01-12].
[24]
“CLImatological database for the World’s OCeans (CLIWOC),” 2014,
Climatological Database for the World’s Oceans 1750–1850, URL: http:
//pendientedemigracion.ucm.es/info/cliwoc/ [accessed: 2014-01-01].
[25]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “High End Computing Using Advanced Archae-
ology and Geoscience Objects,” International Journal On Advances
in Intelligent Systems, vol. 6, no. 3&4, 2013, pages 235–255,
ISSN: 1942-2679, LCCN: 2008212456 (Library of Congress), OCLC:
826628364, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
315
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

intsys v6 n34 2013 7 [accessed: 2014-01-12], URL: http://lccn.loc.
gov/2008212456 (LCCN Permalink) [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[26]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Integrating
Information
Systems
and
Scientiﬁc
Computing,”
International
Journal
on
Advances
in
Systems
and
Measurements,
vol.
5,
no.
3&4,
2012,
pp.
113–127,
ISSN:
1942-261x,
LCCN:
2008212470
(Library
of
Congress),
URL:
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=sysmea v5 n34 2012 3/
[accessed:
2014-01-
01],
URL:
http://www.iariajournals.org/systems and measurements/
sysmea v5 n34 2012 paged.pdf [accessed: 2014-01-01].
[27]
“ROA, (resource-oriented architecture), (Wikipedia),” 2014, URL:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource-oriented architecture
[accessed:
2014-01-12].
[28]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Enabling Dynamical Use of Integrated Systems and
Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources for Archaeological Information
Systems,” in Proceedings of The International Conference on Advanced
Communications and Computation (INFOCOMP 2012), October 21–26,
2012, Venice, Italy.
XPS, 2012, pp. 36–41, ISBN: 978-1-61208-226-
4, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=infocomp
2012 3 10 10012 [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[29]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Advanced
Scientiﬁc
Computing
and
Multi-
Disciplinary Documentation for Geosciences and Archaeology In-
formation,”
in
Proc.
of
The
Int.
Conf.
on
Advanced
Geo-
graphic Information Systems, Applications, and Services (GEO-
Processing 2013), February 24 – March 1, 2013, Nice, France.
XPS Press, 2013, pp. 81–88, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-251-6, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
geoprocessing 2013 4 10 30035 [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[30]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[31]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[32]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Consortium (UDCC),” 2014, URL:
http://www.udcc.org [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[33]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCS),” 2014, URL: http:
//www.udcc.org/udcsummary/php/index.php [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[34]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCS) Translations,”
2014,
URL:
http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/translation.htm
[ac-
cessed: 2014-01-12].
[35]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCS) Translations: Ger-
man,” 2014, URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/php/index.php?
lang=6 [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[36]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCS) Exports,” 2014,
URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/exports.htm [accessed: 2014-
01-12].
[37]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Consortium (UDCC),” 2013, URL:
http://www.udcc.org [accessed: 2013-04-07].
[38]
“Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI) System, The International DOI Foun-
dation (IDF),” 2014, URL: http://www.doi.org (Information) [accessed:
2014-01-12].
[39]
N. Hemsoth, “IBM Big Data VP Surveys Landscape,” Datanami, 2012,
March 09, 2012, URL: http://www.datanami.com/datanami/2012-03-
09/ibm big data vp surveys landscape.html [accessed: 2012-03-18].
[40]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Application and High Performant Computation of
Fresnel Sections,” in Symposium on Advanced Computation and Infor-
mation in Natural and Applied Sciences, Proceedings of The 9th Inter-
national Conference on Numerical Analysis and Applied Mathematics
(ICNAAM), September 19–25, 2011, Halkidiki, Greece, Proceedings
of the American Institute of Physics (AIP), vol. 1389, no. 1, 2011,
pp. 1268–1271, ISBN: 978-0-7354-0956-9, OCLC: 767604605, URL:
http://link.aip.org/link/?APCPCS/1389/1268/1 [accessed: 2014-01-12],
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3637849 (DOI) [accessed: 2014-01-
12].
[41]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Supercomputing Resources Empowering Superstack
with Interactive and Integrated Systems,” in Symposium on Advanced
Computation and Information in Natural and Applied Sciences, Pro-
ceedings of The 10th International Conference on Numerical Analysis
and Applied Mathematics (ICNAAM), September 19–25, 2012, Kos,
Greece, Proceedings of the American Institute of Physics (AIP), vol.
1479, no. 1, 2012, pp. 873–876, ISBN: 978-0-7354-1091-6, OCLC:
767604605, URL: http://link.aip.org/link/apcpcs/v1479/i1/p873/s1 [ac-
cessed: 2014-01-12], URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3637849 (DOI)
[accessed: 2014-01-12].
[42]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “High End Computing for Diffraction Amplitudes,”
in Symposium on Advanced Computation and Information in Natural
and Applied Sciences, Proceedings of The 11th International Confer-
ence on Numerical Analysis and Applied Mathematics (ICNAAM),
September 21–27, 2013, Rhodes, Greece, Proceedings of the American
Institute of Physics (AIP), 2013, pp. 305–308, ISBN: 978-0-7354-1184-
5, OCLC: 861348382, ISSN: 0094-243X, DOI: 10.1063/1.4825483,
URL: http://link.aip.org/link/?APCPCS/1558/305/1 [accessed: 2014-01-
12], URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4825483 (DOI) [accessed: 2014-
01-12].
[43]
“LX-Project,”
2013,
URL:
http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/
rprojs/en/#LX (Information) [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[44]
B. F. S. Gersbeck-Schierholz, “Testimonies of Nature and History in
the Napoli and Vesuvius Region, Italy,” Media Presentation, January
2014, Hannover, Germany, 2014, URL: http://www.user.uni-hannover.
de/zzzzgers/bgs volcano.html [accessed: 2014-02-23].
[45]
J. W. Head, L. S. Crumpler, J. C. Aubele, J. E. Guest, and R. S.
Saunders, “Venus Volcanism: Classiﬁcation of Volcanic Features and
Structures, Associations, and Global Distribution from Magellan Data,”
JGR, vol. 97, no. E8, Aug. 1992, pp. 13 153–13 197.
[46]
“Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB), Leibniz-Archiv der
Nieders¨achsischen Landesbibliothek Hannover,” 2014,
URL: http:
//www.gwlb.de/ [accessed: 2014-01-12] .
[47]
“TELOTA – The Electronic Life Of The Academy,” 2014, Berlin-
Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften, URL: http://telota.
bbaw.de/ [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[48]
TELOTA,
“Gottfried
Wilhelm
Leibniz
(S¨amtliche
Schriften
und
Briefe), Sachregister Schlagwort: Saturn,” 2014, TELOTA – The
Electronic Life Of The Academy, Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, URL: http://telota.bbaw.de/leibniziv/Sachregister/
sachreg fragen.php?aktion=schlagwort&eins=saturn&band= [accessed:
2014-01-12].
[49]
TELOTA,
“Gottfried
Wilhelm
Leibniz
(S¨amtliche
Schriften
und
Briefe), Sachregister Schlagwort: Planet,” 2014, TELOTA – The Elec-
tronic Life Of The Academy, Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, URL: http://telota.bbaw.de/leibniziv/Sachregister/
sachreg fragen.php?aktion=schlagwort&eins=planet&band= [accessed:
2014-01-12].
[50]
G. W. Leibniz, “S¨amtliche Schriften und Briefe,” 2014, s¨amtliche
Schriften und Briefe, Zweite Reihe, Zweiter Band, Teil 2; URL: http://
www.uni-muenster.de/Leibniz/DatenII2/II2 B.pdf [accessed: 2014-01-
12], Universit¨ats- und Landesbibliothek M¨unster, WWU, M¨unster,.
[51]
G. W. Leibniz, “S¨amtliche Schriften und Briefe,” 2014, S¨amtliche
Schriften
und
Briefe,
Vierte
Reihe,
Sechster
Band;
Rechts-
und
Staatswesen,
URL:
http://www.bbaw.de/bbaw/Forschung/
Forschungsprojekte/leibniz potsdam/bilder/IV6text.pdf
[accessed:
2014-01-12], Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften
(BBAW), Berlin.
[52]
G. W. Leibniz, “S¨amtliche Schriften und Briefe,” 2014, S¨amtliche
Schriften und Briefe herausgegeben von der Berlin-Brandenburgischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Akademie der Wissenschaften
in G¨ottingen, Dritte Reihe, Mathematischer, naturwissenschaftlicher
und technischer Briefwechsel, Siebenter Band, 2011; Gottfried Wil-
helm Leibniz, Mathematischer, naturwissenschaftlicher und technischer
Briefwechsel, herausgegeben von der Leibniz-Forschungsstelle Han-
nover der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen beim Leibniz-
Archiv der Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek Hannover, Sieben-
316
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ter Band, Juli 1696 – Dezember 1698, 2011; URL: http://www.nlb-
hannover.de/Leibniz/Leibnizarchiv/Veroeffentlichungen/III7A.pdf
[ac-
cessed: 2014-01-12], Nieders¨achsische Landesbibliothek, Hannover .
[53]
R. Oberschelp, Guiseppe Campani und der Ring des Planeten Saturn,
(English: Guiseppe Campani and the Ring of the Planet Saturn).
Niemeyer, Hameln, 2011, Lesesaal: Erlesenes aus der Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz Bibliothek, Heft 35, ISBN: 978-3-8271-8835-9.
[54]
W. Oberschelp and R. Oberschelp, Cassini, Campani und der Saturnring,
(English: Cassini, Campani, and the Saturn-Ring).
Verlag Harry
Deutsch, 2007, vol. 33, in: Der Meister und die Fernrohre: Das Wech-
selspiel zwischen Astronomie und Optik in der Geschichte, Festschrift
zum 85. Geburtstag von Rolf Riekher, (English: The Master and the
Telescopes: The Interplay between Astronomy and Optics in History,
Festschrift for the 85th birthday of Rolf Riekher), Acta Historica
Astronomiae, ISBN: 9783817118045.
[55]
A. Georgi, R. Budich, Y. Meeres, R. Sperber, and H. H´erenger,
“An Integrated SDN Architecture for Applications Relying on Huge,
Geographically Dispersed Datasets,” in Proceedings of The Third In-
ternational Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
(INFOCOMP 2013), November 17–22, 2013, Lisbon, Portugal.
XPS
Press, 2013, pp. 129–134, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN: 978-1-61208-310-
0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=infocomp
2013 6 20 10087 [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[56]
“Google,” 2014, URL: http://www.google.de [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[57]
P. Leit˜ao, U. Inden, and C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Parallelising Multi-agent
Systems for High Performance Computing,” in Proceedings of The
Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and
Computation (INFOCOMP 2013), November 17–22, 2013, Lisbon,
Portugal.
XPS Press, 2013, pp. 1–6, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-310-0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
infocomp 2013 1 10 10055 [accessed: 2014-01-12].
[58]
U. Inden, D. T. Meridou, M.-E. C. Papadopoulou, A.-C. G. Anadiotis,
and C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Complex Landscapes of Risk in Operations
Systems Aspects of Processing and Modelling,” in Proceedings of
The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and
Computation (INFOCOMP 2013), November 17–22, 2013, Lisbon, Por-
tugal.
XPS Press, 2013, pp. 99–104, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-310-0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
infocomp 2013 5 10 10114 [accessed: 2014-01-12].
317
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

