109
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Active and Cooperative Learning in a Multicultural Software Engineering Class: 
Impact of Switching from Offline to Online Classroom Modality 
 
Simona Vasilache 
Faculty of Engineering, Information and Systems 
University of Tsukuba 
Tsukuba, Japan 
e-mail: simona@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract - Three years after the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, 
the academic world is still feeling the effects of the sudden 
changes brought along by this unprecedented event. With most 
academic institutions abruptly switching to online teaching in 
2020, pursuing the goals of implementing active and 
collaborative learning has turned into a challenging endeavour. 
New strategies had to be imagined and the question arises 
whether this abrupt transition to online teaching can remain 
successful, especially in multicultural groups. This paper is 
based on the experience of teaching a graduate software 
engineering course to a multicultural group of students. It 
describes the active and collaborative learning strategies 
employed during offline classes and highlights the impact of 
switching from an offline to an online class modality. The results 
show that the sudden switch to online teaching was managed 
successfully and the active and collaborating teaching activities 
were successful in fulfilling the course objectives and offering 
student satisfaction with the course and the learning process. 
Keywords - software engineering; active learning; cooperative 
learning; multicultural environments; classroom modality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Active and collaborative learning are two important 
concepts with a multitude of benefits in the education field, 
being applied in teaching various disciplines. Software 
engineering is one such discipline, in which a hands-on 
approach is traditionally considered important ([1], [2]). 
Maxim et al. noticed that students may be exposed to the 
necessary concepts during courses, but they are often "not 
asked to apply these skills in project settings" [3]. They 
showed that active learning can improve software engineering 
education. By implementing active learning, students can 
acquire knowledge in a practical way; by using collaborative 
learning, teachers can create an environment emulating future 
work environments, where software engineers need to work 
together to produce software applications.  
At the same time, multicultural environments are 
ubiquitous – in the workplace, in the academic world, in our 
daily lives. Teaching in multicultural environments has its 
own set of challenges [4], but also its particular advantages 
[5]. In case of teaching software engineering, a multicultural 
classroom offers the benefit of simulating distributed teams of 
software developers. Students learn in one classroom together, 
but they can get a glimpse of how they would have to interact 
with their future developer colleagues belonging to different 
cultures and thus having different values, different behaviour 
and various working styles [5].  
Software engineering education suffered, along with many 
other disciplines, during the Covid-19 pandemic. Academic 
institutions were forced to suddenly move their courses to an 
online format, with very little preparation. The changes in 
classroom modality, from offline to online, created new 
challenges for instructors and students alike. Academic 
institutions and the process of instruction faced an 
unprecedented situation; going through it provided numerous 
valuable lessons for everyone involved in the learning 
process. In our previous paper [1], we highlighted some of the 
challenges encountered, along with lessons learned in 
implementing active learning while teaching software 
engineering to a multicultural group of graduate students at a 
national university in Japan, during an introductory level 
software engineering course. This paper extends our work 
with data from the course held in 2022 (the third year of online 
teaching), as well as with more considerations regarding 
collaborative learning. Moreover, it discusses to what extent 
the various factors which make a successful course depend on 
the class modality, i.e., face-to-face or online. 
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section II 
describes the background of our work, along with related 
work. Section III provides a description of our course, 
whereas Section IV illustrates the implementation of active 
and collaborative learning. Section V includes a discussion on 
course effectiveness and lessons learned during our study; 
conclusions and directions for future work are provided in 
Section VI.  
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
This section will offer an overview of concepts like active 
learning and collaborative learning, and it will present recent 
related work, published in the context of the sudden switch to 
online learning that took place in 2020 after the onset of the 
Covid-19 pandemic. 
A. Active Learning and Collaborative Learning  
A lot has been written about the concepts of active learning 
and cooperative learning and their benefits. Simply explained, 
active learning is “any teaching method that gets students 
actively involved; cooperative learning is one variety of active 

110
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
learning which structures students into groups with defined 
roles for each student and a task for the group to accomplish” 
[6]. During traditional, lecture-based, “passive” classes, 
students listen to experts who impart their knowledge [7]. In 
1996, Gremmels used a truck analogy for lecture-based 
teaching: “So we in effect load our pedagogical dump truck as 
full as we can, back it up to the classroom, and unload it onto 
our students, burying them in teaching ... When we use the 
dump truck method, we overwhelm our students with more 
skills and strategies than they can possibly absorb in an hour. 
That's our first mistake. Then we fail to give students the 
opportunity to practice any of the strategies and skills, 
virtually guaranteeing that they won't be internalized.'' [8]. 
During active learning, students must do more than just listen: 
“they must read, write, discuss, or be engaged in solving 
problems” [9]; importantly, they must engage in “higher-order 
thinking tasks as analysis, synthesis, and evaluation” [9].  
Based on a meta-analysis of 225 studies, Freeman et al. 
concluded that active learning increases student performance 
in science, engineering, and mathematics [10].  This was 
based on reported data on examination scores or failure rates 
when comparing student performance in traditional and active 
learning [10]. Generally, researchers agree that projects using 
“active methodologies” help students to “develop deeper 
knowledge and apply it in a practical way according to a work 
plan” [11]. 
Cooperative learning is one form of active learning, in 
which students work together with the goal of maximizing 
their own learning, as well as their peers’ learning [12]. 
According to Keyser [6], planning is important for 
cooperative learning to work well. It is essential to clarify the 
role of each member of the group, as well as to carefully 
consider the size of the group [6].  
Both active learning and cooperative learning promote the 
achievement of student engagement, which is a common goal 
of all educators in academic institutions.  
B. Emergency Remote Teaching 
The 2020 Covid-19 pandemic forced many academic 
institutions to move their courses to an online format. Online 
and remote learning became a necessity in times of lock 
downs and social distancing [13]. The sudden shift to an 
online format, taking place with virtually no preparation, was 
termed Emergency Remote Teaching (ERT) [14]. As its name 
suggests, this way of teaching was different from the well-
established online class teaching method, which took years of 
work and gradual improvements. Its purpose - as a response 
to crisis - was to provide temporary access to instruction 
quickly and reliably [14].  
Unfortunately, most faculty had no prior training in 
teaching at a distance, and most universities were unable to 
support them in the way universities with traditional online 
programs generally do [15]. The courses which were to be 
delivered in this manner were meant to be a temporary 
solution to an unprecedented, emergency situation, and not a 
long-term replacement of face-to-face courses. In reality, ERT 
continued for a couple of years in many academic institutions; 
a third year on remote teaching should not be named 
“emergent” anymore. In fact, Stewart at al. use the term 
“sustained remote teaching” (SRT) to represent the method of 
teaching employed in the second year of the pandemic [15]. 
Overall, the abrupt change in delivering courses in 2020 
brought innumerable challenges for instructors and students 
alike.  
C. Related Work 
After the onset of the 2020 Covid-19 pandemic, as 
mentioned earlier, most higher education institutions had to 
suddenly switch to an online learning. The experience and the 
lessons learned were described in various research papers. In 
2020 alone, Google Scholar lists a little over 2000 research 
paper mentioning “emergency remote teaching”. Later on, as 
of June 1st 2023, more than 20,000 papers dealing with this 
subject appear on this platform. 
One of the earliest papers published after the proposal of 
the “emergency remote teaching” term  [14] was that of Shim 
and Lee [16]. Using thematic analysis, they analyzed South 
Korean college students' experiences of ERT within the first 4 
weeks of ERT, in March-April 2020. Positive features, along 
with areas of complaints in the context of ERT were 
highlighted. Their conclusions emphasized the importance of 
college students’ educational environment, and showed that 
"the quality of interactions can vary depending on the teachers 
and technology used"  [16]. In the same year (2020), Bozkurt 
and Sharma [17] acknowledged that “online distance 
education is one thing and emergency remote teaching is 
another thing”. Moreover, they remarked that the distinction 
between these two is particularly important, because the 
degree to which educators believe in distance education 
during the early days of the pandemic would “play a 
significant role in the prosperity of distance education in a 
post-COVID world” [17]. 
The experience of dealing with ERT was the subject of 
numerous research works after 2020. In [18], Chierichetti and 
Backer explored faculty perspectives on teaching engineering 
during ERT; their view is that faculty members in engineering 
“have always viewed online teaching with skepticism”. Their 
study concluded that the sudden transition to online teaching 
in engineering at the public university where they teach was 
mostly positive and that the teachers’ concerns were mainly 
focused on methods of assessment and student engagement. 
Douglas et al. [19] provided recommendations for future 
moves to ERT, which included providing mechanisms for 
informal conversations students-students and students-
instructors, availability of instructors for just-in-time feedback 
and questions etc.  
Furthermore, Chiu’s research [20] argued that the delivery 
of knowledge in a digitalized form is dynamic and it relies on 
the efforts of all course participants. The interactions between 
students and teachers were studied and the results pointed to 
the fact that the effectiveness of online learning is strongly 
reliant on the dynamic between the teachers and the students.   
III. 
COURSE DESCRIPTION 
This section will describe the course that constitutes the 
subject of this paper, its setting and content, as well as the 
number of students and format changes throughout the years.  

111
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Course Content and Description 
This paper is based on the experience of teaching an 
introductory software engineering course named “Principles 
of Software Engineering”. The course is offered as an elective 
for master’s students in the computer science department at 
the University of Tsukuba in Japan, and it belongs to the 
“Degree Programs in Science and Information Engineering 
(Specialized Subjects)” category.  The language of instruction 
is English, and the course takes place during modules A and 
B of the spring semester (each module is made up of 5 weeks, 
thus stretching the course over 10 weeks); upon successful 
completion, students acquire two credits.  
The goal of this course is to introduce basic software 
engineering principles; students learn about the necessity of 
software engineering as a modern engineering discipline. The 
main topics covered include software development models, 
life cycle, agile methods, requirements engineering, user 
interface design, testing (verification and validation), project 
planning and management, software engineering tools (IDEs, 
UML) and business aspects of software development. 
The participating students are a mixture of Japanese 
students and international students, with the latter group 
making up the majority. The reason behind a high percentage 
of international students is most likely related to the language 
of instruction. On one hand, the number of courses offered in 
English is not very large; international students take every 
opportunity to attend classes held in English. On the other 
hand, Japanese students often lack the self-confidence to 
enroll in classes not held in their native language.  
Whereas most of the enrolled students belong to the 
computer science department, other participants major in 
material sciences, library, information and media studies, 
intelligent and mechanical interaction systems, policy and 
planning sciences etc. Occasionally, one or two undergraduate 
students enroll in the course, as well (as a general rule, only 
high achieving undergraduate students can attend graduate 
school courses). Also occasionally, exchange students take 
part in classes; they study mostly engineering, but they might 
major in other fields (e.g., linguistics).  
Table I shows the total number of students and the number 
of international students participating in each of the 7 years 
since the course was established. 
TABLE I.  
INTERNATIONAL STUDENT ENROLLMENT  
IN SOFTWARE ENGINEERING COURSE 
 
Total number 
of students 
Number of 
international 
students 
Percentage of 
international 
students 
2016 
15 
9 
60% 
2017 
26 
18 
69.2% 
2018 
35 
24 
68.5% 
2019 
66 
33 
50% 
2020 
34 
28 
82.3% 
2021 
53 
37 
69.8% 
2022 
66 
33 
50% 
 
 
 
As can be observed, whereas the total number of 
participating students decreased suddenly, the percentage of 
international students did not reduce during the pandemic, 
despite the fact that there were simply fewer international 
students physically present on the university campus. Japan 
was one of the countries with the strictest border controls 
during Covid-19. Candidates from abroad already accepted in 
various undergraduate or graduate programs were unable to 
acquire a student visa for more than one year and thus unable 
to enter Japan. However, they were able to enroll in classes 
remotely, which was also the case for many local students, 
who chose to remain in their hometowns and be physically 
away from the university campus. Moreover, there were no 
exchange students entering Japan for the first year; in 2021, in 
theory, it was possible to become an “online” exchange 
student (remaining in own home country but allowed to enroll 
in the online classes offered by the partner university, i.e., the 
University of Tsukuba). However, this arrangement did not 
prove particularly popular and, consequently, there was a very 
low number of students participating in these exchange 
programs in the first two years after the onset of the pandemic. 
Fortunately, the situation has returned to pre-pandemic 
conditions in 2022, i.e., exchange students are now allowed to 
enter Japan and they can join the university for a period 
between three months and one year. Summarizing, whereas 
the ratio of Japanese to international students did not change 
much from the previous years, the total number of 
participating students was drastically reduced at first, but it 
slowly returned to its pre-pandemic numbers.  
 
B. Format and Number Changes 
The introductory software engineering course was first 
offered by the author in 2016; its establishment emerged from 
the necessity of providing more graduate school courses in 
English. Throughout the past 7 years, the course suffered a 
few changes, in terms of format and number of students. 
Figure 1 illustrates these changes, along with a brief overview 
of the style and type of activities used during classes.   
In its first year, the course participants were evaluated 
based on a final exam; in subsequent years, students had to 
submit one mid-term and one final report, bringing the 
evaluation method in line with most of the other courses that 
the participating students enrolled in as part of their graduate 
studies in our university. Importantly, the students were 
allowed to submit their reports either in English or in 
Japanese, to accommodate the often-encountered lack of 
confidence in their English skills of the Japanese students. 
Between 2016 and 2019, the course was provided in the 
traditional face-to-face format. It started with 17 students 
enrolled in its first year, followed by 26, 34 and 66 students 
enrolled in subsequent years, respectively. A major change 
occurred in 2020, with the sudden change to online format 
(i.e., ERT [14]), due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The number 
abruptly decreased to 35 students in 2020, followed by an 
increase to 53 students in 2021. By 2022, even though the 
class was still held online, the number of participants grew 
back to pre-pandemic levels (66 participants).  
 

112
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1.  Software engineering course format and number of participants over the years 
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTING ACTIVE AND COLLABORATIVE 
LEARNING 
This section will describe how active and collaborative 
learning were implemented throughout the 7 years that 
constitute the subject of this paper.  
Note: the questionnaires mentioned in this section were 
administered as per the ethics regulations of the University of 
Tsukuba; approval was received for gathering and using the 
data acquired through these questionnaires.  
A. Face-to-Face Format 
a) Year 2016 
The traditional face-to-face format was used between 2016 
and 2019. In its first edition (in 2016), the course was taught 
in a rather small classroom, with - for the most part - the 
instructor lecturing in front of 15 students. Interactions 
between the instructor and the students took the simple form 
of asking students to answer various questions in class. The 
instructor was constantly hoping that these questions would 
elicit (lively) discussions among students. This happened 
increasingly more often, although with a very slow start. The 
first class introduced the students to the teaching style of the 
instructor (students may have been surprised at first by the 
requirement to participate, at least in giving brief answers). 
Using a small classroom facilitated the interactions: eye 
contact was easily established, and students found it difficult 
to engage in unrelated activities (e.g., checking their phones 
or their personal computers). Moreover, it was easy to address 
students directly, to remember and to be aware of the precise 
level of participation of each student.  
Out of the 15 participants, 9 were international students; 
they were more eager to answer questions and generally more 
inclined to engage with the teacher and with their peers during 
classes. The instructor made sustained efforts to involve the 
Japanese students, as well, with relative success.  As a general 
observation, it is worth mentioning that, most often, lectures 
in Japanese classrooms do not involve active participation of 
students. Traditionally, the instructor teaches new topics in the 
form of lectures, while standing in front of the classroom, 
whereas students simply listen, making them passive 
participants. According to various research works (e.g., [21], 
[22]), the root causes of this type of behaviour are culture 
related. It is promising that the past few years have seen a 
slow, but steady increase in higher and secondary institutions 
in Japan encouraging (and often requiring) active participation 
of students in class and active learning in general.  
 
b) Years 2017-2018 
In the subsequent two years, along with the regular 
practice of asking questions for the purpose of eliciting class 
discussions, one session each year was used to experiment 
with the concept of “flipped classroom”). In order to observe 
the impact on overall class performance, a questionnaire was 
administered at the end of the class; in it, the students 
answered questions about their preference for different class 
styles: lecture style, discussion style, combination (of lecture 
and discussions) and flipped. Although it proved to be the 
least popular with the students, the experimental flipped 
classroom session was perceived as both more challenging 
and more enjoyable (as shown in [23]).  
 The instructor introduced several class activities, which 
appeared to elicit a certain level of enthusiasm, in particular 
with the international students, who made up the majority of 
class participants (18 students out of 26 in 2017 and 24 
students out of 35 in 2018). In these activities, the students 
were required to give solutions to a set of given small-scale 
problems arising during the software development process. 
They were also involved in replicating certain activities that 
need to be implemented in the real world, during various 
phases of software development (again, small scale problems, 
that can be easily replicated in the classroom).  
Moreover, some activities required the creation of mini-
teams, which were given tasks to solve during classes. In order 
to complete their tasks, the students needed to communicate 
and collaborate with their colleagues/team-mates. After 

113
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
completing their task, each team chose a representative to 
report the results in front of the classroom. Our previous 
works ([24] and [25]) show how collaborative learning was 
used and the lessons learned during this time.  
Considering that the class componence was multicultural, 
whenever teams were created, the instructor made sure, as 
much as possible, that the members belonged to different 
cultural groups. This approach enables the students to leave 
their comfort zone and helps them acquire a different 
perspective. In term of the language used, the instructor 
insisted that the interactions take place in English, thus 
making sure that everyone understands everything that is 
being discussed in a team. However, as it turned out, not all 
team interactions took place in English, even in groups of 
students with different mother languages. This often happened 
because the majority of the Chinese students, besides being 
proficient in English, often speak Japanese fluently, as well. 
Considering the traditional reluctance of the Japanese students 
to speak other languages, their Chinese colleagues usually 
switched to Japanese, in order to facilitate a smoother 
communication in the team. Nevertheless, it was understood 
that the reporting in front of the whole class should take place 
in English. The drawback of this requirement was that the 
reporting student was seldom a Japanese student; however (as 
already shown in [26]), the instructor made sure to elicit a 
minimum level of verbal participation in English from the 
Japanese students, as well (in the form of brief new comments 
or at least approval/disapproval of colleagues’ comments). 
 
c) Year 2019 
A number of 66 students enrolled in the course in 2019. 
The class activities were continued, with an increased 
frequency; often, several activities were included in one class. 
Furthermore, a micro-project was introduced, handled 
through the learning management system (LMS) in use at the 
university, i.e., manaba [27]. The LMS facilitated the creation 
of teams, whose members were assigned by the instructor. 
Items submitted in the project on the LMS could be either 
visible by the team only or by the whole class. The purpose of 
the micro-project was teaching the students about the issues 
that arise during the requirements elicitation phase in the 
development of a software product and how cultural 
differences impact the creation of requirements documents. 
The students’ tasks were divided into three parts. In the first 
part, two members acted as “customers” and 4-6 members 
acted as “developers”. The “developers” created a 
questionnaire which the “customers” answered in writing. A 
requirements document was created, using “shall” and 
“should” items, for necessary and desirable requirements, 
respectively. In the second part, the “customers” were 
swapped with those from a different team, after which they 
gave feedback to the requirements document created by the 
“developers”. In the final part, the requirements documents 
were shared and discussed with the whole class. 
The instructor observed carefully the interactions between 
students during the implementation of this mini-project. 
Collaboration between team members played a crucial part 
and cultural differences had to be overcome at this stage. On 
one hand, a group of assertive students could be observed, 
who led the activities and decided the manner in which the 
mini-project would be conducted. On the other hand, the 
students who appeared less confident had to overcome their 
fears and respond/react to the demands of their more assertive 
colleagues. The team componence was carefully selected 
again: students from different cultural groups, with different 
mother languages were assembled in one team.  
The benefits of this activity were two-fold: highlighting 
cultural differences in the classroom (while learning) and 
depicting cultural differences in the workplace (while 
developing a software product).  
Based on the feedback gathered from the students at the 
end of the class, along with the additional questionnaires 
administered by the instructor, this edition of the course was 
the most successful so far, in terms of implementing active 
and collaborative learning. As one student stated, “the 
lecturer changed the students’ silence into discussion and 
projects”. Indeed, based on the instructor’s observations, the 
course was successful in persuading the students more 
inclined to be silent in class to participate more in the various 
discussions and activities. Notably, several students admitted 
that what they learned would be useful later, not only in 
software engineering, but in other fields, as well (to quote one 
other student, “the principles that I learned in the class 
changed the way I approach problem solving in general”).   
To summarize, these first three years of teaching the 
course featured the use of active and collaborative learning on 
an increasingly larger scale. Sudden and major changes were 
about to happen in the following year, as described in the next 
section. 
B. Online Format 
As mentioned earlier, the Covid-19 pandemic brought 
with it an abrupt change in the method of delivering 
instruction to students and pupils all over the world. 
According to Whittle at al., the focus was shifted towards “the 
method of delivering instruction rather than the learning 
goals” [28], making the implementation of collaborative and 
active learning even more challenging than usual. The 
following will describe how these concepts were implemented 
during the pandemic.  
 
a) Year 2020 
The software engineering course starts in April every year; 
the spring of 2020 represented the beginning of the pandemic 
and the time when decisions regarding implementation of 
classes had to be taken. All classes were switched to an online 
version; there was little time to consider the consequences and 
there was no realistic view of what the (near) future would 
bring. In this year, 34 students enrolled in the class (a rather 
large drop in number from the 66 participants in the previous 
year). Two of the reasons for this relatively low number could 
be explained as follows.  
First, in the author’s opinion, in March 2020 (when 
students had to register for their spring semester courses), 
there were many uncertainties regarding the online 
environment, seconded by an optimistic expectation of return 
to face-to-face classes in the very near future. These factors 
enabled the students to think that there was no need to 

114
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
participate in an “online” class, when a “real”, face-to-face 
one would be back “soon enough”.  
Second, in our university, students have around two weeks 
to observe a course, after which they must make a final 
decision regarding whether they enroll in the course or not. 
During the first class in 2020 (held online), the students were 
told that an active participation is required for the duration of 
the whole course. Moreover, being in an online environment 
made it more difficult for them to choose their discussion 
partners. As shown in [25], in case of a physical classroom, 
the students choose where to sit (usually, next to familiar 
faces, friends or colleagues who share the same mother 
tongue). At least for the first two or three lectures, they are 
allowed to discuss and form groups with the students seated 
nearby. After a few classes, the instructor specifically asks 
them to be part of multicultural groups. By this time, the 
students are familiar with their colleagues; moreover, even if 
they wanted to, they could not drop the class at this point. In 
this new virtual environment, several Japanese students felt 
that combining the difficulties of sudden online learning with 
the requirement of being active participants in a multicultural 
class represented a hurdle impossible to overcome. As result, 
more than 10 students cancelled their registration immediately 
after the first class [25].  
 
In this first edition of online course, the classes were held 
synchronously, using Microsoft Teams [29] and Zoom [30]. 
All class materials were placed on manaba (the LMS used in 
our university [27]). Notably, several international students 
were still abroad at the beginning of the course (they could not 
arrive in time or were not allowed to enter Japan, due to the 
pandemic restrictions). In order to accommodate the time 
differences and different locations, the classes were also 
available on demand: each lecture was recorded, and the 
recordings were placed on Microsoft Stream [31] (with links 
to recordings placed in manaba). At the end of the course, the 
instructor administered a questionnaire, to find out the 
students’ opinions and perceptions regarding online classes, 
active learning and specifics of the course they had just taken 
(the results were summarized in our previous work in [24]).  
At the beginning of each class, which started with a warm-
up discussion (usually a piece of technology-related news), 
the students were gently encouraged to turn on their cameras. 
Some students did that in the beginning, but, as the class 
progressed, they became more reluctant to speak or show their 
faces. Moreover, several students became distracted, often 
engaging in a completely different activity. This was easily 
observed by the instructor, either when she tried to address 
them directly and there was no response, or when there were 
group activities and certain students were not present in the 
newly created online groups.  
The instructor continued to make efforts to involve all 
students in the learning process. Although conversations 
online were more difficult to implement than in a classroom, 
she asked questions and attempted to engage all students in 
the discussions. Various class activities were adapted to an 
online format. Instead of teams created in a classroom 
(organized based on the physical location of the desks), the 
instructor created breakout rooms in Zoom; each such room 
acted as a group, where participants held discussions and 
performed various tasks given in class. (Recording of the 
meeting was paused during the switch to breakout rooms.) 
After organizing the students in breakout room and 
“opening” the rooms, the instructor took turns visiting each 
breakout room. She was initially muted, merely observing 
how the activity is being conducted. If the group appeared to 
be silent or not active, she would gently guide the activity, 
suggesting questions, and, if necessary, addressing the non-
participative students directly or guiding the group towards 
deeper discussions. If important issues were raised in a group 
and the instructor believed that they can be shared with the 
whole class, or she observed that certain clarifications are 
needed, she would “call” the participants to the main room and 
address the issue immediately. (The breakout rooms would be 
reopened later, as necessary.) 
It is worth noting that, in the online version of the classes, 
more time is needed to organize activities. Switching from the 
general meeting to breakout rooms and back takes a certain 
amount of time; thus, planning all the activities in advance is 
essential.  
 
As previously described in [1], dealing with a 
multicultural classroom (with 6 Japanese students and 28 from 
4 other countries) meant that cultural differences had a strong 
impact on discussions. Often the same students responded to 
questions every time in the main meeting. However, within 
the breakout rooms, it was easier to involve the less 
communicative (or less confident) students. The most obvious 
reason is the number of peers present: breakout rooms 
consisted of only 5-7 students (as opposed to over 30 in the 
main meeting), which made it easier to overcome the lack of 
confidence, particularly regarding language skills (English 
was not the mother tongue for most participants). The majority 
of students agreed that active participation in an online setting 
may be more difficult, as can be seen from the following two 
responses.  
- “I feel like when classes are held online, people will be 
very hesitant to participate unless they are picked on 
directly.” 
- “I think the online environment keeps many people silent, 
or because they don’t speak and no one can see so they keep 
silent. Such discussions are not very effective and there will 
be problems in the allocation of discussion time.” 
Nevertheless, one participant expressed a different 
opinion, stating that asynchronous work allows for different 
modalities of work: 
- “I think that online classes can result in *more* 
discussion than face-to-face classes because students can 
work asynchronously and in different modalities. I don’t need 
to see someone or hear them to discuss, there are other ways 
of communication.” 
Importantly, when questioned about the class activities, 
about 90% of the students stated that they found them useful 
(a lot or in a moderate amount), whereas about 80% found 
them enjoyable (a lot or in a moderate amount).  
Unfortunately, not all previously used activities could be 
adapted for an online environment, with some of them having 
to be eliminated. One example is the agile game “paper 

115
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
airplanes” [32]. This game teaches the benefits of teamwork, 
working in sprints, planning and retrospectives. It includes the 
task of physically creating paper airplanes and flying them in 
the classroom; even though it is considered a “classic” game 
to illustrate agile development, there was no way of adapting 
this game to the online environment.  
In this first year of online teaching, during the first few 
classes, one of the most challenging parts proved to be the 
collaborative part. At first, after providing a task to be 
completed, a generic request was made by the instructor in 
each breakout room, for one student to share their document 
(which could be in almost any format desired by the group), 
listen to the other group members’ opinions, and take notes 
(draw diagrams, write text, etc.).  Often, no student was 
willing to take the initiative, to guide the discussions or to 
share their own screen. In later classes, the instructor did not 
ask for a volunteer, but instead designated a student to be the 
“sharing” member, and this proved to be a more effective 
strategy of involving students.  
Despite the sudden changes in class format and the initial 
worry that the classes would be much less interactive than 
usual, the instructor believes that active and cooperative 
learning were implemented to an acceptable level, under the 
given circumstances, i.e., in the ERT format.  
 
b) Year 2021 
In 2021, with the pandemic situation not improving, the 
software engineering course was held online again. A number 
of 53 students enrolled in the class - an increase of more than 
50% from the first online class. Considering that students 
often consult with their seniors on which classes to enroll in, 
a larger number of students might hint to the impression that 
the online edition was rather successful and the students this 
year were encouraged to take it, despite its new format. Not 
only more international students enrolled (37, from 9 different 
countries), but the number of Japanese students increased, as 
well (from 6 to 16 participants).   
The format used was very similar to the one from the 
previous year. Classes were held online, synchronously, either 
on Zoom or on Microsoft Teams. They were recorded and 
made available offline for the students, through the LMS. By 
now, the instructor had a better idea of what could work in an 
online setting, and she organized even more class activities. 
Some of these activities were adapted from those originally 
used in a face-to-face setting, other were simply new ones.  
To facilitate the completion of the group task and to make 
sure that important ideas exchanged in a group are recorded, 
an online document was shared, with sections available for 
each group in the breakout room. This idea came from a 
student, who noticed that it would be beneficial for the whole 
class, not only the group involved. In this way, anyone could 
edit the document, and anyone could see what other groups 
wrote and what they were working on. Often students who 
completed their task in their own group would browse the 
common document and comment on other groups’ work. A 
certain level of competition could be observed; allowing the 
participants to see other people’s work made them try to 
improve their own work. From this point of view, this was an 
improvement from the offline class modality: in a classroom, 
students could not see in real time what other groups are 
working on, unless their notes were presented in front of the 
whole classroom, at the request of the instructor.  
Just like every year, the instructor gathered feedback from 
the students with regard to the course. At this point, 40% of 
them stated that they preferred online classes, whereas almost 
25% preferred face-to-face classes. Interestingly, 30% of the 
students responded that this depends on the class they are 
taking (see Figure 2).  
One participant stated that “No matter what kind of 
classroom form, the activity of the classroom is very 
important.”. Another student responded with “I think "Class 
Activity" are interesting. But I am Japanese and not good at 
English. If I could speak English very well, I would have been 
able to participate more actively.”. Other comments included 
“The class with discussion activity should be Face-to-Face.” 
and “Face-to-face classes are more interactive and 
engaging”, supporting the idea that discussions and class 
activities may be perceived as more successful in a physical 
classroom setting.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Format preference for attending classes in 2021 
The participants were further asked which format they 
consider more successful for class activities/discussions. 
About 43% considered that they are more successful if held 
face-to-face, approx. 27% stated that they are about the same, 
and just over 13% believed that they are more successful if 
online (the remaining ~17% responded that they do not know). 
When asked to compare online classes with face-to-face 
classes in terms of cultural differences, almost 49% of the 
students considered that cultural differences are more visible 
in face-to-face classrooms and about 15% thought that they 
are more visible in online classes. 20% of the students found 
no difference between the two (with the remaining 16% 
stating that they do not know). 
Last, but not least, the students were questioned whether 
they find the class activities useful/valuable on one hand and 
enjoyable on the other hand. The results are summarized in 
Table II. As can be observed, more than three quarters of the 
Face-to-face
classes
Online classes No particular
preference
It depends on
the course I
am taking
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
40.00%
45.00%
"If you could choose, which type of 
classes would you attend?

116
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
students find these activities enjoyable and more than 90% 
find them valuable (either a lot or moderately). These results 
show us that, despite the cultural differences and the 
difficulties inherent to online environments, the students 
generally found the active learning implementation not only 
useful, but also rather enjoyable. The instructor’s observations 
are in line with these results: based on the impressions 
gathered in class, she felt that the course was successful and 
that the activities and discussions played an important role in 
achieving this. 
TABLE II.  
CLASS ACTIVITIES IN 2021:  
ENJOYABLE VS. VALUABLE/USEFUL 
 
A lot 
Moderately 
A little 
Not at 
all 
Enjoyable 
24.44% 
53.33% 
20.00% 
2.22% 
Valuable/useful 
32.11% 
60.00% 
8.89% 
0% 
 
 
c) Year 2022 
This past year, the course proceeded very similarly to the 
one in 2021. One might wonder why there was no return to 
the physical classroom yet: Japan was still rather strict with its 
pandemic related rules and there were still students who had 
not managed to enter Japan. The decision was made to 
continue with mostly online classes. Coincidentally, the 
number or students enrolled was the same as in 2019, i.e., 66; 
similarly, the number of international students was exactly the 
same as in 2019, i.e., 33 students. By this time, all the students 
were familiar with the online environment, Microsoft Teams 
and Zoom (as well as manaba, i.e., our university’s LMS).  
With the official course team created on Microsoft Teams, 
the first few classes were conducted on this platform. During 
subsequent discussions with students, it was revealed that 
several of them have a strong preference for Zoom; one 
session was therefore conducted on this platform, at the 
students’ request. However, the remaining classes took place 
on Teams – a decision taken by the instructor together with 
the students. There were minor differences between how 
classes took place on the two platforms. One of them is that 
the students could easily choose their display name on Zoom, 
but they could not change their already assigned display name 
on Teams. This name was decided when they first signed up 
for Microsoft 365, as part of the university’s organization. In 
the case of Japanese and Chinese students, their names were 
often written in “kanji” (Chinese characters). For the 
international students who cannot read them (and considering 
that names are particularly difficult to read), this raised 
problems in recognizing their colleagues’ names in the group.  
Whereas the course was held again online, synchronously, 
one notable difference from the previous year is that the 
instructor decided not to record the classes. The assumption 
was that there were no particular factors preventing the 
students from attending the classes in real time. Moreover, the 
instructor’s (undeclared openly) intention was to make sure 
that students attend every week and pay attention in class, as 
much as possible (thus not relying on class recordings).   
Most of the class activities were similar to those from the 
previous year. There were slight differences in the level of 
participation, i.e., the international students seemed to blend 
slightly better with the Japanese students. However, this is 
most probably a very personal aspect – different students with 
different personalities participate in each year. The groups 
were created by the instructor and seldom randomly assigned. 
This year, the students were allowed to use any language they 
wanted in the breakout rooms, as long as they made sure that 
everything that was said was understood by all the group 
members. This meant, for example, that Japanese was used in 
a group where everyone spoke the language (either Japanese 
students only or a mixture with other students proficient in 
Japanese). English remained the main language of the course, 
as well as the language used for plenary discussions. 
At one point, the instructor conducted a poll in which 
students were asked if they prefer language-based groups, 
randomly assignment groups or if they simply believe that this 
aspect does not matter. Less than a third of the respondents 
preferred language-based groups, with another third 
preferring randomly assigned teams; the rest of the students 
simply stated that it did not matter. This was a pleasant 
surprise for the instructor, who had assumed that the students 
would insist on being able to speak their own language. 
However, it is also possible that the meaning behind these 
preferences is simply that, at least in case of some of the 
students, they did not care about the groups because they did 
not want to participate anyway.   
After the course ended, the instructor asked the students to 
answer a questionnaire about their experiences with the online 
software engineering class, to which 33 students ended up 
answering (this number represents exactly half of the total 
number of participating students). At first, the students 
responded with regard to their preference for an online or face-
to-face class; their answers are summarized in Figure 3.  
We can observe that the general preference of the students 
has changed compared to last year. At this point, most students 
prefer face-to-face classes (“Face-to-Face would be more 
productive”): more than 40%, compared to 25% last year. As 
for online classes, the percentage of students who prefer them 
decreased from 40 in 2021 to slightly more than 30. Same as  
the previous year, several students stated that their preference 
depends on the course they are taking (almost 20%).  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Format preference for attending classes in 2022 
 
Face-to-face
classes
Online classes No particular
preference
It depends on
the course I
am taking
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
40.00%
"If you could choose, which type of 
classes would you attend?"

117
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Some of the observations that students made reflected 
their feelings toward different formats. One student 
commented on the convenience of online classes, but used the 
term “invisible” to show that this is detrimental to the presence 
in the group: “Although online classes are convenient, I think 
it does not help regarding student participation. One would 
think that not showing yourself would be a plus, but in fact it 
is used to be even more invisible”.  
One advantage of being in an online environment was 
highlighted, with regard to the seating in a classroom: “I can 
speak up and ask questions in a flat environment, regardless 
of whether I am in the front or back of the classroom.”. 
Unfortunately, with all the restrictions and their impossibility 
to arrive to Japan, there were students who had never been in 
a face-to-face class at the university, so they could not make a 
justified comparison. As one student stated, “I […] never took 
face2face class since I was here, so it's hard to justify.” 
Next, the class participants were asked to express their 
preference for the class style used in the software engineering 
course (see results in Figure 4). They had the following 
choices: "Lecture" style: teacher speaking in front of the 
whole class, students listening” (27.27% respondents), 
"Discussion" style: new things are taught/learned through 
continuous discussions between students and teacher (21.21% 
respondents), "Combination": half lecture-style teaching by 
the instructor, half interactive communication/discussion with 
students (48.48%) and "Flipped classroom" style: students 
read the new materials at home, then they come to class and 
ask questions, discuss etc.” (3.03% respondents). Almost half 
of the students chose the “combination” style, which is 
precisely the style employed by the instructor for this course. 
This is a promising result, showing that the class was 
relatively successful, and the students were satisfied with the 
style used. 
  
 
Figure 4.  Preference for class style  
When questioned about cultural differences in face-to-face 
classes vs. online classes, the responding students considered 
the two formats equally influential in how visible these 
differences are (as results show in Figure 5). Almost 40% of 
the students considered that cultural differences are more 
visible in face-to-face classrooms; the same percentage stated 
that they are more visible in online classrooms. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Differences between online classes and face-to-face classes in 
terms of cultural diferences 
Only 3% of the students found that there is no difference 
between the two formats. This is an interesting result which 
shows how the perceptions of online classes have changed for 
the participating students. One conclusion that could be drawn 
is that, at first, students believed that the cultural differences 
easily distinguishable in a classroom would attenuate in an 
online environment. After two years of almost exclusive 
online classes, their perceptions seem to have changed: they 
realized that the differences not only remained when online, 
but they are often even more difficult to overcome.  
The class activities are an important part of implementing 
active and collaborative learning. In fact, from the point of 
view of the instructor, this is one of the greatest improvements 
that she managed throughout the years of teaching the course. 
Every year, more numerous and more diverse activities were 
introduced. The instructor wanted to know whether the 
participating students enjoyed these activities on one hand, 
and whether they found them useful/valuable on the other 
hand. Furthermore, she wanted to learn precisely what the 
students liked and what they did not like about these activities. 
Table III summarizes some of the data obtained from the 
questionnaire administered to the students.  
TABLE III.  
CLASS ACTIVITIES IN 2022:  
ENJOYABLE VS. VALUABLE/USEFUL 
 
A lot 
Moderately 
A little 
Not at 
all 
Enjoyable 
45.45% 
33.33% 
21.21% 
0% 
Valuable/useful 
60.61% 
27.27% 
12.12% 
0% 
 
As can be observed, more than three quarters of the 
responding students found the activities enjoyable (either a lot 
or moderately). At the same time, almost 90% thought that 
they were valuable/useful (a lot or moderately). The results 
are similar to those from 2021 and, again, they show that 
students do recognize the usefulness of the activities even 
when they do not enjoy them very much.  
"Lecture"…
"Discussion"…
"Combination…
"Flipped…
Other
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
"For an introductory software engineering 
course, which style of class would you 
choose?"
There is no
difference
between the two
Cultural
differences are
more visible in
face-to-face
classrooms
Cultural
differences are
more visible in
online
classrooms
I don't know
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
"In terms of cultural differences, how do 
online classes compare with face-to-face 
classes?"

118
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The respondents were given 3 choices in regard to what 
they like about activities. Most respondents (63.64%) chose 
“listening to what other people think”, followed by “saying 
what you think”, which was chosen by 24.24% of the 
respondents. Some students (12.12%) chose “nothing” 
(simply not enjoying the discussions at all). When asked to 
specify what they did not like, several responses stood out. By 
far, the largest complaint expressed regarded the participation 
of the other students (often Japanese), as seen below. 
 
- “I felt like I had to force discussion with others sometimes.” 
- “Limited number of people speaking up, only two or three 
may participate in team activities” 
- “That Japanese people do not interact much in the class.” 
- “After we're divided into breakout rooms, some people don't 
join the discussion. I don't know why, but I want them to join.” 
- “I wish all the students participate in the discussion so that 
I can interact with them.: 
- “Many students do not speak.” 
- “Just some people not being involved in the class 100% of 
the time.” 
With the same complaint, some students’ opinions 
included more details: 
- “I like the discussions, but sometimes I'd prefer to not have 
this kind of activity because of the number of times everybody 
stays quiet in my room. I feel I waste more energy trying to do 
the exercise alone or getting some else to talk. I understand 
everybody has its reasons, but these situations are hard for 
me.” 
- “It is hard when one's put in a room where nobody wishes 
to talk. (Now I kind understand how the professor feels) 
Although everybody may have their reason, it affects how I 
enjoy the class as I think I waste more energy: Doing the 
exercise alone or trying to get someone else to talk. I'd say it 
even gave me a little be on anxiety sometimes, as sometimes I 
noticed that if I didn't start to make the requested exercise, 
nobody in the group say or do anything.” 
 
One interesting piece of feedback highlighted the fact that 
some students “talk too much on irrelevant topics: “i. people 
won't talk in breakout rooms ii. some would talk too much on 
irrelevant topics”. From the instructor’s point of view, in a 
class where most Japanese students are very quiet, talking “too 
much” is beneficial for the class, even considering that the 
topics are “irrelevant”.  
One respondent’s comment referred to one of the sessions 
when the groups were constituted on the basis of a common 
language (as much as possible): “Maybe we didn't do ice 
breaking properly, and when we were in breakout room, no 
one speak. There were some classes that there was a real 
discussion. The first one is when we group student based on 
language we speak, and the last one that we discussed about 
risk assessment. About the first one, I think it because of there 
were so many Latin American students which shared a lot in 
their culture so it was easy to connect for them. I think if 
everyone know each other more, we are likely to share a 
conversation.” 
Not all the students were eager to take part in class 
activities, even though they appreciated the content, as one 
participant explained: “The content of the class was very 
useful. Only in my point of view, I think that maybe not having 
so many activities together would have helped me.” 
Regarding class participation and ways to increase it, one 
interesting suggestion came from a student: “Attributing the 
participation score may motivate more people to participate 
in the class.”. Whereas this is an issue worth considering, it 
would most probably be hard to implement. Students joining 
a software engineering class would expect to be evaluated 
more on the knowledge they acquired and less on their 
participation skills.  
Another participant pointed out that easier (and more 
“enjoyable”) tasks might entice the students to speak more 
during class: “I am shy and not good at speaking and listening 
English. So, I want to do easy and enjoyable tasks or games, 
for example, estimating rule from dice results on 6/8. Thanks 
to this game, I understood and talked in English.”. 
A third suggestion came in the form of suggesting “ice 
breaking” activities: “Some people (e.g., me) are unlikely to 
discuss with someone I am not familiar, but will talk a lot with 
close friends. I think a lot of people are like me. So, I think we 
need some kind of ice breaking activities. Also, I have not met 
anyone in my degree since I have been here too.”. (The last 
part refers to the fact that the student is the only one joining 
the course from his department (“degree”).)  
Some participants believe that online classes are helpful 
for “shy” students: “online class is more flexible for me, and 
relax for shy people, i am sure i would only speak less in a 
face to face class.” At the same time, other participants 
believe the opposite: “Offline courses will make shy people 
more likely to participate in discussions”. In the instructor’s 
experience, it is difficult to generalize: some students are more 
comfortable participating online, whereas others, although 
initially “forced” to participate in a real classroom, become 
increasingly more confident in the presence of other students. 
Understanding the factors that contribute to better 
participation and making a systematic comparison between 
online and offline classes (from the active and cooperative 
learning point of view) would make an excellent topic that 
could be studied in future work.  
Last, but not least, even in informal discussions, many 
students expressed their hope that the face-to-face classes will 
return soon. Here is an example of one such comment: “I wish 
the classes to be face-to-face so that I could get a chance to 
interact with more people and exchange the ideas I have and 
get their opinions as well. I wish to come out of the "online" 
class mode and interact with other students directly. Hope this 
changes soon.”.  
 
Finally, when students had the opportunity to express free 
thoughts, they made comments like the following:  
- “I am grateful that [she] always listened to the opinions of 
the students and responded to everything on-time, even though 
it was online” (translated from Japanese).  
- “The course hours are interactive and this keeps a student 
engaging in the classwork”.  
- “It was nice to have an English discussion” (translated from 
Japanese). 

119
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The only request for change took the following form: “It 
would be better if the lecture could be posted to manaba 
before class”, followed immediately by “Anyway, thank you 
for your teaching”. All the remaining comments received 
were of a positive nature, expressing students’ satisfaction 
with the way the course was conducted.   
 
V. 
DISCUSSION ON COURSE EFFECTIVENESS  
AND LESSONS LEARNED 
The changes from offline to online classes provided an 
invaluable experience, to both the students and the instructor. 
While it is generally rather difficult to measure learning and 
its effectiveness very precisely, two of the most common ways 
to assess learning effectiveness are course completion rates 
and learner perception. This section discusses these two 
methods and offers some lessons learned by the instructor 
during the teaching of this course.  
The software engineering course completion rates are 
shown in Table IV. Although slightly lower than those for the 
previous 3 three years (but higher than that for the very first 
year, i.e. 2016), the completion rates for the three “online” 
years were still very high, with the lowest being 94.11%.  
TABLE IV.  
COMPLETION RATES  
OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING COURSE 
 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Number of 
students 
enrolled in 
course 
17 
26 
35 
66 
34 
53 
66 
Number of 
students 
completing 
course 
15 
26 
34 
65 
32 
52 
63 
Completion 
rate  
(%) 
88.23 
100 
97.14 
98.48 
94.11 
98.11 
95.45 
 
Regarding the students’ perceptions, the results obtained 
from the questionnaire administered by the instructor, as 
described in the previous section, show that they were 
overwhelmingly positive towards the class’s effectiveness. 
Furthermore, data from the university-prepared end of course 
questionnaire results support the same idea. (The University 
of Tsukuba prepares a short questionnaire at the end of each 
course, which the students are strongly encouraged to answer, 
usually during the last class of the course. This questionnaire 
is independent of the one administered by the instructor, as 
described in the previous section.)  
The students provided their answers on a scale of 1 to 5, 
corresponding to “strongly agree”, “agree”, “neutral”, 
“disagree” and “strongly disagree”, respectively.  Table V 
summarizes the answers given by the students to 5 of the 
questions in 2022, the last year of the online classes. As can 
be observed, with only a few exceptions of respondents 
choosing “neutral”, all the participants selected either 
“strongly agree” or “agree” with the 5 statements. It is 
encouraging to observe that participants developed a stronger 
interest in the subject after taking this course. Also, even 
though the class took place online, they believed that the ways 
in which the instructor explained and planned the class 
contents were suitable for the course. They also recognized 
that there were sufficient opportunities to ask questions during 
class. Last, but not least, the students were satisfied with the 
course, as shown in their responses: 26 chose “strongly 
agree”, 14 chose “agree” and 1 chose “neutral”.  
TABLE V.  
RESULTS OF END OF COURSE QUESTIONNAIRE  
(1: STRONGLY AGREE; 2: AGREE; 3: NEUTRAL; 4: DISAGREE; 5: STRONGLY 
DISAGREE) 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
“The instructions were well prepared for the 
course.” 
29 
12 
0 
0 
0 
“The ways the instructor explained and planned 
the class contents were suitable for the course.” 
23 
17 
1 
0 
0 
“Attending this course, I developed a stronger 
interest in the field of study related to this 
subject than before.” 
21 
17 
3 
0 
0 
“Overall, I am satisfied with this course.” 
26 
14 
1 
0 
0 
“You were given sufficient opportunities for 
asking questions to the instructor(s).” 
32 
8 
1 
0 
0 
 
Furthermore, empirical observations supported these 
results. The instructor held informal discussions with the 
participants, as often as possible (either during the break time 
or when she met the students on campus, by chance). The 
students expressed their satisfaction with the course, as well 
as their enjoyment in participating in class activities, on 
numerous occasions. They often expressed these feelings even 
without being asked. 
 
To summarize, some important lessons from our 
experience as described in this paper are as follows. 
a) Active learning should be pursued in all its forms, as 
much as possible. In software engineering, it paves the way 
for an easy to achieve understanding of various concepts and 
allows the learners to gain experience similar to that obtained 
in the real world when developing a software application. 
b) Collaborative learning can be very successful, in both 
offline and online settings. As long as an environment that 
facilitates collaboration between participants is ensured, 
collaborative learning can be implemented in either class 
modality, be it online or offline. 
c) Perceived enjoyment and perceived usefulness play an 
important role in an online environment for the students. The 
more enjoyable and useful they feel that classes are, the more 
engaged and satisfied with the course they will be. 
d) Multicultural classrooms provide the opportunity for 
students to experience work in international environments and 
a glimpse of global software engineering practices. 
e) Fulfilling course objectives and achieving student 
satisfaction depend less on the class modality, and more on the 
student engagement strategies used by the teacher. 
It is a fact that the traditional face-to-face classroom 
modality is preferred by many course participants (and even 
the instructor herself). In the case of the software engineering 
course, this preference does not rely on the lack of success of 
online classes, but rather, we suspect, on factors that have to 
do with human psychology. (This is a topic that can be further 
developed in future work.) Nevertheless, the most valuable 
lesson is the fact that, if necessary, online classes can 

120
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
successfully substitute face-to-face classes, provided that 
there is constant interaction between the teacher and the 
students, as well as collaborative activities between the 
students.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on the experience of teaching a graduate school 
software engineering course to a multicultural group of 
students, this paper described the approaches used by the class 
instructor to implement active and cooperative learning, in 
both the traditional face-to-face format and the sudden 
(imposed by the Covid-19 pandemic) online format. It 
highlighted the impact of switching from an offline to an 
online class modality and the challenges brought upon by 
emergency remote teaching. Our study showed that, despite 
all the challenges, the online classes were successful in 
achieving the learning outcomes, as well as achieving student 
satisfaction with the learning process. If the online class 
interactions (between the teacher and the students, as well as 
among students) are constant and the activities are varied, the 
students participate actively, even after initial reluctance. 
Whether the class is enjoyed by the students, and they are 
satisfied or not, depends more on this level of interaction 
rather than the class modality.  
In future work, the instructor plans to make a systematic 
comparison between the online and offline environments from 
the point of view of student in-class participation, in order to 
discover the best strategies for making the best out of active 
and cooperative learning, in either type of environment.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Vasilache, “Offline and Online Active Learning: Lessons in 
Teaching Software Engineering to Multicultural Groups”, 
ICSEA 2022. 
[2] D. Dahiya, "Teaching software engineering: A practical 
approach", ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, 
35(2), pp. 1-5, 2010. 
[3] B. R. Maxim, S. Acharya,  S. Brunvand, and M. Kessentini,  
“WIP: Introducing active learning in a software engineering 
course”, In 2017 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, June 
2017. 
[4] M. A. Alsubaie, "Examples of current issues in the 
multicultural classroom", Journal of Education and Practice, 
6(10), pp. 86-89, 2015. 
[5] M. Malcon-Cervera and C. Montaudon-Tomas, "Multicultural 
Classrooms: Advantages for Foreign and Local Students. A 
Comparative Study",  In EDULEARN17 Proceedings, IATED, 
pp. 6477-6485, 2017. 
[6] M. W. Keyser, "Active learning and cooperative learning: 
understanding the difference and using both styles effectively", 
Research strategies, 17(1), pp. 35-44, 2000. 
[7] S. Sandrone, G. Scott, W. J. Anderson, and K. Musunuru, 
“Active learning-based STEM education for in-person and 
online learning”, Cell, vol. 184, no. 6, pp. 1409-1414, 2021. 
[8] G. S. Gremmels, “Active and cooperative learning in the one-
shot BI session”, Library Orientation Series, pp. 101-106, 
1996. 
[9] C. C. Bonwell and J. A. Eison, “Active Learning: Creating 
Excitement in the Classroom”, 1991 ASHE-ERIC Higher 
Education Reports. ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education, 
The George Washington University, 1991. 
[10] S. Freeman, S.L. Eddy, M. McDonough, M.K. Smith, N. Oko
roafor, H. Jordt, et al., “Active learning increases student 
performance in science, engineering, and mathematics”, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111 (23), 
pp. 8410-8415, 2014. 
[11] V. M. F. Fonseca and J. Gomez, “Applying active 
methodologies for teaching software engineering in computer 
engineering”, IEEE Revista Iberoamericana de Tecnologias 
del Aprendizaje, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 182-190, 2017. 
[12] D. W. Johnson, R.T. Johnson, and K. A. Smith, “Nuts and Bolts 
of Cooperative Learning”, pp. 1-3. Edina, MN: Interaction 
Book, 1991. 
[13] W. Ali, “Online and remote learning in higher education 
institutes: 
A 
necessity 
in 
light 
of 
COVID-19 
pandemic”, Higher education studies, 10(3), pp. 16-25, 2020. 
[14] C. Hodges, S. Moore, B. Lockee, T. Trust, and A. Bond, “The 
difference between emergency remote teaching and online 
learning”, Educause review, 27, pp. 1-12, 2020. 
[15] W. H. Stewart, Y. Baek, and P. R. Lowenthal, “From 
Emergency Remote Teaching (ERT) to Sustained Remote 
Teaching (SRT): A comparative semester analysis of exchange 
students’ experiences and perceptions of learning online during 
COVID-19”, Online Learning, 2022.  
[16] T. E. Shim and S. Y. Lee, "College students’ experience of 
emergency remote teaching due to COVID-19", Children and 
youth services review, 119, p. 105578, 2020. 
[17] A. Bozkurt and R. C. Sharma, "Emergency remote teaching in 
a time of global crisis due to CoronaVirus pandemic", Asian 
journal of distance education, 15(1), pp. i-vi, 2020. 
[18] M. Chierichetti and P. Backer, “Exploring faculty perspectives 
during emergency remote teaching in engineering at a large 
public university”, Education Sciences, 11(8), p. 419, 2021.  
[19] K. A. Douglas, A. C. Johnston, J. P. Martin, T. Short, and R. 
A. Soto‐Pérez, “How engineering instructors supported 
students during emergency remote instruction: A case 
comparison”, Computer 
Applications 
in 
Engineering 
Education, 30(3), pp. 934-955, 2022. 
[20] Y. Y. Chiu, “Effectiveness of online learning relies on the 
dynamic between teachers and students”, Journal of e-learning 
Research, 1(4), pp. 61-81, 2021. 
[21] H. Mercier, M. Deguchi, J. B. Van der Henst, and H. Yama, 
“The benefits of argumentation are cross-culturally robust: The 
case of Japan”, Thinking & Reasoning, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 
2016. 
[22] R. G. Tweed and D. R. Lehman, “Learning considered within 
a cultural context: Confucian and Socratic approaches”,  
American Psychologist 57, No. 2, pp. 89-99, 2002.  
[23] S. Vasilache, “From an International Classroom to a 
Distributed Work Environment: Student Perspectives on 
Global Software Engineering”,  Proceedings of International 
Conference on Teaching and Learning for Engineering (TALE 
2018), Dec. 2018, pp. 825-828. 
[24] S. 
Vasilache, 
“Suddenly 
Online: 
Active 
Learning 
Implementation Strategies During Remote Teaching of a 
Software Engineering Course”, In: Auer M.E., Hortsch H., 
Michler O., Köhler T. (eds) Mobility for Smart Cities and 
Regional Development - Challenges for Higher Education, ICL 
2021, Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, vol 389. 
Springer, Cham, pp. 395-402, 2021. 
[25] S. Vasilache, “A Taste of Distributed Work Environments: 
Emergency 
Remote 
Teaching 
and 
Global 
Software 
Engineering”, In: Stephanidis C., Antona M., Ntoa S. (eds) 
HCI International 2021 - Posters. HCII 2021, Communications 
in Computer and Information Science, vol 1421, Springer, 
Cham, pp. 624-628, 2021. 

121
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[26] S.  Vasilache, “Ad Meliora”: Towards an Improved Approach 
to 
Global 
Software 
Engineering 
Curriculum. 
In HCI 
International 2020-Posters: 22nd International Conference, 
HCII 2020, Copenhagen, Denmark, July 19–24, 2020, 
Proceedings, Part II 22, Springer International Publishing, pp. 
343-348, 2020.  
[27] Manaba [Online]. Available from: https://manaba.jp/products/ 
2023.06.01 
[28] C. Whittle, S. Tiwari, S. Yan, and J. Williams, “Emergency 
remote teaching environment: a conceptual framework for 
responsive online teaching in crises”, Information and 
Learning Sciences, 2020. 
[29] Microsoft 
Teams 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-teams/group-
chat-software 2023.06.01 
[30] Zoom: Zoom Meetings & Chat [Online]. Available from: 
https://zoom.us/meetings 2023.06.01 
[31] Microsoft 
Stream 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/microsoft-
stream 2023.06.01 
[32] B. Willmott, “The Agile Paper Airplane Game”. [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.ppm.academy/post/the-agile-
paper-airplane-game 2023.06.01 
 
 
 
 
 

