Critical Issues in SPI Programs: A Holistic View
Cristiane Soares Ramos, Ana Regina Rocha
COPPE/UFRJ
Federal University of Brazil
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil
email: cristianesramos@unb.br, darocha@cos.ufrj.br
Káthia Marçal de Oliveira
LAMIH, UMR CNRS 8201
Université de Valenciennes
Valenciennes, France
email: kathia.oliveira@univ-valenciennes.fr
Abstract - With the competitive market in the domain of
Information Technology (IT), companies are forced to
expand their field to offer not only the service of software
development, as well as direct customer services (e.g., help
desk) or specialist technology services (e.g., testing and
quality certification of systems). In this context, to apply
software process improvement (SPI) requires addressing
different needs and, therefore, the use of different models
and standards. In this paper, we propose to use a holistic
view to look at the whole company in planning a SPI
program. This is done by defining that which we call critical
issues, as elicited from stakeholders on the strategic, tactical
and operational levels of the company. Critical issues are
those which the stakeholders consider very important to
have in the company in terms of software process but that
they perceive the company does not have or is deficient in.
Critical issues support SPI planning as well as a return on
investment (ROI) evaluation, in a complete strategy for SPI
institutionalization. Preliminary results obtained show that
the critical issues are useful to steer the planning effort in
the SPI program so to deal with that which is critical for the
company.
Keywords - Software Process; Improvement; multimodel;
benefits; ROI.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It
is
a
fact
well
known
that
software
process
improvement (SPI) programs should be in line with the
business
goals
of
the
organization
[1][2].
This
is
particularly difficult when a company has a wide field of
expertise, in services ranging from software development
to direct customer service. Moreover, to define SPI
programs, companies have several standards (e.g., ISO
9000 [3], ISO 29110 [4]) at hand along with quality
models (e.g., CMMI [5[-[7], and MPS.Br [8][9]). The
solutions proposed for SPI programs rarely include
different standards and models in the same program nor
consider the legacy of models already implemented in the
organization.
This situation contributes to uncoordinated efforts and
consequently concurrent improvement actions on different
hierarchical levels or different areas of the company that
choose a suitable model for their own needs, without
taking into account other company initiatives [10]. To
address this problem, we argue that it is essential to have a
holistic view for the planning and evaluation of the
benefits from SPI programs.
As defined in the Cambridge dictionary, holistic view
means, ‘dealing with or treating the whole of something or
someone and not just a part’. We proposed, therefore, to
take into account the expectation of benefits of the
stakeholders from different levels of the IT Company
(strategic, tactical, and operational) to plan the SPI
program. To that end, we argue that we should identify
critical issues to plan the SPI program in a way that it
could later be used to evaluate the ROI with the
institutionalization of the SPI program.
Critical issues are prioritized based on the company’s
business goals. They guide the goals of the SPI program
and support the selection of one or more models/standards
that best fit company needs. That means we consider the
use of a multimodel approach in the definition of a SPI
program.
This paper describes the work done to support the
identification of such critical issues and also how to use
them in the planning of a SPI program, using a real
industry case.
The next section briefly introduces the idea of a
multimodel approach for SPI. Then, Section 3 shows our
approach to plan a multimodel program for SPI, using
critical issues. Section 4 shows how to apply and use this
approach in practice. Section 5 points at the advantages,
limitations, and ongoing work avenues of this research
II.
MULTIMODEL APPROACH FOR SPI
With the wide diversity of SPI standards, one of the
biggest
difficulties
faced
by
organizations
is
the
identification of the best-suited model to support them in
achieving their business goal. In Brazil, a study on the
evolution of software quality [11] showed a large adoption
of the MPS-SW [8] and CMMI-DEV [5] models. Their
use has brought benefits, such as higher customer
satisfaction, increased productivity, and cost reduction.
These and other benefits are often found in the literature as
return on investment from these models (see, for example,
[12-13]).
However, companies that have business features that
go beyond the scope of improvement of these models
require the implementation of other models. We can
mention: (i) companies that develop software products and
have a help desk or desk-service to meet the demands of
their customers and (ii) companies that outsource the
development of some lifecycle activities of their products.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

In the first case, CMMI-SVC [7] and MPS-SV [9] can be
used; in the second one, CMMI-ACQ [6]. Multinational
companies also need to implement specific models, as
required for contracts in different countries (e.g., the
Brazilian model is being required in several contracts with
Brazilian Government).
One can also find several other models/standards
required and used in a smaller scale, such as ISO 9000 [3],
MoProSoft [14], ISO 29110 [4], MPT.Br [15] (a Brazilian
model for software testing).
A joint implementation of these models simultaneously
allows treating different points of improvement in the
organization in a more appropriate way. However, it is
necessary to determine when the joint implementation is
needed, which models are relevant, on which levels of
maturity/capability they should be deployed, and how the
improvement program should be structured towards a
feasible
implementation
in
the
company,
without
generating unnecessary costs, wasted resources, rework
and looking for the best ROI.
With this scenario in mind, the concept of multimodel
environment emerged [16] as a result of the effort of
companies to integrate models and international standards
to achieve process improvement. Its use, however, requires
an understanding and an interpretation of how different
models co-relate, which makes an implementation of
multimodel improvement a complex task. Thus, the use of
a strategy to harmonize and match these models is a
critical success factor [17].
The
harmonization
implies
defining
solutions
to
support the company [10]: (1) determine and understand
which models will help it accomplish its corporate goal;
(2) understand both the differentiating and the overlapping
features of these models; (3) create an organizational
process
focused
on
the
company’s
mission
and
incorporating the features and contents of all models of
choice.
In this context, Mirna et. al. [16] propose a method that
focuses on the business goal and selects the standards and
models that best fit the company, indicating what should
be
done
to
achieve
such
goals.
PRIME
(Process
Improvement in Multimodel Environments) [18] proposes
the alignment between business and improvement goals.
Models are selected and categorized according to their
type of contribution to company goals, and the points of
intersection between models are determined. Both studies
measure the results, evaluating the achievement of the
organizational
goals.
Other
examples
of multimodel
approaches can be found in [19].
Several benefits justify an investment in multimodel
approaches, such as [18]: focus on the business rather than
focusing on the model; cultural change in relation to the
establishment
of
the
processes
in
the
company;
measurement system; robustness and effectiveness of the
organizational approach in the long run. However, a
multimodel
approach
also
presents
some
challenges
[20][21]:
getting
the
commitment
from
senior
management;
determining
the
organization's
strategy,
integrating and coordinating training; integrating measures
so that they do not target the adopted models; knowing the
differences and similarities regarding the various models
adopted in the design of improvements.
We argue that, to support a multimodel approach, one
needs a holistic view of the company in a way that the
potential benefits achieved by the SPI program are visible
to all the stakeholders involved.
III. A HOLISTIC VIEW FOR SPI VIA THE
IDENTIFICATION OF CRITICAL ISSUES
Our proposal for process improvement is based on the
idea that a company that decides to carry out a SPI
program wishes to have some benefits that justify such
investment. Thus, the characterization and understanding
of the needs of the company should be made judiciously
and should guide both the definition of the improvement
goal and the selection of models to be implemented, to
enhance the possibility of getting a better return on the
investment. By applying a holistic view we assume to look
at the company as a whole and, therefore, to look for
benefits for all the stakeholders involved in the SPI
program.
To support this idea we propose to identify critical
issues in the company. Critical issues are what all
stakeholders or their representatives, on the different
organizational levels (strategic, tactical, and operational)
consider very important to have in the company in terms
of process but sense the company does not have or has in a
deficient manner. By identifying these critical issues, the
company can better define a SPI Program plan and later
evaluate the benefits attained, to start a new cycle of
improvement, institutionalizing a continuous process for
improvement.
As shown in Figure 1, the core of a holistic view is the
identification of critical issues that can address different
stakeholder needs. Based on these critical issues the
continuous streamlining of the SPI is done as follows: (1)
Characterizing
the
company:
understanding
the
characteristics of the company as related to its field of
expertise (software development, software maintenance,
software
testing,
service
desk,
product
marketing,
acquisitions, etc.), the improvement program initiatives
already
undertaken,
and
its
types
of
customers
(government, national, and international).
At this point the Critical Issues (CI) are identified
with the different stakeholders from the strategic, tactical
and operational levels; (2) Defining a SPI Program Plan –
defining the SPI plan, including improvement goals,
models/standards to be followed, resources, risk analysis
and mitigation, and an execution schedule; (3) Executing
the SPI Program Plan: Carrying out the plan, and
measuring results based on the critical issues identified;
and (4) Evaluating the Benefits of a SPI Program (4) –
evaluating the reach of the benefits with the stakeholders,
considering the critical issues they identified. These
benefits represent the ROI for the SPI program and if not
attained,
they
can
be
re-considered
in
the
next
improvement cycle.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

Figure 1. Continuous SPI with Holistic View
To support the identification of critical issues we
defined questionnaires based on a detailed research on the
benefits of SPI as shown in next subsection.
A.
Supporting the Identification of Critical Issues for
SPI
To define the questionnaires for the identification of
critical issues we used a proposal that establishes the
implementation
of
theoretical
procedures
(theoretical
studies supporting the definition of the issues and their
semantic
validation)
and
experimental
procedures
(application of the questionnaire).
The theoretical procedures were supported by two
main sources: (1) a systematic mapping of literature [22],
where the benefits of Process Improvement Programs were
mapped (in brief, from 112 papers found in literature, 28
were considered pertinent, and of those 34 different
benefits for SPI were identified); and (2) the purpose of
the processes for quality models in the context of Software
(MPS-SW and CMMI-DEV models), Services (MPS-SV
and CMMI-SVC models) and Testing (MPT.Br model).
These models were picked due to their potential adoption
by Brazilian companies.
As shown in Figure 2 the statements (i.e., issues) of the
questionnaire were set in different categories: process
issues and issues about benefits in SPI. Process issues
were organized into common issues and specific issues, for
each of the process types (software, services, or testing).
Altogether there were 74 issues. This organization avoids
the repetition of issues, making the overlapping of the
process and help explicit in the definition of the SPI.
The definition of the questionnaire is based on [23] that
adapted SERVQUAL questionnaires [24]. This way, all
the issues are organized into two questionnaires: (i) one to
collect the Importance of the issue for the respondent, and
(ii) the second one to collect one’s Perception of each
issue in the company.
Figure 2. Categories of Issues in the Questionnaire
This way, each company stakeholder answers for each
issue to the extent one considers it important for the
organization according to one’s point-of-view (strategic,
tactical, or operational) and what one’s perception is of the
issue in the company. The issues are answered in a four-
point Likert scale.
Critical issues are the ones identified as very important
for the company but with a low level of perception by the
stakeholders. Figure 3 and 4 show respectively an example
of the issues presented in both questionnaires (to collect
the degree of Importance and degree of Perception).
Each one of the statements in the questionnaire (i.e.,
the issues) is associated to some quality model or quality
processes from a model, in a way that can further support
the identification of which model/process should be
addressed in the company. For instance, in Figures 3 and
4, the first statement from each questionnaire is related to
Project Planning/Work Planning; the second statement is
related to the Supplier Agreement Management from these
models; the third to Configuration Management and the
fourth to Process and Product Quality Assurance.
Two experts in Software Engineering, specifically on
software process improvement, reviewed all the statements
defined to ensure compliance with the following criteria:
clearness
(intelligible
even
for
less
experienced
respondents) and simplicity (expressing a single idea).
Once the questionnaires were reviewed, two semantic
validations with the participation of industry professionals
were done.
Figure 3. Some statements of the questionnaire of Importance
Figure 4. Some statements of the questionnaire of Perception
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

TABLE I – CRITERIA FOR QUESTIONNAIRE ADAPTATION
Nature of work in
companies
Common issues
Specific issues
SW,
SV, T
SW,
SV
SW,
T
SW
SV
T
Soft. Develop. or
maintenance
X
X
X
X
-
-
Service-desk
X
X
-
-
X
-
Software testing
X
-
X
-
-
X
SW=Software; SV=Service; T=testing
The application of the full questionnaire depends on
the nature of the work done by the companies as shown in
Table I. Issues not pertinent are eliminated from the
questionnaire before it is applied.
B.
Supporting the SPI Program Plan
Critical issues are used to support the planning of the
SPI Program. In order to reduce the degree of subjectivity
in this planning a need was seen to adopt a method that
would aid the company to grasp what processes deal with
the more critical issues and, when needed, prioritise and
set the order of the processes to be implemented in the
different improvement cycles.
QFD (Quality Function Deployment) aims at relating
product requirements to those of the clients, seeking to
identify how the product requirements are used to build a
product that meets client requirements [25]. The strategy
put forward in this work does not aim at the building of a
product but rather the planning of a SPI Program that
addresses the critical issues identified by the company.
Thus, the QFD was adjusted to relate the critical issues
(client requirements) with the software processes (product
requirements) so to prioritise the software processes that
will be used in the definition of a plan for the improvement
program.
The
main
output
product
is
the
relative
importance (RI) index of the processes which will guide
the prioritisation of the processes in the planning of cycles
for the improvement of the software process.
IV. OUR APPROACH IN PRACTICE: AN
INDUSTRY CASE
In this section we show how the questionnaires
described in the section above were applied and used to
define the SPI program plan in a very small Brazilian
company.
A.
Characterizing the Company and Identifying Critical
Issues
The company has customers in Brazil and overseas. It
does not hire services and/or software development from
other companies and it does not have the Brazilian
Government
as
a
client.
It
works
with
software
development and maintenance by demand, develops and
sells final software products (components, COTS). It also
has a help-desk service for its customers. Currently, one of
its projects is to work as a software testing factory. As
regards its history of process improvements, the company
was rated as first level in the 2009 Brazilian model (MPS-
SW), although the processes are only partially followed
nowadays.
TABLE II – CRITICAL ISSUES IDENTIFIED AS PER CATEGORY
Common Issues
Specific Issues
SW, SV, T*
SW, SV
SW, T
SW
SV
T
2
10
2
0
7
8
7%
34%
7%
0%
24%
28%
Accumulated (Common + Specific)
48%
66%
41%
*SW=Software, SV=Service, T=testing
The questionnaires were answered by all company
employees (stakeholders). As a result, 29 critical issues in
the processes and 13 critical issues in the benefits of SPI
issues were identified. Table II shows the number of
critical issues as per category (see Figure 2). The majority
of critical issues are related to services (66%), followed by
software (48%), and Testing (41%). We also found that
48% are common issues in service, software and testing
quality models.
We should like to point that, in defining improvement
actions that address critical issues, the processes to be
implemented should consider the overlap between models
and also the characteristics that differentiate them. The
critical issues are discussed below from the perspective of
the respondents’ profiles: (a) Technical team - operational
level; (b) Project manager - tactical level; and (c) Senior
manager - strategic level.
1.
Critical Issues in Processes
For the technical team the critical issues are more
concentrated in the realm of testing: control of test
environment incidents; standardization of test results in
projects; quantitative assessment of quality objectives;
identification and elimination of root causes of defects;
and implementation of peer review. As regards services,
the
critical
issues
are
about
the
control
of
the
implementation of changes and the ability to monitor
performance requirements. There are expectations about
improvements in risk management and knowledge sharing
amongst the employees. It is interesting to note that there
are no common critical issues between the technical team
and the project manager.
From the perspective of the project manager, the
critical issues are related to: the use of estimation
techniques (C01); management of the projects and services
portfolio: planning of the services portfolio based on
strategic planning (C15); feasibility assessment for project
continuation against the strategic goals of the company
(C06). It is expected that the achievement of the business
goals of the company are evaluated by measurements
(C07). The critical issues specific to the services area refer
to the definition of mechanisms for the development of
new services; compliance with Service Level Agreements;
control of budget and accounting services; information
security and communication of information on services.
As regards testing, the critical issues for the project
manager
are:
managing
the
completion
of
testing
activities; automated source code assessment; re-use of
work products previously developed in other projects and
control of the use of new tools to support the testing
process. Finally, the critical issues for senior managers
concern
supplier
management
agreements;
use
of
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

estimation techniques (C01); management of the projects
and services’ portfolio (C05, C06, C15); knowledge
sharing amongst employees; implementation of peer
reviews; automated assessment of the source code; use of
criteria for making important decisions; use of measures to
evaluate the achievement of company goals (C07); and
control of budget and accounting services.
As expected, no common critical issue was found in
the three profiles. The expected benefits vary according to
the
responsibilities
and
activities
performed
by
the
respondents. This reinforces the importance of involving
different stakeholders on different hierarchical levels in the
definition of the critical issues.
2.
Critical Issues in SPI Benefits
Critical issues in SPI benefits are expectations of
benefits that are results of the entire SPI program, but
some of them may be associated with specific processes
(e.g., B01, B04, B08, B22, and B24).
For the technical team, the critical issues concern the
monitoring of projects (B24), reduction of re-work, and
the quality of the work life. Compliance projects schedules
(B22) are the only common critical issue of the technical
team with the project managers. The critical issues raised
by
the
project
manager
refer
to
expectations
of
improvements related to the accuracy of estimates (B04);
prompt answer to market demands; and a greater market
share.
Critical issues for senior management relate to
company growth in terms of number of projects and
clients in Brazil and overseas; ensuring that the cost of
projects and services are kept as planned (if there is no
change in requirements) (B08); better understanding of the
tasks and responsibilities by the project teams (B01); and
greater market share.
B.
Defining a SPI Program Plan
The analysis of the critical issues identified in the
company indicates the need of a multimodel approach with
improvement actions for software, services and testing. As
the company aims at increasing the number of projects and
customers
abroad,
the
use
of
quality
models
with
international recognition is advisable; in this case the
CMMI-DEV and CMMI-SVC. However, the MPT.Br and
MPS-SW/MPS-SV models should be used for some
specific
issues
related
to
testing
and
knowledge
management, as there are no CMMI processes that address
these issues.
To define the SPI Program Plan we should analyze all
critical issues, bearing in mind that they should be
addressed in several improvement cycles. Deciding which
questions to address in the first place is no trivial task and
should be done with caution. A bad start places the entire
improvement program at risk. Thus, it is recommended
that the critical issues identified be evaluated by senior
management (strategic level), based on different criteria.
The first one is the alignment with the business goals of
the company. Once this aspect is ensured, it should also
take into consideration company size, its legacy as regards
SPI, target budget for SPI and the natural dependence
between processes (i.e., processes presented on a high
maturity level depend on the implementation of other
processes, and therefore are hardly possible at first).
As shown in Table II, the company identified many
critical issues to tackle and most of them relate to services
(66%). However, the main company business is software
development and maintenance and as a result of that senior
management chose to first face the critical issues in the
domain of software (48%). In spite of that, many of such
issues are common to the services and testing areas.
The QFD approach was applied, considering, as client
requirements, the critical issues mapped in the Software
context. Having established the correlations between the
critical issues and the processes, in the end the Relative
Importance (RI) Index was found for the processes. Table
III shows the four highest RI processes and the CI
associated to such processes.
The processes with highest RI index are prioritised for
implementation. Based on this, 4 processes were chosen to
be implemented in the first SPI cycle: PP, PMC, M&A and
PFM, as they had already been implemented in the
company (PP and PMC) and are the basis for others. We
chose also REQM (requirements management) because it
has many correlation with other processes. The process
M&A is so important for the analyses of benefits of the
SPI program. For the second SPI cycle were selected the
engineering process Verification and Validation, because
of the high interest in the improvement to the quality of the
product and the business goal of answer the market
demand software testing projects.
The idea is to implement these processes in a
capability level 2 (of CMMI) in the first cycle and to
improve continuously in each new cycle of improvement.
Considering the process to be implemented in the first and
second cycles (six months each one), they cover software,
service
and
testing
quality
models.
Therefore,
the
definition of the process specific for the company should
ensure the incorporation of all the required features for
each model. Each cycle will be
At the end of each improvement cycle the perception
questionnaire will be reapplied to measure if the level of
perception of the critical issues are improving, which may
influence in the prioritization of critical issues for the next
improvement
cycles.
Moreover,
to
execute the
SPI
Program Plan a set of measures is proposed for each
process to allow the evaluation of improvement actions
and a return of the investment.
TABLE III – TOP FOUR RI INDEX FOR THE PROCESSES
Process
RI
CI
PP - Project Planning
13,67%
C01, B01,
B04, B22,
B24
PMC - Project Monitoring and
Control
10,73%
M&A - Measurement and Analysis
7,17%
C07
PFM - Portfolio Management
7,12%
C05, C06,
C15
(*) B – Benefit in SPI, C-common to between quality models
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presents an approach to support the
implementation of SPI program based on a multimodel
environment and on the eliciting of CI considering the
whole company. CI are prioritised according to business
goals of the company and guide the objectives, scope and
planning of the SPI Program. We point as an advantage of
this approach the participation of stakeholders from the
different levels and profiles in the identification of critical
issues; and, the idea of promoting the visibility of benefits
achieved by the improvement actions considering the
scope of the initial expectations of the stakeholders.
The holistic view occurs in two different dimensions:
the horizontal and the vertical. The horizontal dimension
goes through many lines of business. The vertical
dimension
goes through only one line of business
considering the views of various hierarchical levels. The
ability to cover these two dimensions depends on the
structure of the company and their own desire to address
them.
It is necessary to do a better systematisation of the final
meeting, to support the alignment of the business goals
with the prioritisation of critical issues and the definition
of
the
number
of
SPI
cycles.
The
general
recommendations we made were essential for the decision
making process, although the experience and certainty of
top management were key factors for the definition of the
SPI plan.
We
are
currently
working
on
this
weakness,
investigating the pick chart
technique as proposed by
Lean [26] and QFD, to construct a House of Quality for
the critical issues and the processes. Other ongoing works
include the definition of a catalogue of measures for all CI
and their related process to allow an evaluation of the ROI
through the analysis of the benefits reaped; to support the
company, presented in this paper in the execution of its
SPI Program plan; and, to apply this approach to other
companies.
REFERENCES
.[1] J. Guzmán, H. Mitre, A. Amescua, and M. Velasco,
"Integration of strategic management, process improvement
and
quantitative
measurement
for
managing
the
competitiveness of software engineering organizations,"
Software Quality Journal, vol. 18, pp. 341-359, 2010.
[2]
T. Birkholzer, C. Dickmann, and J. Vaupel, "A Framework
for
Systematic
Evaluation
of
Process
Improvement
Priorities,"
in
Software
Engineering
and
Advanced
Applications
(SEAA),
2011
37th
EUROMICRO
Conference on, 2011, pp. 294-301.
[3]
ISO 9000:2005, "ISO/IEC 9000:2005 Quality systems -
Fundamentals and vocabulary". International Organization for
Standardization, 2005.
[4]
ISO 29110, "ISO/IEC 29110-4-1: Software engineering --
Lifecycle profiles for Very Small Entities (VSEs)-- Part 4-1:
Profile
specifications:
Generic
profile
group"
International
Organization for Standardization, 2011.
[5]
SEI, "CMMI for Development, Version 1.3," Carnegie
Mellon
University.2010.
Available:
http://cmmiinstitute.com/resources/cmmi-development-
version-13 [retrieved: March, 2015]
[6]
SEI, "CMMI® for Acquisition, Version 1.3," Carnegie
Mellon
University.
CMU/SEI-2010-TR-032,
2010.
Available:http://cmmiinstitute.com/resources/cmmi-
acquisition-version-13 [retrieved: March, 2015]
[7]
SEI, "CMMI® for Services, Version 1.3," Carnegie Mellon
University,2010.
Available:http://cmmiinstitute.com/resources/cmmi-
services-version-13[retrieved: March, 2015]
[8]
SOFTEX, MPS.BR - MPS General Software Guide:
Associação para Promoção da Excelência do Software
Brasileiro,
2012.
Available:http://www.softex.br/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/MPS.BR_Guia_Geral_Software_
2012-c-ISBN-1.pdf [retrieved: March, 2015]
[9]
SOFTEX,
MPS.BR
-
MPS
General
Service
Guide:
Associação para Promoção da Excelência do Software
Brasileiro,
2012.
Available:http://www.softex.br/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/MPS.BR_Guia_Geral_Servicos_2
012..pdf [retrieved: March, 2015]
[10] J. Siviy, P. Kirwan, L. Marino, and J. Morley. (2008,
March). The value of harmonizing multiple improvement
technologies: a process improvement professional's view.
Available:
http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-
view.cfm?assetid=29159 [retrieved: March, 2015]
[11] P. Neto, G. Abib, M. Gomel, J. Pécora, A. Junglos, F. Ishi,
and G. Braga, "Software quality evolution in Brazil from
1994-2010 based on research and projects of PBQP
Software", Ministério da Ciência, Tecnologia e Inovação,
Brasília, 2011.
[12] G. Travassos and M. Kalinowski, iMPS 2011Performance
results of the companies that adopted the MPS model 2008-
2011: Softex, 2012. Available: http://www.softex.br/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/iMPS-2011-Resultados-de-
Desempenho-das-Empresas-que-Adotaram-o-Modelo-
MPS-de-2008-a-2011.pdf [retrieved: March, 2015]
[13] M. Unterkalmsteiner, T. Gorschek, A. Islam, C. Cheng, R.
Permadi, and R. Feldt, "Evaluation and measurement of
software
process
improvement-A
systematic
literature
review," IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol.
38, pp. 398-424, 2012.
[14] H. Okbata, Modelo de Processo para la industria del
Software MoProSoft, Versión 1.3, 2005.
[15] SOFTEX-RECIFE,
MPT.Br
Reference
Guide
Model:
SOFTEX
Recife,
2011.
Available:
http://mpt.org.br/mpt/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/MPT_Guia_de_referencia.pdf
[retrieved: March, 2015]
[16] M. Mirna, M. Jezreel, C. Jose, S. Tomas, and A. Giner,
"Advantages of using a multi-model environment in
software process improvement," in Electronics, Robotics
and Automotive Mechanics Conference (CERMA), 2011
IEEE, 2011, pp. 397-402.
[17] C. Pardo, F. Pino, F. Garcia, M. Piattini, and M.
Baldassarre,
"An
ontology
for
the
harmonization
of
multiple standards and models," Computer Standards &
Interfaces, vol. 34, p. 12, 2012.
[18] J. Siviy, P. Kirwan, J. Morley, and L. Marino. (2008,
March).
Maximizing
your
process
improvement
ROI
through
harmonization.
Available:
http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-
view.cfm?assetid=28907 [retrieved: March, 2015]
[19] C. Pardo, F. Pino, F. García, M. Piattini, and M.
Baldassarre,
"Trends
in
harmonization
of
multiple
reference models," in evaluation of novel approaches to
software engineering. vol. 230, L. Maciaszek and P.
Loucopoulos, Eds., ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011,
pp. 61-73.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

[20] L.
Ibrahim,
"A
process
improvement
commentary,"
Crosstalk: The Journal of Defense Software Engineering,
vol. 21, p. 4, 2008.
[21] U. Andelfinger, A. Heijstek, and P. Kirwan. (2006). A
unified process improvement approach for multi-model
improvement
environments.
Available:
http://www.sei.cmu.edu/library/abstracts/news-at-
sei/feature1200604.cfm [retrivied: March, 2015]
[22] C. Ramos, K.. Oliveira, and A. Rocha, "Towards a strategy
for analysing benefits of software process improvement
programs," in The 25th International Conference on
Software Engineering & Knowledge Engineering, Boston,
2013, p. 6.
[23] J. Xexéo, "Sistema de informação como instrumento de
programas de qualidade," Doutorado, COPPE, Programa de
Engenharia de Sistemas e Computação, Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 2001.
[24] A. Parasuraman, V. Zeithaml, and L. Berry, "SERVQUAL
- A multiple-item for scale for measuring consumer
perceptions of service quality," Journal of Retailing, vol.
66, pp. 12-40, 1988.
[25] F. Franceschini, Advanced quality function deployment:
CRC Press LLC, 2002.
[26] G. Mike, D. Rowlands, and B. Castle, What is Lean Six
Sigma?: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

