82
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Methodological Choices in Machine Learning Applications 
Kendall E. Nygard 
Department of Computer Science 
North Dakota State University 
Fargo, ND, USA 
Email: kendall.nygard@ndsu.edu 
 
 
Mostofa Ahsan, Aakanksha Rastogi,  
Rashmi Satyal 
Department of Computer Science 
North Dakota State University 
Fargo, ND, USA 
Email: {mostofa.ahsan, aakanksha.rastogi, 
rashmi.satyal}@ndsu.edu 
Abstract—Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence 
in which a machine has an ability to learn and employ complex 
algorithms to impersonate human behavior. Development of a 
machine learning model involves careful preparation and 
management of data and selection and features to produce 
meaningful results. The data issues are often challenging due to 
availability, characteristics, properties, categorization, and 
balance.  We report on relevant literature, case studies and 
experiments surrounding the data issues. We describe 
alternative machine learning methodologies and emphasize 
supervised learning, including treatment of experimental 
procedures. Procedures and challenges in the collection, 
quantity, distribution, quality, sampling, of and relevancy of 
data are included. Applications of machine learning models are 
presented, including classification models for self-driving cars. 
These models introduce anti-autonomy trust modeling. We also 
describe intrusion detection models that can detect malicious 
activity in computing systems. These applications also provide 
insight into overfitting and underfitting training data. Feature 
engineering and feature selection issues are presented, including 
approaches to 
identifying, 
combining, and 
eliminating 
attributes and features to determine which are needed and their 
significance. Approaches for treating class imbalances in data 
management are discussed. Comparisons among categorical 
encoding techniques are presented. The work provides 
perspective and insight into resolving multiple issues that must 
be addressed in utilizing machine learning models in practice. 
Keywords- Machine Learning; Data Management; Feature 
Engineering; Feature Selection; Self-Driving Cars; Intrusion 
Detection. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Machine Learning (ML) is a rapidly emerging area of 
artificial intelligence. Many types of applications have been 
successfully developed and new successes are regularly 
reported. The famous Turing award winner Jim Gray referred 
to data science as a “fourth paradigm,” taking a rightful place 
among empirical, theoretical, and computational sciences [2].  
Often viewed as interdisciplinary, data science involves 
mathematics, statistics, and computer science as well as other 
related areas. In many applications, the availability of large 
and relevant datasets, and the methods of data science 
provide the lifeblood of machine learning problem-solving 
approaches. Analyses and decision support in nearly every 
area of human endeavor today are related to machine 
learning. 
The example machine learning studies that we describe 
are in the areas of self-driving cars and intrusion detection [1] 
[3][34][37][38]. Self-driving cars are a real-world example of 
a system that requires machine learning, since they involve 
complex computations, algorithms, computing systems, 
mechanics, and behavioral aspects that endanger human life 
if automated decisions or controls go awry. Automated cars 
have features such as remote engine start, advanced 
information systems, moving object detection (MOD), lane 
change assist, anti-lock braking system (ABS), to name just 
a few. These systems can create vulnerabilities to cyber-
attacks from things like bugs introduced in their core software 
code, remote access to the onboard diagnostic system (OBD) 
of the vehicle, or controller area network (CAN) bus [77]. 
For a self-driving car study focused on classification, we 
utilized available multi-attribute data about specific 
collisions. The data contained many features and attributes of 
the vehicle itself, the damage incurred, roadway conditions, 
etc. The objective of the study was to build a classification 
model that could translate the detailed data into collision 
predictions and to drive an anti-autonomy trust model. There 
were several important and difficult choices made related to 
scale and balance within the available dataset, and in feature 
engineering. A linear sequential supervised machine learning 
model was employed. 
The intrusion detection study used supervised learning 
techniques to build a model for identifying outside threats 
initiated by malicious actors who wish to breach or 
compromise a system. Among other datasets, the study 
examined the famous dataset that originated in the KDD 
(Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining) competition and 
was later modified to form the now publicly available NSL 
(Network Security Laboratory) KDD dataset [7][8]. 
Data management and feature engineering are important 
steps in the cybersecurity domain to prepare data for machine 
learning algorithms and build effective models for detecting 
security threats and anomalies. Data analysis involves 
exploring, visualizing, and understanding the data to identify 
patterns, trends, and anomalies [48]. This may include 
statistical analysis, correlation analysis, time series analysis, 
and other techniques to gain insights into the data. In the 
cybersecurity domain, data analysis may also involve 
extracting features that are relevant to the security domain, 
such as network traffic flow, packet size and content, system 

83
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
logs, user behavior, and other indicators of security threats 
[49]. Feature engineering is the process of selecting, 
transforming, and creating features that are relevant and 
informative for the machine learning model. This may 
involve selecting features that are correlated with the target 
variable, transforming features to make them more 
informative or meaningful, and to create new features from 
existing ones [50]. Feature engineering in the cybersecurity 
domain may also involve domain-specific knowledge and 
expertise to select and create features that capture the specific 
characteristics of security threats and anomalies [51][52]. 
Feature 
engineering 
techniques 
may 
also 
involve 
dimensionality reduction, feature scaling, and other 
preprocessing techniques to improve the performance of the 
machine learning model. All these methods have their 
strengths and weaknesses, and their effectiveness may 
depend on the specific dataset and classification problem at 
hand. In the cybersecurity domain, they can be useful to 
improve the performance of machine learning models that 
aim to detect and classify security threats, anomalies, or 
attacks [53]. We describe some of the data analysis and 
feature engineering techniques used in cybersecurity in the 
data management section of this paper. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, we describe supervised machine learning with illustrations 
of the flow of a machine learning model and data splits for 
cross validation. In Section III, we present a self-driving cars 
example illustrating an implementation of a linear sequential 
supervised learning artificial neural network model utilizing 
multiple pre-processed complex attributes. In Section IV, we 
present the intrusion detection example, explaining how a 
machine learning model can be tuned to predict and identify 
attacks. In Section V, we describe data management and 
feature engineering issues that are ubiquitous in machine 
learning practice. This section also includes several 
categorical encoding techniques for preprocessing data for a 
machine learning algorithm. Finally, we conclude our work 
in Section VI. An abbreviated version of the work is available 
in [1]. 
II. 
MACHINE LEARNING EXPERIMENTS 
Machine learning methods are of four distinct types. 
Supervised learning models are trained using datasets with 
known labels, then used to make predictions on new data. 
Unsupervised learning models work with unlabeled data and 
seek clusters or patterns in the data. Semi-supervised learning 
is a hybrid approach that uses both unsupervised and 
supervised learning techniques. Reinforcement learning uses 
no labeled data, but instead is based upon evaluation of 
rewards or punishments of behaviors. We have conducted 
extensive experiments using supervised learning in 
applications 
concerning 
circumstances 
under 
which 
collisions occur in self-driving cars and in detecting 
intrusions into computer platforms.  
Supervised machine learning (SML) methods are very 
effective in addressing classification problems. When applied 
to classification tasks, a SML method has a set of available 
data for which their correct classifications are known. Such a   
data set can be represented as shown below. 
 
(𝒙1,𝑦1), (𝒙2,𝑦2), … (𝒙𝑛,𝑦𝑛)  
 
Here, the xi shown in bold are vectors that capture a data 
instance or situation, and the corresponding yi values are 
discrete labels for the available classifications.   
The initial task in a supervised learning experiment is to 
computationally train the machine learning model to accept 
the known data instances as input and to produce the correct 
target as output. Many types of SML methods can be used in 
training, including decision trees, neural networks, support 
vector machines, and logistic regressions [78]. For some 
methods, training can be a computationally intensive process. 
Once trained, the model is available to accept new data 
instances and predict their target classification. The model is 
successful if it has high values of performance measures such 
as percentage of accuracy in correctly classifying the new 
data instances, called the ability to generalize. There are 
multiple issues surrounding the characteristics of the 
available data, the classes into which they fall, their attributes 
and features, and the learning models charged with producing 
the predictions. Concerning baseball, Coach Yogi Berra 
famously said, “It's tough to make predictions, especially 
about the future.” This aphorism is equally true in machine 
learning [46]. 
Figure 1 illustrates the general flow of a machine learning 
technique. Several tasks are included. The overall task of the 
DEVELOP phase shown at the top is to produce a Final 
Model that is fully specified, trained and feeds into the 
PREDICT phase shown below the dotted line, where it is 
available for generalization use on new data. Starting from 
the top, the data is shown as partitioned into splits for 
Training, Validation and Test. The full data is divided into 
the Training Split and the Test Split. A good way to perform 
training is to withhold a portion of the data while training is 
done. It is viewed as a mistake to train and test a machine 
learning model on the same data. So, doing that would result 
in the model memorizing all the data/target pairs, resulting in 
the model perfectly knowing all of the answers, leaving no 
ability to generalize. The result is known as overfitting. For 
validation purposes, the Training Split is typically divided 
into pieces called folds. Called k-fold cross validation, Figure 
2 illustrates basic logic for splitting the data. In this example, 
k=5 so there are five equal parts. This corresponds to the 
Validation Split and Model Tuning blocks in Figure 1. In 
Figure 2, shown in bold italics on the diagonal, there is a 
designated fold in each row that is specified for testing, with 
the other four used for training. The key idea is to find the 
best set of meta-level parameters for a model being 
developed. All major machine learning models have 
parameters. For example, an ML that utilizes an Artificial 
Neural Network (ANN) in some way, will be parameterized 
with 
settings 
like 
Learning 
Rate 
(governs 
weight 
adjustments), topology (number of hidden layers, nodes 

84
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
within layers, and interconnectedness), and activation 
functions.  
In cross validation, when a model is trained on the folds, 
a performance metric, such as classification accuracy, can be 
calculated on the testing fold. After all the fold splits are 
evaluated in this way, an average is calculated, which yields 
a score for the parameter settings. Various optimization 
methods can be employed to explore the parameter space in 
a quest to identify the best settings. Viewed more generally, 
the Model Tuning block can also be viewed as exploring 
various types of models in a quest to not only optimize the 
use of one type of model, but to also choose among 
competing models. 
In multiple places of the ML process, there is a need to 
evaluate the quality of the predictions using a metric. The 
empirical accuracy of a method is simply the percentage of 
the predictions made that are correct. Other metrics are 
available. More details are provided later in this paper.  
Raw data is rarely available in a form that is suitable for 
direct use by an ML model. Pre-processing of data is typically 
necessary to deal with such things as null or missing values, 
outliers, transforming or reconciling numeric and categorical 
values, rescaling, and standardizing. We expand on the data-
centric issues, for the example applications reported in this 
article.  
Feature Engineering also appears in Figure 1. Features 
are those characteristics that are present in the data that are 
potentially useful in predicting a target outcome. 
 
  
 
 
Figure 1. Flow of a Machine Learning Model [3]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Data Splits for Cross Validation. 
  
 It is often effective in ML to modify or combine features in 
some way to produce a new feature that can improve the 
prediction accuracy of the method. Called Feature 
Engineering, the operations that can be carried out include 
things like mathematically transforming a single feature or 
applying a functional calculation on multiple features. 
Feature Selection refers to reducing the number of features 
employed by the model while retaining acceptable results. 
Reducing the features needed can ease the data collection task 
and reduce the computational load of running the model. 
Feature Selection typically follows Feature Engineering. We 
provide details related to the examples discussed in this 
paper. 
Unsupervised Learning is different than supervised 
learning in many ways. Some of the most known algorithms 
are, k-means clustering, hierarchical clustering, principal 
component analysis, and a priori algorithm [45]. The need for 
unsupervised models is increasing in the cybersecurity 
domain since attacks are being modified every day [47].  
We have discussed multiple machine learning techniques 
in this section. The primary concern is to make proper choice 
of methods to optimize the solution of a problem. We discuss 
the criteria we need to adopt to address a machine leaning 
problem in the following sections. 
III. 
SELF-DRIVING CARS APPLICATIONS  
A self-driving car underway must adhere to laws and rules 
of the road, like adhering to speed limits, stopping at red 
traffic lights, turning from an appropriate lane, etc. In 
addition, the vehicle must carry out control actions in 
response to sensor and communication information that 
provides information regarding things like conditions of the 
roadway (such as snow, rain, deteriorated pavement); 
construction zones; presence of bicycles, pedestrians, other 
cars, or obstacles; or visibility issues like glare, fog, snow, 
rain, darkness, or any type of impaired lighting. 
 
When addressing how a self-driving car can be trained to 
carry out an appropriate action under circumstances that it 
encounters, we draw an analogy with how positive 

85
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
reinforcement can work efficiently when a person or animal 
learns a new skill or behavior. This vehicle training need 
lends itself naturally to Reinforcement Learning (RL), a 
powerful machine learning technique that rewards good 
behaviors, and as needed, punishes bad behaviors.  A RL 
training method proceeds iteratively and is illustrated in 
Figure 3 [76]. While undergoing learning in a simulated 
environment, the vehicle is an agent that carries out actions, 
receives their consequences in the form of positive or 
negative feedback, and adjusts their model of actions 
accordingly. When complete, experience gained in this way 
can maximize rewards. With acceleration, deceleration and 
steering as the primary actions, a self-driving car (agent) aims 
at maximizing short-term rewards (like safe driving) and 
long-term rewards (like fast arrival at the destination) using 
the RL approach. 
 
 
Figure 3. Reinforcement Learning illustration.  
 
We carried out extensive experiments using supervised 
learning for analyses of collisions that occur with self-driving 
cars. Official collision reports basically map data items that 
describe driving conditions into a collision classification. We 
used these reports to help determine circumstances under 
which self-driving cars carry out actions that cause collisions 
or fail to avoid them. These harmful actions are referred to as 
anti-autonomy traits and factors on the part of the vehicle that 
cause collisions and diminish trust [3][39]. Data availability 
was a challenge since jurisdictions of different states, federal 
traffic agencies and motor vehicle departments often do not 
make their data publicly available. Data used in this study 
was submitted by the manufacturers of autonomous vehicles 
to the California Department of Motor Vehicles for collisions 
that occurred with other cars, pedestrians, bicyclists, and 
other objects during their test drives on roads and freeways in 
the state. All data applied to collisions that occurred while the 
cars were being driven in autonomous driving mode. The 
collisions occurred between October 2014 and March 2020 
[3][39]. The attributes of this dataset are listed in Table I 
below. All attribute names are feature type categorical and 
data type object. 
 
TABLE I.  
COLLISION DATA ATTRIBUTES [3] 
Attribute Type 
Attribute Names 
Autonomous vehicle details 
Manufacturer Name, Business 
Name, Vehicle Year, Vehicle 
Make, Vehicle Model, Vehicle 
was (stopped in traffic/moving)  
Attribute Type 
Attribute Names 
Accident Details  
Date of Accident, Time of 
Accident 
Involved in Autonomous vehicle 
accident 
Involved in Autonomous Vehicle 
Accident 
(Pedestrian/Bicyclist/Other), 
Number of vehicles involved with 
Autonomous Vehicle 
Autonomous vehicle damage 
Vehicle Damage, Damaged Area  
Details of other vehicle involved 
in accident 
Vehicle 2 Year, Vehicle 2 Make, 
Vehicle 2 Model, Vehicle 2 was 
(stopped in traffic/moving) 
Involved in other vehicle 
accident 
Involved in Vehicle 2 Accident 
Pedestrian, Involved in Vehicle 2 
Accident Bicyclist, Involved in 
Vehicle 2 Accident Other, 
Number of vehicles involved with 
Vehicle 2  
Injuries 
Injured, Injured Driver, Injured 
Passenger, Injured Bicyclist 
Vehicle driving mode 
Vehicle Driving Mode 
Weather conditions for both 
vehicles 
Clear, Cloudy, Raining, Snowing, 
Fog/Visibility, Other, Wind 
Lighting conditions for both 
vehicles 
Daylight, Dusk-Dawn, Dark 
Street Lights, Dark-No Street 
Lights, Dark-Street Lights Not 
Functioning 
Roadway surface for both 
vehicles 
Dry, Wet, Snowy-Icy, 
Slippery/Muddy/Oily/etc., Holes-
Deep-Rut, Loose Material on 
Roadway, Obstruction on 
Roadway, Construction/Repair 
Zone, Reduced Roadway Width, 
Flooded, Other, No Unusual 
Conditions 
Preceding Movement of 
Autonomous Vehicle before 
collision 
Stopped, Proceeding Straight, Ran 
Off Road, Making Right Turn, 
Making Left Turn, Making U 
Turn, Backing, Slowing/Stopping, 
Passing Other Vehicle, Changing 
Lanes, Parking Maneuver, 
Entering Traffic, Unsafe Turning, 
Xing into Opposing Lane, Parked, 
Merging, Travelling Wrong Way, 
Other 
Preceding Movement of Other 
Vehicle before collision 
Stopped, Proceeding Straight, Ran 
Off Road, Making Right Turn, 
Making Left Turn, Making U 
Turn, Backing, Slowing/Stopping, 
Passing Other Vehicle, Changing 
Lanes, Parking Maneuver, 
Entering Traffic, Unsafe Turning, 
Xing Into Opposing Lane, Parked, 
Merging, Travelling Wrong Way, 
Other 
Type of Collision 
Head On, Side Swipe, Rear End, 
Broadside, Hit Object, 
Overturned, Vehicle/Pedestrian, 
Other 
Other 
CVC Sections Violated Cited, 
Vision Obscurement, Inattention, 
Stop and Go Traffic, 
Entering/Leaving Ramp, Previous 
Collision, Unfamiliar with Road, 
Defective WEH Equip Cited,  
Uninvolved Vehicle, Other, Non-
Apparent, Runaway Vehicle 

86
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This data was extracted from PDF files and converted into 
CSV format with 256 rows of data in 140 columns. As is 
often the case in machine learning, data cleaning was a 
significant effort, and included pre-processing steps for 
augmenting, labeling, and classifying the data [3][39]. Data 
was augmented to 5256 rows with the goal of yielding a 
model with minimal noise. Details of data augmentation 
criteria is described in [3]. The core purpose of the study was 
to associate conditions into a level of trust that people had in 
a self-driving car. The values of attributes in the data that 
describe conditions and circumstances that are present when 
a collision occurs provide a handle to model a mapping 
between data and trust level. After pre-processing the data, a 
linear sequential supervised learning ANN model called 
NoTrust was devised, validated, and tested to classify the 
target data, using the basic approach illustrated in Figure 1.   
The model used the libraries provided by Keras with the 
Tensorflow backend [40][41][42]. Python was used for 
programming since it integrates with Keras to access the 
neural network Application Programming Interface. The 
deep learning libraries of Keras support fast prototyping, 
modularity, and smooth computation. 
There are multiple challenges concerning data, features, 
and metrics in applying the ML methodology to the self-
driving car application. First, there were only 256 collision 
reports available, which is arguably a small number to use in 
a ML method. This was mitigated by augmenting the data to 
produce a larger set to develop a model with higher accuracy. 
Also, in the context of alternative target value possibilities, 
the data is unbalanced in that the number of samples across 
the distinct classes differs widely. Section V describes 
methods, such as oversampling, to deal with unbalanced data. 
Second, there are 140 attributes, a large number relative to 
sample size, as shown in Table I. Thus, the possible 
permutations and combinations that could be evaluated in the 
ANN model are explosive. Fortunately, with initial analyses 
of the data and evaluation runs, it was possible to identify a 
subset of attributes and features that were mandatory to 
include. This analysis was done by systematically 
configuring sets with and without specific attributes, 
evaluating each combination, and comparing the outcomes. 
Using this search method, we identified certain categorial 
features that were closely correlated with the anti-
autonomous traits of the vehicles. This supported dropping 
the features related to date/time of accident, vehicle 
manufacturer, weather conditions, lighting conditions, 
roadway conditions, vehicle movement and type of collision. 
Ultimately, we arrived at the five attributes shown below to 
form the mandatory set.  
 
• 
Vehicle driving mode = autonomous 
• 
Vehicle damage = moderate and major 
• 
First vehicle involved = Pedestrians/Bicycle/Other 
• 
Second vehicle involved = Bicycle/Other  
• 
Injuries sustained = Pedestrians/Bicyclists/Others 
While keeping the model simple and still retaining 
accuracy, the mandatory feature set performed well in 
making trust and do not trust predictions for autonomous 
vehicles. However, when anti-autonomous traits of the self-
driving car itself were incorporated into the model it became 
apparent that more attributes had to be utilized. 
Anti-autonomy refers to decisions and actions taken by 
a self-driving car that are in some way inappropriate in terms 
of increasing risk, diminishing safety, causing potential harm, 
or lowering trust. It entails from an unexpected, 
unconventional, and abnormal decisions that self-driving car 
makes in the event of unfavorable surrounding driving 
conditions related to weather, roadway surface conditions, 
drivability of other vehicles and, pedestrians or bicyclists 
sharing the road. Autonomous vehicles have been known to 
have certain technological shortcomings in terms of Lidar 
failing when the weather conditions are rainy or foggy with 
limited visibility. Extensive study and analysis of the 
collision data revealed the following anti-autonomous 
behavior of self-driving cars [3]: 
• 
In 50.22% of collisions, a pedestrian was involved 
while the vehicle was driving autonomously. 
• 
In 52.08% of collisions, a pedestrian was involved 
while vehicle was driving autonomously and was 
moving in traffic. 
• 
In 55.13% of the collisions, a bicyclist was involved 
while the vehicle was driving autonomously and 
was about to slow down or stop. These statistics 
illustrate the confusing behavior of a self-driving 
car, its mechanical functioning and decision making 
at the second when a bicyclist appears in front of 
them. 
• 
In 55.84% of the collisions, a pedestrian was 
involved 
while 
the 
vehicle 
was 
driving 
autonomously and was attempting to make a parking 
maneuver. These statistics reveal a potential 
malfunction of vehicle operation in terms of gauging 
pedestrian behavior and hitting the breaks just in 
time. 
• 
54.28% of the collisions happened when the vehicle 
was driving autonomously during foggy weather 
with limited visibility. These statistics depict the 
malfunctioning of the sensors, camera, and Lidar 
sensors. 
• 
In 51.71% of the collisions, a pedestrian was 
involved 
while 
the 
vehicle 
was 
driving 
autonomously during foggy weather with limited 
visibility. 
• 
In 50.68% of the collisions, a bicyclist was involved 
when the vehicle was driving autonomously at night 
when streetlights were on. 
• 
In 53.18% of the collisions, a pedestrian was 
involved 
when 
the 
vehicle 
was 
driving 
autonomously at night when streetlights were on. 

87
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The anti-autonomous traits that were incorporated into the 
model include vehicle driving mode, type of collision, 
weather conditions, roadway surface conditions and injuries 
sustained by pedestrian/bicyclists/others. In addition to the 
linear sequential ANN, evaluation of Recurrent Neural 
Networks (RNN) models with Long Short-Term Memory 
(LSTM) were available for possible comparison purposes. 
The primary reason for choosing a sequential ANN model 
was that the classification sought is binary, predicting 
whether the autonomous vehicles could be trusted. A 
sequential ANN model utilizes a stack of layers with each 
layer having exactly one input tensor and one output tensor. 
This contrasts with a Functional API with shared layers, non-
linear topology, and multiple inputs/outputs. This study uses 
an input stack of layers of selective features that have a single 
output to model affirmation or denial of trust.  Thus, we 
avoided layer sharing, non-linear topologies, multiple 
inputs/outputs, or creation of a directed acyclic graph or 
graph of layers. These properties favor the choice of 
sequential ANN. Also, this model was chosen over RNN 
because the data utilized for model processing was not a time 
series or natural language sequence data. When the additional 
attributes are included, along with measures of severity of 
damage sustained by vehicle, the imbalance of the data 
increases. More specifically, the larger number of predictors 
added more noise, redundancies, increased overfitting, and 
decreased the quality of the predictions. A related study by 
Meiri and Zahavi [4] used simulated annealing to search the 
attribute space.  
Combinatorial problems often have issues related to model 
accuracy, performance, and optimizer bias. Also, the model 
solutions offered by machine learning include approximation 
errors, which further exacerbates issues related to differences 
between training and validation data [5]. This can be solved 
by two approaches – active learning and passive learning. 
Active learning involves updating the model itself to assure a 
convergence between training and validation curves, in turn 
improving model accuracy and optimization bias. Passive 
learning involves the training set providing a uniform and 
sufficient coverage of the search space [5]. In a similar 
context, Charikar, Guruswami, Kumar, Rajagopalan, and 
Sahai [6] defined and studied combinatorial feature selection 
problems, presented a theoretical framework, and provided 
algorithms on approximation and hardness results of these 
combinatorial problems [6].   
IV. 
INTRUSION DETECTION APPLICATIONS 
In today’s world of connected devices, security of the 
network is of critical importance. Unauthorized access and 
malicious activities are a great threat to confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability that form the information security 
triad. The role of an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is to 
detect abnormalities caused by an unauthorized reach into the 
network and send alerts. An IDS is an element of support for 
a wall of defense between cyber-attacks.  Supervised ML 
techniques in an IDS can provide high detection accuracy, 
particularly against known types of attacks.  
The NSL-KDD is an update and improvement to the 
KDD’99 dataset that was developed for the KDD Cup 
competition in 1999 [7]. These datasets are publicly available 
and are very widely used for IDS experiments. The data is 
primarily internet traffic consisting of 43 features per record, 
of which the last two are class (attack or normal) and score 
(severity of traffic input) [8]. The class column provides 
information on whether the record is considered normal or is 
a member of one of four attack classes - Denial of Service 
(DoS), Probe, Remote-to-Local (R2L) or User-to-Root 
(U2R). There are14 attack types under these 4 classes: 
Apache2, Smurf, Neptune, Back, Teardrop, Pod, Land, 
Mailbomb, 
Processtable, 
UDPstorm, 
WarezClient, 
Guess_Password, WarezMaster, Imap, Ftp_write, Named, 
Multihop, Phf, Spy, Sendmail, SmpGetAttack, AnmpGuess, 
Worm, Xsnoop, Xlock, Buffer_Overflow, Httptuned, 
Rootkit, LoadModule, Perl, Xterm, Ps, SQLattack, Satan, 
Saint, Ipsweep, Portsweep, Nmap, Mscan [43][44]. A 
mixture of categorical (nominal), binary and numeric 
variables are in the feature set. Each record has basic, 
content-related, time-related, and host-based features [9]. 
The attributes of this dataset are listed in Table II. 
 
TABLE II.  
NSL-KDD DATASET ATTRIBUTES [9] 
Attribute Type 
Attribute Names 
Basic 
Duration, Protocol_type, Service, Flag, Src_bytes, 
Dst_bytes, Land, Wrong_fragment, Urgent 
Content 
related 
Hot, 
Num_failed_logins, 
Logged_in, 
Num_compromised, 
Root_shell, 
Su_attempted, 
Num_root, 
Num_file_creations, 
Num_shells, 
Num_access_files, 
Num_outbound_cmds, 
Is_hot_login, Is_guest_login 
Time related 
Count, Srv_count, Serror_rate, Srv_serror_rate, 
Rerror_rate, 
Srv_rerror_rate, 
Same_srv_rate, 
Diff_srv_rate, Srv_diff_host_rate 
   Host 
based 
traffic  
Dst_host_count, 
Dst_host_srv_count, 
Dst_host_same_srv_rate, 
Dst_host_diff_srv_rate, 
Dst_host_same_src_port_rate, 
Dst_host_srv_diff_host_rate, Dst_host_serror_rate, 
Dst_host_srv_serror_rate, 
Dst_host_rerror_rate, 
Dst_host_srv_rerror_rate 
 
The study also used the UNSW-NB15 dataset. This 
dataset has 49 features categorized into 6 groups: basic, flow, 
time, content, labelled and additional generated features [10]. 
There are 9 attack types: fuzzers, analysis, back-doors, DoS, 
exploits, generic, reconnaissance, shell code and worms [11]. 
This dataset has a mixture of categorical, binary, and 
numerical datatypes. The attributes of this dataset are listed 
in Table III below. 
 
TABLE III.  
UNSW-NB15 DATASET ATTRIBUTES [16] 
Attribute Type 
Attribute Names 
Basic 
state, dur, sbytes, dbytes, sttl, dttl, sloss, dloss, 
service, sload, dload, spkts, dpkts 
Flow 
srcip, sport, dstip, dsport, proto 

88
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Content 
swin, dwin, stcpb, dtcpb, smeansz, dmeansz, 
trans_depth, res_bdy_len 
Time 
sjit, djit, stime, ltime, sintpkt, dintpkt, tcprtt, 
synack, ackdat  
Additional generated 
(general purpose) 
is_sm_ips_ports, 
ct_state_ttl, 
ct_flw_http_mthd, is_ftp_login, ct_ftp_cmd 
Additional generated 
(connection) 
ct_srv_src, ct_srv_dst, ct_dst_ltm, ct_src_ltm, 
ct_src_dport_ltm, 
ct_dst_sport_ltm, 
ct_dst_src_ltm 
Labelled 
attack_cat, attack_cat 
 
The target attribute either identifies records as ‘normal’ or 
‘attack’ or distinguishes the record as a particular attack type. 
Depending on the desired goal of an intrusion detection 
system, the machine learning model is tuned to identify a 
particular attack, which is a challenge. It is thus essential to 
understand the requirement thoroughly and preprocess input 
data accordingly. 
As an illustration of evaluation metrics, at a high level in 
the IDS study, for each input vector we have exactly one of 
the following outcomes: 
 
TP = True Positive = Correct predication that the input 
vector is an Attack 
TN = True Negative = Correct prediction that the input 
vector is not an Attack 
FN = False Negative = Incorrect prediction the input 
vector is not an Attack 
FP = False Positive = Incorrect prediction the input vector 
is an Attack 
 
The most widely reported metric is Basic Accuracy of the 
model, which simply reports the proportion of attack reports 
that are correct. 
 
Accuracy = (TP + TN)/(TP = TN = FP +FN) 
 
Basic Accuracy is notoriously deceptive when the classes are 
unbalanced, as in the case of intrusion detection studies, 
where most input vectors are not attacks. False reports are of 
interest. This gives rise to the need for metrics such as 
Precision and Recall, which can be calculated from 
information in the confusion matrix given below. 
 
 
Prediction 
 
Actual 
 
Attack 
Not an Attack 
Attack 
TP 
FN 
Not an Attack 
FP 
TN 
 
Precision = TP/(TP + FP) 
 
Recall = TP/(TP + FN) 
 
Precision measures the proportion of the vectors reported 
by the IDS as attacks that are real attacks. Recall measures 
the proportion of the vectors that are real attacks and do get 
reported as such. This means that when Recall is high the IDS 
does not misclassify many true attacks. 
In Intrusion Detection applications, false negatives can be 
very deadly, which favors high Recall. However, dealing 
with false positives also has a cost. Unfortunately, 
experiments that improve Precision typically reduce Recall. 
The reverse is also often true. For this reason, the harmonic 
mean of the two, called the F1 score is often calculated.  
 
F1 = (2*(Precision * Recall))/(Precision + Recall). 
 
The effect of the F1 score, which falls between 0 and 1, is to 
punish extreme values. 
The NSL-KDD and UNSW NB-15 datasets are used for 
training machine learning models by several researchers. In 
[34] researchers trained the KDD-99 dataset with a mutation 
of a convolutional neural network and Long Short Term 
Memory (LSTM) network. The machine learning algorithm 
test accuracy was 99.7% , which outperformed other models, 
including DenseNet, CNN (Convolutional Neural Network), 
GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit), BiLSTM, and Auto Encoder. 
The experiment was multilabel and nearly all the individual 
target variables had f1-score, precision and recall exceeding 
98%. Work reported in [54] and [55] took similar steps for 
setting up a machine learning model experimental design to 
train the NSL KDD and UNSW NB-15 datasets and were 
able to improve accuracy in both cases. 
The NSL-KDD data set has 49 attributes of 6 types and 9 
types of intrusions. We considered possibilities for reducing 
the number of attributes without eliminating information 
critical to the classifications. Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA) is a time-honored statistical method for identifying 
high correlations and ranking the relative importance of the 
attributes. Although we considered PCA, we alternatively 
chose to implement an autoencoder neural network. In brief, 
an autoencoder is a multiple layer neural network in which 
the input and output layers are identical, and a middle layer 
is of smaller dimensionality. An autoencoder is a deep 
learning unsupervised learning method in that the labels for 
the known data play no role, and after training, the middle 
layer becomes a compressed version of the input data. The 
middle layer serves as a pattern that is a discrete model of the 
data 
in 
a 
compact 
form. 
The 
approach requires 
experimentation that searches through alternative topologies 
and tuning parameters of the neural network, including 
number of layers, nodes within layers, learning rate, and 
number of epochs. Results of the autoencoder experimental 
work are given in Table IV below. 
   
TABLE IV.  
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF IDS CLASSIFICATION 
Algorithm 
Accuracy 
(%) 
Precisio
n 
Recall 
F1_sc
ore 
Autoencoder 
88.76 
0.852 
0.971 
0.908 
SVM 
86.54 
0.824 
0.913 
0.901 
Logistic 
Regression 
82.12 
0.808 
0.921 
0.893 
 

89
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The results show that the model performs well as a binary 
classifier for threat detection. After applying auto encoder, 
the accuracy reaches 88.76%, False positives occur at a low 
rate, so that the method flags only a few normal network 
inputs as attacks, , which is useful in keeping a focus on real 
threats. Importantly, recall at a high level of 97.1% means 
that nearly all real attacks are correctly identified and flagged. 
This is a must-have feature of an IDS since undetected attacks 
can be very damaging. SVM with RBF kernel (Radial Basis 
Function) competes with the Autoencoder with a good F1 
score. The simple logistic regression works well for binary 
classification but fails to achieve better results for the NSL 
KDD dataset. These experiments are a baseline for machine 
learning methodologies and their proper application. We did 
not perform any parameter tuning for this experiment, which 
might have improved the accuracy and performance metrics. 
V. 
DATA AND FEATURE ENGINEERING  
We provide descriptions of data management and feature 
engineering issues that are pervasive in ML practice and were 
of importance in our applied studies. 
A. Data Management 
Class imbalance in a dataset means that the relative 
numbers of instances within the classes vary significantly in 
number [17]. The magnitude of the discrepancies will also 
vary. Class imbalance is common in most important data 
domains, including detection of things like fraudulent 
activities, anomalies, oil spills, and in medical diagnoses. The 
imbalance of classes occurs in both binary class and multi-
class classification [18]. In binary classes, the smaller and 
larger cardinality classes are called minority and majority 
classes respectively [17][19]. Class imbalance can influence 
the training process of ML techniques and lead to ignoring 
the minority class entirely. We discuss some of the 
approaches to treat class imbalances. Figures 4 – 10 illustrate 
the results of applying each technique. 
Random oversampling of a minority class. In this approach 
data instances in minority classes are duplicated at random to 
induce a balance of membership between classes. Due to 
randomness of the oversampling, the method is naïve in that 
it makes no assumptions about the classes and their members 
[20][21]. Since exact copies of some data instances are 
included in training, there is a risk of overfitting. Classifier 
accuracy may also be influenced, and computational effort 
may be increased.  
Random undersampling of a majority class. This approach 
discards data instances from majority classes to induce 
balancing [22]. As in the case of the oversampling method, 
the discarded data is chosen randomly and naively. The 
method applies to both binary and multiclass data. The 
approach can make it difficult to distinguish boundaries 
between classes, with an inimical impact on performance 
measures [23]. 
Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE). 
This technique was introduced in 2002 to address the 
shortcomings of the oversampling and undersampling 
approaches [24][25]. The technique generates synthetic data 
by calculating feature space similarities between minority 
class data instances. The K-nearest neighbors of each data 
instance in a minority class are calculated, then randomly 
selected one by one. The method then calculates linear 
interpolations among the data and uses them to create 
synthetic data instances. 
Borderline SMOTE. The SMOTE approach encounters 
issues when minority class data instances occur in the vicinity 
of majority class data instances, creating undesirable bridges. 
The Borderline SMOTE variation addresses this drawback by 
oversampling only minority class instances near the 
borderline. Data points are called border points if they are 
incident to both minority and majority classes and called 
noise points otherwise [26]. Border points are then utilized to 
balance the data between classes.  
K-Means SMOTE. This technique generates minority class 
samples in safe and crucial borders of input spaces and thus 
assists performance in classification. The method begins by 
clustering the dataset using the K-means procedure, then 
selects the clusters that have higher numbers of minority 
samples [27]. Additional synthetic samples are then assigned 
to clusters where minority class samples are sparsely 
distributed. No noise points are generated. 
SVM SMOTE. A variation of Borderline-SMOTE, the 
method finds misclassification points. The borderline points 
are approximated and classified with a Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) classifier [28]. Synthetic data points are 
created randomly around the lines joining each minority class 
support vector with its neighbors. 
Adaptive Synthetic Sampling – ADASYN. A limitation of 
Borderline SMOTE is that is utilizes only synthetic points 
generated from extreme observations and the borderline 
instances and neglects the rest of the points in minority 
classes. This issue is addressed by ADASYN by creating 
synthetic data using the density of the existing data [29]. The 
ratio of synthetically generated data is created in inverse 
relation to the minority class density. In this way, a less dense 
area creates more synthetic data. 
The Churn Modeling Data from Kaggle was applied to the 
methods [30]. Figure 4 shows the distribution of the data in 
the original classes, followed by the outcomes of the 
alternative methods in Figures 5 to 10. 

90
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 4. Original Class Imbalance Illustration. 
 
Figure 5. Outcome of Random Oversampling. 
 
Figure 6. Outcome of SMOTE. 
 
Figure 7. Outcome of Borderline-SMOTE. 
 
Figure 8. Outcome of K-Means SMOTE. 
 
Figure 9. Outcome of SVM SMOTE. 
 
Figure 10. Outcome of ADASYN. 
B. Data Management and Feature Engineering 
 
There are multiple methods for feature engineering on 
categorical data. The inputs to ML algorithms must be 
numeric, but many applications have categorical data. In our 
work with ML methods for self-driving car collisions there 
are examples of ordinal categorical data, such as rating of 
severity of damages or a weather condition. The intrusion 
detection work examples include counts of file access 
attempts, session duration, or error rates. There are also 
examples of nominal data, such as a type of vehicle in our 
self-driving car work, or whether a flag is set in the intrusion 
detection work. Various encoding methods are used to 
convert the variables into a useful numerical representation 
[10]. Choosing an appropriate encoding scheme is an 
essential part of data preprocessing for a ML algorithm. Some 
of the categorical encoding techniques are described below. 

91
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B.1. One-hot encoding  
This method converts an attribute with N possible 
categories into N distinct features. In the NSL-KDD dataset, 
the protocol type attribute has 3 possible values - Internet 
Message Control Protocol (ICMP), Transmission Control 
Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). One-hot 
encoding converts this attribute into three feature columns as 
shown in Figure 11. It follows a 0/1 representation to indicate 
presence (indicated by 1) or absence (indicated by 0) of a 
value. 
  
 
Figure 11. One-hot encoding used in Protocol Type attribute. 
 
One-hot encoding has the advantage that it can convert 
ordinal and categorical features into orthogonal vector space 
[56]. It is one of the most used feature transformation 
techniques 
in 
machine 
learning 
experiments. 
The 
disadvantage of one-hot encoding appears when features with 
high cardinality are transformed. It might have the curse of 
dimensionality, also leading to a very sparse matrix. Also, 
there is a possibility to introduce bias in case the feature is 
distributed in an orderly fashion [57]. 
B.2. Dummy coding  
Like one-hot encoding, dummy coding converts an 
attribute with N values to a feature set of N-1 values. The 
converted set of binary variables are called dummy variables. 
Figure 12 illustrates one-hot ending and dummy coding 
applied to the same set of categorical records.  
 
 
Figure 12. One-hot and dummy encoding used in the same dataset [12]. 
 
An advantage of dummy encoding is that it decreases the 
complexity and entropy complications. Dummy variable is of 
slightly better space complexity since it creates (k-1) dummy 
variables for k original variables. Whereas one hot encoding 
creates exactly k number of converted variables. The dummy 
variable trap is a camp term in machine learning 
preprocessing that refers to more than one independent 
categorical feature being multi-collinear [58][59]. 
 
B.3. Effect coding  
While one-hot encoding and dummy coding use only 0 
and 1 to encode categorical variables, effect coding sets 
values that sum to zero in the new feature set. As a result, 
negative values may also be generated in the encoded feature 
set. Effect coding is a preferred choice when there is an 
interaction of categorical variables in a dataset as it can 
provide reasonable estimates of main effect and of the 
interaction [13]. Effect coding has an advantage over dummy 
coding when there is an interaction between categorical 
variables [60]. The benefit is that the feature will achieve a 
reasonable estimate of both main effect and interaction using 
effect coding, which is efficient when training data is 
unbalanced [61].  
B.4. Hash encoding  
Hash encoding is appropriate for categorical variables that 
have many possible values. The method uses a hash function 
to map categorical values into numbers. Commonly used 
hash functions include Message Digest functions MD2, 
MD4, MD5 and Secure Hash Algorithms SHA0, SHA1, 
SHA2 and SHA3. The MD5 hash function is used by default 
[12]. Hash encoding returns a variable map with smaller 
dimensions than other encoding schemes, such as one-hot 
encoding or dummy coding. Figure 13 below illustrates the 
hash-encoding process: 
 
 
Figure 13. Hash Encoding Process [14]. 
 
Hash encoding is a fast and memory-efficient technique 
for categorical feature encoding. It has limitations such as 
inducing collisions and losing ordering information. Unlike 
the one-hot and dummy encoding, the method can handle 
unseen categorical values during interference by mapping 
them to a random numerical value [62]. Also, since it does 
not need a separate encoding dictionary, it is quite easy to 
deploy. Hash encoding can result in collisions, where 
different categorical values are mapped to the same 
numerical value. This can reduce the accuracy of the machine 
learning model and make it difficult to interpret the 

92
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
importance of the feature. Hash encoding is considered 
unsuitable for categorical features with a small number of 
unique values, since the collision rate can be high, and the 
encoding may not be informative [63]. 
B.5. BaseN encoding  
BaseN encoding converts categorical variables into a 
consistently encoded feature set using a selected base, such 
as base 2 for binary encoding. The base or radix is the 
available number that can be used in different combinations 
to represent all values in a numbering system. A BaseN 
encoder encodes categorical values into arrays of their base-
n representation.  
BaseN encoding is a powerful technique for encoding 
categorical variables as numerical variables. BaseN encoding 
preserves ordinal relationships among categories, which can 
improve the interpretability and accuracy of the machine 
learning model [64]. It can reduce the number of features in 
the machine learning model,  which improves computational 
efficiency and reduces risk of overfitting. Limitations are 
potential for noise or sparsity, inability to capture complex 
relationships, and compatibility with specific machine 
learning models. The suitability of BaseN encoding depends 
on the specific dataset and machine learning task at hand [65]. 
B.6. Target encoding  
Target encoding (also known as mean encoding) replaces 
a variable with a mean of the target value for that variable. 
Figure 14 provides an illustration. When the values of a 
categorical variable are already of a high volume, target 
encoding provides an advantage over other methods as it does 
not add extra dimensions to the dataset. 
  
    
 
Figure 14. Target Encoding [15]. 
 
Target encoding can reduce the number of features in the 
machine learning model, which improves computational 
efficiency and reduces the risk of overfitting [66]. Target 
encoding is a powerful technique for encoding categorical 
variables as numerical variables based on the target variable. 
Limitations include potential for bias or overfitting, limited 
generalization to new data, and lack of compatibility with 
certain machine learning models. The suitability of Target 
encoding depends on the specific dataset and machine 
learning task. It is recommended to use cross-validation to 
avoid overfitting when using target encoding [67]. 
B.7. Label or ordinal encoding scheme 
Ordinal categorical variables require that the order of the 
variable be preserved. For example, a road surface when a 
collision occurs might be categorized as dry, somewhat wet, 
or very wet so that the 3 values have an order that might 
provide additional insights. Ordinal encoding scheme aims at 
preserving this order when mapping values to numeric form. 
The method simply assigns each label a number (for example 
dry=1, somewhat wet=2 and very wet=3). 
Label encoding preserves ordinal relationships among 
categories, which improves the interpretability and accuracy 
of the model [68]. It can reduce the number of features in the 
machine 
learning 
model, 
improving 
computational 
efficiency, and reducing risk of overfitting. Limitations are 
potential for bias or arbitrary ranking, inability to capture 
complex relationships, and lack of compatibility with specific 
machine learning models. The suitability of Label encoding 
depends on the specific dataset and machine learning task 
addressed. It is recommended to use label encoding only 
when the categorical variable has a meaningful order, or the 
number of categories is small [69]. 
C. Feature Selection 
The complexity of ML models increases with the 
dimensionality of the dataset. Predictive models often fail to 
achieve high accuracy because of inadequate analyses 
directed to feature selection. Selecting the most important and 
significant features reduces the complexity of the model and 
can also increase the prediction performance [37][38]. 
Multiple approaches are available and effective for reducing 
the feature set. Prominent ones are described below.  
Filter Methods. In our work, we choose feature selection 
methods that apply to situations with a categorical output, 
such as whether an input vector is an attack or not. The filter 
methods eliminate features independently of the ML method 
used. A univariate feature filter evaluates the importance of 
single features using univariate statistical tests. Each feature 
is paired with the target to evaluate statistical significance 
between them. The analysis of variance or ANOVA F-test is 
widely used. The F-test calculates the ratio between variance 
values [31]. The resultant measures of the relative importance 
of individual features provide a tool for determining features 
that are unnecessary or of little importance. 
The filter method is effective for scalability, especially for 
high-dimensional datasets with a large number of features 
[70]. It improves accuracy and interpretability by removing 
irrelevant and redundant features. It also helps to reduce 
overfitting and improve generalization. The disadvantages of 
the filter method are the lack of modeling interaction and/or 
non-linear relationships between features and the target 

93
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
variables [79]. The method limits the accuracy and predictive 
power to a certain threshold [71]. 
Wrapper Methods. Wrapper methods directly evaluate 
combinations of features by running the ML model restricted 
to the set of candidate features. Taken to an extreme, all 
combinations would be evaluated, an impossible task in 
practice. Thus, various search space approaches are 
employed. Forward search iteratively adds promising feature 
vectors one by one to build a feature set. Backward search 
starts with all features and successively eliminates those that 
perform poorly. Many approaches based on optimization 
techniques are available [32][33]. The self-driving car work 
basically follows a forward selection approach based on both 
advance knowledge about the importance of certain features 
from analytics on the data itself along with test runs of the 
ML model. Heavy computational load and possibilities of 
overfitting are potential drawbacks [34]. 
The Wrapper method is efficient in capturing complex 
relationships and interactions between features and targets. It 
can handle non-linear relationships which is often impossible 
for other feature selection techniques [72]. Like the filter 
method, it improves the interpretability and generalization 
ability of the model. Wrapper methods are computationally 
expensive, especially for high dimensional data. Also, the 
wrapper method can overfit the model to the training data, 
especially if the search space of feature subsets is large or the 
evaluation metric is not carefully chosen [73]. 
Embedded 
Methods. 
Embedded 
methods 
utilize 
mathematical information that is available during the training 
of the model to determine the relative importance of features. 
In some sense embedded methods mitigate the drawbacks of 
the filter and wrapper methods but retain their strengths. 
When implemented carefully, they are not prone to 
overfitting [35]. The XGBoost technique produces an 
importance score for each attribute that is used to identify 
those that can be confidently eliminated [36]. In applications 
like intrusion detection, having many attributes presents a 
huge computational burden. The embedded methods are 
highly successful in greatly reducing the features needed in 
intrusion detection ML work.  
The Embedded method handles non-linear relationships 
and interactions among features and the target variable, a 
capability that may not possessed by the filter method or 
many other feature selection techniques [74]. The method is 
a powerful technique for feature selection that can capture 
complex relationships and interactions among features and 
the target variable. Limitations include high computational 
cost, lack of compatibility with certain models, and potential 
for overfitting or underfitting. The suitability of embedded 
method depends on the specific dataset, machine learning 
model, and optimization algorithm [75]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Machine learning is now a well-established and effective 
approach in many domains. When using machine learning 
approaches in practice, issues arise concerning choices for 
which type of model to use, parameters to choose and tune, 
data management, feature engineering and selection. We 
address many of these issues in the context of applications to 
self-driving cars and intrusion detection. The applications are 
of high importance in inter-related areas of cybersecurity, 
trust, risk, safety, reliability, autonomy, and anti-autonomy. 
For the studies concerning self-driving cars, we present uses 
for reinforcement learning and supervised learning that 
reveal circumstances under which the autonomous vehicle 
makes decisions to take actions that result in collisions. For 
intrusion detection, model choices and computational results 
are presented that result in excellent values for performance 
metrics. Included are reports of recall metrics that indicate 
that it is possible to use machine learning methods that flag 
nearly all potentially dangerous attack vectors. The data-
centric and feature engineering challenges are extensive and 
detailed, but addressable. We describe approaches to 
addressing 
these 
challenges. 
Results 
reveal 
several 
implications for needs for next steps in research. New 
frontiers include methods that can be deployed in real-time, 
automate feature engineering, choose, and extract features 
dynamically, and simultaneously support optimization of 
multiple performance evaluation metrics. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. E. Nygard, M. Ahsan, A. Rastogi, and R. Satyal, “Data and 
Feature Engineering Challenges in Machine Learning,” in 
ADVCOMP 2022, The Sixteenth International Conference on 
Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in 
Sciences, pp. 1–10, November 2022.  
[2] T. Hey, S. Tansley, and K. Tolle, “The Fourth Paradigm: Data-
Intensive Scientific Discovery,” Redmond, Washington: 
Microsoft Research, 2009. 
[3] A. Rastogi, “Trust and Anti-Autonomy Modelling of 
Autonomous Systems,” Order No. 28255688, North Dakota 
State University, Ann Arbor, 2020. 
[4] R. Meiri and J. Zahavi, “Using simulated annealing to optimize 
the feature selection problem in marketing applications,” 
In European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 171, no. 3, 
pp. 842-858, 2006. 
[5] M. Lombardi and M. Milano, “Boosting combinatorial 
problem modeling with machine learning,” In Proceedings of 
the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, pp. 5472-5478, 2018. 
[6] M. Charikar, V. Guruswami, R. Kumar, S. Rajagopalan, and A. 
Sahai, 
“Combinatorial 
feature 
selection 
problems,” 
In Proceedings 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of 
Computer Science, pp. 631-640, 2000. 
[7] KDD Cup 1999 Data, Kdd.ics.uci.edu [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/kddcup99.html 
[Accessed: 2022.08.22]. 

94
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[8] A Deeper Dive into the NSL-KDD Data Set. Medium [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://towardsdatascience.com/a-deeper-
dive-into-the-nsl-kdd-data-set-15c753364657 
[Accessed: 
2022.08.22].  
[9] L. Dhanabal and S.P. Shantharajah, “A Study on NSL-KDD 
Dataset for Intrusion Detection System Based on Classification 
Algorithms,” In International Journal of Advanced Research 
in Computer and Communication Engineering, vol. 4, no. 6, 
pp. 446-452, June 2015. 
[10] S. Choudharya and N. Kesswani, “Analysis of KDD-Cup’99, 
NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15 Datasets using Deep Learning in 
IoT,” In Procedia Computer Science, vol. 167, pp. 1561-1573, 
2020. 
[11] A. Divekar, M. Parekh, V. Savla, R. Mishra, and M. Shirole, 
“Benchmarking 
datasets 
for 
Anomaly-based 
Network 
Intrusion Detection: KDD CUP 99 alternatives,” In 2018 IEEE 
3rd International Conference on Computing, Communication 
and Security (ICCCS), IEEE, pp. 1-8, 2018. 
[12] 8 Categorical Data Encoding Techniques to Boost your Model 
in Python!, Analytics Vidhya [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2020/08/types-of-
categorical-data-encoding/ [Accessed: 2022.08.22].  
[13] Introduction to SAS, UCLA: Statistical Consulting Group. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://stats.idre.ucla.edu/sas/modules/sas-learning-
moduleintroduction-to-the-features-of-sas/ 
[Accessed: 
2022.08.22] 
[14] A Data Scientist’s Toolkit to Encode Categorical Variables to 
Numeric. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://towardsdatascience.com/a-data-scientists-toolkit-to-
encode-categorical-variables-to-numeric-d17ad9fae03f 
[Accessed: 2022.08.22] 
[15] Improve your classification models using Mean /Target 
Encoding. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://medium.com/datadriveninvestor/improve-your-
classification-models-using-mean-target-encoding-
a3d573df31e8 [Accessed: 2022.08.22] 
[16] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: a comprehensive data 
set for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 
network data set),” In 2015 military communications and 
information systems conference (MilCIS), IEEE, pp. 1-6, 2015. 
[17] N. Japkowicz and S. Stephen, “The class imbalance problem: 
A systematic study,” In Intelligent data analysis, vol, 6, no. 5, 
pp. 429-449, 2002. 
[18] R. Gomes, M. Ahsan, and A. Denton, “Random Forest 
Classifier in SDN Framework for User-Based Indoor 
Localization,” In 2018 IEEE International Conference on 
Electro/Information Technology (EIT), IEEE, pp. 0537-0542, 
2018. 
[19] A. Ali, S. M. Shamsuddin, and A. L. Ralescu, “Classification 
with class imbalance problem: A review,” In Int. J. Adv. Soft 
Comput. its Appl., vol. 5, no. 3, 2013. 
[20] A. Ghazikhani, H. S. Yazdi, and R. Monsefi, “Class imbalance 
handling using wrapper-based random oversampling,” In 20th 
Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE2012), 
IEEE, pp. 611-616, 2012. 
[21] Z. Zheng, Y. Cai, and Y. Li, “Oversampling method for 
imbalanced classification,” In Computing and Informatics, vol. 
34, no. 5, pp. 1017-1037, 2015. 
[22] A. M. Denton, M. Ahsan, D. Franzen, and J. Nowatzki, “Multi-
scalar 
analysis 
of 
geospatial 
agricultural 
data 
for 
sustainability,”  In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Big 
Data (Big Data), IEEE, pp. 2139-2146, 2016. 
[23] N. V. Chawla, N. Japkowicz, and A. Kotcz, “Special Issue on 
Learning from Imbalanced Data Sets,” In ACM SIGKDD 
explorations newsletter, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1-6, 2004. 
[24] M. 
Ahsan, 
R. 
Gomes, 
and 
A. 
Denton, 
“SMOTE 
Implementation on Phishing Data to Enhance Cybersecurity,” 
In 2018 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Electro/Information Technology (EIT), IEEE, pp. 0531-0536, 
2018. 
[25] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. 
Kegelmeyer, “SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling 
technique,” In Journal of artificial intelligence research, 
vol. 16, pp. 321-357, 2002. 
[26] H. Han, W. Y. Wang, and B. H. Mao, “Borderline-SMOTE: A 
new over-sampling method in imbalanced data sets learning,” 
In International conference on intelligent computing, pp. 878-
887. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. 
[27] H. Hairani, K. E. Saputro, and S. Fadli, “K-means-SMOTE 
untuk menangani ketidakseimbangan kelas dalam klasifikasi 
penyakit diabetes dengan C4.5, SVM, dan naive Bayes,” In J. 
Teknol. dan Sist. Komput., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 89-93, 2020. 
English – H. Hairani, K. E. Saputro, and S. Fadli, “K-means-
SMOTE to trate class imbalance in the classification of 
diabetes with C4.5, SVM, and Naïve Bayes,” In J. Teknol. dan 
Sist. Komput., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 89-93, 2020.  
[28] Y. Tang, Y. Q. Zhang, and N. V. Chawla, “SVMs modeling for 
highly imbalanced classification,”  In IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), vol. 39, 
no. 1, pp. 281-288, 2008. 
[29] H. He, Y. Bai, E. A. Garcia, and S. Li, “ADASYN: Adaptive 
synthetic sampling approach for imbalanced learning,” In 2008 
IEEE international joint conference on neural networks (IEEE 
world congress on computational intelligence), IEEE, pp. 
1322-1328, 2008. 
[30] O. Özdemir, M. Batar, and A. H. Işık , “Churn Analysis with 
Machine Learning Classification Algorithms in Python,” 
In The International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and 
Applied Mathematics in Engineering, pp. 844-852. Springer, 
Cham, 2019. 
[31] N. O. F. Elssied, O. Ibrahim, and A. H. Osman, “A novel 
feature selection based on one-way ANOVA F-test for e-mail 
spam classification,” In Research Journal of Applied Sciences, 
Engineering and Technology, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 625-638, 2014. 
[32] M. Ahsan, R. Gomes, and A. Denton, “Application of a 
convolutional neural network using transfer learning for 
tuberculosis 
detection,” 
In 2019 
IEEE 
International 
Conference on Electro Information Technology (EIT), IEEE, 
pp. 427-433, 2019. 
[33] A. Mustaqeem, S. M. Anwar, M. Majid, and A. R. Khan, 
“Wrapper method for feature selection to classify cardiac 
arrhythmia,”  In 2017 39th Annual International Conference of 
the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 
(EMBC), IEEE, pp. 3656-3659, 2017. 
[34] M. Ahsan and K. Nygard, “Convolutional Neural Networks 
with LSTM for Intrusion Detection,” In The 35th International 

95
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Conference on Computers and Their Applications (CATA 
2018), vol. 69, pp. 69-79. 2020. 
[35] H. Liu, M. Zhou, and Q. Liu, “An embedded feature selection 
method for imbalanced data classification,” In IEEE/CAA 
Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 703-715, 2019. 
[36] Y. Wang and X. S. Ni, “A xgboost risk model via feature 
selection and bayesian hyper-parameter optimization,”  In 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08433, 2019. 
[37] M. Chowdhury, J. Tang, and K. Nygard, “An artificial immune 
system heuristic in a smart grid,”  In The 28th International 
Conference on Computers and Their Applications, 2013. 
[38] M. Chowdhury and K. Nygard, “Machine learning within a con 
resistant trust model,” In The 33rd International Conference on 
Computers and Their Applications (CATA 2018), pp. 9-14, 
2018. 
[39] A. Rastogi and K. Nygard, “Threat and alert analytics in 
autonomous vehicles,”  In The 35th International Conference 
on Computers and Their Applications (CATA 2018), vol. 69, 
pp. 48-59, 2020. 
[40] Home - Keras Documentation, Keras.io, 2020. [Online]. 
Available: https://keras.io/. [Accessed: 2022.08.16].  
[41] “TensorFlow,” TensorFlow, 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.tensorflow.org/. [Accessed: 2022.08.16].  
[42] “tensorflow/tensorflow,” GitHub, 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow. 
[Accessed: 
2022.08.16]. 
[43] M. Ahsan, N. Rifat,  M. Chowdhury,  and R. Gomes,  
“Detecting Cyber Attacks: A Reinforcement Learning Based 
Intrusion Detection System,” In 2022 IEEE International 
Conference on Electro Information Technology (eIT), IEEE, 
pp. 461-466, 2022. 
[44] M. Ahsan,  K. E. Nygard,  R. Gomes,  M . M . Chowdhury,  N. 
Rifat, and J. F. Connolly,  “Cybersecurity Threats and Their 
Mitigation 
Approaches 
Using 
Machine 
Learning—A 
Review,”  In Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy, vol. 2, no. 
3, pp. 527-555, 2022. 
[45] N. I. Rifat, “Feature Engineering on the Cybersecurity Dataset 
for Deployment on Software Defined Network,” 2020. 
[46] Y. Berra, “A Quote By Yogi Berra,” 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/261863-it-s-
tough-to-make-predictions-especially-about-the-
future. [Accessed: 2022.08.22].  
[47] M. Ahsan,  N. Rifat,  M. Chowdhury, and R. Gomes,  
“Intrusion Detection for IoT Network Security with Deep 
Neural Network,” In 2022 IEEE International Conference on 
Electro Information Technology (eIT), IEEE, pp. 467-472, 
2022. 
[48] P. Sajda, A. Gerson, K. R. Muller, B. Blankertz, and L. Parra, 
“A data analysis competition to evaluate machine learning 
algorithms for use in brain-computer interfaces,” In IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
neural 
systems 
and 
rehabilitation 
engineering, 11(2), pp. 184-185, 2003. 
[49] A. Fleury-Charles, M. M. Chowdhury, and N. Rifat, “Data 
Breaches: Vulnerable Privacy,” In 2022 IEEE International 
Conference on Electro Information Technology (eIT), 
Mankato, MN, USA, pp. 538-543, 2022. 
[50] Z. Li, X. Ma, and H. Xin, “Feature engineering of machine-
learning chemisorption models for catalyst design,” Catalysis 
today, vol. 280, pp. 232-238, 2017. 
[51] D. K. Davis, M. M. Chowdhury, and N. Rifat, “Password 
Security: What Are We Doing Wrong?,” In 2022 IEEE 
International Conference on Electro Information Technology 
(eIT), Mankato, MN, USA, 2022, pp. 562-567. 
[52] R. Vanness, M. M. Chowdhury, and N. Rifat, “Malware: A 
Software for Cybercrime,” In 2022 IEEE International 
Conference on Electro Information Technology (eIT), 
Mankato, MN, USA, pp. 513-518, 2022. 
[53] Y. Xu, K. Hong, J. Tsujii, and E.I.C. Chang, “Feature 
engineering combined with machine learning and rule-based 
methods for structured information extraction from narrative 
clinical discharge summaries,” In Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 824-832, 
2012. 
[54] M.Ahsan, R. Gomes, M.M. Chowdhury, and K. E. Nygard,  
“Enhancing machine learning prediction in cybersecurity using 
dynamic feature selector,” In Journal of Cybersecurity and 
Privacy, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 199-218, 2021. 
[55] M.K. Ahsan, “Increasing the Predictive Potential of Machine 
Learning Models for Enhancing Cybersecurity,” Order No. 
28416096, North Dakota State University, Ann Arbor, 2021. 
[56] M. K. Dahouda and I. Joe, “A deep-learned embedding 
technique for categorical features encoding,” In IEEE Access, 
vol. 9, pp. 114381-114391, 2021. 
[57] B. Gu and Y. Sung, “Enhanced reinforcement learning method 
combining one-hot encoding-based vectors for CNN-based 
alternative high-level decisions,” In Applied Sciences, vol. 11, 
no.3, p. 1291, 2021. 
[58] I. Mukherjee, N.K. Sahu, and S.K. Sahana, “Simulation and 
modeling for anomaly detection in IoT network using machine 
learning,” In International Journal of Wireless Information 
Networks, pp. 1-17, 2022. 
[59] J.M. Jerez, I. Molina, P.J. García-Laencina, E. Alba, N. 
Ribelles, M. Martín, and L. Franco, “Missing data imputation 
using statistical and machine learning methods in a real breast 
cancer problem,” In Artificial intelligence in medicine, vol. 50, 
no.2, pp. 105-115, 2010. 
[60] R.S. Sutton, “Generalization in reinforcement learning: 
Successful examples using sparse coarse coding,” In Advances 
in neural information processing systems, vol. 8, 1995. 
[61] C.H. Chien, C.C. Chang, S.H. Lin, C.W. Chen, Z.H. Chang, 
and Y.W. Chu, “N-GlycoGo: predicting protein N-
glycosylation sites on imbalanced data sets by using 
heterogeneous and comprehensive strategy,” In IEEE Access, 
vol. 8, pp. 165944-165950, 2020. 
[62] Z. Cao, M. Long, J. Wang, and P.S. Yu, “Hashnet: Deep 
learning to hash by continuation,” In Proceedings of the IEEE 
international conference on computer vision, pp. 5608-5617, 
2017. 
[63] I. Lopez-Arevalo, E. Aldana-Bobadilla, A. Molina-Villegas, H. 
Galeana-Zapién, V. Muñiz-Sanchez, and S. Gausin-Valle, “A 
memory-efficient encoding method for processing mixed-type 
data on machine learning,” In Entropy, vol. 22, no.12, p. 1391, 
2020. 
[64] J.M Springer, C.S. Strauss, A.M. Thresher, E. Kim, and G.T. 
Kenyon, “Classifiers based on deep sparse coding architectures 

96
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
are robust to deep learning transferable examples,” In arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1811.07211, 2018. 
[65] S. Naseer, Y. Saleem, S. Khalid, M.K. Bashir, J. Han, M.M. 
Iqbal, and K. Han, “Enhanced network anomaly detection 
based on deep neural networks,” In IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 
48231-48246, 2018. 
[66] N. Nazyrova, T.J. Chaussalet, and S.Chahed, “Machine 
Learning models for predicting 30-day readmission of elderly 
patients using custom target encoding approach,” In 
Computational Science–ICCS 2022: 22nd International 
Conference Proceedings, vol. III, pp. 122-136, June 2022. 
[67] D. Silhavy, C. Krauss, A. Chen, A.T. Nguyen, C. Müller, S. 
Arbanowski, S. Steglich, and L. Bassbouss, “Machine learning 
for per-title encoding,” In SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal, 
vol. 131, no.3, pp. 42-50, 2022. 
[68] A. Mottini and R. Acuna-Agost, “Relative label encoding for 
the prediction of airline passenger nationality,” In 2016 IEEE 
16th International Conference on Data Mining Workshops 
(ICDMW), pp. 671-676, 2016. 
[69] C. Song, T. Ristenpart, and V. Shmatikov, “Machine learning 
models that remember too much,” In Proceedings of the 2017 
ACM SIGSAC Conference on computer and communications 
security, pp. 587-601, 2017. 
[70] S. Khalid, T. Khalil, and S. Nasreen, “A survey of feature 
selection and feature extraction techniques in machine 
learning,” In 2014 science and information conference,  pp.  
372-378, August 2014. 
[71] A. Zheng and A. Casari, “Feature engineering for machine 
learning: principles and techniques for data scientists,” In 
O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2018. 
[72] S.M. Kasongo and Y. Sun, “A deep learning method with 
wrapper based feature extraction for wireless intrusion 
detection system,” In Computers & Security, vol. 92, pp. 
101752, 2020. 
[73] M. F. Rafique, M. Ali, A. S. Qureshi, A. Khan, and A. M. 
Mirza, “Malware classification using deep learning based 
feature extraction and wrapper based feature selection 
technique,” In arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10958, 2019. 
[74] J. Zhou, L. Liu, W. Wei, and J. Fan, “Network representation 
learning: from preprocessing, feature extraction to node 
embedding,” In ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),vol.  55, no. 
2, pp. 1-35, 2022. 
[75] S. Wang, J. Arroyo, J.T. Vogelstein, and C. E. Priebe, “Joint 
embedding of graphs,” In IEEE transactions on pattern 
analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 43, no.4, pp. 1324-
1336, 2019. 
[76] Introduction to Various Reinforcement Learning Algorithms. 
Medium 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://medium.com/towards-data-science/introduction-to-
various-reinforcement-learning-algorithms-i-q-learning-sarsa-
dqn-ddpg-72a5e0cb6287 [Accessed: 2023.03.05]. 
[77] A. Rastogi and K. E. Nygard, “Trust Issues in Cybersecurity 
and Autonomy,” In 27th International Conference on Software 
Engineering and Data Engineering, 2018. 
[78] U. S. Shanthamallu, A. Spanias, C. Tepedelenlioglu, and M. 
Stanley, “A brief survey of machine learning methods and their 
sensor and IoT applications,” In 2017 8th International 
Conference 
on 
Information, 
Intelligence, 
Systems 
& 
Applications (IISA), pp. 1-8, 2017. 
[79] S.M. Kasongo and Y. Sun, “A deep learning method with filter 
based feature engineering for a wireless intrusion detection 
system,” In IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 38597-38607, 2019. 

