238
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Computational Model of Place on the Linked Data Web
Alia I Abdelmoty, Khalid O. Al-Muzaini
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, Wales, UK
Email: {A.I.Abdelmoty, Almuzainiko}@cs.cf.ac.uk
Abstract—The Linked Data Web (LDW) is an evolution of
the traditional Web from a global information space of linked
documents to one where both documents and data are linked.
A signiﬁcant amount of geographic information about places is
currently being published on this LDW. These are used to qualify
the location of other types of datasets. This paper examines
the limitations in the nature of location representation in some
typical examples of these Resource Description Framework (RDF)
resources, primarily resulting from the simpliﬁed geometric
representation of location and the incomplete and random use
of spatial relationships to link place information. The paper
proposes a qualitative model of place location that enforces an
ordered representation of relative spatial relationships between
places. This work further explores how semantic properties of
place can be included to derive meaningful location expressions.
The model facilitates the application of qualitative spatial reason-
ing on places to extract a potentially large percentage of implicit
links between place resources, thus allowing place information to
be linked and to be explored more fully and more consistently
than what is currently possible. The paper describes the model
and presents experimental results demonstrating the effectiveness
of the model on realistic examples of geospatial RDF resources.
Keywords–qualitative place models; spatial reasoning; geospa-
tial web.
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the ‘Linked Data Principles’ is to include links
to connect the data to allow the discovery of related things.
However, identifying links between data items remains a
considerable challenge that needs to be addressed [1], [2], [3].
A key research task in this respect is identity resolution, i.e.,
to recognise when two things denoted by two URIs are the
same and when they are not. Automatic linking can easily
create inadequate links, and manual linking is often too time
consuming [4]. Geo-referencing data on the LDW can address
this problem [5], whereby links can be inferred between data
items by tracing their spatial (and temporal) footprints. For
example, the BBC uses RDF place gazetteers as an anchor to
relate information on weather, travel and local news [6].
Yet, for geospatial linked data to serve its purpose, links
within and amongst the geographic RDF resources need them-
selves to be resolved. That is to allow place resources to be
uniquely identiﬁed and thus a place description in one dataset
can be matched to another describing the same place in a
different dataset. A scheme that allows such links between
place resources to be discovered would be a valuable step
towards the realisation of the LDW as a whole.
In this paper, location is used as a key identiﬁer for place
resources and the question to be addressed is how location
can be used to deﬁne a linked place model that is sufﬁcient to
enable place resources to be uniquely identiﬁed on the LDW.
Several challenges need to be addressed, namely, 1) location
representation of RDF place resources is simple; deﬁned as
point coordinates in some resources, detailed; deﬁned with
extended geometries in others, and sometimes missing all
together, 2) coordinates of locations may not match exactly
across data sources, where volunteered data mapped by in-
dividuals is mashed up with authoritative map datasets, 3)
non-standardised vocabularies for expressing relative location
is used in most datasets, e.g., in DBpedia, properties such
as dbp:location, dbp-ont:region and dbp-ont:principalarea are
used to indicate that the subject place lies inside the object
place.
Towards addressing this problem, a linked place model is
proposed that uses qualitative spatial relationships to describe
unique place location proﬁles, as presented in [1]. The proﬁles
don’t rely on the provision of exact geometries and hence can
be used homogeneously with different types of place resources.
They can be expressed as RDF statements and can thus be
integrated directly with the resource descriptions. The rationale
behind the choice of links to be modelled is primarily twofold:
to allow for a sensible unique description of place location and
to support qualitative spatial reasoning over place resources.
The model is further adapted to consider semantic aspects
of place location deﬁnition. In particular, the notion of salience
of place is used to scope the type of relationships used in the
location expressions in the deﬁned place proﬁles. It is shown
how the proposed representation scheme is ﬂexible to allow
for the encoding of relevant location expressions, whilst also
retaining the power of spatial reasoning within the framework
proposed.
The value of the linked place model is illustrated by
measuring its ability to make the underlying RDF graph of
geographic place resources browsable. Samples of realistic
geographic linked datasets are used in the experiments pre-
sented and results demonstrate signiﬁcant potential value of
the methods proposed.
The paper is structured as follows. An overview of related
work on the representation and manipulation of place resources
on the LDW is given in section II, In section III the proposed
relative location model, as well its adaptation to include
semantic aspects of place deﬁnition, are described. In section
IV, application of the models proposed is evaluated on two
different realistic datasets. Conclusions and an overview of
future work is given in section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
Here related work on the topics of representing place
resources and reasoning with them on the LDW are reviewed.

239
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Representing RDF place Resources on the LDW
Sources of geographic data on the LDW are either volun-
teered (crowdsourced) resources, henceforth denoted Volun-
teered Geographic Information (VGI), created by individuals
with only informal procedures for validating the content,
or authoritative resources produced by mapping organiza-
tions, henceforth denoted Authoritative Geographic Informa-
tion (AGI). Example of VGIs are DBpedia (dbpedia.org),
GeoNames (geonames.org), and OpenSreetMaps (linkedgeo-
data.org) [7] and examples of AGIs are the Ordnance Survey
linked data [8] and the Spanish linked data [9]. Data collected
from users on the Social Web, e.g., on Twitter and Foursquare,
can also be considered as VGIs [10].
The volume of VGI resources is increasing steadily, provid-
ing a wealth of information on geographic places and creating
detailed maps of the world. DBpedia contains hundreds of
thousands of place entities, whose locations are represented as
point geometry. GeoNames is a gazetteer that collects both spa-
tial and thematic information for various place names around
the world. In both datasets, place location is represented by a
single point coordinates. While DBpedia does not enforce any
constraints on the deﬁnition of place location (e.g., coordinates
may be missing in place resources), reference to some relative
spatial relationships, and in particular to represent containment
within a geographic region, is normally maintained. A detailed
analysis of the spatial data content of DBpedia can be found
in [11], [12]. GeoNames places are also interlinked with each
other by deﬁning associated parent places.
In [13], the LinkedGeoData effort is described where
OpenStreetMap (OSM) data is transformed into RDF and
made available on the Web. OSM data is represented with
a relatively simple data model that captures the underlying
geometry of the features. It comprises three basic types,
nodes (representing points on Earth and have longitude and
latitude values), ways (ordered sequences of nodes that form
a polyline or a polygon) and relations (groupings of multiple
nodes and/or ways). Furthermore, [14] presented methods to
determine links between map features in OSM and equivalent
instances documented in DBpedia, as well as between OSM
and Geonames. Their matching is based on a combination
of the Jaro-Winkler string distance between the text of the
respective place names and the geographic distance between
the entities. Example of other work on linking geodata on the
Semantic Web is [15], which employs the Hausdorff distance
to establish similarity between spatially extensive linear or
polygonal features.
In contrast to VGI resources that manages geographic
resource as points (represented by a coordinate of latitude and
longitude), AGI resources deal with more complex geometries
as well, such as line strings. AGIs tend to utilise well-
deﬁned standards and ontologies for representing geographic
features and geometries. Ordnance Survey linked data also
demonstrates the use of qualitative spatial relations to describe
spatial relationships in its datasets. Two ontologies, the Ge-
ometry Ontology and the Spatial Relations Ontology, are used
to provide geospatial vocabulary. These ontologies describe
abstract geometries and topological relations (equivalent to
RCC8 [16]) respectively.
In summary, the spatial representation of place resources in
VGI datasets is generally limited to point representation, and
is managed within simple ontologies that encode non-spatial
semantics and in some cases limited spatial relationships. On
the other hand, place data provided as AGI tend to present
more structured and detailed spatial representations, but is also
limited to speciﬁc types and scales of representation. Use of
some qualitative spatial relationships has been demonstrated
for capturing the spatial structure in some example datasets.
The model proposed in this paper offers a systematic and
homogenous representation of place location that can be con-
sistently applied to VGIs or AGIs and demonstrates the value
of heterogenous qualitative spatial relations in representing
place information on the LDW.
B. Manipulating and Querying RDF place resources on the
LDW
Recently, much work has been done on extending RDF
for representing geospatial information through deﬁning and
utilising appropriate vocabularies encoded in ontologies to
represent space and time. The work capitalises on speciﬁcation
of standards, deﬁned by the Open Geospatial Consortium
(OGC)(opengeospatial.org), for modeling core concepts related
to geospatial data. Prominent examples are the geographic
query language for RDF (GeoSPARQL), an OGC standard
[17] and stRDF/stSPARQL (st stands for spatiotemporal) [18].
Both proposals provide vocabulary (classes, properties, and
functions) that can be used in RDF graphs and SPARQL
queries to represent and query geospatial data, for example
geo:SpatialObject, which has as instances everything that
can have a spatial representation and geo:Geometry as the
superclass of all geometry classes. In addition, geometric
functions and topological functions are offered for performing
computations, such as geof:distance and for asserting topo-
logical relations between spatial objects, e.g., dbpedia:Cardiff
geo:sfWithin dbpedia:Wales.
Qualitative spatial representation and reasoning (QSRR)
are established areas of research [19], [20], whose results have
inﬂuenced the deﬁnition of models of spatial relationships in
international standards, e.g., the OGC models, and commercial
spatial database systems (for example, in the Oracle DB
system). RCC8, a QSRR model, has been recently adopted
by GeoSPARQL [17], and there is an ever increasing interest
in coupling QSR techniques with Linked Geospatial Data
that are constantly being made available [18]. On the other
hand, Semantic Web reasoning engines have been extended
to support qualitative spatial relations, e.g., Racerpro [21]
and PelletSpatial [22]. Scalability of the spatial reasoning is
recognised and reported challenge. Scalable implementations
of constraint network algorithms for qualitative and quantita-
tive spatial constraints are needed, as RDF stores supporting
Linked Geospatial Data are expected to scale to billions of
triples [18]. Lately, promising results have been reported by
[23], who proposed an approach for removing redundancy in
RCC8 networks and by [24], who examined graph-partitioning
techniques as a method for coping with large networks; in
both cases leading to more effective application of spatial rea-
soning mechanisms. Finally, qualitative methods were used to
complement existing quantitative methods for representing the
geometry of spatial locations. In [25], heterogenous reasoning
methods are proposed that combine calls between a spatial
database system and a spatial reasoning engine implemented
in OWL2 RL to check the consistency of place ontologies.

240
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In [26], Younis et al described query plans that make use
of a combination of qualitative spatial relationships associated
with place resources in DBpedia and detailed representations
of geometry maintained in a spatially indexed database for
answering complex queries. In both cases, qualitative reason-
ing was limited by the fragmented and scarce availability
of spatial relationships to work on. The qualitative scheme
of representation of place location proposed in this paper
addresses this issue and provides a novel method for deﬁning
spatial relationships that is designed to support and facilitate
the effective use of qualitative spatial reasoning on the LDW.
III.
A LINKED PLACE MODEL FOR THE LINKED DATA
WEB
A Relative Location model (RelLoc) is proposed here to
capture a qualitative representation of the spatial structure
of place location. Two types of spatial relations are used as
follows.
1)
Containment relationships, to record that a parent
place directly contains a child place; i.e., one step
hierarchy. For example, for three places representing
a district, a city and a country, the model will explic-
itly record the relationships: inside(district, city) and
inside(city, country), but not inside(district, country).
2)
Direction-proximity relationships, to record for every
place the relative direction location of its nearest
neighbour places. The direction frame of reference
can be selected as appropriate. For example, for a
4-cardinal direction frame of reference, a place will
record its relative direction relation with its nearest
neighbour in four directions.
For a given set of places Pl, let DirPr be the set of all
direction-proximity relations between instances of places in Pl
as deﬁned above, and let Con be the set of containment rela-
tions between instances of places in Pl as deﬁned above. Then,
RelLoc(Pl) is deﬁned as a tuple RelLoc(Pl) := (Pl, D, C),
where: D ∈ DirPr and C ∈ Con. Rnn(x, y) is used to denote
that x is the nearest neighbour from the direction R to object
y. For example, Nnn(pl1, pl2) indicates that pl1 is the nearest
neighbour from the north direction to pl2, etc.
To illustrate the model, consider the scene in Figure 1 that
consists of a set of places, a to f, with a 4-cardinal direction
frame of reference overlaid for some places in the scenes.
A representative point is used to deﬁne the place location.
It is further known that places represented as points a, b, c, e
are inside d and places d, f are inside g. The full set of
relationships used to model the scene are given in the table
in Figure 1(b). Note that in some cases, no relation can be
found, e.g., there are no neighbours for object c from the west
direction in Figure 1(a).
A. Spatial Reasoning with the Relative Location Model
We can reason over the relative location model to in-
fer more of the implicit spatial structure of place location.
Qualitative spatial reasoning (QSR) tools can be utilised
to propagate the deﬁned relationships and derive new ones
between places in the scene. QSR takes advantage of the
transitive nature of the partial or total ordering of the quan-
tity space in order to infer new information from the raw
information presented. In particular, the transitive nature of
(a)
Set of spatial relations to model relative location
Nnn(d, a), Snn(b, a), Wnn(c, a), Enn(e, a)
Nnn(g, d), Snn(a, d), Wnn(c, d), Enn(e, d)
Nnn(g, c), Snn(b, c), Enn(a, c)
Nnn(a, b), Enn(f, b)
Nnn(a, f), Wnn(b, f)
Nnn(g, e), Snn(b, e), Wnn(d, e)
Snn(d, g)
in(a, d), in(b, d), in(c, d), in(e, d),
in(d, g), in(f, g)
(b)
Figure 1. (a) An example map scene with a set of places represented as
points.(b) Set of direction, proximity and containment relations chosen to
representative relative location in the proposed model.
TABLE I. COMPOSITION TABLE FOR 4-CARDINAL DIRECTION
RELATIONSHIPS.
N
E
S
W
N
N
N ∨ E
All
N ∨ W
E
N ∨ E
E
S ∨ E
All
S
All
S ∨ E
S
S ∨ W
W
W ∨ N
All
W ∨ S
W
some spatial relationships can be used to directly infer spatial
hierarchies, for example, containment and cardinal direction
relations. The scope of the model is deliberately focussed
on general containment relationships and ignores other pos-
sible topological relations, such as overlap or touch. Hence,
building containment hierarchies is straightforward using the
transitivity rules: inside(a, b) ∧ inside(b, c) → inside(a, c)
and contains(a, b) ∧ contains(b, c) → contains(a, c).
In the case of direction relationships, more detailed spatial
reasoning can be applied using composition tables. Table I
shows the composition table for a 4-cardinal direction frame
of reference between point representations of spatial objects.
In considering the entries of the composition tables, some of
those entries provide deﬁnite conclusions of the composition
operation, i.e., the composition result is only one relationship
(emboldened in the table), other entries are indeﬁnite and
result in a disjunctive set of possible relationships, e.g., the
composition: N(a, b) ∧ E(b, c) → N(a, c) ∨ E(a, c).
Spatial reasoning can be applied on the linked place model

241
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II. RESULT OF REASONING WITH CARDINAL RELATIONS
FOR THE PLACE MODEL IN FIGURE 1.
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
a
-
N
E
S
W
N
S
b
S
-
S
S
S
W
S
c
W
W
-
W
W
N ∨ W
S ∨ W
d
N
N
E
-
W
N
S
e
E
N
E
E
-
N
S
f
S
E
S ∨ E
S
S
-
S
g
N
N
N
N
N
N
-
using different strategies. The most straightforward is through
deriving the algebraic closure, i.e., completing the scene by
deriving all possible missing relationships between objects.
Path-consistency algorithms for deriving the algebraic closure
has been been implemented in various tools, e.g., in the SparQ
spatial reasoning engine [27]. Table II shows the result of
this operation for the example scene in Figure 1. Explicit
relations are shown in bold and the remaining relation are
inferred by spatial reasoning. As can be seen in the table,
using the 19 relationships deﬁned for the model in Figure 1(b),
reasoning was able to derive a further 19 deﬁnite relationships,
completing over 90% of the possible relations in the scene.
B. Applying the Relative Location Place Model on the LDW
The underlying structure of any expression in RDF is a
collection of triples, each consisting of a subject, a predicate
and an object. A set of such triples is called an RDF graph, in
which each triple is represented as a node-arc-node link and
each triple represents a statement of a relationship between the
subjects and objects, denoted by the nodes, that it links. The
meaning of an RDF graph is the conjunction (logical AND)
of the statements corresponding to all the triples it contains.
The RelLoc place model can be interpreted as a simple
connected graph with nodes representing place resources and
edges representing the spatial relationships between places.
Thus a realisation of the place model for a speciﬁc RDF
document of place resources is a subgraph of the RDF graph of
the document. The RelLoc RDF graph is completely deﬁned if
RDF statements are used to represent all spatial relationships
deﬁned in the model, e.g., for the scene in Figure 1, 25
RDF statements are needed to encode the cardinal (19) and
containment (6) relationships in the table in Figure 1(b).
Let Pl be a ﬁnite set of place class resources deﬁned in
an RDF data store and DirPr(Pl) deﬁnes cardinal direction
relations between members of Pl and Con(Pl) describes the
containment relations between members of Pl as deﬁned by
the relative location model above.
A RelLoc subgraph GL = (VL, EL) is a simple connected
graph that models Pl, where: VL = Pl is the set of nodes,
EL = {DirPr(Pl) ∪ Con(Pl)} is the set of edges labelled
with the corresponding direction and containment relation-
ships.
Note that there exists a subgraph of GL for every place
pl ∈ Pl, which represents the subset of direction-proximity
and containment relationships that completely deﬁne the rela-
tive location of pl. Thus, a location proﬁle for a particular place
pl ∈ Pl can be deﬁned as Lpl = {(DirPrpl, Conpl}. Lpl is
the restriction of L to pl, where DirPrpl and Conpl deﬁnes
(a)
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
a
-
1
1
1
1
0
0
b
1
-
0
0
0
1
0
c
1
1
-
0
0
0
1
d
1
0
1
-
1
0
1
e
0
1
0
1
-
0
1
f
1
1
0
0
0
-
0
g
0
0
0
1
0
0
-
(b)
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
a
-
N
E
S
0
N
0
b
S
-
S
0
S
W
0
c
W
0
-
W
0
0
0
d
N
0
0
-
W
0
N
e
E
0
0
E
-
0
0
f
0
E
0
0
0
-
0
g
0
0
N
N
N
0
-
(c)
Figure 2. (a) A graph representing the sample map scene from Figure 1. (b)
Adjacency matrix for the location graph representing nearest neighbour
relationships. (c) Adjacency-orientation matrix representing nearest
neighbour and direction relationships.
direction proximity and containment relations respectively
between pl and other places in Pl, as speciﬁed by our model.
For example the location proﬁle for place a in Fig-
ure 1 is the set of statements describing the relations:
N(d, a), S(b, a), W(c, a), E(e, a), in(a, d).
The RelLoc graph can be represented by a matrix to register
the adjacency relationship between the place and its nearest
neighbours. The scene in Figure 1 is shown as a graph with
nodes and edges in Figure 2(a) and its corresponding adjacency
matrix is shown in (b). The fact that two places are neighbours
is represented by a value (1) in the matrix and by a value
(0) otherwise. Values of (1) in the matrix can be replaced by
the relative orientation relationship between the corresponding
places as shown in Figure 2(c) and the resulting structure is
denoted Adjacency-Orientation Matrix.
C. A Semantic Place Model
So far, the RelLoc place model considers distance and
direction relationships as the primary factors for specifying
place location. The importance of a place or its salience is

242
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
another factor that is useful to consider. Salience of a place
can be described from a personal or from an absolute point of
view.
On a personal level, many factors can inﬂuence the impor-
tance of place to an individual [28], including, a) place depen-
dence; how far the place satisﬁes the individuals behavioural
goals as compared to other alternatives (e.g., [29], [30]), b)
place affect; reﬂecting the emotional or affective bond between
an individual and a place (e.g., [30], [31]), and c) place social
bonding; reﬂecting the importance of social relationships and
the context within which they occur. The speciﬁc settings of the
place share the meanings attributed to them by the individuals
social environment (e.g., [32], [30]).
On an absolute level, salience of a place can be deﬁned
irrelevant of attachment to speciﬁc individuals. For example,
Hall, Smart and Jones [33] considered salience as a factor
in deﬁning the place location when devising methods for
automatic caption generation for images (or photographs). In
their work, the equation that determines the set of relative
places to choose from in a particular image caption is a
combination of an equal number of ”ways” (highways, roads,
paths, · · · ) and other places, ordered by their relative salience.
A salience value is, in turn, a measure of how close the location
of a place is to the image (i.e., its distance from the image),
and its popularity (i.e., how well-known the place is). The later
factor can be derived automatically from the Web, for example,
from the counts of place mentions on Flickr, Wikipedia and
web pages [34].
Our basic RelLoc place model can be adapted to handle
different possible semantics of place, such as, place type,
activities carried out in a place or place salience. The adapted
model will, henceforth, be denoted Semantic Relative Location
model, or SemRelLoc.
Hence, in SemRelLoc, a layer of salient places is ﬁrst
extracted from the base map layer and this acts as the anchor
for place location deﬁnition. Thus, the algorithm for deﬁning
the relative location model is applied between, a) all places on
the salient feature layer, and b) every place in the remaining
set of places in the base map layer and the salient place layer
only.
Consider the example schematic maps in Figure 3. In
Figure 3(a), places on the map are not distinguished by any
speciﬁc property and relationships between them are deﬁned
using RelLoc. In (b), a salient place layer is ﬁltered out and
used as a basis for the SemRelLoc model. The selection of
places in this layer can be chosen to serve the application in
context, for example, as a selection of particular place types, or
speciﬁc place instances with high popularity, or even those of
relevance to a particular individual. Note that in (b) spatial
relationships are deﬁned only with reference to the salient
place instances and no relationships are deﬁned amongst the
remaining places on the base map layer, as will be described
below.
Let SalientPl be a ﬁnite set of place resources deﬁned
as a subset of all places Pl in an RDF data store, and
SalientPl be the rest of places remaining on the base layer
(i.e., {Pl\SalientPl} .
A semantic relative location SemRelLoc subgraph GL =
(VL, EL) is a simple connected graph that models Pl,
where: VL
=
SalientPl is the set of nodes, EL
=
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. (a) Schematic of sample base map layer. (b) Salient place layer
ﬁltered out.
{DirPr(SalientPl)∪DirPr(SalientPl)∪Con(Pl)} is the
set of edges labelled with the corresponding direction and
containment relationships. {DirPr(SalientPl) is the set of
direction-proximity relationships between places on the salient
feature layer. DirPr(SalientPl) is the set of direction-
proximity relationships between the rest of places on the
base layer with places on the salient layer. Hence, no inter-
relationships are deﬁned between places on the base layer
itself.
Note that there exists a subgraph of GL for every place
pl ∈ Pl, which represents the subset of direction-proximity
and containment relationships that completely deﬁne the rel-
ative location of pl. Thus, a Semantic location proﬁle for a
particular place pl ∈ Pl can be deﬁned as follows.
Lpl =
 {DirPrSalientpl, Conpl}
, if pl ∈ SalientPl
{DirPrSalientP l, Conpl}
, ∀pl ∈ SalientPl

Figure 4(a) shows a section of the Cardiff Bay area in
Cardiff, Wales. A set of places are shown around the place:
‘Cardiff Ice Rink’. Figure 4(a) shows the set of places chosen
to describe the location with the original RelLoc model, while
in 4(b) the set of some selected salient features (hotels,
museums, railway stations, etc.) around the place are shown.
These are used to describe the location with SemRelLoc. Table
III lists the set of location expressions deﬁned by both models.
While both are topologically correct, the location expressions
of the SemRelLoc model can be considered more meaningful
and useful for general contexts.

243
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Sample map scene with places deﬁning the location of ”Cardiff Ice
Rink”: a) with RelLoc model, and b) with SemRelLoc.
SemRelLoc offers two potential advantages over RelLoc;
a) more meaningful place location expressions, using selected
relevant place instances, and b) potentially a more economical
data model to manage and reason with. The number of pre-
deﬁned relationships remains constant, as every place will have
a set of statements deﬁning its proximity and direction relation-
ships. However, spatial reasoning with the semantic location
graph can be more efﬁcient with the reduction of the variety
of modelled edges between places. In the following section,
the effectiveness of spatial reasoning with SemRelLoc will
be compared against the basic RelLoc model.
IV.
APPLICATION AND EVALUATION
The main goals of the Linked Place model is to provide
a representation of place location on the LDW that allows
TABLE III. Location expressions deﬁning the place ”Cardiff Ice Rink” in
both the RelLoc and SemRelLoc models
RelLoc Model
Wharf Disused N Cardiff Ice Rink
Slipway NE Cardiff Ice Rink
BT Data Centre Cardiff Bay E Cardiff Ice Rink
Watkiss Way SE Cardiff Ice Rink
Planet Ice Cardiff Arena SW Cardiff Ice Rink
Weighbridge W Cardiff Ice Rink
Cardiff Bay Yacht Club NW Cardiff Ice Rink
SemRelLoc Model
Dingle Road railway station N Cardiff Ice Rink
Cogan railway station NE Cardiff Ice Rink
Copthorne Hotel Cardiff E Cardiff Ice Rink
Cardiff Athletics Stadium SE Cardiff Ice Rink
Cardiff Central railway station S Cardiff Ice Rink
St Davids Hotel and Spa SW Cardiff Ice Rink
Cardiff Bay Barrage W Cardiff Ice Rink
Figure 5. Components of the developed system to implement the linked
place model.
for place information to be linked effectively and consistently.
The effectiveness of the proposed model can be evaluated
with respect to two main aspects; whether it provides a sound
deﬁnition of place location, that is to test the correctness of
the place location proﬁles, and whether it provides a complete
deﬁnition of place location, that is whether a complete relative
location graph can be derived using the individual place
location proﬁles.
The soundness of the location proﬁles is assumed as it
essentially relies on the validity of the computation of the
spatial relationships. Issues related to the complexity of this
process are discussed in the next section.
Here, we evaluate the completeness aspect of the model.
An individual place location proﬁle deﬁned using the model
represents a ﬁnite set of spatial relationships between a place
and its nearest neighbours and direct parent. Completeness of
the model can be deﬁned as the degree to which these individ-
ual proﬁles can be used to derive implicit links between places
not deﬁned by the model. The model is entirely complete if a
full set of links between places can be derived using automatic
spatial reasoning, i.e., the model can produce a complete graph,
where there is a deﬁned spatial relationship between every
place in the dataset and every other place.
A system was developed that implements the Linked Place
model and further builds an enriched model using spatial
reasoning for evaluation purposes as shown in Figure 5.

244
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
prefix d: <http://dbpedia.org/ontology/>
prefix :<http://dbpedia.org/resource/>
prefix prop: <http://dbpedia.org/property/>
prefix geo: <http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#>
select ?place
(MAX(?lat) as ?lat)(MAX(?long) as ?long)
where{
?place ?ontology ?resource.
?place a d:Place.
?place geo:lat ?lat.
?place geo:long ?long.
filter ( ?resource = :Wales or ?resource = "Wales"@en )
}
group by ?place
order by ?place
Figure 6. SparQL query used to extract place data from DBpedia.
TABLE IV. RESULTS OF REASONING APPLIED ON THE DBPEDIA
DATASET.
Deﬁned
Deﬁnite
2-Relations
3-Relations
Others
2751
50340
63148
28
136
2.36%
43.24%
54.22%
0.02%
0.12%
A. Evaluation of the Relative Location Place Model
Two datasets were used in this experiment, DBPedia and
the Ordnance Survey open data [8]. These were chosen as they
exhibit different representations of place resources on the LDW
and are typical of VGIs and AGIs respectively. A description
of the datasets used is presented below, along with the results
of the application of spatial reasoning over the constructed
linked place models.
DBpedia DataSet
A sample dataset containing all Places in Wales, UK, has
been downloaded from DBpedia using the SPARQL query in
Figure 6.
A total of 489 places were used, for which a relative
location graph of 2751 direction-proximity relations was con-
structed. Completing the graph resulted in 116403 total number
of relations, out of which 50340 relations are deﬁnite (deﬁning
only one possible relationship).
Note that of the indeﬁnite relationships some are a dis-
junction of 2 relations, e.g., {N, NW} or {E, SE} and
some are a disjunction of 3 relations, e.g., {N, NE, NW} or
{NE, E, SE}. In both cases, relations can be generalised to
a “coarser” direction relation, for example, {NE, E, SE} can
be generalised to general East relationship. These results are
considered useful and thus are ﬁltered out in the presentation.
The remaining results are disjunctions of unrelated directions,
e.g., {N, NE, E}, and are thus considered to be ambiguous.
A summary of the results is shown in Table IV. Using the
Linked Place model we are able to describe nearly half the
possible relations precisely (45.6%), as well as almost all of
the rest of the scene (54.22%) with some useful generalised
direction relations.
Ordnance Survey DataSet
The Boundary-line RDF dataset for Wales was downloaded
from the Ordnance Survey open data web site [8]. The data
gives a range of local government administrative and electoral
boundaries.
Figure 7 shows the relative location graph constructed for
the Unitary Authority dataset for Wales. Dashed edges are
Figure 7. (a) Linked Place Graph for the Unitary Authorities in Wales from
the Ordnance Survey dataset.
TABLE V. RESULTS OF REASONING APPLIED ON THE ORDNANCE
SURVEY DATASET.
Deﬁned
Deﬁnite
2-Relations
3-Relations
Others
73
94
64
0
0
31.6%
40.69%
27.7%
0
0
used to indicate that relationships (and inverses) are deﬁned
both ways between the respective nodes, but only one relation
is used to label the edge in the Linked Place model. The set
contains 22 regions, for which 73 direction-proximity relations
were computed. Reasoning applied on this set of relations
produces the results shown in Table V.
We can use the above results to describe the effectiveness
of the linked place model in terms of the information content
it was able to deduce using the ratio of the number of deﬁned
relations to the number of deduced relations. A summary is
presented in Table VI.
B. Evaluation of the Semantic Place Model
The value of the SemRelLoc model is primarily in its
ability to deliver ﬂexible and meaningful place location ex-
pressions. Here, we also evaluate its effectiveness with respect
to spatial reasoning. An experiment is carried out with a
sample point of interest dataset obtained from the Ordnance
Survey, that records information on places and place types
in the city of Cardiff, Wales, UK. A set of approximately
300 places were chosen in 5 unitary authorities in South
Wales; (Cardiff, Newport, Caerphilly, Vale of Glamorgan and
TABLE VI. SUMMARY OF THE EXPERIMENT RESULTS.
Defined
Definite
Defined
Useful
DBpedia
0.054
0.024
OS
0.78
0.32

245
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 8. A map scene with a sample set of point of interest places in South
Wales, UK. Red/dark stars represent salient features and white stars are all
other places.
TABLE VII. RESULTS OF REASONING APPLIED ON THE SALIENT
FEATURE LAYER ONLY.
Deﬁned
Deﬁnite
2-Relations
3-Relations
538
3261
2515
2
8.52%
51.63%
39.81%
0.031%
Rhondda). Salient features were chosen on the basis of popular
place types, including hotels, museums, hospitals, castles and
railway stations. A map of the area chosen is shown in Figure 8
with the salient (red/dark) and other places (white) highlighted.
Table VII shows the result of applying spatial reasoning on
the complete graph on the salient feature layer only. A total of
108 places were used, for which a relative location graph of
538 direction-proximity relations was deﬁned. Completing the
graph resulted in 5778 total number of relations, out of which
3261 (56%) relations are deﬁnite (deﬁning only one possible
relationship) and a further 2515 (44%) are useful 2-relations.
Thus, using RelLoc on the salient feature layer, and deﬁning
only 8% of relations, we were able to derive almost all of the
scene with useful location expressions.
With the SemRelLoc model, no relations have to be pre-
deﬁned between the base layer places. Every place on the base
layer is instead linked to places on the salient feature layer.
Thus, for the complete map of places in Figure 8, a further
181 other places were added to the scene and a total of 1331
pre-deﬁned proximity direction relations are deﬁned by the
model. Completing the graph resulted in 29403, out of which
12939 (44%) relations are deﬁnite and a further 15454 (53%)
are useful 2-relations. Thus, using SemRelLoc model, and
deﬁning only 5% of possible relationships between places in
the map scene, we were able to complete the whole graph
and derive over 96% of all possible relationships between all
places.
The result demonstrates that the application of spatial
TABLE VIII. RESULTS OF REASONING APPLIED ON THE WHOLE
MAP SCENE with SemRelLoc.
Deﬁned
Deﬁnite
2-Relations
3-Relations or more
1331
12939
15454
1010
4.52%
44%
52.56%
3.44%
reasoning on the adapted semantic model is as effective as
in the case of the basic model. Further research can now be
directed at the scalability of the framework with respect to
both representation and reasoning on the Linked Data Web.
C. Discussion
The proposed approach to place representation and rea-
soning can be adopted on the LDW in different scenarios as
follows.
•
The spatial integrity of the linked web resources can
be checked. Here, spatial reasoning can be applied
on the whole resource to determine which predicates
are contradictory [25]. Scalability of the reasoning
engine can be an issue and methods for managing
large resources need to be considered [18].
•
Enriching linked web resources by the basic relative
location model allows uniform and complete represen-
tation of place across resources, which in turn supports
effective retrieval of place information.
•
Using the reasoner to build a parallel, complementary
resource of the complete set of possible spatial in-
formation that can be inferred from the basic relative
location model, as was done in the experiments above.
The inferred resource will need to be updated regularly
to reﬂect the current state of the original resource and
scalability of the reasoning method will also be an
issue that needs to be addressed.
•
Spatial reasoning can be applied ‘on the ﬂy’ to support
a deﬁned set of query plans on the basic relative
location structure. A possible framework to implement
this scenario is given in Figure 9. Possible query
plans that can be supported by this framework includes
ﬁnding relationships directly supported by the model
(namely, containment, nearest neighbour and direction
queries) as well as those derived by spatial inference
using spatial reasoning. Detailed speciﬁcation of these
queries are the subject of future research.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
Data on geographic places are considered to be very useful
on the LDW. Individuals and organisations are volunteering
data to build global base maps enriched with different types
of traditional and non-traditional semantics reﬂecting people’s
views of geographic space and place. In addition, geographic
references to place can be used to link different types of
datasets, thus enhancing the utility of these datasets on the
LDW. This work explores the challenges introduced when
representing place data using the simple model of RDF, with
different geometries to represent location and different non-
standardised vocabularies to represent spatial relationships
between locations.

246
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 9. A framework for the implementation of the proposed approach.
A linked place model is proposed that injects certain
types of spatial semantics into the RDF graph underlying
the place data. Speciﬁc types of spatial relationships between
place nodes are added to the graph to allow the creation
of individual place location proﬁles that fully describe the
relative spatial location of a place. It is further shown how the
enriched relative location graph can allow spatial reasoning to
be applied to derive implicit spatial links to produce even more
richer place descriptions. Salience of place is introduced as a
means of scoping out relevant and meaningful place location
expressions. The representation scheme is adapted to allow for
the ﬂexible choice of place instances to be used in the model.
The results obtained from the evaluation experiments
demonstrate possible signiﬁcant value in the proposed model.
Further work need to be done to explore the potential utility
of the proposal. Some of the interesting issues that we aim to
explore in the future are described below.
•
Simple methods and assumptions were used to com-
pute the direction relationships between places. Fur-
ther study need to be carried out to evaluate whether
more involved representations are useful [35].
•
Applications of spatial reasoning need to be consid-
ered further. Describing the complete graph is not a
practical (nor a useful) option. Can spatial reasoning
be selectively applied, for example, as part of query
processing on the location graph?
•
The application of the approach on other types of data
sets on the LDW as individual as well as combined
resources.
APPENDIX
Follows is a sample set of relationships deﬁning the loca-
tion of ”Techniquest”: an educational charity in The Cardiff
Bay area, Wales, UK, resulting from the application of spatial
reasoning on the salient features in the map in Figure 8.
(Techniquest (sw) Bastion_Road)
(Techniquest (sw) Barry_Power_Station)
(Techniquest (sw) Barry_Docks_railway_station)
(Techniquest (sw) Barry_Island_railway_station)
(Techniquest (sw) Barry_Dock_Lifeboat_Station)
(Techniquest (sw w) Cowbridge_railway_station)
(Techniquest (sw w) Llantwit_Major_Roman_Villa)
(Techniquest (sw) Barry_railway_station)
(Techniquest (sw w) Aberthaw_power_stations)
(Techniquest (sw w) Aberthaw_High_Level_railway_station)
(Techniquest (sw w) Aberthaw_Low_Level_railway_station)
(Techniquest (ne) Celtic_Manor_Resort)
(Techniquest (ne) Kingsway_Shopping_Centre)
(Techniquest (ne) Allt-yr-yn)
(Techniquest (ne) Caerleon_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Caerphilly_Castle)
(Techniquest (n nw) Argoed_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Brithdir_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Aberbargoed_Hospital)
(Techniquest (n nw) Aber_Bargoed_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n ne) Crosskeys_railway_station)
(Techniquest (sw w) Atlantic_College_Lifeboat_Station)
(Techniquest (nw) Coed_Ely_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Bargoed_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Cefn_Eglwysilan)
(Techniquest (nw) Church_Village)
(Techniquest (nw) Church_Village_Halt_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Sardis_Road)
(Techniquest (nw) Cross_Inn_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Aberdare_Low_Level_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Aberdare_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Coed-Ely)
(Techniquest (n nw) Cilfynydd)
(Techniquest (n nw) Abercynon_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Abertysswg_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Darran_and_Deri_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Dinas_Rhondda_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Abercynon_North_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Bute_Town)
(Techniquest (nw) Mynydd_William_Meyrick)
(Techniquest (nw) Clydach_Vale)
(Techniquest (nw) Lluest-wen_Reservoir)
(Techniquest (n nw) Abercwmboi_Halt_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Abernant_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Athletic_Ground_Aberdare)
(Techniquest (nw) Aberaman_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Cwmbach_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Beddau_Halt_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n) Abercarn_railway_station)
(Techniquest (s) Alberta_Place_Halt_railway_station)
(Techniquest (w) St_Fagans_National_History_Museum)
(Techniquest (sw) Dinas_Powys_railway_station)
(Techniquest (e) Pierhead_Building)
(Techniquest (e) Mermaid_Quay)
(Techniquest (n nw) Caerphilly_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n ne) Ruperra_Castle)
(Techniquest (n nw) Birchgrove_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) National_Museum_Cardiff)
(Techniquest (ne) Bassaleg_Junction_railway_station)
(Techniquest (ne) RAF_Pengam_Moors)
(Techniquest (n) Childrens_Hospital_for_Wales)
(Techniquest (w) Aberthin_Platform_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Abertridwr_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n) Cefn_Onn_Halt_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Creigiau_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Efail_Isaf_railway_station)
(Techniquest (n nw) Aber_railway_station)
(Techniquest (nw) Castell_Coch)
(Techniquest (nw) Whitchurch_Hospital)
(Techniquest (n nw) Hilton_Cardiff)
(Techniquest (w) St_Fagans_Castle)
(Techniquest (sw) Eastbrook_railway_station)
(Techniquest (w) Cardiff_International_Sports_Stadium)
(Techniquest (s) Cardiff_Bay_Barrage)
(Techniquest (sw w) Dyffryn_Gardens)
(Techniquest (n) University_Hospital_of_Wales)
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Abdelmoty and K. Al-Muzaini, “Reasoning with place information
on the linked data web,” in The Second International Conference on
Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data- ALLDATA 2016,
V. Gudivada, D. Roman, M. di Buono, and M. Monteleone, Eds., 2016,
pp. 48–53.

247
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[2]
T.
Berners-Lee.
Linked
data.
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/
LinkedData.html. Accessed: 2016-11-30.
[3]
C. Bizer, T. Heath, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked data - the story so
far,” International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems,
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1–22, 2009.
[4]
J. Goodwin, C. Dolbear, and G. Hart, “Geographical linked data:
The administrative geography of great britain on the semantic web,”
Transactions in GIS, vol. 12, pp. 19–30, 2008.
[5]
G. Hart and C. Dolbear, Linked Data: A Geographic Perspective. CRC
Books, 2013.
[6]
C. Henden, P. Rissen, and S. Angeletou. Linked geospatial data, and
the bbc. http://www.w3.org/2014/03/lgd/papers/lgd14 submission 28.
Accessed: 2016-11-30.
[7]
M. Hackley, “How good is volunteered geographical information? a
comparative study of openstreetmap and ordnance survey datasets,”
Environment and Planning B, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 682–703, 2010.
[8]
Ordnance survey linked data platform. http://data.ordnancesurvey.co.
uk/. Accessed: 2016-11-30.
[9]
Geolinkeddata.es. http://linkeddata.es/. Accessed: 2016-11-30.
[10]
S. Mohamed and A. Abdelmoty, “Uncovering user proﬁles in location
based social networks,” in The Eighth International Conference on
Advanced Geographic Information Systems, GEOProcessing 2016, C.-
P. Rckemann and Y. Doytsher, Eds., 2016, p. 1421.
[11]
E. Younis, “Hybrid geo-spatial query processing on the semantic web,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Cardiff University, Cardiff Univeristy, 2013.
[12]
E. M. Younis, C. Jones, V. Tanasescu, and A. Abdelmoty, “Hybrid geo-
query methods on the semantic web with a spatially enhanced index of
dbpedia,” in 7th International Conference on Geographic Information
Science, GIScience, 2012, N. Xiao, M.-P. Kwan, M. Goodchild, and
S. Shekhar, Eds., vol. LNCS 7478, 2012, pp. 340–353.
[13]
S. Auer, J. Lehmann, and S. Hellmann, “Linkedgeodata- adding a spatial
dimension to the web of data,” in Proc. of 7th International Semantic
Web Conference (ISWC), vol. LNCS 5823.
Springer, 2009, pp. 731–
746.
[14]
C. Stadler, J. Lehmann, K. Hffner, and S. Auer, “Linkedgeodata: A core
for a web of spatial open data,” Semantic Web Journal, vol. 3, no. 4,
pp. 333–354, 2012.
[15]
J. Salas and A. Harth, “Finding spatial equivalences accross multiple rdf
datasets,” in Terra Cognita Workshop,co-located with ISWC, R. Grtter,
D. Kolas, M. Koubarakis, and D. Pfoser, Eds., 2011, pp. 114–126.
[16]
A. Cohn, B. Bennett, J. Gooday, and N. Gotts, “Qualitative spatial
representation and reasoning with the region connection calculus,”
Geoinformatica, vol. 1, pp. 1–44, 1997.
[17]
Geosparql - a geographic query language for rdf data. http://www.
opengeospatial.org/standards/geosparql. Accessed: 2016-11-30.
[18]
M. Koubarakis, M. Karpathiotakis, K. Kyzirakos, C. Nikolaou, and
M. Sioutis, “Data Models and Query Languages for Linked Geospatial
Data,” in Reasoning Web. Semantic Technologies for Advanced Query
Answering,Invited tutorial at the 8th Reasoning Web Summer School
2012 (RW 2012), T. Eiter and T. Krennwallner, Eds., vol. LNCS 7487.
Springer, 2012, pp. 290–328.
[19]
A. G. Cohn and J. Renz, Qualitative Spatial Representation and
Reasoning, ser. Handbook of Knowledge Representation.
Elsevier,
2008, pp. 551–596.
[20]
B. Gottfried, “Reasoning about intervals in two dimensions,” in IEEE
Int. Conf. on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, W. e. a. Thissen, Ed.,
2004, pp. 5324–5332.
[21]
What is racerpro. http://www1.racer-systems.com/products/racerpro/
index.phtml. Accessed: 2016-11-30.
[22]
M. Stocker and E. Sirin, “Pelletspatial: A hybrid rcc-8 and rdf/owl
reasoning and query engine,” in 6th Intern. Workshop on OWL: Ex-
periences and Directions (OWLED2009).
Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp.
2–31.
[23]
M. Sioutis, S. Li, and J.-F. Condotta, “On redundancy in linked
geospatial data,” in 2nd Workshop on Linked Data Quality (LDQ),
ser. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, A. Rula, A. Zaveri, M. Knuth,
and D. Kontokostas, Eds., no. 1376, 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1376/#paper-05
[24]
C. Nikolaou and M. Koubarakis, “Fast consistency checking of very
large real-world rcc-8 constraint networks using graph partitioning,”
in Proceedings of the 28th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
2014, pp. 2724–2730.
[25]
A. Abdelmoty, P. Smart, and B. El-Geresy, “Spatial reasoning with place
information on the semantic web,” International Journal on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Tools, vol. 23, no. 5, p. 1450011, 2014.
[26]
E. Younis, C. Jones, V. Tanasescu, and A. Abdelmoty, “Hybrid geo-
spatial query methods on the semantic web with a spatially-enhanced
index of dbpedia,” in Geographic Information Science, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, N. Xiao, M.-P. Kwan, M. Goodchild, and
S. Shekhar, Eds., vol. 7478.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp.
340–353.
[27]
D. Wolter and J. Wallgrn, “Qualitative spatial reasoning for applications:
New challenges and the sparq toolbox,” in Qualitative Spatio-Temporal
Representation and Reasoning: Trends and Future Directions, S. Haz-
arika, Ed., 2012, pp. 336–362.
[28]
G. Kyle, A. Graefe, and M. R., “Testing the dimensionality of place
attachment in recreational settings,” Environment and Behavior, vol. 37,
no. 2, pp. 153–177, 2005.
[29]
G. Brown and C. Raymond, “The relationship between place attach-
ment and landscape values toward mapping place attachment,” Applied
Geography, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 89–111, 2007.
[30]
G. Kyle, K. Bricker, A. Graefe, and T. Wickham, “An examination
of recreationists relationships with activities and settings.” Leisure
Sciences, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 123–142, 2004.
[31]
B. Jorgensen and R. Stedman, “Sense of place as an attitude: Lakeshore
owners attitudes toward their properties.” Journal of Environmental
Psychology, vol. 21, pp. 233–248, 2001.
[32]
H. Gu and C. Ryan, “Place attachment, identity and community impacts
of tourism the case of a beijing hutong.” Tourism Management, vol. 29,
no. 4, pp. 637–647, 2008.
[33]
M. Hall, P. Smart, and C. Jones, “Interpreting spatial language in image
captions,” Cognitive Processing, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 67–94, 2011.
[34]
M. Hall, “Modelling and reasoning with quantitative representations of
vague spatial language used in photographic image captions,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Cardiff University, Cardiff Univeristy, 2011.
[35]
X. Yao and J.-C. Thill, “How far is too far? a statistical approach to
context-contingent proximity modeling,” Transactions in GIS, vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 157–178, 2005.

