Requirements for an AI-enabled Industry 4.0 Platform - Integrating
Industrial and Scientific Views
Eichelberger Holger
Software Systems Engineering
University of Hildesheim
Hildesheim, Germany
e-mail: eichelberger@sse.uni-hildesheim.de
Stichweh Heiko
Head of Innovation
Lenze SE
Hamelin, Germany
e:mail: heiko.stichweh@lenze.com
Sauer Christian
Software Systems Engineering
University of Hildesheim
Hildesheim, Germany
e-mail: sauer@sse.uni-hildesheim.de
Abstract—Intelligent manufacturing is one goal of smart in-
dustry/Industry 4.0 that could be achieved through Artificial
Intelligence (AI). Flexibly combining AI methods and platform
capabilities, such as dynamic offloading of code close to produc-
tion machines, security or interoperability mechanisms are major
demands in this context. However, recent Industry 4.0 software
platforms fall short in various of these demands, in particular
in upcoming ecosystem scenarios, e.g., when data or services
shall be shared across platforms or companies without vendor
lock-ins. The aim of the funded Intelligent Industrial Production
(IIP) IIP-Ecosphere project is to research concepts and solutions
for ‘easy-to-use’ AI in Industry 4.0 and to demonstrate the
results in a prototypical software platform. Core questions are
which demands shall drive the development of such a platform
and how a feasible set of requirements can be determined that
balances scientific and industrial interests. In this paper, we
discuss our approach on eliciting requirements in this context
for two interlinked requirements perspectives, a usage and a
functional view. In summary, we collected 67 usage view activities
/ scenarios and 141 top-level requirements with 179 detailing sub-
requirements. About 35% of the requirements have so far been
realized in a prototype and some of the identified concepts are
currently being taken up by a standardization initiative for edge
devices in Industry 4.0.
Keywords—Industry 4.0 platforms; intelligent production; AI;
requirements; edge; adaptation; asset administration shell.
I. INTRODUCTION
The digitization of industry increases the performance of
technical systems and their processes, but also their complex-
ity. Intelligent manufacturing (smart industry, Industry 4.0)
can be realized through application of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) in the production context. This is perceived as an enabler
for an increase of productivity of up to 50% [1]. However,
currently more than 75% of AI applications are ultimately not
deployed [2], e.g., as they are not considered to be production
ready or as they are not easily applicable by domain users.
One further trend in Industry 4.0 are edge devices. As
an evolution of Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC), they
are frequently used for retrofitting, e.g., equipping legacy
manufacturing machines with recent communication proto-
cols. Moreover, modern edge devices combine hard real-
time functions connected to the manufacturing machines with
soft/non real-time IT capabilities. Some recent edge devices
even ship with modern hardware accelerators, such as Graphic
Processing Units (GPUs) or Tensor Processing Units (TPUs),
which are often beneficial for AI calculations. While edge
devices allow for offloading IT functionality close to pro-
duction machines, e.g., to operate AI at low latency, they
also significantly increase the management and deployment
complexity in Industry 4.0 setups by emphasizing distributed
on-premise computing.
To support companies in managing this complexity, several
software platforms for Cyber-Physical Production Systems
(CPPS) or Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT/IoT) applications
are available, e.g., Siemens MindSphere or PTC ThingWorx.
As we discussed in [3], these platforms significantly differ in
their capabilities, in particular with respect to AI, edge offload-
ing or cloud usage. Moreover, they often fall short in providing
capabilities for consistent (distributed) system customization,
one key capability to cope with the complexity, but also in
data protection or data/service sharing for ecosystem setups.
In the funded project IIP-Ecosphere, we are researching
concepts for easy-to-use AI in the manufacturing domain. The
overall mission of IIP-Ecosphere is to create an ecosystem
of involved stakeholders for the mutual transfer of experi-
ence and knowledge. For demonstrating the approaches, the
partners develop a prototypical IIoT platform. On the one
side, the requirements for such a platform must reflect the
scientific goals and pave the way for experimenting with and
demonstrating of novel approaches. On the other side, such
a platform must also be interesting for industrial stakeholders
and support production requirements. Thus, an elicitation of
platform requirements needs to be carefully balanced.
Our main questions are 1) how to collect and combine
scientific and industrial requirements in an Industry 4.0 context
and 2) can different views on the requirements be used
to improve their mutual completeness? As contributions we
present a pragmatic combination of scientific methods, e.g.,
surveys, with requirements elicitation techniques in the context
of an industrial reference process for systems design. This
involves the creation two complementing views, a usage, as
well as a functional/quality view on the requirements and
allows for a more encompassing requirements collection, but
also a discussion of mutual influences. We provide insights
into elicited requirements and experiences that we made.
In summary, we collected 67 usage view activities/scenarios
and 141 top-level requirements further detailed by 179 sub-
requirements. These requirements characterize the (prioritized)
desires for an AI-enabled Industry 4.0 platform. Intentionally,
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

we were open to requirements that will probably not be real-
ized during the lifetime of IIP-Ecosphere in order to provide
inspiration for future works. At the point of writing, about 35%
of the requirements have been realized in a prototypical open
source platform and several of the identified concepts are being
taken up by a standardization initiative for edge devices in
Industry 4.0. Moreover, some industrial IIP-Ecosphere partners
adopted our integrated requirements approach to improve their
internal software development processes.
This paper is structured as follows: In Section II, we provide
a brief overview of the IIP-Ecosphere project. In Section III,
we introduce our approach for requirements collection and
discuss results from that approach in the following sections,
i.e., on a detailed platform survey in Section IV and for
the requirements collection with two views in Section V. In
Section VI, we discuss related work and in Section VII we
conclude this paper and outline future work.
Cycle Time
Optimization
Cycle
Optimization
Autonomous
Final
Inspection
A
Lower
Saxony
Bavaria
Framework
Conditions
Interfaces
Business
Models
Working Group
Working Group
Working Group
Working Group
Working Group
A
Experi-
mentation
Field
Figure 1. IIP-Ecosphere project structure.
II. IIP-ECOSPHERE PROJECT OVERVIEW
Our work takes place in the context of the IIP-Ecosphere
project, which is funded by the German ministry for Eco-
nomics and Energy in its AI innovation competition program.
IIP-Ecosphere aims at achieving an innovative leap in the
field of industrial production exploiting networked, intelligent,
autonomous system capabilities to increase productivity, flex-
ibility, robustness and efficiency of Industry 4.0. The goal is
to build a novel ecosystem of humans (through companies
and organizations), software, machines and products with a
specific focus on mutual experience and knowledge transfer.
To achieve this, the activities in IIP-Ecosphere are structured
in three layers, as illustrated in Figure 1. The Innovation
Core is at the heart of the ecosystem and is constituted by
four so called think tanks performing research on core topics,
such as platforms, AI, business models and data. The Easy
Tech layer aims at demonstrating the research results and
transferring them into industrial practice, in particular through
the AI Accelerator, which works, e.g., on a public catalog of
AI solutions and on generalized, (re-)usable AI services for
manufacturing. Finally, the Stakeholder Community conducts
activities for external parties, e.g., workshops on the core top-
ics or linking of linking start-ups, SMEs, large companies and
multiplicators with the project (Regional Innovation Hubs).
This paper is based on joint activities of the platform think
tank, the AI accelerator and the demonstrators. After the end of
the project’s lifetime, the created community/ecosystem shall
continue the project activities on its own.
One core activity in IIP-Ecosphere is the realization of a
virtual platform that connects existing devices and factory
installations in a vendor-independent manner. A virtual plat-
form [4] takes up functionality and services of existing, already
installed protocols and platforms, integrates them and offers
additional services on top of these. In IIP-Ecosphere, we aim
at enabling intelligent manufacturing applications based on
an open set of re-usable AI and platform services. These
services shall be flexibly distributed to available resources,
such as edge devices, on-premise servers or clouds. The
service distribution shall be determined by the platform before
starting an application, but also during run-time, i.e., in a self-
adaptive manner. As requested by the funding scheme, IIP-
Ecosphere strives for concepts and methods to achieve/increase
vendor-neutrality, interoperability and flexible uptake of Indus-
try 4.0 related standards, e.g., Message Queuing Telemetry
Transport (MQTT) [5], or Open Platform Communications
Unified Architecture (OPC UA) [6].
III. APPROACH
The realization of such a platform is not only a tech-
nical endeavor that commands the application of software
engineering methods, such as requirements engineering or
architectural design. It forms a data-driven system and, thus,
faces challenges that are, e.g., discussed in [7]. Particular
challenges are highly interdisciplinary teamwork (production,
AI, data science, software engineering, economics) including
researchers and practitioners, but also volatile and unclear
requirements due to explorative AI and data science processes.
As stated above, we head for a research-integrated re-
quirements collection, which is based on relevant stan-
dards/approaches for Industry 4.0 and IIoT. For system de-
velopment, the German Standardization Roadmap Industry
4.0 [8] advocates the Industrial Internet Reference Architecture
(IIRA) [9], in particular the so-called ‘Industrial Internet View-
points’. Figure 2 a) illustrates these interlinked viewpoints,
consisting of a business view (roles attributed with business
interests), an usage view (a use case collection for all involved
roles and system entities), a functional view (domain decom-
position of system functions) and an implementation view
(detailed architecture). This approach is also used in relevant
inputs for our work, particularly in an international effort to
standardize edge computing in manufacturing [10]. However,
like several other works [11]–[13], the IIRA approach focuses
on the technical side, neglecting research demands.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

	

	
	
	

	



	
	


 
!"
"

	
Figure 2. Steps towards requirements: a) IIRA [9] b) our approach.
For our requirements collection, we adopted the IIRA usage
and functional views in Figure 2 b) as follows:
• Start with an open-minded pre-survey: We conducted
surveys on research literature for IIoT platforms and
on economically predominant IIoT platforms. As result,
we identified (research-)gaps in dynamic and adaptive
deployment, semantic data integration, security, and con-
sistent customization/configurability (in the sense of vari-
ability modeling in software product lines [14]).
• Create a joint vision: Based on the pre-surveys, we
identified further (research-)relevant topics and integrated
them into a joint vision. One topic is to explore the up-
coming Asset Administration Shell (AAS) [15] standard,
which aims at interoperable modeling of Industry 4.0
”assets”, i.e., products, machines or digital twins, similar
to the “Smart Manufacturing Profile” concept in the US.
From a software perspective, AAS can be viewed as
(distributed) functional interfaces allowing for transparent
remote access [16]. One aim is to identify benefits and
limitations of AAS, e.g., platform interfaces can effi-
ciently be realized by AAS. Further platform challenges
target transparent mechanisms for data privacy, secure
data sharing (along the lines of the International Data
Spaces Association (IDSA) [17]) or the optimization of
code deployment to computational resources.
• Stabilize the vision by detailed surveys, i.e., assure the
gaps and identify supporting arguments for the vision
through focused surveys. In Section IV, we will report
on a survey of IIoT platforms, while an accompanying
systematic literature review is out of scope here.
• Create a usage and a functional view: Using the vision
as scope, elicit the requirements in terms of the two views
so that they can complement each other. In our case, two
teams created the views and performed a comparison of
the results to assess and improve the comprehensiveness
of the requirements collection. We will report our results
for both views, the identified similarities and gaps, as
well as our experiences in Section V.
Our results act as input for further works, e.g., the IIP-
Ecosphere think tank “Business Models” uses our usage view
to derive a business view for the platform and ultimately for
the ecosystem. Further, the technical partners design an archi-
tecture and create an implementation of the platform based
on the collected research-integrated requirements. In turn, this
will act as a basis for the think thanks and demonstrators to
demonstrate their results in an integrating environment.
It is important to emphasize that the collected requirements
are so far based on the input of the IIP-Ecosphere partners.
Ongoing work with the stakeholder community may lead to
additional input and a refinement of the existing views. This
input may be taken up in an iterative manner or induce
requirements that document future work for the community.
IV. SURVEY OF CURRENT IIOT PLATFORMS
To stabilize the joint vision, we performed a survey of
current IIoT platforms [3]. We selected 21 platforms, among
them 9 platforms due to a competitive stakeholder analysis
(including AWS IoT, PTC ThingWorx, SAP Leonardo or
Siemens MindSphere), as well as 12 further platforms of par-
ticular interest to the project (such as Adamos, Deviceinsight
Centersight, or Software AG Cumolocity). Based on a pre-
survey and the joint vision, we defined 16 analysis dimensions
including (re-usable) AI, Edge/IoT/cloud capabilities, uptake
of standards, security, data privacy, ecosystem building and
systematic configurability. We systematically analyzed the
platforms along these dimensions based on vendor material
and web pages in the period from June to August 2020.
• Although stated as relevant to almost all platforms, only
77% detail their AI capabilities. 48% enable customiza-
tions of the AI capabilities, while only 14% support user-
defined orchestration or third party AI functionality.
• 95% of the platforms offer some form of cloud integra-
tion, which is frequently used to argue the scalability of
the platform. Although a (mandatory) cloud integration
is sometimes perceived by customers as an adoption
barrier [18], only 19% offer an optional cloud integration,
and only 24% support an on-premise installation.
• 85% support edge devices, but the functionality is rather
diverse, ranging from data storage (67%) to customer-
specific deployments (29%). 33% support AI on edge
devices, however, this is currently often limited to func-
tionality shipped with the platform. 38% of the platforms
rely on container technology (usually Docker [19]) and 4
platforms (19%) utilize containers for edge deployment.
• 57% are characterized as (soft-)real-time capable. This
roughly correlates with the edge findings. 76% employ
some form of data stream or complex event processing,
partially offering query languages, "low code" or "no
code" environments to customize the data processing.
• Usually, the platforms offer extensive support for mod-
ern and legacy protocols, as well as (secure) device
management. More recent approaches like OPC UA are
used rarely. Most of the platforms offer some vendor-
specific (REST) interfaces, while none of the platforms
seems to uptake recent Industry 4.0 interfacing works like
AAS [15] or OPC UA companion specs.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering


	

• 	
 
			

	
	

	


	

	

	


	

		



	


	

	


	


  		
	



	

	

	
	

		

 
		




			



	
	
	



	
	
!


	
	
	


	
	
	
		
	
	
	






	

			

	
	
	
"
	
	
	


	
	
	
		
	
	





			
	
	
	
	
	
	
	


	
	
	


	
	
	
		
	
	
		


	
	

	

	

	

	




	
	
	
	
	
	
	



#	


		

		

	


	
	


	
	

	

$		


	
Figure 3. IIP-Ecosphere System under Consideration (SuC).
• Security and data protection seem to be essential for all
surveyed platforms, in particular for cloud integration.
86% describe employed authorization measures, 71%
allow limiting the data retention, but only 48% implement
mechanisms to control processing of personal data.
• 81% of the platforms appear to be customizable, e.g,
62% of the surveyed platforms allow for external (AI)
components. However, the utilized mechanisms, e.g., to
ensure a consistent platform configuration, remain unclear
despite the fact that customization approaches for the
manufacturing/CPPS domain do exist, e.g., [20].
• Openness and customization often correlate with platform
ecosystems [4]. Usually, the platforms focus on developer
and community support, while only some platforms build
up an ecosystem around their own platform (19%).
With the advent of AI, the demand for real-time processing
and flexible deployments of (customer-defined) AI methods
will become more prevalent. This coincides with demands for
flexible offloading including edge devices for latency reduction
and cloud capabilities. However, issues in standardization,
openness, interoperability among platforms, security and data
protection/privacy impact this trend, as well as the user’s
freedom of choice. We used these results to confirm the
gaps/topics identified for the joint platform vision (cf. Section
III) and as a scope for the subsequent requirements collection.
V. REQUIREMENTS COLLECTION
We now detail the requirements collection for the IIP-
Ecosphere platform, the results and experiences that we made.
The requirements collection was conducted by two distinct
teams. The input was mostly elicited through document anal-
ysis (relevant papers, standards and documents also attesting
prior work, as well as the IIP-Ecosphere grant agreement as
described in [21]) and interactive workshops, with stakeholders
from research, industry and multipliers with backgrounds
in AI (research, application), industrial production, factory
construction, device supply, software engineering in individual
cases also with experience in requirements collection. The
workshops introduced the vision/scope based on the findings
from our review of selected IIoT platforms [3], gave an expla-
nation of the respective approach to requirements collection,
and typically led to many interactions and lively discussions.
The results of these interactions were scripted, summarized in
a document and reviewed by the participants.
A. Usage view
An IIRA usage view consists of an initial architecture,
the "System under Consideration" (SuC), a definition of the
used entities, the interacting roles, as well as activities on
when/how the roles interact with the entities. Activities can be
specified in terms of a template with a sequence enumerating
the interactions (similar to use cases). The edge configuration
usage view [10] provided a good basis for our work, but it does
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

not cover all relevant topics for IIP-Ecosphere, particularly
deployment to on-premise/cloud resources or AI activities. For
these topics we organized focus workshops, where the par-
ticipants discussed existing/new roles, entities and activities.
Finally, we integrated the collected information into the usage
view in [22] with the following results:
• A significantly extended SuC, as illustrated in Figure
3. The entities are colored in gray, the roles in purple,
and the interactions between the SuC and roles are
drawn as purple arrows. Areas indicating systems of
the IIP-Ecosphere platform, such as the ECS (Edge,
Cloud and Server) management system or the ECS de-
vices/infrastructures, are shaded in light gray, covering
all entities that belong to the indicated systems. Data
flows between entities are drawn as light blue arrows.
The underlying IT Infrastructure of the SuC, connecting
the ECS devices/infrastructures with the IIP-Ecosphere
platform is depicted as a white box with a purple outline,
as it is neither entity nor role in the SuC.
• As in [10], field devices, such as sensors, actuators or
(parts of) manufacturing machines are only connected to
edge devices. In contrast to [10] where entire applications
are deployed to edge devices, the IIP-Ecosphere platform
shall focus on applications that are composed of orches-
trated services that can be distributed across ECS devices.
• Applications and services are specified in a configuration
model (not shown in the SuC) that allows for creating the
runtimes of applications and services for the deployment
into containers and for determining optimizations or in-
compatibilities in the orchestration of services. Means for
validating the consistency of the model shall be provided
and integrated with the user interactions. Services can be
added to/updated in a service store as needed.
• Each ECS device runs a device abstraction (ECS
runtime)
being
responsible
for
executing
the
ser-
vices/containers and for reporting their runtime mea-
surements. The platform decides about the deployment,
dynamically composes service containers for the tar-
get resource, and adapts the distribution runtime. For
developing applications and services, the stakeholders
indicated that pre-deployment testing or simulation of
new or updated services is highly desirable.
• All resources and services provide a self-description in
terms of an AAS [15] information model and communi-
cate only via Industry 4.0 protocols to foster interoper-
ability, but also to explore limitations.
• The elicited AI and data science activities form an
orthogonal space. The stakeholders contributed activities
for data exploration, AI model design/testing and the
integration of external data science toolchains. In the con-
text of developing new AI services, the stakeholders also
expressed the need for the ability to use pre-deployment
testing of new and updated AI services/models, which are
key elements in the continuous development and opera-
tion of machine learning (MLOPs, [23]) of applications
and services within the IIP-Ecosphere platform.
• AI methods typically operate on models that may incur
data protection, IPR or further legal issues. Some
issues may be addressed by limiting deployment targets,
e.g., through the exclusion of certain cloud spaces. Issues,
such as data protection could be addressed by modifying
the data close to the source, e.g., through anonymization
or pseudonymization. However, the impact of such mod-
ifications on AI and further data processing is currently
unclear and shall be researched using the platform.
In summary, as illustrated in Figure 4, the usage view for
the IIP-Ecosphere platform consists of 18 entities, 19 roles, as
well as 43 deployment and 24 AI activities (as opposed to [10]
with 5 entities, 7 roles and 27 activities). Although the joint
vision focused the discussions to a certain system scope and
one might expect that this also limited the contributions of the
participants, several results were creative and surprising to us.
We will detail some examples below.
For example, the data scientists argued about alternatives
on how to integrate a data science toolchain into the platform.
An initial idea on a tight integration was rejected in favor
of a loose integration, i.e., the toolchain shall remain flexible
so that a data scientist may use his/her favorite tools while
the platform supports the process in terms of provisioned
resources, access to experimental and life data, as well as
available (AI) services. This insight let to 10 activities specif-
ically on ’activities for model training and evaluation’, which
cover many of the 9 stages of the machine learning workflow
in [24], some are exemplified in Figure 4. Furthermore, the
aspect of continuous delivery of AI services following MLOps
concepts was emphasized by the AI experts. This led to
activities like ’continuous application of AI models on new
data’ or ’re-calibration of AI model parameters’ shown in
Figure 4. Moreover, the stakeholders requested capabilities to
measure the accuracy of productive or simulated AI models
to observe the quality of predictions and to early on detect
model-drift, e.g., the loss of accuracy due to slow changes
in the application environment. This induced 5 activities on
’analysis and prediction of performance and accuracy’.
During the workshops, the industry experts expressed the
necessity to provide simulation- and testing-capabilities to
allow for simulation-driven development of applications and
services. A key approach that was identified here is the
development, simulation and monitoring of applications and
services but also of ECS devices, based on digital twins.
Similar to MLOps, these activities target DevOps [25] capa-
bilities, for example, allowing for pre-deployment testing of
any application, service or ECS device. We represented this
desire in terms of 8 ’activities for (distributed) applications’.
As described, the presented results focus on service deploy-
ment and AI activities. Initially, we planned to explore also
further topics, such as data sharing or data privacy. However,
we also experienced that interactively creating a usage view
is a significant effort. Thus, in particular for a research-
integrating usage view, it is important to focus on the most
important topics first. It is noteworthy that, as outlined above, a
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

Activities for ECS management (7)
Activities for AI services and processes (5)
Adding Entities (4)
Removing Entities (4)
Provision of Entities (8)
Provision of service and application template (4)
Service configuration and orchestration (6)
Setting up operational configurations (9)
Activities for (distributed) applications (8)
Roles (19)
Activities for data exploration (5)
Activities for model training and evaluation (10)
Use of AI applications/services (2)
Analysis/Prediction of performance and accuracy (5)
Using AI services/applications manually, offline (2)
Training of AI models
Provision of intermediary model results
Simulating the integration
Simulating the deployment
Visualizing the results
Edge device provider
Data scientist
Entities (18)
Continuous application of a model on new data
Re-calibration of model parameters
Analysis of metadata to detect deviation/model drift
Provision of metrics for an application/service
Figure 4. Usage view overview with sections, (number of) contained roles /
activities, and example roles / activities (in italics).
significant number of capabilities needed for the platform and
subsequent activities that enable theses, were identified by the
close communication and interaction between the AI experts,
who were focused on research aspects of the IIP-Ecosphere
platform and the Industry experts with their focus lying on
the technical aspects of the platform. Hence, the integration
of the scientific and the industrial view in these two groups
yielded deep and very valuable results for the elicitation and
formulation of the IIP-Ecosphere platform requirements. It is
also worth to mention that during the cooperation of both
expert groups a significant amount of "mutual understanding"
was established, clarifying for both groups of experts specific
vocabulary, views and motivations present in the two groups
and thus enabling a productive discourse and collaboration.
B. Functional View
A second team collected required platform functions, as
well as quality requirements, initially independent of the
usage view activities. We performed a requirements collection
combining the recording of ideas and desires mentioned in
specific discussions with structured approaches, such as inter-
views or questionnaires. In particular, within the consortium
we conducted a requirements questionnaire with 8 questions
driven by the joint vision, ranging from a summary of the
planned applications over envisioned AI methods, relevant data
protection measures up to imaginable run-time changes for
self-adaptation.
We documented the requirements in terms of phrase tem-
plates [26], i.e., based on a template sentence indicating the
acting role, the required functionality and the prioritization
of the requirement. All requirements were reviewed by the
stakeholders, categorized, prioritized (must/should/can) - with
more emphasis on scientific goals, required basis functionality
and the grant agreement of IIP-Ecosphere - annotated with
their source, and, if needed, detailed by an explaining text.
Ultimately, we compared the usage view with the functional
view. While more than two third of the topics do occur in both
views, we also identified differences. We found entire topics in
the usage view that the stakeholders did not touch at all in the
requirements discussions, e.g., the pre-deployment simulation.
Moreover, the interaction steps in the usage view activities
pointed us to details that were not covered by the requirements,
e.g., how IIoT applications shall be managed. For the opposite
direction, we found, e.g., that run-time adaptation was treated
in the questionnaire as an interesting feature, which was
also viewed with caution, i.e., some stakeholders requested
explicit human approvals rather than autonomously changing
a deployment (or, similarly, a re-trained AI model).
In summary, we elicited 141 top-level and 179 refining sub-
requirements as documented in [21]. 17% of all requirements
were added due to the comparison of the two requirements
views. Figure 5 illustrates the requirements categories that we
identified along with the number of contained top-level and
sub-requirements, as well as selected example requirements
(without explaining text). About 16% of all requirements
target quality, among them 7 on data processing, e.g., on the
expected data frequency and volume. The largest group of
quality requirements focuses on security and data protection.
The main sources are the think tanks (41%), the IIP-Ecosphere
demonstrators (20%) and the grant agreement (12%). Further
sources are standards, the platform survey from Section IV
and the comparison with the usage view.
Although our set of functional requirements is rather de-
tailed, we are aware that it is potentially incomplete. On
the one side, the IIP-Ecosphere platform forms a data-driven
system and, as mentioned above, requirements in such systems
are known to be volatile, unclear or incomprehensive due to
the explorative nature of data science and AI processes [7].
On the other side, resource limitations in this research project
prevented us from conducting further/deeper usage view and
R110. The AI toolkit must define interfaces for AI components 
in industrial production.
R111. The AI toolkit must be extensible.
General Requirements (12, 15)
Connectors and Connections (10, 20)
Heterogeneous, dynamic Deployment (15, 24)
Security (7, 6)
Data Protection (24, 8)
Central Storage Services (10, 21)
Data Sharing (4, 8)
Data Integration (10, 0)
Configurability (9, 9)
Optimized / Adaptive Deployment (8, 9)
AI (Service) Toolkit (10, 27)
Adaptive Service Selection (7, 6)
Virtualization (4, 0)
Application Support (11, 26)
R94. Platform must support automatic configuration validation.
R96. Configuration must include optional/alternative 
components/services.
R24. Resource properties/functions must be described as AAS.
R26. Platform must support on-premise deployment.
Figure 5. Requirements overview with categorization topics, number of top-
/sub-requiements and selected example requirements (in italics).
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

requirements workshops, e.g., on data sharing. Thus, in both
views, particular topics/requirements could still be missing.
However, the described results allow for discussing the effects
of an interactive multi-view requirements collection. More-
over, the collected requirements are sufficient to incrementally
realize the IIP-Ecosphere platform and, if needed, to elicit
missing details during platform realization in agile manner.
C. Experiences
The two teams recorded the experience that they made
during the elicitation that we briefly summarize in this section.
Both views are based on templates (activities and phrases)
that seemed to give a certain form of guidance to the partic-
ipants. In comparison, the usage view workshops seemed to
have allowed for more creativity, i.e., the participants tended to
talk more freely about desirable system interactions or known
limitations. The workshops also allowed for more interactions,
such as agreements among the participants as stated in Section
V-A. However, this impression may be biased by the first
workshop, where the participants were asked to name any
missing topic. Some of the topics were taken up by later
workshops where then mostly ‘experts‘ participated, which
allowed also more quiet persons to participate more actively.
The discussions on the functional view were focused on
capabilities for developing applications on top of the platform
and, thus, more technical. Here the stakeholders did not
interact so lifely, which might be one reason why we missed
application-related topics. Moreover, we noticed that different
persons participated in the usage view and in the requirements
workshops. In the latter, the participants seemed to have more
technical background, probably as the workshop invitation
asked for contributions to functional requirements for the
platform. Yet, the functional view also revealed interesting
aspects, e.g., as mentioned above, (different levels) of adapta-
tion approvals or the need for explainable adaptation decision
making. This may be biased by our questionnaire, where we
explicitly asked for these topics and the participants could
overthink their answers or discuss them with their team.
We also experienced that research-integrated requirements
do not come for free. Questions like “Why do we need this?”
or “Isn’t that too risky?” for certain research topics, e.g., for
self-adaptive capabilities, arise and must even be defended
against more practical/industrial requirements.
VI. RELATED WORK
We now review briefly work related to our core topics, i.e.,
surveys and requirements collections for IoT platforms.
Various comparisons and surveys of IoT platforms are
published. As stated by Mijuskovic at al. [27], this is often
done for a specific set of criteria lacking a sound comparison
framework. Moreover, comparisons are typically based on
a selection of platforms as the market is rather dynamic
and encompasses hundreds of platform vendors [28], i.e.,
typical numbers of platforms are 11 in [29], 13 in [30],
20 in [31], 24 in [28] or 26 in [32]. Often, such sur-
veys are based on vendor material, while in [28] inter-
views with vendor representatives were used. Regarding com-
parison criteria, the topics are frequently device manage-
ment [28] [30] [31], fog/edge/cloud deployment [29] [30] [32],
connectivity/protocols
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32],
secu-
rity [28] [29] [31], data management [28] [29] [30] [32],
data analytics [28] [31] [32], visualizations/UI [28] [31] [32],
application development [28] [29] [30] [32], system/service
management [30] [32], or licensing/payment [29] [30]. In
contrast, in our survey we also analyzed AI capabilities,
edge usage, ecosystem building, data protection and consistent
configurability and used that survey as a basis for our research-
integrated requirements approach.
There is also a body of work on requirements manage-
ment for IoT/CPPS platforms or ecosystems, e.g., [11]–[13].
However, we do not aim at proposing a completely new
requirements approach rather than performing a requirements
collection for IoT/CPPS systems while balancing scientific
and practical interests. Many technical publications moti-
vate their work with a focused set of requirements, while
overview work with collections of platform requirements
is less common. Among those, we identified the following
topics for functional requirements: device/resource/distribution
management
[33]
with
heterogeneous
deployment
[27],
communication/networking [27] [34], data (base) manage-
ment [27] [33] [34], data processing [27] [33], data analytics
including AI [27], monitoring [27] service management [34],
security/privacy [27] [33] [35] [36], or visualization [27] [33].
Moreover, we found non-functional topics, such as scala-
bility [33] [35], performance [27] [33] [34], standardiza-
tion/interoperability [33]–[35], development support [27] [33]
and even self-adaptation [33]. In contrast to our work, the cited
publications typically focus on a single (functional/quality
requirements) view, i.e., do neither take the scientific site nor
interactions of multiple views into account.
VII. CONCLUSION
IIoT, CPPS and Industry 4.0 platforms form the software
foundation of complex manufacturing systems. The introduc-
tion of Artificial Intelligence into such systems will enable new
opportunities, but further increases the complexity and causes
challenges for all involved disciplines. Eliciting requirements
for future platforms is not trivial, in particular if scientific and
industrial interests must be balanced and integrated.
In this paper, we reported on a pragmatic approach to
perform a requirements collection of a platform that shall
demonstrate research approaches in an upcoming Industry 4.0
ecosystem. Driven by pre-studies, we used a joint vision as
scope for the further steps, a surveying phase and a require-
ments collection phase. For the surveys, we reported on an
overview of 21 recent Industry 4.0 platforms that helped us to
identify gaps and to stabilize the vision. The vision then guided
an intensive requirements collection for two perspectives, a
usage view and a functional/quality view, which, in summary,
integrates research and industrial interests. We discussed our
experiences with such a requirements elicitation, in particular
that different views can successfully complement each other.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

The joint work, in particular on documenting the results,
helped the involved partners to clarify and synchronize their
view on the system to be built, e.g., the terminology or the
needed components. Based on these experiences, first com-
panies in IIP-Ecosphere started applying such a requirements
elicitation approach as part of their own activities. Moreover,
concepts and ideas on service-based Industry 4.0 platforms as
outlined in the usage view [22] were fed back to the originating
Labs Network Industrie 4.0 (LNI 4.0) organization and at the
time of writing are being integrated into a revised version
of [10].
Current and future work is on developing the IIP-Ecosphere
platform based on both requirements documents, including
incremental architecture design or integration of research and
industrial approaches. At the time of writing, about a third
of all platform requirements have been realized and validated.
We also plan for evaluations of the platform approaches in
terms of industrial use cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The IIP-Ecosphere project (https://www.iip-ecosphere.de/)
is partially supported by the German Ministry of Economics
and Energy (BMWi) under the grant numbers 01MK20006C
and 01MK20006D. The authors would like to thank the part-
ners who participated in and contributed to our requirements
workshops.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Delsing, “Local Cloud Internet of Things Automation,” IEEE Indus-
trial Electronics Magazine, pp. 8–21, 2017.
[2] R. Wöstmann et al., “Conception of a Reference Architecture for
Machine Learning in the Process Industry,” in Intl. Conference on Big
Data, 2020, pp. 1726–1735.
[3] C. Sauer, H. Eichelberger, A. S. Ahmadian, A. Dewes, and J. Jürjens,
“Current Industry 4.0 Platforms - An Overview,” retrieved 03-2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iip-ecosphere.eu/wp-content/uploads/
2021/02/IIP-2020_001-en.pdf
[4] K. Schmid, H. Eichelberger, and C. Kröher, “Domain-Oriented Cus-
tomization of Service Platforms: Combining Product Line Engineering
and Service-Oriented Computing,” Journal of Universal Computing,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 233–253, 2013.
[5] “Website of the Organization for the Advancement of Structured
Information
Standards
on
MQTT,”
retrieved
03-2022.
[Online].
Available: https://mqtt.org/
[6] “Website of the OPC UA foundation,” retrieved 03-2022. [Online].
Available: https://opcfoundation.org/
[7] O. Hummel, H. Eichelberger, A. Giloj, D. Werle, and K. Schmid, “A
Collection of Software Engineering Challenges for Big Data System
Development,” in Proceedings Euromicro Conference on Software En-
gineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA’18), 2018, pp. 362–369.
[8] H. Bedenbender et al., “Industrie 4.0 Plug-and-Produce for Adaptable
Factories: Example Use Case Definition, Models, and Implementation,”
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.zvei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/
Presse_und_Medien/Publikationen/2017/Juni/Industrie_4.0_Plug_and_
produce/Industrie-4.0-_Plug-and-Produce-zvei.pdf
[9] Industrial Internet Consortium, “The Industrial Internet Reference
Architecture,” retrieved 03-2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.
iiconsortium.org/pdf/IIRA-v1.9.pdf
[10] A.
Graf,
U.
Löwen,
M.
Rentschler,
B.
Vojanec,
and
T.
Roehrl,
“LNI
4.0
Testbed
Edge
Configura-
tion
-
Usage
View,”
retrieved
03-2022.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.plattform-i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/
Publikation/LNI4.0-Testbed-Edge-Configuration_UsageViewEN.html
[11] P. Loucopoulos, E. Kavakli, and N. Chechina, “Requirements Engineer-
ing for Cyber Physical Production Systems,” in Advanced Information
Systems Engineering (CAiSE’19), 2019, pp. 276–291.
[12] S. Kaleem et al., “A Review on Requirements Engineering for Internet
of Things (IoT) Applications,” in HCT Information Technology Trends
(ITT’19), 2019, pp. 269–275.
[13] D. Silva, T. G. Gonçalves, and A. R. C. da Rocha, “A Requirements
Engineering Process for IoT Systems,” in Brazilian Symposium on
Software Quality (SBQS’19), 2019, pp. 204–209.
[14] F. van der Linden, K. Schmid, and E. Rommes, Software Product Lines
in Action.
Springer, 2007.
[15] S.
Bader
et
al.,
“Details
of
the
Asset
Ad-
ministration
Shell,”
retrieved
03-2022.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.plattform-i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/
Publikation/Details_of_the_Asset_Administration_Shell_Part1_V3.html
[16] M. G. Casado and H. Eichelberger, “Industry 4.0 Resource Monitoring
- Experiences with Micrometer and Asset Administration Shells,” in
Symposium on Software Performance (SSP ’21), 2021.
[17] “Website of the International Data Space Association,” retrieved
03-2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://internationaldataspaces.org/
idsa-industrial-community/
[18] C. Esposito, A. Castiglione, B. Martini, and K. R. Choo, “Cloud
manufacturing: Security, privacy, and forensic concerns,” IEEE Cloud
Comput., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 16–22, 2016.
[19] “Website of Docker Inc.” retrieved 03-2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.docker.com/
[20] K. Meixner, R. Rabiser, and S. Biffl, “Towards Modeling Variability
of Products, Processes and Resources in Cyber-Physical Production
Systems Engineering,” in Intl. Systems and Software Product Line
Conference (SPLC’19) - Vol. B, 2019, pp. 49–56.
[21] H.
Eichelberger
et
al.,
“IIP-Ecosphere
Platform
Requirements
(Functional
and
Quality
View),”
retrieved
03-2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.iip-ecosphere.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/
IIP-2021_002-en.pdf
[22] C. Sauer, H. Stichweh, and H. Eichelberger, “IIP-Ecosphere Platform
Requirements (Usage View),” retrieved 03-2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.iip-ecosphere.eu/ergebnisse/
[23] S. Mäkinen, H. Skogström, E. Laaksonen, and T. Mikkonen, “Who needs
mlops: What data scientists seek to accomplish and how can mlops
help?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.08942, 2021.
[24] S. Amershi et al., “Software engineering for machine learning: A case
study,” in International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP), 2019, pp. 291–300.
[25] R. Jabbari, N. bin Ali, K. Petersen, and B. Tanveer, “What is DevOps?
A systematic mapping study on definitions and practices,” in Scientific
Workshop Proceedings of XP2016, 2016, pp. 1–11.
[26] K. Pohl and C. Rupp, Requirements Engineering Fundamentals. Rocky
Nook, 2011.
[27] A. Mijuskovic, I. Ullah, R. Bemthuis, N. Meratnia, and P. Havinga,
“Comparing Apples and Oranges in IoT context: A deep dive into
methods for comparing IoT platforms,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
pp. 1797–1816, 2020.
[28] T. Krause et al., “IT-Plattformen für das Internet der Dinge (IoT),” 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://publica.fraunhofer.de/documents/N-470532.
html
[29] P. Agarwal and M. Alam, “Investigating IoT Middleware Platforms for
Smart Application Development,” in Smart Cities - Opportunities and
Challenges, ser. Lect. Notes Civ. Eng.
Springer, 2020, vol. 58.
[30] M. Asemani, F. Abdollahei, and F. Jabbari, “Understanding IoT Plat-
forms: Towards a comprehensive definition and main characteristic
description,” in Intl. Conference on Web Research (ICWR’19), 2019,
pp. 172–177.
[31] H. Hejazi, H. Rajab, T. Cinkler, and L. Lengyel, “Survey of platforms
for massive IoT,” in Future IoT Technologies, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[32] P. P. Ray, “A survey of IoT cloud platforms,” Future Computing and
Informatics Journal, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 35 – 46, 2016.
[33] P. Agarwal and M. Alam, “Open Service Platforms for IoT,” in Internet
of Things (IoT): Concepts and Applications, 2020.
[34] E. Patti and A. Acquaviva, “IoT platform for Smart Cities: requirements
and implementation case studies,” in Research and Technologies for
Society and Industry Leveraging a better tomorrow (RTSI’16), 2016.
[35] P. Bhuyan and A. Ray, “IoT Service Platform,” in Interoperability in
IoT for Smart Systems.
CRC Press, 2021, pp. 91–97.
[36] S. Oh and Y. Kim, “Security Requirements Analysis for the IoT,” in
International Conference on Platform Technology and Service (Plat-
Con’17), 2017, pp. 1–6.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-946-1
SOFTENG 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

