Creating and Using Personas in Software Development Practice
Jane Billestrup, Jan Stage
Department of Computer Science
Aalborg University
Aalborg, Denmark
{jane,jans}@cs.aau.dk
Lene Nielsen, Kira Storgaard Hansen
Games & Interaction Design
IT University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
{lene,kist}@itu.dk
Abstract — Personas has been suggested as a strong technique 
for providing software developers with a deep understanding 
of  the  prospective  users  of  a  software  system.  This  paper 
reports from two separate but related empirical studies. The 
first study was a questionnaire survey about Personas usage in 
software development companies. The purpose was to uncover 
to  what  extent  and  in  which  ways  Personas  are  used  in 
software  development  companies  located  in  a  specific 
geographical area. This study demonstrated that less than half 
of the respondents had ever heard about Personas. We also 
identified key obstacles towards use of the technique: lack of 
knowledge  of  the  technique,  lack  of  resources,  sparse 
descriptions  and  scarce  integration  in  development. The 
second  study  was  based  on  detailed  interviews  with  four 
software  developers  about  their  usage  of  Personas  in 
development processes in the software industry. We identified 
basic practices in Personas creation and usage, and found that 
the  respondents  understand  Personas  creation  and  use 
differently from the practice described in the literature. In 
fact, developers are evolving their own practices for creating 
and using Personas.  
Keywords—Personas; Personas creation and use; software 
development; questionnaire survey; interview.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper is an extended version of the paper “Creating 
and Using Personas in Software Development Practice: Ad-
vantages, Obstacles and Experiences” [1]. 
Personas is being promoted as a technique that supports 
design and engineering of interactive software systems with 
an explicit focus on the prospective end-users. 
The general definition of the technique is that a Persona 
is a description of a fictitious person based on data collected 
about the target user group of a system [2][3]. The common 
way to represent a Persona is as a text describing, and usu-
ally also a photo depicting, the fictitious person [2][4].
The main idea for introducing Personas is consistent with 
results from numerous reports that have documented that 
software developers lack knowledge and understanding of 
their users, their work, and their goals, e.g., [5][6]. A con-
sequence is that when a system has been developed, it does 
not fulfil the needs of the users and is incompatible with their 
work processes. The Personas technique has been suggested 
as a strong tool to overcome these problems by providing 
software developers with a specific understanding of pro-
spective end-users of their software [7].
It has been argued that the use of Personas provides soft-
ware developers with empathy for, and engagement in, the 
end-users of the software solution [8]. There are also literat-
ure that concludes that the use of Personas has been a suc-
cess [9][10].
The literature includes several conclusions about the be-
nefits of the Personas technique, if it is used to its full poten-
tial. Matthews et al. [11] found that the designers who had a 
very positive attitude towards Personas were primarily those 
who had done extensive work with Personas, and had some 
training in the creation of Personas, and used them as pre-
scribed by the literature. The Personas technique is not yet 
incorporated as an integrated and general part of the toolbox 
in the software development industry [11]. It has been docu-
mented that a main reason for this is that many developers in 
the industry have problems using Personas in practice [12]. 
Thus, there are still many unanswered questions about the 
actual advantages of using Personas in software development 
practice. The strength of using Personas compared to other 
techniques are also unexplored.
The purpose of this paper is to inquire into the way in 
which software companies use Personas and whether the 
technique is used as proposed in the literature. We report 
from a questionnaire survey and a case study of experiences 
with creation and use of Personas in software development 
practice. The questionnaire survey (Study A) was conducted 
in a delimited region in Denmark, where we inquired into the 
experiences software companies in this region had in using 
Personas and incorporating the technique as a part of their 
development toolbox. The case study (Study B) was based 
on interviews with four developers who were or had been 
working with Personas in practice. Our focus in this paper is 
on comparing the literature with the experiences and the per-
ceived strengths and weaknesses of the Personas technique 
from the perspective of the software development industry, 
Our empirical basis includes using a mixed method approach 
involving both quantitative and qualitative data collection.
Section II presents a more detailed description of work 
related to this study. It describes how Personas are created 
and used, including the pitfalls to avoid. Section III describes 
the method used in the questionnaire survey (Study A). Sec-
tion IV presents the results from this survey.  Section V 
presents the method used in the case study (Study B). Sec-
tion VI provides the findings derived from the interviews. 
Section VII compares the findings from the two studies and 
discusses the results compared to experiences about Personas 
1
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

reported in the literature. Finally, Section VIII provides the 
conclusion.
II.
RELATED WORK
The literature offers four different perspectives regarding 
the basis for and role of Personas [13]: 1) Cooper’s goal-dir-
ected perspective 2) Grudin, Pruitt and Adlin’s role-based 
perspective 3) the engaging perspective, which emphasises 
how the story can engage the reader. These three perspect-
ives agree that the Persona descriptions should be founded 
on real data. However, 4) the fiction-based perspective, does 
not include data as a basis for Persona description, but cre-
ates Personas from the designers’ intuition and assumptions. 
Even though the Personas technique has been around for 
more than a decade, when comparing the four perspectives, 
it is still unclear what and how much background material is 
required to create Personas [14].
The  common  perceived  benefits  of  Personas,  when 
designing products are two-fold: 1) the technique facilitates 
that designers remember that they are different from the end-
users, and 2) the technique enables designers to envision the 
end-users' needs and wants. Furthermore, in the design pro-
cess Personas increase the focus on users' and their needs. 
The technique is an effective communication tool, which 
uses the Persona description to acquire direct design influ-
ence and lead to better design decisions and definition of the 
products' feature set [2][3][7][10][15][16][17].
The literature includes a rich variety of guidelines and 
experiences about the use of Personas.
1)
Defining Personas. The literature originally defined a 
Persona as a text and a photo describing the character [2]
[18]. Later developed into posters, websites and hand-outs 
[19]. Personas are considered to be most useful if they are 
developed as whole characters, described with enough detail 
for designers and developers to get a feeling of its personal-
ity [7][12][19]. The benefits of Personas are that they enable 
designers to envision the end-user’s needs and wants, re-
minding designers that their own needs are not necessarily 
the end-users' needs, and provide an effective communica-
tion tool, which facilitates better design decisions [10][15]
[16][17].
2)
Creating Personas. Before creating Personas, a com-
prehensive study of the target user group is suggested. It has 
been recommended to acquire this information through in-
terviews with the target user group [20] or observational 
studies of them [21]. Yet Chapman and Milham argue that it 
is not possible to verify that the created Personas actually 
reflect the target user group [22]. It has been suggested to 
create 3-5 Personas [23][24], but the amount of users one 
Persona can represent has been questioned [22].  
3)
Personas Critique. Personas has been characterized 
as unreliable and preventing designers from meeting actual 
users  [5][12][13]. Problems have been reported regarding 
creation and distribution of the developed Personas [12]
[19]. The descriptions have been perceived as unreliable and 
not well communicated. Also, developers lack understand-
ing of how to use Personas [3][12][19]. The technique itself 
is criticised for being too founded on qualitative data and, as 
a consequence of that, being non-scientific, being difficult 
to implement. Also, for not being able to describe actual 
people as it only portrays some characteristics, and for pre-
venting designers from meeting actual users [5]. Moreover, 
the unsolved question about how many users one Persona 
can represent is emphasized as problematic [22].
Some have tried to prevent poor use of the Personas tech-
nique, e.g., Faily and Flechais [25] describe regularly send-
ing information about the Personas to the development team, 
to ensure that the designers and developers consider the Per-
sonas in the design process. They also suggest that the creat-
ors should hand over instructions and provide tools that sup-
port the developers’ usage [25]. Problems in applying Perso-
nas are reported as also involving the mindset of the de-
velopers, which is documented by both Blomquist and Ar-
vola [6], and Pruitt and Adlin [3].
Matthews et al. [11] focused mainly on designers and 
user experience professionals who had some training in Per-
sonas creation and had done extensive work with Personas 
using them as described by others [2][3]. These designers 
had a very positive attitude towards the technique. Those 
who had done minor use of Personas had a moderate or neut-
ral  opinion  regarding  Personas,  and  those  who  had  not 
worked with Personas at all had a negative or indifferent 
opinion regarding the technique. 
The use of the Personas technique in software develop-
ment processes, e.g., by combining Personas and agile devel-
opment like XP, has also been explored. In this case, the cus-
tomer preferred a Persona without a picture, merely describ-
ing a job title and maybe a name, but Powell et al. do not 
support this as it will take away the developers' empathy for 
the users. Moreover, by using Personas integrated in XP, the 
developers  felt  confident  to  make  decisions  without  in-
volving the onsite customer every time [29].
4)
Personas in Practice. An inquiry of design teams in 
13 Danish multi national companies report that Personas 
help keep the focus on user needs instead of what the de-
velopers and designers like, and help in gaining an under-
standing of how the product can create value for end-users 
[26]. A different study describe how designers are using 
Personas contrary to the original intended usage; instead of 
creating Personas on research results, designers tend to base 
the Personas on their own experiences and thoughts [27]. 
This will make it even harder to ensure that the right Perso-
nas are created to represent the relevant user groups [8]. 
Problems in application of the Personas technique caused by 
the mindset of the developers have also been reported [3]
[12]. It has been suggested to overcome this by regularly 
sending information about the Personas to the development 
team [19][25]. It seems difficult in practice to avoid making 
stereotypes  when  creating  Personas,  and  using  Personas 
does not seem to solve the problem that Cooper originally 
intended to solve [28].
III.
STUDY A: METHOD
In order to inquire into the usage of Personas we conduc-
ted a questionnaire study in 60 software development com-
panies. We chose to focus on a well-defined geographical 
area in order to allow us to do as complete a survey with as 
many companies as possible, and thereby achieve a more 
complete coverage of software companies in that area. The 
focus on one defined region is that it allows us to establish 
contact  with  all  companies  located  in  the  region.  This 
provides a more complete picture than randomly picking out 
2
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

companies located in several regions or even countries. We 
made considerable efforts to identify and contact all compan-
ies in the area. The selection of companies would be more 
random if we had chosen a larger geographical area.
A.
Participants 
We focused on companies that were developing software, 
either for internal or external use. We ended up with soft-
ware companies with the following characteristics: 
The company;
•
develops software with a graphical user interface 
(e.g., mobile phones, games, web applications, PC 
or PDA software). 
•
develops software for customers or for internal use 
and is geographically located within the defined 
geographical area. 
•
employs more than a single person and it is not a 
hobby company.
TABLE I. 
THE NUMBER OF RELEVANT COMPANIES.
Companies
Lists used 
to find 
companies
Total number of 
companies on 
list
Out of scope or 
gone out of 
business
Relevant com-
panies
List 1
77
-35
42
List 2
139
-63
76
Linked In
16
0
16
Total
134
To obtain a list with as many software development com-
panies as possible we acquired two lists containing software 
companies located in the chosen region. These lists were 
from a previous study of companies (List 1) and an industry 
network (List 2). This was followed by a search on Linked-
In to include companies that only had a smaller development 
department in the region and had their headquarters located 
either in another region or in another country. Table I shows 
the total number of software companies in the region, which 
were within the scope of this study. 
B.
Data Collection 
We created an online questionnaire using the tool Sur-
veyXact [30]. The first part of the questionnaire was made to 
gain information about the respondent and his or her place of 
employment (e.g., job function, business, number of employ-
ees in the company and line of business, within software de-
velopment). The second part was designed to uncover if the 
respondents knew what a Persona was and what it was used 
for. The third part was about the use of Personas in the com-
panies. This part was only filled out by the people who 
answered that they knew of, and worked with, Personas. The 
questionnaire consisted of 35 questions, but only respondents 
who knew of and was working with Personas in their current 
employment got to answer all 35 questions. The question-
naire consisted of both open and closed questions.
The distribution of the questionnaire was done in two 
ways. First, 43 companies in which we had a known contact 
person was contacted by phone. Then the remaining 91 of 
the 134 companies were contacted to acquire a contact per-
son. Eight of these declined to participate and 14 we could 
not locate a viable phone number or email address.  This res-
ulted in 112 emails being sent out with a link to the question-
naire. The recipients were given three weeks to fill out the 
questionnaire survey. The data collection process resulted in 
69 responses in total. Of the 69 respondents nine did not fin-
ish the questionnaire, leaving us with 60 complete responses. 
The  nine  who  did  not  complete  the  questionnaire  were 
mainly CEO's in small companies. These respondents mainly 
stopped filling out the quiestionnaire after entering their per-
sonal details. 
The responding companies were asked to characterize 
their main line of business. The distribution is shown in 
Table II. 
TABLE II. 
THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE COMPANIES AFTER LINE OF 
BUSINESS.
Characterization of Companies 
Number of Answers
Software development
44
Design and development
4
Financial services
2
Marketing and advertisement
2
Game development and 
entertainment
1
Telecom
2
Web development
4
Other line of business
1
Total
60
Table II shows that the respondents prevailingly characterize 
their main line of business as software development.
C.
Data Analysis 
Data  analysis  was  conducted  continuously  while  the 
questionnaire was still open for submissions, as suggested by 
Urquhart [31]. When the questionnaire was closed, the data 
was updated with the results from the latest incoming ques-
tionnaires.
In the questionnaire, we used both open and closed ques-
tions. All responses to closed questions were analysed quant-
itatively. For the open questions, the grounded theory ap-
proach, as described by Corbin and Strauss [32], Urquhart 
[31] and Urquhart et al. [33], was used as analysis method. 
The aim of grounded theory is described as “building theory, 
not  testing  theory”  [34].  This  means  that  theory  should 
emerge while the analysis takes place and should not be used 
to prove an already existing theory.
1) Open Questions: Coding was used to analyse the open 
questions. One question was: “How would you explain what 
a Persona is and how it is used?”. For this question the fol-
3
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

lowing coding categories were assigned: technique (for cre-
ating Personas), finding target user group, when in the pro-
cess the Personas are used and how they are used. Grounded 
theory coding was not used for other open questions since 
the respondents mainly answered in very short sentences and 
they were sent directly to the end of the questionnaire when 
answering  “No”,  e.g.,  “Have  you  ever  heard  about 
Personas?”  or  “Have  you  ever  worked  with  Personas?” 
meaning that the number of respondents dropped for every 
question. As it makes no sense to ask a respondent about 
their knowledge  about  the use of Personas if they have 
already indicated they have never heard about Personas.
2)
Closed Questions: Statistics was produced directly 
from the closed questions.
IV.
STUDY A: RESULTS
This section presents the results of the questionnaire sur-
vey. It is divided into two sub-sections. ‘Knowledge about 
the Personas technique’ is referring to the first part of the 
questionnaire. This subsection reports if the Personas tech-
nique has been adopted by the software developing compan-
ies in the defined region. The second subsection “The under-
standing of Personas and their use” is dividing the obstacles 
towards Personas usage into four main areas.
A.
Knowledge about the Personas technique
The results of the questionnaire indicate that 27 out of 60 
respondents, or 45%, have heard about Personas. Fourteen 
respondents out of 60 have worked with Personas. Seven re-
spondents out of 60 are using Personas as a development tool 
in their current job. This can be seen in Table III.
TABLE III. 
DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONDENTS AND KNOWLEDGE ABOUT 
PERSONAS
Knowledge about Personas
Number of respondents
Heard about Personas
27 out of 60
Have Worked with Personas
15 out of the 27
Are using Personas in current job
7 out of the 15
Meaning that 11.5% of the responding companies are cur-
rently using Personas as a development tool and 55% of the 
respondents have never heard about the technique.
TABLE IV. 
DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONDENTS ON COMPANY SIZE.
Number of Employees
Number of companies
1-10
11-
50
51-
200
200<
Total
Using Personas
1
3
1
2
7
Not using Personas
23
16
8
6
53
Total
24
19
9
8
60
The distribution across different sizes of companies is 
shown in Table IV, showing the number of respondents fa-
miliar with Personas.
TABLE V. 
RESPONDENTS' KNOWLEDGE ABOUT PERSONAS IN 
COMPANIES THAT DO NOT USE THEM.
Number of Employees
Knowledge about Personas
1-10
11-
50
51-
200
200<
Total
Never heard about Personas
18
7
6
2
33
Heard about Personas, but 
never used them
4
5
2
2
13
Worked with Personas in 
other employment or while 
studying
1
2
0
1
4
Have used Personas, but 
stopped
2
1
0
0
3
Total
25
15
8
5
53
In Table V, the 53 responding companies that do not use 
Personas have been grouped. It shows that 33 respondents 
have never heard about Personas. Three of the organisations 
did use Personas at some point but stopped. One respondent 
stated his organisation used Personas in a project where they 
collaborated with a group of university students, but did not 
find the Personas technique useful for other projects. The 
other two respondents stated that their respective companies 
stopped using Personas, because they did not find the de-
veloped Personas applicable in their line of development. 13 
respondents stated they had heard about the Personas tech-
nique but had never worked with creating Personas them-
selves and four respondents had worked with creating Perso-
nas in an earlier employment or while studying.
B.
Understanding of Personas and their use
An open question in the questionnaire was analysed with 
coding to reveal all the participating companies' understand-
ing of the term “Persona”. “Personas being an imaginary 
user”, were expressed by 22 respondents, e.g., “a fictitious 
user of the system you are developing”. “Personas are used 
as a validation of the design”, were expressed by 17 respond-
ents, e.g.,  “making sure user needs are  met by a given 
design”.
A Persona “being a representation of a larger user seg-
ment” was expressed by 13 respondents, e.g., “description of 
a set of characteristics characterizing a certain group of users' 
behavioural patterns”. Personas “being a tool for making 
sure to keep the users and their needs in mind all the way 
through the development process” were recognised by four 
respondents, e.g., “...the Personas are used as focus points for 
planning the entire product life cycle”. This means that Per-
sonas by far are recognised as fictionalised users used as a 
tool for designing features requested by users and user seg-
ments. On the other hand, no more than four respondents ex-
pressed that Personas should be used through the entire de-
velopment cycle. This means that the common idea seems to 
be that Personas are mainly a tool for identifying some as-
4
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

pects of the user group and not so much a tool to be used 
during the entire development process.
TABLE VI. 
DISTRIBUTION OF JOB TITLES OF RESPONDENTS.
Job Title of re-
spondents
Not working with Per-
sonas in current 
employment
Currently working with 
Personas
CEO, CTO, Owner
12
4
System developer or 
consultant
11
1
Project, Product or 
Sales manager
16
0
Business architect, 
Communication and 
PR
8
0
UX or Web 
Designer or 
Manager
6
2
Total
53
7
1)
Lack of Knowledge (of the technique): Lack of know-
ledge about the Personas technique seems to be a major 
obstacle regarding usage of Personas as shown in Table III. 
The analysis showed that 55% of the respondents had never 
heard about the concept or technique. Of the respondents 
who had never heard about Personas, 10 people were CEOs, 
owners or partners (primarily in micro- or small sized com-
panies), five were managers in IT and three worked as sales 
managers (all three in medium sized companies). In Table 
VI, the respondents’ job titles have been divided into groups 
based on whether the company is currently working with 
Personas, or not. This indicates that the chance of allocating 
resources to Personas development might be slim. One re-
spondent indicated that the company did not recognise the 
importance for any communicative tools. “The company has 
downsized and has eliminated the communications position 
since it is primarily a production company and they do not 
really understand the importance of, e.g., Personas, ambas-
sadors, first movers, e.g., or communication in general for 
that matter”. This means that in these companies the know-
ledge about the Personas technique will not come from man-
agement, and even if employees bring the knowledge about 
Personas into the companies, funding will probably not be 
allocated. On the other hand, as seen in Table IV, in the sev-
en companies currently working with Personas four respond-
ents was CEO, CTO or owner.
2)
Lack of Resources (time and funding):  The analysis 
found that Personas are mainly created if a need has been 
identified for a specific project and “cutting a corner” when 
using Personas seems to be the general idea. Some only use 
Personas to the point that they think it creates value for the 
customer and thereby, profit for the company. Also, when 
asked in the survey how much resources were allocated to 
develop Personas, the general answer was zero.
3)
Sparse descriptions:  When a Persona is created too 
superficially the Persona will lack the depth that would nor-
mally be the strength of the technique, making the Personas 
untrustworthy  and  unusable.  This  contradicts  with  what 
helps making Personas useful tools that lead to better design 
decisions [2][3][15][16][17]. When a Persona is created with 
much detail and described as a whole character, and not a 
stereotype, it will support the design and innovation process. 
One respondent indicated difficulty in finding a suitable tem-
plate for the descriptions and that they wanted to create short 
descriptions instead of detailed character descriptions. “It is 
hard to find good templates for constructing Personas. We 
ended up with a few lines in bullets describing each Persona, 
which could be used as a fast reference. Instead of a large 
scheme describing lots of details nobody wanted to read any-
way”. This corresponds with the descriptions of Personas by 
some respondents answering the questionnaire. These de-
scriptions were quite superficial and did not describe indi-
vidual Personas but mainly a job role and a use situation.
4)
Not integrated in the development: This ties-in with 
the finding of lacking resources. The superficial Personas are 
created to be used in the design process. The descriptions are 
not meant to be used in any other stages of the design pro-
cess.  Furthermore,  they  are  not  used  to  keep  reminding 
neither developers nor designers about the end-user’s and 
their needs. This means that the potential of the Personas 
technique is not explored.
C.
Advantages of using Personas
The respondents currently using Personas described why 
their companies are using Personas as follows: “to support 
the development of a system that is easy to use for all types 
of users...It is very important for us that the system will be 
very easy to use, which is why a mapping of the various user 
groups is important”. 
Another respondent stated: “Internally in the company, 
Personas are used to communicate characteristics of the 
customer segments that we want to focus on especially”. Yet 
another respondent stated that “Personas are primarily used 
for optimizing the product”. These advantages correspond 
with the advantages identified in the related work section.
V.
STUDY B: METHOD
We have conducted a case study about the use of Perso-
nas as a development technique in four software develop-
ment organizations, including if, and how practitioners per-
veive Personas and how they actually use this technique in 
practice. 
A.
Respondents
From Study A software developers were identified, who 
had different types of experience using Personas as part of 
the software development process. Four kinds of software 
developers were identified, whom had different experiences 
and perceptions in regards to using Personas. One software 
developer from each category was identified and asked to 
participate in this study. The four different types are de-
scribed as follows;
•
Wants to start using Personas as a development tech-
nique. (R1)
•
Has formerly used Personas as a development tech-
nique. (R2)
5
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

•
Is currently using Personas as a development tech-
nique. (R3)
•
Has knowledge about it but never used it as a devel-
opment technique. (R4)
R1 – R4 shows which respondent falls under what cat-
egory. 
The respondents were working as software developers or 
project managers. None of them had any education in user 
experience. All respondents had worked in the industry for at 
least ten years and been in their current organization for at 
least two years. All four interviewees use an agile software 
development method in their current organisations. All are 
using SCRUM or an adjusted version of SCRUM. 
B.
Data Collection
The four interviews were conducted as semi-structured 
qualitative interviews [35]. The interviews were recorded 
and later transcribed. Each interview lasted between 22 and 
55 minutes. All interviewees were asked about their educa-
tional background and their current and previous job func-
tions. Through the interviews the interviewees' knowledge 
about and previous experiences with the Personas technique 
was explored. 
C.
Data Analysis. 
All interviews were analysed using grounded theory [32]
[33] and open coding with the Dedoose tool (http://www.de-
doose.com/). This resulted in the following seven categories;
•
Learning to Create Personas
•
The Basis for Creating Personas
•
Usefulness of Personas
•
Strengths of Personas
•
Redundancy of Personas
•
Weaknesses and Limitations of Personas
•
Personas and other techniques
   These seven categories were used to categorise the 
findings. 
VI.
STUDY B: FINDINGS
This section presents the findings based on the analysis 
of the interviews. The findings are divided into seven sub-
sections in accordance with the coding categories. 
A.
Learning to Create Personas
The respondents learned about the Personas technique in 
different ways. Their first meeting with Personas seems to 
mainly have happened by chance. Two respondents describe 
it this way: 
R2: The first time I heard about Personas was at a ses-
sion at the universitys' humanities department four or five 
years ago. … Microsoft has created a number of Personas 
describing the users some years ago. They encourage us, as 
Microsoft consultants, to use these in our development pro-
cess.
R1: I have a background as a software developer but in 
my former employment I worked very closely with user ex-
perience designers. 
One respondent described coming from a smaller com-
pany where he learned about several usability techniques and 
why it is important to understand and represent the users' in 
the development process. 
None of the respondents learned about Personas and oth-
er User-Centered Design  or Usability techniques through 
education. 
B.
The Basis for Creating Personas  
The respondents use different ways of collecting data for 
the creation of Personas. Yet all of them depend either on in-
formation they already have or information their customers 
have.  
R1: If we do not have enough information ourselves to 
create the Personas we will ask our customers about their 
usage of the existing systems. 
None of the respondents get money or time allocated spe-
cifically to gather information about the target user group, 
which is why they have to make use of the information they 
already have themselves or they can get from their custom-
ers.
Another respondent explained that due to not having a 
budget for data collecting, he was creating Personas a bit dif-
ferently  than  suggested  by  the  literature.  He  primarily 
thought about the existing users and the archetypes that were 
standing out. 
R3: We know our users quite well. Our Personas are 
based on real users, like “can this user understand this?” 
We use them like Personas archetypes and we do not use 
Personas formalized. - Unformalized we use Personas quite 
a lot. Personas are based on the users who are critical to-
wards our system; the people that make noise if they have a 
problem. 
Another respondent described making Personas that were 
short and without much detail.
R2: To me a Persona does not have to be too detailed in 
the description of the person. 
None of the respondents remembered reading specific lit-
erature about Personas. They had mainly learned the do's and 
don'ts about Personas from others, or from their own experi-
ences. 
C.
Usefulness of Personas
Personas are considered particularly useful when the de-
velopers are missing information about the users and their 
needs. As all four respondents are employed in companies 
that use an agile development method, they usually work 
with an onsite costumer. Personas was found particularly 
useful if they did not have an onsite customer on a project. 
The greater the distance between the users, and the designers 
and developers the more useful Personas are considered to 
be.   One respondent explained that he found Personas very 
useful as a substitute for onsite customers: 
R1: If  there is no onsite customer or employee  that 
knows the field we are developing for very well, Personas 
seems to be very usable. The further the designers and de-
6
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

velopers are from the users, the more value Personas can  
bring to the development process. 
Another respondent described Personas as a useful tool if 
there was a geographical distance between designers and de-
velopers. This was meant as Personas could help the de-
velopers remember the end-users during the development 
process. So instead of the design team present to make sure 
the developers focused on the end-users, Personas could do 
the same thing, if the Personas was made visible for the de-
velopers. 
R3: I find Personas useful if the distance between design-
ers and developers is substantial and they are not working 
side by side all day. 
One respondents described that his company does con-
siderable work for the health sector, and they used to have a 
former nurse employed to help them understand that domain. 
However, this was no longer an option, so they needed to 
find new techniques to bring an understanding of the user 
groups into the development process. He thought Personas 
could be useful for exactly that. 
Another respondent described Personas as useful when 
developing software solutions for very specific user seg-
ments.
R2: We are creating ERP solutions. I feel that Personas 
are a relevant tool for us. Because we are developing very  
specific software solutions for our customers. 
This respondent also outlined different opinions about the 
usefulness of Personas and other techniques in regards to 
User-Centered Design;
R2: One of my colleagues approached me one day and 
said the following “we live by creating solutions, not draw-
ings.” I understand his position but personally I feel that 
drawing up the organization first can help me understand 
their needs. 
Other respondents described similar experiences of col-
leagues having different oppinions in regards to using User-
Centered Design techniques or Usability theory in regards to 
software development.  
D.
Strengths of Personas 
The respondents expressed different expectations about 
the benefits of using Personas in the development process. 
The respondents were asked to describe situations in which 
the Personas technique would have been beneficial. 
R4: I believe using Personas would have helped us de-
velop a more user-friendly system.
Personas are also perceived as a strong tool for ensuring 
the software developers keep the end-users in mind during 
the development process. 
R1: Personas can help keeping the developer’s focus on 
the users' needs. Personas will provide the software de-
veloper with the ability to understand the users' perspective.
R2: I think that Personas can provide the security for us 
not developing the wrong system for our user group. 
One respondent added that he found Personas especially 
useful  if using a development  method like the waterfall 
method. His argument was that when using the waterfall 
method  the  developers  have  only  one  possibility  to  get 
everything right.
R3: If using the waterfall development method you have 
to get everything right the first time. When developing agile  
it is not as critical if we make a mistake, we can change that 
in the next iteration as a new iteration starts every two 
weeks. 
The respondents find that a strenght of the Personas tech-
nique is that it can support the developers in developing soft-
ware that live up to the users' requirements, and that Perso-
nas is especially useful in situations where it is eminent get-
ting it right the first time. 
E.
Redundancy of Personas
Two respondents stated that Personas are unnecessary if 
user experience designers or expert users are part of the pro-
ject team, meaning that the design decisions are not only left 
to the developers.
R4: Personas are unnecessary when design is not left to  
the developer but is in place long before the developers be-
gin to create the software.  
R3: If you have an employee who is an expert user and 
knows what the user group need, Personas are unnecessary. 
The Personas technique is considered redundant if User 
Experience Designers or similar are involved in the develop-
ment process. 
F.
Weaknesses and Limitations of  Personas 
The respondents agreed that using Personas incorrectly 
can have substantial negative impact on software or product 
development. They also agreed that Personas should not be 
used if there is insufficient data or if the creators are unfamil-
iar with Personas. 
R2: If the choice you make when creating the Personas is 
wrong they will work against the design. 
Another respondent raised the concern that he felt con-
strained by some formalized Personas. Every time he was in 
doubt he went to look at the Persona, but this meant that he 
felt boxed in, and it stopped him from looking outside of the 
box. 
R3: When using Personas formalized you might be a bit  
constrained, always going to look at the posters with the 
Personas [...] To me it works better if I just keep them in my 
head. Of course our company is not that large anyway so I 
can  just  go  talk  to the developers  if  I  need  to change  
something. 
Another respondent had drawn a similar conclusion:
R1: What tends to go wrong in software development is 
that developers  tend to lock on some user requirements 
pretty early in the process, without documentation, and then 
describe the entire solution. If the user requirements or the 
solution change at some point, the developers tend to forget 
the user and their needs somewhere in the process.
The respondents described using a technique like Perso-
nas could be a limitation in regards to the software de-
velopers, as the respondents could have a problem changing 
focus if the requirements changed at some point.  
Using Personas requires a certain level of maturity. An-
other respondent’s current organization was not using Perso-
nas:
R1:“We are not using the Personas technique at the mo-
ment. I have worked with Personas in my last employment  
and found them very useful. I would like to introduce Perso-
nas in my current employment but the company needs to be 
7
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

at a higher level of maturity before it would make sense. We 
simply have larger issues at the moment than this”.
Using the Personas technique is described as a strenght, 
but only if the company has reached a certain level of matur-
ity. Personas are perceived as usable if the organisation  is 
unmature. 
G.
Personas with Other Techniques
The respondents stated that scenarios are very usable in 
combination with Personas.
R4: Scenarios are often used in combination with Perso-
nas.
Workshops and focus groups were also considered useful 
in combination with creating Personas. 
R3: We have a community around our product and we 
host meetings with user groups, where we meet three times a  
year and discuss new releases and improvements. 
Three respondents described that they are primarily using 
user stories to document the users' needs. The user stories are 
described by two respondents as being used instead of devel-
oping a specification of requirements.
R3: We use common sense and we are not afraid of mak-
ing a mistake because it is okay if we do not get it right the  
first time.  
Even though Personas are considered useful the respond-
ents also discribed working agile meaning that correcting er-
rors was not perceived a big deal. 
VII.
DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss our results in relation to exper-
iences about Personas reported in the literature, and we com-
pare the findings across the two studies.
The discussion is structured with the following four is-
sues: 1) software developers lack knowledge and understand-
ing of their users, their work, and goals, 2) the Personas tech-
nique has been promoted as a strong tool for providing the 
software developers with a better understanding of the poten-
tial users, 3) the use of Personas has been a success, and 4) 
the Personas technique is not necessarily an incorporated 
part of the toolbox in the software development industry and 
the industry might experience problems using Personas.
A.
Lack of knowledge and understanding of the users
 Software developers lack knowledge and understanding 
of their users and their needs [5][6]. In many development 
situations, users do not know what they want, thus, it is the 
designer’s job to find out. Pruitt and Grudin [19] argue that a 
good design does not come from users, but from designers. 
This is because users do not really know what they want un-
til they get it. But for this approach to work, the designers 
need in-depth knowledge of the users and their needs. The 
aim of Personas is to provide that knowledge.
Among our findings was poor application of the Personas 
technique in practice. This relates precisely to the point about 
developers  lacking  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the 
users, since the Personas descriptions, if applied, are made 
sparse and only used in a very narrow time frame of the de-
velopment process. Another finding was that the develop-
ment of the Personas lacked resources, since none of our re-
spondents had a budget allocated specifically for the Perso-
nas development. This is contrary to the related work em-
phasizing that Personas can lead to better design decisions 
[2][3][10][15][16][17].
B.
Personas can help developers understand users
The Personas technique has been promoted as a strong 
tool for providing software developers with a better under-
standing of the potential users [7]. Thus, Personas is presen-
ted as a useful technique to keep the developers focused on 
the users and their needs and give them empathy towards the 
Personas and the end-users [7][8].
The results from our questionnaire indicate that the most 
useful aspect of using the Personas technique was that Perso-
nas helped the team share a specific and consistent under-
standing of several, different user groups; which can lead to 
another advantage of product optimization.
In our case study, we found that the respondents per-
ceived Personas as a technique that supports designing and 
engineering interactive systems with a focus on the end-
users. Matthews et al. [11] found that mainly developers who 
have been working with Personas are positive in regards to a 
technique like Personas. We got the same impression from 
our respondents. Unfortunately, the Personas technique is 
still suffering from developers considering it unnecessary; 
e.g., one respondent explained that his colleague told him 
that creating background material or drawings was a waste of 
time. 
C.
Personas used as a successful tool
Several papers conclude the use of Personas has been a 
success [9][10]. This corresponds with the experiences of our 
respondents who are using Personas. The tool is described as 
useful to help developers understand the users and their 
needs, especially if the system needs to be usable for several 
different types of end-users. Some respondents using Perso-
nas, identified some challenges for creating Personas, e.g., 
“it can be hard to find templates for creating Personas.” an-
other respondent stated that “it is a challenge to map all user 
groups without asking all customers”. These obstacles have 
to be resolved before Personas can be applied as a useful 
tool.
In our case study, we found that the practitioners do not 
use Personas as suggested in the literature. Instead, data is 
collected before creating Personas and it is mainly collected 
within their own or the customers’ organization, or Personas 
are created on the basis of real users. 
Baird [36] argued that Personas could be developed in a 
workshop while discovering requirements. One of our re-
spondents described how they used Personas, and hosted 
meetings with their user group regularly. These meetings 
were also used to get to know their users and to help get an 
understanding of the customers’ needs.
Personas are primarily considered useful if designers and 
developers are not working closely together to ensure that 
the developers understand the intended users and use, or 
merely as a representation of a user if there is no onsite cus-
tomer available. 
Using Personas has also been described as being risky. If 
the Personas created are targeting a wrong user group, the 
8
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

software  solution could end up being  developed  for the 
wrong users. 
Scenarios and user-stories are considered useful in com-
bination with Personas. In particular, user stories have been 
used to describe user situations and as a requirements spe-
cification. 
D.
Personas are not incorporated in the industry
The Personas technique is not necessarily an incorporated 
part of the toolbox in the software development industry, and 
the industry might have problems using Personas [12]. Since 
only 44% of our respondents have ever heard about the Per-
sonas technique and less than 12% have worked with creat-
ing Personas, it is fair to say that Personas are not an integ-
rated tool in the software development industry in this re-
gion. Also, we found that only four respondents indicated 
that Personas should be used through the entire development 
process, meaning that even if Personas are used, they are not 
necessarily used to their full potential. In companies using 
Personas, the technique is used mainly to identify types of 
users or use cases.
The Personas are kept to a minimum and not focused on 
describing whole characters. As in the related work, we 
found developers lacking understanding of how to use Perso-
nas to gain most from their usage [7][12][19]. The reasons 
for that could be a combination of several aspects. We found 
that resources are not allocated specifically for creating Per-
sonas, which corresponds with the area of usability in gener-
al [5][19][37].
The full potential of Persona usage does not seem to have 
caught on in the industry. Matthews, Judge and Whittaker 
[11] found a connection between, on one hand, the percep-
tion of Personas and, on the other hand, to what extent the 
technique was used and, the amount of training the de-
velopers had had using Personas.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has reported from a combined questionnaire 
survey and case study of experiences with creation and use 
of Personas in software development practice. There are still 
only few studies of the actual use of Personas in software de-
velopment practice [1]. The purpose of these studies were to 
identify both on the overall level and in detail how practi-
tioners in the industry create and use Personas in their devel-
opment processes.
In the questionnaire study, we explored to what extent 
Personas were used by software development companies in a 
defined geographical area and whether they used Personas as 
proposed in the literature. To accomplish this, we conducted 
a questionnaire survey with complete responses from  60 
software development companies. The study showed that 
only 7 out of the 60 software development companies used 
Personas. The results from the questionnaire also uncovered 
four issues. Lack of knowledge of the technique as such and 
lack of resources both related to companies not using the 
Personas technique. Sparse or badly designed descriptions or 
not being part of the development process both related to 
poor application, when using the technique.
Our findings are well linked to other studies described in 
the related work section. Yet our study contributes with a 
new angle by focusing on making a complete study within a 
limited geographical area we now have a pretty good idea 
about if the Personas technique is an integrated tool in soft-
ware development in this geographical area. We have not 
been able to find related work that has done a similar study 
in another country. This means that this paper is the first pa-
per assessing whether and how Personas are used for devel-
oping software in the industry.
The main limitation on our results is that we focussed on 
a defined geographical area. This was necessary to achieve a 
high level of coverage of all companies in that area. As fu-
ture work it would be interesting to learn more about the ad-
vantages of using Personas. This area still needs further stud-
ies even though some advantages have been identified in this 
paper, also, it would be interesting to learn if companies that 
do not use Personas are using another tool instead. The num-
ber of respondents for the questionnaire survey can also bee 
seen as a limitation. 
We have presented results that are qualitative and based 
on four developers who have been interviewed in depth. The 
number of respondents is obviously a limitation of this study; 
yet  only few software companies are using the Personas 
technique in their development process, so it is very challen-
ging to find even a few respondents with experiences from 
using the Personas technique. Conducting a qualitative study 
means that  the perspective of the interviewees  are in focus. 
Conducting a study like this obviously requires  that the in-
tereviewees are trustworthy and telling the truth from their 
perspective. 
It would be interesting to conduct a more extensive series 
of interviews with practitioners about their use of Personas 
and study how that influence the quality of the systems they 
develop. Also, if there is a correlation between the type of 
company  that  uses  Personas  and  the  product  being  de-
veloped, and if the use of Personas differs by type of soft-
ware  development  company or product  being developed. 
And if the use of Personas differs by the size of the com-
pany. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the companies and their employ-
ees that participated in our questionnaire survey. We would 
also like to thank the Danish innovation network in Informa-
tion Technologies, Infinit for providing partial financial sup-
port to the research. 
REFERENCES
[1]
J.  Billestrup,  J.  Stage,  L.  Nielsen,  and  K.  S.  Nielsen, 
“Persona usage in software development; Advantages and 
Obstacles,” Proc. of International Conference on Advances 
in  Computer-Human  Interactions  (ACHI  2014),  IARIA, 
2014, pp. 359-364.
[2]
A. Cooper, “The inmates are running the asylum: Why High-
Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the 
Sanity,” Sams Publishers, 1999.
[3]
J. Pruitt  and T. Adlin, “The  Persona Lifecycle: Keeping 
People  in  Mind  Throughout  Product  Design,”  Morgan 
Kaufman, 2006.
[4]
L. Nielsen, “A model for Personas and scenarios creation,” 
Roskilde, Denmark 27th November, 2003, 71. 
[5]
J. Bak, K. Nguyen, P. Riisgaard, and J. Stage, “Obstacles to 
usability  evaluation  in  practice:  a  survey  of  software 
9
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

development organizations,” Proc. of Nordic Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction: Building Bridges (NordiCHI 
2008),  ACM  Press,  2008  
 pp.  23-32.  doi: 
10.1145/1463160.1463164
[6]
A.  Bruun  and  J.  Stage,  “Training  software  development 
practitioners in usability testing: an assessment acceptance 
and  prioritization,”  Proceedings  of  the  24th  Australian 
Computer-Human Interaction Conference (ozCHI 2012), pp. 
52-60. doi: 10.1145/2414536.2414545
[7]
A. Cooper and R. Reimann, “About face 2.0: The Essentials 
of Interaction Design,” Wiley Publishing, 2003.
[8]
L. Nielsen, “Engaging Personas and Narrative Scenarios,” 
Vol 17, PhD Series. Copenhagen: Samfundslitteratur, 2004.
[9]
A. Cooper, R. Reimann, and D. Cronin, “About Face 3.0: 
The Essentials of Interaction Design,” Wiley 2007.
[10] A.  Dotan,  N.  Maiden,  V.  Lichter,  and  L.  Germanovich, 
“Designing with Only Four People in Mind? - A Case Study 
of Using Personas to Redesign a Work-Integrated Learning 
Support  System,”  Procedings  of  Human-Computer 
Interaction – INTERACT (INTERACT 2009) pp. 497-509.
[11] T.  Matthews,  T.  Judge,  and  S.  Whittaker,  “How  Do 
Designers  and  User  Experience  Professionals  Actually 
Perceive  and  Use  Personas?,”  Proceedings  of  SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 
2012), ACM Press, pp. 1219-1228.
doi: 10.1145/2207676.2208573
[12] Å. Blomquist and M. Arvola, “Personas in action: Ethno-
graphy in an Interaction Design Team,” Proceedings of Nor-
dic  Conference  Human-Computer  Interaction  (NordiCHI 
2002), pp. 197-200.  doi: 10.1145/572020.572044 
[13] L.  Nielsen,  “Personas  –  User  Focused  Design,”  Human-
Computer Interaction. Springer, 2012.
[14] L.  Nielsen,  “Personas.  In  The  Encyclopedia  of  Human-
Computer  Interaction,”  2nd  Ed.,  Aarhus,  Denmark:  The 
Interaction
 
Design
 
Foundation, 
http://www.interactiondesign.org/encyclopedia/Personas.htm
l, 2013. 2015.05.30
[15] F. Long, “Real or Imaginary - the Effect of Using Personas 
in  Product  Design,”  IES  Conference,  Dublin:  Irish 
Ergonomics Review, 2009, pp. 1-10.
[16] J.  Ma  and  C.  LeRouge,  “Introducing  User  Profiles  and 
Personas into Information Systems Development,” AMCIS. 
Paper  237,  2007.
 http://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2007/237 
2015.05.30
[17] T. Miaskiewicza and K. A. Kozarb, “Personas and User-
Centered Design: How Can Personas Benefit Product Design 
Processes?,”  Design  Studies  32,  5.  2011,  pp.  417–430. 
doi:10.1016/j.destud.2011.03.003
[18] A. Cooper, R. Reimann, and D. Cronin, “About Face 3.0: 
The Essentials of Interaction Design,” Wiley 2007.
[19] J. Pruitt and J. Grudin, “Personas: Practice and Theory,” 
Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Designing for user 
experiences
 
(DUX
 
2003),
 
pp.
 
1-15.
 
doi: 
10.1145/997078.997089
[20] D. Levin, (2004). “Which Personas are you targeting?,” 5 
Minute Whitepaper.
[21] W. Quesenbery, “Using Personas: Bringing Users Alive,” 
STC Usability SIG Newsletter-Usability Interface, 2004.
[22] C. N. Chapman and R. Milham, “The Personas' new Clothes: 
Methodological and Practical Arguments Against a Popular 
Method,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonom-
ics Society Annual Meeting, October 2006 vol. 50 no. 5 634-
636
  
(HFES  2006),
 pp.
 634-636,.
 
doi: 
10.1177/154193120605000503 
[23] T. Adlin and J. Pruitt, “The essential Persona lifecycle: Your 
guide to building and using Personas,” Morgan Kaufmann, 
Burlington, MA,  2010.
[24] E. Friess, “Personas and decision making in the design pro-
cess: an ethnographic case study,” Proceedings of SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 
2012),  ACM  Press  pp.  1209-1218,  2012.  doi: 
10.1145/2207676.2208572
[25] S. Faily and I. Flechais, “Persona Cases: A Technique for 
Grounding Personas,” Proceedings of SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2011), ACM 
Press, pp. 2267-2270,  2011. doi: 10.1145/1978942.1979274
[26] L. Nielsen, K. S. Nielsen, J. Stage, and J. Billestrup, “Going 
global  with  Personas,”  Procedings  of  Human-Computer 
Interaction – INTERACT (INTERACT 20013), pp. 350-357. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 2013. doi:  10.1007/978-3-642-
40498-6_27
[27] Y. Chang, Y. Lim, and E. Stolterman, “Personas: From The-
ory to Practices,” Proceeding of Proc. of Nordic Conference 
on Human-Computer Interaction: Building Bridges (Nordi-
CHI 2008), pp. 439-442. doi 10.1145/1463160.1463214
[28] P. Turner and S. Turner, “Is stereotyping inevitable when 
designing with Personas?,” Design Studies, 32, 1, 30-44, 
(2011) doi:10.1016/j.destud.2010.06.002
[29] S. Powell, F. Keenan, and K. McDaid, “Enhancing Agile 
Requirements  Elicitation  With  Personas,”  IADIS 
International Journal on Computer Science and Information 
Systems, 2(1), 82-95, 2007.
[30] www.survey-xact.com 2015.05.30
[31] C. Urquhart, “Grounded Theory for Qualitative Research: A 
Practical Guide,” Thousand Oaks, California: Sage, 2013.
[32] J. Corbin and A. Strauss, “Basics of Qualitative Research, 
Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded The-
ory,” 3rd edition, Sage Publications, 2008.
[33]
C. Urquhart, H. Lehmann, and M. D. Myers, “Putting the 
Theory  Back  Into  Grounded  Theory,”  Guidelines  for 
grounded  theory  studies  in  Information  Systems”.  Info 
Systems  J  20,  2010,  pp.  357-381.  doi:  10.1111/j.1365-
2575.2009.00328.x
[34] S. Pace, “A Grounded Theory of the Flow Experiences of 
Web Users,” Proceedings of International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies (IJHES, 2003), pp.  327-363. 2003. doi: 
doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2003.08.005
[35] Kvale, S.: “Interview,” København: Hans Reitzel  (1997) 
NordiCHI, 2008, pp. 353-362.
[36] S.  Baird,  “Using  Personas  To  Discover  Requirements,” 
http://philarnold.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/User-
Personas.pdf  (2002) 2015.05.30
[37] D. Svanæs and J. Gulliksen, “Understanding the Context of 
Design – Towards Tactical User Centered Design,” Proceed-
ings of Nordic Conference oon Human-Computer Interac-
tion: Building Bridges (NordiCHI, 2008), pp. 353-362. doi: 
10.1145/1463160.1463199
10
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

