Towards A Smart-City Security Architecture 
Proposal and Analysis of Impact of Major Smart-City Security Issues 
Felipe Silva Ferraz1,2,Carlos Candido Barros Sampaio1,2, Carlos André Guimarães Ferraz1 
 
1Informatics Center 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
Recife, Brazil 
{fsf3, ccbs, cagf }@cin.ufpe.br 
2CESAR  
Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems 
Recife, Brazil 
{fsf, ccbs }@cesar.org.br
  
Abstract—Concepts and solutions related to smart cities have 
been the focus of related studies and improvements for several 
years. Part of the motivation to the growing body of research in 
this field comes from the eminent need for solutions to address 
the present situation of urban environments. For the first time in 
human history, more than 50% of the population now live in big 
cities and not in the countryside. In this matter, computer 
networks and systems have an important role towards the 
construction of solutions that enable cities and citizens to 
maintain a continuous and agile use of those environments. At 
the same time that new solutions come forth offering readily 
available, integrated, and reliable information to citizens, new 
challenges related to information security arise. In this context, 
this paper explores a set of information security issues in the 
environment of a smart city and proposes a new approach (City 
Security Layer) based on the use of different and unique 
identifiers for each entity (citizen or sensor) involved in the 
relations of a city to its systems. 
Keywords—security; smart city; architecture; identification 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Beginning in the early 2000, a major proportion of the 
human population started to move from small towns to live in 
big cities [1]; this change in the world’s urban structures has 
led to an unprecedented consumption of natural resources and 
added an enormous load on city systems [1][2].  
 
To attempt to address this situation, cities have started to 
put efforts in creating more sustainable and green 
environments [1][3][4], and to offer its citizens with more and 
diverse services coming from existing systems of Education, 
Health, Public Safety, Resources, Government, and Public 
Transport [5]. To do so, investments in both time and money 
have been made to increase IoT adoptions to provide the city 
with more detailed and precise information [6][7][8] and 
services interoperability, guaranteeing increasing systems 
evolutions [5][9]. Combined with other definitions, such urban 
environments that are now extremely connected and highly 
technological are known as smart cities [10]. 
Pursuing 
interoperability 
in 
such 
a 
heterogeneous 
environment, new challenges arise, such as performance in the 
face of enormous amount of generated and transferred data 
[6][11][12][13]. Another is services availability to assure both 
citizens and the city with access every time they have a need 
[14][15][16]. Information security also becomes a concern and 
how to ensure that sensitive data like a patient’s medical 
records, a driver or vehicle’s location or an engineer’s 
structural plan, are dealt with appropriate and expected 
confidentiality [17][18][19][20]. 
Information security is an important challenge yet to be 
properly and fully addressed in the construction of smart 
cities. At the same time that it is necessary to develop the 
means to maintain data trafficked by such cities private, 
integrated, and available upon access, it is also necessary to 
provide the city systems with ways for the same data to be 
shared and to be equally protected. 
Furthermore, Sen et al. [17] states that  there are 
information security issues related to privacy in the role of a 
smart city. Thus, it is vital to deal with this situation because 
the data shared among a smart city environment is as sensitive 
as the citizen itself, but affirming that privacy issues are the 
main problem in terms of security would be over simplistic 
[18][21]. There are other kinds of issues that may pose as a 
threat to the entire urban system if they are not properly 
addressed [22][23]. In this scenario, it is vital to develop 
different architectures, protocols, and other policies that will 
allow citizens to better manage and access their data [24][25]. 
Standards such as OpenID [26][27], OAuth [28][29], and 
SAML [11][30] appear as good choices to provide cities with 
the means to integrate its services in an environment, with 
authorization and authentication capabilities. However, their 
strength relies on offering a unique ID within an environment 
that is responsible for sharing permission rather than them 
offering tools to manage individual IDs as separate 
information. 
 
Rather 
than 
just 
providing 
an 
environment 
with 
authentication and authorization, it is important to provide 
citizens with the means to manage their own identity across a 
heterogeneous system [9][25], without compromise; the 
environment interoperability and the citizens’ privacy and 
anonymity, ergo identity management, is a key enabler for 
smart cities’ evolution and maintenance. 
This paper presents a communication protocol, based on 
identification management that aims to increase security in 
smart cities’ environment, providing entities (citizens, 
services, and sensors) with a mechanics to interact with 
systems using unique IDs for each system. This paper is 
divided as follows: Section II will briefly introduce the 
concepts of smart cities, followed by Section III dealing with 
security analyses on smart cities. Section IV will depict 9 
security issues that may affect smart cities’ solutions, while 
Section V will describe the CSL (City Security Layer). 
Sections VI and VII will end this paper, analyzing the impact 
of the proposed approach. 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

II. SMART CITIES 
Today’s level of urbanization has reached an unprecedented 
economical and social growth different from other ages; large 
cities now have the most part of the world’s population and an 
increasing share of the world’s most skilled, educated, creative, 
and entrepreneurial women and men [1]. More than 50% of 
people on the planet now live in large cities. According to the 
United Nations, this number will increase to 70% in less than 
50 years [1]. This so-called city growth or emerging of urban 
life is driving the city infrastructure into a stress level never 
before seen as the demand for basic services increases and is 
exponentially overloaded [5]. 
Cities 
are 
becoming 
increasingly 
empowered 
technologically as their core systems (i.e., Education, Public 
Safety, Transportation, Energy and Water, Healthcare and 
Services) are instrumented and interconnected, enabling new 
ways to deal with massive, parallel, and concurrent usage. In 
the same pace, new challenges in the field of information 
security rises and must be properly addressed. 
Tracing the genealogy of the word ‘smart’ in the label 
‘smart city’ can contribute to an understanding of how the term 
‘smart’ is being used in this field. In marketing language, 
smartness is centered on user perspective. Because of the need 
for appeal to a broader base of community members, ‘smart’ 
serves better than the more elitist term ‘intelligent’. Smart is 
more user-friendly than intelligent, which is limited to having a 
quick mind and being responsive to feedback. Smart city is 
required to adapt itself to the user needs and to provide 
customized interfaces [36]. In the urban planning field, this 
defines smartness. 
 
 
Figure 1. Smart city concept based on intelligence, 
connection, and instrumentation 
 
Another  perspective, represented in Figure 1, points out 
three main characteristics towards a smart city definition; it is 
an environment that is instrumented, interconnected, and 
intelligent [32]. 
 
 Each one has a meaning: 
Instrumented: means a city covered by a set of sensors 
that could be both physical and social. Through those sensors, 
the cities’ core systems have access to real-time and reliable 
information. This relates directly with the IoT concepts. 
Interconnected: means a vast set of systems working 
together to offer information from different points and sources. 
A correct combination of interconnected and instrumented 
systems creates a connection from the physical world to the 
real world. 
Intelligent: refers to an instrumented and interconnected 
environment that makes the best use of information obtained 
from different sensors and systems, to offer a better life to the 
citizen. 
Offering just one or any combination from those three 
concepts creates a scenario where a vital part will be missing. 
To illustrate, a system may have the means to extract the best 
from a set of information, but it does not have data to analyze. 
A system may also have the data to analyze but does not have 
ways to pass through other points of the environment its 
discoveries and information.  
However, offering an environment so broadly constructed 
could have the side effect of creating a different set of 
scenarios where security information flaws could be created 
and explored.  
III. SMART CITIES’ SECURITY ANALYSES 
Apart from the number of studies and protocols related to 
information security, the amount of vulnerabilities in connected 
applications has increased in the past few years [14]. In this 
matter, smart-city systems will demand a specific treatment to 
address its specific information security challenges [18]. 
According to [5][17][18][19][36], smart-city solutions 
depend on a high degree of connectivity, so that their systems 
(such as Education, Government, Traffic, Security, Resources, 
and Health) can create an interoperable network, offering 
citizens with more powerful, accurate, and innovative [35] 
services. For this reason, one of the biggest challenges facing 
smart-city development is associated to information security in 
the scope of interoperable systems [1]. Information security is a 
critical issue due to the increasing potential of cyber attacks 
and incidents against critical sectors in a smart city.  
Information security must address not only deliberate 
attacks, such as from disgruntled employees, industrial 
espionage, and terrorists, but also inadvertent compromises of 
the information infrastructure due to user errors, equipment 
failures, and natural disasters. Vulnerabilities might allow an 
attacker to penetrate a network, gain access to control software, 
and alter load conditions to destabilize the system in 
unpredictable ways. To protect a smart city in a proper way, a 
number of security problems have to be faced according to a 
specific design/plan. 
Believing that a traditional security approach based on 
privacy keeping, authorization, and authentication concept can 
simply be added into a city’s critical infrastructure to make it 
safer as a city becomes smarter, is far from the real scenario. 
To deal with new paradigms related to smart cities is necessary 
to think about in terms of new architectures and not only to 
improve services and current solutions [36]. 
 
This class of services is fundamental to the success of the 
future city, and represents a topic of such complexity that it is 
beyond the scope of this paper to cover in detail. As an 
illustration, let us explore the design of identity services for the 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

future city – which is required to maintain privacy while 
maintaining security. 
 
The integration of the identity of the citizen across multiple 
systems and services, and the ability to provide a joint-up 
response to the needs of life events, comprises the goal of 
allowing the citizen to manage their own identity. This also 
includes what information is released about them to whom or 
when, while anonymous, aggregate data are made more widely 
available [25]. 
 
Thus, identity management is a key enabler for future 
cities. A unified identity system albeit one that can integrate 
with multiple identity providers and different forms of 
authentication and identification is needed to handle the 
extensively ‘wired’ nature of the city and the density of data 
transactions, systems, and solutions diversity [25]. 
 
Citizens or entities will use their identities to gain access to 
services and systems, and through benefits that they offer. This 
is a way to integrate to several solutions (systems and services), 
entities and service will eventually repeat their identification 
artifact in different moments and situations. 
 
Ideally, every citizen and/or entity shall have a number of 
identities, each of which is made up of a number of attributes, 
which are either exposed, or used to validate a claim without 
exposing the information. The use of multiple identities limits 
exposure of truly important credentials, minimizing risk of 
abuse and identity theft, while allowing for the exposure of less 
critical information that is helpful for participants in the city 
ecosystem such as retailers, building operators, service 
providers, and governments [25]. 
 
Not only will citizens be in charge of their identities, but 
also the information that constitutes them, and when this 
information could be exposed. The proposed solution is 
intended to build a trusting relationship between the city, the 
services/systems, and the citizens. This will allow the 
acquisition and flow of information that are helpful to all 
participants without compromising their identity. 
IV. SECURITY ISSUES IN THE CONTEXT OF A SMART CITY 
Previous studies brought into attention the need to make 
further improvements related to information security on smart-
city environments [5][17][18][19][36]. Based on this need, 
this section will describe a set of 9 security issues that an 
urban system and a city may be under the risk of [22][23]. 
It is important to add to this train of thought that even 
though the technical solutions applied in those environments 
handle questions, such as Code Injection [37], Cross Site 
Scripting [37], Cross Site Request Forgery [37], Buffer 
Overflow [37], and so on, the issues posted in this work 
explore concepts related to the nature of a smart-city system. 
Our approach is to present a set of issues that, regardless of the 
technical solution applied, may be a threat to urban cities (or a 
smart-city system) in a different level.  
Urban systems are composed by Citizens using Solutions, 
which could be Platforms, Frameworks, and Applications; all 
of those built on Technologies to receive and use Data. Urban 
system security issues or security issues, in brief, in the 
context of a smart city are situations that can pose as problems 
to the entire infrastructure of a smart city [22][23]. 
In the following, 9 security issues will be described; the 
focus will be the explanation of scenarios and situations that 
could be a potential threat to an urban environment and its 
systems. 
A. Access to information from applications 
According to Sen et al. [17], packet transfer must be 
studied to apply efforts on adding security to improve data 
privacy and integrity.  
From a network and access perspective, devices have the 
means to access a packet, or a set of packets, in different ways 
and locations using different amounts of effort. For instance, 
to reduce latencies during data transfer, local copies or cache 
values of those packets could be created, and from there, the 
mentioned data could be retrieved not only from the network 
or during a transfer, but also from a local device. 
To illustrate further, a sensor connects to a server to 
identify and authenticate user A and retrieves its permissions. 
During this process, user B could intercept the packet in 
different points of the network or of the device, and gain a set 
of information from user A and the service it is accessing. 
B. Information tracking 
It is important to have an interoperable and interconnected 
environment for systems to interact with one another like in 
[5][11]–[15]. It is also extremely important that, for instance, 
the information used by system B and that are originally 
created by system A, cannot be tracked back to its origin. This 
means that even though system A has provided a set of 
information to B, a user from system B should not realize that 
this information is from another part or user.  
As an example, let us assume that system A provides 
information to a solution B.  
Let us suppose that A is a system of criminal reports; B is 
another solution that uses those criminal reports to define the 
most suitable place to open a new commercial building, based 
on criminal records. The information used by B, which was 
provided by A, must not be unveiled or disclosed. This 
situation could destroy the anonymity in A and compromise, 
for instance, witnesses and victims of crimes.  
C. Citizen tracking 
Solutions for smart cities make use of different sensors 
(physical or social); those sensors are used to collect data from 
several city systems, and based on this, it is possible for urban 
systems to have a better city management.  
To avoid further problems, such sensors must be under the 
control of a responsible entity to preserve the integrity of its 
functionality and generated data. 
Among the possible problems raised by this feature is that 
it may be open or subject to unauthorized citizen tracking, 
discovery of movement patterns, and may cause ‘flooding’ of 
directional advertisement/merchandising. 
D. User/Citizen data loss  
Smart systems, within the context of smart cities, may use 
devices, such as smart phones, tablets, and other gadgets to 
gather a wide range of data and information. Depending on the 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

data type handled by such devices, it is possible to have 
personal and sensitive data, such as messages, pictures, 
appointments, bank account numbers, contacts details, and 
others.  
This issues deals with the concept that applications are 
saving precious data in the device, and if are not well treated, 
those data could be lost or compromised, creating significant 
problems to the citizen. 
This could be achieved by adding a mechanism related to 
client cryptographic storage [5], system isolation, and even 
solutions 
related 
to 
authorization 
and 
authentication 
mechanics. 
E. Crossed access to information in data centers  
For this scenario, we deal with situations related to 
unauthorized access to information by exploiting flaws on the 
server side. 
If by any means data security is violated, for instance, 
while they are under storage, analysis, and management 
procedures, the entire system may be compromised.  
For example, when accessing information related to 
students’ educational systems, a given entity (application) can 
recover criminal records, from a non-specific connection 
related to this citizen even though the solution should only be 
using Educational Services. This situation may occur because 
both systems share a common area or permissions that must be 
respected to avoid this kind of behavior.  
F. Crossed access at the client side 
Description (E), Crossed access to information in data 
centers, details a situation related to unauthorized access in the 
server side.  
Issue (F), in this current topic, brings forth a subject 
related to unauthorized access at the client side, for instance in 
a mobile that holds sensitive information. 
This is different from issue (D), which is concerned about 
every information saved and that is not properly stored, and is 
liable to undesired access within the context of a device. 
For instance, system A saves in a device values related to 
paid fees, and system B uses the same mechanism to store 
information regarding the user financial account. If the device 
does not provide A and B with the correct isolation, it is 
possible that through A, an attacker can gain access to values 
presented in B, and even more, it is possible that a malicious 
third part system may be installed, and then gain access to 
both systems information [36]. 
G. Lack of in-depth security 
According to OWASP TOP 10, one of the top-ten risks to 
web application is related to code injection. Also according to 
OWASP, sanitizing input values and removing undesired text 
are measures that can be used to avoid this issue and other 
security flaws [37]. 
This flaw, (G), relates to systems that do not validate data 
in different layers, and are compromised in any level, by data 
coming from other services. 
 On the other hand, in-depth security relates to the concept 
of adding several security measures in different layers of a 
solution [38].  
In an interconnected environment, like in an urban system, 
if a system C does not provide the entered data with proper 
sanitization, other solutions that do not use concepts of in-
depth security  may also be affected. 
In other words, if system A provides the user with a rich 
UI environment, and has several validations and sanitization in 
this part, if the back-end structure does not apply the same 
criteria, whenever a system C sends data to system A, system 
A may use this data. It means that if C has a malicious code 
inputted, it might be transferred to A once A misses its 
defense in terms of in-depth security check. 
H. Viral effect in urban environment 
A smart city uses an interoperable environment to provide 
solutions with the opportunity to interact with other systems, 
exchanging data, and creating more value to its citizens[36]. 
 If the border of these relations is not well defined, the 
systems may face a scenario where a value is changed in 
system A and when system B uses this changed value, it may 
corrupt the information used in system B.  
For instance, let us assume that this environment is made 
of a set of systems (named A, B, C… Z), we can foresee a 
situation where A provides B with an infected value while B 
may provide or transfer to C, D ... Z systems the same infected 
value. For an attacker to infect the entire environment, only a 
small portion of the system needs to be infected and then the 
contamination may spread throughout the entire system.  
In issue (G), our main concern is with the lack of 
protection in every layer, and how this could be a problem that 
an urban scenario is highly connected. In the present issue, our 
concern is with the consequences of issues like issue (G), if 
the system is highly connected and lacks protections in several 
parts, the consequences of an attack can be exponentially 
increased, infecting the entire solution through the infection of 
a small part. 
I. 
Infection traceability and recovery  
The amount of data used and stored by a smart city has 
reached unprecedented levels. Moreover, the connection 
between systems has created a system of systems structure that 
provides those solutions with data coming from different 
services. 
Issue (H) presents a viral threat related to a set of data that 
can share or provide another service with different data, 
creating, at some level, a self-sustained system. From that 
point of view, this issue presents a consequence for issue (I). 
Due to the amount of data and interconnected system, it is 
possible for an infection to maintain its origin undetected and 
beyond data recovery. 
 
Using as an example, system A, with terabytes of data, 
exchanging values with a System B, that feeds systems C and 
D with updated and new values, processed from A data. D, on 
other hand, keeps passing some fine-grained data back to 
system A. If A suffers an infection having its data 
compromised, B will be fed with infected data, spreading the 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

infection to other systems, like C and D. As soon as the 
infection could be detected, recovery processes may not be an 
option because the amount of data compromised is too big to 
be restored to a previous form. In addition, due to the relation 
between systems, the infection source may not be detectable. 
V. SMART CITY SECURITY LAYER 
OAuth, SAML, and OpenID are architectural solutions 
focused on identification and assets protection. Those assets 
could be any type of information or entities such as documents, 
data, and photos, among others. Through its adoption, it is 
feasible to create mechanisms in which it is possible to pass the 
responsibility of security measures to a third party, that could 
be a known server (Facebook, Google, and others), or to 
implement the same approach in an in-company solution. 
A. Objective 
 
Smart CSL’s main objective is to be a layer, where the 
change of a sent identifier for another identifier is made. The 
new identifier will be generated from the combination of an ID 
and the accessed service. 
 
Through that mechanism, it will be possible to make an 
entity keep its identity secret from a service and unique within 
the whole environment. This can still be done even though the 
same entity can access different sets of services, as the creation 
of the ID is made from the combination of two other 
identifiers; the resultant ID will be different for the different 
service coming from the same entity. 
B. General view 
The City Security Layer (CSL) is a mechanism based on 
the concept of change identifiers involved in a system relation. 
The following are the basic components and flow of CSL. 
Entity: which is a component that is requesting 
information to a service; an Entity can be anything from a 
citizen, to a sensor or a service that is interoperating with 
another one. 
Service: represents any service contacted from an entity. 
Communication Layer: represents a contact point from 
entity to service, responsible for changing the identifier sent 
by the entity into the correct ID to be used within the service. 
ID Service: is a component responsible for storing and 
managing information to generate the correct ID. 
 
 
Figure 2. CSL basic flow.  
C. Comparing with related works 
CSL’s main strengths rely on the fact that for each entity 
using a specific service, a unique and new ID will be presented 
to the service. For each system adopting this approach, the 
identifier sent by the layer will be interpreted as a real 
individual, protecting the real user through the protection of its 
real ID. On other hand, CSL presents no other feature, like 
OAuth, SAML, and OpenID, related to authentication and 
authorization.  
Finally, CSL has presented an interesting contribution 
mostly due to the fact that it only relies on ID changing and 
management, providing the environment with means to use 
different IDs. However, it is also important to use an extra 
layer or process to take care of authorization and authentication 
under the scenario of an urban environment. 
VI. ANALYSES OF ISSUES 
 
Analyzing through this scope, Table 1 shows a compilation 
of CSL impacts when compared against the 9 issues previously 
studied. 
TABLE I.  
CSL COVERAGE 
 
A. Access to information from applications 
Assuming the behavior that each packet will be sent through 
the net with different user IDs per system, even though an 
‘eavesdropper’ can capture many of those packets, this issue 
will be addressed; hence, the amount of senders will now be 
considerably bigger, making it even harder try to understand 
who is who. 
B. Information tracking 
For issue (B), the same toughness to identify each user will 
isolate information, at the same pace, it will also influence 
issue  (C), isolating also the citizen, because information about 
the entity will be protected, as a consequence, the entity will 
also be untraceable. 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

C. Citizen tracking 
Through the adoption of CSL, information will be hard to 
track; ergo, the citizen will also be hard to track because their 
data will be hard to track. 
 
D. User/Citizen data loss 
As mentioned in OAuth, OpenID, and SAML section, the 
main strength in the three standards relies on interoperability 
and authentication, and for that issue, they do not impact (D). 
The same way goes to CSL, its concept proposes to change the 
way identifiers are sent and used by systems; therefore, this 
issue is not impacted by CSL. 
E. Crossed access to information in data centers  
Issue (E) is addressed by CSL from the point of view that 
even though an attacker can compromise a system, and gather 
information about citizen A and also access other systems, this 
attacker will have the perception that the systems databases 
are composed only of different entities, but in practice, for 
each system/service, an entity will be presented differently. 
F. Crossed access in client side 
 
The consequence behind these issues is directly related to an 
application A accessing information from application B in the 
client side, without the authorization to do so. In CSL, this has 
no impact because identifier changes are made not at the client 
side. 
G. Lack of in-depth security 
CSL adoption will add an extra layer, responsible for 
creating and maintaining different IDs for different users.  If 
citizens are to access a service, their IDs will pass for an 
adaptation to retrieve the real ID. Even if the requesting party 
is a service, retrieving information about a specific entity, it 
will also be submitted to CSL approaches, enhancing security 
in the environment as a single piece. 
H. Viral effect in urban environment 
The basic idea from issue (G) applies to issue (H); it will 
be more difficult to explore breaches due to the existence of an 
extra layer, but, issue (H) deals with a further consequence, 
which is the creation of a viral effect. This effect could be 
produced in different forms and with different types of data, 
not only a citizen ID, and that said, issue (G) is only partially 
addressed. 
I. 
Infection traceability and recovery  
The adoption of CSL will increase security, mostly because 
it will add an extra security layer that will provide the city 
systems with the means to keep its entities and citizens using 
different IDs for different services. As a consequence, this will 
promote systems isolation.  
Even though they are isolated, they are not disconnected, 
that said, issues (G) and (I) are addressed completely by the 
CSL proposal. Issue (G) was presented with an extra layer; for 
issue (I), better traceability of the origins of an infection will 
be possible. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
For the first time in human history, humanity is facing a 
unique situation where more than 50% of the population now 
live in big cities. For that to work out, there is an urgent need to 
evolve information technology systems to solutions that 
provide citizens with more and detailed information about 
different subjects of their daily use. 
At the same time that new solutions rise, new challenges 
also develop, and among those, information security plays an 
important role, and not only due to citizens’ privacy issues, as 
it is a subject that may go beyond citizens and impact entire 
systems. 
Solutions like OpenID, SAML, and OAuth play an 
important part in guaranteeing user security and single sign on. 
Unfortunately, lay all expectations in one of those 3 standards 
may not address and solve all problems. In this scenario, this 
paper proposed the creation of an architectural solution, called 
city security layer, an architecture based on a cryptography that 
proposes the creation of different and unique IDs for each 
system relating to each citizen. This way, it is possible to 
address more security issues than with the 3 mentioned 
standards.  
CSL still needs further studies and evolutions to be 
considered as a final solution. In this matter, the next steps for 
this project are to develop an environment to better validate the 
proposed approach, and conduct some stress and performance 
tests to CSL implementation to guarantee its reliability and 
applicability. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Dirks and M. Keeling, “A vision of smarter cities: How cities can 
lead the way into a prosperous and sustainable future,” IBM Inst. Bus. 
Value. June, 2009. 
[2] 
IBM. Ibm smarter healthcare. http://ibm.co/bCJpHX, 2012. ”[Online] 
Available: 19-March-2015”. 
[3] 
C. G. Kirwan, “Urban Media  : A Design Process for the Development 
of Sustainable Applications for Ubiquitous Computing for Livable 
Cities,” pp. 7–10. 
[4] 
P. Jollivet, “Crowd sourced security, trust & cooperation for learning 
digital megacities: valuing social intangible assets for competitive 
advantage and harmonious development,” IET Int. Conf. Smart Sustain. 
City (ICSSC 2011), pp. 52–55, 2011. 
[5] 
F. Ferraz, C. Sampaio, and C. Ferraz, “Towards a Smart City Security 
Model Exploring Smart Cities Elements Based on Nowadays 
Solutions,” ICSEA 2013, pp. 546–550, 2013. 
[6] 
R. van Kranenburg and A. Bassi, “IoT Challenges,” Commun. Mob. 
Comput., vol. 1, no. 1, p. 9, 2012. 
[7] 
M. Chen, “Towards smart city: M2M communications with software 
agent intelligence,” Multimed. Tools Appl., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 167–178, 
Feb. 2012. 
[8] 
M. Fazio, M. Paone, A. Puliafito, and M. Villari, “Heterogeneous 
Sensors Become Homogeneous Things in Smart Cities,” 2012 Sixth Int. 
Conf. Innov. Mob. Internet Serv. Ubiquitous Comput., pp. 775–780, Jul. 
2012. 
[9] 
Y. Wang and Y. Zhou, “Cloud architecture based on Near Field 
Communication in the smart city,” in 2012 7th International 
Conference on Computer Science & Education (ICCSE), 2012, no. 
Iccse, pp. 231–234. 
[10] T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Conceptualizing smart city with dimensions 
of technology, people, and institutions,” Proc. 12th Annu. Int. Digit. 
Gov. Res. Conf. Digit. Gov. Innov. Challenging Times - dg.o ’11, p. 
282, 2011. 
[11] T. Tran and C. Wietfeld, “Approaches for optimizing the performance 
of a mobile SAML-based emergency response system,” 2009 13th 
Enterp. Distrib. Object Comput. Conf. Work., pp. 148–156, Sep. 2009. 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

[12] I. B. M. Global, B. Services, and E. Report, “Smarter cities for smarter 
growth, How cities can optimize their systems for the talent-based 
economy.” 
[13] Z. Fan, Q. Chen, G. Kalogridis, S. Tan, and D. Kaleshi, “The power of 
data: Data analytics for M2M and smart grid,” 2012 3rd IEEE PES 
Innov. Smart Grid Technol. Eur. (ISGT Eur., pp. 1–8, Oct. 2012. 
[14] J. M. Gonçalves, “Privacy and Information Security in Brazil? Yes, We 
Have It and We Do It!,” 2010 Seventh Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. New 
Gener., pp. 702–707, 2010. 
[15] R. Giaffreda, “Enabling Smart Cities through a Cognitive Management 
Framework for the Internet of Things,” no. June, pp. 102–111, 2013. 
[16] F. Hu, M. Qiu, J. Li, T. Grant, D. Tylor, S. Mccaleb, L. Butler, and R. 
Hamner, “A Review on Cloud Computing  : Design Challenges in 
Architecture and Security,” pp. 25–55, 2011. 
[17] M. Sen, A. Dutt, S. Agarwal, and A. Nath, “Issues of Privacy and 
Security in the Role of Software in Smart Cities,” 2013 Int. Conf. 
Commun. Syst. Netw. Technol., pp. 518–523, Apr. 2013. 
[18] A. Bartoli, J. Hernández-Serrano, and M. Soriano, “Security and 
Privacy in your Smart City,” cttc.cat, pp. 1–6. 
[19] W. M. da Silva, A. Alvaro, G. H. R. P. Tomas, R. a. Afonso, K. L. 
Dias, and V. C. Garcia, “Smart cities software architectures,” in 
Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing - SAC ’13, 2013, p. 1722. 
[20] Z. Chen, W. Fan, Z. Xiong, P. Zhang, and L. Luo, “Visual data security 
and management for smart cities,” Front. Comput. Sci. China, vol. 4, 
no. 3, pp. 386–393, Aug. 2010. 
[21] S. Report, “Software Security Assurance,” 2007. 
[22] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. G. Ferraz, “More Than Meets the Eye In Smart 
City Information Security: Exploring security issues far beyond privacy 
concerns,” in IEEE computer science, UFirst-UIC 2014, 2014. 
[23] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. G. Ferraz, “Smart City Security Issues: Depicting 
information security issues in the role of a urban environment,” in IEEE 
Cloud Computing Initiative, UCC 2014, 2014. 
[24] G. Suciu, A. Vulpe, S. Halunga, O. Fratu, G. Todoran, and V. Suciu, 
“Smart Cities Built on Resilient Cloud Computing and Secure Internet 
of Things,” 2013 19th Int. Conf. Control Syst. Comput. Sci., pp. 513–
518, May 2013. 
[25] L. PlainIT, “Cities in the Cloud, a living planit introduction to future 
cities technologies.” 
[26] A.-V. Anttiroiko, P. Valkama, and S. J. Bailey, “Smart cities in the new 
service economy: building platforms for smart services,” Ai Soc., Jun. 
2013. 
[27] M. Noureddine and R. Bashroush, “An authentication model towards 
cloud federation in the enterprise,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 86, no. 9, pp. 
2269–2275, Sep. 2013. 
[28] OAuth, “OAuth 2.0.” [Online]. Available: www.oauth.net. 
[29] B. Leiba, “OAuth Web Authorization Protocol” pp. 1–3, 2012. 
[30] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliafito, “Security and Cloud 
Computing: InterCloud Identity Management Infrastructure,” 2010 
19th IEEE Int. Work. Enabling Technol. Infrastructures Collab. 
Enterp., pp. 263–265, 2010. 
[31] M. Naphade, G. Banavar, C. Harrison, J. Paraszczak, and R. Morris, 
“Smarter Cities and Their Innovation Challenges,” Computer (Long. 
Beach. Calif)., vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 32–39, Jun. 2011. 
[32] IBM. Ibm smarter healthcare. http://ibm.co/bCJpHX, 2012. ” [Online] 
Available: 19-March-2015” 
[33] C. Balakrishna, “Enabling Technologies for Smart City Services and 
Applications,” 2012 Sixth Int. Conf. Next Gener. Mob. Appl. Serv. 
Technol., pp. 223–227, Sep. 2012. 
[34] N. Mitton, S. Papavassiliou, A. Puliafito, and K. S. Trivedi, 
“Combining Cloud and sensors in a smart city environment,” EURASIP 
J. Wirel. Commun. Netw., vol. 2012, no. 1, p. 247, 2012. 
[35] M. Batty, K. W. Axhausen, F. Giannotti, A. Pozdnoukhov, A. Bazzani, 
M. Wachowicz, G. Ouzounis, and Y. Portugali, “Smart cities of the 
future,” Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. vol. 214, no. 1, pp. 481–518, Dec. 
2012. 
[36] I. Verbauwhede, “Efficient and secure hardware,” Datenschutz und 
Datensicherheit - DuD, vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 872–875, Nov. 2012.  
[37] OWASP, “OWASP Top 10 - 2013  : The most critical web application 
security risks,”. https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Top_10_2013-
Top_10, 2013 "[Online] Available: 19-March-2015” 
[38] M. Schumacher, E. Fernandez-Buglioni, D. Hybertson, F. Buschmann, 
and P. Sommerlad, Security Patterns  : Integrating Security and Systems 
Engineering (Wiley Software Patterns Series). John Wiley & Sons, 
2006. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

