276
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Subjective Assessment of Text Quality on Smartphone Display with Super 
Resolution 
 
Aya Kubota 
Department of Information Science 
Kogakuin University 
Tokyo, Japan 
em17008@ns.kogakuin.ac.jp 
Seiichi Gohshi 
Department of Information Science 
Kogakuin University 
Tokyo, Japan 
gohshi@cc.kogakuin.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— It is only a decade ago that smartphones appeared on 
the market. However, the market has since grown rapidly, and 
people of all ages now use smartphones. In many cases, people 
read text on their smartphones, but depending on the design of 
a website, it may be difficult to read its text. By improving the 
resolution of the text, the readability of the text can be improved. 
One research area for increasing the resolution is Super 
Resolution (SR), which includes Non-Linear Signal Processing 
Super- Resolution SR (NLSP), a method that can be 
implemented on smartphones. However, NLSP has never been 
applied to text to improve readability. Text has many kinds of 
characters, such as Chinese characters, and alphabets of 
different languages. Features of these characters are different. 
We applied NLSP to Japanese text including Chinese characters, 
katakana and numbers, displayed on Liquid Crystal Display 
(LCD), and verified its effectiveness using a subjective 
assessment. In addition, we applied NLSP to English text and 
compared the difference between image quality text with and 
without NLSP. The subjective assessment results show that 
NLSP can increase the resolution of Japanese and English text. 
Thus, the assessment results for text on LCD are discussed in 
this paper. 
Keywords- Nonlinear signal processing; Super-Resolution; 
Subjective assessment; Smartphone. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smartphones have become daily necessities in modern 
society. In addition to processing communication functions, 
such as telephone and e-mail, it is possible to obtain 
information in real time via the Internet. When used for the 
above functions, text must often be read, in the form of 
operation buttons or explanatory text. Support functions to 
make text easier to read, such as changing the font size, are set 
in the application that is preinstalled in the operating system 
(such as mail, smartphone settings, etc.). However, there are 
websites that do not have a font size larger than a certain size 
even if the text is enlarged, and sites where the color of the 
background and the text is very similar. Therefore, problems, 
such as these can make it difficult to read the text.  
Improving the resolution of the images can make it easier 
to read a text. One method to improve resolution is Super-
Resolution (SR) technology [1]. Most 4K Televisions (TV) 
are equipped with SR. Non-Linear Signal Processing SR 
(NLSP) is an SR technology that can be embedded into 
smartphones [2]. The algorithm is simple and fast: hence, 
processing with software is possible, and smartphones with 
NLSP are already being sold on the market [3]. The 
effectiveness of NLSP is higher than that of other SR 
technologies [4][5], and NLSP is effective even in smartphone 
videos [6].  
However, the effectiveness of NLSP for text on 
smartphone display has not been verified. In this study, we 
verify the effectiveness of using a smartphone with NLSP 
compared to one without NLSP.  
Images processed with NLSP are introduced only to the 
display of the smartphone and there is no electric output of the 
processed image. Therefore, it is impossible to use an 
objective assessment because the objective assessment 
requires electric image signal with and without NLSP. 
Subjective assessment is the only way to assess the difference 
between the displays. However, subjective assessment is only 
a reflection of how we feel. It is difficult to ensure the 
reproducibility of subjective assessments. In addition the 
subjective assessments require observers and time to assess 
the image quality. 
Although there are issues with the subjective assessment, 
the ITU-R has standardized subjective assessment methods. 
ITU-R BT.710 recommends experimental conditions to 
obtain reproducible results in subjective assessment 
experiments [7]. However, BT.710 does not mention practical 
quantitative scoring assessment, which is defined in BT.500. 
They are the Double Stimulus Continuous Quality Scale 
(DSCQS) and the Double Stimulus Impairment Scale (DSIS). 
In this experiment, we need to compare five smartphones and 
they are different manufactures products, and BT.500 and 
BT.710 do not meet our requirements. One of our authors 
developed a subjective assessment for multiple displays [7][8]. 
It applies best–worst method, and statistical analysis is 
introduced to analyze reproducibility. It shows good results if 
the images/videos are selected appropriately.  
This paper is organized as follows. In Section Ⅱ, the 
subjective assessment for multiple displays is explained. In 
Section Ⅲ, NLSP is explained. In Section Ⅳ, the test images 
are presented and the experiments are explained. In Section Ⅴ, 
the statistical analysis is adapted to the assessment results and 
in Section Ⅵ the analyzed result is discussed. Section Ⅶ is 
the conclusion of the paper. 

277
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
II. 
QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF DIFFERENT 
SMARTPHONE DISPLAYS 
Smartphone displays show us images as optical signal. It 
is difficult to compare image quality between different types 
of smartphones. It is very difficult to conduct objective 
quantitative assessments between optical images. Until now, 
objective comparison of the image quality using different 
types of smartphone displays has not been reported. In this 
study, we introduced subjective assessment, and made it 
possible to quantitatively asses the image quality between 
different displays. 
Objective assessment and subjective assessment are 
evaluation methods. Objective assessments analyze the signal 
and express high and low image quality by a numerical value. 
However, the results of an objective assessment do not always 
match with how we feel. For example, an original image is 
given in Figure 1(a), and the degraded image is given in Figure 
1(b). The Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) of the degraded 
image in Figure 1(b) is 40.1112dB. A PSNR 40dB is generally 
said to be a high image quality [9]; however, Figure 1(b) 
contains degradation in the form of a black square in the center 
of the image. When images include local degradation, the 
results of PSNR sometimes deviate from our feeling.  
Thus, objective assessments cannot reflect image quality 
accurately. In addition, objective assessments require a 
comparison of the assessment image with the original image. 
As discussed in the previous section, signals processed inside 
the smartphone cannot be output anywhere outside the display. 
Therefore, assessment by signal analysis is impossible, and 
thus the experiment is conducted using subjective assessment.  
The best–worst method was adopted as the assessment 
method using multiple displays. Normalized ranking method 
and paired comparison method are other assessment methods. 
Experimental stimuli are ranked at once in the normalized 
ranking method. The process of the method is simple; 
however, when differences between the stimuli are small, 
sometimes the differences cannot be detected because of large 
differences between stimuli influences. In the paired 
comparison method, stimuli are compared one on one and 
ranked. Two stimuli are selected, and the observers evaluate 
the stimuli based on the other. Thus, differences between 
stimuli can be obtained in detail. However, evaluation is 
performed for all the stimulus combinations, which places a 
heavy burden on the observers. In the best–worst method, 
observers select the best stimuli and the worst stimuli. After 
excluding the selected stimuli, the observers again select the 
best and the worst from the remaining stimuli.  
Although normalized ranking method is common, the 
best-worst method can detect small differences more 
accurately than the normalized ranking method. Accuracy of 
the best-worst method is lower than the paired comparison. 
However, the time consumption of the best-worst method is 
shorter than that of the paired comparison. It means that 
observers’ burden of the best-worst method is lower than that 
of the paired comparison. Therefore, in this paper, the best–
worst method is adopted.  
 
 
(a) Original image 
(b) Degraded image 
(PSNR: 40.1112dB) 
Figure 1. Objective assessment by PSNR 
 
In this study, an assessment experiment was conducted 
using five smartphones. The test images are screenshots of a 
website containing text. 
III. 
SUPER RESOLUTION 
      Super resolution technology is a method to improve 
image/video resolution, and mounted on most 4K TVs. 
Although smartphones that has 4K resolution display are for 
sale, images/videos that have 4K resolution are insufficient. 
Therefore, it is necessary to improve the image/video 
resolution. However, it is impossible to mount current 
mainstream SR technologies to smartphones due to the tech-
nical reason. In this section, problems of the conventional SR 
technologies if they are mounted to smartphones, and NLSP, 
which can solve the issue are explained. 
A. Super resolution for smartphones 
The purposes of TV and smartphone are different; 
therefore, performance difference, such as display size and 
processing speed, is great.  
      If conventional SR are mounted to smartphones, issues 
will occur. For example, image quality difference cannot be 
understood on small smartphone displays, and processing 
will be slow because processing works on software. Although 
designed hardware for implementation SR is mounted in TVs, 
smartphones have no space to mount new hardware.  
      Therefore, it is impossible to implement SR for TVs to 
smartphones. The size of the monitor becomes an important 
factor in seeing an SR processed image [10]. Much research 
on SR has been conducted. However, it does not discuss the 
difference in clarity of the image depending on the display 
size. Even if images are processed with SR, whether SR is 
effective or not on small smartphone displays has not been 
reported. SR studies freely select their processed image sizes 
to recognize the resolution improvement. Personal Computer 
(PC) monitors have been used to check image resolution. 
Although commercial HDTV sets with SR technology can be 
used (Tos, 2009 [11]), the screen sizes of HDTVs are 40 
inches or larger.  On the other hand, the display sizes of 
commercial smartphones are approximately 5 to 6 inches. It 
is difficult to recognize improvement with SR on a small 
display. Even if we can recognize resolution improvement on 
a large display, such as a PC monitor or HDTV, it is not 

278
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
always recognizable on smartphone displays. Therefore, if 
we are to implement SR technology, it is meaningless to 
implement the SR function unless resolution improvement is 
recognized.  Smartphones are developed on the assumption 
that they are portable; therefore, the small devices are used to 
carry out many functions. Thus, it is impossible to add 
devices to a smartphone to use SR. There are two difficulties 
in implementing SR on a smartphone with limited resources. 
The first is the complexity of the SR algorithm. Many SR 
algorithms have been proposed (Farsiu et al. [10], Park et al. 
[12], Katsaggelos et al. [13], van Eekeren et al.[14], Panda et 
al. [15], Glasner et al. [16], Sun et al. [17], Dong et al. [18]). 
Super Resolution image Reconstruction (SRR) and Learning-
Based Super Resolution (LBSR) are typical SR technologies, 
though many others have been proposed. However, all SR 
algorithms, including SRR and LBSR are difficult to use in 
real time for video because they require iteration to create a 
high-resolution image. Iteration is very time consuming and 
difficult to execute on the CPU/GPU of a smartphone. 
Although a non-iteration SRR algorithm for HDTV has been 
proposed (Matsumoto and Ida, 2010), the resolution is lower 
than that of a conventional HDTV and an additional device 
for implementation SRR is required.  
      The second difficulty is SR on smartphones must work on 
the CPU/GPU of a smartphone. Due to the space and power 
consumption, it is difficult to add a device for SR 
implementation to a smartphone. If we add a new device to a 
smartphone, the new parts will shorten battery duration 
owing to higher power consumption. Thus, to use SR on a 
smart-phone, it is necessary to work with the limited 
resources, such as the CPU/GPU, of a smartphone. The 
CPU/GPU executes many tasks, and resources, such as the 
memory bandwidth are limited. If sufficient CPU/GPU 
power and resources are not provided for the SR process, a 
video cannot be processed in real time, and frame drops can 
occur. In the worst case, the video will freeze. To overcome 
these difficulties, an SR algorithm for a smartphone must be 
simple and sufficiently light to work on CPU/GPU power and 
limited resources. 
B. NLSP 
      NLSP is a simple and fast SR technique, which made it 
possible to implement SR to smartphones for the first time in 
the world.  
      The process is similar to enhancer that it increases 
resolution by emphasizing edges; however, NLSP emphasizes 
high-frequency components extracted from the input image 
using a nonlinear function [2]. Figure 2 shows the signal flow 
of NLSP. The input signal has two paths. The first path 
consists of a High-Pass Filter (HPF), Non-Linear Function 
(NLF), and a Limiter (LMT). This path generates high-
frequency components that the original video does not have. 
High-frequency components include the edges and details of 
an image/video. HPF detects the edges of the input signal. 
Then, the detected edges are processed with the NLF. It can 
create high-frequency components not included the  
 
Figure 2. Block diagram of NLSP 
 
input video. An example of an NLF is a cubic function (f(x) =
𝑥3). The function can amplify the high-frequency components 
by as many as three times. We explain the NLF using the cubic 
function f(x) = 𝑥3. It is well known that images and videos 
can be expressed by sine and cosine waves with Fourier series. 
If f(x) is assigned sinθ, it is changed to (sin 𝜃)3 using the 
cubic function. Similarly, if f(x)  is assigned cosθ , it is 
changed to (cos 𝜃)3. (sin 𝜃)3 can be changed to sin⁡(3θ) and 
(cos 𝜃)3  can be changed to cos⁡(3θ) . sin⁡(3θ)  and 
cos⁡(3θ)are harmonic waves, and the frequency is higher than 
the original video. The cubic function is just an example of a 
nonlinear function, and the NLF is used to create the high-
frequency components by harmonic waves. The harmonic 
waves are generated only from the edges detected with the 
HPF. Flat areas do not have edges; therefore, there are no 
harmonic waves. The LMT saturates these large values to fit 
the harmonic waves to the video. 
      The second path is from the input, and it is directly 
connected to the Adder (ADD). The ADD adds the harmonic 
waves processed by the LMT to the original video. The 
process is conducted pixel by pixel.  
Therefore, the output of the ADD has high-frequency 
components not included the original video. This processing 
method can improve the resolution, and even generate high-
frequency components that exceed the Nyquist frequency of 
the original video. This simple and fast algorithm has led to 
the development of real-time NLSP hardware.  
      Figure 3 shows an image processed with NLSP hardware. 
Figure 3(a) is an enlarged image from HDTV to 4K. Figure 
3(b) is the NLSP processed result of Figure 3(a). Although 
Figure 3(a) is blurry, Figure 3(b) more clearly expresses the 
edge and details than Figure 3(a). Figures 3(c) and (d) are the 
two-Dimensional Fast Fourier Transform (2D-FFT) results of 
Figures 3(a) and (b) respectively.  
      Figures 3(c) and (d) show the frequency characteristics in 
the frequency domain. The horizontal and vertical axis are the 
horizontal and vertical frequencies of the image. The center 
of the image shows low-frequency. The frequency is higher 
with distance from the center. Figure 3(d) has horizontal and 
vertical high-frequency components that are  

279
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
(a) 4K image enlarged from HD 
(b) 4K image enlarged with NLSP 
 
 
(c) 2D-FFT result of Figure 3(a) 
(d) 2D-FFT result of Figure 3(b) 
Figure 3. Image processed with real-time NLSP hardware 
 
 
 
(a) Input image 
(b) Image processed with smartphone emulator 
 
 
 
 
(c) 2D-FFT result of Figure 4(a) 
(d) 2D-FFT result of Figure 4(b) 
Figure 4. Image processed with an NLSP smartphone 

280
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
not present in Figure 3(c). This means that NLSP creates high-
frequency components, and increases the resolution.  
      Although Super-Resolution image Reconstruction (SRR) 
and Learning-Based Super Resolution (LBSR) are the current 
mainstream SR technologies, they cannot be mounted to a 
smartphone. SRR is a technology that generates a high-
resolution image from multiple degraded images [10]; 
however, the processing requires iteration. When the input 
image and output image have the same resolution, the 
technique is not very effective [19]. LBSR is a method that 
increases resolution using a database [20]. The effectiveness 
is affected by the database, and the processing requires both 
an expensive database and iteration. Thus, both of the above 
technologies require complex processing. In addition, their 
effectiveness is lower than that of NLSP [5][8]. 
      Although the NLSP algorithm is very simple, whether 
NLSP can process videos in real-time on CPU/GPU of a 
smartphone has not been verified. One of the authors used a 
smartphone emulator to prove that NLSP can work normally 
on a smartphone [2]. Figure 4 shows the NLSP processed 
result with a smartphone emulator. Figure 4(a) shows a frame 
of an input video. Figure 4(b) shows the NLSP processed 
result of Figure 4(a) on a smartphone. Figure 4(a) more clearly 
expresses the edge and the details than Figure 4(a) does. 
Figures 4(c) and (d) show the 2D-FFT results of Figures 4(a) 
and (b) respectively. Figure 4(d) has horizontal and vertical 
high-frequency components not included Figure 4(c). The 
results show that NLSP can process in real-time and improve 
the resolution on a smartphone. A smartphone with NLSP has 
already been sold on the markets (Figure 5) [3]. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 
The effect of image processing differs, depending on the 
image. We adjusted NLSP for text; hence, it was necessary to 
verify the effect of NLSP for text. When a new technology is 
developed, it is necessary to compare a processed image with 
an unprocessed image. Thus, in this experiment, a smartphone 
with NLSP and one without NLSP were compared. The result 
of the comparison indicates the effects of using NLSP. In 
addition, the experiment was conducted using smartphones 
from different manufacturers and verified the effect of NLSP 
in comparison with other technologies. 
Text includes many types of characters, such as Chinese 
characters, hiragana, and alphabets. Each character has 
different features. Most Chinese characters consist of straight 
lines. Hiragana and alphabets consist of straight and curved 
lines. Therefore, even if NLSP is effective when applied to 
Chinese characters, we do not know whether NLSP is 
effective or not for characters that have different features. 
Thus, in this study, we conducted a subjective assessment to 
evaluate the image quality of Japanese text including Chinese 
characters, katakana, and hiragana. After, a similarly 
subjective assessment was conducted using English text. 
A. Experimental Condition 
The observers were instructed on the experimental 
procedure, the meaning of resolution and the point of 
evaluation. Explanation of the resolution was conducted  
 
Figure 5. Developed Smartphone with NLSP 
 
using training images to make the observers understand 
correctly. In addition, the observers were instructed not to 
consider the color, brightness, or noise of the image. When the 
observers purchase a smartphone, the viewing distance is 
different for each observer. Thus, observers could freely 
adjust the viewing distance. After evaluation, we investigated 
points where the observers gazed to judge whether the 
observers correctly evaluated differences in resolution. 
B. Test Images 
      Nine screenshots of websites containing text were used as 
experimental images. Five images were Japanese text, and the 
others were English text. Japanese text images included  
hiragana, katakana, and Chinese characters. The images are 
shown in Figure 5. The resolution of all the images is WQHD. 
Figure 5 [a]-[e] shows the Japanese text images. Figure 5 [f]- 
[i] shows the English text images. The Japanese text images 
are of websites browsed by many people (a site for 
smartphones, a PC, a map). The site for smartphones is 
enlarged and viewed when the site has small text; therefore, 
an un-enlarged site image and two enlarged site images were 
used. One of the two enlarged images contained text with only 
small differences in color from the background color. 
Similarly, the three English text images are screenshots of 
websites for a smartphone and a map. When web articles 
written on PDF are browsed, the resolution is often low. Thus, 
one of the website screenshots for smartphones is a PDF 
article page. 
C. Observers 
At least 20 observers are required for adequate statistical 
analysis. In this experiment, 23 observers participated in the 
experiment and had normal visual acuity and color vision. 
Non-experts who do not work in the image industry cannot 
always distinguish image quality differences, even if experts 
can distinguish them. If there is a significant difference in the 
experiment using non-experts, the difference of image quality 
is great. Therefore, all the observers were non-experts. 

281
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[a] Map 
[b] Route 
[c] TV 
[d] Airport 
[e] Ticket 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[f] Station 
[g] Company 
[h] Article 
[i] News 
Figure 6. Test images 
 
D. Experiment 1 
In Experiment 1, NLSP was applied to Japanese text, and 
the subjective assessment to evaluate the image quality of  
NLSP for text was conducted. A smartphone with NLSP and 
a smartphone without NLSP, and different manufacturer’s 
smartphones were used. This experiment shows that NLSP is 
more effective than the conventional SR technologies. 
1) Experimental Equipment 
      Five smartphones were used in this experiment. To ensure 
that the results were not caused by display differences, two of 
the five smartphones featured the same terminal. One was a 
smartphone with NLSP (smartphone A), and the other was 
one without NLSP (smartphone B). The remaining three 
smartphones were smartphones from different manufacturers 
(smartphone C–E). The display resolution of smartphones A 
and B was WQHD (2560 × 1440), whereas that of the others 
was full HD (1920 × 1080). The brightness was adjusted to be 
close to the same brightness. 
2) Experimental Method 
      The observers evaluated the image quality of the test 
image and ranked the five smartphones by resolution. The 
best-worst method was used in the experiment. First, the 
observers selected the best (1st rank) and the worst (5th rank) 
smartphones from the five smartphones. Second, the next best 
(2nd rank) and the next worst (4th rank) smartphones were 
selected in the same way from the remaining three 
smartphones. The remaining smartphone was ranked 3rd. 
E. Experiment 2 
      In Experiment 2, English text images with and without 
NLSP were compared and evaluated.  
1) Experimental equipment 
      Two smartphones were used to evaluate the image quality. 
These were the same terminal smartphones. One smartphone 
output images processed with NLSP to a display. The other 
output unprocessed images. When the image quality 
assessments were conducted using multiple displays, it was 
proven that an individual difference of displays did not affect 
the results [21].  
      The smartphones have 5.4 inch display, and the resolution 
is WQHD. The brightness was adjusted to be close to the same 
brightness on both devices.  
      The 
observers 
compared 
images 
displayed 
on 
smartphones, and chose the smartphone, which had the higher  

282
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
TABLE  I. Analysis result (Map) 
 
 
resolution. To prevent prejudice from affecting the results, 
the state of NLSP (ON/OFF) was not revealed to the 
observers. 
V. 
RESULTS 
In this section, the results of the two experiments in the 
previous section are explained.  
1) Experiment 1 results 
      The assessment results were analyzed, and the presence 
or absence of significant differences was identified. The 
assessment results were quantified, and the average scores 
representing the image quality of each stimulus were 
calculated [22]. The calculation requires a normalized score 
𝐾𝜀𝑙, which can be calculated using 𝑃𝑙 and 𝜀𝑙. 𝑃𝑙 is the average 
of each segment of the range from 0 to 100 separated into the 
number of stimuli. In this experiment, the number of stimuli, 
i.e., the number of smartphones (n), equals 5. The value 𝜀𝑙 is 
the median of each segment of the standard normal 
distribution separated into n segments. 𝐾𝜀𝑙 is the percentile of 
the standard normal distribution. Thus, 𝐾𝜀𝑙  is the distance 
from the average of the standard normal distribution. The 
values of 𝐾𝜀𝑙 were given as a normalized score according to 
rank. The average scores of the total score are the evaluation 
values for each stimulus. 
      The aggregate results of “Map” (Figure 3(a)) are shown 
in Table 1. The rows represent rank, and the columns 
represent stimuli (smartphones A–E). The values of 
intersection (𝑓𝑘𝑙) are the number of observers for stimulus k 
for rank l. Thus, 𝑓1𝐴 indicates that 22 observers ranked the 
smartphone with NLSP (smartphone A) 1st.  
      First, rank is converted to a value. The higher the ranking, 
the higher the 𝑟𝑙  value of the smartphone, where 𝑟𝑙  is 
calculated as follows:  
 
𝑟𝑙 = 𝑛 − 𝑙 + 1 
(1) 
      The percentile values 𝑃𝑙 are calculated using 𝑟𝑙 as follows: 
 
𝑃𝑙 =⁡𝑟𝑙 − 0.5
𝑛
100 
(2) 
      The calculation results are shown in each row 𝑟𝑙, 𝑃𝑙 of 
Table 1. Next, 𝜀𝑙 is calculated using (3) or (4). If the value of 
𝑃𝑙 is larger than 50, formula (3) is used. If the value of 𝑃𝑙 is 
50 or less, formula (4) is used. This is because the values of 
𝜀𝑙 are calculated based on the point of the variance 0 of the 
standard normal distribution.  
 
𝜀𝑙 = 
1 − 𝑃𝑙
100   (𝑃𝑙 > 50) 
(3) 
 
𝑃𝑙
100 ⁡⁡  ⁡⁡(𝑃𝑙 ≤ 50) 
(4) 
      The calculation results are shown in row 𝜀𝑙 of Table Ⅰ.  
𝐾𝜀𝑙 is calculated using 𝜀𝑙 from the normal distribution table. 
The values of 𝐾𝜀𝑙  shown in Table Ⅰ were given to each 
stimulus according to the ranking. The average scores (𝑅𝑙) of 
the total scores (∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙 × 𝐾𝜀𝑙)) are the evaluation values of the 
stimulus. For example, the average score 𝑅𝐴 is calculated as 
follows: 𝑅𝐴 = 28.72 23
⁄
≒ 1.25. The average scores and 
total scores are shown in Table 1. The average scores of “Map” 
(Figure 3(a)) are shown in the yardstick graph in Figure 4. 
The horizontal axis indicates the average score. The marks on 
the axis (oval, triangle, square, rhombus, and x) indicate the 
average scores of each stimulus (smartphone A, smartphone 
B, smartphone C, smartphone D, and smartphone E, 
respectively). The higher the average score, the higher the 
evaluation. In Table 1, the average score of smartphone A is 
the highest, indicating that smartphone A has the highest 
resolution.  
      A t-test was used to verify the significant difference 
between the stimuli. The variance of the average score (𝑆𝑘
2) 
and the statistical quantity 𝑡0 are calculated as follows:  
 
𝑆𝑘
2 =  𝛴{𝑓𝑘𝑙 × (𝐾𝜀𝑙)2}
√𝛴(𝑓𝑘𝑙)
− 𝑅𝑘
2 
(5) 

283
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 𝑡0 =
𝑅𝑥 − 𝑅𝑦
√∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙) (𝑆𝑥2 + 𝑆𝑦2)
√∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙) ∑{(𝑓𝑘𝑙) − 1} 
(6) 
      The value ∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙) indicates the number of observers. x 
and y are stimuli. The calculation results are shown in Table 
1. The values of t are calculated using the Degree of Freedom 
(DoF) from t distribution. In this experiment, the DoF is 
DoF = 2 ∗ ∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙) − 2 = 46 − 2 = 44. The t value of 1% 
significant level is 𝑡1% = 2.414134 and that corresponding 
to a 5% significant level is 𝑡5% = 1.68023. If the value of 𝑡0 
is larger than the value of 𝑡5%, there is a significant difference 
between stimuli.  
      Here, smartphone A is the highest, and smartphone D is 
the second highest. The 𝑡0 value between smartphones A and 
D (𝑡0(𝐴, 𝐷)) and the result of the t-test is as follows:  
 
𝑡0(A, D) = 10.33 >⁡𝑡1% 
(7) 
      In (7), 𝑡0(𝐴, 𝐷) is larger than 𝑡1%. This result indicates 
that smartphone A has a higher resolution than smartphone D 
and has a significance value of 1%. The results of the 3rd rank 
(smartphone C), 4th rank (smartphone B), and 5th rank 
(smartphone E) are as follows:  
 
𝑡0(D, C) = 4.13 >⁡𝑡1% 
(8) 
 
𝑡0(C, B) = 0.53 >⁡𝑡1% 
(9) 
 
𝑡0(B, E) = 2.77 <⁡𝑡5% 
(10) 
      𝑡0(𝐷, 𝐶)  and 𝑡0(𝐶, 𝐵)  are larger than 𝑡1% . Therefore, 
there are significant differences of 1% between smartphones 
D and C, and smartphones C and B. 𝑡0(𝐵, 𝐸) is less than 𝑡1% 
and 𝑡5% , indicating that there is no significant difference 
between smartphones B and E. The arrows indicate significant 
differences in the graph in Figure 4. The asterisks represent 
the level of significant difference between stimuli. “**” 
represents a significant difference of 1%, and “*” represents a 
significant difference of 5%. The analysis results of images 
[b–e] are shown in Figure 3 (b–e). Smartphone A has the 
highest resolution and significant differences of 1% between 
other smartphones in all the images. On the other hand, 
smartphone E has the worst resolution for all of the images 
and significant differences for four out of five images with the 
other smartphones. 
2) Experiment 2 results 
      In Experiment 2, the observers compared the images 
processed with and without NLSP, and chose the smartphone, 
which had the higher resolution. We calculated ratio of each 
smartphones selected, and evaluated the statistical significant 
differences between the stimuli. In statistics, there are two 
important criteria about the significant difference. They are 
95% and 99%. To obtain the 95% significant difference, at 
least 20 observers are required. If one out of twenty observers 
selects the smartphone with NLSP, the 95% significant 
difference between the stimuli is obtained. In contrast, if two 
observers select the smartphone with NLSP, the probability is 
90%. In statistics, 90% does not indicate a significant 
difference. In this experiment, more than 20 observers 
participated. Thus, if 95% of the observers assess that the 
smartphone with NLSP has a higher resolution than the 
smartphone without NLSP, there is a significant difference of 
95%.  
●A   ▲B   ■C   🔶D   ×E 
 
[a] Map 
 
●A   ▲B   ■C   🔶D   ×E 
 
[b] Route 
 
●A   ▲B   ■C   🔶D   ×E 
 
[c] Schedule 
 
●A   ▲B   ■C   🔶D   ×E 
 
[d] Airport 
 
●A   ▲B   ■C   🔶D   ×E 
 
[e] Ticket 
Figure 7. Assessment results (Experiment 1) 
 
        Figure 7 shows the results. The vertical axis represents 
the stimuli, the horizontal axis represents the number of 
observers. Here, the smartphone with NLSP is represented as 

284
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
“NLSP,” and the smartphone without NLSP is represented as 
“OFF.” 
      The results are explained using the result of “Station” 
(Figure 7[a]) and that of “Company” (Figure 7[b]). The graph 
of Figure 7[a] indicates that 23 observers selected NLSP as 
having high resolution, and no one selected OFF. The results 
show that all the observers, that is, 100% observers assessed 
that NLSP has a higher resolution than OFF. Therefore, NLSP 
has a higher resolution, and there is a significant difference of 
99% between the stimuli. In Figure 7[b], 22 observers selected 
NLSP, and one observer selected OFF. More than 95% of 
observers selected NLSP, which indicates that the result has 
reproducibility of more than 95%. Figure 7 [c], [d] show the 
results of the other test images. The results show that NLSP 
has a higher resolution than OFF, and there are significant 
differences of more than 95% between the stimuli for all of 
the images. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
      In Experiment 1, smartphone A (with NLSP) has the 
highest score and a significant difference of 1% between the 
other smartphones (which are either without NLSP or from 
different manufacturers) in all the images. The results indicate 
that NLSP is valid for text on smartphone displays. The same 
results were obtained for all the images. Thus, NLSP is valid 
for images other than the five images used in this paper. There 
are significant differences between smartphones without 
NLSP. It is assumed that the results were influenced by the 
internal processing differences.  
      In Experiment 2, the smartphone with NLSP has a higher 
resolution than the smartphone without NLSP, and there are 
statistical significant differences of 1% or 5% between the 
stimuli for all scenes. Significant differences were obtained in 
both Japanese and English texts containing characters with 
different features. Therefore, it is assumed that NLSP can 
improve the resolution of text on smartphone displays.  
      In this experiment, a gazing point was not specified for the 
observers. In addition, there were significant differences in all 
of the images when all the observers were non-experts. From 
the above, there are clear differences of image quality between 
the images with NLSP and those without NLSP. 
      The same results were obtained in Experiments 1 and 2. 
Therefore, different of effect according to language cannot be 
found. Although we cannot technically specify the font type 
of test images, bold letters may affect the subjective 
assessment results. However, it can be adjusted by parameter 
controls. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
      Subjective assessments using smartphones with NLSP and 
smartphones without NLSP were conducted to verify the 
effectiveness of NLSP for texts. In Experiment 1, Japanese 
text including hiragana, katakana, and Chinese characters was 
used as test images. In Experiment 2, test images included 
English text images.  
      The results of Experiments 1 using five smartphones 
indicated that the image quality of a smartphone with NLSP 
is the highest, and there are significant differences between 
the other smartphones. In Experiment 2, the images with and  
 
 
[a] Station 
 
 
[b] Company 
 
 
 
 
[c] Article 
 
 
[d] News 
Figure 8. Assessment results (Experiment 2) 
 
      without NLSP were compared using two smartphones. 
The results show that the smartphone with NLSP has a higher 
resolution than the smartphone without NLSP does, and there 
were significant differences for all test images.  
      From the above, it was proven that NLSP can improve the 
resolution of texts on smartphone displays.  
      The statistical analyses indicate that the experimental 
results are reproducible. The conclusion that a smartphone 
with NLSP has the highest image quality was obtained for all 
the images; therefore, both the assessment method and the 
analysis method in this experiment were valid as subjective 
assessment methods. 
      In future work, we will apply to more characters and type 
of fonts, such as bold letters, and verify the general 
performance. Although the NLSP has been implemented only 
to one model of smartphone, its processing can work 
regardless of the operating system. Therefore, our final target 
is to implement the NLSP on as many smartphone models as 
we can. 
 

285
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Kubota and S. Gohshi, “Subjective Assessment for Text 
with Super Resolution on Smartphone Displays,” International 
Conference 
on 
Creative 
Content 
Technologies 
2018 
(CONTENT 2018), pp. 24-29, Feb. 2018. 
[2] S. Gohshi, “A new signal processing method for vide-
o:reproduce the frequency spectrum exceeding the Nyquist 
frequency,” MMsys '12 Proceedings of the 3rd Multimedia 
Systems Conference, pp. 47-52, Sep. 2012. 
[3] http://www.fmworld.net/product/phone/f-
02h/display.html?fmwfrom=f-02h_index. 
[retrieved: 
Nov. 
2018]. 
[4] H. Shoji and S. Gohshi, “Subjective Assessment for Resolution 
Improvement on 4K TVs:Analysis of Learning-Based Super-
Resolution and Non-Linear Signal Processing Techniques,” 
The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in 
the Global Information Technology (ICCGI2016), Vol. 2016, 
pp. 10-15, 2308-4529, Nov. 2016 
[5] M. Sugie, S. Gohshi, H.Takeshita, and C. Mori,“Subjective 
Assessment of Super-Resolution 4K Video using Paired 
Comparison,”2014 International Symposium on Intelligent 
Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ISPACS-
2014), pp. 42-47, Dec. 2014. 
[6] C. Mori and S. Gohshi,“Image Quality of a Smartphone 
Display with Super-Resolution,”Proceedings of the ISCIE 
Inter-national Symposium on Stochastic System Theory and its 
Applications, Vol. 2016, pp. 340-344, 2016. 
[7] ITU-R. BT.710-4, “Subjective Assessment Method for Image 
Quality in High-Definition Television,” Nov. 1998. 
[8] H. Shoji and S. Gohshi, “Subjective Assessment for Learning-
Based Super-Resolution and Non-Linear Signal Processing 
Techniques,” The 47th ISCIE International Symposium on 
Stochastic Systems Theory and Its Applications (SSS’ 15), pp.  
79-80, Dec. 2015. 
[9] Y. Mukaigawa, K. Suzuki, and Y. Yagi, “Analysis of 
subsurface scattering under generic illumination,” 2008 19th 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp.  
1-5, 1051-4651, Dec. 2008. 
[10] S. Farsiu and M. Dirk Robinson, “Fast and Robust Multi-Frame 
Super-Resolution,” IEEE Trans Image Process 2004, Vol.13, 
no.10, pp. 1327-1344, 1941-0042, Oct. 2004. 
[11] Toshiba (in Japanese), http://www.toshiba.co.jp/regza/de-
tail/superresolution/resolution.html. [retrieved: Nov. 2018]. 
[12] S. H. Park, M. K. Park, and M. G. Kang, “Super-Resolution 
Image Reconstruction: A Technical Overview,” IEEE Signal 
Processing Magazine, 1053-5888/03, pp. 21-36, May. 2003. 
[13] M. R. Banha, and A. K. Katsaggelos, “Digital Image Resto-
ration,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 1558-0792, Vol. 14 
(2), pp. 24-41, Mar. 1997. 
[14] A.W.M.Eekeren, K. Schutte, and L. J. van Vliet, “Multiframe 
Super-Resolution Reconstruction of Small Moving Objects,” 
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 1941-0042, pp. 2901-
2912, Vol. 19, no. 11, Nov. 2010. 
[15] S. Panda, M. S. R. S. Prasad, and G. Jena, “POCS Based Super-
Resolution Image Reconstruction Using an Adaptive 
Regularization Parameter,” International Journal of Computer 
Science Issues, Vol. 8, issue 5, No. 2, 1694-0814, Sep. 2011. 
[16] D. Glasner, S. Bagon, and M. Irani, “Super-Resolution from a 
Single Image,” International Conference on Computer Vision 
(ICCV), pp. 349-35, 2380-7504, Oct. 2009. 
[17] J. Sun, Z. Xu, and H. Y. Shum, “Image Super-Resolution using 
Gradient Profile Prior,” IEEE Conference on Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1-8, 1063-6919, Jun. 
2008. 
[18] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tanh, “Learning a Deep 
Convolutional Network for Image Super Resolution”, 
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Vol. 8692, 
pp. 184-199, 978-3-319-10593-2, Sep. 2014. 
[19] S. Gohshi and I. Echizen, “Limitation of Super Resolution 
image Reconstruction,” The Journal of The Institute of Image 
Information and Television Engineers, Vol. 36,  No. 48, 
ME2012-125, pp. 1-6, 978-9-8975-8129-8, Nov. 2012. 
[20] W.T. Freeman, T.R. Jones, and E.C. Pasztorm, “Example-
Based Super-Resolution,” IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications,” Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 56-65, 1558-1756, Mar. 
2002. 
[21] C. Mori, M. Sugie, H. Takeshita, and S. Gohshi, “Method of 
Subjective Image Quality Assessment of Multiple Displays,” 
The Journal of the Institute of Image Electronics Engineers of 
Japan, Vol. 46, No. 2, pp. 315-323, Apr. 2017. (in Japanese) 
[22] T. Fukuda and R. Fukuda, “Ergonomics handbook, ” Tokyo: 
Scientist press co.ltd, pp. 41-71, 2009. (in Japanese).    
 

