272
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Generation and Assessment of Urban Land Cover Maps 
Using High-Resolution Multispectral Aerial Cameras 
Joachim Höhle 
Department of Planning, Aalborg University 
Aalborg, Denmark 
Email: jh@land.aau.dk 
 
Michael Höhle 
Department of Mathematics, Stockholm University 
Stockholm, Sweden 
Email: hoehle@math.su.se 
 
 
Abstract—New aerial cameras and new advanced geo-
processing tools improve the generation of urban land cover 
maps. Elevations can be derived from stereo pairs with high 
density, positional accuracy, and efficiency. The combination 
of multispectral high-resolution imagery and high-density 
elevations enable a unique method for the automatic 
generation of urban land cover maps. In the present paper, 
imagery of a new medium-format aerial camera and advanced 
geoprocessing software are  applied to derive normalized 
digital surface  models and vegetation maps. These two 
intermediate products then become input to a tree structured 
classifier, which automatically derives land cover maps in 2D 
or 3D. We investigate the thematic accuracy of the produced 
land cover map by a class-wise stratified design and provide a 
method for deriving necessary sample sizes. Corresponding 
survey adjusted accuracy measures and their associated 
confidence intervals are used to adequately reflect uncertainty 
in the assessment based on the chosen sample size. Proof of 
concept for the method is given for an urban area in 
Switzerland. Here, the produced land cover map with six 
classes (building, wall and carport, road and parking lot, hedge 
and bush, grass) has an overall accuracy of 86% (95% 
confidence interval: 83-88%) and a kappa coefficient of 0.82 
(95% confidence interval: 0.78-0.85). The classification of 
buildings is correct with 99% and of road and parking lot with 
95%. 
To 
possibly 
improve 
the 
classification 
further, 
classification tree learning based on recursive partitioning is 
investigated. We conclude that the open source software “R” 
provides all the tools needed for performing statistical prudent 
classification and accuracy evaluations of urban land cover 
maps.  
Keywords-land 
cover 
map; 
classification; 
assessment; 
thematic accuracy; multispectral camera; map revision 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Land cover maps are an important product of the 
mapping and GIS industry. The coverage of the landscape 
with vegetation, soil or man-made constructions may be 
automatically mapped and analysed. Images taken from an 
airplane or a satellite are used to derive land cover maps 
automatically. The intensity values of picture elements 
(pixels) in different bands of multispectral images are used to 
determine the different types of objects. It is difficult to 
distinguish between objects on the ground and objects above 
the ground, e.g., between buildings and parking lots or trees 
and hedges. Land cover maps can be generated with a higher 
thematic accuracy when information on elevations is 
included [1]. Today, advanced processing tools are able to 
generate elevations of high accuracy and density from 
imagery [2]. The generation of land cover maps and their 
applications will benefit from these innovations.  
Of special interest are built-up areas where small objects 
have to be mapped and where changes over time frequently 
occur. For such areas, land cover maps have to be produced 
by means of high-resolution images. Their ground sampling 
distance (GSD) is a few centimeters. The use of a new high-
resolution multispectral aerial camera will be a characteristic 
of this contribution. In addition, the applied methodology 
uses a new approach in mapping. The images are used for the 
generation of a point cloud of high density and of regular 
structure (grid). Besides the spatial coordinates of a geodetic 
reference system and a map projection (e.g., easting, 
northing, and elevation) the individual points may also have 
attributes such as “height above ground” and “vegetation 
index”. The land cover map is generated by a classification 
procedure and the result is then visualized by simple plot 
commands. In order to assess the thematic accuracy of the 
land cover maps, one typically selects a sample of points in 
the map, derives their true classes using manual procedures 
and then extrapolates the accuracy results to the entire map 
using statistical principles [3].  
The outline of this paper is as follows: After the 
introduction (Section I) the state of the art in the generation 
of land cover maps is discussed and our aims are formulated 
(Section II). The new generation of aerial cameras and 
processing tools is presented in Sections III and IV. Our 
method for the generation of urban land cover maps is 
explained in Section V. Special attention is given to the 
accuracy assessment of these land cover maps (Section VI). 
In Section VII our method is applied to a test area in 
Switzerland. The obtained results on the test area are 
evaluated in Sections VIII and IX. A conclusion on the work 
carried out and suggestions for future work end the paper 
(Section X). 
II. 
LAND COVER MAPS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS 
Land cover maps have a number of different classes 
(categories), which are visualized in a two-dimensional (2D) 
map by different colours. The standard methods classify the 
images by means of training areas where the truth (reference) 
is known from field work or manual interpretation of images. 
The automatic classification of the images uses the intensity 
values of image elements (pixels) in different bands of the 

273
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
images and applies various statistical methods. More 
advanced methods form larger areas (objects) first and 
classify them in a second step. This object-based 
classification uses a number of attributes like shape, size, and 
texture and generates land cover. The land cover map has to 
be georeferenced. This means that the orientation of the 
images and a digital terrain model (DTM) have to be known 
in advance. The classification may use the original images or 
orthoimages - in the first case the classification result has to 
be rectified and orthogonalized. The derived land cover map 
is assessed by a few independent check points or check 
areas. The results are presented by means of an error 
(confusion) matrix.  
The usage of elevations as an attribute of objects has 
been tried before. In [1], a solution for automatic generation 
of land cover maps has been proposed and applied to a one 
hectare large test area. Elevations, heights, and vegetation 
indices have been derived from images only. True-colour 
orthoimages and false-colour stereo pairs were used for the 
determination of the reference. The overall accuracy of the 
derived land cover map with four classes (building, road and 
parking lot, tree and hedge) has been 79%. The use of stereo-
vision was the preferred approach in the assessment of the 
thematic accuracy. 
In [4], elevations were derived from laser scanning and 
have been used together with aerial images and cadastre 
maps for the generation of a land cover map. Ten urban and 
seven agriculture classes have been determined for the city of 
Valencia/Spain. The overall accuracy of the derived land 
cover map was 85%. Reference [5] describes an object-
oriented classification where 81% of all residential buildings 
are correctly determined for a test area located in Austin, 
Texas/U.S.A. Attributes of objects are  derived from laser 
scanning, aerial images, and road maps.  
Machine learning algorithms are applied for the urban 
land cover classification in [6]. The classification can either 
be based on pixels or object features. A combination of 
pixels, object features (area, length, etc.), and layer values 
(mean, standard deviation, etc.) has been suggested in 
Reference [7].  
A land cover map has many applications and can be used 
for all types of planning. View shed analysis and studies of 
propagation of noise or electromagnetic waves are 
applications in engineering. An important application is the 
revision of topographic data bases. This task requires a high 
positional and thematic accuracy. In order to detect changes 
and errors in topographic databases the generation of a land 
cover map may be the first step in the revision process. The 
superimposition of the land cover map with the topographic 
database will indicate which objects of the topographic 
database have to be added, deleted, or changed in size or 
shape. Recent studies in revision of topographic databases  
are carried out in [8] [9]. The exact actions depend on what 
types of data have to be revised. There are topographic 
databases in 2D, 2.5D, and 3D. Sometimes, the important 
objects are updated only, e.g., buildings, roads, and trees. 
Land cover maps are also used for studies in town 
development. The changes in areas of buildings, traffic, and 
vegetation over several years are studied in [10]. In that 
investigation, the land cover maps are derived from vector 
maps and low-resolution satellite images. The applied 
classification of the images uses intensity values of pixels 
only.  
Thus, our aims for this paper are:  
1) Generation of urban land cover maps by applying decision 
trees based on height and vegetation information derived 
from a new type of aerial images. 2) Assessing the thematic 
accuracy using overall and class specific accuracy measures. 
3) To do so by a class-wise stratified sampling design of 
reference points, which allows for precise estimation of per 
class accuracy quantities. 4) To illustrate that all the 
necessary computation can be done by “R” and its extension 
packages.  
In comparison to the investigation in [1] we now focus 
here on the accuracy assessment as point estimates and 
confidence intervals in the light of a class-stratified sampling 
design. Furthermore, classification is now improved using 
additional classes, and a comparison is made with machine 
learning derived decision trees. Finally, all computations in 
the proof-of-example section are now based on a larger test 
area than previously.  
III. 
NEW DIGITAL AERIAL CAMERAS 
With the development of new advanced digital aerial 
cameras, the generation of land cover maps has new tools at 
its disposal. There are different types and models of aerial 
cameras. Three of the most advanced cameras will be 
discussed in the following: the Hexagon/Intergraph DMCII 
250, the Microsoft UltraCam Eagle, and the Hexagon/Leica 
Geosystems RCD30 camera. Details of the cameras are 
described in publications [11] [12] [13]. All three cameras 
are frame cameras, which can produce images of high 
resolution and high geometric quality. They are designed for 
mapping tasks. The produced images have different features; 
the major ones are listed in Table I. 
There is a considerable difference in the format of the 
output image. The RCD30 is a medium-format camera; the 
other two cameras are considered as large-format cameras. A 
larger format requires less flying time in order to cover an 
area to be mapped assuming that the images of all cameras 
have the same GSD. The necessary length of the flight is an 
economic factor, and large-format cameras have an 
advantage in projects covering large areas. All three cameras 
can produce black & white, colour, and false-colour images 
simultaneously. Newly designed lenses match the resolution 
of the sensors and make high image quality possible. The 
TABLE I. FEATURES OF THREE NEW DIGITAL AERIAL CAMERAS 
Features 
UC 
Eagle 
DMCII 
250 
RCD30 
 pixel size                                          [µm] 
5.2 
5.6 
6.0 
 focal length                                      [mm] 
80 
112 
50, 80 
 image size (in flight direction)        [pel] 
                                                          [mm] 
13 080 
68.0 
14 656 
82.1 
6708 
40.2 
 image size (across flight direction)  [pel] 
                                                          [mm] 
20010 
104.1 
17216 
96.4 
8956 
53.7 
 number of pixels per image             [MP] 
262 
252 
60 
 

274
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
cameras are calibrated, and the obtained calibration data are 
used to correct the images in geometry and radiometry. 
Additional sensors for position (GNSS) and attitude can be 
supplemented and will support accurate georeferencing of 
the imagery. More details have to be mentioned on the 
RCD30 camera because its images will be used in the 
following examples. The colour images are produced from 
one charge-coupled device (CCD) with Bayer filters. The 
infra-red band is imaged by a second CCD of the same high 
resolution (pixel size=6 µm x 6 µm). Image motion is 
compensated mechanically in two axes. The output images 
are corrected for distortion, light-fall off of the lens, and non-
uniformity for dark signals. Two different lenses can be used 
without the need of re-calibration. In order to obtain images 
with GSD=0.05 m, they have to be taken from 417 m above 
ground with a 50 mm lens. One frame will cover 0.15 km2 on 
the ground. A gyro-stabilized mount can be used which will 
prevent big tilts of the imagery.  
IV. 
NEW PROCESSING TOOLS 
The generation of land cover maps from images requires 
the use of specific software tools. They span from general 
image processing to dedicated software for photogrammetry, 
remote sensing, and geographic information systems (GIS). 
The characteristic of our approach is the use of digital 
elevation models, which are derived from high-resolution 
images. The latest developments in this field may enhance 
the performance of the previously suggested approach of the 
generation of land cover maps [1]. One of the problems to 
overcome is the large amount of data, which might make it 
necessary to divide the work into smaller units. One 64-bit 
computer with 8 GB RAM (as is at disposal in this 
investigation) is not an optimal processor for this task. More 
computer power is necessary to solve the task for large areas. 
The many different software tools are expensive if they have 
to be acquired from commercial software vendors. However, 
an increasing amount of freeware and open source tools has 
become available to conduct some of the tasks. Such tools 
are preferred whenever possible. Specifically, we use the 
open-source software environment “R” [14] for statistical 
computing and visualization and, hence, one aim of the 
present paper is to demonstrate its use in the generation and 
assessment of land cover maps. 
A. Programs for the generation of  digital elevation 
models 
Digital elevation models can automatically be derived 
from two or more images covering the same area on the 
ground. Corresponding image parts are matched using the 
intensity values of image elements (pixels). Spatial ground 
coordinates are intersected by means of the corresponding 
pixels in two or more georeferenced images. The resulting 
point cloud can be transferred into a regular grid of points 
representing a digital surface model (DSM). Such software 
programs are pretty complex and their development requires 
many man years. Professional programs are, therefore, 
expensive. Many parameters have to be tuned by the user in 
order 
to 
derive 
elevations 
of 
high 
accuracy 
and 
completeness, which in turn means that some expertise is 
necessary in order to derive good results.  
The problems to be overcome are the huge amount of 
data and the mismatches due to the lack of contrast and 
structure in the images. International tests reveal elevation 
accuracies of RMSEZ=4cm at large-scale images with 
GSD=8 cm [15]. The density of the point cloud may be 
extremely high, e.g., 156 points/m2 at GSD=8 cm [16]. This 
means that the derived DSM may have the resolution of the 
images. The use of distributed processing and dedicated 
hardware make a high performance in the calculations 
possible. Reference [17] reports about a benchmark test 
where 997 million points are  derived from 1562 images 
(filling 1.44 TB) in 2.5 hours or six seconds/image.  
The DSM is an intermediate product only. For the 
generation of land cover maps the heights of the objects 
(buildings, trees, etc.) are required. This is accomplished by 
filtering the DSM so that only elevations of the bare earth 
(terrain) will remain. This process requires editing and 
checking. From the remaining terrain points a grid of 
elevations is interpolated, which represents a DTM. The 
editing software is a complex software tool, which allows for 
measuring, correcting, and visualizing of 3D data. The 
difference between DSM and DTM is the normalized DSM 
(nDSM), which is the required input of the classification 
program. The nDSM is derived using a C++ program, which 
performs the matching between the two point clouds by 
using a linear search to identify the first neighbour within a 
distance of 0.05 m. As a consequence, the search of 
corresponding elevations in the two elevation models (DSM 
and DTM) is quite time-consuming. Improvements could be 
obtained by exploiting the spatial structure of the data in the 
search.  
B. Programs for the generation and assessment of urban 
land cover maps 
The generation of the land cover map and the assessment 
of the results are developed using the statistical software 
environment “R”, which is an open source environment for 
statistical computing and graphics. The programming can be 
both object-oriented and functional in style. Furthermore, a 
large number of open source extension packages (created by 
an active community) provide the newest methodological 
functionality for many visualization and statistical tasks. For 
example, the package “survey” [18] can be used for 
computing accuracy measures in complex survey situations, 
“rpart” 
[19] 
implements 
recursive 
partitioning 
for 
classification trees, and “vrmlgen” enables the visualization 
of land cover maps in 3D [20]. 
V. 
APPLIED METHOD FOR THE GENERATION OF LAND 
COVER MAPS  
The applied method uses the nDSM derived from images 
and supplements it with additional attributes. The points of 
the nDSM are arranged in a regular grid of high density. The 
spacing between points has been selected as a multiple of the 
image element (pixel) on the ground. The new unit is called a 
cell in the 2D space or cube in the 3D space. The attributes to 
be added characterize the object to be mapped. They are  

275
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
derived from the images only. The first attribute is the 
normalized height which is the height of objects above 
ground (nDSM). The normalized difference vegetation 
index (NDVI) is the second attribute, which characterizes 
vegetation. Classes of objects are obtained by defining 
thresholds for the nDSM and NDVI values. Table II shows 
an example of such a point cloud with its attributes. A 
classification program will assign a class to each cell/cube 
of the spatial point cloud. The classification scheme is 
depicted in Figure 1. The chosen classes are ‘grass’, ‘road 
and parking lot’, ‘tree and hedge’, and ‘building’. This 
classified point cloud can then be plotted in 2D or 3D. This 
simple classification may be improved by selecting more 
steps in the thresholds and by using information which 
characterizes a class. 
VI. 
ASSESSMENT OF ACCURACY 
The assessment of the accuracy of the generated land 
cover map is an important task to ensure an appropriate 
quality of the maps. It concerns the positional and the 
thematic accuracy. The positional accuracy is checked within 
the production of the land cover map. It is of great 
importance that all data are in the same reference system and 
that positional and thematic accuracies of the reference data 
are superior to the classified data. The assessment of the 
thematic accuracy is conducted by means of an error matrix. 
This measure is widely accepted and described [3] [21]. The 
employed accuracy measures based on the error matrices as 
well as the design of the accuracy sample will be 
summarized in the following sections.  
A. Accuracy assessment and error matrix 
The classified data are compared with reference data. 
Assume the land cover map consists of a total of N units 
(cells), which each is classified into one of k classes. 
Selecting a cell at random let pij=P(class=i, ref=j), i=1,...,k, 
and j=1,...,k, be the joint probability that the classifier claims 
class i for this class while the reference says it is class j. Note 
that the sum over these k·k probabilities will be 1. The 
probabilities can be represented by a k·k matrix, where the 
rows represent the classified data and the columns the 
reference data. The probabilities in the diagonal of the matrix 
denote the correctly classified sample units for each of the 
classes; all probabilities outside the diagonal represent errors.  
 
The sum of the probabilities in the diagonal is the so 
called “overall accuracy”, i.e., it is the probability that a 
randomly selected unit (cell) will be correctly classified:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other accuracy measures are the so called class-wise 
“producer’s accuracy” and “user’s accuracy” [3]. The 
“producer’s accuracy for class j” is defined as 
  
 
 
 
 
 
and the “user’s accuracy for class i” as  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The estimation of these accuracy measures for a specific 
thematic map depends on an estimation of the pij's from an 
“accuracy” sample of size n from the population. Here, n is 
typically much smaller than N. In the case where simple 
random sampling with replacement is used to draw the 
accuracy, the sample estimates are  
 
/ ,
ˆ
n
= n
p
ij
ij
  
 
where nij is the number of cells in the accuracy sample with 
classifier class i and reference class j, and  
 
 
 
the total size of the accuracy sample. Typically, the entire 
error matrix is then just represented by the nij
 counts in the 
sample. However, in more complex survey designs, the 
probabilities have to be estimated according to the sampling 
design. Hence, any error matrix representing an accuracy 
∑∑
=
=
k
i
k
j
nij
=
n
1
1
( )
(
)
.
class
ref
1∑
=
k
j
ij
ii
+
i
ii
p
p
=
p
= i = p
= |i
uacc i = P
(3) 
( )
(
)
,
ref
class
1∑
=
k
i
ij
jj
j
+
jj
p
p
=
p
= j = p
|j
=
pacc j = P
(2) 
.
1∑
=
k
i
pii
oacc =
(1) 
TABLE II. SPATIAL POINT CLOUD WITH ATTRIBUTES 
Easting 
[m] 
Northing 
[m] 
Elevation 
[m] 
nDSM 
[m] 
NDVI 
537129.2 
5228938.6 
486.5 
0.2 
0.31 
537129.2 
5228938.7 
488.5 
2.3 
0.28 
537144.5 
5228987.4 
486.4 
0.1 
0.01 
537128.0 
5228938.3 
490.8 
4.2 
0.07 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Classification tree for a land cover map with four classes.     
The abbreviations are: b=’building’, t=’tree and hedge’, r=’road and 
parking lot’, g=’grass’.  

276
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
sample has to be accompanied by a statement of the selected 
sample design in order to facilitate proper estimation. 
To assess the thematic accuracy of the land cover map by 
the above measures, one has to decide on an adequate design 
and sample size of the accuracy sample. Since one of our 
aims is to estimate user accuracy for each class up to a given 
precision we use a stratified simple random (STSI) sampling, 
selecting nc samples for each class by simple random 
sampling (without replacement) and, hence, a total sample 
size of n=k·nc. In the subsequent analyses of our stratified 
accuracy sample it is, thus, important to take the stratification 
into account, because classes might be over- or under-
sampled compared to their overall distribution in the map. In 
this case (and ignoring any finite population correction), we 
will use 
 
(
) (
i+ )
ij
i
ij
n
n
N
p = N
/
/
ˆ
⋅
  
 
as estimates [27], where Ni is the total number of units in the 
population, which are of class i and  
 
∑ =
k
j
ij
i+
n
=
n
1
 
 
is the number of units  in the accuracy sample, which have 
classifier class i. A particular strength of “R” is here the 
availability of the package "survey" [18], which facilitates 
the computation of such survey weighted accuracy measures 
- even in complex survey situations. As an example, the 
above stratified design is easily specified using the 
svydesign function after which the accuracy measures can 
be computed using the function svyciprop. 
B. Reference data 
The reference data should be independent, of high 
accuracy, and reliable. The collection of the reference data 
has to be carried out nearly at the same point of time as the 
production of the land cover map, so that a change in the 
landscape and vegetation will not have an effect on the 
results of the assessment. The efforts for collecting reference 
data have to be economically justified, i.e., they should be a 
fraction of the costs for generating the land cover map.  
It may be difficult to fulfil all of these requirements. The 
land cover map is generated from a vegetation map (derived 
from false-colour orthoimages based on a DTM) and a 
normalized DSM. Both digital elevation models are 
automatically derived from images in true colour. The 
reference data may be derived by manual photointerpretation 
using false-colour stereo pairs and manual measurements of 
elevation differences. The orientation data of the images are 
determined by some ground control (measured by means of 
GNSS) and tie point measurements in the images. The 
orientation data of the images are the same both for the 
generation of the map and for the assessment. 
C. Sample size determination and confidence intervals 
Since per class user accuracy can be thought of as the 
probability p for a correct classification in a binomial 
experiment with x successes in n trials, one way to determine 
sample size is by specification of the desired width of the 
resulting 95% confidence interval (CI) for this proportion p. 
We will use likelihood ratio test (LRT) based confidence 
intervals for this proportion, because such intervals have 
better coverage probabilities than the standard Wald intervals 
often used in remote sensing [22]. Here, coverage probability 
of a CI refers to the proportion of times the CI will cover the 
true value of p (when thinking of an infinite number of 
hypothetical repetitions). The better coverage of LRT CIs is 
especially pronounced if p is near zero or one, respectively, 
or if the sample size is small. As an example, a 95% Wald CI 
in the situation where n=21 and p=0.85 will have an actual 
coverage probability of just 84%, which is far away from the 
nominal 95%, whereas a 95% LRT interval has a coverage 
probability of 94%.  
LRT intervals for the proportion p are constructed by 
inversion of the LRT test for the hypothesis H0: p=p0 vs. H1: 
p≠p0 [23]. That is, the lower and upper limit of a 95% LRT 
CI are found numerically as the boundary values of p0 
solving the inequality 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Here, Λn,x(p0) denotes the likelihood ratio between p0  and the 
maximum likelihood estimate 
x n
p
/
ˆ =
, i.e., 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
n x
x
n x
x
n,x
p
p
p
= p
p
Λ
−
−
−
−
ˆ
ˆ 1
1
0
0
0
,  
 
and χ2
0.95(1)≈3.841 denotes the 95% quantile of the χ2 
distribution with one degree of freedom. Implementation of 
such LRT intervals can be found in the “R” package “binom” 
[24]. Assuming a worst-case user accuracy of about 60% for 
each class and a desired half-width of no more than w=10%, 
one can sequentially increase the sample size n until the 
confidence interval for p has a width smaller than 2·w when 
using 
the 
observation 
x=0.6·n. 
The 
“R” 
package 
“sampleSizeBinom” [25], which implements this procedure, 
obtains a required sample size of n=91 per class. Hence, our 
stratified accuracy sample when using 4 classes will totally 
consist of 91·4=364 units. In order to compute the previously 
described LRT confidence intervals also for the survey 
weighted accuracy measures, we use the procedure suggested 
by Rao and Scott [26], which is implemented as part of the 
function svyciprop in the "survey" package. 
D. Kappa analysis 
A further measure of agreement between two raters, who 
both classify a number of items into each of k categories, is 
Cohen's κ [21], which can be viewed as chance adjusted 
agreement measure defined as follows: 
 
  
 
 
∑
∑
∑
=
=
=
−
−
k
i
+i
+
i
k
i
+i
+
i
k
i
ii
p
p
p p
p
=
κ
1
1
1
1
(5) 
(
)
(
)
.
ln
2
0.95
0
2
n,x
χ
p
Λ
≤
⋅
−
(4) 

277
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Landis and Koch [27] characterize κ-values between 0.41 
and 0.60 as moderate, 0.61–0.80 as substantial, and 0.81–1 
as almost perfect agreement between the classification and 
the reference data. An estimate for κ is found by replacing 
pii, pi+, and p+i in (5) with the respective survey adjusted 
estimates. If one, however, ignores the sampling design 
underlying the numbers in the error matrix, and just uses the 
raw survey-unadjusted estimates for the p’s, the obtained κ 
estimate will be biased. For example, if a particular poorly 
classified class is over-sampled, the obtained κ estimate 
might be too low. 
For a STSI design, formulae for computing κ from the 
resulting error matrix can be found in [28]. In [28], the 
formulae are an instance of a more general technique for 
calculating point estimates and variances for transformations 
of survey weighted estimates (see, e.g., [29]).  
To reflect uncertainty in the estimation of κ it is also 
prudent to specify a corresponding (1-α)·100% CI. Again, 
[30] presents equations for computing the variance of the 
estimate, which enables the computing of Wald CIs for the 
stratified case. Note that the package “survey” contains the 
function svykappa to directly compute the survey weighted 
κ estimate and associated Wald CIs based on the general 
equations in [29] – this even works for more complex survey 
designs. It has to be remarked that the use of κ to assess 
classifier performance in remote sensing is somewhat 
debated [30], because κ is directly linked to the overall 
accuracy, but its scale is harder to interpret. Still, we report κ 
estimates here as a supplement measure to the overall 
accuracy, since κ just as the overall and user's accuracy is 
particularly easy to calculate with “R” – even in the case of a 
complex design of the accuracy sample. In summary, the 
principle in the assessment of the thematic accuracy is 
depicted in Figure 2.  
As accuracy measures the survey weighted overall 
accuracy and Cohens’s κ, as well as the producer’s and 
user’s accuracy for each class are selected. Each measure is 
supported by a corresponding CI in order to quantify the 
uncertainty in its estimation. Altogether, one of our points is 
that a per-class stratified sampling approach for the 
assessment of thematic accuracy is easily handled with “R”. 
Such an approach provides reliable estimates for the 
accuracy of each class. 
VII. 
PRACTICAL EXAMPLE 
A practical investigation is conducted for a residential 
area in Switzerland to evaluate the proposed approach. The 
area consisting of buildings, car ports, roads, parking lots as 
well as trees, hedges, and grassland is photographed from the 
air. The size of the test area is about 1.6 hectares.  
The first land cover map comprises the four classes 
‘building’, ‘tree and hedge’, ‘grass’, ‘road and parking lot’ 
only. The steps in the generation of the land cover map are 
depicted in Figure 3. True colour images are used to derive a 
very dense 3D point cloud by means of matching 
corresponding image parts. The point cloud is then 
transformed into a gridded DSM using interpolation 
techniques. Through a process of filtering, which removes 
elevations above ground as well as blunders, a DTM is 
generated. Then, the difference between the DSM and the 
DTM, the nDSM, can be derived. The DTM is also used for 
the production of a false colour orthoimage, which is further 
processed to a NDVI map containing two classes 
(vegetation, non-vegetation). NDVI and nDSM information 
is used to produce a point cloud with two attributes (nDSM, 
NDVI). The land cover map is produced by classification of 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Steps in the production of a land cover map [1]. Colour and 
false-colour aerial images are used to derive accurate and dense height 
data (nDSM), which are supplemented with vegetation data (NDVI). 
Such an ‘intelligent’ 3D point cloud is input to a classification 
scheme, which generates the land cover map. 
 
Figure 2. Principle of the applied assessment of the 
thematic accuracy. 

278
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 5. Visualization of spatial land cover map in 3D. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the point cloud with attributes. In this contribution, various 
methods of classification are investigated. The thematic 
accuracy of the land cover map is assessed by several 
accuracy measures including their uncertainty. 
The classification program assigns a class to each cell. 
The cells (cubes) are plotted in 2D (3D) using different 
colours for the chosen classes. Some measures for quality 
assurance are undertaken during the generation of the land 
cover map in order to avoid errors and to obtain good results. 
This involves checking the georeferencing of all input data, 
their completeness, and the intermediate results. In the 
following sections, details of the data used, the tools applied, 
and the results of the assessment of thematic accuracy are 
given.  
A. Used data 
The RCD30 imagery includes four bands (red, green, blue, 
and near infrared) from which colour and false-colour 
images can be composed. Each image is about 6.4 Megabyte 
(Mb) in size. The images are taken with a GSD of about 5 
cm. The radiometric resolution of each band is 8 bit or 256 
intensity values. The images are geo-referenced and data of 
the geometric calibration (camera constant, position of 
principal point) are provided. False-colour images are used 
to derive reference data using stereovision. Furthermore, a 
map of building footprints is produced by means of 
digitizing a stereo-pair of colour images.  
 
B. Software tools 
For the generation of the 3D point cloud the Match-T 
program, version 5.4, of the Trimble/Inpho Company is used 
[31]. Filtering of the data is applied using filters of the 
professional program “DTMaster”, version 5.4, of the same 
company. Manual editing may also be carried out by this 
program. The orthoimages in false colours are produced by 
Inpho’s ”OrthoMaster” program. The difference between the 
two elevation models (nDSM) is calculated by a simple C++ 
program written for the purpose (cf. Section IV.A). The 
generation of the land cover map is carried out in “R”. Input 
is the nDSM and the NDVI map. The NDVI map is 
generated by the open source software LEOWorks [32]. The 
land cover map is visualized using “Quantum GIS” - an open 
source Geographic Information System [33]. The assessment 
of the land cover map uses the “DTMaster” program, which 
enables dynamic positioning to derived sample data. 
C. Results 
The calculation of the DSM (with a spacing of 0.25 m) 
yields a precision of σZ = 0.04 m. The absolute accuracy of 
the DSM is roughly checked by means of a few points, 
which had a maximum difference to the true values of 0.26 
m. The binary NDVI map is generated by applying a 
threshold of TNDVI = 0.1. The threshold for separating low 
and tall vegetation and non-vegetated objects is selected with 
TnDSM =1.0 m. The result of the classification using these two 
inputs is depicted in Figure 4. The four classes are 
represented by different colours and are well separated from 
each other.  
 
Figure 5 shows an extract of the land cover map in 3D. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Result of classification in 2D. Legend: Red dots = 
‘building’, brown dots = ‘road and parking lot’, bright green dots = 
‘grass’, dark green dots = ‘tree and hedge’. 

279
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
D. Assessment of the thematic accuracy 
The overall number of classified cells in the test area 
when using four classes was 255222 (b), 254890 (r), 155819 
(t) and 241408 (g), which gives a distribution of 28%, 28%, 
17%, and 27% of the total area. 364 DSM-cells are selected 
based on the STSI design and are compared with the 
reference as shown in the error matrix of Table III. The 
resulting 
survey 
weighted 
overall 
accuracy 
of 
the 
classification is 82% (95% CI: 78-86%).  
 
The user’s accuracy of the four classes can be found in 
Table IV. The survey weighted κ estimate is 0.76 (95% CI: 
0.71-0.81). When only two classes (i.e., ‘vegetated’ and 
‘non-vegetated’) are considered, the overall accuracy is 91% 
(95% CI: 88-94%).  
 
E. Refinement of the classification 
The achieved results may be improved by selecting 
another strategy and definition of thresholds for NDVI and 
nDSM. Leaving the binary split of NDVI at 0.1, we refine 
the subdivision of nDSM by using splits at both 1m and 3m. 
Figure 6 shows the resulting six classes, i.e., the vegetated 
classes ‘grass’, ‘hedge and bush’, and ‘tree’ and the non-
vegetated classes ‘road and parking lot’, ‘wall and car port’, 
and ‘building’. According to the classifications, the 
percentage of the classes of the total area are 27%, 9%, 8%, 
and 28%, 4%, 24%, respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The derived land cover map with six classes is depicted 
in Figure 7; white areas indicate areas, which are not 
classified. The error matrix obtained from using stratified 
sampling is displayed in Table V. In this case, the overall 
accuracy is 86% (95% CI: 83-88%). User’s accuracy for 
each class is shown in Table VI and the survey weighted κ 
estimate is 0.82 (95% CI: 0.78-0.85). When only two classes 
(‘vegetated’ and ‘non-vegetated’) are considered, the overall 
accuracy is 95% (95% CI: 93-97%). 
 
TABLE III. 
ERROR MATRIX OF THE DERIVED LAND 
COVER MAP WITH FOUR CLASSES FOR THE STRATIFIED SAMPLE. 
class \ reference 
b 
r 
t 
g 
row 
total 
building  
72 
7 
9 
3 
91 
road & parking lot  
3 
79 
1 
8 
91 
tree & hedge  
8 
2 
64 
17 
91 
grass  
0 
2 
8 
81 
91 
column total 
83 
90 
82 
109 
364 
 
 
TABLE IV.  
USER’S ACCURACY OF THE DERIVED LAND COVER 
MAP WITH FOUR CLASSES 
class 
accuracy 
95% CI 
building 
79% 
70%-87% 
road & parking lot 
87% 
79%-93% 
tree & hedge 
70% 
60%-79% 
grass 
89% 
81%-94% 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Land cover map with six classes. Legend: Red dots = 
‘building’, grey dots = ‘road and parking lot’, bright green dots = 
‘grass’, dark green dots = ‘tree’, dark yellow dots = ‘hedge and bush’, 
brown dots = ‘wall and car ports’. 
 
 
Figure 6. Classification scheme for a land cover map with six classes. 
The abbreviations are: b=’building’, t=’tree’, h=’hedge and bush’, 
w=’wall and car port’, g=’grass’. 
 

280
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Another possible improvement is the use of more 
advanced 
classification 
methods 
than 
the 
current 
classification trees with manually derived rules for the tree 
splitting. We, therefore, investigate the use of classification 
and regression trees [34] with automatically derived splits 
based on recursive partitioning and as implemented in the 
“R” package “rpart” [19]. The classification of each cell is 
based on the continuous measurement values of both nDSM 
and NDVI. 
 
In order to take the sampling design into account during 
the classification we weight each cell i, i=1,…,n, in the 
accuracy sample by its inverse inclusion probability, i.e., in 
our case of stratified simple random sampling the weights 
are wi=Nc(i)/nc(i), where c(i) denotes the class of cell i. An 
overall accuracy of this classification procedure is then 
calculated by n-fold cross-validation, i.e., for each cell i in 
the accuracy sample a classification tree is fitted using the 
other (n-1) weighted cells as training set, then the obtained 
tree is used to classify cell i. Overall accuracy in its survey 
weighted form (as explained in Section VI.A) is then 
computed 
from 
these 
predictions. 
Such 
fitting 
of 
classification trees and accuracy measure computations can 
conveniently be performed using the “R” package “ipred” 
[35].  
In the case of four classes and the accuracy sample of 
n=364, the resulting overall accuracy of the automatically 
fitted regression trees is 77% (95% CI: 72-81%) as compared 
to 79% (95% CI: 74-83%) of the manual tree.  
Note: The overall accuracy of the manual tree is slightly 
different compared to the numbers presented in Section 
VII.D, since the NDVI values are here calculated  from an 
image with a higher resolution (3300 pixel x 3200 pixel 
instead of 802 pixel x 828 pixels of the NDVI-map derived 
by the program “LEOWorks”).  
In case of six classes with n=546, the overall accuracy is 
81% (95% CI: 78-84%) as opposed the 82% (95% CI: 79-
85%) of the manual tree. Altogether, the two results show 
that the gain in accuracy for our test area is not substantial 
when using the automatic classification trees trained from the 
accuracy sample. We, therefore, focus the presentation on 
the more easily interpretable manual tree. 
VIII. DISCUSSION 
The achieved overall survey weighted accuracy of the 
land cover map with six classes is 86%. Regarding the 
important user’s accuracy, the result for class ‘building’ is 
correct with 99% and of class ‘road and parking lot’ with 
95%. This is a very good result because simultaneously the 
survey adjusted producer’s accuracy for the two classes is 
97% and 92%. The results for classes ‘grass’ and ‘tree’ are 
also good with 82% and 84% (corresponding producer’s 
accuracy of 82% and 76%). The derived survey weighted κ 
value is 0.82, which is better than the 0.76 at four classes. 
Using six classes  improves the overall accuracy. 
Automatically 
fitted 
classification 
trees 
are 
a 
computationally intensive supervised learning approach, 
which use more flexible splits and thresholds to perform the 
classification. However, these methods require a sufficiently 
large training set to work well. In our test example, the tree 
splitting rules are initially manually selected based on a-
priori contextual information (e.g., a house has a certain 
height) and the resulting classification trees actually perform 
comparable to the more sophisticated machine learning 
approach, while being easier to interpret. One reason for this 
is that contextual knowledge is not captured by the purely 
data driven machine learning procedure - in case of small 
accuracy samples this makes a difference. A way to improve 
the automatic procedure will be to use a Bayesian framework 
for the classification trees where contextual information 
about splits is reflected as data augmented prior cases. 
However, when training sets are larger or contextual prior 
information less clear (e.g., in case of many diffuse classes or 
many indirect input variables), the automatic classification 
trees method and its refinements (e.g., classification tree 
ensembles) may provide superior classification results. 
However, our aim was not to fully explore the details of such 
complex classification for our test area, but rather to show 
TABLE V.  
ERROR MATRIX OF THE DERIVED LAND COVER MAP 
WITH SIX CLASSES. 
Class \ 
Reference 
b 
h 
g 
r 
t 
w 
row 
total 
building 
90 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
91 
hedge & 
bush 
0 
41 
29 
5 
16 
0 
91 
grass 
1 
11 
75 
4 
0 
0 
91 
road & 
parking 
lot 
0 
1 
4 
86 
0 
0 
91 
tree 
3 
2 
8 
1 
76 
1 
91 
wall & 
car port 
5 
8 
1 
13 
2 
62 
91 
column 
total  
99 
63 
117 
109 
95 
63 
546 
 
TABLE VI.  
USER’S ACCURACY OF THE DERIVED LAND COVER 
MAP WITH SIX CLASSES 
class 
accuracy 
95% CI 
building 
99% 
95%-100% 
hedge & bush 
45% 
35%-56% 
grass 
82% 
74%-89% 
road & parking lot 
95% 
88%-98% 
tree 
84% 
75%-90% 
wall & car port 
68% 
58%-77% 
 

281
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
that normalized DSMs and NDVI maps provide important 
additional information for land cover classification and that 
training and subsequent accuracy assessments of the 
classification can be refined using stratified sampling without 
much extra software effort. Future work could focus on 
adding extra cell-based attributes and on different machine 
learning algorithms such as support vector machines [36]. 
The displacements of elevated objects in standard 
orthoimages could be avoided by means of using true 
orthoimages 
instead 
of 
standard 
orthoimages 
when 
compiling the NDVI map. The use of true orthoimages 
requires digital building models (DBMs), which are seldom 
available because their production is very expensive. 
IX. 
EVALUATION 
In this paper, elevation data of high density have been 
derived from aerial images. The applied high-resolution 
multispectral images enable the generation of a vegetation 
map and the generation of heights above ground. By means 
of a combined use of height and vegetation data a land cover 
map can be produced with a high degree of automation. Such 
a map is the graphical output of a point cloud with two 
attributes (height above ground and vegetation index).  
Land cover maps with even more classes than the six 
investigated in our work can be generated when a finer 
partitioning of objects attributes is used or further attributes 
characterizing objects are added. For example, more 
intervals in the height above ground can differentiate various 
types of vegetation. In addition, water areas can 
automatically be extracted from the near-infrared band of the 
multispectral imagery. 
An important prerequisite for good results of land cover 
maps is the quality of the applied imagery. Reference [1] 
investigates images used in this work. It is concluded that the 
images of the used camera have similar good results in the 
point spread function as large-format aerial cameras. The use 
of a medium-format digital camera (which is considerably 
less expensive than a large-format camera) is also a novel 
approach for the generation of land cover maps. 
Furthermore, its low weight and dimension enable the 
installation in helicopters and unmanned airborne vehicles. 
The use of medium-format aerial cameras instead of large-
format cameras seems to be a general trend in the field of 
mapping and GIS.  
DTMs, DSMs, nDSMs, or 3D point clouds may already 
exist for large areas. The generation of land cover maps may 
use such elevation data of existing databases. However, 
quality checks have to be carried out in order to determine 
whether the data are fit for purpose. High density, high 
positional accuracy, and completeness of the elevation data 
are prerequisites of the presented approach.  
X. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
New advanced aerial cameras and new processing 
software make the automatic generation of urban land cover 
maps more efficient. The additional use of elevations yields 
better results in the classification. In this contribution, the 
assessment of the thematic accuracy of a test area is carried 
out by stereo observations of false-colour images for the 
derivation of reference values. The achieved good results at 
the manual tree classification (86% overall accuracy) as well 
as at the automated classification based on cross validation 
(81% overall accuracy) are possible, because accurate and 
dense elevation and vegetation data can be derived from the 
high-resolution multispectral imagery. The selected approach 
is, thereby, superior to classification from low-resolution 
satellite data. The open source software “R” provides all the 
tools needed for performing statistical prudent classification 
and accuracy evaluation of land cover maps. The updating of 
topographic data bases receives new possibilities to improve 
existing procedures.  
In summary, we suggest to try out the proposed method 
on larger test areas – possibly also comprising of additional 
urban structures – in order to gain more insights about the 
scalability and robustness of the method.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We thank Hexagon/Leica Geosystems for providing 
aerial image data and Trimble/Inpho for lending the software 
packages “Match-T” and “DTMaster” for deriving and 
editing point clouds. The comments of several anonymous 
reviewers helped to improve the manuscript. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Höhle, “Generation of land cover maps using high-
resolution 
multispectral 
aerial 
cameras”, 
 
Proc. 
GEOProcessing, 2013, pp. 133-138. 
[2] J. Höhle, “DEM generation using a digital large format frame 
camera”, Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing, 
75:1, 2009, pp. 87-93. 
[3] R. G. Congalton and K. Green, “Assessing the accuracy of 
remotely sensed data”, CRC Press, 183p., 2009, ISBN 978-1-
4200-5512-2. 
[4] T. Hermosilla, L. A. Ruiz, and J. A. Recio, “Land-use 
mapping of Valencia City area from aerial images and LiDAR 
data”, Proc. GEOProcessing, 2012, pp. 232-237.  
[5] X. Meng, N., Currit, L. Wang, and X. Yang, “Detect 
residential buildings from lidar and aerial photographs 
through 
object-oriented 
land-use 
classification”, 
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, vol. 78, 
no. 1, 2012, pp. 35-44. 
[6] T. Novack, T. Esch, H. Kux, and U. Stilla, "Machine learning 
comparison 
between 
WorldView-2 
and 
QuickBird-2-
simulated imagery regarding object-based urban land cover 
classification", Remote Sensing, vol. 3, no. 10, 2011, pp. 
2263-2282. 
[7] N. Wolf, “Object features for pixel-based classification of 
urban 
areas 
comparing 
different 
machine 
learning 
algorithms”, 
Photogrammetrie, 
Fernerkundung, 
Geoinformation, 2013, no 3, pp. 149-161. 
[8]  N. Champion, “Detection of unregistered buildings for 
updating 2D databases,” EuroSDR Official Publication, no. 
56, 2009, pp. 7-54. 
[9] L. Elmansouri, “Object-based approach and tree-based 
ensemble classifications for mapping building changes”, Proc. 
GEOProcessing, 2013, pp. 54-59. 
[10]  L. Halounova, K. Veprek, and M. Rehak, “Geographic 
information systems models of 40-year spatial development of 
towns in the Czech Republic”,  Proc. GEOProcessing, 2011, 
pp. 75-80.  

282
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[11]  M. Gruber, M. Ponticelli, R. Ladstädter, and A. Wiechert, 
“UltraCam 
Eagle, 
details 
and 
insight”, 
Int. 
Arch. 
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., XXXIX-B1, 
2012, pp.15-19.  
[12]  K. Jacobsen and K. Neumann, “Property of the large-format 
digital aerial camera DMC II”, Int. Arch. Photogramm. 
Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., XXXIX-B1, 2012, pp. 21-25. 
[13]  R. Wagner, “The Leica RCD30 medium-format camera: 
imaging revolution”, Proc. Photogrammetric Week ’11, 
Wichmann Verlag, 2011, pp. 89-95. 
[14]  R Development Core Team, “R: A language and environment 
for statistical computing”, R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2013, ISBN 3-900051-07-0, 
http://www.r-project.org/ (accessed 10.11.2013). 
[15]  N.Haala, H. Hastedt, K. Wolff, C. Ressl, and S. Baltrusch, 
“Digital photogrammetric camera evaluation – generation of 
digital elevation models”, Photogrammetrie, Fernerkundung, 
Geoinformation, 2010, no.2, pp. 99-115. 
[16]  H. Hirschmüller, M. Buder, and I. Ernst, “Memory efficient 
semi-global 
matching”, 
ISPRS 
Annals 
of 
the 
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information 
Sciences, vol. I-3, 2012, pp. 371-376. 
[17]  T. Heuchel, “Trimble Match-T DSM“, Proc. of the EuroSDR 
workshop on 'High Density Image Matching for DSM 
Computation', EuroSDR publication nr. 61, 2012, 39 p.  
[18]  T. Lumley, "Survey: analysis of complex survey samples". R 
package version 3.28-2, 
http://cran.r-project.org/package=survey  
(accessed 10.11.2013). 
[19]  T. Therneau, B. Atkinson, and B. Ripley, “rpart: Recursive 
partitioning”, R package, version 4.1-1.  
http://cran.r-project.org/package=rpart (accessed10.11.2013). 
[20] E. Glaab, J.M. Garibaldi, and N. Krasnogor, “vrmlgen: An R 
package for 3D data visualization on the Web”, Journal of 
statistic software, 2010, vol. 36, issue 8, pp. 1-18, 
http://www.jstatsoft.org/v36/i08/paper (accessed 10.11.2013). 
[21]  J. Cohen, “A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales”, 
Educational and Psychological Measurement. vol. 20, no. 1, 
1960, pp. 37-40. 
[22] L. D. Brown, T. T. Cai, and A. DasGupta, “Interval 
estimation for a binomial proportion”, Statistical Science 
2001, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 101–133. 
[23] G. A. Young and R. L. Smith, “Essentials of statistical 
inference”, Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[24] S. Dorai-Raj, “binom: Binomial confidence intervals for 
several parameterizations”, R package version 1.0-5, 2009, 
http://cran.r-project.org/package=binom  
(accessed 10.11.2013). 
[25] M. Höhle, “binomSamSize: Confidence intervals and sample 
size determination for a binomial proportion under simple 
random sampling and pooled sampling”, R package version 
0.1-2, 2009.  
http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/binomSamSize/ 
(accessed 10.11.2013). 
[26] J. N. K. Rao and A. J. Scott, “On chi-squared tests for 
multiway contingency tables with cell proportions estimated 
from survey data”, The Annals of Statistics, vol. 12, no.1, 
1984, pp. 46-60. 
[27] J. Landis and G. Koch, “The measurement of observer 
agreement for categorical data”, Biometrics, vol. 33, 1977, pp. 
159-174. 
[28] S. V. Stehman, “Estimating the kappa coefficient and its 
variance under stratified random sampling”, Photogrammetric 
Engineering & Remote Sensing, vol. 62, no. 4, 1996, pp. 401-
407. 
[29] C-E. Särndal, B. Swensson, and J. Wretman, “Model assisted 
survey sampling”, Springer, 1992. 
[30] G. M. Foody, “Sample size determination for image 
classification 
accuracy 
assessment 
and 
comparison”, 
International Journal of Remote Sensing, 2009, vol. 30, no. 
20, pp. 5273-5291. 
[31] T. Heuchel, A. Köstli, C. Lemaire, and D. Wild, “Towards a 
next level of quality DSM/DTM extraction with Match-T”, 
Proc. Photogrammetric Week ’11, Wichmann Verlag, 2011, 
pp. 197-202. 
[32]  ASRC, 
“LEOWorks, 
version 
4.0,” 
2011. 
http://leoworks.asrc.ro (accessed 10.11.2013)  
[33] QGIS, “User Guide of Quantum GIS program, version 1.8.0”, 
2013, 216 p.,  
http://download.osgeo.org/qgis/doc/manual/qgis-
1.8.0_user_guide_en.pdf (accessed 10.11.2013). 
[34] L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J Stone, 
“Classification and regression trees”, Wadsworth, 1984. 
[35] A. Peters and T. Hothorn, “ipred: Improved predictors”, R 
package version 0.9-1, http://cran.r-project.org/package=ipred 
(accessed 10.11.2013). 
[36] C. Hung, L. S. Davis, and J. R. G. Townshand, “An 
assessment of support vector machines for land cover 
classification”, International Journal of Remote Sensing, 
2002, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 725–749.  

