304
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
EMSoD — A Conceptual Social Framework that Delivers
KM Values to Corporate Organizations
Christopher Adetunji, Leslie Carr
Web Science Institute
School of Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton
Southampton, England
Email: {ca6g14, lac}@soton.ac.uk
Abstract—As social software is becoming increasingly disruptive
to organizational structures and processes, Knowledge Manage-
ment (KM) initiatives that have hitherto taken the form of a
‘knowledge repository’ now need redeﬁning. With the emergence
of Social Media (SM) platforms like Twitter, the hierarchical
boundaries within the organization are broken down and a lateral
ﬂow of information is created. This has created a peculiar kind
of tension between KM and SM, in which one is perceived as
threatening the continued relevance of the other. Particularly,
with the advances of social media and social software, KM is more
in need of delivering measurable value to corporate organizations,
if it is to remain relevant in the strategic planning and positioning
of organizations. In view of this, this paper presents EMSoD
— Enterprise Mobility and Social Data — a conceptual social
framework which mediates between KM and SM to deliver
actionable knowledge and employee engagement. Meanwhile, given
that the main objective of this research is in the delivery of
KM value to corporate organizations, this paper devises some
mechanisms for measuring actionable knowledge and employee
engagement, both as parameters of KM value.
Keywords—social-media;
tacit-knowledge;
actionable-
knowledge;
twitter;
SMEs;
employee-engagement;
enterprise-
mobility; social-network-analysis; folksonomy.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Social media have become viable sources of data from
which corporate organizations can discover knowledge and
insights for their strategic competitive advantage. In [1], a
case of a medium-sized enterprise that lacks a signiﬁcant
social media presence, is explored with regards to how public
Twitter data is exploited to discover actionable knowledge
that propels the enterprise’s strategic competitive advantage.
The work utilises text analysis techniques to make sense of
the unstructured social media data harvested through Twitter’s
Streaming API.
The work in [1] is a cascading of our original research
exploring the question of how social media platforms like
Twitter can deliver Knowledge Management (KM) values to
corporate organizations. As a form of social machinery that
facilitates human interaction on the Web, social media enable
people to create new knowledge by sharing and synthesizing
knowledge from various sources [2]. Using this social infras-
tructure as leverage for corporate knowledge management is
the main objective of the framework presented in this paper.
In this paper, we discuss our motivation for exploring
the question of how social media platforms like Twitter can
deliver KM values to corporate organizations. We present
the Enterprise Mobility and Social [media] Data (EMSoD)
framework, our proposed conceptual social framework, with
KM value at its core. We provide an overview of our previous
work that culminates in an important measure of KM value
— actionable knowledge — upon which a signiﬁcant business
decision is made by a case study organization. This is un-
derpinned by the fact that the real essence of knowledge is its
actionability, especially when it contributes to the advancement
of a proposed undertaking [3]. Measuring the value of such
contributions has been one of the main issues of disagreement
in Knowledge Management, which is why we devised a
mechanism for measuring the KM value which our framework
helps in delivering to corporate organizations.
Moreover, our framework identiﬁes another important mea-
sure of KM values, which is employee engagement. Included
in this paper therefore, is a report on a social network analysis
of @unisouthampton, the Twitter handle for the University of
Southampton, with the aim of examining the impact of the
structure of the network on employee engagement.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sections II
and III provide some background to this study, with the aim of
setting out the research motivation for our framework. Section
IV presents the EMSoD social framework, describes its basic
elements and discusses the central position of Knowledge
Management Value (KMV) as the cynosure around which other
basic components of the framework revolves, as well as its
(KM value) measurement. In Section V we re-present our
previous work on knowledge discovery that culminates in ac-
tionable knowledge as a measure of KM value. Also included
in this section are further insights from recent data on the same
subject. Sections VI and VII discuss actionable knowledge and
employee engagement as a measures of KM value, respectively,
with their measurement mechanisms. Section VIII concludes
the paper with recommendation for corporate organizations and
discusses indications for future work.
II.
BACKGROUND AND RESEARCH MOTIVATION
KM within organizations has traditionally been through a
top-down, process approach [4, p.7][5] which precludes em-
ployees from collaborating and/or participating in the process
of creating and sharing valuable knowledge that are relevant
for the organizations competitive advantage. In making KM a
part of everyone’s job [6, p.107], the top-down approach to KM
is being broken down by current and emerging Web technolo-
gies like microblogs (e.g., Twitter), social media/networking
(e.g., YouTube/Facebook), and multimedia chat platforms (e.g.,

305
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Skype) [7]. These are pervasive technologies, and are most
profound in their capabilities to, in the words of Mark Weiser
of Xerox Lab in [8], weave themselves into the fabrics of
everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it, thanks
to the ubiquity (and consumerization) of mobile devices like
tablets and smartphones.
In recent times, these devices have woven themselves
around us in so much so that employees are compulsively using
them to keep in touch with friends and families even while at
work. Many organizations have therefore, already subscribed
to the theory and practice of enterprise mobility on the
grounds that, allowing employees to access corporate systems
and data over these devices (BYOD) enhances productivity
while also helping to maintain work and life balances [9].
It also enhances knowledge sharing within the organization
in its capacity for fostering discussions over documents and
thereby enabling organizations to build social environment or
communities of practice necessary for facilitating the sharing
of tacit knowledge [10] [6, p.26].
Tacit knowledge is usually in the domain of subjective,
cognitive and experiential learning; it is highly personal and
difﬁcult to formalise [11, p.478], which is why Polanyi [12]
classiﬁes it as one class of knowledge for which we cannot
tell as much as we know. How then do we capture and/or
engineer this tacit knowledge being inadvertently generated
by employees in the enterprise mobility and social media
space? This paper answers this question from a big social
data perspective, drawing insights from the literature, using a
conceptual social framework - EMSoD. Moreover, a vision of
a knowledge social machine is encapsulated in this framework,
which leverages the ﬂow of tacit knowledge on existing social
interactions within the boundary of the organization as deﬁned
by its enterprise mobility strategies. This social machine has
the organizations workforce as its user base, using their own
devices (BYOD) or using the company-owned devices that
have been personally enabled for them (COPE). The social
machine produces company-relevant insights and knowledge
as output, taking its input from a combination of internal
data (enterprise social media, transactional data, system/web
logs, etc.) and open/public data, together with the active
participation of the employees in the process of knowledge
management, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Meanwhile, the traditional top-down approach to KM men-
tioned earlier has also resulted in KM becoming a lacklustre
concept, considering the perceived lack of maturity and the
general state of apathy in the ﬁeld, as evidenced in a recent
Knowledge Management Observatory survey referenced in
[13] and the 2015 follow up of same report [14]. More so,
there is hardly any sector in which organizations have not
embarked on a Knowledge Management program or project to
improve on their organization practice; research has shown that
knowledge-oriented management has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
performance, in spite of the image problem suffered by KM
due to its overselling by vendors and consultants in the 1990s
[15].
To shake off this image problem and to douse the per-
ceived tension between KM and social media [16], participants
in a recent massive survey into the future of KM by the
Global Knowledge Research Network (GKRN - Network of
Researchers sharing an interest in undertaking joint research
Figure 1: Tacit Knowledge Flow
on knowledge management) published in [15], regard social
software as an advancement of the KM ﬁeld. The research sug-
gestion in this regard, places clear emphasis on the economic,
organizational and human context factors related to the use and
implementation of this new social software technologies. This
organizational and human context factor is what culminates in
the concept of Enterprise Social Networking, fondly referred
to as Enterprise 2.0 - another concept made possible by the
advances in social media . Although, some of the proponents of
Knowledge Management were initially hostile towards the new
concept of Enterprise 2.0 as propagated by [17], describing
it as a new wine in an old bottle, Davenport’s [18] earlier
comment in a HBR (Harvard Business Review) blog post is
worth noting:
“If E2.0 can give KM a mid-life kicker, so much
the better. If a new set of technologies can bring
about a knowledge-sharing culture, more power to
them. Knowledge Management was getting a little
tired anyway.”
These new sets of technologies that can bring about a
knowledge sharing culture has been found in social media and
their social networking capabilities, as enabled and popularised
by the consumerization of mobile devices. KM can therefore,
be repositioned within these innovative technological trends of
enterprise mobility and social media analytics, which can be
exploited for rejuvenating the concept and practice of KM, in
consonance with Delic and Riley’s [19] assertion that,
“The ﬁeld of knowledge management, having passed
several hypes and disappointments, has yet another
chance of reappearing in totally new technological
and social circumstances.”
The overarching issue recognised in the GKRN research
mentioned above is the challenge for KM in being able to
deliver measurable value for businesses. The conceptual social
framework (see Figure 3) presented in this paper places the
value proposition of KM at the centre of organizational knowl-
edge management processes. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst framework of its kind that seeks to use the

306
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
convergence of enterprise mobility and social (media) data as
leverage for corporate knowledge management in such a way
that corporate organizations can derive KM value from the
synergy. Meanwhile, we did not arrive at this framework on
the ﬂy. The core elements of the framework have emanated
from a rigorous review of relevant literature, the process of
which is described in Section III.
III.
THE MAKING OF THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
With regards to the image problem suffered by KM in
the 1990s [15], there has been an increasing effort by KM
consultants and academics, since the 2000s, to explore how
the growing trends of enterprise mobility — as manifest in the
surge in mobile devices and applications — can be exploited
for corporate Knowledge Management. This is evident in
Knowledge Management literature, which abounds with issues
and concerns about Enterprise Mobility.
Figure 2: A Word Cloud for Mobilization from the Literature
For this research, about 160 KM literature materials pub-
lished between 2004 and 2016 were examined. These include
books, book sections, conference papers, journal articles, re-
ports, thesis and web pages. The term, ‘mobilization’ — with
variants of mobile, mobility, mobilize — is topmost in the list
of Top 50 most frequently used words in these KM literature
(see Figure 2).
IV.
EMSOD — THE CONCEPTUAL SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
Enterprise Mobility and Social [media] Data (EMSoD) is
a conceptual social framework that exploits the convergence
of enterprise mobility and social media data as leverage for
corporate Knowledge Management. The proposed framework
is presented cyclically in Figure 3 to emphasize the inter-
dependence of its ﬁve core elements — Managed Platform,
Social Media, Knowledge Discovery, Tacit Knowledge and,
KM Values. The cyclical illustration of the framework also
emphasizes that changing one element has an impact on other
elements and on the capability for the framework to deliver the
intended KM value at its core. Each of the ﬁve core elements
are examined in this section.
A. Managed Platform
This framework supports the vision of a knowledge social
machine, which serves as a leverage for the ﬂow and conver-
sion of tacit knowledge, on existing social interactions within
the boundary of the organization, as deﬁned by its enterprise
mobility strategies. This social machine has the organizations
workforce as its user base, using their own devices (BYOD
- Bring Your Own Devices) or using the Company-Owned
devices that have been Personally-Enabled for them (COPE).
With BYOD for example, the choice of the brand, functionality
and installed apps are entirely that of the employee and, when
these devices are allowed to be used in accessing the corporate
data from anywhere the employee may be located, it exposes
the organization to the risk of compromise of the privacy and
security of its corporate data. Also, because there are as many
different devices as there are employees, the organization is
faced with the challenge of how to integrate these disparate
devices into a platform for ease of support and interoperability.
To mitigate against these constraints of privacy, security and
interoperability, there is need for the organization’s enterprise
mobility strategy and social media data to be contained within
a managed platform.
Enterprise Mobility Strategies
“Given the plethora of devices, operating systems,
solution providers and overall mobility commoditi-
zation, how will technology leaders meet their em-
ployees needs and offer mobile access to corporate
system, data and information they crave, in order
to maximise the potential for productivity and the
competitive advantage that follows?”
The above quote is from Mihaela Biti, the Programme
Director of Enterprise Mobility Exchange, in her Foreward on
the Global State of Enterprise Mobility [20] as reported by the
company, following a global survey. The report shows that the
bulk of the respondents are IT, Mobility and Technology work-
ers, an industry where mobility is already widely embraced.
Also, about 30.1% of the respondents have their operations
globally, which presupposes they would have to mobilize any-
way. Nonetheless, the mobility agenda for these enterprises are
largely for automation aimed at operational performances and
not for the facilitation of social interactions among employees.
For example, when UPS successfully introduced the handheld
Delivery Information Acquisition mobile Device (DIAD) for
their drivers in 1991 [21], the question arose as to whether the
next move was for customers to be able to quickly look and
see real-time location of their driver and contact them directly.
An answer to this question is FEDEX Mobile Solutions which
allows customers to conveniently track their shipments, ﬁnd the
nearest FedEx station or drop-box, etc. An enterprise mobility
strategy that is geared towards simple automation with mobile
devices is good for enhancing operational efﬁciency of an
enterprise. Of course, this is a source of competitive advantage,
but only up to the point where they are unique to the company
and as such, cannot easily be replicated (e.g., the Walmart
Satelite investment [22]).
However, the consumerization of mobile devices has meant
that the competitive advantage that a company derives, if any,
from automation or implementation of mobile solutions will
soon erode when competitors have adopted the same or similar
solutions. In essence, a true competitive advantage is attainable
when businesses and organizations proceed to the second - and
third - order of organizational change, which are to informate
and transform as highlighted in [23].
Therefore, the focus of this research is on mobile appli-
cations and devices that facilitate social interaction among

307
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3: EMSoD - A Conceptual Social Framework for Corporate Knowledge Management
employees from which organizational knowledge could be
gained. Such mobile devices as smart phones and tablets as
well as the mobile applications like social media that they
enable, which are in turn, enablers of social interaction within
the organization.
KM based on the management and facilitation of these
social interactions is potentially able to propel organization
to strategic competitive advantage, especially in this era of
knowledge economy where social media is playing a crucial
role.
Technically, custom-made mobile devices for single ap-
plications like those used in the FEDEX and UPS examples
can not be integrated with social interaction as the limitation
of their design and capabilities precludes this. Therefore,
employees cannot be expected to bring their own (BYOD),
neither could they be expected to choose (CYOD) or personally
enable (COPE) their own devices. Nonetheless, the newer tech-
nological trends of smart phones are already been used for the
same functions, which means, delivery drivers can track and
manage their delivery on their smart phones while also using
the smart phones to interact with their colleagues on social
media. They can, for example, tweet their locations or ask
for direction and get immediate response from colleagues. On
the same smart phone, they could make/receive calls to/from
friends, family or colleagues or even interact with friends and
family through social media on the smart phones. These are
healthy for work life balances which results in a satisﬁed work
force that is motivated to engage in social interaction and
as such, knowledge sharing. This is altogether a function of
the ﬂexibility of the enterprise mobility management strategy
adopted by the organization. If the organization’s mobility
strategy is aimed only at operational efﬁciency without the
facilitation of social interaction, then the organization may
not be able to reap the beneﬁts in employee insights and
knowledge for its strategic competitive advantage.
B. Tacit Knowledge
Inherent in humans is a tacit power by which all knowledge
is discovered, and this propels an active shaping of experience
performed in the pursuit of knowledge [12]. Our framework
places more emphasis on the externalization of tacit knowl-
edge, which, we believe, has become the dominant element of
the widely known Nonaka’s model of knowledge conversion
(see Figure 4). This is due to the impact of the current trends
of mobile devices and social media which allow an uninhibited
externalization of thoughts even at the spur of the moment [10]
except where the inhibiting factor is the individual motivation.
1) ‘Externalization’ Driven by Individual Motivation
The distinction between data and information is a given,
from Computer Science and Information Systems perspec-
tives. However, Information is often used interchangeably with
Knowledge, albeit erroneously. [24] have gone a step further in
attempting to create an understanding of data and information
as necessary tools [or resources] for knowledge, discarding the
notion that knowledge is data or information. [25, pp. 170-
172], [26] and [27] all agree on a DIKW pyramid, which
describes the conﬁguration of data, information, knowledge
and wisdom while [28] attempts to highlight the important
differences between Knowledge Management and Information
Management. It is because of the explicit nature of information
that it has often been used interchangeably with knowledge
whereas, explicit knowledge is only one side of the coin to
knowledge. The other side of the coin is tacit knowledge,
which people have in their minds and are not represented in an
explicit way [29] because it is highly personal and difﬁcult to

308
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
formalise [5, 478]. One distinguishing factor between Knowl-
edge and Information is in the disposition of tacit knowledge
through its conversion to explicit knowledge (externalization)
on the one hand, and the exchange of explicitly codiﬁed
Knowledge on the other.
However,
unlike
the
spiralling
movement
of
tacit
knowledge as described by the SECI model of [30] (see
Figure 4), this framework considers the horizontal ﬂow of
tacit knowledge between individuals within an organization.
This ﬂow consists in each individuals ‘externalizing’ their
views, opinions, sentiments and know-hows, at the spur of the
moment [10], as enabled by the affordances of social media
and mobile devices like smart phones and are supported by the
current social interactions that exist within the organization.
Having established engagement as a measurable value for
organizations, the measurement of engagement is hinged upon
the analysis of the social network that serves as the platform
for the social interactions that exist within the organization.
The thesis in this work is in the potential for a vast amount
of data being generated by this social interaction, and from
which actionable knowledge of value for the organization can
be discovered.
2) Subsumption of SECI Model
[31] categorises KM processes into knowledge learning and
developing phases. The main task in the knowledge learning
phase is to learn new knowledge and increase employees’
tacit knowledge from other tacit knowledge (socialization)
or explicit knowledge (internalization). The main task in the
knowledge developing phase is to develop new knowledge by
transforming tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge (exter-
nalization) or by combining explicit knowledge with other ex-
plicit knowledge (Combination). In as much as tacit knowledge
remains the conduit that connects both phases, the main thrust
of this framework is to determine how the KM process can add
value to organizations by enhancing tacit to explicit knowledge
conversion within the construct of new technological trends
of social media and enterprise mobility. This implies that
this study is mostly concerned with the impact of the new
technological trends of social media and enterprise mobility
in supporting the “externalization” pane of SECI model. We
believe that this is the ﬁrst framework that subsumes an aspect
of the SECI model into current technological circumstances.
By the same token, this is the very ﬁrst attempt at positioning
an engaged workforce as the nucleus of an organizational
knowledge creation process.
Moreover,
[32]
argues
that
socialization
results
in
what he calls organization defensive routines with which
most individual employees behave consistently even as the
individuals move in and out of the organization. He concludes
therefore that because the actions used to create or to
trigger organizational defensive routines are used by most
people, their use cannot be attributed primarily to individual
psychological anxiety. In as much as knowledge conversion
occurs when individual employees cooperate voluntarily in
the process based on their own intrinsic motivation [33], the
organizational culture would determine how this cooperation
would
engender
positive
knowledge
sharing
experience
[34]. In supporting the externalization and combination
Figure 4: Nonaka’s Model of Knowledge Conversion [30]
stages of SECI model, [29] observes the availability of
knowledge acquisition methodologies for expert systems,
discussion support systems or groupware in stimulating
people’s interaction. “However, these methods do not support
the people’s real-time discussion for knowledge acquisition”,
notes [29]. Mobile devices and social media trends enhance
real-time discussion and as such require a new methodology
in enabling them to support knowledge acquisition.
3) KM Process within New Trends
The tacit knowledge that exists within the socialization
pane of SECI model cannot be converted to explicit knowledge
if it existed solely at this pane, and therefore would not be
usable except in an apprenticeship or a mentoring situation
[31]. As mentioned above, the main thrust of the EMSoD
framework is in how social media and enterprise mobility
support employees in externalizing their tacit knowledge in
such a way that shared knowledge is created through a
combination of the explicit knowledge thus created with other
explicit knowledge.
This framework subsumes the entire SECI model into the
externalization of individuals’ tacit knowledge which is en-
hanced by the Enterprise Mobility strategies of the organization
coupled with the freedom of spontaneous expression offered
by social media [10]. Social media tools like blogs and wikis,
in addition to platforms like Twitter and Facebook, constitute
the new technological trends with which KM must contend
and subsist if it were to remain relevant [16, 17, 35, 36], ditto
the perceived tension between KM and Social Media [4].
It is worth noting that existing methodologies in Computer
Science do not sufﬁciently support the SECI model of knowl-
edge conversion [29], especially in this new era in which IT
has revolutionized the world [34]. Therefore, this framework is
all about repositioning KM in a way that it delivers measurable
value to organizations within these new trends.
C. Social Media
Social media are the collection of adaptable, scalable Web-
based tools and technologies that facilitate the creation and
sharing of user-generated contents [37, 38]. [39] describe them
as “ browser or mobile-based applications that allow users to

309
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
easily create, edit, access and link to content and/or to other
individuals.”. “Perhaps the best deﬁnition of social media,
though, is content that has been created by its audience”, posits
[40]. They include blogs, wikis and other social networking
platforms like Facebook and Twitter [7, 16, 17, 35, 36],
collaborative platforms like Myspace,Wikipedia, Ushahidi and
Galaxy Zoo [2, 41]. Although, their origin can be traced back
to the era of “weblog” which coincided with the creation of
“Open Diary” which brought together online diary writers into
one community in the sixties, they have become a popular
trend that should be of interest to any company today [41].
Wikis are good for preserving the organization’s memory while
social networks like Facebook and micro-blogs like Twitter are
helpful in expertise identiﬁcation and location within the orga-
nization [42]. When it comes to including customer insight in
an organization’s social media strategies as suggested by [10],
forums and message boards are probably the most common
platform for questions and answers about products and brands
[43], and can as well be included as a constituent source of
external (public) social media that serve as external data source
to the social data within the organization’s managed platform.
1) Social Interactions on Social Media
Despite the media richness and “lifelike immersive world”
that some social media platforms like Second Life provides,
interactions on social media still cannot be as effective as
face-to-face interactions [16], which has traditionally been the
means of knowledge creation and transfer [44, pp. 7]. In fact,
there has been a number of criticism with regards to the
authenticity of the interaction and communication exchange
over social media. One example pit forward by [45] is the story
of a daughter who attempted suicide while in an actual state
of distress whereas, she was at the same time using smiling
emoticons and positive expressions to communicate a state of
happiness to her mother. Perhaps this is why [46] believes
that social media allows “individuals to put on masks and
hold up shields”. Yet the common denominator between all the
Web-based social media tools and platforms is their ability to
facilitate social interactions and conversations between people
[17, 37, 39, 47, 48]. Moreover, it is not unusual for this online
social interactions to extend even to face-face interaction, as
it is found in [37] where an Informant comments that:
“ ...A lot of these people I have engaged in an
online fashion have become part of our ofﬂine social
functions and I formed real relationships with many.
Hundreds of people: my network exploded it grew
exponentially and it’s through Twitter. It’s through
connecting with people. They ﬁnd me. They reach
out to me or I ﬁnd them. I reach out to them. And
we engage in ongoing conversations online, meeting
up sometimes ofﬂine. These are real relationships.”
.
In understanding the nature of social interaction on social
media, [48] have aptly and succinctly provided some opera-
tional deﬁnitions of the following terms, which are reproduced
here, with kind permission from the publishers (Emerald
Insights):
1)
Sociability
The ability to interact with others, or to socialize...
Websites
use
features,
design
standards
or
technologies to encourage sociability. For example,
an online dating website uses proﬁles to encourage
users to interact with other users. Or, a blog with
user comments allows readers to respond to a topic
and socialize with both the author and other readers.
2)
Social network theory
An interdisciplinary theoretical lens that emphasizes
the relationships between actors (or users) within the
network. The structure of the network is understood
to be more important than the individual users...
Social network theory, also called social network
analysis (SNA), examines how the structure of a
network affects users within the network.
3)
Social networking sites
Websites that encourage social interaction through
proﬁle-based
user
accounts.
Social
networking
sites are commonly deﬁned as Web 2.0..., meaning
they mimic desktop applications. Popular social
networking sites include Facebook and MySpace.
4)
Social websites
Websites and web technologies that promote social-
ization online. This term encompasses social net-
working sites as well as more traditional social
web technologies including bulletin boards, message
boards or web-based chat rooms. This will be the
primary term used in this paper to describe social
networking websites.
2) Folksonomy
Folksonomy is a term coined [49] as a linguistic contraction
of folk, which informally refers to “people in general”; and tax-
onomy, which, as a formal system of structured classiﬁcation
of things and concepts, arose as a solution to the paramount
problem in information management and retrieval: lack of
organization [50]. Folksonomy is a practice in which individual
users save/deﬁne Web contents as bookmarks/keyword in a
social environment by attaching annotations in form of tags
[51].
While taxonomy is a structured, top-down tagging system
which the organization or a content creator imposed on the
content for ease of retrieval and organization, folksonomy is
an informal bottom-up approach to tagging where the user
assigns tags to contents depending on the system. These tags
are often used to create aggregated informal classiﬁcations (or,
folksonomy), and as a navigational/discovery method.
3) Social Network Analysis
“A social network is a social structure comprised of types
of interdependency between nodes. Nodes are most commonly
individuals or organizations. The conﬁguration of individual
nodes into a larger web of interdependency creates a social
network”, explained [48], who also identify the two major
types of interaction that exists within the social Web as:
1)
People focused, which emphasizes social interaction
through user-driven personal content centred around

310
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a personal individual proﬁle (e.g., Facebook, Twitter).
2)
Activity focused, which emphasizes social interac-
tion through site-speciﬁc content centred around a
thematic focus for a website with users providing
their own contributions to that speciﬁc theme (e.g.,
Youtube and Flickr for video and photo themes,
respectively).
According to the authors [48], this analysis of the social
web examines people focused websites and their strategies to
encourage sociability. It also entails studying the structure of
the connections and relationships within a social network like
Twitter with regards to the further depths and insights they
provide towards the pieces of knowledge discovered from the
network as suggested in [1].
D. Knowledge Discovery
Frawley et al. [52] describe knowledge discovery as a
nontrivial extraction of implicit, previously unknown, and
potentially useful information from data. The word, ’nontriv-
ial’ in the deﬁnition implies that a signiﬁcant organizational
effort must come to bear on a knowledge discovery initiative.
Knowledge discovery has been a cause of signiﬁcant concern
for corporate organizations since the 1980s when the total
number of databases in the world was an estimated ﬁve million
[52]. Nowadays, with the proliferation of mobile devices and
the social interactions enabled by them, there has been an
exponential increase in the amount of data being produced
— an amount that dwarfs the ﬁgure mentioned above.
As a result, corporate organizations are increasingly explor-
ing and exploiting insights from the big (social) data being
generated, for their competitive advantage [1]. Not only is
there a need for organizations to focus on knowledge discovery
from their private/corporate data, there are potential knowledge
and insights to be gained from public social data as this
would help organizations know their industry trends, know
their environments and know their customers better [10].
Therefore, knowledge discovery efforts must be geared
towards
exploring
and
exploiting
both
public
and
pri-
vate/corporate data, using big (social) data analytics techniques
E. KM Value
A couple of decades ago, “discounted cash ﬂow value”
may have been the best measure of value creation available
[53]. Recently however, organizations have not only been
regarding value in terms of the Returns on Investments, but
they have also been giving considerations to intangible as-
sets like organizational knowledge, patent and trademarks as
measure of an organization’s true value [54]. These indirect
assets, according to [54], include employee morale, customer
satisfaction and innovation; and, they are poised to “transform
the nature of business transactions by establishing the real
value of enterprises for all stakeholders”.
Knowledge Managers and/or CIOs have often struggled
to justify IT expenditure, especially, since when IT has been
viewed from a cost centre perspective. This has often resulted
in intangible ﬁeld of practice like KM taking the hits from
budget cuts as a result of a lack of measurable value [55].
However, since each process of Nonaka’s SECI model (from
socialization through internalization), “is positively associated
with perceived knowledge satisfaction”, [56] argue that organi-
zations should focus more on perceived knowledge satisfaction
rather than an objective measure of knowledge effectiveness.
This is corroborated by “the Microsoft and Netscapes of the
world...” which, according to [54, p. 6], show that, “even
without a common yardstick for measuring Intellectual Capital,
the recognition of its presence by informed observers will
establish a value for a ﬁrm that dwarfs its balance sheet”.
Moreover, with regards to value being deﬁned as outcomes
relative to cost, cost reduction without regard to the outcome
achieved is dangerous and self-defeating, according to [57],
who concludes that, outcomes, which are the numerator of the
value equation, are inherently condition-speciﬁc and multidi-
mensional. This position is strengthened by the NAO’s deﬁ-
nition of Value for Money (VFM): “Good value for money is
the optimal use of resources to achieve the intended outcomes”
[58]. What are these intended outcomes by which KM value
can be measured and how can social media (the resources)
be optimally used to achieve them? These are some of the
issues encapsulated in the motivation for this research and the
question this paper attempts to answer.
Based on the above premises, this paper identiﬁes two
intended outcomes from which knowledge satisfaction can be
perceived, and by which we assert our measure of KM value
to organizations: (i) the generation of actionable knowledge
and, (ii) the facilitation of employee engagement.
Although many organizations have turned to storytelling
and anecdotal success stories to show the value of their KM
investments, there is an increasing need for businesses to show
the business value of KM in terms of normalised quantitative
measures in developing a case for Return on Investments
[59]. This is what business managers and accountants, whose
perception of realities is largely in terms of numbers, are
looking for when they criticise KM for a want of measurable
values. The EMSoD social framework proposed in this paper
does not only deliver the KM value but also proffers solution
for the measurement.
Meanwhile, “Metrics fulﬁl the fundamental activities of
measuring (evaluating how we are doing), educating (since
what we measure is what is important; what we measure
indicates how we intend to deliver value to our customers),
and directing (potential problems are ﬂagged by the size of
the gaps between the metrics and the standard)” [60]. It is
worth noting that the topic of metrics is viewed differently
from both Management and Academics, as Melnyk and others
[60] observe:
“The academic is more concerned with the validity
and generalisability beyond the original context, of
the results from such measurements that are deﬁned,
adapted and validated in addressing speciﬁc research
questions. The manager, on the other hand, is more
than willing to use a beﬁtting measure if it can
quickly provide useful information.”
In view of this, we devised a simple measurement mecha-
nism which, we believe, satisﬁes both academic and manage-
ment concerns. This is denoted by the formula:
KMV = AK ×EW
(1)

311
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
where
KMV = KM Value,
AK = Actionable Knowledge
EW = Engaged Work force.
Having laid out the EMSoD Framework, the next section
proceeds with an overview of our work on Knowledge Dis-
covery from Social Media Data... [1], with some additional
insights that strengthen the work. This, we hope, would help
the reader in making the connection between the background
and our strong cases for actionable knowledge and employee
engagement as measures of KM value, and the practical
application of the above Formula (1) in measuring the value
derived from KM through the EMSoD framework.
V.
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY FROM SOCIAL MEDIA DATA
In [1], we demonstrate the discovery of actionable knowl-
edge from social media data with a case of Twitter data for
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). This is not only
because SMEs are drivers of sustainable economic develop-
ment [61], but also because their role within an Economy is
so crucial that even the World Bank commits hugely to the
development of the sector as a signiﬁcant part of its efforts in
promoting employment and economic growth [62].
Liaise Loddon is a medium-sized enterprise with about 220
employees, providing residential social care for adults with
autism and learning disabilities in Hampshire, United King-
dom. As typical in this sector, operational procedures result
in an enormous amount of documentation arising from daily
diaries, incident/activity reports and several other reporting in
compliance with regulatory requirements, analytical purposes
and decision making. Although the company has recently
deployed an enterprise mobility suite of mobile devices and
applications to replace the existing paper-based documentation
system, the research experiment explores how this enterprise
mobility agenda could be hardened with knowledge sharing
and knowledge extraction from the mass of social data freely
available on Twitter, for example, in such a way as it supports
the organization at the second level of organizational change.
This highlights the people dimension of a socio-technical
system [23, p.35-38].
As such, a total of 149,501 tweets based on categorical
keyword, autism, is harvested from Twitter streaming API.
Using textual analysis technique, extraneous elements are
ﬁltered out in order to reduce the data, as it is in data mining
where one solution to the challenges of handling vast volumes
of data is to reduce the data for mining [63]. We narrowed
the investigation down to only the tweets emanating from the
United Kingdom and in English language, out of which we
discovered 1473 tweets containing meaningful contents within
our research context. The contents, as categorised in Table I,
are outlined in Subsection V-A below.
A. An Outline of Knowledge Contents from the Case Data
Despite the data collection being based on domain-speciﬁc
keywords of interest to the paper’s case study, the research is
an exploratory study in which there was not a preconceived
idea of the insights/knowledge inherent in the data. Out of
Table I: CONTENT CLASSIFICATION OF TWEET DATA
Contents
No. of Tweets
(Including RTs)
Impact of Technology on Disability
15
Information Gathering
10
Political Opinions (#votecameronout)
132
Social Welfare Beneﬁts
327
Living with Autism
989
Total Tweets
1473
an enormous amount of data, only a handful may contain
the valuable and actionable knowledge that propels an
organization towards strategic competitive advantage [63,
p.5]. As such, the bulk of the contents as seen in Table I, are
largely re-tweets (RT) of the original messages and so, may
be regarded as extraneous ampliﬁcation of the original tweets.
Therefore, this section describes the categories observed in
the data and the next section follows with a discussion on the
value and actionability of the knowledge so discovered:
1) Impact of Technology on Disability
“RT @BILD tweets: Helping to unlock the secrets of
autism - a project using innovative technology aims to
change how we address autism http:...”
The above tweet provides an insight into a project using
innovative technology to change how we address autism. As
this paper’s case study organization is in the business of autism
support and also currently implementing mobile technologies
to enhance its operational performance, it is worth exploring
this piece of insight further.
Figure 5: Original Tweet with Link to Project on Innovative Technol-
ogy
Although the link to the actual URL of the story about
the project is missing from the tweet, we can easily follow up
with the original source of the tweet, as the above is a RT
(Re-Tweet) of @BILD tweets, which is the Twitter handle
for BILD (British Institute of Learning Disabilities). BILD
actually tweeted that piece of content on the 29th of April,
which is a day before our data capture began, as can be seen in
Figure 5. This explains why the original tweet was not captured
in our twitter streaming data capture of 30th April to 6th May.
From this original tweet, we have been able to extract the URL
link (bit.ly/1JRNhV0) to the story about the project on inno-
vative technology. This is about the National Autism Project,
which “aims to create a more strategic approach to addressing
the challenges of the condition”. This project highlights the
impact of iPads, picture dictionaries and interactive schedules
on the improvements of communication and vocabulary of
autistic people. Strategic competitive advantage requires an
alignment/tagging along with this project. Below are samples
of other tweets related to this content of Technology’s impact

312
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6: Retracted Study Linking Vaccine to Autism
on disability while its pertinence, as an actionable piece of
knowledge, is discussed further in Section VI. Meanwhile, we
have derived further insights from Twitter data, that helps in
strengthening the position of this knowledge item (Impact of
Technology on Disability). This is discussed in Section V-B
“tech reducing the impact of disability - or are the lat-
est gadgets too pricey? Watch @SkyNewsSwipe at 2130
http://t.co/iHtX1spOqQ”
“Technology limits impact of disability but is it affordable?
@TwitterUser GT http://t.co/Az3nJejO32”
2) Information Gathering
Below is the ﬁrst tweet about vaccines causing autism in
this category, which is a request for information.
“@TwitterUser @BBCNewsUS @BBCWorld Please direct
me to this research, the thing about vaccines causing
autism was admitted to be a fraud.”
Just as an enterprise micro-blogging tool could be used
within
the
organizational
social
network,
public
micro-
blogging tools like Twitter provide the platform to quickly seek
information, knowledge and/or ideas from a heterogeneous
audience defying the constraints of space, time and location.
Thus, the above tweet was almost instantly replied to by the
one below:
“@TwitterUser Here’s the original study that said that
vaccines cause autism, from a respected, peer-reviewed
journal: http://t.co/cmVVKpLQgh”
Even though the original study is from a ‘respected, peer-
reviewed journal’, as claimed by the sender of the above
tweet, we know from the link provided that the publication
of the research has been retracted as shown in Figure 6. The
ability for anyone to search, gather and distribute information
seamlessly in this manner provides an interesting dimension of
social media as “relatively inexpensive and widely accessible
electronic tools that enable anyone to publish and access
information...”[64].
Meanwhile, the following two tweets provide link to further
information that could help drive home the knowledge that the
research study in question has actually been rebuffed:
“RT @TwitterUser: @SB277FF vaccines do not cause
autism. They don’t. But if they did, what would you prefer?
Autism or incurable smallpox/po”
“RT @BILD tweets: There is ‘no link between MMR and
autism’, major study concludes. http://t.co/Re9L8fPfGV
via the @guardian #autism”
In as much as Twitter allows for an almost spontaneous
expression of opinions by anyone, it offers a good platform
for healthy debate on topical issues from which knowledge
could be mined, as exempliﬁed by the question of preference
between autism and incurable smallpox posed by one of the
tweets above.
Moreover, the following tweet with a URL link to
Learning Disability Census is an example in knowledge
discovery (of an ofﬁcial census and regional data on Learning
Disabilities), which when actioned in conjunction with the
enterprise resource planning, could have an impact on the
company’s strategic planning:
“RT
@dmarsden49:
Learning
disability
census
with
regional stats is out. Check http://t.co/Ja3tk7ZRDZ”
3) Political Opinions (#votecameronout)
The role of public opinion cannot be over-emphasized
insofar as it shapes and is shaped by government policies.
A recent and relevant example is the UK tax credits row
[65], which has seen the planned tax credit cuts, at the time
of writing this report, suspended by government because the
scheme proved unpopular to the public and thus defeated
in the House of Commons. Social media, especially Twitter,
provides a means of capturing and measuring the sentiments
and opinions of the electorate.
It is therefore, no coincidence that political opinions that
have been expressed, are included in the Twitter data gathered
over autism and disability keywords:
“#votecameronout Because he wants to get rid of Human
Rights Act which will affect: Maternity Rights; Workers
rights; Disability Rights”
“For the harassment of people struggling on sick &
disability beneﬁts... #VoteCameronOut”
“5 more years of the Tories we will lose Social Care, NHS,
Human Rights, Workers Rights, Unions, Disability support.
#VoteCameronOut”
Using the hashtag #votecameronout in the run up to the UK
General Elections of 2015, the above tweets represent an active
campaign against the then incumbent Tory-led government
in which David Cameron is Prime Minister. It is interesting
to note that the bulk (129) of the political tweets in this
experiment’s Twitter data are a proliferated re-tweets (RT) of
the above 3 original tweets. The correlation between public
sentiments on social media and elections results and/or on gov-
ernment policies, is another growing area of interest in social
media research. In politics meanwhile, it is not uncommon for
opponents to whip up public sentiments by whatever means
possible. Social Welfare issues are quintessentially core, and
often politicised, concerns in the UK. A parallel category of
tweets in this work is that of social welfare beneﬁts, which is
described in the next section. Although this research’s data-set
is based, as stated earlier, on categorical keywords that deﬁne

313
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 7: Public Spending on Beneﬁts in the UK
the business of the case study organization, the inﬁltrated
political opinions cannot be ignored in as much as these are
public opinions that shape political trends which potentially
impacts on businesses in terms of government policies. Akin
to this is the category on social welfare beneﬁts, described in
the next section.
4) Social Welfare Beneﬁts
Social Welfare simply implies the “Well being of the entire
society” [66], which promotes inclusivity for the disabled,
the sick, the elderly/pensioner, the unemployed and even the
low income earners. As this is the hallmark of an egalitarian
society, the UK government renders ﬁnancial assistance to
these categories of people in form of a range of Social
Welfare Beneﬁt payments. Figure 7 provides an insight into
public spending on social welfare beneﬁts in the UK [67].
As indicated in the preceding section, social welfare issues
affect the fabrics of the society and any proposed signiﬁcant
cut in social welfare beneﬁts is a natural invitation for public
dissent. This category of tweets from this work represents
genuine sentiments and opinion of those expressing them,
without political motivations like the preceding category:
“Uproar at thought of @Conservatives cutting child
beneﬁts if elected - I wish there was same media outrage
over disability cuts #GE2015”
“@George Osborne If only I could live until pensionable
age. You‘ve reduced my disability beneﬁt well below living
standards!”
“39 yo woman killed herself after Department Work
and
Pensions
threats
to
cut
off
disability
beneﬁts
http://t.co/TkVQF2UYki...”
Again, the above are a few samples of sentiments and
opinions about Child Beneﬁts and Disability Beneﬁts, which
provide an initial understanding to the unassuming, that
social welfare beneﬁts are not a one-size-ﬁts-all affair but are
multifarious (see Figure 7), with some being exclusively non-
means tested (e.g, Child Beneﬁt). These tweets provide some
insights into public sentiments towards government policies.
Since any of such social welfare beneﬁt cuts would directly
and/or indirectly impact the service users and providers of
social care, it can be inferred that the case study organization
would also share these public sentiments.
5) Living with Autism
Autism is deﬁned as a life-long neurodevelopmental condi-
tion interfering with the person’s ability to communicate and
relate to others [68]. How can this deﬁnition be juxtaposed
with one of the myths surrounding autism [69, item 8] that
autistic people do not interact? This myth is however, dispelled
by the tweet below, which is a re-tweet of an original tweet by
an actual autistic blogger who attempts to use his blog posts
to connect with the general public:
“@matt diangelo
RT?
It
would
be
truly
amazing if u could view my blog about living
with
Autism&amp;OCD.
Would
mean
a
lot-
http://t.co/JCGBBZz8fJ”
This category constitutes the bulk of the Twitter data for
this work as it contains multiple unique re-tweet of the same
tweet — over 900 times (see Table I). This is an indication of
the public interest/curiosity and positive sentiment towards the
subject of autism in general, and towards the autistic blogger
in particular. Despite the National Health Service (NHS)’s
attempts at educating the general public by diffusing some
of the myth surrounding the subject of Autism [70], among
several Autism Awareness initiatives, the story of autism as told
by an autistic person appears to garner more public support
and understanding. Measuring public opinion and sentiments
through social media impact, reach and networks is another
interesting research area in social media research towards
which this work can potentially be extended.
B. Further Insights from Twitter Data
As it has been over one year since we gathered the
data used for our previous study in [1] using the categorical
keyword of autism, we decided to do a quick check on the
current public conversation on the subject. We gathered 6118
tweets mentioning the categorical search keyword of autism
for just one day on the 5th of August, 2016. Of this, 3,290
are original posts by Twitter users, 2828 are a Re-tweets of the
original posts while the rest are replies-to. Although the day
opens with a tweet containing a pleasant human story about
the cure of autism (Figure 8), we found it pleasantly surprising
that some top issues as discovered from our data of over a year
ago, are still currently leading the conversations on the subject,
as shown in Figure 9. Considering (A) and (B) from Figure
9, the following tweet content, as tweeted by the CNN, led
the conversation at different times of the day, with 111 and 93
reactions, respectively:
“How
pokemon
go
helps
kids
with
autism
https://t.co/DZatqTX4sc #PokemonGo”
It is worth recalling that the theme of the impact of tech-
nology on disability, which was the most pertinent knowledge

314
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 8: Tweet about Cure for Autism
item from our previous data, did inform a signiﬁcant corporate
decision by the case study organization, as asserted in [1].
The above tweet on how the new Pokemon Go game helps
autistic kids, is an indication of the fact that the theme of
the impact of technology on disability, dominates the conver-
sations on the subject of autism for the second year running.
Although, not directly related to our actionable knowledge
gains, another issue that gained prominence in our previous
data was the debate over the causal relationship between vac-
cines and autism. The same debate still reappears prominently
in the recent newer data on the subject of autism as shown in
Figure 9 (C). The next section proceeds with a discussion on
actionable knowledge and presents our proposed mechanism
for placing a weighted measurement for KM value.
VI.
ACTIONABLE KNOWLEDGE
Everyone agrees that Knowledge entails true belief [71],
but this is not always the case. Using the man, the job and
the coin analogy, Gettier [72] argues that it is possible for a
person to be justiﬁed in believing a proposition that is in fact,
false. This brings about the question of what actually counts as
knowledge. In light of our data, we shall examine this question
in our discussion on actionable knowledge, next.
A. Discussion on Actionable Knowledge
According to [73], propositions that are actionable are
those that actors can use to implement effectively their in-
tentions. A case in point is the enterprise mobility agenda of
the case study organization as presented in Section V. The
outcomes from an organization’s KM efforts cannot adequately
be measured from the report card perspective and indicator sys-
tems used in schools, for example. These systems, according to
[74], contribute far less than they could to school improvement.
Posner [74] highlights the following as the reasons for this
assertion:
1)
Their purposes and intended audiences are often
diffuse or ill-deﬁned.
2)
They tend to focus too much on ranking and not
enough on exemplary practices and models for action.
3)
Many data sets are overly tied to consumer choice
and not enough to citizen engagement.
4)
Despite vast improvements, research remains inacces-
sible to many people, bringing knowledge online but
not infusing it into capitols, classrooms and kitchen-
table problem-solving
[74] therefore, suggests that information must be crafted
around organising and action, citing [75], who says, “Action-
able Knowledge is not only relevant to the world of practice,
it is the knowledge that people use to create that world”. The
action triggered by knowledge is of the essence in determining
the value that KM delivers to an organization. In fact, the real
essence of knowledge is its actionability, especially when it
contributes to the advancement of a proposed undertaking [3].
Each of the knowledge items discovered from the tweet
data, as highlighted in Section V-A, is capable of provid-
ing signiﬁcant insights that informs decision making, which
impacts company’s proposed undertakings at one point or
another. However, as stated in [1], the ﬁrst item, Impact of
Technology on Disability (No.1), is more pertinent to the
enterprise mobility agenda by which the company deploys
mobile application and devices to its operations. For example,
one of the shortened URLs contained in one of the tweets
(http://t.co/Az3nJejO32), leads to a Sky News supplement on
How Tech is Helping with Struggle of Disability.
We assert therefore that, to aspire to a leadership position in
the health and social care sector, the case study organization
cannot afford to be oblivious to such reports as this, which
could potentially shape the industry trends and direction. This
knowledge, coupled with the insights gained from the use
of iPads and pictorial dictionary mentioned in the Project
on Innovative Technology, resulted in an ofﬁcial resolution
by the company to extend the use of mobile devices to its
service users as well, and not only to help staff in operational
performances. It is worth noting that, although the piece of
actionable knowledge regarding the impact of technology on
disability was on the news prior to the extraction of data
for that research, it was neither known nor acted upon by
the company until the above decision was driven through a
presentation made by the authors of this paper.
Meanwhile, we also discovered further insights from recent
data, as discussed in Section V-B, which indicates that the
theme of the impact of technology on autism is still leading
the conversations on autism for the second year running. We
had earlier alluded to the criticism of Knowledge Management
as a ﬁeld of practice, in spite of the gains — albeit intangible
— from Knowledge Management and knowledge discovery
efforts. This is due, in part, to the lack of a measurable value
of those gains. With Equation (1) in Section IV-E, this paper
proposes a measurement mechanism for KM Value delivered
by our EMSoD framework, which is the main objective of
this paper. The next section proceeds with a measurement
mechanism for actionable knowledge.
B. Value Measurement Mechanism for Actionable Knowledge
(AK)
The main objective of this paper is the delivery of KM
value to corporate organizations which, we believe, our EM-
SoD framework helps to deliver. We had earlier identiﬁed
actionable knowledge as a measure of KM value, in which
actionable knowledge is denoted as AK for measurement
purposes (see Equation 1 in Section IV-E).
To ﬁnd the numerical value of (AK) in the equation
(KMV = AK ×EW), we devise a simple measurement mech-
anism as denoted in Equation (2):
∑nWeightn
n×MaxWeight
(2)
where

315
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 9: Top Issues from Newer Twitter Data
Table II: KNOWLEDGE CONTENTS AND THEIR WEIGHTS
Content
Weight
Impact of Technology on Disability
5
Information Gathering
2
Political Opinions (#votecameronout)
2
Social Welfare Beneﬁts
3
Living with Autism
2
n = total content items
MaxWeight = maximum assignable weight
As an example, we consider our knowledge content items
from our previous work as outlined in Subsection V-A and
displayed in Table I. The total content items (n) is 5 and
each one of them is given a weight of 2, 3 or 5, which
represent low, medium or high value, respectively. Please note
that the weights have nothing to do with the No. of Tweets
as displayed in the second column of Table I. However, the
weights represent the pertinence of the knowledge item to
the matter or issue at hand within the organization, where
the maximum weight (MaxWeight) of 5 represents a high
pertinence, 3 represents medium pertinence and the weight of 2
represents a low pertinence. High to low pertinence is directly
mappable to high to low value, respectively. We acknowledge
the probability and freedom for subjectivity in assigning these
weights. However, in order to reduce the level of subjectivity,
we recommend for this measurement activity to be carried
out only after the KM activity/event in question has been
concluded. In our example, the knowledge discovery from
social media data has been completed and we know which of
the knowledge items has had a high impact on management’s
decision making for us to assign a high weight of 5; and,
medium weight of 3 and low weight of 2 to items we consider
of medium and low values, respectively, as shown in Table II.
The item with the maximum weight (MaxWeight) of 5,
Impact of Technology on Disability, is of a high pertinence to
the enterprise mobility agenda by which the company deploys
mobile application and devices to its operations.
Therefore, going by Equation (2), the maximum value is
25, being a product of the total number of content items (n,
which in this case, is 5) and the maximum weight (5). The
total number of content items (n) could be any whole number,
which allows for AK to be representative of every knowledge
content item or categories that is considered relevant for
inclusion in the value measurement. Also, with the numerator
being a sum of all the Weightsn, the value of AK from Equation
(1) is given thus:
KMV = 0.56×EW
(3)
A Note on Weights and Values Assignment
One may ask why the Impact of Technology on Disability
receives the maximum weight of 5? As stated earlier, it is
because of being of more pertinence to the enterprise mobility
agenda by which the company deploys mobile application and
devices to its operations? For example, one of the shortened
URLs from the tweets (http://t.co/Az3nJejO32) leads to a Sky
News supplement on ‘How Tech is Helping with Struggle of
Disability’. To aspire to a leadership position in the health and
social care sector, the case study organization cannot afford to
be oblivious to such reports as this, which could potentially
shape the industry trends and direction. This knowledge,
coupled with the insights gained from the use of iPads and
pictorial dictionary mentioned in the ‘Project on Innovative
Technology’ resulted in an ofﬁcial resolution by the company
to extend the use of mobile devices to its service users as well,
and not only to help staff in operational performances. It is
worth noting that, although the piece of actionable knowledge
regarding the impact of technology on disability was on the
news prior to the extraction of data for that research work, it
was neither known nor acted upon by the company until the
above decision was driven through a presentation made by the
authors of this paper.
The EMSoD framework presented in this paper is pred-
icated upon the capability of social media in delivering ac-
tionable knowledge to corporate organizations. We have thus,

316
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
been able to place a measurable value on actionable knowledge
(AK). This is ordinarily sufﬁcient as a measure of KM value
derived from such insights from social media data. However,
our framework — and the KM value it delivers to corporate
organizations — is further strengthened by an additional
measure of the KM value, which is employee engagement,
denoted as EW (Engaged Workforce) in Equation (1). The
next section discusses employee engagement in the light of the
social network that exists within the organization, the impact
of the structure of the network on employee engagement and
knowledge sharing as well as a measurement mechanism for
the KM value of employee engagement.
VII.
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
It is worth reiterating our assertion of employee engagement
as a measure of KM value for business, given that “the level of
employee engagement is one of the most important indicators
of the likelihood of an organization succeeding ﬁnancially and
delivering to its vision and mission statements” [76]. Also,
research has shown that, having a highly engaged workforce
not only maximises a companys investment in human capital
and improves productivity, but it can also signiﬁcantly reduce
costs (such as turnover) that directly impacts the bottom line
[77].
Thus, the organization’s Enterprise Mobility Management
(see Managed Platform in Section IV-A) deﬁnes the organi-
zational boundary within which employees’ contributions are
gathered as a measure of their engagement and as a reference
point for the organizations Social Network Analysis, which
can serve as knowledge input to the organizations Intellectual
capital.
Based on the above premises, this work posits the preva-
lence of knowledge creation and knowledge sharing culture in
an organization with a truly engaged workforce. How then,
does the social network facilitate employee engagement? How
does the structure of the connections and relationships within a
social network provide further depth and insights to knowledge
discovered from such networks [1]? We explore this question
further, ﬁrst in the light of the power of social networks and
an anatomy of the social network of an engaged workforce.
A. Power to Know, Power to Tell
“I shall reconsider human knowledge by starting from the
fact that we can know more than we can tell”, writes Michael
Polanyi [12], whose writings and philosophical thoughts pro-
vide an impetuous theoretical background for many scholars
and practitioners of Knowledge Management. This lends cre-
dence to Turban and others [11, p.478]’ idea of the difﬁculty
in formalising tacit knowledge. Embroiled in information
overload due to a deluge of data and exponential growth
in information systems, technologies and infrastructures, the
ability to know or tell as much as we know is limited by our
human cognitive capabilities. However, the same information
systems and technologies, which were not in existence during
the times of Polanyi, allow us to ofﬂoad our cognition on to
them [78]. Such technologies (e.g., the Web) are enablers of
online social networks, which does not only allow us to ofﬂoad
our cognition onto them but also allow us to beneﬁt from
the problem-solving and decision-making situations offered
through the ”wisdom of the crowd” [79] amazed through the
cognition ofﬂoaded by several other individuals.
With several actors within a social network ofﬂoading their
cognition onto the social network through explicit expression
[10], a wealth of tacit knowledge is inadvertently built up,
albeit explicitly converted. This wealth of knowledge is, of
course, too massive for an individual to tell. It might even
be impossible for one individual to be expected to know of
the existence and/or extent of such knowledge, due in part, to
the limitations in human cognitive capabilities, as mentioned
earlier. It must be noted however, that this is only a limitation
applicable to a single individual, but not to a corporate organi-
zation. With the affordances of social network analysis (SNA),
a corporate organization is empowered to know more about,
and exploit, the wealth of knowledge that is built up within its
enterprise social network. The organization can tell, through
visualisation and network analysis, the structure of the social
network and its impact on employee engagement that propels
externalization of tacit knowledge. In essence, we can assume
that, if Polanyi [12] were to reconsider human knowledge
within the context of social networking trends today, he would
probably say that, “we can tell as much as we can know.”
B. Social Network Analysis
Social Network Analysis (SNA) is described as a detailed
examination of the structure of a network and its effect on
users (actors) within the network, wherein the structure of the
network is understood to be more important than the individual
users [48]. A core component of our EMSoD framework is
Social Media (see Section IV-C), which serve as platforms
for social interactions on the Web. With peculiar example
of Twitter, these social interactions are explained by the
relationship types of ‘mentions’, ‘replies to’ and just, ‘tweets’.
A mentions relationship exist when a message on Twitter
tweet mentions another user (@Username) while a replies to
relationship exist when a tweet is in reply to another user’s
tweet by preceding the tweet with the other user’s Twitter
ID (@Username). When a tweet is neither a reply to - or
contain a mention of - another Twitter user, the tweet creates
a relationship type of tweet, which exist as a self loop and
is indicated on a network visualisation as a node with an
arrow that projects and returns unto itself. These relationships
develop into a network of connections.
In SNA, the connections between people are considered
as the units of analysis that reveal the ﬂow of information
and how these connections deﬁne the structure of the net-
work, which also refers to the presence of regular patterns in
relationship [80]. Gaining insights towards the understanding
of the components and structure of a social network requires
a vocabulary and techniques provided by Social Network
Analysis (SNA) and Visualisation [81]. This vocabulary and
techniques are described in our examination of two different
kinds of networks identiﬁed by Rossi and Magnani [82] as, (i)
the topical network, which is made up of relationships created
through tweets/activities that are aggregated over a topic or the
#hashtag and, (ii) the Twitter network, which is made up of all
the relationships between the users (followers and friends). We
believe that the relationship between the Twitter [structural]
network and the topical network can be likened to that of the

317
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 10: Inﬂuencers Engagement Network Graph
physical and logical topologies of a communications network
infrastructure.
C. Understanding the Topical Network
A topical network is created when users are connected
by common topical issues, where individuals save/deﬁne Web
contents as bookmarks/keyword in a social environment by
attaching annotations in form of tags [51], normally preceded
by the hash symbol on most keyboards (#). The hashtag can be
said to be the democratic manifestation of taxonomic principles
in the social media era (see Section IV-C). Trant (2009) [83]
highlights the description of such tags as publicly shared user
generated keywords, which have been suggested for use as
a trivial mechanism for further improving the description of
online information resources and their access through broader
indexing.
An example of the topical network is shown in the Inﬂu-
encers Engagement Network Graph presented in Figure 10.
This network has been aggregated over the search keyword
and hashtag of #autism, as found in our recent data on the
subject (see Section V-B). Both this topical network study and
the study that results in further insights on our previous study
from recent data, were performed on the University’s account
on the Pulsal Platform — an audience intelligence analytic
platform for social media.
D. Limitation of the Topical Network
The EMSoD social framework proposed in this research
operates within a managed platform (Section IV-A), which
deﬁnes the organizational boundary. Although the hashtag
phenomenon has been successful in aggregating online topical
discussions without boundaries, the relationships created over
mutual hash-tagged conversation is ephemeral [82], and so
is the network created. Unless the hashtag can be tamed, its
use on a public Twitter account can be so widespread that it
compromises the need, if there were, to keep the conversations
within the organizational boundary. Even with the use of
enterprise Twitter’s alternative like Yammer, aggregating events
and conversation over the hashtag cannot but include Yammer-
wide conversations and events from outside the organizational
boundary.
To illustrate, when one takes a look at the topical network
created over our recent data on the subject of autism in Figure
10. The nodes are not deﬁned within a single geographical
boundary. The nodes in yellow colour represent those from
the United Kingdom. The location information for the nodes
in blue is unavailable. This means that users from various
countries other than the UK are aggregated over this topic.
In fact, the two most engaged inﬂuencers’s networks (CNN
and genevassky) are not from the UK. This may be good in
that it provides further reach and depth around the topic but not
for classiﬁed organizational conversation that needs to be kept
within the boundary of the organization’s network, assuming
the UK was a corporate entity in the business sense.
Specifying network boundaries in terms of hashtag or
keywords that connect people together in this manner is
more akin to the normalist approach of specifying a network,
which is based on the theoritical concerns of the researcher
[80], whereas the actors may not even know one another.
Contrarily, Wasserman and Faust [80] also describe a second
way of specifying network boundaries, the realist approach,
wherein the actors know one another, since membership of
such network is as perceived and acknowledged by members
themselves. In essence, employees would readily acknowledge
and engage with fellow colleagues as members of the same
network. The realist approach aligns with the Twitter network
as identiﬁed by Rossi and Magnani [82]. The next section
attempts to create an understanding of the Twitter network.
E. Understanding the Twitter Network
Considering its perceived ease of use and a broad coverage
of SNA metrics and visualisation features [84], we used
NodeXL — a network analysis and visualisation package
designed for the analysis of online social media on Microsoft
Excel [85] — to examine the egocentric network [86] of
relationships that develop over a one month period from
26/07/2016 to 25/08/2016. As stated earlier, relationships
emerge when a user (the source) mentions or replies to another
user (the destination) in their tweet. For example, the following
tweet of 29/07/2016, in which @unisouthampton mentions
@nature — the Twitter handle for the International Weekly
Journal of Science — creates a relationship (mentions) between
the two entities:
“Our
#research
places
us
top
50
globally
and
4th
in
the
UK,
in
@nature
Index
Rising
Stars:
https://t.co/XwXKR9N8Az
https://t.co/VGQDxPE74y”
A relationship also emerges when a tweet is self sufﬁcient
without mentioning or replying to any other tweet by including
or preceding with another Twitter @username, respectively.
These are regarded as self loop and is indicated in Figure
11 by the red arrow proceeding and returning to the source
(@unisouthampton). As can be expected that a user could
tweet without having to mention or reply to any other user,
there are 68 such self loops, 102 unique Edges and 129 Vertices
(Nodes) within the network so generated (see Table III). The
connections made through the ‘replies to’ relationships are
represented with Edges (connections lines) of 60% opacity
than the connections made through the mentions relationship,
which are represented by Edges of 20% opacity.

318
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 11: A Directed Network Graph of @unisouthampton
Meanwhile, the network graph in Figure 11 is a directed
graph, or digraph for short, which represents directional re-
lations comprised of a set of nodes representing the actors in
the network and a set of arcs [lines] directed between pairs of
nodes representing directed ties between nodes [80]. A social
network graph is formally represented by a graph G = (V,
E), where V is the set of nodes (vertices) and E is the set
of edges (ties) [87]. However, a cursory look at the network
graph in Figure 11 would reveal that the @unisouthampton
account, represented with the large icon of the University of
Southampton logo, has only an Out-Degree connection with up
to the 129 nodes and 1 In-Degree connection, which is the self
loop unto itself. The directed relations through In- and Out-
Degree connections deﬁne the asymmetric relationship model
of ‘following’ in Twitter, which allows one to keep up with
the tweets of any other user without the need for the other user
to reciprocate [88].
Table III: GRAPH METRICS FOR FIGURE 11
Vertices
129
Unique Edges
102
Edges With
Duplicates
163
Total Edges
265
Self Loops
68
According to [80], “the concept of a network emphasizes
the fact that each individual has ties to other individuals, each
of whom in turn is tied to a few, some or many others. The
phrase, “social network” refers to the set of actors and the
ties among them. The network analyst would seek to model
these relationships to depict the structure of a group. One could
then study the impact of this structure on the functioning of
the group and/or the inﬂuence of this structure on individuals
within the group”.
However, the network as it is presented in Figure 11 is
not an ideal network that encourages knowledge sharing and
engagement among the actors. The three relationships that
develop were initiated by @unisouthampton’s tweets in which
other users were mentioned or replied to or in which the tweets
were sent wholly to create a tweet relationship. Querying
NodeXL with only the Twitter ID of a corporate or individual’s
Twitter account, as we did with @unisouthampton, would only
result in a visualisation of the list of connections, as Figure
11 reveals. Moreover, with over 40,000 nodes, a meaningful
visible visualisation of a network of such magnitude as the
@unisouthampton’s can be difﬁcult because of the inherent
complexity of the relationships and limited screen space [89].
According to Wasserman and Faust [80], “The restriction to a
ﬁnite set or sets of actors is an analytic requirement.”
Therefore, we identiﬁed 93 Twitter users (Vertices or
Nodes) within the University of Southampton and examine
the network of connections that evolves around them. Table
IV presents the overall graph metrics.
Table IV: GRAPH METRICS FOR THE NETWORK GRAPH OF
93 VERTICES
Graph Metric
Value
Graph Metric
Value
Graph Type
Directed
Connected
Components
9
Vertices
93
Single-Vertex
Connected Components
8
Unique Edges
303
Maximum Vertices in a
Connected Component
85
Edges with
Duplicates
15925
Maximum Edges in a
Connected Component
15758
Total Edges
16228
Maximum,Geodesic
Distance (Diameter)
3
Self-Loops
13628
Average Geodesic
Distance
1.962102
Reciprocated
Vertex Pair Ratio
0.221206581
Graph,Density
0.078073866
Reciprocated
Edge Ratio
0.362275449
NodeXL
Version
1.0.1.355
1) Grouping the Network on the Basis of Node Importance
Various metrics (Degree centrality, eigenvector centrality,
pagerank, etc) capture various ways in which each individual
node (user) acts as a centre of attraction through which
knowledge and information propagates within the network.
Sorting by Betweenness Centrality for example, sorts people
who have the quality of most broadly connecting across the
network to the top while Clustering coefﬁcient measures how
closely connected each users connections connected to one
another [90]. As this work is focused on measuring and seeking
to facilitate employee engagement, we have used Betweeness
Centrality (BC) as our measure of ranking for node importance
based on the potential of such central points for binding
the network together by coordinating the activities of other
points, albeit, they may be viewed as structurally central to
the extent that they stand between others and can therefore
facilitate, impede or bias the transmission of messages [91].
Moreover, measuring proximities can help to characterise the
global structure of a network by showing how closely coupled
it is [92]

319
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table V: Groups of Vertices with Metrics
Group
Vertices
Unique
Edges
Edges
with
Duplicates
Total
Edges
Self
Loops
MAX.
Geodesic
Distance
AVG.
Geodesic
Distance
Graph
Density
G1
41
90
7415
7505
6972
4
2.083
0.115
G2
21
1
2112
2113
2113
0
0.000
0.000
G3
19
2
2759
2761
2751
1
0.240
0.012
G4
12
21
2151
2172
1792
2
1.194
0.462
Accordingly, the 93 nodes (users, also referred to as
vertices) in the network are ranked and grouped on the basis
of their Betweeness Centrality, with each group disc sized
according to the number of nodes that make up the range of
measures for the group, as visualised in Figure 12 and the
group metrics in Table V.
2) Decomposing the Network Group of 93 Nodes
The smallest group in the network graph presented in
Figure 12 (Light Green, G4:12) is a group of 12 nodes with
the highest Betweeness Centrality ranging from 115.194 to
2494.640 (see Table VI), although the node with the highest
Betweeness Centrality (2494.640) is @unisouthampton, and
understandably with over 40,000 followers compared to only
558 followers of the next highest Betweeness Centrality node,
@sotonwsi (at BC score of 522.543), and 2390 followers for
@lescarr (with a betweeness centrality score of 425.512), in
that order.
The largest group (Dark Blue, G1 : 41) is comprised
of 41 nodes (vertices) with the second highest Betweeness
Centrality ranging from 11.408 to 99.715, with the highest
being @garethpbeeston (99.715), @lisaharris (94.079) and
@mark weal (93.573) in that order. Group 3 (Dark Green,
G3:19) is composed of nodes with the third highest betweeness
centrality ranging from 1.067 to 8.627.
Groups 4, 3 and 1 are subgroups of this directed graph, as
demonstrated by the direction of the arrows on all sides, and
as such, potentially represent an engaged network that could
possibly facilitate knowledge sharing. Group 2 (Light Blue,
G2:21) may be considered negligible as 16 out of the 21 nodes
have not a single score for Betweeness Centrality, and thus,
they would have little or no impact on the network. Expanding
the graph to show the nodes in each group (see Figure 13
reveals some of the nodes in group 2 (light green dots) are
actually outliers that have no tie with the network at all as they
have not engaged in any relationship with any other member
of the network, either by mentioning or replying to, other than
themselves by way of tweeting (self loop), hence, they have
each scored zero in the betweeness centrality measurement. We
can even spot 2 of them that have never tweeted within the
time-frame and as such, do not have the arrow-edged ring of
self loop (tweet) but are standing aloof. The top 20 nodes are
labelled 1 through 20 in order of their Betweeness Centrality
while the top 12 are colour coded light green. Essentially, the
groups are examples of subgroups in a one-mode network,
in which measurement is based on just a single set of actors
[80], albeit grouped according to their individual attributes of
Betweeness Centrality.
Meanwhile, the chart in Figure 14 reveals that the Red,
Dark Green and Green bars are in the top echelons of nodes
with the highest Betweeness Centrality (a total of 23 nodes)
while the bulk of the nodes in the entire graph - that is, a
Figure 12: Network graph of 93 Vertices Grouped According to
Betweenness Centrality
Figure 13: Expanded Group of Nodes According to Betweeness
Centrality
total of 70 nodes represented as Dark Blue bar on the chart
- are with the lower range of Betweeness Centrality. With
the highest Betweeness Centrality of 2,494.64 (Colour red on
the far right), the node representing the egocentric network
of @Unisouthampton, which is the ofﬁcial Twitter account
of the University of Southampton, has over 40,000 followers.
However, the measure of a node’s Betweeness Centrality is
not based on the number of followers but on the number
of shortest paths from all nodes to all other nodes that pass
through that node [91]. This explains why the node with only
558 followers (@sotonwsi) has the second highest betweeness
centrality (522.543). Although it could be argued that both
@unisouthampton and @sotonwsi are non-personal accounts,
it must be noted that the node with the next highest betweeness
centrality of 425.512 (@lescarr) has more follower count
(2390) than the previous (@sotonwsi). The top 20 nodes by
betweeness centrality can be visualised in the network graph
in Figure 13 (with each node labelled 1 through 20) while
Table VI presents the individual metrics for 12 of the top 20
nodes (users), according to betweeness centrality, within the
network. The Individual Node Metrics in Table VI provides

320
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table VI: TOP 12 INDIVIDUAL NODE METRICS
No.
Node
Betweeness
Centrality
Eigenvector
Centrality
Page
Rank
Clustering
Coefﬁcient
1
unisouthampton
2494.640
0.038
4.644
0.092
2
sotonwsi
522.543
0.037
2.764
0.198
3
lescarr
425.512
0.031
2.520
0.186
4
ecsuos
349.333
0.028
2.308
0.191
5
suukii
325.737
0.019
1.756
0.165
6
susanjhalford
206.940
0.029
2.065
0.227
7
damewendydbe
179.074
0.028
1.852
0.284
8
hughdavis
164.789
0.019
1.538
0.233
9
iliadsoton
150.258
0.015
1.646
0.174
10
webscidtc
146.866
0.026
1.784
0.268
11
richardgomer
134.370
0.14
1.321
0.180
12
sotonwais
115.194
0.015
1.176
0.233
another interesting aspect, which is that, another metric or a
combination of metrics may be used depending on the intended
purposes, although we have ranked these 12, out of 20 nodes,
according to their scoring highest in Betweeness Centrality.
For example, if the nodes were ranked in accordance with
their Eigenvector Centrality, @susanjhalfod (No.6) would have
ranked higher than @suukii (No.5). Eigenvector is a centrality
measure that considers the value of a node, not in terms
of its connections but in terms of the value of centrality of
such connections [87]. In essence, the ranking of a node is
based on the importance and/or ranking of the nodes it is
connected to, which means @suukii may serve as bridge to
propagate knowledge among a vast number of people than
@susanjhalford; the connections in themselves are not as
strong and vital within the network.
Figure 14: A Chart of Betweeness Centrality Spread among the 93
Vertices
F. Determination of an Engaged Workforce
With reference to our Knowledge Management Value mea-
surement in Formula (1), where KMV = AK × EW (see KM
Value in Section IV-E), we hereby devise a mechanism to
determine the value of an engaged workforce (EW). We have
established that the interactions that create the user network
is based on users’ activities in tweeting and/or mentioning
or replying-to another user within their own tweets, thereby
creating the relationships known as Edges in Table V. Each
node in the network has been assigned to the groups in Table V
based on individual node’s measure of Betweenness Centrality.
Table V also includes the graph density for each group. A sum
of all the groups’ graph densities equals 0.59, which indicates
a sparse graph, owing that a dense graph is always equals to
1.
Graph density is an indicator of connectedness of a net-
work, given as the number of connections in a graph divided by
the maximum number of connections [93]. This connectedness
is also a function of the interactions that create the relationships
upon which the network is formed, as mentioned earlier. We
therefore, measure engagement in terms of graph density.
Whatever value we get for AK is either maintained or negated
by the value of EW depending on whether the network is dense
or sparse, respectively. This allows for the determination of
Knowledge Management Value (KMV) to be inclusive of both
values from AK and EW as indicated in Equation (4).
KMV = 0.56×0.59 = 0.33
(4)
This method can be used to compare Knowledge Man-
agement values derived from different KM activities/events or
expressed in percentage to determine the return on investments
on such activities/events.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
This paper has presented EMSoD, a conceptual social
framework that mediates between KM and SM, with the aim
of delivering KM values to corporate organizations. The paper
identiﬁes actionable knowledge and employee engagement as
parameters of KM values that the EMSoD framework helps
in delivering. As KM has suffered an image problem due,
in part, to the lack of measurable value, the paper devises a
mechanism for measurement of the KM value delivered by the
EMSoD social framework. Meanwhile, the paper has adopted
very simple approaches, making it easy for any organization of
any size to replicate the methods, not only for delivering KM
value, but also for measuring and evaluating the KM values
so delivered. Thus, the paper serves as basis and initial input
for integration and operationalization of the EMSoD social
framework within a corporate social software platform. To
this end, it is important to, ﬁrst, consider the interdependence
and interactions between the core elements of the framework
(as emphasized by the cyclical presentation of the EMSoD
framework in Figure 3) as an iterative process that results in
KM value for organizations, within the construct of social
media. Then, the framework can further be modelled into
entity relationship for database and software developers to
operationalize by deﬁning Entity classes that are independent
of a database structure and then, map the core elements to
the tables and associations of the database. This provides a
suggestion for future direction to which this paper could be
extended.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Adetunji and L. Carr, “Knowledge Discovery from Social Media Data
: A Case of Public Twitter Data for SMEs,” in 8th International Con-
ference on Information, Process and Knowledge Management (eKnow),
no. c.
Venice: IARIA XPS Press, 2016, pp. 119–125.
[2] P. R. Smart and N. R. Shadbolt, “Social Machines,” in Encyclopedia of
Information Science and Technology, M. Khosrow-Pour, Ed.
Pennsyl-
vania: IGI Global, Aug. 2014.

321
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[3] R. Cross and L. Sproull, “More Than an Answer: Information Relation-
ships for Actionable Knowledge,” Organization Science, vol. 15, no. 4,
Aug. 2004, pp. 446–462.
[4] D. P. Ford and R. M. Mason, “A Multilevel Perspective of Tensions
Between Knowledge Management and Social Media,” Journal of Orga-
nizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, vol. 23, no. 1-2, Jan.
2013, pp. 7–33.
[5] E. Turban, R. Sharda, and D. Delen, Decision Support and Business
Intelligence Systems, 9th ed.
Dorling Kindersly (India) Pvt, Ltd., 2011.
[6] T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, Working Knowledge: How Organizations
Manage what They Know, Part 247.
Boston: Harvard Business Press,
1998.
[7] L. Razmerita, K. Kirchner, and T. Nabeth, “Social Media in Orga-
nizations: Leveraging Personal and Collective Knowledge Processes,”
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, vol. 24,
no. 1, Jan. 2014, pp. 74–93.
[8] C. Sorensen, “Enterprise Mobility,” Work and Globalization Series,
Palgrave, 2011.
[9] C. Sørensen, A. Al-Taitoon, J. Kietzmann, D. Pica, G. Wiredu,
S. Elaluf-Calderwood, K. Boateng, M. Kakihara, and D. Gibson,
“Exploring enterprise mobility: Lessons from the ﬁeld - Information,
Knowledge, Systems Management - Volume 7, Number 1-2 / 2008 -
IOS Press,” Information, Knowledge, Systems Management, vol. 7, no.
1-2, 2008, pp. 243–271.
[10] P. Zikopoulos, C. Eaton, D. DeRoos, T. Deutsch, and G. Lapis, Un-
derstanding Big Data: Analytics for Enterprise Class Hadoop and
Streaming Data.
New York: McGraw Hill, 2012.
[11] E.
Turban,
N.
Bolloju,
and
T.-P.
Liang,
“Enterprise
Social
Networking: Opportunities, Adoption, and Risk Mitigation,” Journal of
Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, vol. 21, no. 3,
Jul. 2011, pp. 202–220.
[12] M. Polanyi, The Tacit Dimension.
University of Chicago Press, 2009.
[13] D. Grifﬁths and B. Moon, “The state of knowledge management A
survey suggests ways to attain more satisﬁed users.” 2011. [Online].
Available: http://goo.gl/2bqHLB [Last Accessed 17 November 2016].
[14] D. Grifﬁths, A. Jenkins, and Z. Kingston-Grifﬁths, “The 2015 Global
Knowledge Management Observatory c⃝ Report,” Juran Benchmarking,
Tech. Rep., 2015.
[15] E. Bolisani and M. Handzic, Eds., Advances in Knowledge Management
- Celebrating Twenty Years of Research and Practice.
Springer
International Publishing, 2015.
[16] D. P. Ford and R. M. Mason, “Knowledge Management and Social
Media: The Challenges and Beneﬁts,” Journal of Organizational
Computing and Electronic Commerce, vol. 23, no. 1-2, Jan. 2013, pp.
1–6.
[17] A. P. McAfee, “Enterprise 2 . 0 : The Dawn of Emergent Collaboration,”
MIT Sloan Management Review, vol. 47, no. 3, 2006, pp. 21–28.
[18] T.
Davenport,
“Enterprise
2.0:
The
New,
New
Knowledge
Management?”
2008.
[Online].
Available:
https://hbr.org/2008/02/
enterprise-20-the-new-new-know/ [Last Accessed: 17 November 2016].
[19] K.
A.
Delic
and
J.
A.
Riley,
“Enterprise
Knowledge
Clouds:
Next Generation KM Systems?” 2009 International Conference on
Information, Process, and Knowledge Management, Feb. 2009, pp.
49–53.
[20] “Global State of Enterprise Mobility 2016,” Enterprise Mobility
Exchange,
London,
Tech.
Rep.,
2016.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//eu.enterprisemobilityexchange.com/media/1001912/59471.pdf
[Last
Accessed 17 November 2016].
[21] L.
Mallis,
“Birth
of
the
DIAD
—
upside
Blog,”
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://blog.ups.com/2009/12/07/birth-of-the-diad/
[Last Accessed 15 March 2016].
[22] D. Dalmeyer and K. Tsipis, Heaven and Earth:Vol. 16, USAS:Civilian
Uses of Near-Earth Space.
Kluwer Law International, 1997.
[23] G. Piccoli, Information Systems for Managers: Texts & Cases. Hoboken:
John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[24] T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, “Working knowledge: How organizations
manage what they know,” Ubiquity, vol. 2000, no. August, 2000.
[25] R. L. Ackoff, Wiley: Ackoff’s Best: His Classic Writings on Management
- Russell L. Ackoff.
Wiley, 1999.
[26] R.
Schumaker,
“From
Data
to
Wisdom:
The
Progression
of
Computational Learning in Text Mining.” Communications of the
IIMA, vol. 11, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1–14.
[27] G. Bellinger, D. Castro, and A. Mills, “Data, Information, Knowledge,
& Wisdom,” 2004. [Online]. Available: http://www.systems-thinking.
org/dikw/dikw.htm [Last Accessed 15 March 2016].
[28] J. Terra and T. Angeloni, “Understanding the difference between
information management and knowledge management,” KM Advantage,
2003, pp. 1–9.
[29] Y. Hijikata, T. Takenaka, Y. Kusumura, and S. Nishida, “Interactive
knowledge externalization and combination for SECI model,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 4th international conference on Knowledge capture -
K-CAP ’07.
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, Oct. 2007, p.
151.
[30] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, The Knowledge-creating Company: How
Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation.
Oxford
University Press, 1995.
[31] T.-C. Chou, “Internal learning climate, knowledge management process
and perceived knowledge management satisfaction,” Journal of Informa-
tion Science, vol. 31, no. 4, 2005, pp. 283–296.
[32] C. Argyris, “Seeking truth and actionable knowledge: How the scientiﬁc
method inhibits both,” Philosophica, vol. 40, 1987, pp. 5–21.
[33] M. B¨ohringer and A. Richter, “Adopting social software to the
intranet: a case study on enterprise microblogging,” in Proceedings
Mensch und Computer 2009, Oldenbourg, Berlin, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[Online]. Available: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=
10.1.1.520.9286&rep=rep1&type=pdf [Last Accessed 18 November
2016].
[34] N. Sousa, C. J. Costa, and M. Aparicio, “IO-SECI: A conceptual model
for knowledge management,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Open
Source and Design of Communication - OSDOC ’13.
New York,
New York, USA: ACM Press, Jul. 2013, pp. 9–17. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2503848.2503850
[35] I. Guy, U. Avraham, D. Carmel, S. Ur, M. Jacovi, and I. Ronen, “Mining
expertise and interests from social media,” Proceedings of the 22nd
international conference on World Wide Web, 2013, pp. 515–526.
[36] F. Sousa, M. Aparicio, and C. J. Costa, “Organizational wiki as a knowl-
edge management tool,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
Conference on Design of Communication - SIGDOC ’10.
New York,
New York, USA: ACM Press, Sep. 2010, p. 33.
[37] E. Fischer and A. R. Reuber, “Social interaction via new social
media: (How) can interactions on Twitter affect effectual thinking and
behavior?” Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 26, no. 1, Jan. 2011, pp.
1–18.
[38] M. Kleek and K. O’Hara, “The Future of Social is Personal:
The Potential
of
the
Personal
Data
Store.” [Online].
Available:
http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/363518/1/pds.pdf [Last Accessed 19 November
2016].
[39] F. Cabiddu, M. D. Carlo, and G. Piccoli, “Social media affordances:
Enabling customer engagement,” Annals of Tourism Research, vol. 48,
2014, pp. 175–192.
[40] J. Comm, Twitter Power 2.0: How to Dominate Your Market One Tweet
at a Time.
Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2010.
[41] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! The chal-
lenges and opportunities of Social Media,” Business Horizons, vol. 53,
no. 1, 2010, pp. 59–68.
[42] M.
Miller,
A.
Marks,
M.
DeCoulode,
J.
Hagel,
J.
S.
Brown,
and D. Kulasooriya, “Social software for business performance The
missing link in social software: Measurable business performance
improvements,” Deloitte Center for the Edge, 2011.
[43] J. Falls, “Why Forums May Be the Most Powerful Social Media Channel
for Brands,” 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.entrepreneur.com/
article/223493
[44] M. Alavi, “Knowledge Management Systems: Issues, Chanllenges and
Beneﬁts.” Communications of the Association for Information Systems,
vol. 1, no. 7, 1999, pp. 1–37.
[45] S.
Tardanico,
“Is
Social
Media
Sabotaging
Real
Communication?
-
Forbes,”
2012.
[On-
line]. Available: http://www.forbes.com/sites/susantardanico/2012/04/30/
is-social-media-sabotaging-real-communication/#366347a04fd8
[Last
Accessed 19 November 2016].
[46] T.
White,
“Why
Social
Media
Isn’t
Social,”
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/thomas-white/
why-social-media-isnt-social b 3858576.html
[Last
Accessed
19
November 2016].
[47] M. A. Zeng, “The Contribution of Different Online Communities in
Open Innovation Projects,” Proceedings of The International Symposium
on Open Collaboration - OpenSym ’14, 2014, pp. 1–9.
[48] A. Keenan and A. Shiri, “Sociability and social interaction on social
networking websites,” Library Review, vol. 58, no. 6, Jun. 2009, pp.
438–450.
[49] T. V. Wal, “Folksonomy Coinage and Deﬁnition,” 2007. [Online].

322
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Available:
http://vanderwal.net/folksonomy.html
[Last
Accessed
19
November 2016].
[50] Delphi Group, “Information Intelligence: Content Classiﬁcation and the
Enterprise Taxonomy Practice,” Boston, Tech. Rep., 2004. [Online].
Available: http://inei.org.br/inovateca/estudos-e-pesquisas-em-inovacao/
InformationIntelligence-taxonomy-Delphi-2004.pdf [Last Accessed 19
November 2016].
[51] A. Zubiaga, “”Harnessing folksonomies for resource classiﬁcation” by
Arkaitz Zubiag with Danielle H. Lee as coordinator,” ACM SIGWEB
Newsletter, no. Summer, Jul. 2012, pp. 1–2.
[52] W. J. Frawley, G. Piatetsky-shapiro, and C. J. Matheus, “Knowledge
Discovery in Databases : An Overview,” AI Magazine, vol. 13, no. 3,
1992, pp. 57–70.
[53] T. Koller, “What is value-based management?” The McKinsey Quarterly,
no. 3, Jun. 1994, pp. 87–102.
[54] L. Edvinsson and M. Malone, Intellectual Capital: Realizing Your
Company’s True Value by Finding Its Hidden Brainpower.
Collins,
1997.
[55] G.
Gruman,
“IT
Value
Metrics:
How
to
Communi-
cate
ROI
to
the
Business
—
CIO,”
2007.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.cio.com/article/2437929/it-organization/
it-value-metrics--how-to-communicate-roi-to-the-business.html
[Last
Accessed 19 November 2016].
[56] I. Becerra-Fernandez and S. Rajiv, “Organizational Knowledge Manage-
ment: A Contingency Perspective,” Journal of Management Information
Systems, vol. 18, no. June, 2001, pp. 23–55.
[57] M. E. Porter, “What Is Value in Health Care?” New England Journal of
Medicine, 2010, pp. 2477–2481.
[58] National Audit Ofﬁce, “Analytical framework for assessing Value for
Money,” National Audit Ofﬁce, Tech. Rep. Step 6, 2010. [Online].
Available:
http://www.bond.org.uk/data/ﬁles/National Audit Ofﬁce
Analytical framework for assessing Value for Money.pdf
[Last Ac-
cessed 25 November 2016].
[59] W. Vestal, “Measuring Knowledge Management,” in Symposium: A
Quarterly Journal In Modern Foreign Literatures.
APQC, 2002, pp.
1–6.
[60] S. A. Melnyk, D. M. Stewart, and M. Swink, “Metrics and performance
measurement in operations management: dealing with the metrics maze,”
Journal of Operations Management, vol. 22, no. 3, 2004, pp. 209–218.
[61] R. Blundel, “Is small still beautiful?: Exploring the role of SMEs in
emerging visions of a green’ economy,” Middlesex University, London,
Tech. Rep., 2016. [Online]. Available: http://oro.open.ac.uk/46768/
(Accessed 2 Aug., 2016).
[62] M. Ayyagari, T. Beck, and A. Demirguc-Kunt, “Small and Medium
Enterprises Across the Globe,” Small Business Economics, vol. 29,
no. 4, 2007, pp. 415–434.
[63] T. W. Liao and E. Triantaphyllou, Recent Advances in Data Mining of
Enterprise Data: Algorithms and Applications.
World Scientiﬁc, 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://www.worldscientiﬁc.com/worldscibooks/10.
1142/6689 [Last Accessed 19 November 2016].
[64] D.
Murthy,
Twitter:
Social
Communication
in
the
Twitter
Age.
Cambridge:
Polity
Press,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.lehmanns.de/shop/sozialwissenschaften/
27894960-9780745665108-twitterhttp://wiley-vch.e-bookshelf.de/
products/reading-epub/product-id/3973642/title/Twitter.html?lang=en
[65] “Tax
Credits
Row
What
Will
Happen
Now
After
Government
Defeat?”
2015.
[Online].
Available:
https://uk.news.yahoo.com/
tax-credits-row-happen-now-100031983.html
[Last
Accessed
29
February 2016].
[66] “What is social welfare? deﬁnition and meaning.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.businessdictionary.com/deﬁnition/social-welfare.html
[Last
Accessed 03 March 2016].
[67] S. Rogers, “UK welfare spending: how much does each beneﬁt
really cost?” 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.theguardian.com/
news/datablog/2013/jan/08/uk-beneﬁt-welfare-spending [Last Accessed
30 April 2016].
[68] M. Elsabbagh, G. Divan, Y.-J. Koh, Y. S. Kim, S. Kauchali, C. Marc´ın,
C. Montiel-Nava, V. Patel, C. S. Paula, C. Wang, M. T. Yasamy,
and E. Fombonne, “Global prevalence of autism and other pervasive
developmental disorders.” Autism research : ofﬁcial journal of the
International Society for Autism Research, vol. 5, no. 3, Jun. 2012, pp.
160–79.
[69] J. Baldock, “World Autism Awareness Day 2015: 16 autism myths
debunked,” Apr. 2015. [Online]. Available: http://metro.co.uk/2015/
04/02/autism-sixteen-myths-debunked-5123051/
[Last
Accessed
19
November 2016].
[70] NHS Choices, “Autism spectrum disorder - NHS Choices.” [Online].
Available:
http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Autistic-spectrum-disorder/
Pages/Introduction.aspx
[71] D. Pritchard, “KNOWLEDGE,” in Central Issues of Philosophy,
J. Shand, Ed.
Oxford: Wiley - Blackwell, 2009, pp. 1–16.
[72] E. Gettier, “Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis, vol. 23, no. c,
1963, pp. 444–446.
[73] C. Argyris, Actionable Knowledge, C. Knudsen and H. Tsoukas,
Eds.
Oxford
University
Press,
Mar.
2005.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/
9780199275250.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199275250-e-16
[Last
Ac-
cessed 19 November 2016].
[74] L.
Posner,
“Actionable
Knowledge:
Putting
Research
to
Work
for School Community Action,” 2009. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.idra.org/resource-center/actionable-knowledge/ [Last Accessed
19 November 2016].
[75] C. Argyris, Knowledge for action: a guide to overcoming barriers
to organizational change.
Jossey-Bass, 1993. [Online]. Available:
http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED357268 [Last Accessed 19 November 2016].
[76] B. Marr, “Employee Engagement Level,” in 25 Need-to-Know Key
Performance Indicators, 1st ed.
Harlow: Pearson Education Ltd., 2014,
ch. 22, pp. 151 – 157.
[77] Harvard Business Review, “The Impact of Employee Engagement
on
Performance,”
Harvard
Business
Review,
Tech.
Rep.,
2013.
[Online]. Available: https://hbr.org/resources/pdfs/comm/achievers/hbr{
}achievers{ }report{ }sep13.pdf [Last Accessed 19 November 2016].
[78] L. Carr and S. Harnad, “Ofﬂoading cognition onto the Web,” IEEE
Intelligent Systems, Jan. 2011.
[79] S. K. M. Yi, M. Steyvers, M. D. Lee, and M. J. Dry, “The Wisdom
of the Crowd in Combinatorial Problems,” Cognitive Science, vol. 36,
no. 3, Apr. 2012, pp. 452–470.
[80] S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Network Analysis: Methods and
Applications.
Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[81] A. Gruzd and C. Haythornthwaite, “Enabling Community Through
Social Media,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 15, no. 10,
Oct. 2013.
[82] L. Rossi and M. Magnani, “Conversation practices and network structure
in Twitter,” Proceedings of the Sixth International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media, 2012, p. 4.
[83] J. Trant, “Studying social tagging and folksonomy: A review and
framework,” Journal of Digital Information, vol. 10, no. 1, 2009, pp.
1–44.
[84] D. L. Hansen, D. Rotman, E. Bonsignore, N. Milic-Frayling, E. M.
Rodrigues, M. Smith, and B. Shneiderman, “Do you know the way
to SNA’: A process model for analyzing and visualizing social media
network data,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ASE International Conference
on Social Informatics, SocialInformatics 2012.
IEEE Explore Digital
Library, 2013, pp. 304–313.
[85] D. Hansen, B. Shneiderman, and M. A. Smith, “Analyzing Social Media
Networks with NodeXL: Insights from a Connected World,” Graduate
Journal of Social Science, vol. 8, no. 3, 2011, p. 284.
[86] J. Golbeck, Introduction to Social Media Investigation - A Hands-On
Approach.
Waltham: Elsevier Inc. (Syngress), 2015.
[87] B. Ruhnau, “Eigenvector-centrality a node-centrality?” Social Networks,
vol. 22, 2000, pp. 357–365.
[88] M. A. Russell, Mining the Social Web, 2nd Edition.
O’Reilly Media,
2013.
[89] C. Dunne and B. Shneiderman, “Motif Simpliﬁcation: Improving
Network Visualization Readability with Fan, Connector, and Clique
Glyphs,” CHI ’13: Proc. 2013 international conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 2013, pp. 3247–3256.
[90] M.
A.
Smith,
L.
Raine,
B.
Shneiderman,
and
I.
Himel-
boim,
“How
we
analyzed
Twitter
social
media
net-
works
with
NodeXL,”
Pew
Research
Center,
Tech.
Rep.,
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.pewinternet.org/ﬁles/2014/02/
How-we-analyzed-Twitter-social-media-networks.pdf
[Last
Accessed
19 November 2016].
[91] L.
C.
Freeman,
“A
Set
of
Measures
of
Centrality
Based
on
Betweenness,” Sociometry, vol. 40, no. 1, Mar. 1977, pp. 35–41.
[92] Y. Koren, S. C. North, and C. Volinsky, “Measuring and extracting
proximity graphs in networks,” ACM Transactions on Knowledge
Discovery from Data, vol. 1, no. 3, Dec. 2007, pp. 12–es.
[93] D. G. Lorentzen, “Polarisation in political Twitter conversations,” Aslib
Journal of Information Management, vol. 66, no. 3, May. 2014, pp.
329–341.

