551
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Smartphone Based 3D Navigation Techniques in an Astronomical Observatory 
Context: Implementation and Evaluation in a Software Platform 
 
Louis-Pierre Bergé1, Gary Perelman1, Adrien Hamelin1, Mathieu Raynal1, Cédric Sanza1, Minica Houry-
Panchetti1, Rémi Cabanac2, and Emmanuel Dubois1
1 University of Toulouse 
IRIT 
Toulouse, France 
{Louis-Pierre.Berge, Emmanuel.Dubois}@irit.fr 
2 Télescope Bernard Lyot, Observatoire Midi-Pyrénées 
University of Toulouse 
Tarbes, France 
remi.cabanac@obs-mip.fr 
 
Abstract—3D Virtual Environments (3DVE) come up as a good 
solution to transmit knowledge in a museum exhibit. In such 
contexts, providing easy to learn and to use interaction 
techniques which facilitate the handling inside a 3DVE is 
crucial to maximize the knowledge transfer. We took the 
opportunity to design and implement a software platform for 
explaining the behavior of the Telescope Bernard-Lyot to 
museum visitors on top of the Pic du Midi. Beyond the 
popularization of a complex scientific equipment, this platform 
constitutes an open software environment to easily plug 
different 3D interaction techniques. Recently, popular use of a 
smartphones as personal handled computer lets us envision the 
use of a mobile device as an interaction support with these 
3DVE. Accordingly, we design and propose how to use the 
smartphone as a tangible object to navigate inside a 3DVE. In 
order to prove the interest in the use of smartphones, we 
compare our solution with available solutions: keyboard-
mouse and 3D mouse. User experiments confirmed our 
hypothesis and particularly emphasizes that visitors find our 
solution more attractive and stimulating. Finally, we illustrate 
the benefits of our software framework by plugging alternative 
interaction 
techniques 
for 
supporting 
selection 
and 
manipulation task in 3D. 
Keywords-museum 
exhibit, 
3D 
environment, 
software 
platform, interactive visualization, interaction with smartphone, 
3D navigation, experiment. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In comparison to our initial work [1], this paper explored 
the context of astronomical observatory in museum exhibit, 
integrating our previous experiment and creating a larger 
software platform for public demonstrations. Nowadays, 3D 
Virtual Environments (3DVE) are no longer restricted to 
industrial use and they are now available to the mass-market 
in various situations: for leisure in video games, to explore a 
city on Google Earth or in public displays [2], to design a 
kitchen on a store website or to observe 3D reconstructed 
historical sites on online virtual museum [3]. The use of a 
3DVE in a museum, to engage people and facilitate the 
transmission of knowledge by adding fun and modern aspect 
[4], is the core of this work. As part of collaboration with the 
Telescope Bernard-Lyot (TBL), we intended to provide a 
support for helping visitors to better understand how this 
telescope operates. Indeed, access to the real telescope is 
restricted to keep the best possible values of temperature and 
hygrometry, 
crucial 
parameters 
for 
collecting 
good 
observation results. The telescope only works at night and 
thus cannot be observed in a running context during the day. 
Therefore, an interactive application support was required to 
help visitors discover the TBL. It has been shown that 3D 
virtual environments can help understand a complex system 
by improving the spatial representation users have of the 
objects or by allowing cooperation between different users 
[5]. Therefore, we developed an interactive 3D environment 
representing the TBL and its behavior. 
However, in a museum context, the visitor’s attention 
must be focused on the content of the message and not 
distracted by any difficulties caused by the use of a complex 
interaction technique. This is especially true in a museum 
where the maximization of the knowledge transfer is the 
primary goal of an interactive 3D experience. Common 
devices, such as keyboard and mouse [6] or joystick [7] are 
therefore widely used in museums. To increase the 
immersion of the user, solutions combining multiple screens 
or cave-like devices [8] also exist. However, these solutions 
are cumbersome, expensive and not widespread. 
Alternatively, the use of a smartphone, as a personal 
handheld computer, is commonly and largely accepted. 
Smartphones provide a rich set of features and sensors that 
can be useful to interact, especially with 3DVE and with 
remote, shared and large displays. Smartphones also create 
the opportunity for the simultaneous presence of a private 
space of interaction and a private space of viewing coupled 
with a public viewing on another screen. Furthermore, many 
researches have already been performed with smartphones to 
study their use for interacting with a computer. They explore 
multiple aspects such as technological capabilities [9], tactile 
interaction techniques [10], near or around interaction 
techniques [11]. Given the potential in terms of interaction 
support and the availability of smartphones in anyone's 
pocket, we explore the benefits and limitations of the use of a 
smartphone for interacting with a 3DVE displayed in a 
museum context in this article.  
Beyond the development 
of 
an 
interactive 3D 
environment for science popularization with only one set of 
interaction techniques, we took the opportunity to design and 
implement a platform on which it is easy to plug interaction 
techniques of different forms. The contribution presented in 
this paper is thus threefold.

552
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
  
   
 
Figure 1. Smartphone-Based interaction techniques to navigate into a 3D museum exhibit:  
a) principle of use, b) controlled experiment, c) integration in an in-situ exhibit. 
First, we adopt a user-centered approach to address the 
concrete need of the Telescope Bernard-Lyot: providing a 
3D interactive platform for museum exhibit, which facilitates 
the understanding of the telescope behavior.  
Second, we describe the design and implementation of 
the interactive platform. The platform is based on an open 
architecture in order to be able to plug different interaction 
modalities easily. Fundamental features integrated in the 
platform are then presented, such as 3D rendering, data 
visualization and interaction based on widows, mouse and 
3D mouse device. As a result, this platform provides a 
pedagogical environment in which different interaction 
techniques can easily be plugged into one specific 3D 
environment: the objects, the size of the elements and the 
available actions are the same for every technique. 
Third, we design and evaluate a new smartphone-based 
technique for navigating inside the 3D interactive platform: 
indeed navigation is the most predominant task a user will 
have to perform in order to discover and understand the 
virtual space. Concretely, our technique translates the 
motions of the smartphone into motions of the point of view 
in the 3DVE. We thus propose 1) to consider a smartphone 
as a tangible object, in order to integrate it smoothly into a 
museum environment and because it has been proven to be 
easier to apprehend by newcomers [12], 2) to display 
feedback and/or personalized information on the smartphone 
display, 3) to deport the display of the 3DVE on a large 
screen, in order to provide a display space visible by multiple 
users as required in museum contexts. As a result, our 
technique combines the use of a popular and personal 
portable device, the physical space surrounding the device 
and the user’s gestures and input for navigating inside a 
3DVE. We compared our designed solution to the use of 
more common and available technologies: the keyboard-
mouse device and a 3D mouse device. We proposed a 
controlled evaluation focused on the interaction techniques: 
out of a specific museum context, the user will not be 
distracted by pedagogical content. We measure its usability 
and 
attractiveness 
in 
conjunction 
with 
performance 
considerations. The results confirm the interest of 
considering the use of personal mobile devices for navigating 
inside a 3DVE: the results are particularly significant in 
terms of a user’s attractivity.  
The paper is structured as follow. We first position our 
work with regards to the context of 3D interactive 
application in museums (Section II). Then we introduce our 
design approach of the platform and the relevant software 
considerations related to the platform implementation in 
Section III. After, we detail our smartphone-based 
interaction technique (Section IV) with the settings of the 
user experiment (Section V) and the results (Section VI). We 
finally discuss (Section VII) the validation of our 3D 
interactive platform, the originality and limitations of our 
smartphone-based solution and other interaction techniques 
integrated in our platform (Section VIII). We conclude with 
perspectives and future works. 
II. 
BUILDING A 3D INTERACTIVE PLATFORM FOR 
MUSEUM EXHIBIT: RELATED WORKS 
As 
already 
mentioned, 
interactive 
3D 
virtual 
environments are emerging in public space applications and 
especially in museum contexts where they contribute to the 
immersion and engagement of visitors. 
In this field, many works have already been done and we 
propose in this section a review of already well known and 
explored challenges. First, we focus on the different forms a 
3D interactive visiting application can take in a museum. 
Then we synthesize technological considerations of 
importance and finally look at the design approaches for 
building a 3D interactive virtual exhibit. 
A. Visiting assistance 
In order to enhance the visit in museums, tour guides or 
audio-guide are available. These guides provide information 
about the different sections of a museum and guide the user 
through they visit by defining a specific path to follow. In the 
context of 3D, this raises specific challenges. First, the 
application must help the visitor so that he does not get lost 
in the 3D environment. Offering landmarks, maps, etc. are 
thus required [13]. The realism of the scene also plays a role 
[14]. To complement this immersion, avatars, conversational 
agents, realistic humanoids are also inserted in such app to 
guide or provide explanations to the visitors [15]. 
Alternatively, a smooth mix of real and virtual enables 
the visitor to proceed through a real museum, to collect 
elements of interests, and after the visit to virtually re-
explore in 3D those collected elements [16]. This is close to 
the attempts of using 3D virtual environments to support 
post-visit of a museum [17].  

553
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Beyond those individual visits, 3D virtual visits also raise 
the possibility to develop true collaborative visits so that 
remote visitors can visit it together [18]. To some extent, it is 
also a possible solution to explore in 3D some of the objects 
exposed in the museum. The concept of collaborative exhibit 
is especially relevant for blind visitors [19]. 
B. Technological considerations 
To settle these different forms of 3D interactive museum 
visits, several technical issues are raised and addressed in the 
scientific literature. In the museum context, two main 
considerations 
emerge 
from 
the 
literature: 
the 3D 
environment realism and the remote access. 
1) 3D use and constraints 
Although not specific to museum contexts, many ways of 
modeling museum objects into a 3D scene have been 
explored. It ranges from the modeling of the objects using 
dedicated approaches [20] to really precise modeling with a 
3D laser scanner [21] through image based reconstruction 
[22]. In addition, the rendering of the resulting 3D meshes 
can be crucial in order to give the user a good experience 
during a virtual visit: it involves a large graphical 
management as the handling of light effects on the objects or 
realistic shadows [23]. More complex treatments may also be 
required to obtain high resolution, accurate and complete 3D 
models of parts of an exhibit. This is for example possible 
through the combination of different 3D model types [24]. 
2) Collaborative access, distant access 
Once the virtual exhibit has been built, it remains 
necessary to allow its use in the context of a museum. 
Specific software design aspect must be considered to 
provide a support to an effective distant and collaborative 
access [25]. Indeed, as many visitors may come at the same 
time to the museum section, they have to be able to interact 
with the environment at the same time without having to 
wait the other visitors to leave. Many software architectures 
have been defined in the scientific literature to deal with such 
problems [26]. For example, if the 3D virtual environment 
allows a visitor to manipulate an element of the virtual 
museum, control over the environment must be handled by 
the platform. Apart from the collaborative or simultaneous 
access, visitors may have access to the virtual exhibit from 
everywhere: to this end, web access has been explored [14]. 
C. Building support to virtual exhibits  
Behind the form, rendering and software considerations, 
developing a virtual exhibit also requires to think of the 
structure of the application. This must be done in two ways. 
1) Management systems 
The first way consists in structuring the development of 
the application. Tool chains to create, store, manage and 
visualize all the data needed in virtual exhibits have been 
defined [27]. Other approaches have also been proposed 
where non-familiarized-in-computer-science users can edit 
their own application [27]. Such systems help the museum 
staff to manage their virtual museum easily and allow 
dynamic modifications (adding or removing objects, adding 
museum sections that does not exists in the real museum, 
etc.) [27]. 
2) Learning perspectives 
The second way consists in structuring the knowledge 
transfer approach. Indeed, once the 3D environment has been 
built, there is still the need to consider the ultimate goal of 
this virtual environment: its knowledge transfer capabilities. 
Some researchers have been led to determine if the use of a 
3D environment helps the user in the learning process [4]. 
After experiments with several museums with or without a 
3D virtual environment, it has been shown that these virtual 
accesses allow a better understanding of the museum 
information. This finding is based on the fact that the users 
are not forced to follow a specific path during their visit and 
thus are more concentrated on the museum section they are 
visiting. 
3D virtual spaces also offer tools and support for a 
pedagogical transfer. The impact of different tools is studied 
to reveal how it may enhance the learning experience [28]. 
D. Interaction techniques for 3D museum applications 
Finally, the fourth major areas of research related to 
interactive 3D virtual environment in museum is focusing on 
the user’s interaction with and within the 3D environment. 
Many interaction techniques dedicated to a 3D virtual 
museum environment have been studied in the past few 
years. Indeed, interacting with a 3D virtual exhibit 
application can be achieved using a simple GUI interface 
[29], where each object is represented by a tab that can be 
activated. It is possible to use tactile devices [30] to allow 
zooming on particular objects or turning them around to see 
them on a different point of view. Haptic devices can also be 
used [8] to enhance the spatial knowledge of the users when 
they manipulate the 3D objects of the application. Finally, 
augmented reality can be used to upgrade the immersive 
capabilities of the virtual exhibit [31]. 
E. Outcome of the state of the art 
According to the scientific literature, the use of 3D in a 
museum context has been widely addressed over the last 
years. Many different preoccupations have been raised and 
considered such as the integration of such application in a 
museum, 3D rendering issues and interaction techniques.  
Technological advances now largely allow the use of 
various and advanced forms of interactions. It is therefore 
required to provide a way to change interaction techniques 
easily in order to support the opportunity offered by new or 
emerging forms of interaction.  
Furthermore, little attention has been paid so far to the 
use of personal devices for navigating 3D in a museum 
context. Exploring the potential support personal smartphone 
can offer to perform complex interaction such as tasks in 3D 
environment are thus also required.  
In our work, the visiting assistance we are interested in is 
limited to a virtual interactive application, used in a museum 
with museum mediators available to explain the information 
provided by the application or using the application to catch 
an audience. From a technological point of view, we are 
seeking to provide a support to easily test different 
interaction techniques. Therefore, we need a software 
platform allowing easy plug and play of multiple interaction 

554
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
techniques. Regarding the application supporting the visit, 
we are focusing on a way to disseminate information about 
the Telescope Bernard Lyot (TBL) to none experts of 
astronomy and telescopes. We are more specifically focusing 
on the understanding of the operators’ activity on the TBL. 
Finally, in terms of interaction techniques we are mainly 
interested in providing a support for individual visitor to use 
a smartphone device to perceive a detailed area of one part of 
the 3D scene rendered on the remote and large screen. 
From these considerations, we designed, implemented 
and evaluated a set of interaction techniques based on the use 
of a smartphone for 3D virtual museum exhibit. The 
different interaction techniques have been plugged into a 
new platform that handles a 3D virtual museum exhibit 
based on a user-centered design approach. The aim of the 
platform is also to contribute to better take into account the 
user when developing a 3D interactive museum exhibit by 
offering a support to easily plug new interaction techniques: 
our goal behind the platform is thus to plug and compare 
different interaction techniques in a scenario and a 3D 
environment that serve as references. As a consequence, the 
platform architecture, which has been designed according to 
the state of art, also contains particular features that allow a 
better handling of the multiple interaction techniques that can 
be plugged on it. 
III. 
DESIGNING THE 3D INTERACTIVE PLATFORM 
As already mentioned, the platform is simultaneously 
intended to be a support for explaining how a telescope 
works and easy to plug interaction techniques for museum 
3D virtual environments. 
The user-centered design approach we followed to reach 
these two goals includes two steps. It firstly includes an 
observation step in which the goal is to identify the 
requirements for the interactive exhibit of the TBL. The 
design software architecture and the interaction techniques 
have been led in a second place. In the following sections we 
report the design tools used along the different steps and the 
design decisions taken to develop the platform.  
 
  
 
Figure 2. The Telescope Bernard-Lyot outside (left) and inside (right). 
A. Context 
The Telescope Bernard-Lyot (TBL) is located on top of 
the Pic-du-Midi (Figure 2). It is the largest telescope in 
Europe (2m.) and it takes advantage of a very good position: 
high altitude, far from city lights, etc. The operators of the 
TBL are in charge of planning and executing observations of 
“stars”. These observations are requested by European 
researchers.  
To perform these observations, a Windows, Icons, Menus 
and Pointing device (WIMP) application allows the 
monitoring of relevant data and the emission of “command-
lines” to position the telescope and its dome. Several screens 
are displaying all the required information in a very basic 
form as illustrated on the Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. Current operators’ desktop (top) and their WIMP applications 
(bottom). 
B. Domain analysis 
In this context, we performed two different forms of 
analysis: an in-situ observation to identify the tasks and data 
used by the current operators, and semi-guided interviews to 
define the potential end-users and the scenario describing the 
use of the TBL. 
During the in-situ observation, we watched the operators 
of the TBL during their work in the supervision room. We 
also visited the dome to have a better representation of the 
telescope and its components. We discussed with them to 
understand the tasks they performed more finely and we 
observed the current WIMP application they used. We 
formalized this task analysis through a task tree expressed 
with K-MADe [32]. The modeling of the overall activity 
leads to the identification of approximately 60 tasks. This 
provides a representation of the operator’s activity and the 
required data can easily be linked to the appropriate subtask. 
It constitutes a good support to organize the data retrieved in 
this first step of the analysis. 
After that, we organized semi-guided interviews with the 
operators and the personnel in charge of the visits (at the 
existing museum and at the dome) to define their additional 
or more specific needs that did not appear in the first 
observations. These multidisciplinary and participative 
meetings were especially important to identify the audience 
and the most important steps of the activity of an operator 
that must be explained to the different audiences. 

555
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
From this domain analysis step, we established a list of 
data that are the most relevant when performing an 
observation with the telescope: 
 
The two angles of the TBL  
 
The position of the seal of the dome (two 
angles).  
 
Inside and outside temperatures and hygrometry 
are also required to ensure a good quality 
observation.  
 
We also ended with two potential targets, sharing a 
common scenario:  
 
A museum visitor  
 
An astronomy student who learns how such 
telescopes work.  
 
Out of the task analysis we built with animators of the 
museum a defined pedagogical scenario allowing a random 
person to understand the set of operations performed to 
operate the telescope. It is split in five different steps, which 
globally represent how the telescope works and gathers data 
from a selected star:  
 
Activation of the hydraulic system 
 
Selection of a star 
 
Alignment of the telescope and the dome in the 
star direction 
 
Activation of the earth rotation and movement 
of the telescope to follow the star movement 
 
View of the gathered data 
 
These steps are further detailed and illustrated in Section 
III.C.3. Knowing all these informations, we were able to 
develop a platform that not only answers the required 
features, but also provides an easy way to plug the 
interaction techniques of different modalities and connect 
them to the 3D environment. 
C. Design 
Obviously, the basis of the 3D interactive platform is the 
3D scene. We thus started by building this environment on 
the basis of 3D meshes provided by the Telescope Bernard-
Lyot. These meshes had been built in SketchUp [33] on the 
basis of the 2D blueprints of the TBL. Our 3D environment 
has been built using the open source 3D renderer: Irrlicht 
[34]. 
Beyond the 3D environment, the design of the platform 
was decomposed into three subparts: the software and 
architecture of the system, a first set of interaction techniques 
and the instantiation of the pedagogical scenario. 
1) Software design 
The software design must allow plugging different 
interaction techniques to be used and evaluated. The 
software perspective must also take into account the context 
of use of the platform: several museum visitors may interact 
simultaneously from different devices or even places, time 
constraints for the visit exists, etc. This resulted into three 
design considerations: the architecture, the multi-users 
management and the components communication. 
To ensure a clear decomposition of the interaction and 
system parts, and allow for a modular implementation, an 
adaptation of the MVC architecture model is used to 
structure our platform.  
The concept of Model is used in our case to handle the 
data related to the operated telescope: position of the 
different elements, temperature, humidity, etc. The TBL 
being only operated at night, a simulation is required at day 
time to demonstrate its behavior to visitors. Therefore, the 
concept of Model applied to our platform allows a 
connection to the real TBL and/or a simulation of it. The first 
Model, called “real telescope” (Figure 4), gathers the data of 
the TBL and transfers it to the platform. The second one, 
called “simulated telescope” (Figure 4), emulates the 
behavior of the TBL. Actually, the 3D software platform 
allows visitors to manipulate only the simulated telescope 
and visualize the real one. 
The need to visualize the telescope data with a WIMP 
interface for example can directly be mapped to the concepts 
of View of the MVC pattern (Figure 4). Moreover, the need 
to manipulate the telescope or to navigate inside the 3D view 
can directly be mapped to the concepts of Controller of the 
MVC pattern (Figure 4). The 3D view is a mix of View and 
Controller concepts. In fact, the 3D view allows a 
visualization of the telescope data and also permits to 
manipulation element that control the scenario of the 
software platform (see Section III.C.3). 
In the middle of these components, a "Dialog Controller" 
orchestrates these components and their synchronization 
(Figure 4). It also includes a waiting queue to dispatch the 
control 
over 
the 
multi-user 
setting. 
This 
software 
implementation supports an easy reconfiguration of the 
platform to fit with different types of tasks, settings, features 
and interaction techniques.  
 
 
Figure 4. MVC architecture with different plugged components. 
Finally, to ensure an easy-to-plug, multi-platform 
compliant architecture and multi-programming language, we 
based the software communication protocol on the Ivy 
network API [35]. We created a set of textual predefined 
messages to support the communication over the different 
components types. These messages are generic for plugging 

556
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
different interaction technique into our software platform. As 
an example, controller components supporting manipulation 
of the 3D virtual environment has specific network messages 
to take control over the 3D scene and to control the 
telescope; view components have messages to update 
information regarding the telescope data modification. Those 
communications are encapsulated into DLLs in order to help 
future interaction technique developer to worry only about 
the interaction technique and not about their link to the 
platform. 
2) Interaction techniques design 
The second perspective of the design focuses on the way 
the users will concretely act on the 3D environments and its 
features. Users’ interaction design is more specifically 
dedicated to the definition of a concrete interactive 
application to support the explanation and popularization of 
the scientific equipment. It aims at offering flexibility to the 
user in terms of access to the interactive system, i.e., to 
provide multiple interaction types to perform the three tasks 
we defined previously in the 3D environment. 
We first lead a participatory design session, involving 
telescope operators, visitors, HCI specialists, 3D specialists 
and museum facilitators to produce mockups describing the 
organization and representation of the data required when 
operating the telescope. Results permits to design two 
different forms of data visualization and two sets of 
interaction technique. 
a) Data visualization 
Two forms of visualization are available on the current 
platform: a textual view and a 3D view of the data. The 
textual view is made of a set of labels with information such 
as the angles of the telescope and the position of the seal on 
the dome (Figure 5-left). It also contains hydrometric and 
temperature data, inside and outside the dome (Figure 5-
right). 
 
 
Figure 5. WIMP based view of the telescope data. 
The 3D view provides a graphical representation of the 
current position and orientation of the elements of the 
telescope in 3D (Figure 6). Relevant data are also labeled 
where appropriate: angle values are displayed on the rotation 
axis, temperature is a flying label in the always visible dome, 
etc. The 3D view thus aggregates information in a single 
graphical and a realistic fairly representation.  
Further, 
on-going 
iterations 
will 
optimize 
the 
presentation of the data. For example, recent participatory 
design 
sessions 
produced 
mock-ups 
for 
iconic 
representations of the labels: once developed they will be 
used to replace the textual label in the 2D view. 
 
Figure 6. 3D view of the telescope. 
b) Keyboard-mouse interaction technique 
To cover all these manipulations, the simplest solution 
consists in offering the user traditional windows and buttons 
interface. This also constitutes the most realistic interaction 
with regard to the actual settings used by the real operators 
of the TBL (Figure 3). Figure 7-left show our WIMP 
interface to manipulate the elements of the telescope and to 
select a star from a list. In comparison to the initial WIMP 
interface, our domain analysis permits to limit the number of 
buttons and therefore simplify the interface for non-expert 
users. A similar interface allows controlling the earth 
rotation and thus observing the stars movement in the 3D 
view.  
 
 
Figure 7. WIMP based telescope manipulator. 
To complement this widget set and allow navigation in 
the 3D environment we also developed two alternatives. The 
first one involves the use of the mouse and keyboard, which 
are very common in video games. The keyboards arrow keys 
are used to perform translations in the environment and the 
mouse motions allow the user to orient its point of view in 
the scene. The second is a WIMP interface for different 
buttons for controlling the position and orientation in the 3D 
environment (Figure 8).  
 
 
Figure 8. WIMP interface to navigate inside the 3DVE. 
 

557
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
c) 3D mouse interaction technique 
We have also integrated a commercial device dedicated 
to navigate inside the 3D environment: a 3D mouse, the 
Space Navigator [36] (Figure 9-left corner). This 3D mouse 
can be used to control the three rotation axis and three 
translation axes. A WIMP interface permits to calibrate and 
select the sensibility of the translation and rotation 
movement (Figure 9).  
 
 
Figure 9. WIMP interface to configure the 3D mouse named Space 
Navigator [36] (left corner). 
3) Instantiating the scenario on the platform 
The third and last perspective clearly addresses the need 
to develop a concrete application to explain the behavior of 
the Telescope Bernard-Lyot through a scenario. 
Given the 3D environment and the interaction techniques 
we developed, the five steps of the pedagogical scenario 
defined in close collaboration with the TBL and museum 
facilitators (see Section III.B) has been instantiated as 
follow.  
The first step, “activation of the hydraulic system” 
consists in finding a red button placed in the 3D 
environment. This navigation task can be achieved using a 
WIMP interface or a 3D mouse navigator. Coming close to 
the button triggers a pressure on it. This button, although it 
does not match any button on the real telescope, represents 
the first step that the operators do when they use the 
telescope: initiating the equipment.  
The second step, “selection of a star”, consists in 
selecting the star to observe. To do this, the dome of the 3D 
environment fades and the user can see all the stars currently 
added in the 3D scene. Selecting a star can be done either by 
clicking on it thanks to the mouse in the 3D scene or by 
choosing a star in the WIMP interface (Figure 7-left). 
The third step, “alignment of the telescope and the dome 
in the star direction”, consists in manipulating all the 
elements of the 3D scene in order to observe the star. To do 
that, the user can move the 3D objects by using the WIMP 
interface (Figure 7-left). Alternatively, an automatic 
resolution can be executed by the platform to perform the 
appropriate translations and rotations of the different 
elements of the TBL. 
The fourth step, “activation of the earth rotation and 
movement of the telescope to follow the star movement”, 
emulates the earth rotation around its axis. From a human 
point of view, it seems that the stars are rotating in the sky 
around the polar star. As a real observation can last for 
hours, it is important to perceive the impact of the earth 
rotation on the work of the operator. The sky rotation in the 
3D environment is of course a lot faster than in reality. The 
stars start rotating and the user has to constantly align the 
telescope in the star direction. Another interest of this step is 
to underline that the telescope has been built in such a way 
that there is only one axis that changes over time.  
The fifth and last step, “view of the gathered data”, 
shows to the user the data collected from the star observation 
performed through the previous steps (Figure 10). These data 
were gathered on real stars by the Telescope Bernard-Lyot 
and are shown to the user with an explanatory text. The data 
gathered are the spectrum of the star light obtained with a 
spectropolarimeter, 
one 
scientific 
originality 
of 
the 
equipment offered at the TBL. 
 
 
Figure 10. Spectrum of a star light (left) and its associated magnetic 
field (right). 
As illustrated here, the set of interaction techniques, 
based on windows, label, keyboard-mouse and 3D mouse is 
well suited for professional contexts and for users who are 
familiar with the use of 3D environments. But targeted 
audience is also made of museum visitors who may be very 
occasional users of 3D. To better engage the visitor and to 
explore the adequacy of other forms of interactive 
techniques, we have therefore designed a second type of 
interaction techniques to navigate inside the 3D environment 
based on the use of a smartphone. In the next section, we will 
detail our interaction technique. 
IV. 
OUR SMARTPHONE-BASED INTERACTION TECHNIQUE 
As described in the introduction, our interaction 
technique is based on the handling, manipulation and use of 
a smartphone, a familiar and personal object for most users. 
Three major characteristics define our interaction technique: 
tangible manipulation of the smartphone, personalized data 
displayed on the smartphone and 3DVE displayed on a 
remote screen. 
We restricted the degrees of freedom of the navigation 
task in order to be close to human behavior and existing 
solutions in video games with standard device: two degrees 
of freedom (DOF) are used for translations (front/back and 
left/right) and two for rotations (up/down and left/right). We 
did not include the y-axis translation and the z-axis rotation 
since they are not commonly used for the navigation task. To 
identify how to map the tangible use of the smartphone to 
these DOF, we first performed a guessability study as 
performed by other work [37]. 

558
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Guessability study 
14 participants have been involved and they were all 
handling their own smartphone in the right hand. To 
facilitate the understanding, the guessability study dealt with 
only one translation and one rotation. A picture of a 3DVE 
was presented to the participants on a vertical support 
(Figure 11-left). It included a door on the left of the 3D scene 
and the participants were asked to perform any actions they 
wished on their smartphones in order to be able to look 
through the door. A second picture (Figure 11-right) was 
then displayed: now facing the door, the participants were 
instructed to pass through the door.  
 
 
Figure 11. Pictures presented during the guessability study. 
In this second question, 11 participants performed hand 
translations to translate the point of view. Interestingly none 
suggested using the tactile modality. Results are more 
contrasted with the first question, requiring a rotation: 5 par-
ticipants used a heading rotation of the handled smartphone; 
only one used the roll technique; three proposed to hit the 
target with their smartphone; five participants placed the 
smartphone vertically (either in landscape or portrait 
orientation) and then rotated the smartphone according to the 
vertical axis (roll) thus preventing the view on the 
smartphone screen.  
B. Design solution 
From the guessability study, we retained that physical 
translations of the smartphone seem to be the most direct 
way to perform translations of the point of view in the 
3DVE. It has been implemented in our technique as follows. 
Bringing the smartphone to the left / right / front or back 
from its initial position triggers a corresponding shifting 
movement of the point of view in the 3DVE (Figure 12-a). 
The position of the point of view is thus controlled through a 
rate control approach; the applied rate is always the same and 
constant. It is of course possible to combine front / back 
translation with right / left translation.  
Feedback is displayed on the smartphone while moving it 
to perform these translations (Figure 12-b). A large circle 
displayed on the smartphone represents the initial position of 
the smartphone and the physical area in which no action will 
be triggered: the neutral zone. A small circle represents the 
current position of the smartphone and arrows express the 
action triggered in the 3DVE. As long as the small circle is 
inside the large circle, the navigation in the 3DVE is not 
activated. The feedback provided during each of four 
possible motions is illustrated in Figure 12-b. Finally, the 
smartphone vibrates every time that the navigation action is 
changed. 
 
 
Figure 12. Our smartphone based interaction. (a) Physical action for 
translation. (b) Feedback of the translation: front, left, front and right, back 
translation. 
Regarding rotations, we retain from the guessability 
study the most usable solution: rotations of the hand-wrist 
handling the smartphone are mapped to orientations of the 
point of view in the 3DVE. In our implementation, 
horizontal wrist rotations to the left/right of the arm are 
mapped to left/right rotations of the viewpoint (heading axis, 
rY) and wrist rotations above/below the arm are mapped to 
up/down rotations of the viewpoint (pitch axis, rX) (Figure 
13-a). A position control approach has been adopted here 
that establishes a direct coupling of the wrist angle with the 
point of view orientation. A constant gain has been set for 
the wrist rotations: the limited range of 10° left and right [38] 
can be used to cover the range of the rotation angle inside the 
3DVE (180°). This solution does not bear a U-turn: this was 
not required in the experiment but could be solved by 
transforming the position control into a rate control when the 
wrist reaches a certain angle.  
As for translations, feedback is displayed on the 
smartphone while moving it to perform these rotations. It is 
rendered through two "spirit levels": they provide an 
estimation of the current orientations of the smartphone 
(Figure 13-b) with respect to the initial orientations used as a 
reference. 
 
 
Figure 13. Our smartphone based interaction. (a) Physical action for rotation. 
(b) Feedback of the rotation. 

559
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
To avoid unintended motions of the virtual camera in the 
3DVE, the translations and rotations of the smartphone are 
applied to the 3DVE only when the user is pressing the 
button “navigate” displayed on the smartphone. 
The smartphone also displays a “calibrate” button. This 
allows the user to recalibrate the smartphone at will, i.e., to 
reset the center of the neutral zone to the current position of 
the smartphone and the reference orientations. 
  
Figure 14 illustrates the use of this smartphone-based 
interaction technique. Circles in the middle of the smart-
phone screen indicate that the user is in the neutral zone. 
Spirit levels on top of the smartphone screen indicate he is 
looking a little bit upwards (right spirit level) and slightly to 
the right (left spirit level). As the user's thumb is not pressing 
the "navigate" button displayed on the smartphone screen 
(left corner), the motions of the smartphone do not currently 
affect the point of view on the scene.  
 
 
Figure 14. User navigating with the smartphone-based technique. 
V. 
EXPERIMENT 
We 
conducted 
an 
experiment 
to 
compare 
our 
smartphone-based interaction technique with two other 
techniques using devices available in museums: a keyboard-
mouse combination and a 3D mouse. In the museum context, 
the temporal performances are not predominant. In fact our 
goal was to assess and compare the usability and 
attractiveness of these three techniques. Our protocol does 
not include museum information in order to keep the 
participant focused on the interaction task.  
A. Task 
The task consisted in navigating inside a 3D tunnel com-
posed by linear segments ending in a door (Figure 15-b). The 
task is similar to the one presented in [39] and sufficiently 
generic to evaluate the interaction techniques correctly. The 
participants had to go through the segments and go across 
the doors but could not get out of the tunnel. Black arrows on 
the wall allowed finding the direction of the next door easily. 
The segments between the doors formed the tunnel, its 
orientation was randomly generated: the center of each door 
is placed -40, -20, 0, 20 or 40 pixels to the left/ right axis and 
to the top/bottom axis of the center of the previous door 
(Figure 15-a). One trial of the task consist in navigate inside 
a tunnel including all 25 possible directions of the next door. 
The movement of the user is not liable to gravity. When the 
user looks up and starts a front translation movement, the 
resulting motion is a translation in the direction of the 
targeted point. 
 
 
Figure 15. (a) Representation of one segment of the 3D tunnel. 
(b) Screenshots of the 3D environment of the experiment. 
B. Interaction techniques 
We compared three techniques: keyboard-mouse, 3D 
mouse and our technique based on a smartphone. In 
keyboard-mouse, the movements of the mouse control the 2 
DOF point of view of the virtual camera (orientation). The 
four directional arrows of the keyboard control the 2 DOF of 
the translation of the virtual camera. In 3D mouse, the 
participant applies lateral forces onto the device to control 
translations (right/left, front/back), and rotational forces to 
control orientations of the virtual camera. The use of our 
technique, the smartphone, has been described in Section IV. 
For the three techniques, it appears that left/right translations 
are particularly useful when collision with doors occurs. 
For each technique we determined the speed gain of the 
translation and rotation tasks through a pre-experiment with 
six subjects. We asked the participants to navigate inside our 
3D virtual environment with each technique and to adjust the 
gains freely to feel comfortable when performing the task. 
We stopped the experiment and recorded the settings when 
the participant successfully went through 5 consecutive 
doors. Finally, for each technique, we averaged the values of 
gain between the participants. We noticed that the gain of the 
translation of the keyboard-mouse was higher than the 3D 
mouse or smartphone. This is probably due to the people 
habit in handling this technique. 
C. Apparatus 
The experiment was done in full-screen mode on a 24″ 
monitor with a resolution of 1920 by 1080 pixels. We 
developed the environment with a 3D open source engine, 
Irrlicht, in C++. For the keyboard and mouse device, we used 
a conventional optical mouse and a standard keyboard with 
108 keys (Figure 16-a). For the 3D mouse we used the 
Space-Navigator [36] (Figure 16-b), a commercial device 
with 6 DOF. For the smartphone, we implemented the 
technique on a Samsung Galaxy S2 running Android 4.1.2 
(Figure 16-c). To avoid an overload of the smartphone 
computing capacities with the processing of the internal 
sensors (accelerometers, gyroscope) we used an external 6D 

560
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
tracker: the Polhemus Patriot Wireless [40] (Figure 16-d). 
We fixed a sensor to the rear face of the smartphone. Via a 
driver written in C++, the marker returns the position and the 
orientation of the smart-phone. We filtered the data noise 
with the 1€ filter [41]. 
 
 
Figure 16. (a) The keyboard-mouse, (b) The 3D mouse and (c) the 
smartphone configuration. (d) The Polhemus sensor. 
D. Participants and procedure 
We recruited a group of 24 subjects (6 female) aged 29.3 
(SD=9) on average. All subjects were used to the keyboard 
and mouse, 17 of them had a smartphone and only 1 had 
already used the 3D mouse.  
Every 
participant 
performed 
the 
3 
techniques 
(smartphone, keyboard-mouse and 3D mouse). They started 
with the keyboard-mouse technique in order to be used as a 
reference. The order of smartphone and 3D mouse 
techniques was counterbalanced to limit the effect of 
learning, fatigue and concentration. For each technique, the 
subject navigated inside 6 different itineraries. We 
counterbalanced the itineraries associated with each 
technique across participants so that each technique was used 
repeatedly with each group of users. 
The participants were siting during the experiment and 
were instructed to optimize the path, i.e., the distance 
travelled. They could train on each technique through one 
itinerary. When the user passed through a door, a positive 
beep was played. When the user collided with an edge of the 
tunnel, a negative beep was played. 
After having completed the six trials for one technique, 
the subject filled the System Usability Scale (SUS) [42] and 
AttrakDiff [43] questionnaires and indicated three positive 
and negative aspects of the technique. The procedure is 
repeated for the two remaining technique. The experiment 
ended with a short interview to collect oral feedback. The 
overall duration of the experiment was about 1 hour and 30 
minutes per participant. 
E. Collected data 
In addition to the SUS and AttrakDiff questionnaires 
filled after each technique to measure usability and 
attractiveness, we also asked for a ranking of the three 
interaction techniques in terms of preferences. From a 
quantitative point of view we measured the traveled distance 
and the number of collisions.  
VI. 
RESULTS 
In the following section here are the quantitative and 
qualitative results we obtained. 
A. Quantitative results 
First, a Kruskal-Wallis test confirmed that none of the 18 
randomly chosen itineraries had an influence on the collected 
results. On average, we observed (Figure 17) that the 
travelled distance is the smallest with the keyboard-mouse 
(2766px, SD = 79), followed by the 3D mouse (2881px, SD 
= 125) and the smartphone (2996px, SD = 225). According 
to a Wilcoxon test these differences are significant. The same 
conclusions can be drawn with regard to the amount of 
collisions (keyboard-mouse: 5.08, SD = 5.68; 3D mouse: 
16.11, 
SD = 15.86; smartphone: 33.35, SD = 24.64). 
 
 
Figure 17. Evolution of the travelled distance and the amount of 
collisions according to 6 trials of the subjects. 
Given the high dispersion of the distance and collision 
measures, we refined this analysis in distinguishing the 
results obtained for each of the six trials performed by the 24 
participants (Figure 17). This refined analysis reveals a 
significant learning effect with the smartphone technique: 
between the first and sixth trial, the distance is 7.3% shorter 
(Wilcoxon test, 𝑝 = 6 × 10−6) and collision are reduced of 
43.3% (Wilcoxon test, 𝑝 = 2 × 10−4). A significant learning 
effect is also observed with the 3D mouse, but only in terms 
of distance and with a smaller improvement (1.6% shorter, 
Wilcoxon test, 𝑝 = 0.049).  
The learning effect with the smartphone is so important 
that, at the last trial, the travelled distance for the smartphone 
(2893px) and the 3D mouse (2873px) is comparable (no 
significant difference, Wilcoxon test, 𝑝 = 0.49). 
B. Qualitative results  
Three aspects have been considered in the qualitative 
evaluation: usability, attractiveness and the user’s preference.  
 
Usability evaluation: the SUS questionnaire [42] gives 
an average score of 82.60 (SD=12.90) for the keyboard-
mouse, 54.79 (SD=22.47) for the smartphone based 
interaction and 53.54 (SD=27.97) for the 3D mouse. A 
Wilcoxon test shows that the SUS difference is statistically 
significant between the keyboard-mouse and each of the two 
other techniques (3D mouse, smartphone). However, the 
SUS difference is not statically significant between the 3D 
mouse and the smartphone. Research conducted to the 
interpretation of the SUS score [44] permits to classify the 
usability of the keyboard-mouse as “excellent”. According to 
this interpretation scale, the usability of the smartphone and 
the 3D mouse is identified as “ok”. 

561
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
We also note a wide dispersion of the SUS score. We 
thus performed a more detailed analysis of the SUS score. 
First, according to [44] a system with a “good” usability 
must obtain a score above 70. In our experiment, 33% of the 
participants scored the 3D mouse above 70 while 37% of the 
participants scored the smartphone above 70. Second, 3D 
mouse and smartphone were two techniques unfamiliar to 
the participants. The results of the SUS questionnaire show 
that when the smartphone is used after the 3D mouse, the 
average score for the smartphone is 65.62 whereas in the 
other order the average score is 43.96. The perceived 
usability of the two unfamiliar techniques is therefore lower 
than the perceived usability of the keyboard-mouse. 
However, once the participants have manipulated these two 
unfamiliar techniques, the perceived usability of the 
smartphone increases drastically.  
 
Attractiveness: Data collected using AttrakDiff [45] 
give an idea of the attractiveness of the technique and how it 
is experienced. Attrakdiff supports the evaluation of a system 
according to four distinct dimensions: the pragmatic quality 
(PQ: product usability, indicates if the users could achieve 
their goals using it); the hedonic quality – stimulation (HQ-
S: determine to which extent the product can support the 
need in terms of new, interesting and stimulating functions, 
contents and interaction); the hedonic quality – identity (HQ-
I: indicates to what extend the product allows the user to 
identity with it); the attractiveness (ATT: global values of the 
product based on the quality perception).  
 
 
 
Figure 18. Portfolio generated on the AttrakDiff website. 
Figure 18 shows a portfolio of the average value of the 
PQ and the HQ (HQ-S+HQ-I) for the three interaction 
techniques assessed in our user experiment.  
The keyboard-mouse was rated as “fairly practice-
oriented”, i.e., one of the first levels in the “task-oriented” 
category. According to the website report [45], the average 
value of PQ (above 1) indicates that there is definite room of 
improvement in terms of usability. The average value of HQ 
obtained (approx. -1) expresses that there is clearly room for 
improvement in terms of user’s stimulation. The 3D mouse 
was rated as “fairly self-oriented”, i.e., one of the first levels 
in the category “self- oriented”. The average value of PQ 
(approx. 0) expresses that there is room for improvement in 
terms of usability. The average value of HQ obtained 
(approx. 1) expresses that room for improvement also exists 
in terms of user’s stimulation. The smartphone was rated as 
“self-oriented”. The average value of PQ (approx. 0) 
expresses that there is room for improvement in terms of 
usability. The average value of HQ obtained (above 1) 
expresses that the user identifies with the product and is 
motivated and stimulated by it. 
 
Figure 19 summarizes the average values for the four 
AttrakDiff dimensions of the three interaction techniques. 
With regards to the four dimensions the smartphone is rated 
higher than the 3D mouse and the differences are statistically 
significant (T-test, p<0.05). For the PQ value the keyboard-
mouse is better than the smartphone (statistically significant, 
p<0.05). For HQ-I and HQ-S values the smartphone is better 
than the keyboard-mouse (statistically significant, p<0.05). 
In terms of ATT, the smartphone is again rated higher than 
keyboard-mouse but the difference is however not 
statistically significant (p>0.05). Compared to the keyboard-
mouse, the smartphone is considered as novel, innovative, 
inventive, stylish and creative. Improvements in terms of 
simplicity, straightforwardness or predictability could 
increase the average value of PQ and probably increase even 
more the ATT value of the smartphone. 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Average values for the four dimensions of the AttrakDiff 
questionnaire. 
User preference: at the end of the experiment a short 
semi-guided interview was performed. The participants were 
first asked to rank the three techniques from 1 (best) to 3 
(worst). The results are in line with the SUS scores: the 
keyboard-mouse technique is largely preferred and the 3D 
mouse is by far the least appreciated technique: only 2 
participants out of 24 ranked it as the best, and 14 ranked it 
as the worst. The smartphone based-interaction is ranked 
uniformly in the three places (7, 9, 8). 
Finally, three positive points and three negative points 
were asked for each technique. The most frequently 

562
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
mentioned positive points are “quick”, “easy” and “accurate” 
for the keyboard-mouse technique, “intuitive”, “novel” and 
“usable with on hand” for the 3D mouse and “immersive”, 
“funny”, and “accessible to everybody” for the smartphone. 
The participants thus appreciate the conditions of use created 
by the smartphone while they particularly pinpoint the 
effectiveness of the mouse and provide general comments 
about the 3D mouse. 
The most frequently mentioned negative aspect is related 
to a practical aspect of the keyboard-mouse (“requires the 
use of both hands”). They are related to the effectiveness of 
use of the 3D mouse (“difficulty to combine translation and 
rotation at the same time”, “lack of precision” and “high 
need for concentration”) and for the smartphone it focuses on 
one specific feature (“difficulty to translate to the left or 
right”) and the overall context of use (“the apparent time of 
learning” and “the tiredness caused in the arm”).  
Technical issues for the 3D mouse and effectiveness of 
the keyboard-mouse are thus highlighted while the benefits 
and limits related to the interactive experience are mentioned 
for the smartphone. This clear shift of interest between the 
three techniques reveals that the disappointing performances 
of the smartphone highlighted in the previous section are not 
totally overruling the interest of the participants for the 
smartphone-based technique. It is therefore a very interesting 
proof of interest for further exploring the use of a 
smartphone in 3DVE. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
A. Smartphone-based interaction: comparing our solution 
to existing ones  
Among the existing attempts for exploring the navigation 
of 3DVE with a smartphone, two different settings exist. A 
first set of solutions, as opposed to our setting, proposes to 
display the 3DVE directly on the smartphone. Different 
techniques are explored to change the point of view inside 
the 3D scene: tactile screen like Navidget [46], integrated 
sensor [47], smartphone motions in the space around a 
reference, as Chameleon technique [48] and T(ether) [49] 
and manipulation of physical objects around the smartphone 
[50]. The second set of solutions avoids issues related to the 
occlusion of the 3DVE with fingers by displaying the 3DVE 
on a distant screen. These involved solutions integrated 
sensor [51] to detect user’s motions, additional tactile screen 
[52] or a combination of both [53]. Although our technique 
is clearly in line with this second set of solutions, our use of 
the smartphone presents three major originalities. Firstly, the 
smartphone is not limited to a remote controller: it is also 
used to provide the user with feedback or personalized 
information. Secondly, using tactile interaction to support the 
navigation would occlude part of the screen and prevent its 
use to visualize data, selecting objects or clicking on 
additional features. Instead, physical gesture are applied to 
the smartphone to control rotations like in [54] or [53] but 
also to control translations of the point of view in the 3DVE. 
Thirdly, the choice of the gestures to apply has been guided 
by the results of a guessability study that highlights the most 
probable gesture users would perform with a smartphone. 
We used this approach rather than a pre-experiment or 
results of existing experiment [53] because when getting 
familiar with the manipulation of a smartphone, universal 
gestures will be adopted, and not necessarily the ones known 
as the most efficient. The users’ prime intuition of use 
looked more important to us. 
B. User’s experiment results: analysis 
Beyond the designed interaction technique, the contribu-
tion includes a set of evaluation results. The user experiment 
revealed a significant learning effect with the smartphone. 
This is a very encouraging result because no learning effect 
was observed with keyboard-mouse and 3D mouse although 
the participants were unfamiliar with 3D mouse and 
smartphone: the use of a smartphone thus significantly 
improves over the time.  
Results also revealed that the use of our smartphone 
based technique to navigate inside a 3DVE is more attractive 
and stimulating than a more usual technique such as the 
keyboard-mouse and the 3D mouse.  
In terms of usability, users’ preferences (interaction 
technique ranking) and quantitatively (travelled distance and 
amount of collisions) our smartphone technique appears to 
be weaker than the keyboard-mouse technique but similar to 
the 3D mouse.  
This 
tradeoff 
between 
attractivity 
and 
usability 
/performance emphasizes that compared to two manufac-
tured devices; our technique is better accepted but weaker in 
performance and usability. This is particularly encouraging 
because technological improvements of our technique, such 
as mixing the use of integrated sensor with image processing 
to compute more robust and accurate smartphone position 
and orientation, will also increase the user's performance. In 
addition, the use of smartphones is already widely spread and 
we believe that their use as an interaction support with 
remote application will develop as well and become a usual 
interaction form.  
Altogether this user experiment establishes that the use of 
a smartphone to interact with 3DVE is very promising and 
needs to be explored later.  
VIII. INTEGRATING THE SMARTPHONE BASED TECHNIQUE 
AND OTHER ADVANCED INTERACTION TECHNIQUES IN THE 
PLATFORM 
A. Assessing the easy to plug feature of the platform 
Following these very positive results, we have 
successfully and easily connected the presented smartphone 
interaction technique to the interactive platform presented in 
Section III. Concretely, our technique is used to control the 
navigation step in the pedagogical step of the scenario. It 
thus consists in moving through the dome and around the 
telescope to collect the inside temperature, displayed only 
when the visitor is close to the floor, and the outside 
temperature, displayed only when the visitor is close to the 
aperture of the dome. We just add one class implementing 
the Controller concept of the DLL to plug our interaction 
technique into the software platform. Approximately 10 

563
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
minutes are sufficient to create the link between a new 
interaction technique and our software platform. 
To further assess the ability of the platform to plug new 
interaction technique easily, we have developed two other 
advanced interaction techniques for controlling navigation. 
The first one is based on a physical doll (Figure 20 – left). 
An ARToolKit marker [55] and a push button are attached to 
the doll, which is handled by the user. When the user presses 
the button, the marker is tracked by a camera to trigger, in 
the interactive platform, a navigation command that 
corresponds to the doll motion. The user can thus move the 
doll to perform a translation in the 3D environment or a 
rotation of the point of view.  
The second one is based on a physical cube (Figure 20 – 
right). Users’ movements to navigate in the 3D environment 
are identical to the doll technique. We used the Polhemus 
Patriot Wireless [40] for tracking the position and the 
orientation of the cube over timer. We had a Phidget SBC 
board [56] for wirelessly transmitting the state of a push 
button. When the cube face presenting the rotation and 
translation instructions is facing upward, and if the button is 
pressed, any motion applied by the user to the physical cube 
will be directly mapped to a navigation command in the 3D 
environment. This design reveals the possibility to map other 
features to the five remaining cube faces. Again, inserting 
this different type of interaction technique, based on a new 
type of sensors, in the platform did not raise any problem of 
software connections. 
 
 
 
Figure 20. Tangible navigation technique based one a physical doll 
(left) and one a physical cube (right). 
However, all the steps of the pedagogical scenario are not 
covered with these techniques. Indeed, the second and third 
steps that require selection and manipulation are not 
supported by these techniques.  
Regarding the selection phase, as described in [57], we 
explored touchscreen input, mid-air movement of the mobile 
device (Figure 21-right), and mid-air movement of the hand 
around the device (Figure 21-left) for exploring and selecting 
element in 3D detail view of the virtual environment. Results 
shows that gesture with the smartphone or around the 
smartphone perform better than traditional tactile interaction 
modality. Interestingly, users preferred mid-air movement 
around the smartphone. Therefore, we developed an 
additional technique around the smartphone to support the 
selection step of the pedagogical scenario.  
We also enriched the physical cube based interaction 
technique so that it covers the selection step by simply 
adding an RF-ID reader inside the cube and close to a second 
cube face. It thus supports the selection of a star to observe 
and thanks to the Phidget SBC board [56], the 
communication between the application and the RF-ID 
reader remains wireless. 
 
 
 
Figure 21. Smartphone-based technique for exploring and selecting 
element in 3D detail view: mid-air movement of the mobile device (left), 
and mid-air movement of the hand around the device (right). 
Now regarding the manipulation step of the scenario, the 
only interaction techniques initially available were limited to 
the WIMP based controller described in Section III.C.2. We 
developed a smartphone application, which allows the user 
to manipulate and visualize the telescope information 
through a simple and easy to pick up interface (Figure 22). 
Sliders are displayed to allow the modification of the 
different parameters while a list of labels can be visualized to 
monitor the state of the relevant data.  
 
  
 
Figure 22. Smartphone interface for manipulation (left) and data 
visualization (right). 
The cube based interaction techniques has also be 
enriched to support the manipulation task: two additional 
cube faces present the instructions to manipulate the different 
elements of the 3D environment. When facing upward, they 
respectively allow manipulating the dome elements and the 
telescope axes.  
B. 3D Interactive Platform deployment 
We deployed our interactive platform in two major 
public situations: in October 2013, during two days in our 
university hall for a scientific festival named Novela, and in 
June 2014, during two days in the museum of the Pic Du 
Midi (Figure 23). Large and varied audiences, ranging from

564
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 23. The in-situ deployment of our 3D interactive platform. 
scholar to retired people, have used at this interactive 
installation. These two in-situ deployment permitted to 
validate the robustness of our platform and interaction 
techniques (WIMP, tangible and smartphone-based). It also 
allowed us to identify some limitations about the different 
techniques. Our future goal is to perform an overall user’s 
experimentation of the different interaction techniques we 
plugged into the platform in order to assess and compare 
their learnability, efficiency with regards to the museum 
visit, usability and attractiveness. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
In this article, we have presented a software platform that 
provides a way to visualize, manipulate and navigate through 
a complex and concrete 3D environment representing the 
Telescope Bernard-Lyot. From the museum point of view, 
rather than using a poster or photographs, the interactive 
software platform provides an immersive and engaging way 
to transfer knowledge about the telescope to the museum 
visitors. The adapted MVC architecture grants a multiuser, 
multiplatform and remote access to the 3D environment, 
which is particularly interesting in a museum context. From 
the scientific point of view, the interactive software platform 
that we developed provides an easy way to plug new 
interaction techniques. In future works, other interaction 
modalities like tangible or gesture interaction could be 
plugged into the 3D in the 3D interactive platform. These 
techniques can then be tested and evaluated in a concrete 3D 
environment with real tasks (navigation, manipulation and 
visualization). The originality of this 3D museum exhibit lies 
in the fact that it has been designed to be opened and easy to 
adapt. As a result, our contribution to the field of interaction 
in 3D spaces is also a reference platform in which user-
centered evaluation of other interaction techniques can be 
easily performed. 
We then explored the feasibility of using a smartphone to 
navigate inside a 3DVE. Smartphones present the advantage 
to provide a private space for viewing and to constitute a 
personal device for navigating or controlling a 3D cultural or 
pedagogical content. Generalizing its use throughout a 
museum is also completely imaginable. With a QR code the 
visitor can easily download the mobile app in front of the 
exhibit and interact with the 3DVE. The originality of our 
technique relies on the fact that the smartphone is used as a 
tangible object. Physical actions on the smartphone trigger 
translation and rotation in the 3DVE. Very promising results 
have been highlighted in a user experiment comparing our 
solution to a keyboard-mouse technique and a 3D mouse, the 
most common devices found in museums nowadays. We 
measured that after a short learning period, the smartphone 
technique leads to performant results that are comparable 
with the 3D mouse. Through technical optimization we are 
also convinced that it might become comparable to the 
keyboard-mouse technique. But more notably, we clearly 
established that visitors find such a more attractive and 
stimulating solution. In this study, we have therefore 
established that the use of a smartphone as a tangible object 
for navigating inside a 3DVE is a good alternative to the 
keyboard-mouse and 3D mouse.  
We then successfully plugged in our software platform 
different advanced interaction techniques that have then been 
used in public contexts. These techniques used tangible, 
tactile and gesture modality. To complete these works, it will 
be interesting to measure the impact of these different 
interaction techniques on a museum visit and on the quality 
of the educational transfer. For example, in terms of 
knowledge acquired through the defined pedagogical 
scenario, it could be original to compare smartphone-based 
technique with tangible interaction techniques. 
In long term future work, we have two precise goals. 
First, we plan to add an interaction technique database within 
our software platform in which a description of every 
interaction technique evaluated would be stored with its 
associated results. This could be really beneficial for the 
future interaction techniques designers who will be able to 
compare their own technique with the already developed 
ones. The second objective is to reuse the platform for the 
monitoring of the energy consumption at the level of a 
university campus. The 3D environment will then be 
replaced by the simulation of the energy consumption in the 
campus. The visualization task would then provide a way to 
see the energy consumption and the manipulation task would 
allow the user to close windows or change the wall material 
for example. The software infrastructure would remain 
unchanged. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Novela festival for supporting 
us in the deployment of the platform in a public space. We 
also thank the TBL team for their help and their implication 
in this project. 

565
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCE 
[1] L.-P. Bergé, G. Perelman, M. Raynal, C. Sanza, M. Serrano, 
M. 
Houry-Panchetti, 
R. 
Cabanac, 
and 
E. 
Dubois, 
“Smartphone-based 3D navigation technique for use in a 
museum exhibit,” in The Seventh International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI 2014), 
2014, pp. 252–257. 
[2] D. S. Tan, D. Gergle, P. Scupelli, and R. Pausch, “Physically 
large displays improve performance on spatial tasks,” ACM 
Trans. Comput. Interact., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 71–99, Mar. 
2006. 
[3] “3D Ancient Wonders, archeological reconstruction online 
virtual 
museum.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.3dancientwonders.com/. 
[Accessed: 
05-Feb-
2014]. 
[4] R. Hawkey, “Learning with digital technologies in museums, 
science centres and galleries,” NESTA Futur., pp. 1–44, 2004. 
[5] H. S. Jerome Rodrigues, “Transfer of spatial knowledge from 
virtual to real environment: effect of active/passive learning 
depending on a test-retest procedure and the type of retrieval 
tests,” J. Cybertherapy Rehabil., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 275 – 285, 
2010. 
[6] L. Pecchioli, M. Carrozzino, F. Mohamed, M. Bergamasco, 
and T. H. Kolbe, “ISEE: Information access through the 
navigation of a 3D interactive environment,” J. Cult. Herit., 
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 287–294, Jul. 2011. 
[7] T. Wischgoll and J. Meyer, “An explorational exhibit of a 
pig’s heart,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Posters on - 
SIGGRAPH ’05, 2005, p. 138. 
[8] C. Christou, C. Angus, C. Loscos, A. Dettori, and M. 
Roussou, “A versatile large-scale multimodal VR system for 
cultural heritage visualization,” in Proceedings of the ACM 
symposium on Virtual reality software and technology - VRST 
’06, 2006, pp. 133–140. 
[9] H. Graf and K. Jung, “The smartphone as a 3D input device,” 
in 2012 IEEE Second International Conference on Consumer 
Electronics - Berlin (ICCE-Berlin), 2012, pp. 254–257. 
[10] H.-N. Liang, J. Trenchard, M. Semegen, and P. Irani, “An 
exploration of interaction styles in mobile devices for 
navigating 3d environments,” in Proceedings of the 10th asia 
pacific conference on Computer human interaction - APCHI 
’12, 2012, pp. 309–313. 
[11] D. Avrahami, J. O. Wobbrock, and S. Izadi, “Portico: tangible 
interaction on and around a tablet,” in Proceedings of the 24th 
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and 
technology - UIST ’11, 2011, pp. 347–356. 
[12] O. Shaer and E. Hornecker, “Tangible User Interfaces: past, 
present, and future directions,” Found. Trends® Human–
Computer Interact., vol. 3, no. 1–2, pp. 1–137, Jan. 2009. 
[13] A. Parush and D. Berman, “Navigation and orientation in 3D 
user interfaces: the impact of navigation aids and landmarks,” 
Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 375–395, Sep. 
2004. 
[14] C.-Y. Lin, “Investigating the potential of on-line 3D virtual 
environments to improve access to museums as both an 
informational and educational resource,” Faculty of Art and 
Design De Montfort University, 2009. 
[15] L. Chittaro, L. Ieronutti, and R. Ranon, “Navigating 3D 
virtual environments by following embodied agents: a 
proposal and its informal evaluation on a virtual museum 
application,” PsychNology J., vol. 2, no. Special issue on 
Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 24–42, 2004. 
[16] P. Alessio and A. Topol, “A public 3D visualization tool for 
the musée des Arts et Métiers de Paris,” in ICEC’11 
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on 
Entertainment Computing, 2011, pp. 136–142. 
[17] P. Mulholland, T. Collins, and Z. Zdrahal, “Bletchley Park 
Text: Using mobile and semantic web technologies to support 
the post-visit use of online museum resources,” J. Interact. 
Media Educ., no. Special Issue: Portable Learning - 
Experiences with Mobile Devices, pp. 1–21, 2005. 
[18] T. Barbieri, F. Garzotto, G. Beltrame, L. Ceresoli, M. Gritti, 
and D. Misani, “From dust to stardust: a collaborative 3D 
virtual museum of computer science,” in International 
Cultural Heritage Informatics Meeting - ICHIM, 2001, pp. 
341–345. 
[19] G. Jansson, M. Bergamasco, and A. Frisoli, “A new option for 
the visually impaired to experience 3D art at museums: 
manual exploration of virtual copies,” Vis. Impair. Res., vol. 
5, pp. 1–12, 2003. 
[20] R. Berndt, D. W. Fellner, and S. Havemann, “Generative 3d 
models: a key to more information within less bandwidth at 
higher quality,” in Web3D ’05, 2005, pp. 111–121. 
[21] J. Taylor, J.-A. Beraldin, G. Godin, L. Cournoyer, R. 
Baribeau, F. Blais, M. Rioux, and J. Domey, “NRC’s 3D 
imaging technology for museum & heritage applications,” J. 
Vis. Comput. Animat., vol. 14, pp. 121–138, 2006. 
[22] C. H. Esteban and F. Schmitt, “Silhouette and stereo fusion 
for a 3d object modelling,” Comput. Vis. Image Underst., vol. 
96, no. 3, pp. 367–392, 2003. 
[23] M. Glencross, A. G. Chalmers, M. C. Lin, M. A. Otaduy, and 
D. Gutierrez, “Exploiting perception in high-fidelity virtual 
environments,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Courses on - 
SIGGRAPH ’06, 2006, pp. 1–188. 
[24] J.-A. Beraldin, M. Picard, S. F. El-Hakim, G. Godin, V. 
Valzano, and A. Bandiera, “Combining 3D technologies for 
cultural heritage interpretation and entertainment,” in SPIE 
5665, Videometrics VIII, 2005, pp. 108–118. 
[25] E. Ciabatti, P. Cignoni, C. Montani, and R. Scopigno, 
“Towards a distributed 3D virtual museum,” in Proceedings 
of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces - 
AVI ’98, 1998, pp. 264–266. 
[26] X. Guo and P. W. H. Chung, “The architecture of a web 
service-based remote control service system,” in Proceedings 
of the 10th International Conference on Information 
Integration and Web-based Applications & Services - iiWAS 
’08, 2008, pp. 555–558. 
[27] M. White, N. Mourkoussis, J. Darcy, P. Petridis, F. 
Liarokapis, P. Lister, K. Walczak, R. Wojciechowski, W. 
Cellary, J. Chmielewski, M. Stawniak, W. Wiza, M. Patel, J. 
Stevenson, J. Manley, F. Giorgini, P. Sayd, and F. Gaspard, 
“ARCO - an architecture for digitization, management and 
presentation of virtual exhibitions,” in Proceedings Computer 
Graphics International, 2004., 2004, pp. 622–625. 
[28] M. D. Dickey, “Brave new (interactive) worlds: A review of 
the design affordances and constraints of two 3D virtual 
worlds as interactive learning environments,” Interact. Learn. 
Environ., vol. 13, no. 1–2, pp. 121–137, Apr. 2005. 
[29] F. Liarokapis, S. Sylaiou, A. Basu, N. Mourkoussis, M. 
White, and P. F. Lister, “An interactive visualisation interface 
for virtual museums,” Eurographics Assoc. p. 47-56, pp. 47–
56, Dec. 2004. 
[30] C.-W. Fu, W.-B. Goh, and J. A. Ng, “Multi-touch techniques 
for exploring large-scale 3D astrophysical simulations,” in 
Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human 
factors in computing systems - CHI ’10, 2010, pp. 2213–2222. 
[31] E. Woods, M. Billinghurst, J. Looser, G. Aldridge, D. Brown, 
B. Garrie, and C. Nelles, “Augmenting the science centre and 
museum experience,” in Proceedings of the 2nd international 
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques 
in Austalasia and Southe East Asia - GRAPHITE ’04, 2004, 
pp. 230–236. 
[32] M. Baron, V. Lucquiaud, D. Autard, and D. L. Scapin, “K-
MADe: un environnement pour le noyau du modèle de 
description de l’activité,” in Proceedings of the 18th 
international 
conference 
on 
Association 
Francophone 
d’Interaction Homme-Machine - IHM  '06, 2006, pp. 287–
288. 
[33] “Home 
| 
SketchUp,” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.sketchup.com/. [Accessed: 03-Jul-2014]. 
[34] “Irrlicht Engine - A free open source 3D engine,” 2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://irrlicht.sourceforge.net/. 
[Accessed: 14-Feb-2014]. 

566
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[35] “The 
Ivy 
software 
bus.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.eei.cena.fr/products/ivy/. 
[Accessed: 
16-Feb-
2014]. 
[36] “3Dconnexion : 
SpaceNavigator.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.3dconnexion.fr/products/spacenavigator. 
[Accessed: 27-Jan-2014]. 
[37] J. O. Wobbrock, M. R. Morris, and A. D. Wilson, “User-
defined gestures for surface computing,” in Proceedings of 
the 27th international conference on Human factors in 
computing systems - CHI 09, 2009, p. 1083. 
[38] T. Tsandilas, E. Dubois, and M. Raynal, “Modeless pointing 
with low-precision wrist movements,” in Human-Computer 
Interaction – INTERACT 2013, 2013, vol. 8119, pp. 494–511. 
[39] A. Martinet, G. Casiez, and L. Grisoni, “The effect of DOF 
separation in 3D manipulation tasks with multi-touch 
displays,” in Proceedings of the 17th ACM Symposium on 
Virtual Reality Software and Technology - VRST ’10, 2010, p. 
111. 
[40] “Polhemus Patriot Wireless - Polhemus,” 2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.polhemus.com/motion-tracking/all-
trackers/patriot-wireless/. [Accessed: 14-Feb-2014]. 
[41] G. Casiez, N. Roussel, and D. Vogel, “1 € filter: a simple 
speed-based low-pass filter for noisy input in interactive 
systems,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12, 2012, 
pp. 2527–2530. 
[42] J. Brooke, “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale,” Usability 
Eval. Ind., pp. 189–194, 1996. 
[43] M. Hassenzahl, “The interplay of beauty, goodness, and 
usability in interactive products,” Human-Computer Interact., 
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 319–349, Dec. 2004. 
[44] A. Bangor, P. T. Kortum, and J. T. Miller, “An empirical 
evaluation of the System Usability Scale,” Int. J. Hum. 
Comput. Interact., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 574–594, Jul. 2008. 
[45] “AttrakDiff.” [Online]. Available: http://attrakdiff.de/index-
en.html. [Accessed: 27-Jan-2014]. 
[46] M. Hachet, F. Decle, S. Knodel, and P. Guitton, “Navidget for 
3D interaction: Camera positioning and further uses,” Int. J. 
Hum. Comput. Stud., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 225–236, 2009. 
[47] W. Hürst and M. Helder, “Mobile 3D graphics and virtual 
reality interaction,” in Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment 
Technology - ACE ’11, 2011, pp. 28–36. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[48] B. Buxton and G. W. Fitzmaurice, “HMDs, caves & 
chameleon: A human-centric analysis of interaction in virtual 
space,” Comput. Graph. SIGGRAPH Q., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 
64–68, 1998. 
[49] D. Lakatos, M. Blackshaw, A. Olwal, Z. Barryte, K. Perlin, 
and H. Ishii, “T(ether): spatially-aware handhelds, gestures 
and proprioception for multi-user 3D modeling and 
animation,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM symposium on 
Spatial user interaction - SUI ’14, 2014, pp. 90–93. 
[50] M. Hachet, J. Pouderoux, and P. Guitton, “3D elastic control 
for mobile devices,” IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., vol. 28, no. 
4, pp. 58–62, Jul. 2008. 
[51] S. Boring, M. Jurmu, and A. Butz, “Scroll, tilt or move it: 
using mobile phones to continuously control pointers on large 
public displays,” in Proceedings of the 21st Annual 
Conference of the Australian Computer-Human Interaction 
Special Interest Group on Design: Open 24/7 - OZCHI ’09, 
2009, pp. 161–168. 
[52] D. Gracanin, K. Matkovic, and F. Quek, “iPhone/iPod Touch 
as Input Devices for Navigation in Immersive Virtual 
Environments,” in 2009 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, 
2009, pp. 261–262. 
[53] A. Benzina, A. Dey, M. Toennis, and G. Klinker, “Empirical 
evaluation of mapping functions for navigation in virtual 
reality using phones with integrated sensors,” in Proceedings 
of the 10th asia pacific conference on Computer human 
interaction - APCHI ’12, 2012, pp. 149–158. 
[54] F. Daiber, L. Li, and A. Krüger, “Designing gestures for 
mobile 3D gaming,” in Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia - MUM 
’12, 2012, pp. 3–8. 
[55] P. Lamb, “ARToolKit developer homepage.” [Online]. 
Available: http://artoolkit.sourceforge.net/. [Accessed: 29-Jul-
2014]. 
[56] Phidgets, “Phidgets Inc. - 1073_0 - PhidgetSBC3.” [Online]. 
Available: http://www.phidgets.com/products.php?category= 
21&product_id=1073_0. [Accessed: 29-Jul-2014]. 
[57] L.-P. Bergé, M. Serrano, G. Perelman, and E. Dubois, 
“Exploring 
smartphone-based 
interaction 
with 
overview+detail interfaces on 3D public displays,” in 
Proceedings of the 16th international conference on Human-
computer interaction with mobile devices & services - 
MobileHCI ’14, 2014, pp. 125–134.  
 

