Automatic Tagging of Art Images with Color Harmonies and Contrasts 
Characteristics in Art Image Collections 
 
Krassimira Ivanova 
Institute of Mathematics and 
Informatics – BAS 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
kivanova@math.bas.bg 
Peter Stanchev 
Kettering University 
Flint, MI, 48504, USA 
Institute of Mathematics and 
Informatics – BAS 
pstanche@kettering.edu 
Koen Vanhoof 
IMOB 
Hasselt University 
Hasselt, Belgium 
koen.vanhoof@uhasselt.be 
 
 
 
Abstract – In this paper we present a classification of color 
harmonies and contrasts, which is consistent with human 
perceiving of visual expression. It is conformed to the 
possibilities of automatic extraction of visual information from 
digitalized copies of art images. The classification is done on 
the base of the three main characteristics of the color most 
closed to the human perception – hue, saturation and lightness. 
Functions for automatic features extraction from digital 
images are defined. These functions are realized as part of a 
virtual laboratory "Art Painting Image Color Aesthetic and 
Semantic" (APICAS). The system can be used by designers 
and art students for searching images, having certain 
harmonies or contrasts in image collections as well as a for 
examining specifics of artists or movements. In future we will 
use the system as a Web 2.0 service, which could be included in 
a virtual learning environment. 
 
Keywords – Content-Based Image Retrieval; Image content; 
Color; Harmonies; Contrasts 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the most felicitous analogies for presenting the 
existing semantic gap in area of Content-Based Image 
Retrieval (CBIR) can be found in "The Hitch-Hiker’s Guide 
to Galaxy" by Douglas Adams. In this story, a group of 
hyper-intelligent pan-dimensional beings demand to learn 
the "Answer to Life, the Universe, and Everything" from the 
supercomputer Deep Thought, specially built for this 
purpose. It takes Deep Thought 7½ million years to compute 
and check the answer, which turns out to be "42" [2]. The 
efforts of covering the semantic gap in CBIR are turned to 
avoid these misunderstanding between human perceiving 
and the ways of communications and computer manner of 
low-level representations. 
As it is mentioned in [3], the user questions in image 
search are partitioned into three main levels: 
Low level – this level includes basic perceptual features 
of visual content (dominant colors, color distribution, texture 
pattern, etc.). Low-level queries and analysis can support the 
retrieval of art images in order to seek some specifics or 
common 
characteristics 
between 
artists, 
schools 
or 
movements. 
Intermediate level – this level forms next step of 
extraction from visual content, connected with emotional 
perceiving of the images, which usually is difficult to express 
in rational and textual terms. The visual art is an area, where 
these features play significant role. Typical features in this 
level are color harmonies and contrasts, because one of the 
goals of the painting is to produce specific psychological 
effects in the observer, which are achieved with different 
arrangements of colors. 
High level – this level includes queries according to 
rational criterions. In many cases the image itself does not 
contain information, which would be sufficient to extract 
some of the characteristics. For this reason current high-level 
semantic systems still use huge amount of manual 
annotation. 
Different features' levels imply different ways for 
communication between the user and the CBIR system. 
When a system uses low-level properties such as color 
percentages, color layout, and textures (see the pioneer of the 
area QBIC, developed by IBM [4]), the queries do not need 
to be described in words. When working with such systems, 
the user can select a sample image and the system returns all 
images that are "similar" to it. For systems, which operate 
with high level features, only choosing a sample or drawing 
a sketch and search similar characteristics is not sufficient, 
even because such system has to "know" which of 
characteristics are targeted by the user. There are two 
mutually connected tasks in this area: 
 
Defining features and terms, which present certain 
effect or criterion and describing correlation between 
defined concepts; 
 
Finding appropriate algorithms for generating 
metadata, which alone or in combination with 
present terminal features and terms will allow 
improved image search as well as proposing 
adequate methods and tools for establishing 
belonging of a sample to same concept. 
This paper presents an experimental software system for 
intermediate semantic image search based on color 
harmonies and contrasts. These ideas were firstly introduced 
in [1]. Section 2 stops the attention on the different sides of 
the image content. In Section 3 we make an analysis of the 
phenomenon of the impact of one color on the perception of 
others. In Section 4 we present a hierarchical classification of 
474
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

different types of harmonies and contrasts in order to be used 
as base for further analysis and extraction tools from image 
databases. In Section 5 we describe an experimental software 
system, which integrates the proposed tools. Section 6 
contains experimental results made by the realized system. 
Finally, conclusion and future work are presented. 
 
II. 
TAXONOMY OF ART IMAGE CONTENT 
In the last years several efforts have been devoted to the 
application of image processing and digital imaging 
techniques in order to facilitate museums activities. 
Numerous applications have to consider fully or partially 
some artworks analysis techniques: e.g., virtual restoration of 
artworks, artistic practices studies, art history investigation, 
authentication, watermarking, expressive rendering, etc. [5]. 
From point of view of universal citizen, taking into account 
that artwork brings a specific authors' message to the viewer 
the computer should provide the ability to present history, 
context, and relevance in order to enrich education, enhance 
cross-cultural understanding, and sustain one’s heritage and 
cultural diversity. 
In the field of image retrieval we have faced with 
obvious difference between human vision system, which has 
evolved genetically over many millenniums, and computer 
possibilities, which is limited to processes of capturing and 
analyzing pixels. Even in this first step of image recognition 
we have a hard task to find appropriate machine algorithms 
to represent the picture, which are different of human ways 
of perceiving, but that can give similar results for 
interpreting the aesthetic and semantic content in the 
pictures. Naturally, the interpretation of what we see is hard 
to characterize, and even harder to teach a machine. Over the 
past decade, ambitious attempts have been made to make 
computers learn to understand, index and annotate pictures 
representing a wide range of concepts, with much progress. 
The unique specific of visual pieces of arts is that they 
are created by a cognitive process. It can therefore be 
instructive not to only understand the way we look at an 
artistic image, but also to understand how a human being 
creates and structures his artwork. Each touch to the artwork 
causes building the bridge between cultures and times. As 
was mentioned in [6] "research on significant cultural and 
historical materials is important not only for preserving them 
but for preserving an interest in and respect for them". 
Different styles in art paintings are connected with used 
techniques from one side and aesthetic expression of the 
artist from other side. The process of forming artist style is 
very complicated process, where current fashion painting 
styles, social background and personal character of the artist 
play significant role. All these factors lead to forming some 
common trends in art movements and some specific features, 
which distinguish one movement to another, one artist style 
to another, one artist period to another, etc. From other side 
the theme of the paintings also stamp specifics and can be 
taken into account. The compositions in different types of 
images (portraits, landscapes, town views, mythological and 
religious scenes, or everyday scenes) also set some rules, 
aesthetically imposed for some period. 
Trying to put some basis for bridging the gaps between 
interpreting the information from human and from computers 
several taxonomies of image content as extracted by the 
viewer of an image are suggested. Alejandro Jaimes and 
Shih-Fu Chang [7] are focused on two aspects of image 
content – the received visual percepts from the observed 
images and underlying abstract idea, which corresponds to 
concepts, connected with the image content. In his brilliant 
survey for 2D artistic images analysis Tomas Hurtut [5] 
expands taxonomy given by Bryan Burford, Pam Briggs and 
John Eakins [8]. He gives profiling of extraction primitives 
and concepts accounting the specific of artworks, splitting 
image categories into three groups: image space, object 
space and abstract space.  
In our investigation we consent Hurtut's proposition with 
slightly changes of distribution of features in the groups. We 
examine image space, semantic space and abstract space. 
Image space contains visual primitives, needed to record an 
image through visual perception. Image space includes 
perceptual primitives (color, textures, local edges), geometric 
primitives 
(strokes, 
contours, 
shapes) 
and 
design 
constructions (spatial arrangement, composition). Semantic 
space is related to the meaning of the elements, their 
potential for semantic interpretation. Semantic space consists 
of semantic units (objects), 3D relationship between them 
(scene, perspective, depth cues) and context (illumination, 
shadow). Abstract aspects are specific to art images and 
reflect cultural influences, specific techniques as well as 
emotional responses evoked by an image.  
Several big projects addressed the description of the 
high-level semantic and abstraction concepts in the art 
domain:  
 
The Getty vocabulary databases [9] are produced 
and maintained by the Getty Vocabulary Program. 
They contain terms, names, and other information 
about people, places, things, and concepts relating 
to art, architecture, and material culture. The 
vocabularies in this program are: The Art and 
Architecture Thesaurus (AAT), the Union List of 
Artist Names (ULAN), the Getty Thesaurus of 
Geographic Names (TGN), and finally the Cultural 
Objects Name Authority (CONA), which expects to 
be introduced in 2011; 
 
WordNet [10] is a large lexical database of English, 
developed under the direction of George A. Miller. 
WordNet is freely and publicly available for 
download. Although it is not domain-specific, it is a 
useful tool for computational linguistics and natural 
language 
processing 
especially 
for 
English-
language texts; 
 
Iconclass [11] is a hierarchical system designed for 
art and iconography, developed by the Netherlands 
Institute for Art History. It includes the following 
main divisions: Abstract, Non-representational Art; 
Religion and Magic; Nature; Human being, Man in 
general; Society, Civilization, Culture; Abstract 
Ideas and Concepts; History; Bible; Literature; 
Classical Mythology and Ancient History. 
475
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In order to present properly concepts and their correlation 
between low and intermediate levels as well as the 
connections to the high level, every system usually creates its 
own dataset. This allows implementing the specific elements 
of the used methods and tools. Some examples are:  
 
The "Pictorial Portrait Database" [12] uses a 
hierarchical database indexing method based on 
Principal Component Analysis. Its description model 
is based on the eyes as the most salient region in the 
portraits; 
 
An approach for extraction of low level color 
characteristics and their conversion into high level 
semantic features using Johannes Itten theory of 
color, Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence and fuzzy 
production rules is suggested in [13]; 
 
Hering theory of complementary colors is in the 
ground of the approach for extracting high level 
concepts, proposed by [14]; 
 
The team, headed by R. Jain uses annotation of 
paintings based on brushwork, where brushwork is 
modeled as part of the annotation of high-level 
artistic concepts such as the artist name using low-
level texture [15]. 
 
III. 
HUMAN PERCEPTION OF THE COLOR 
From all the senses that connect us to the world – vision, 
hearing, taste, smell, and touch – vision is the most 
important. More than 80% of our sensory experiences are 
visual [16]. When the brain receives a light stimulus it first 
interprets form as distinct from background. Figure-ground 
separation or pattern recognition is the first cognitive step in 
the process of perception. Color plays an important, but 
secondary role in recognition. Color responses are more tied 
to human emotions than to his intellect. Just this property 
makes the colors very powerful source of influence of human 
perception. The presence of one or more colors in different 
proportions conveys different messages, which can increase 
or suppress the perception of the observed objects. 
 
A. 
Color 
The nature of color is in the focus of research by different 
science disciplines – Physics studies the power essence of 
the color, Physiology is interested in the process of human 
eyes perception of specific wavelengths and theirs 
transformation to color, Psychology examines the problems 
of colors' perception and theirs influence on the mentality, 
Mathematics suggests methods for color measurement. The 
enormous growth of the number of digital images and videos 
in different application areas explains the extensive interest 
in developing computer science methods in this area.  
Different models for presenting the color have been 
created from Antiquity. A detailed survey of color models 
was made by the team of Urs Baumann [17]. Different 
models serve various domains – from Physics and 
Colorimetry; through Painting, Architecture, and Design; to 
Digital coding for printers, monitors and TV. The history and 
practice show that a perfect color model cannot be created: 
one is suitable to supply compact coding and transmitting of 
the color characteristics, another is easy perceived from 
humans, etc.  
From human point of view, it is most easy to define the 
color as composition of three components – hue, saturation 
and lightness. Hue means the name of the color – red, 
orange, etc. Black, grays and white are called achromatic. 
Saturation measures the hue intensity or brilliance of a 
sample, its dullness or vividness. Lightness refers to relative 
light and dark in a sample [16]. Such point of view to the 
color facilitates the structuring of color harmonies and 
contrasts are evinced in art images. 
 
B. 
Harmonies and Contrasts  
The contrasts are experienced when we establish 
differences between two observed effects. When these 
differences reach maximal values we talk about diametrical 
contrast. Our senses perceive only on the base of 
comparison. For instance one segment is short when lays 
near long segment and vice versa. In similar way color effect 
becomes strong or weak thorough contrasts.  
The color combinations called "harmonious" in common 
speech usually are composed of closely similar hues, or else 
of different colors in the same shades. They are combination 
of colors that meet without sharp contrast. As a rule, the 
assertion of harmony or discord simply refers to an 
agreeable-disagreeable or attractive-unattractive scale. 
Many people are observed and examined the influence of 
the color each other. Aristotle in his "De meteorologica" 
posed questions about different looking of violet near to 
white wool and black wool [18]. His questions were 
systematically examined and explained later by Michel 
Eugène Chevreul. 
In 1772 – the same year that Johann Heinrich Lambert 
constructed his color pyramid and demonstrated for the first 
time that the complete fullness of colors can only be 
reproduced within a three dimensional system [19], another 
color 
circle 
was 
published 
in 
Vienna 
by 
Ignaz 
Schiffermüller. He was one of the first, who arranged the 
complementary colors opposite one another: blue opposite 
orange; yellow opposite violet; red opposite green [18].  
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) had probably been the 
first to notice that when observed adjacently, colors will 
influence each other. Goethe, however, was the first who 
specifically draw attention to these associated contrasts.  
Michel Eugène Chevreul (1786-1889) had continued 
resolving the questions for contrast with establishing a law of 
"Simultaneous Contrast" [18]. When colors interact, they are 
capable of changing in appearance, depending on particular 
relationships 
with 
adjacent 
or 
surrounding 
colors. 
Simultaneous contrast is strongly tied to the phenomenon of 
afterimage, also known as "Successive contrast", when the 
eye spontaneously generates the complementary color even 
when the hue is absent. The explanation of successive 
contrast is given in opponent color vision theory, which 
acquired its integral view in the works of Ewald Hering in 
1872 [18]. Successive and simultaneous contrast suggest that 
476
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the human eye is satisfied, or in equilibrium, only when the 
complemental relation is established. 
The great contribution in revealing effects of color 
interactions has Josef Albers (1888-1976). His book "The 
Interaction of Color" [20] has proven key to understanding 
color relationships and human perception. Albers stated that 
one color could have many "readings", dependent both on 
lighting and the context in which the color is placed. He felt 
that the comprehension of color relationships and 
interactions was the key to gaining an eye for color. 
According to Albers, we rarely see a color that is not affected 
by other colors. Even when a color is placed against a pure 
neutral of black, white, or gray, the color is influenced by 
that neutral ground. Colors interact and are modified in 
appearance by other colors in accordance with three guiding 
rules: Light/dark value contrast, Complementary reaction, 
and Subtraction. 
Johannes Itten (1888-1967) continued theories of Albers. 
He was one of the first to define and identify strategies for 
successful color combinations [21]. Through his research he 
devised seven methodologies for coordinating colors 
utilizing the hue's contrasting properties. These contrasts add 
other variations with respect to the intensity of the respective 
hues; i.e., contrasts may be obtained due to light, moderate, 
or dark value. He defined the following types of contrasts: 
Contrast of hue, Light-dark contrast, Cold-warm contrast, 
Complementary contrast, Simultaneous contrast, Contrast of 
saturation, and Contrast of extension (proportion). 
 
C. 
Artists' color wheel 
Usually, in accordance of Johannes Itten proposition, the 
color wheel, which represents relations between hues, is 
divided in twelve sections. Centers of three equidistance 
sections correspond to primary colors. Between them 
secondary colors are posed, which from one side are middle 
points of two primary colors, and from other side are 
complementary to the third color. The quantization is 
expanded with the intermediate colors, which lays at 
midpoint to adjacent primary and secondary hues.  
 
RED
VIOLET
BLUE
GREEN
YELLOW
ORANGE
 
Figure 1.  Standard artists' color wheel 
 
In Figure 1 the position of the hues in standard artists' 
color wheel is shown. This order and correlations between 
hues is described in RYB (Red-Yellow-Blue) color model, 
used by the artists. Let us mention that this arranging of hues 
differs from many of contemporary color models – RGB 
(Red-Green-Blue), CMY (Cyan-Magenta-Yellow), HSL 
(Hue-Saturation-Luminance), HSV (Hue-Saturation-Value), 
based on the defining of colors as primary or secondary in 
accordance with trichromatic theory [22].  
 
IV. 
CLASSIFICATION OF HARMONIES AND CONTRASTS 
We present one classification of different types of 
harmonies and contrasts, from the point of view of the three 
main characteristics of the color – hue, saturation and 
lightness.  
A. 
Harmonies/contrasts from point of view of hue 
There can be examined two different types of 
harmonies/contrast: ones that take into consideration only 
disposition of hues each other and others that account exact 
hue values and their influence on the human perceiving.  
1) Hue harmonies/contrasts based on the disposition of 
hues 
The figures below shows only relatively disposition of 
the colors, not the absolute meaning of the color. Some of 
these combinations are discussed in [16] and [23]. 
a) Monotone compositions: These compositions use one 
hue, and image is built on the base of varying of lightness of 
color. These images are used to suggest some kind of 
emotion since every hue bears specific psychological 
intensity; 
 
b) Analogous hues: Analogous hues can be defined as 
groups of colors that are adjacent on the color wheel; contain 
two, but never three primaries and have the same hue 
dominant in all samples; 
 
c) Complementary contrasts: Complementary colors are 
hues that are opposite one another on the color wheel. When 
more than two colors take part in the composition the 
harmonic 
disposition 
suggests 
combination 
between 
analogous and complementary hues; 
 
d) Triads: Three colors that are equidistance on the color 
wheel form triad. This means that all colors are primary or 
secondary, or intermediate; 
 
477
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

e) Tetrads: 
The 
tetrad 
includes 
four 
colors 
in 
equidistance on the color wheel. This contrast produces very 
complicated scheme and can lead to disharmony; 
 
f) Achromatic compositions: As a special case, images 
composed by black, grays and white tones or contain colors 
with very small saturation. 
 
2) Harmonies/contrasts based on the group of hues 
(Warm-cold contrast) 
Warm and cold are two opposing qualities of hue. Warm 
colors are hues around red and orange; cold colors are these 
around blue. The terms warm and cold are helpful for 
describing families of colors. They can be defined as 
follows: 
a) Warm: The image is warm when composition is built 
from family of warm colors; 
b) Cold: By analogy – the image is cold when it is 
composed only (or predominantly) with cold colors; 
c) Neutral: The composition contains colors mainly from 
neutral zones; 
d) Warm-cold: The composition lays in this category 
when the percentage of cold family is in some proportion to 
the percentage of warm family; 
e) Warm-neutral: 
In 
such 
compositions 
there 
is 
proportion between warm colors and neutral ones; 
f) Cold-neutral: The image contains cold and neutral 
tones in some proportion. 
 
Unlike of hue, which is circular and continuous, 
saturation and lightness are linear. That difference 
determines different definitions of harmonies for these 
characteristics. 
 
B. 
Harmonies/contrasts from point of view of saturation 
This harmony appears together with the hue ones. It is 
used to give different perception when the color is changed. 
As a whole we can define three big groups of harmonies and 
contrasts: 
a) Dull: An image can be classified as dull when 
composition is constructed mainly from desaturated colors; 
b) Clear: Clear images have been build mostly from clear 
(spectral and near to spectral, respectively only with varying 
in lightness) colors. 
c) Different proportion of saturations: Usually in 
composition of clear colors in combination of dull ones. 
Depending on content of different saturation and of distance 
between predominate quantities harmonies can be defined 
such as smooth, contrary, etc. 
C. 
Harmonies/contrasts from point of view of lightness 
The whole effect of the lightness of the image as well as 
light-dark contrast is a very powerful tool in art mastering. 
Mainly, an artwork can not contain light-dark contrast – at 
that case the image has one integral vibration of the 
lightness. In other case sharp light-dark contrast is used to 
focus the attention in exact points of the image. 
a) Dark: Dark compositions are built mainly from dark 
colors; 
b) Light: Light images contain mostly colors near white; 
c) Different proportion of lightness: Light colors 
combined with dark ones compose the image. Depending on 
content of different lightness and of distance between 
predominate quantities contrasts can be defined as: smooth, 
contrary, etc. 
 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL SOFTWARE SYSTEM FUNCTIONALITY  
An experimental software system for automatic image 
descriptor annotation, which corresponds to defined 
harmonies and contrasts, was created in the frame of a virtual 
laboratory for semantic image retrieval APICAS.  
We have used analyses of the images and artists' styles, 
made in [18][21][24][25][26] to tune up our algorithms and 
parameters. 
For the purposes of the system we convert RGB-values 
of color of each pixel to values in non-uniformly quantized 
HSL-feature space – twelve hues plus one value for 
achromatic color, five levels of saturation and five levels of 
luminance are identified. The numbers of the layers are 
chosen on the base of Itten’s color theory. 
The system allows user definitions of the quantization of 
the space. Figure 2 shows the screen where the user can set 
up quantization for the purposes of further defining of color 
harmonies or contrasts. The screenshot is made when 
quantization of hue is in accordance with artists' color wheel. 
The displacement between correlation of hues in two color 
models – RYB and HSL is clearly seen. Current realization 
of defining hue dispositions is based on RYB color space.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Screen for set up the quantization parameters and boundaries 
478
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The saturation and luminance are quantized in five levels. 
The boundaries can be set up by the user. By default, equal 
quantization is proposed. 
In previous version [1] we have used exact function of 
defining the belonging of the color characteristic to 
quantizing segment. Now, quantization of colors is made 
using fuzzy calculating of belonging of color to 
corresponded index (Figure 3). If the position of examined 
value is in inner part of one defined segment (more than one 
half from the left bound and less than three half from the 
right bound) the characteristic is considered to belong to this 
segment. In other case (except the endmost parts for 
saturation and lightness), part of the characteristic is 
considered to belong to this segment and the rest part is 
considered to belong to the adjacent segment. For receiving 
that part a linear function, which reflects the decreasing of 
belonging of that characteristic to the segment, is used. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Fuzzy function for calculating quantization part  
of color characteristic 
 
Taking into account our earlier examination of the 
distribution of color components in art paintings [27] we 
make normalization of the colors in respect of hue 
distribution 
(Figure 
4). 
This 
normalization 
allows 
simplifying of comparing presence of color characteristic 
values in further stages. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Average distribution of hue component in art paintings 
 
As a result, every picture is represented with three 
dimensional array containing coefficients of participation of 
colors with correspondingly measured characteristics of the 
picture.  
A={A(ih,is,il)|ih=-1,...,NH-1; is=0,...,NS-1; il=0,...,NL-1}  
Here NH=12  and corresponds to the number of 
quantized colors in Ittens' circle. "-1" index percentage of 
achromatic tones; "0" to "NH-1" points percentage of colors, 
ordered as it is shown on Figure 1, starting from reds and 
ending to purples. 
In our examination NS=5. Index "0" holds percentage of 
grays and almost achromatic tones, and "4" contains 
percentage of pure (in particular – spectral) tones. 
For indexing of luminance we use NL=5  also. "0" holds 
percentage of very dark colors, and "4" contains percentage 
of very light colors. 
On the base of this array for simplification of further 
calculation in some cases three arrays, containing percentage 
values of corresponding characteristics in the picture is 
calculated. These arrays are: 
 
H (h-1, h0, … , hNH-1) for hues;  
 
S (s0, …, sNS-1) for saturation; 
 
L (l0, …, lNL-1) for lightness.  
 
A. 
Hue order vector  
This vector contains number of dominant hues nh, and 
positions of dominant hues, ordered in decreasing 
percentage. nh can vary from zero for achromatic paintings, 
to maximal defined dominant colors. For the purposes of 
defining hue harmonies maximal dominant colors are 
restricted in this example to 5. When image is not achromatic 
the value of nh is defined as the number of ordered hues, 
which sum of the percentages exceed some (expert-defined) 
value x. 
(nh; p1, p2, …, pnh), 
nh{0, …, 5} 
pi {-1, …, NH-1} and 
i
i+1
p
p
h
 h
, i{1, … , nh-1} 
1
1
1
1
1  
 
                                    
 
  
<   
  
 
:  
 
i
i
p
n
n
p
p
i
i
nh
if h
x
nh
n if
h
x and
h
x
nh














 
 
B. 
Hue harmony/contrast, based on disposition 
For defining hue harmonies/contrasts first we define: 
2
2
2
2
( )
p
NH div    if    p
NH div 
p
NH div    if    p
NH div 
opposite p




 


 
1
0
1
{1,...,
1}
_
( )
NH
  if   p
                  
p
  if   p  in 
NH
l
neighbour p




 


 
0
1
1
{0,...,
2}
_
( )
 if   p
NH 
                   
p
  if   p  in 
NH
r
neighbour p




 
 
_
( )
(
 
 3) mod  
l
triad p
NH
p
NH div
NH



 
_
( )
(
 
 3) mod  
r
triad p
p
NH div
NH


 
(
 
 4) mod  
_
( )
NH
p
NH div
NH
l
tetrad p



(
 
 4) mod  
_
( )
p
NH div
NH
r
tetrad p


 
 
The values of the hue harmony depend from the number 
of dominant hues nh:  
479
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
nh=0:  
Achromatic: the composition is constructed by black, white 
and gray tones. This construction can be examined as special 
case of monochromatic harmony; 
 
nh=1:  
Monochromatic: only one hue predominates in image; 
 
nh=2:  
Analogous: when p2=l_neighbour(p1) or p2=r_neighbour(p1); 
Complementary: when p2=opposite(p1); 
Partial Triad: when p2=l_triad(p1) or p2=r_triad(p1); 
 
nh=3:  
Analogous: if for one of dominant hues pi (i{1,…,nh}) is 
fulfilled that the other two colors are l_neighbour(pi) and 
r_neighbour(pi) respectively; 
Split complementary: if for one of dominant hues pi 
(i{1,…,nh}) is fulfilled that the other two colors are 
l_neighbour(opposite(pi)) and r_neighbour(opposite(pi)); 
Triad: if for one of dominant hues pi (i{1,…,nh}) the other 
two colors are l_triad(pi) and r_triad(pi); 
 
nh=4:  
Analogous: if for one of dominant hue pi (i{1,…,nh}) is 
fulfilled 
that 
one 
of 
the 
other 
three 
colors 
pj 
(j{1,…,nh}, ji) pj=l_neighbour(pi) or pj=r_neighbour(pi) 
and 
other 
two 
colors 
are 
l_neighbour(pj) 
and 
r_neighbour(pj); 
Double Complementary: if for one of dominant hue pi 
(i{1,…,nh}) is fulfilled that one of the other three colors pj 
(j{1,…,nh}, ji) pj=opposite(pi) and other two colors are 
l_neighbour(pi) and l_neighbour(pj) or r_neighbour(pi) and 
r_neighbour(pj); 
Split Complementary: if for one of dominant hue pi 
(i{1,…,nh}) is fulfilled that one of the other three colors pj 
(j{1,…,nh}, ji) pj=opposite(pi) and other two colors are 
l_neighbour(pj) and r_neighbour(pj); 
Tetrad: if for first hue p1 the other hues are l_tetrad(p1), 
opposite(p1), r_tetrad(p1) respectively; 
 
nh=5:  
Multicolor: here can be searched the presence of defined 
combinations discarding one of the colors.  
 
C. 
Cold/warm contrast 
For defining cold/warm contrast the system compares 
percentage values of families of colors pwarm, pcold, and 
pachromatics. We have take into account the fact of changing the 
type of some color in dependency of its saturation and 
lightness [28]. Because of this we calculate the values of 
pwarm, pcold, and pachromatics on the base of three-dimensional 
array A . The strongest contrasts points is the warmest "red-
orange" (ih=1) and the coolest "blue-green" (ih=7). We use 
semi-linear 
function of including 
colors 
in warm, 
respectively cold family, whit following properties: 
 
all achromatic values (ih=-1) and very desaturated 
colors (is=0) are added to achromatic family; 
 
increasing the lightness in desaturated colors (is=1,2) 
leads to increasing of coldness. For instance dark 
desaturated colors is added in warm family from 
magenta to orange-yellow (ih in {11, 0, 1, 2, 3}), but 
from light ones only red and red-orange are added 
(ih in {0, 1}). Conversely, dark colors added to cool 
family 
are 
only 
these 
near 
blue-green 
(ih in {6, 7, 8}); increasing the light expands the 
range and in cool family from lightest yellow-green 
to lightest blue-magenta (ih in {5, 6, 7, 8, 9}) and 
half of neighbors are included (ih in {4, 10}); 
 
colors with middle saturation (is=3) include stable 
families of warm colors (ih in {0, 1, 2, 3}) and cold 
colors (ih in {6, 7, 8}); 
 
for saturated colors (is=4) increasing the lightness 
cause expanding of both families of warm and cold 
colors. For instance for dark saturated colors in 
warm family belongs from magenta to orange-
yellow 
(ih in {11, 0, 1, 2, 3}), 
while 
in 
light 
spectrum half of their neighbors also are included 
(ih in {10, 4}).  
 
The image is defined as warm, cold, or neutral if 
corresponding value is greater than some threshold. If none 
of these values exceeds given parameters, the image is 
warm-cold, warm-neutral, cold-neutral according to order of 
decreasing of corresponded values. 
 
D. 
Saturation order vector  
This vector contains number of dominant saturations ns 
(ns{1,…, NS}), and positions of dominant saturations, 
ordered in decreasing percentage. The value of ns is defined 
as the numbers of ordered saturations, which sum of the 
percentages, exceed some value y. 
(ns; p1, p2, …, pns), 
ns{1, …, NS} 
pi {0, …, NS-1} and 
i
i+1
p
p
s
 s
, i{1, … , ns-2} 
1
1
1
1
1  
 s
                                   
  
  
  
  
:  
 
i
i
p
n
n
p
p
i
i
ns
if
y
ns
n if
s
y and
s
y
ns















 
 
E. 
Saturation combinations 
If ns=1 the picture is defined as monointense. If ns>1 
some combinations of presence of dominant saturations can 
be outlined. For instance, if p0 and pNS-1 are dominant 
saturations, the image can be defined as contrary; 
if saturations are adjoining – the feature is smooth, etc. 
 
480
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

F. 
Clear/dull contrast 
Depending of the global lightness of the image the 
saturation distribution of the image is possessed in another 
attribute, which can receive values as soft or sharp for light 
images, ground or spectral for images with medium 
lightness and dull or clear for dark images.  
 
G. 
Lightness order vector 
This vector (nl; p1, p2, …, pnl) is defined in the same way 
as the saturation order vector. It contains number of 
dominant lighting values nl (nl{1,…, NL}), and their 
positions, ordered in decreasing percentage. 
 
H. 
Lightness combinations 
These values are defined in the equal manner as 
saturation ones – the same function are used; only 
corresponding parameters are changed. 
 
I. 
Light/dark contrasts 
The attribute, which receives values for light-dark 
contrast depends of user defined threshold of darkness and 
lightness. The images, which hold l0 more than given dark 
threshold, are identified as very dark. Dark images are these 
for which l0+l1 exceed this threshold. Similarly, the images 
with l4 receive value very light and these for which l3+l4 
exceed the threshold are light. Depending of distribution of 
lightness, images can be categorized as dark-light, light-
dark, middle, etc. 
 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTAL SOFTWARE SYSTEM REALIZATION  
The proposed tools for automatic annotation of the 
images with harmonies' and contrasts' descriptors are 
realized as part of a virtual laboratory for image retrieval 
"Art Painting Image Color Aesthetic and Semantic" 
(APICAS).  
A. 
Data entry 
The system operates with images in JPEG-format. 
Images, stored in one directory, form a collection.  
The user can choose the specific collection by changing 
the working directory. The system automatically scans the 
collection and extracts features. The user can refine setting of 
some parameters or boundaries (see Figure 2), which 
provoke recalculating of the corresponded descriptors. 
The files, used in these collections, contain in their names 
the information about the artist and the name of the stored 
painting. The system extracts the names of the picture and 
the artist and, using a small thesaurus with information about 
the artists (dates of birth and death; countries; movement; 
periods), connects these metadata, extracted by the context, 
to information for the pictures. This way for automatic 
metadata extraction is applied in order to ensure easy way for 
making the experiments and analyzing the results. 
B. 
Access 
The extracted descriptors (from the content and from the 
context) can be observed in a grid. The user can sort it by 
any selected feature. Pointing on the exact image, the user 
can see all extracted metadata, connected to this image – an 
example is given on Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Results of calculating of types of harmonies/contrasts  
for the picture "Annunciation" by Botticelli 
 
The user can set different conditions on the extracted 
descriptors and receive the images that satisfy these 
conditions. The results can be obtained in two forms: 
 
in thumbnail form, where the images can be seen. 
An example of such result is shown on Figure 6; 
 
in a file, where selected images can be additionally 
batched using other features, selected by user. 
The system allows searching within a collection of 
images, which has specific combination of the colors, 
defined by some harmony or contrast. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Result of retrieval from the image base with parameter:  
"Dark/light contrast = Light" 
 
481
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Another part of the system allows creating a datasets, 
containing extracted attributes or selected part of them 
labeled with chosen profile such as artist name, movement, 
scene-type. These datasets can be used for further analysis by 
data mining tools for searching typical combinations of 
characteristics, which form profiles of artists or movements, 
or reveal visual specifics, connected to the presented 
thematic in the images. 
 
VII. EXPERIMENT RESULTS 
For our experiments we have used a dataset that includes 
600 paintings of 18 artists from different movements of 
West-European fine arts and one group, which represent 
Orthodox Iconographic Style from Eastern Medieval Culture 
(Table 1). The paintings were chosen by an art expert 
reviewer. He has included in the collection the most valuable 
paintings for every movement. The pictures were obtained 
from different web-museums sources using ArtCyclopedia as 
a gate to the museum-quality fine art on the Internet [29].  
 
TABLE I.  
LIST OF THE ARTISTS, WHICH PAINTINGS WERE USED IN 
EXPERIMENTS, CLUSTERED BY MOVEMENTS 
Movement 
Artist 
Icons (60) 
Icons (60) 
Renaissance (90) 
Botticelli (30); Michelangelo (30); Raphael (30)
Baroque (90) 
Caravaggio (30); Rembrandt (30); Rubens (30) 
Romanticism (90) 
Friedrich (30); Goya (30); Turner (30) 
Impressionism (90) 
Monet (30); Pissarro (30); Sisley (30) 
Cubism (90) 
Braque (30); Gris (30); Leger (30) 
Modern Art (90) 
Klimt (30); Miro (30); Mucha (30) 
 
A. 
Distribution of some harmonies/contrasts in art 
paintings 
Here some examples of distribution of defined features 
by movements or artists styles are presented. 
In these experiments we have used HSL-artist color 
model with fuzzy calculating of belonging of color to 
corresponded index. 
 
Figure 7 shows the distribution of images from different 
movements, based on cold/warm contrast. The high 
predominance of warm paintings in ICON style can be 
explained with the orthodox tradition for using gold paints as 
well as red color, which is main symbol of sacrificing and 
martyrdom. The big presence of dark warm colors is specific 
for the Baroque. Presenting the nature in paintings is typical 
for the Romanticism, which leads to forcing the presence of 
cold (green and blue) tones. This tendency increases in the 
Impressionism. 
Intensive 
study 
of 
nature 
led 
the 
Impressionists to an entirely new color rendition. Study of 
sunlight, which alters the local tones of natural objects, and 
study of light in the atmospheric world of landscape, 
provided the Impressionist painters with new essential 
patterns [21]. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Distribution of paintings,  
grouped by movements, based on cold/warm contrast 
 
Figure 8 shows the distribution of lightness in paintings 
from different movements. The big presence of dark colors 
and dark-light contrast is typical for Baroque. This is 
connected with using the techniques of oil-paints, which 
gives very deep dark effects in the paintings from one side 
and with typical using of light-dark contrast in this 
movement. This fact is connected not only with searching of 
maximal expression with applying this tool in the paintings, 
but also with the practice of this epoch to paint in the candle 
lights in studios [18]. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Lightness distribution of paintings,  
grouped by movements 
 
Figure 9 shows the distribution of images in different 
movements, based on the first dominant hue. As we have 
observed in our previous work [27] the colors around orange 
are frequently dominant colors in the paintings in classic art. 
More modern movements tend to use different colors as 
dominant. 
482
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 9.  Distribution of paintings,  
grouped by movements, based on first dominant hue 
 
Figure 10 shows the distribution of hue contrasts in the 
paintings, clustered by authors.  
 
 
Figure 10.  Percentage of different hue contrasts in the paintings of 
examined movements 
 
As we can see partial triads are used in a lot of cases of 
natural paintings, for instance Pissarro and Sisley. The triads 
exist in paintings with scene presentation from authors, 
which techniques are based mainly on hue contrasts, such as 
Botticelli and Goya. Monochromaticity and analogous 
harmonies are presented in artworks of painters, where other 
key expressions are used, for instance light-dark contrast in 
Baroque artists, gradient expressions in Braque style, Miro's 
abstract paintings, etc. [26].  
 
B. 
Analysis of combination of defined features 
The collective of Institute of Mathematics and 
Informatics in Bulgarian Academy of Sciences has created 
data mining environment system PaGaNe [30]. Using the 
associative rule miner, realized in PaGaNe we have made 
more complicated analysis for extracting combinations of 
extracted features typical for examined artists. For instance, 
for more than one third of paintings, combinations of four 
attributes are presented in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
COMBINATIONS OF FOUR ATTRIBUTES, WITH MORE THAN 
33.33% SUPPORT FOR EXAMINED ARTISTS 
Artist 
4-items combinations 
support
CARAVAGGIO
Sat. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Lum. Harmony =2-SMOOTH 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM-NEUTRAL 
Clear-dull contrast =CLEAR-DULL 
33.33 
GRIS 
Hue Harmony =PARTIAL TRIAD 
Sat. Harmony =4-VARIETY 
Lum. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Dark-light contrast =MIDDLE 
36.67 
GRIS 
Hue Harmony =PARTIAL TRIAD 
Lum. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Clear-dull contrast =SPECTRAL-GROUND
Dark-light contrast =MIDDLE 
33.33 
ICON 
Hue Harmony =ANALOGOUS 
Lum. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM 
Dark-light contrast =MIDDLE 
35.00 
ICON 
Hue Harmony =ANALOGOUS 
Sat. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM 
Dark-light contrast =MIDDLE 
31.67 
MUCHA 
Hue Harmony =ANALOGOUS 
Sat. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Lum. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM 
36.67 
MUCHA 
Hue Harmony =ANALOGOUS  
Sat. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Lum. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Clear-dull contrast =SPECTRAL-GROUND
33.33 
MUCHA 
Hue Harmony =ANALOGOUS 
Lum. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM 
Clear-dull contrast =SPECTRAL-GROUND
33.33 
RUBENS 
Hue Harmony =ANALOGOUS 
Sat. Harmony =3-SMOOTH 
Lum.Harmony =2-SMOOTH 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM 
33.33 
REMBRANDT 
Hue Harmony =ANALOGOUS 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM 
Clear-dull =CLEAR-DULL 
Dark-light =DARK 
40.00 
REMBRANDT 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM 
Hue harmony =ANALOGOUS 
Clear-dull contrast =CLEAR-DULL 
Sat. Harmony =1-MONOINTENSE 
36.67 
REMBRANDT 
Warm-cold contrast =WARM 
Clear-dull contrast =CLEAR-DULL 
Lum. harmony =1-MONOINTENSE  
Dark-light =DARK 
33.33 
 
Such approach of extracting rules from frequent datasets 
as well as their extension in the direction of class association 
algorithms can be used for defining semantic profiles of 
observed phenomena – movement, artists style or thematic, 
connected with abstract space of the taxonomy of the art 
image content, discussed by T. Hurtut [5]. 
483
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article we presented a novel and more complete 
classification 
of 
color 
harmonies 
by 
three 
main 
characteristics of the color, which is most close to the human 
perception. We used this classification in a designated 
software tool, which extracts the defined features from an 
image.  
The next step will be to extend these concepts, adding 
texture features, which will allow us to address additional 
definitions of contrasts, presented in Ittens' theory. 
One of the directions for future work will be to conduct 
experiments for the educational use of the resource and build 
a service, which could be included in a virtual learning 
environment and will allow student to search for similar 
images. 
Another future application of the method and tool 
presented in the article is to integrate it in image databases as 
a service for generation of tags for use within Web 2.0 
services. The huge amount of digital objects and the 
metadata bottleneck are well known; such a system will not 
produce the human social tagging but could generate image-
characteristics tags like ‘greenish’, ‘scarlet’, ‘pale’, ‘dark’, 
which will be useful in image searches. 
This makes the presented tool a natural component 
within the virtual laboratory for semantic image retrieval. 
The work presented here provides a good basis for these 
subsequent developments. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially financed by Bulgarian National 
Science Fund under the project D002-308/19.12.2008 
"Automated 
Metadata 
Generating 
for 
e-Documents 
Specifications and Standards". 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Kr. Ivanova, P. Stanchev, "Color harmonies and contrasts search in 
art image collections", First International Conference on Advances in 
Multimedia MMEDIA, 20-25.07.2009, Colmar, France, pp. 180-187. 
[2] D. Adams, The Hitch-hiker’s Guide to Galaxy, Pan Macmillan, 1979. 
[3] V. Castelli, L. Bergman (eds.), Image Databases: Search and 
Retrieval of Digital Imagery, John Wiley & Sons, 2002. 
[4] M. Flickner, H. Sawhney, W. Niblack, J. Ashley, Q. Huang, B. Dom, 
M. Gorkani, J. Hafner, D. Lee, D. Petkovic, D. Steele, P. Yanker, 
"Query by image and video content: the QBIC system", Computer, 
1995, pp. 23-32. 
[5] T. Hurtut, 2D artistic images analysis, a content-based survey, 2010, 
http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00459401_v1/, 10.01.2011.  
[6] C.-C. Chen, H. Wactlar, J. Wang, K. Kiernan, "Digital imagery for 
significant cultural and historical materials – An emerging research 
field bridging people, culture, and technologies", International Journal 
Digital Libraries, 5(4), 2005, pp. 275–286. 
[7] A. Jaimes, S.-F. Chang, "Concepts and techniques for indexing visual 
semantics", Image Databases: Search and Retrieval of Digital 
Imagery. V. Castelli and L. D. Bergman, John Wiley & Sons, 2002, 
pp. 497-565. 
[8] B. Burford, P. Briggs, J. Eakins, "A taxonomy of the image: on the 
classification of content for image retrieval", Visual Communication, 
2(2), 2003, pp. 123-161. 
[9] Getty Vocabulary Program, 
http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/, 
10.01.2011. 
[10] WordNet: a lexical database for the English language, 
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/, 10.01.2011. 
[11] Iconclass, http://www.iconclass.nl/, 10.01.2011. 
[12] C. Saraceno, M. Reiter, P. Kammerer, E. Zolda, W. Kropatsch, 
"Pictorial 
portrait 
indexing 
using 
view-based 
eigen-eyes", 
D. Huijsmans and A. Smeulders (eds), Visual Information and 
Information Systems, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1614, 
1999, pp. 649-656. 
[13] P. Stanchev, D. Green Jr., B. Dmitrov, "High level color similarity 
retrieval", International Journal on Information Theories and 
Applications, vol.10, Num.3, Sofia, 2003, pp 283-287. 
[14] J. Lay, L. Guan, "Retrieval for color artistry concepts", IEEE Trans. 
on Image Processing 13, 3, 2004, pp. 326-339. 
[15] Y. Marchenko, T. Chua, R. Jain, "Semi-supervised annotation of 
brushwork in painting domain using serial combinations of multiple 
experts", Technical Report, NUS, Singapore, 2006. 
[16] L. Holtzschue, Understanding Colors, John Wiley & Sons, 2006. 
[17] Color museum, ©Echo Productions, http://www.colorsystem.com/, 
10.01.2011. 
[18] J. Gage, Colour and Culture: Practice and Meaning from Antiquity to 
Abstraction, Thames and Hudson, London, 1993. 
[19] W. Spillmann, "Color systems", Color Consulting, H. Linton, New 
York, 1992, pp. 169-183. 
[20] J. Albers, Interaction of Color, Yale University Press; Revised 
edition, 1975. 
[21] J. Itten, The Art of Color: the Subjective Experience and Objective 
Rationale of Color, Reinhold Publishing Corporation of New York, 
1961. 
[22] A. Colman, A Dictionary of Psychology, 2nd ed., Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 2006. 
[23] L. Eiseman, Color: Messages and Meanings. A PANTONE Color 
Resource, Hand Books Press, 2006.  
[24] R. Arnheim, Art and Visual Perception: A Psychology of the Creative 
Eye, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1974. 
[25] M. Walch, A. Hope, Living Colors – The Definitive Guide to Color 
Palletes through the Ages, Chronicle Books, San Francisco, 1995. 
[26] B. Koenig, Color Workbook, Prentice Hall, Third edition, 2010. 
[27] Kr. Ivanova, P. Stanchev, B. Dimitrov, "Analysis of the distributions 
of color characteristics in art painting images", Serdica Journal of 
Computing, vol.2, num.2, Sofia, 2008, pp. 111-136. 
[28] K. Clark, Civilisation – a Personal View. British Broadcasting 
Corporation, London and John Murray, London. 1969. 
[29] ArtCyclopedia: The Guide to Great Art on the Internet, 
http://www.artcyclopedia.com/, 10.01.2011. 
[30] I. Mitov, K. Ivanova, K. Markov, V. Velychko, K. Vanhoof, 
P. Stanchev, "PaGaNe – a classification machine learning system 
based on the Multidimensional numbered information spaces", In 
Intelligent Decision Making Systems, WSPS on Computer 
Engineering and Information Science, No:2, pp. 279-286, 2009. 
 
 
484
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

