Information Security in Smart Cities
Using OpenID, SAML and OAuth to increase security in urban environment
Felipe Silva Ferraz1,2, Carlos Candido Barros Sampaio1,2, Carlos André Guimarães Ferraz1
1Informatics Center
Federal University of Pernambuco
Recife, Brazil
emails: {fsf3, ccbs, cagf }@cin.ufpe.br
2CESAR
Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems
Recife, Brazil
emails: {fsf, ccbs}@cesar.org.br
Abstract — As the population living in cities and
metropolis grows, the need for the transformation of a
city into a Smart City grows, too. The Smart City
concept refers to a broad range of definitions and
technologies; among those it is possible to identify
topics
such
as
Internet
of
Things,
ubiquity,
empowering
citizens,
interoperability
of
services/systems,
green
systems,
and
open
data.
Whatever is the explored concept, all of them try to
reach a single goal, namely, turn the city into a better
place
to
live
through
the
use
of
Information
Technology.
In
this
context,
more
specifically,
interoperable environments play an important role as
it provides means to connect different services by
creating new systems that are able to provide a bigger
variety of information to its users. In this matter, a
new range of challenge rises; among those challenges,
information security is one of the most important to be
discussed. This paper presents a group of security
issues that raises a dangerous concern in Smart City
solutions, discusses how identity standards, such as
OpenID, SAML and OAuth, impact on those issues.
Keywords — Smart City; Information Security;
Security Standards.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The evolution of cities has been taking a toll both on
the environment, as well as on the shape of human
population. Its needs have been increasing, and so the
pressure on the ecosystem of systems has been constantly
escalating.
In the modern world [1], sustainability is a major
issue; if we keep on exploiting resources and services
without any thought about the following generations, the
future of human race may no longer have enough
resources to survive. But also, industrial development is
as important as environmental
issues;
safety is
as
important as saving time; continuous availability of
resources is as important as not exploiting them, and so on
[2]–[4].
To match this kind of situation, the citizens of major
cities around the world must become more informed,
responsible and efficient, in order to gain and provide
faster
and
more
continuous
access
to
information
[3][5][6]. Every structure, whether its intended use relates
to
resources,
health,
government,
transportation,
education, or public safety systems was designed, built
and maintained
with advanced, integrated materials,
sensors, electronics, and networks to provide those
citizens with the means to attend those needs [7]–[9].
In this area, new solutions are absolutely necessary not
only to improve the quality of daily-life with innovative,
sustainable, long term and efficient protocols but also in
terms of security/reliability. Security and/or reliability are
important paths mostly because the solutions will be
exposed to an extensive range of attacks. Internal and
external parties are not trusted, and privacy, integrity and
availability will be a vital prerequisite for the approval of
the citizens. In addition to it, since the assumptions and
requirements for smart critical infrastructures are very
different, implying that networks for smart cities should
be engineered quite differently, it also raises a problem of
integration or interoperability [10].
With cities progressing towards smarter societies,
worldwide Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT), a class of software is also advancing and ushering
itself to the IT sector, nowadays, called ‘green software’
or ‘smart software’ [11]. The primary role of a smart
software is to enable the functioning of the devices,
running them in such a way that the device is eco-friendly
and aids the smart behavior of a city [9][12]. For a smart
software to increase the functioning and sustainability of a
Smart City as a whole, the devices with smart software
must contribute to the entire system. As software systems
are vulnerable to threats, the Smart City should be
prepared for such attacks and breaches of security [11].
Web-based protocols, for instance, protocols as OAuth
[13], Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) [14],
and OpenID [15], play an important role in web and cloud
platforms [16]. They present means to guarantee access to
specific services in order to provide authorized access to
its private data to the users. Furthermore, they present a
major contribution to single signing needs.
This paper presents an analysis on 9 security issues
proposed
in
previous
works
[14][15],
facing
three
different security standards. This paper is divided as
follows:
after
a
brief
Introduction,
Section
II
will
introduce the concepts of Smart Cities, followed by
Section III dealing with security analysis on smart cities;
Section IV will depict 9 security issues in the role of smart
cities solutions. Section V will explore differences and
strengths
on
OpenID,
SAML
and
OAuth.
Finally,
Sections VI and VII will finish this paper analyzing the
impact of the mentioned standards and presenting some
conclusions, respectively.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

II.
SMART CITIES
A long and exhausting talk has been taking part in
research areas – solutions of Smart Cities, studies and
implementation play an important role in solving a visible
problem. How to deal with the unprecedented level of
citizens living in cities? Differently from other ages, large
cities have now most part of the world population and an
increasingly share of the world's most skilled, educated,
talented, creative and entrepreneurial personalities. For
the first time in human history, more than 50 percent of
the population of the world now lives in large cities, and
what is more alarming is that, according to the United
Nations, this number will increase to 70 percent in less
than 50 fifty years [19]. This city growth or emerging of
urban life is taking the city infrastructure to a stress level
that has never been seen before, since the demand for
basic services increased and are exponentially overloaded
[7].
According to a research called Smarter Cities and
Their Innovation Challenges [20], there is an urgent need
for urban scenarios and cities to be smarter in the
management
of
their
infrastructure
resources
and
interactions [20]. The urban performance must not rely
only on its hardware infrastructure, or the physical
concepts of infrastructure, but it must start taking into
account the social interactions and a faster deployment of
information and services.
Cities
are
becoming
increasingly
technologically
empowered as their core systems; e.g., Education, Public
Safety, Transportation, Energy and Water, Healthcare and
Services are instrumented and interconnected, enabling
new ways to deal with massive, parallel and concurrent
usage. In the same pace, new challenges in the field of
information security rise and must be properly addressed.
III.
SMART CITIES SECURITY ANALYSIS
Despite the number of studies and protocols related to
information security, the amount of vulnerabilities in
connected applications has increased in the past few years.
In this matter, Smart Cities systems will demand a
specific treatment in order to address its specific security
challenges information.
According to [9][21]–[23], Smart cities solutions rely
on a high degree on connectivity, so that their systems
(such
as
Education,
Government,
Traffic,
Security,
Resources
and
Health)
can
create
an
interoperable
network, providing more powerful, accurate and unique
services to the citizens. For this reason, one of the biggest
challenges facing Smart City development is related to
Information
Security
of
Interoperable
Systems
[1].
Information security is a critical issue due to the
increasing potential of cyber attacks and incidents against
critical sectors in a Smart City. Information Security must
address not only deliberated attacks, such as from
disgruntled
employees,
industrial
espionage,
and
terrorists,
but
also
inadvertent
compromises
of
the
information
infrastructure
due
to
the
user
errors,
equipment failures, and natural disasters. Vulnerabilities
might allow an attacker to penetrate a network, gain
access to control the software and alter load conditions to
destabilize the system in unpredictable ways. To protect
the Smart City in a proper way, a number of security
problems have to be faced according to a specific
design/plan.
It would be too simplistic, and probably a lapse, to
believe that traditional security approach based only on
privacy and authorization concepts can simply be added
into a critical infrastructure of a city to make it safer as
much as it becomes smarter. New architectures are
necessary not only to improve the security services, but
the interoperability and the security in general.
This class of services is fundamental to the success of
the future city, and represents a topic of such complexity
that it is beyond the scope of this paper to cover in details.
As an illustration, let us explore the design of identity
services for the future city – which is required to maintain
privacy while maintaining security.
The integration of the identity of the citizen across
multiple systems and services and the ability to provide a
joined-up response to life events needs, comprises the
goal of allowing the citizens to manage their own identity
and what information is released about them to who or
when, while anonymous, aggregate data is made more
widely available.
So, Identity Management is an essential key for future
cities. A unified identity system, one that can integrate
itself with multiple identity providers and different forms
of authentication and identification, is needed to handle
the extensively wired nature of the city and the density of
data transactions, systems and diversity of solutions.
Citizens or entities will use their identities to get
access to services and systems, and through that the
benefits offered by those. This way, to integrate several
solutions (systems and services), entities and services will
eventually repeat their identification artifact in different
moments and situations.
Ideally, every citizen and/or entity shall have a number
of identities, each is made of a number of attributes,
which are either exposed, or used to validate a request
without exposing the information. The use of multiple
identities
limits
the
exposure
of
truly
important
credentials, minimizing risk of abuse and identity steal,
while allowing the exposure of less critical information
that is helpful for participants in the city ecosystem such
as retailers, building operators, service providers, and
governments.
Not only the citizens will be in charge of their
identities, but also the information that constitutes them,
and when this information can be exposed. The proposed
solution is proposed to build a trustworthy relationship
between the city, the services/systems and citizens,
allowing the acquisition and flow of information that is
helpful to all participants without compromising their
identities.
IV.
SECURITY ISSUES IN THE ROLE OF A SMART CITY
Based on previous studies [14][15], which brought to
attention the need to make further improvements, related
to information security on Smart Cities environment, this
session will depict a set of 9 Security issues that an urban
system and a city may be under the risk of.
It is important to complement that, even though the
technical solutions applied in those environments handle
with matters, such as Code Injection [24], Cross Site
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

Scripting [24], Cross Site Request Forgery [24] and
Buffer Overflow [24], and others, the issues presented in
this work explore concepts related to the nature of a Smart
City system. Our proposal is to present a set of issues that,
regardless of the technical solution applied, may be a
threat to urban cities (or a Smart City system) in a
different level.
Figure 1 presents an overview of this difference.
Figure 1. Security issues overview
Urban Systems are composed by Citizens using
Solutions, which could be Platforms, Frameworks and
Applications; All of those built on Technologies to receive
and use Data. Urban System Security Issues or Security
Issues in the role of a Smart City are situations that can be
put as problems to the infrastructure as a whole.
In the following section, those issues will be depicted,
in order to illustrate the impact on OAuth [13], Security
SAML [14], and OpenID [15].
A.
Access to information from applications
According to Sen et al. [25], packet transfer must be
addressed, in order to apply efforts to add security
improving data privacy and integrity. Looking from a
network
and
access
perspective,
devices
have
the
meanings to access a packet, or a set of packets, in
different ways and locations and with different efforts. For
instance, to reduce latencies during data transfer, local
copies or cache values of those packets could be created.
Let us assume that a sensor connects to a server to
identify
and
authenticate
user
A
and
retrieves
its
permissions. During this process, a user B could intercept
the packet, in different points of the network or of the
device, and gain a set of information from user A and the
service it is accessing.
B.
Information Tracking
It
is
important
to
have
an
interoperable
and
interconnected environment for systems to interact with
one another, as in [5][11]–[15]. It is also extremely
important that, for instance, the information used by
system B and, that are originally created by system A,
cannot be tracked back to its origin; it means that even
though system A has provided a set of information to B, a
user
from
system
B
should
not
realize
that
this
information is from another part.
As an example, let us assume that system A provides
information to a solution B.
Let us supposed that A is a system of criminal reports
B is another solution that uses those criminal reports to
define the most suitable place to open a new commercial
building, based on criminal records. The information used
by B, which was provided by A, must not be unveiled.
This situation could destroy the anonymity in A and
compromise witnesses and citizens victims of crimes, for
example.
C.
Citizen Tracking
Solutions
for
smart
cities
use
different
sensors
(physical or social), those sensors are used to collect data
from several city systems, and, based on this, it is possible
for urban systems to have a better city management.
In order to avoid further problems, such sensors must
be under the control of a responsible entity in order to
preserve its functionality and generated data.
Among the possible problems raised by this topic, it
can
be
appropriate:
Unauthorized
citizen
tracking,
discovery of movement patterns and flood of directional
advertisement/ merchandising.
D.
User/Citizen data loss
This issue deals with the concept that applications are
saving precious data in the device and, if are not well
treated, those data could be lost or compromised creating
significant problems to the citizen.
This could be achieved by adding mechanisms related
to client cryptographic storage [7][22], system isolation
and
even
solutions
related
to
authorization
and
authentication mechanisms.
E.
Crossed access to information in data centers
For this scenario, we deal with situations related to
unauthorized access to information by exploiting flaws on
the server side.
For example, when accessing information related to
students educational systems, a given entity (application)
can
recover
criminal
records,
from
a
non-specific
connection, related to this citizen even though the solution
should only be using Educational Services. This situation
may occur since both systems share a common area or
permissions that must be respected in order to avoid this
kind of behavior.
F.
Crossed access in client side
Description #E, Crossed access to information in data
centers, details a situation related to unauthorized access
in server side.
Issue #F, this current topic, brings forth a subject
related to unauthorized access on the client side, for
instance,
in
a
mobile
device
that
holds
sensitive
information.
Different from issue #D, which the concern is about
every information saved and that are NOT properly stored,
and liable to undesired access within the context of a
device.
If, for instance, system A saves in a device values
related to paid fees, and system B uses the same
mechanism to
store information regarding the user
financial account. If the device does not provide A and B
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

with the correct isolation, it is possible that through A an
attacker gains access to values presented in B, and even
more, it is possible that a malicious third part system may
be installed and, then, gains access to both systems
information [28].
G.
Lack of Security in Depth
According to OWASP TOP 10, one of the Top Ten
risks to WEB application is related to code injection. Also
according to OWASP, sanitize inputted values and
remove undesired texts is one of the measures to avoid
that and other security flaws [24].
This flaw, #G, is related to systems that do not
validate data in different layers, and are compromised in
any level, by data originated from other services.
In other words, if system A provides a rich UI
environment to the user and has several validations and
sanitization in this part, if the back-end structure does not
apply the same criteria, whenever a system C sends data
to system A, system A may use this data. It means that, if
C has a malicious code inputted, it might be transferred to
A once A misses defense in depth concepts.
H.
Viral effect in urban environment
A Smart City uses an interoperable environment to
provide solutions with the opportunity to interact with
other system, exchanging data and creating more value to
its citizens [2].
If the border of these relations is not well defined, the
systems may face a scenario where a value is changed in
system A and when system B uses this changed value, it
may corrupt the information used in system B.
In issue #G, our main concern is with the lack of
protection in every layer, and how this could be a problem
that an urban scenario is highly connected. In the present
issue, our concern is with the consequences of issues like
issue #G, if the system is highly connected and lacks
protections in several parts, the consequences of an attack
can be exponentially increased, infecting the entire
solution through the infection of a small part.
I.
Infection traceability and recovery
The amount of data used and stored by a Smart City
has
reached
unprecedented
levels.
Moreover,
the
connection between systems has created a System of
Systems structure that provides those solutions with data
coming from different services.
Issue #H presents a viral threat related to a set of data
that can share or provide another service with different
data, creating, at some level, a self-sustained system.
From that point of view, this issue presents a consequence
for issue #I. Due to the amount of data and interconnected
system, it is possible for an infection to maintain its origin
undetected and beyond data recovery.
Using as an example, System A, with terabytes of
data, exchanging values with a System B, that feeds
Systems C and D with updated and new values, processed
from A data. D, on the other hand, keeps passing some
fine-grained data back to System A. If A suffers an
infection having its data compromised, B will be fed with
infected data, spreading the infection to other systems,
like C and D. As soon as the infection could be detected,
recovery processes may not be an option since the amount
of data compromised is too big to be restored to a
previous form. In addition, due to the relation between
systems, the infection source may not be detectable.
V.
EXPLORING OAUTH, SAML AND OPENID
To address some issues mentioned on the previous
section, identification management will play an important
role [28]; therefore, this section will present architectural
solutions that addresses security issues, specially related
to identification, authorization and authentication across
an interoperable environment. This section will depict
three
different
approaches
that
offer
a
set
of
functionalities that could aid mitigating previous issues.
According to approaches related to, or making use of,
OAuth
2.0
[27][28],
SAML
[29][30]
and
OpenID
[31][32], it appears as the bigger responsible for security
assurance in interoperable environments. For this reason,
OAuth, SAML and OpenID will be depicted in the
following section, and compared with the mentioned
issues in order to understand if there are positive impacts
on a Smart City environment.
A. OAuth
Open Authorization (OAuth) is an authentication
standard used by service providers to store protected
resources in a way that a resource owner do not have to
hand out their credentials to gain access to the protected
assets. It means that through OAuth is possible to
authorize another website,
with access to the user
information
stored
within
another
service
provider,
without the need to share their access permissions.
The basic structure of OAuth is composed by a
Resource Owner, that is an entity responsible for storing
protected assets and is capable of granting access to the
assets under its control, an Authorization Server is
responsible for handling authentication and authorization
of different entities involved and a Resource Server that is
a server that hosts the client asset [27][28][33].
Figure 2 shows the basic flow of an OAuth structure:
Figure 2. OAuth basic flow
(A) In the first step, a client requests an authorization
from the resource owner.  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

(B) The resource owner, replies to the client and
redirects the request to authorization server.  
(C) The client requests an authorization grant from the
authorization
 server
by
presenting
the
client
credentials.  
(D) The authorization server validates the client
credentials and the  authorization grant, and if valid
issues an access token.  
(E) The client requests the protected resource from the
resource server and authenticates by presenting the
access token.  
(F) The resource server validates the access token, and
if valid, serves  the request.  
B. SAML
Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) defines
an XML based framework used to describe and exchange
information related to security between secure web-based
entities [1][34]–[37].
SAML is a reference standard that implements identity
provider that has the capability to address several security
scenarios and technologies. The main strength of a SAML
based system is that it can create a trust relationship using
entities that relies on different security mechanism.
Different from other security systems SAML approach is
to express assertions about an entity that other application
within the same network or environment can trust
Figure 3. SAML basic flow
(A) A client tries to access an asset in resource server.
(B) The resource server, redirects the request to the
authorization server.  
(C) The client informs login and password.  
(D) Once the authentication is made, the authorization
server redirects the SAML token to the resource
server.  
(E) The asset access is granted to the client.  
C. OpenID
OpenID is a distributed open standard technology,
used to identify users with URL typed ID. Any type of
system can use an OpenID protocol without any kind of
fee.
The final user also does not need to depend on a
specific site or domain to keep their ID controlled. It
means that they do not need to enter any of its personal
information such as email, name, address or other
identifiers to have an ID and password for every site,
instead all that is necessary is to lot in using their OpenID
in a site that adopts and OpenID system [21]. Due to this
property, a user do not need to have a separate ID and
Password for each site further OpenID creates the effect
of a outsourced user authentication service.
OpenID basic flow is composed of a Client, which
represents and entity using the OpenID system, Relying
Party (RP) that is the service provider and the OpenID
Provider that holds the logic related to IDs and Passwords
[29][38], as presented in Figure 3.
Figure 4. OpenID basic flow
(A) The client informs the OpenID to a RP.  
(B) The RP normalizes the clients OpenID, identify the
OpenID and redirects it to the client.
(C) The client informs credentials for the ID.
(D) After authentication, access is granted.
 
VI.
TOWARDS ISSUES ANALYSIS
In this section, the impact of OAuth, SAML and
OpenID, under the vision of the security issues mentioned
in Section III, will be analyzed.
The three-depicted protocols have a direct relation
with both creation and maintenance of identifiers and with
authorization
and
authentication
in
an
interoperable
environment.
A. Access to information from applications
Once the token is generated, and somehow stored
within the client, only the OpenID presents means to
avoid this threat, due to its characteristic of asking for a
password once the ID is presented. This way even if the
ID is compromised, the attacker needs to have extra
security information about the ID. OAuth and SAML, on
the other hand, it does not request other verification after
the token is created.
B. Information Tracking
This issue is related to the concept of an information
source not being able to be discovered. About this idea,
the three mentioned protocols have no ways to avoid the
issue if the correct authorization attribution is not made.
In other words, the protocol can address the problem, but
if not well used, or by any human misconfiguration it can
still be explored.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

C. Citizen tracking
Considering that the token generated by OAuth and
SAML
are
compromised,
it
is
possible
to
track
information from different systems. To both mentioned
protocols, even if it is possible to explore the flaw, it also
is unlikely that every system used by the citizen could be
reachable by the same token. In OpenID relies the trust
that, even though the ID is compromised, the user needs
to achieve also the password of the citizen.
D. User/Citizen data loss
Since the main focus of the studied protocols are related
to the interoperability of systems, it has no direct relation
with protection regarding the client side. That way OAuth,
OpenID and SAML are marked with no positive impacts
with issue number #4.
E.
Crossed access to information in data centers
Similar to issue number #2, this issue is partially
addressed by OpenID, SAML and OAuth, because they
have the strengths to solve this kind of scenario, but due
to incorrect use of the protocols or by human mistakes,
when adding the permissions and authorizations, data
could be compromised even in the server side.
F. Crossed access in client side
Similar to issue #4, issue #6 deals with the concept of
client side been compromised, the difference in this case
is about the notion that a data in application A could be
wrongly accessed from another application B, causing
data leakage from one app to another, whereas for issue
#4 it is related to data loss on the client side by any other
means, for example, week client storage. The same
explanation for issue #4 is applied for #6 and the three
protocols have no impact on this scenario.
G.
Lack of Security in Depth
As previously mentioned, Security in Depth is a
concept that suggests adding several layers of protection
within a system scope. OAuth, SAML and OpenID, deals
with the concept of providing few tokens to every user
making it simpler to log and gain access to the proper
asset. Due to that fact it is feasible to realize that the three
protocols make the use of a set of services easier, but lose
some security by repeating the same checks for different
services.
H.
Viral effect in urban environment
Issue #8 is potentially solved by the three protocols
since they present means to avoid actions coming from
unauthorized parts. Even though they are susceptible to
human flaws, it is still highly unlikely that for every
system using the protocols, they present bad settings or
operational flaws.
I.
Infection traceability and recovery
Finally, issue number #9 deals with the idea that if some
point of a broad system is compromised, it is improbable
to identify where the infection or the flaw was first
initialized and also to recover the state of the system to a
previous version. Since OAuth, SAML and OpenID, deal
with a single ID for a set of systems, this will make it
impossible to track which system the flaw came from.
Table I uses the following subtitle, to summarize the
impacts of each one of the three protocols:  for no
positive impacts, / partially address the scenario. 
directly addresses the situation.
TABLE I. OAuth, SAML AND OpenID IMPACTS
AGAINST ISSUES
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
For the first time in human history, humanity is facing
a unique situation where more than 50% of the population
lives in big cities. To work it out, there is an urgent need
to evolve information technology systems to solutions that
provide the citizens more and detailed information about
different subjects of its daily usage.
At the same time that new solutions rise, new
challenges are also developed. Among those, information
security plays an important role, and not only due to the
privacy issues of the citizens; it is a subject that may go
beyond citizens and impact the entire system.
Solutions
like
OpenID,
SAML
and
OAuth
are
fundamental to guarantee the safety of the single sign on
users. Unfortunately, all the expectations rely on one of
those 3 standards and it may not address and solve all the
problems. Most of this concern is related to the fact that
those standards are under authentication and authorization
purposes, which, based on previously described issues are
not enough. As a future work, is expected to go deeper in
the analyses of the impact of OpenID, SAML and OAuth
and to proposes and extension to those technologies to
focuses more in smart cities identification management.
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Gil-Castineira, E. Costa-Montenegro, F. Gonzalez-
Castano, C. López-Bravo, T. Ojala, and R. Bose,
“Experiences inside the Ubiquitous Oulu Smart City,”
Computer (Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 48–55,
Jun. 2011.
[2]
A. Bartoli, M. Soriano, J. Hernandez-Serrano, M. Dohler,
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

A. Kountouris, D. Barthel, Security and Privacy in your
Smart City , in Proceedings of Barcelona Smart Cities
Congress 2011, 29-2 December 2011, Barcelona (Spain).
[3]
M. Batty, K. W. Axhausen, F. Giannotti, a. Pozdnoukhov,
a. Bazzani, M. Wachowicz, G. Ouzounis, and Y. Portugali,
“Smart cities of the future,” Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top., vol.
214, no. 1, pp. 481–518, Dec. 2012.
[4]
J. Bélissent and S. Analyst, “What’s new in Smart
Cities ?,” pp. 1–20, 2011.
[5]
O. Haubensak, “Smart cities and internet of things,” Bus.
Asp. Internet Things, Semin. pp. 33–39, 2011.
[6]
A. Frost, “Moving Citizens in the Smarter City — Using a
Framework Approach to Plan Intelligent Transportation
Systems Strategies and Implement Solutions.”
[7]
F. Ferraz, C. Sampaio, and C. Ferraz, “Towards a Smart
City Security Model Exploring Smart Cities Elements
Based on Nowadays Solutions,” ICSEA 2013, pp. 546–
550, 2013.
[8]
D. Washburn, U. Sindhu, and S. Balaouras, “Helping CIOs
Understand ‘Smart City’ Initiatives,” Growth, 2009.
[9]
W. M. da Silva, A. Alvaro, G. H. R. P. Tomas, R. a.
Afonso, K. L. Dias, and V. C. Garcia, “Smart cities
software architectures,” in Proceedings of the 28th Annual
ACM Symposium on Applied Computing - SAC ’13, 2013,
p. 1722.
[10] J. Ko, N. Tsiftes, S. Dawson-haggerty, and M. Durvy,
“Industry : Beyond Interoperability – Pushing the
Performance of Sensor Network IP Stacks,” pp. 1–11.
[11] M. Sen, A. Dutt, S. Agarwal, and A. Nath, “Issues of
Privacy and Security in the Role of Software in Smart
Cities,” 2013 Int. Conf. Commun. Syst. Netw. Technol., pp.
518–523, Apr. 2013.
[12] M. Chen, “Towards smart city: M2M communications
with software agent intelligence,” Multimed. Tools Appl.,
vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 167–178, Feb. 2012.
[13] OAuth, “OAuth 2.0.” [Online]. Available: www.oauth.net.
[14] F. Nie, F. Xu, and R. Qi, “SAML-Based Single Sign-On
for Legacy System,” no. August, pp. 470–473, 2012.
[15] J.-H. You and M.-S. Jun, “A Mechanism to Prevent RP
Phishing in OpenID System,” 2010 IEEE/ACIS 9th Int.
Conf. Comput. Inf. Sci., pp. 876–880, Aug. 2010.
[16] J. Sendor, Y. Lehmann, G. Serme, and A. Santana de
Oliveira, “Platform-level Support for Authorization in
Cloud Services with OAuth 2,” 2014 IEEE Int. Conf.
Cloud Eng., pp. 458–465, Mar. 2014.
[17] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. G. Ferraz, “More Than Meets the
Eye In Smart City Information Security: Exploring
security issues far beyond privacy concerns,” in IEEE
computer science, UFirst-UIC 2014, 2014.
[18] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. G. Ferraz, “Smart City Security
Issues: Depicting Information Security Issues in the Role
of an Urban Environment,” in 2014 IEEE/ACM 7th
International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing,
2014, pp. 842–847.
[19] S. Dirks and M. Keeling, “A vision of smarter cities: How
cities can lead the way into a prosperous and sustainable
future,” IBM Inst. Bus. Value. June, 2009.
[20] M. Naphade, G. Banavar, C. Harrison, J. Paraszczak, and
R. Morris, “Smarter Cities and Their Innovation
Challenges,” Computer (Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. 44, no.
6, pp. 32–39, Jun. 2011.
[21] C. Harrison, B. Eckman, R. Hamilton, P. Hartswick, J.
Kalagnanam, J. Paraszczak, and P. Williams, “Foundations
for Smarter Cities,” IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1–
16, Jul. 2010.
[22] C. Balakrishna, “Enabling Technologies for Smart City
Services and Applications,” 2012 Sixth Int. Conf. Next
Gener. Mob. Appl. Serv. Technol., pp. 223–227, Sep.
2012.
[23] N. Mitton, S. Papavassiliou, A. Puliafito, and K. S.
Trivedi, “Combining Cloud and sensors in a smart city
environment,” EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw., vol.
2012, no. 1, p. 247, 2012.
[24] OWASP, “OWASP Top 10 - 2013 : The the most critical 
web application security risks,” 2013.
[25] M. Sen, A. Dutt, S. Agarwal, and A. Nath, “Issues of
Privacy and Security in the Role of Software in Smart
Cities,” in 2013 International Conference on
Communication Systems and Network Technologies,
2013, pp. 518–523.
[26] O. Garcia-Morchon, S. L. Keoh, S. Kumar, P. Moreno-
Sanchez, F. Vidal-Meca, and J. H. Ziegeldorf, “Securing
the IP-based internet of things with HIP and DTLS,” Proc.
sixth ACM Conf. Secur. Priv. Wirel. Mob. networks -
WiSec ’13, p. 119, 2013.
[27] I. Verbauwhede, “Efficient and secure hardware,”
Datenschutz und Datensicherheit - DuD, vol. 36, no. 12,
pp. 872–875, Nov. 2012.
[28] M. Schumacher, E. Fernandez-Buglioni, D. Hybertson, F.
Buschmann, and P. Sommerlad, Security Patterns : 
Integrating Security and Systems Engineering (Wiley
Software Patterns Series). John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[29] M. Noureddine and R. Bashroush, “A provisioning model
towards OAuth 2.0 performance optimization,” 2011 IEEE
10th Int. Conf. Cybern. Intell. Syst., pp. 76–80, Sep. 2011.
[30] B. Leiba and H. Technologies, “OAuth Web Authorization
Protocol,” pp. 0–3, 2012.
[31] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliafito, “Security
and Cloud Computing: InterCloud Identity Management
Infrastructure,” 2010 19th IEEE Int. Work. Enabling
Technol. Infrastructures Collab. Enterp., pp. 263–265,
2010.
[32] H. Wang, C. Fan, S. Yang, J. Zou, and X. Zhang, “A New
Secure OpenID Authentication Mechanism Using One-
Time Password (OTP),” in 2011 7th International
Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and
Mobile Computing, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[33] F. Yang and S. Manoharan, “A security analysis of the
OAuth protocol,” 2013 IEEE Pacific Rim Conf. Commun.
Comput. Signal Process., pp. 271–276, Aug. 2013.
[34] T. T. A. Dinh, W. Wenqiang, and A. Datta, “City on the
Sky: Extending XACML for Flexible, Secure Data
Sharing on the Cloud,” J. Grid Comput., vol. 10, no. 1, pp.
151–172, Mar. 2012.
[35] S. Dirks and M. Keeling, “A vision of smarter cities,” IBM
Inst. Bus. Value, 2009.
[36] M. Al-Hader, A. Rodzi, A. R. Sharif, and N. Ahmad,
“SOA of Smart City Geospatial Management,” 2009 Third
UKSim Eur. Symp. Comput. Model. Simul., pp. 6–10,
2009.
[37] A. Aldama-Nalda, H. Chourabi, T. a. Pardo, J. R. Gil-
Garcia, S. Mellouli, H. J. Scholl, S. Alawadhi, T. Nam,
and S. Walker, “Smart cities and service integration
initiatives in North American cities,” Proc. 13th Annu. Int.
Conf. Digit. Gov. Res. - dg.o ’12, p. 289, 2012.
[38] T. Tran and C. Wietfeld, “Approaches for optimizing the
performance of a mobile SAML-based emergency
response system,” 2009 13th Enterp. Distrib. Object
Comput. Conf. Work., pp. 148–156, Sep. 2009.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-449-7
SOFTENG 2015 : The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

