Deep Learning Decision Making for  
Autonomous Drone Landing in 3D Urban Environment  
 
 
Oren Gal1,2 and Yerach Doytsher3 
          1Department of Marine Technologies   2Kinneret Academic College      3Mapping and Geo-information Engineering      
                      University of Haifa                               Kinneret                        Technion - Israel Institute of Technology                                 
                            Haifa, Israel                                       Israel                                                    Haifa, Israel                        
e-mails: {orengal@alumni.technion.ac.il, doytsher@technion.ac.il} 
 
 
Abstract— Quadcopters are four rotor Vertical Take-Off and 
Landing (VTOL) Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) with agile 
manoeuvring ability, small form factor and light weight – which 
makes it possible to carry on small platforms.  Quadcopters are 
also used in urban environment for similar reasons – especially 
the ability to carry on small payloads, instead of using 
helicopters on larger vehicle which are not possible in these 
dense places. In this paper, we present a new approach for 
autonomous landing a quadcopter in 3D urban environment, 
where the first stage is based on free obstacle environment and 
maximal visibility for the drone in the palled landing spot. Our 
approach is based on computer-vision algorithms using markers 
identification as input for the decision by Stochastic Gradient 
Descent (SGD) classifier with Neural Network decision making 
module with greedy motion planner avoiding static and 
dynamic obstacles in the environment. We use OpenCV with its 
built-in ArUco module to analyse the camera images and 
recognize platform/markers, then we use Sci-Kit Learn 
implementation of SGD  classifier to predict landing optimum 
angle and compare results to manually decide by simple 
calculations. Our research includes real-time experiments using 
Parrot Bebop2 quadcopter and the Parrot Sphinx Simulator. 
 
 
Keywords - Swarm; Visibility; 3D; Urban environment; 
autonomous landing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK 
   A Quadcopter is a specific type of a UAV, with four 
rotors and Vertical takeoff and Landing (VTOL) capability, 
its agility, light weight and size makes it a perfect companion 
to smaller boats from sail-boats to even kayak, rather than 
classic helicopters that accompany bigger ships or fixed-
wings airplanes on extremely large aircraft carriers. 
The efficient computation of visible surfaces and 
volumes in 3D environments is not a trivial task. The visibility 
problem has been extensively studied over the last twenty 
years, due to the importance of visibility in GIS and 
Geomatics, computer graphics and computer vision, and 
robotics. Accurate visibility computation in 3D environments 
is a very complicated task demanding a high computational 
effort, which could hardly have been done in a very short time 
using traditional well-known visibility methods [1].  
The exact visibility methods are highly complex, and 
cannot be used for fast applications due to their long 
computation time. Previous research in visibility computation 
has been devoted to open environments using DEM models, 
representing raster data in 2.5D (Polyhedral model), and do 
not address, or suggest solutions for, dense built-up areas.  
Most of these works have focused on approximate 
visibility 
computation, 
enabling 
fast 
results 
using 
interpolations of visibility values between points, calculating 
point visibility with the Line of Sight (LOS) method. Lately, 
fast and accurate visibility analysis computation in 3D 
environments. 
  A vast number of algorithms have been suggested for 
speeding up the process and reducing computation time. 
Franklin evaluates and approximates visibility for each cell in 
a DEM model based on greedy algorithms. Wang et al. 
introduced a Grid-based DEM method using viewshed 
horizon, saving computation time based on relations between 
surfaces and the line of sight (LOS method). Later on, an 
extended method for viewshed computation was presented, 
using reference planes rather than sightlines.  
 One of the most efficient methods for DEM visibility 
computation is based on shadow-casting routine. The routine 
cast shadowed volumes in the DEM, like a light bubble. 
Extensive research treated Digital Terrain Models (DTM) in 
open terrains, mainly Triangulated Irregular Network (TIN) 
and Regular Square Grid (RSG) structures. Visibility analysis 
in terrain was classified into point, line and region visibility, 
and several algorithms were introduced, based on horizon 
computation describing visibility boundary. 
  In the many uses of UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) a 
pilot uses real-time telemetry to take-off, fly and land the craft 
with continuous communication between ground station and 
the UAV on-board computer. Making these tasks 
autonomous, will allow UAVs to perform missions without 
continuous communication, and thus prevent hijack or 
damage by hackers, be more stealth for surveillance and have 
unlimited distance from ground station (bound to energy 
limitation). 
224
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Autonomous landing of a UAV is a problem on the focus 
of many studies [6][7][8] and landing on marine vessel makes 
this problem even more complex due to sea level motion that 
also occur when target platform is at stand-still. 
The object of this research is to produce a safe landing 
mechanism for a quadcopter in 3D urban environment, in 
order to allow it to perform fully autonomous missions carried 
out at sea. Also, this mechanism could be used in pilot guided 
missions, as guideline suggestions to the pilot with how/when 
it is safe to land . 
We assume the target position is known and Ground Station 
sets “home” position in the drone to be target’s GPS position. 
Then the Bebop2 built-in “Return Home” function will bring 
it to the target, with up to a few meters off. 
The proposed mechanism will perform the following tasks 
to achieve a "safe landing" decision: First, we need to visually 
search for and recognize the platform target and find the 
docking area. Once the target is found, the drone should set 
course and fly to target to be exactly above. Then, we detect 
and analyze the position of the landing surface and its plane 
angle relative to the camera. And finally, we will send the data 
to each of two implementations of the decision algorithms: 1. 
Using a supervised machine-learning classifier (pre-loaded 
with data), The machine input requires a quick pre-processing 
to set the data into a fixed structure vector, to resemble fitted 
data in the classifier. 2. Calculating directly from the data 
returned from the ArUco detection functions. The drone will 
then land safely on the boat, by sending a “land” command on 
time. 
The problem of autonomous landing an UAV was on the 
focus of many studies as the survey review state-of-the art 
methods of vision-based autonomous landing, for a wide 
range of UAV classes from fixed-wing to multi-rotors and 
from large-scale aircrafts to miniatures. The main motivation 
for dealing with autonomous landing is the difficulty in 
performing a successful landing even with a pilot controlling 
the UAV. As it seems by statistics showed in [5], most of the 
accidents related to Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems 
(RPAS) occur when the pilot tries to land the UAV. 
 Extensive research has been done on the subject to explore 
the various situations, technologies and methods to engage 
this problem. The work performed on previous studies, 
reviewed later in this section, is a great starting point for this 
project, as it is purely academic and relays on series of already 
existent technologies and tools, such as OpenCV [4], Sci-kit 
learn and the Parrot Ground SDK [2]. 
 
Figure 1. Proposed autonomous landing mechanism 
In the following sections, we first introduce an overview 
of 3D models and extended the 3D visible volumes analysis. 
In the next section, we present the autonomous navigation 
process based on our fast visibility analysis with training data 
and classifier as can be seen in Figure 1. Later, we present the 
simulation based on our 3D visible volumes analysis. 
II. 
AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION PROCESS 
 The basic step starting this process related to obstacle 
avoidance and visible area described in the next sections. 
Following that, we divide the autonomous navigation mission 
into two separate problems. The first part deals with 
navigating UAV from an arbitrary position far from target, as 
far field. The second part is related to navigating to the target 
in the near field where the target is visible. 
 In the first scenario, which is when the mission objectives 
are reached and the drone needs to get to the target vessel for 
landing, we can use the built-in functionality of the drone to 
“Return Home” by setting it “Home” position to the target’s 
known GPS position. 
 Bebop2 “Return Home” function works in a way that it 
will lift the drone to 20m above ground relative to take-off 
position, then fly directly to GPS position of “Home” and 
descend to 2m. Notice that if the drone is starting at height of 
more than 20m it will not descend to 20m, but rather keep its 
height until final descend near “Home”. 
 The “Return Home” accuracy brings the drone to “Home” 
sometimes with offset of a few meters. This is good enough to 
get us to the second problem of navigation with visual distance 
to the target, until the drone will be directly above target and 
ready for landing. 
 Once the drone is at “Home” position, it will rotate and 
with each full rotation the tilt angle will increase to look 
further below, and if after rotating and tilting to the maximum 
of -90 degrees to the horizon, i.e., directly down, it will try 
again at higher altitude (1m up) to maybe see further away.  
After getting a visual identification the drone will set 
course, keeping the target in the middle of the screen, and 
moving forward to it, tilting the camera during the movements 
until the landing pad is directly below. According to that, 
landing pad located in the middle of the image and camera tilt 
is maximum. 
Then the drone will lower altitude to ~50cm while keeping 
the landing pad centered underneath, and in that height the 
data from the AR tags will be converted to a vector of 
predefined structure to feed a classifier trained to detect 
optimum landing angle/position. Once the classifier gives 
“Safe” signal – a “Land” command will issue to the drone to 
perform immediately. 
III. 
FAST AND APPROXIMATED VISIBILITY ANALYSIS 
In this section, we present an analytic analysis of the 
visibility boundaries of planes, cylinders and spheres for the 
predicted scene presented in the previous sub-section, which 
leads to an approximated visibility. 
Search Platform
Fly To Target
Identify Landing 
Area
Descend Close 
To Target
Analyze Plane 
Angular Position
Decide: 
If Safe - Land
225
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Analytic 3D Visible Volumes Analysis 
In this section, we present fast 3D visible volumes analysis 
in urban environments, based on an analytic solution which 
plays a major role in our proposed method of estimating the 
number of clusters. We present an efficient solution for visible 
volumes analysis in 3D. 
We analyze each building, computing visible surfaces and 
defining visible pyramids using analytic computation for 
visibility boundaries. For each object we define Visible 
Boundary Points (VBP) and Visible Pyramid (VP). 
A simple case demonstrating analytic solution from a 
visibility point to a building can be seen in Figure 2(a). The 
visibility point is marked in black, the visible parts colored in 
red, and the invisible parts colored in blue where VBP marked 
with yellow circles.  
 
                            (a)                                                        (b) 
Figure 2. (a) Visibility Volume Computed with the Analytic Solution. (b) 
Visible Pyramid from a Viewpoint (marked as a Black Dot) to VBP of a 
Specific Surface 
In this section, we introduce our concept for visible 
volumes inside bounding volume by decreasing visible 
pyramids and projected pyramids to the bounding volume 
boundary. First, we define the relevant pyramids and volumes. 
 
The Visible Pyramid (VP): we define VPij=1..Nsurf(x0, y0, 
z0) of the object i as a 3D pyramid generated by connecting 
VBP of specific surface j to a viewpoint V(x0, y0, z0). 
In the case of a box, the maximum number of Nsurf for a 
single object is three. VP boundary, colored with green 
arrows, can be seen in Figure 2(b). 
For each VP, we calculate Projected Visible Pyramid 
(PVP), projecting VBP to the boundaries of the bounding 
volume S. 
Projected Visible Pyramid (PVP) - we define 
PVPi
j..Nsurf(x0,y0, z0) of the object i as 3D projected points to 
the bounding volume S, VBP of specific surface j trough 
viewpoint V(x0, y0, z0). VVP boundary, colored with purple 
arrows, can be seen in Figure 3.  
The 3D Visible Volumes inside bounding volume S, VVS, 
computed as the total bounding volume S, VS, minus the 
Invisible Volumes IVS . In a case of no overlap between 
buildings, IVS is computed by decreasing the visible volume 
from the projected visible volume, ∑
∑
(V(PVPi
j) −
Nsurf
j=1
Nobj
i=1
V(VPi
j)). 
By decreasing the invisible volumes from the total 
bounding volume, only the visible volumes are computed, as 
seen in Figure 4. Volumes of VPV and VP can be simply 
computed based on a simple pyramid volume geometric 
formula. 
 
 
Figure 3. Invisible Projected Visible Pyramid Boundaries colored with 
purple arrows from a Viewpoint (marked as a Black Dot) to the boundary 
surface ABCD of Bounding Volume S 
In a case of two buildings without overlapping, IVS 
computed for each building, as presented above, as can be 
seen in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 4. Invisible Volume V(PVPi
j) − V(VPi
j) Colored in Gray Arrows. 
Decreasing Projected Visible Pyramid boundary surface ABCD of 
Bounding Volume S from Visible Pyramid 
 
Figure 5. Invisible Volume V(PVPi
j) − V(VPi
j) Colored in Gray Arrows. 
Decreasing Projected Visible Pyramid boundary surface ABCD of 
Bounding Volume S from Visible Pyramid 
Considering two buildings with overlap between object's 
Visible Pyramids, as seen in Figure 6(a). In Figure 6(b), VP11 
boundary is colored by green lines, VP21 boundary is colored 
by purple lines and the hidden and Invisible Surface between 
visible pyramids ISVP1i
VP2i  is colored in white. 
226
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Invisible Hidden Volume (IHV) - We define Invisible 
Hidden Volume (IHV), as the Invisible Surface (IS) between 
visible pyramids projected to bounding box S. 
For example, IHV in Figure 6(c) is the projection of the 
invisible surface between visible pyramids colored in white, 
projected to the boundary plane of bounding box S. 
In the case of overlapping buildings, by computing 
invisible volumes 𝐼𝑉𝑆, we decrease IHV twice between the 
overlapped objects, as can be seen in Figure 6(c), IHV 
boundary points denoted as {A11, . ., A18}. The same scene is 
presented in Figure 7, where Invisible Volume V(PVPi
j) −
V(VPi
j) is colored in purple and green arrows for each 
building. 
   
 
                      (a)                                          (b)                                                           
 
(c) 
Figure 6. (a)  Computing Hidden Surfaces between Buildings , VP2
1 Base 
Plane, ISVP1i
VP2i
 (b) The Two Buildings - VP1
1 in green and VP2
1 in Purple 
(from the Viewpoint) and ISVP1i
VP2i
 in White (c) IHV boundary points colored 
with gray circles denoted 
The PVP of the object close to the viewpoint is marked in 
black, colored with pink circles denoted as boundary set points 
{B11, . . , B18} and the far object's PVP is colored with orange 
circles, denoted as boundary set points {C11, . ., C18}. It can be 
seen that IHV is included in each of these invisible volumes, 
where {A11,. ., A18} ∈ {B11, . . ,B18}  and  {A11,.. , A18} ∈
{C11, . . , C18}. 
Therefore, we add IHV between each overlapping pair of 
objects to the total visible volume.  
The same analysis holds true for multiple overlapping 
objects, adding the IHV between each two consecutive 
objects. 
In Figure 8, we demonstrate the case of three buildings 
with overlapping. The invisible surfaces are bounded with 
dotted lines, while the projected visible surfaces to the 
overlapped building are colored in gray. In order to calculate 
the visible volumes from a viewpoint, IHV between each two 
buildings must be added as a visible volume, since it is already 
omitted at the previous step as an invisible volume. 
 
Figure 7. Invisible Volume V(PVPi
j) − V(VPi
j) colored in purple and green 
arrows for each building. PVP of the object close to viewpoint colored in 
black, colored with pink circles and the far object PVP colored with orange 
circle 
 
Figure 8. Three overlapping buildings. Invisible surfaces bounded with 
dotted lines, projected visible surfaces of the overlap building colored in 
gray 
      In this part, we extend the previous visibility analysis 
concept and include cylinders as continuous curves 
parameterization 
. 
Cylinder parameterization can be described in (1): 
  
      
, 
        (1) 
 
      We define the visibility problem in a 3D environment for 
more complex objects as: 
 
     (2) 
 
cln ( , , )
d
C
x y z
ln
sin( )
( , , )
cos( )
C
d
r const
r
C
x y z
r
c


=




= 





_ max
0
2
1
0
peds
c
c
c
h




=
+


co
s
co
s
0
0
0
'( , )
( ( , )
(
,
,
))
0
n t
n t
z
z
C x y
C x y
V x
y
z

−
=
227
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

where 3D model parameterization is 
, and the 
viewpoint is given as 
. Extending the 3D cubic 
parameterization, we also consider the case of the cylinder. 
Integrating (1) to (2) yields: 
 
                        (3) 
 
(4) 
 
    As can be noted, these equations are not related to Z axis, 
and the visibility boundary points are the same for each x-y 
cylinder profile, as seen in (3), (4). 
. 
    The visibility statement leads to complex equation, which 
does not appear to be a simple computational task. This 
equation can be efficiently solved by finding where the 
equation changes its sign and crosses zero value; we used 
analytic solution to speed up computation time and to avoid 
numeric approximations. We generate two values of 
 
generating two silhouette points in a very short time 
computation. Based on an analytic solution to the cylinder 
case, a fast and exact analytic solution can be found for the 
visibility problem from a viewpoint. 
    We define the solution presented in (4) as x-y-z 
coordinates values for the cylinder case as Cylinder 
Boundary Points (CBP). CBP, defined in (5), are the set of 
visible silhouette points for a 3D cylinder, as presented in 
Figure 9: 
 
(5) 
 
        
                    (a)                                         (b)  
Figure 9. Cylinder Boundary Points (CBP) using Analytic Solution marked 
as blue points, Viewpoint Marked in Red: (a) 3D View (Visible Boundaries 
Marked with Red Arrows); (b) Topside View. 
In the same way, sphere parameterization can be described as 
formulated in (6): 
 
               (6) 
 
We define the visibility problem in a 3D environment for this 
object in (7): 
 
     (7) 
 
where the 3D model parameterization is 
, and the 
viewpoint is given as 
. Integrating (6) to (7) 
yields: 
 
   (8) 
Where r is defined from sphere parameter, and 
are changes from visibility point along Z axis, as described in 
(8). The visibility boundary points for a sphere, together with 
the analytic solutions for planes and cylinders, allow us to 
compute fast and efficient visibility in a predicted scene from 
local point cloud data, which are updated in the next state. 
This extended visibility analysis concept, integrated with 
a well-known predicted filter and extraction method, can be 
implemented in real time applications with point clouds data. 
 
IV. 
VISIBILITY-BASED DRONE AUTONOMOUS LANDING 
The landing pad designed as a plate with five markers – 
one in the center and four others on each corner: 
 
Figure 10. Landing pad with fiducial markers 
Every ArUco marker has an ID as described in Figure 10, 
which can be determined when the marker gets detected, and 
( , )z const
C x y
=
0
0
0
(
,
,
)
V x y z
sin
cos
sin
cos
0
0
x
y
z
r
V
r
r
r
V
c
V






−

 



−

−
=





 

−

 


_
_
_
_
1
1
1
1..
2
0
0
0
,
,
(
,
,
)
,
,
PBP
bound
PBP
bound
PBP
bound
PBP
bound
i
N
N
N
N
x y z
CBP
x
y z
x
y
z
=
=


= 





sin
cos
( , , )
sin sin
cos
0
0
2
Sphere
r const
r
C
x y z
r
r









=




= 









0
0
0
'( , , )
( ( , , )
(
,
,
))
0
C x y z
C x y z
V x
y z

−
=
( , , )
C x y z
0
0
0
(
,
,
)
V x y z
0
0
0
(
,
,
)
V x y z
228
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

by that we can easily center the drone location above the 
landing pad even if only one or two markers are in view. 
This landing pad has markers with ID values of {18,28, 
17,25,4} selected randomly, but once selected they are very 
important to the implementation since  the training data 
linked to the classifiers used as will be discussed later. 
The proposed system takes each frame, and resolve all 
markers, then create a data vector of fixed length with all the 
necessary information of the markers. 
Data format for each marker can be described as: [ID, rx, 
ry, rz, tx, ty, tz],  
Where [
𝑟𝑥
𝑟𝑦
𝑟𝑧
] is the rotation vector of a single marker and 
[
𝑡𝑥
𝑡𝑦
𝑡𝑧
] is the translation vector of that marker. This format 
repeats five times in each vector, where a tag ID has a fixed 
position for each tag. When a marker could not be found on 
a frame, the tag ID and all values of that marker will be set to 
zero. 
Then send this vector to a classifier which will simply 
return strings telling us if the drone is centered above the 
landing pad or a correction movement is required. Possible 
answers are in the set: “CENTER”, “DOWNWARD”, 
“FORWARD”, “RIGHT”, “LEFT”. 
For the Navigation we added more ArUCO tags 
surrounding this pad, in three sizes, so that they will be visible 
from varying distances along the navigation and descend 
process of the mechanism. 
We used eight large tags, each surrounded by four medium 
tags and in between another five small tags as seen in Figure 
11. The landing pad is printed on A4 page. And each of the 
eight patterns described here is also on an A4 page. 
 
Figure 11. Navigation Assisting Tag Board Design 
A. Training Data and Classifiers 
In order to train the classifier, we used OpenGL as can be 
seen in Figure 12 to simulate the landing pad in a precisely 
controlled position and viewing angles. By that, we created a 
labeled data set, then use this precisely labeled data to fit in a 
variety of classifiers and test for accuracy. Following that, we 
tested several classifiers and selected the best performance 
for the purpose of the landing mechanism proposed. 
 
 
Figure 12. OpenGL Simulation for Training Data 
The simulated platform rotating in roll, pitch and yaw - 
controlled by passing parameters, allowing me to tag every 
rendered frame as either safe for landing or not without visual 
computation (pre-label the data). 
The simulator gets parameters from command line for 
setting some axis angle to run on a limited range, while 
rolling over all possible values of angles and positions, so the 
workload could be divided to parallel processes and even run 
on different machines. 
After a few days running on several computers in parallel, 
the simulators generated a total of 15,193,091 vectors dataset, 
that could be used as training dataset for different models of 
classifiers. 
Sci-Kit Learn package implements SVM with a fit 
function that takes labeled data as input in two variables: Y 
vector of y labels in a single column and X array of x vectors 
– each x vector is a line vector corresponds to the appropriate 
y in Y. 
SVM does not allow incremental learning, i.e., it needs all 
data at once. This was quit an issue with the data size we tried 
to fit – fifteen million vectors. However, Sci-Kit Learn offers 
other types of classifiers, although all of them do not perform 
actual incremental learning (they do need all data at once), 
nonetheless, they do implement a partial fit function that can 
take each round a small portion of the data, and update the 
classifier’s support vectors. 
For each classifier, we tried different parameters, and 
different sizes of the dataset by selecting randomly a fraction 
of the data. Then, test the model (using 25% of the data for 
test) to check it prediction accuracy. 
 
TABLE I.  CLASSIFIERS ACCURACY COMPARISSION 
Classifier Type 
Best accuracy 
SGD, epsilon insensitive 
57.341% 
SGD, hinge 
75.716% 
SGD, huber 
59.841% 
SGD, log 
73.658% 
SGD, modified huber 
73.362% 
SGD, squared eps. insensitive  
59.6% 
SGD, squared hinge 
73.857% 
SGD, squared loss 
57.171% 
Perceptron 
74.579% 
Bernoulli NB 
62.317% 
Passive Aggressive Classifier 
74.455% 
229
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The result in Table I shows that even the best classifier got 
only approximately 75% success in recall. This is insufficient 
for a safety mechanism even with filters added to the process 
of a final “safe” decision. 
To further increase accuracy, we thought it would be more 
effective to use more than one classifier, in a voting manner, 
to decide together on the data. At first, we suggested a voting 
scheme that takes 10-15 of the best classifiers and check if 
more than 50% of them agree on a "safe" result, take that as 
the answer, we checked that over the data and results did not 
increase accuracy at all. Then we thought maybe a classifier 
of classifiers outputs could extract some new information in 
a smarter manner than a simple voting, and will help increase 
accuracy. We created a new dataset of the same size, only this 
time the vector consisted of zero for safe and one for unsafe 
result of a classifier over fifteen of the best classifiers (72%-
75% accuracy) and trained this dataset on all types of 
classifiers with different parameters as before. This time, all 
classifiers listed above got around 76% accuracy, where the 
best classifier reached 76.8% accuracy. Approximately 2% 
improvement.  
Finally, looking closely on live videos of the ArUco 
markers detections, we noticed that the axis drawn on the 
detected markers tend to shift rapidly usually around more 
“safe” angles, so we tried to manually correct the data, and 
remove some of the spiking data that is tagged as safe – i.e., 
the simulator created it as a safe angle, but detection errors 
made it as a vector that should rather be tagged as unsafe. 
All data marked as safe, with “Z” axis angle in all detected 
markers, re-tag as unsafe, if a certain threshold is passed.  
Before rectifying the dataset consisted of about 50% safe 
labels. This method reduced the number of “safe” tagged 
vector to about 20% of the data. 
Fitting this new retagged dataset to all models as before, 
and testing again for accuracy, results improvements shown 
in details reported in Table III. The results improved 
drastically. 
Best classifier selected for the mechanism is SGD 
(Stochastic Gradient Descend) with loss parameter set to 
logarithmic. This classifier showed 86% percent accuracy, 
which could be used with some filtering to suppress false 
alarm rate even more. 
 
V. 
SPATIAL RAPID RANDOM TREES 
In this section, the Rapid Random Trees (RRT) path 
planning technique is briefly introduced with spatial 
extension, which is the basic motion planning drone 
algorithm. RRT is dealing with high-dimensional spaces by 
taking into account dynamic and static obstacles including 
dynamic and non-holonomic robots' constraints. 
The main idea is to explore a portion of the space using 
sampling points in space, by incrementally adding new 
randomly selected nodes to the current tree's nodes. 
RRTs have an (implicit) Voronoi bias that steers them 
towards yet unexplored regions of the space. However, in case 
of kinodynamic systems, the imperfection of the underlying 
metric can compromise such behavior. Typically, the metric 
relies on the Euclidean distance between points, which does 
not necessarily reflect the true cost-to-go between states. 
Finding a good metric is known to be a difficult problem. 
Simple heuristics can be designed to improve the choice of the 
tree state to be expanded and to improve the input selection 
mechanism without redefining a specific metric. 
A. RRT Stages  
The RRT method is a randomized one, typically growing 
a tree search from the initial configuration to the goal, 
exploring the search space. These kinds of algorithms consist 
of three major steps: 
1. Node Selection: An existing node on the tree is chosen 
as a location from which to extend a new branch. 
Selection of the existing node is based on probabilistic 
criteria such as metric distance. 
2. Node Expansion: Local planning applied a generating 
feasible motion primitive from the current node to the 
next selected local goal node, which can be defined by a 
variety of characters. 
3. Evaluation: The possible new branch is evaluated based 
on cost function criteria and feasible connectivity to 
existing branches. 
These steps are iteratively repeated, commonly until the 
planner finds feasible trajectory from start to goal 
configurations, or other convergence criteria. 
 
 
Figure 13. The RRT algorithm: (A) Sampling and node selection steps;  
(B) Expansion step. 
A simple case demonstrating the RRT process is shown in 
Figure 13. The sampling step selects Nrand, and the node 
selection step chooses the closest node, Nnear,  as shown in 
Figure 13.A. The expansion step, creating a new branch to a 
new configuration, Nnew, is shown in Figure 13.B. An example 
for growing RRT algorithm is shown in Figure 14. 
 
Figure 14. Example for growing RRT algorithm. 
230
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Spatial RRT Formulation  
We formulate the RRT planner and revise the basic RRT 
planner for a 3D spatial analysis case for a continuous path 
from initial state xinit to goal state xgoal:  
1. State Space: A topological space, X. 
2. Boundary Values: 
xinit
 X
 and 
xgoal
 X
. 
3. Free Space: A function 
:
{
,
}
D X
→ true false
 that determines 
whether ( )
free
x t
 X
where 
X free
consist of the attainable 
states outside the obstacles in a 3D environment.  
4. Inputs: A set, U, contains the complete set of attainable 
    control efforts ui, that can affect the state. 
5. Incremental Simulator: Given a current state, ( )
x t , and 
input over time interval t
 , compute (
)
x t
t
+  . 
6. 3D Spatial Analysis: A real value function, f (x; u, OCPi) 
which specifies the cost to the center of 3D visibility 
volumes cluster points (OCP) between a pair of points in
X . 
C. Spatial RRT Formulation  
We present a revised RRT pseudo code described in Table 
II, for spatial case generating trajectory T, applying K steps 
from initial state xinit. The f function defines the dynamic 
model and kinematic constraints,  𝑥̇ = f (x; u, OCPi), where u 
is the input and OCPi  set the next new state and the feasibility 
of following the next spatial visibility clustering point. 
TABLE II.  SPATIAL RRT PSEUDO CODE 
Generate Spatial RRT (xinit; K; ∆𝑡)  
T.init (xinit); 
For k = 1 to K do 
             xrand ← random.state(); 
             xnear ← nearest.neighbor (xrand; T ); 
             u ← select.input (xrand; xnear); 
             xnew ← new.state (xnear; u; ∆𝑡; f); 
             T.add.vertex (xnew); 
             T.add.edge (xnear; xnew; u); 
End 
Return T 
D. Search Method 
Our search is guided by following spatial clustering points 
based on 3D visible volumes analysis in 3D urban 
environments, i.e., Optimal Control. The cost function for 
each next possible node (as the target node) consists of 
probability to closest OCP, POCPi , and probability to random 
point, Prand . 
In case of overlap between a selected node and obstacle in 
the environment, the selected node is discarded, and a new 
node is selected based on POCPi and Prand.  
E. STP Planner Pseudo-Code 
We present our STP planner pseudo code described in 
Table III, for spatial case generating trajectory T with search 
space method presented above. The search space is based on 
POCPi and Prand. We apply K steps from initial state xinit. The f  
function defines the dynamic model and kinematic 
constraints,  ẋ = f (x; u), where u is the input and OCPi  are 
local target points between start to goal states.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15. STP Search Method: (A) Start and Goal Points; (B) Explored 
Space to the Goal Through OCP 
F. Completeness 
Motion-planning and search algorithms commonly 
describe 'complete planner' as an algorithm that always 
provides a path planning from start to goal in bounded time. 
For random sampling algorithms, 'probabilistic complete 
planner' is defined as: if a solution  exists, the planner will 
eventually find it by using  random sampling. In the same 
manner, the deterministic sampling method (for example, 
grid-based search) defines completeness as resolution 
completeness. 
Sampling-based planners, such as the STP planner, do not 
explicitly construct search space and the space's boundaries, 
but exploit tests with preventing collision with obstacles and, 
in our case, taking spatial considerations into account. 
Similarly, to other common RRT planners, which share 
similar properties with the STP planner, our planner can be 
classified as a probabilistic complete one. 
VI. 
SIMULATIONS 
The quadcopter we used in this research is a Parrot Bebop2 
drone. It is a GPS drone with full HD 1080p wide-angle video 
camera with 3-axis digital stabilization, that can also take 
14MB still pictures.  
Bebop2 has GPS guided Return Home feature, strong 6” 
propellers, long rage communication (with WiFi extender or 
Skycontroller remote), which makes it suitable for a windy 
outdoors flight. 
The Bebop2 drone uses seven different sensors 
simultaneously to keep it stable and produce an extremely 
stabilized video even when the drone makes tiny maneuvers 
to keep itself in place, the apparent view to the user looks like 
the drone is in fixed position as if it was hanging on a crane. 
Also, there are no moving parts when we pan/tilt the camera, 
it is done entirely by changing the relevant pane in the full 
fisheye image. 
 
 
Goal 
Goal 
OCP
OCP
A) 
B) 
231
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III. STP PLANNER PSEUDO CODE 
STP Planner (xinit; xGoal ;K; ∆𝑡; OCP)  
T.init (xinit); 
xrand ← random.state(); 
xnear ← nearest.neighbor(xrand; T ); 
u ← select.input(xrand; xnear); 
xnew ← new.state.OCP (OCP1; u; ∆𝑡; f); 
While xnew≠ xGoal do 
xrand ← random.state(); 
xnear ← nearest.neighbor(xrand; T ); 
u ← select.input(xrand; xnear); 
xnew ← new.state.OCP (OCPi; u; ∆𝑡; f); 
T.add.vertex(xnew); 
T.add.edge(xnear; xnew; u); 
end  
return T; 
 
Function new.state.OCP (OCPi;u; ∆𝑡; f)  
Set POCPi , Set Prand 
p←uniform_rand[0..1] 
if    0 < p < POCPi 
       return xnew = f(OCPi,u,∆𝑡); 
else  
      if POCPi < p < Prand+ POCPi 
then 
       return RandomState(); 
end. 
 
Parrot Ground SDK includes software development suite 
that provides a tool for developers to communicate and 
control with Parrot drones that uses AR.SDK3 framework, 
e.g., Mambo, Bebop, Disco, and Anafi. It also includes a 
simulator platform called Sphinx, built on Gazebo platform, 
with Parrot drones not just as models but with full featured 
firmware that are similar to the ones on the equivalent 
physical drones. This allows developers to fully test and 
debug their programs with real firmware feedback from a 
drone in mid-flight without the risk of injury or damages to 
equipment. 
Ground SDK also provides a python wrapper called 
Olympe, to easily control drone objects. We preferred a third-
party implementation named pyparrot, which is better 
documented and fully open-sourced, so it would be easier to 
add or change functionality to my needs. 
A. ArUco Markers  
The first problem we had to deal with, involves detection 
and identification of the landing pad. Afterword, we had to 
gather all planar information to pass to the decision 
mechanism for processing. 
In order to simplify detection and get a fast and robust 
identification and planar information of the target, we used 
AR-tags on a specially designed landing pad. 
Specifically, the use of off-the-shelf open source ArUCO 
seem to be a simple solution (other implementations of AR-
tags, e.g., APRIL-TAGS may be suitable as well). 
Implementation of ArUco marker detection exists in open-
source library OpenCV, available for c/c++ and python. In 
order to get the marker real-world coordinates, we need the 
projection matrix of the camera and the distortion coefficients 
vector. To get these parameters a calibration is needed to be 
done once, then it could be loaded through a configuration 
file. The calibration process also available in OpenCV 
documentation, using a printed checkboard of known 
dimensions, and about twenty shots in different orientations 
and locations across the screen. 
We incorporate different marker sizes to be able to detect 
markers in different distances from the target landing pad and 
follow the tags. ArUco Markers also have tag ID encoded in 
them so we even know which tag we are seeing and thus what 
size it is or where it is located on the board. 
 
TABLE IV.  IMPROVEMENTS IN ACCURACY OF CLASSIFIERS 
 
B. Implementation 
To get control over a Bebop2 Drone, we found two python 
wrappers that we could use, and tested both of them. The first  
one comes with a Parrot Ground-SDK suite which includes 
the Sphinx Simulator, called Olympe. The Second wrapper 
pyparrot, originally developed for the Parrot Mambo, but 
now capable of controlling most of the newer generation 
Parrot drones. 
We decided to work with pyparrot due to two main 
reasons: 1. Olympe used a closed virtual environment that 
made it harder to install additional packages using pip. 2. 
pyparrot is an open source, making it easy to adapt and 
change to my needs, it also suggests two types of video 
handling class: the first one uses FFMPEG and the other 
opens SDP file with VLC on a separate thread. Both methods 
were slow and missed critical frames especially in SEARCH 
mode, when the camera rotates to find the target. Sometimes 
the video smeared so badly we could barely recognize the 
landing pad even when we knew where it was there. 
We changed the video handler to run on a separate thread 
(like the VLC option on pyparrot) only that in my 
Classifier type 
Best 
accuracy 
Before 
correction 
Improve
ment 
SGD, epsilon 
insensitive 
83.450% 
57.341% 
26.11% 
SGD, hinge 
85.062% 
75.716% 
9.35% 
SGD, huber 
81.876% 
59.841% 
22.04% 
SGD, log 
86.175% 
73.658% 
12.52% 
SGD,  
modified huber 
86.131% 
73.362% 
12.77% 
SGD, squared 
eps. Insensitive 
82.019% 
59.6% 
22.42% 
SGD,  
squared hinge 
85.891% 
73.857% 
12.03% 
SGD, squared 
loss 
82.942% 
57.171% 
25.77% 
Perceptron 
85.470% 
74.579% 
10.89% 
Bernoulli NB 
81.664% 
62.317% 
19.35% 
Passive 
Aggressive 
Classifier 
84.041% 
74.455% 
9.59% 
232
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

implementation we used standard OpenCV capturing module 
VideoCapture to open SDP file (contains IP, port, codec) for 
streaming coming from the drone or sphinx (depends on 
DRONE_IP parameter in the code), and another separate 
thread for the automation state machine that runs the different 
stages of this autonomous mission control and landing 
mechanism. 
For proof of concept, all experiments were simulated in 
Gazebo based Sphinx simulator without moving wave 
simulations, or any automated changes in landing-pad angles 
or position. The changes were made manually by rotating the 
pad during simulation when the drone was waiting to get a 
safe signal from either classifier or calculations.  
The experiment also did not simulate the use of “Return 
Home” functionality and assumed to start near target at about 
five meters in a random position. 
The drone starts to search around to get a visual of the 
landing pad, then fly to set exactly above while looking 
directly down (-90 degrees below horizon). 
Drone initiates with slow descend while keeping target in 
the middle of the frame, until reaches height of less than 
50cm. 
In this stage, decision mechanism under test should trigger 
“safe” when ArUco markers of the pad will be in a position 
that is regarded flat enough to be considered as safe. 
 In a preliminary experiment, we found that the classifier 
that we trained, could not get to a “safe” decision even when 
the landing pad was flat without any movements. Same 
classifier was tested with images from web-cam input seems 
to work fine, this could be issue caused by miscalibration of 
the camera. These inaccuracies cause ArUco functions that 
heavily relay on camera calibration, to produce different 
range of data relative to what the classifier was trained with 
(data from an OpenGL graphics drawn landing pad). This 
method should be further explored in future work. 
Simplified manual calculation that work directly on data 
from ArUco functions output, could also be easily 
recalibrated and adjustable to fit with data ranges of mis-
calibrated data. Finally, running full scenario of the 
experiment with landing pad on unsafe initial position got the 
drone flying above it and waiting, then manually flatten the 
landing pad, made the decision mechanism to trigger “safe” 
and send a landing command to the drone, which landed in 
the desired spot.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
    In this work we introduced a mechanism for autonomous 
landing a quadcopter in. The work focused to assist in the 
final stage of an autonomous mission, when drone returned 
to home, but still needs to find exact position of landing on 
the target and dealing with sea-level motion of the target. 
    In this study we developed a training simulator to create 
large data set of visual input, produced by OpenGL graphics 
in a controllable manner. 
    Also, we compared different types of trained classifiers to 
find best match to our particular data, and competed best 
classifier vs. direct observation and improvements as can be 
seen in Table IV.    
    For conclusion, the ArUco functions produce enough 
information regarding marker positions to be used manually 
and get a satisfying result for that manner. It is fast and robust 
and easily read to get a quick answer to whether it is safe or 
not, and the use of a classifier is not necessary. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] O. Gal and Y. Doytsher, “Autonomous Drone Landing in 3D 
Urban Environment Using Real-Time Visibility Analysis,” 
GEOProcessing 2023, The Fifteenth International Conference 
on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, 
and Services, pp. 67- 72, 2023. 
[2] Parrot Inc., “developer.parrot.com,” 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://developer.parrot.com/docs/olympe/userguide.html. 
[3] A. McGovern, “pyparrot github repository,” Jan. 2020. 
[Online] https://github.com/amymcgovern/pyparrot. 
[4] OpenCV, Open Source Computer Vision Library, 2015. 
[5] K. 
Williams, 
“A 
Summary 
of 
Unmanned 
Aircraft 
Accident/Incident Data: Human Factors Implications,” The 
Federal Aviation Admistrator Oklahoma City, 2004. 
[6] A. F. Cobo and F. C. Benıtez, “Approach for Autonomous 
Landing on Moving Platforms based on computer vision,” The 
International Journal of Computer Vision, vol 4., 2016. 
[7] L. Daewon, R. Tyler, and K. H. Jin, “Autonomous landing of a 
VTOL UAV on a moving platform using image-based visual 
servoing,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation, pp. 971-976, 2012. 
[8] T. Merz, S. Duranti, and G. Conte, “Autonomous Landing of 
an Unmanned Helicopter Based on Vision and Inertial 
Sensing,” Experimental Robotics IX, pp. 343-352, 2006. 
 
233
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

