Distributed Asynchronous Focus Group Interviews 
Gathering Requirements from Distributed Stakeholders Using Asynchronous Focus Group Methodology 
 
Ulrike Hammerschall 
Department of Computer Science and Mathematics 
University of Applied Sciences Munich 
Munich, Germany 
ulrike.hammerschall@hm.edu 
 
 
Abstract— Globally distributed project teams are a more and 
more common trend in software development. Stakeholders 
and development teams of the same project are situated in 
different countries and time-zones. As a consequence, 
coordination between team members relies heavily on suitable 
online communication environments. This is especially the case 
during requirements elicitation, when requirements for a new 
system need to be identified. Most elicitation techniques 
require physical presence of stakeholders in order to be 
effective. This is not always possible in distributed project 
teams. The question is if and how traditional elicitation 
techniques can be adapted to distributed project settings. This 
paper proposes a concept to adapt a special elicitation 
technique - traditional face-to-face focus group interviews – to 
online focus group interviews. The concept proposes a 
discussion model based on a questionnaire that allows 
conducting asynchronous online focus groups in online 
environments as similar as possible to traditional face-to-face 
focus group discussions. Furthermore, a process model is 
introduced to plan and conduct asynchronous online focus 
groups. Finally, the paper discusses open issues of the concept 
that need further investigation. 
Keywords- focus group; distributed asynchronous focus 
group; requirements elicitation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Requirements Elicitation is the process of finding 
requirements for a software system. A common technique for 
requirements elicitation is interviews with stakeholders [1]. 
Interviews in requirements elicitation are usually performed 
face-to-face with each stakeholder. The interviewer asks a 
list of questions based on a questionnaire and documents 
answers from the interviewee. 
Besides traditional interviews, the use of focus group 
interviews has emerged as an effective elicitation technique 
as well [2]. Focus groups are a powerful social interviewing 
technique that allows researchers to elicit several viewpoints 
from users at the same time [3]. Individuals are asked to 
participate in what is usually a structured interview on a 
predesignated topic [4]. During a focus group session, data is 
collected through group interaction on a topic determined by 
the researcher [5]. Focus groups emerged as a qualitative 
research method used in market research or social sciences 
[6]. Its strength is to reveal hidden information through 
group interaction in addition to information that could be 
gathered by face-to-face interviews. 
In traditional focus groups, the interviewer and the 
interviewees meet in a room and discuss face-to-face. In 
global project teams presence of all group members at the 
same time in the same room might not always be possible. In 
this case, focus group discussion needs to be conducted 
online. Research in focus groups addresses this problem. 
Due to the widespread use of internet technology, online 
focus groups have emerged during the nineties [7][8]. Online 
focus 
groups 
can 
be 
performed 
synchronously 
or 
asynchronously. Synchronous groups are similar to face-to-
face focus groups, as they are conducted in real time via chat 
or video-conferencing. Asynchronous groups on the other 
hand, do not require real time attendance of participants 
during a session. Communication is done via forums or 
email. Participants can contribute, read and comment on 
contributions from other group members [8]. 
Traditional face-to-face focus groups are a well-
established elicitation technique. However, this type of group 
discussion is not useful in distributed project environments 
when stakeholders live globally distributed in different 
countries and time-zones. There are platforms available for 
asynchronous online group discussions, however, support for 
focus group methodology is still rare [9]. 
This paper proposes a concept for tool-supported 
asynchronous online focus groups (AOFG). This includes a 
model for online discussions and a process model to plan and 
conduct focus group events with distributed participants. 
Both models - discussion and process model – can be used in 
distributed, tool-supported environments.  
Section 2 starts with a survey on focus group 
methodology and identifies relevant aspects that need to be 
considered in online focus group methodology. Based on 
this, a discussion model for focus group sessions is proposed 
in Section 3. Section 4 defines a process model to prepare, 
conduct, and analyze AOFG. This paper marks the first step 
of a larger research project. Therefore, Section 5 discusses 
open issues and research questions for further investigation. 
Related work and summary in Sections 5 and 6 round up this 
paper. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

II. 
CONDUCTING FOCUS GROUPS 
Focus groups are a carefully planned discussion, 
designed to obtain the perceptions of the group members on 
a defined area of interest [10]. The term “focus” (or 
“focused”) refers to the fact that a moderator intervenes to 
shape the discussion using a researcher-determined strategy 
[4]. The group setting enables the participants to build on the 
responses and ideas of the others, which increases the 
richness of the information gained [11]. Traditional (face-to-
face) focus groups are usually conducted in similar ways 
with small variations: 
Group setting: A group of people is gathered in one room 
and is discussing a topic. Group size is usually small. Many 
authors propose a group size between four and twelve 
participants ([10][13][14][15][18]). Size is a crucial aspect 
for group success. Large groups are more difficult to 
manage. They require a higher level of moderation and 
control which might not be desirable for the research topic of 
the group [15]. On the other hand, it might be difficult to 
maintain an active discussion in a smaller group. Small 
groups also run the risk of being less productive. They work 
best when the participants are likely to be both interested in 
the topic and respectful of each other [15]. 
Duration: Duration of focus group sessions depends 
mainly on group size. Kitzinger proposes session length up 
to two hours [12]. Powell and Single determine session time 
from 90 up to 120 minutes [6]. 
Roles: Focus groups are usually based on a two role 
model: moderator and participant. To [13] the moderator is 
quite critical to the success of the group. He or she 
supervises and guides group session in order to achieve the 
best results for the research question. Davis proposes a third 
role, the client [7]. This might be reasonable, e.g., in case of 
market research. Client representatives of the product under 
discussion 
observe 
focus 
group 
discussion 
without 
interfering. 
Discussion methodology: Focus groups are group 
interviews. Therefore, there are several ways to conduct a 
group session. An obvious proceeding would be to ask each 
participant in the group the same question and document his 
or her answers. However, Kitzinger states that group 
interaction should explicitly be used as part of the interview 
method. The interviewer has a series of open ended 
questions to discuss within the group. Participants are 
encouraged to explore the questions and talk to one another, 
asking questions, exchanging anecdotes and commenting on 
each other’s experiences and points of view [12]. Powell and 
Single propose up to six open ended questions for a focus 
group session [6]. 
Most aspects of face-to-face focus groups, e.g., group 
size or role model can be easily adapted to asynchronous 
online focus groups. Discussion methodology on the other 
hand will need to be adapted to distributed environments. 
III. 
DISCUSSION MODEL 
In this section, a discussion model for asynchronous 
online focus groups is proposed. This model adapts as much 
as possible face-to-face group discussions to an online 
environment, when discussion participants are not available 
in real time. Figure 1 summarizes the model structure. Each 
online session needs - similar to face-to-face focus groups - 
two roles: a moderator who supervises the discussion and 
several participants who conduct the discussion. In the center 
of any focus group session is a questionnaire with a list of 
questions that guides the focus group discussion. The 
questionnaire and the questions are prepared by the 
moderator based on group objective and context information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Discussion model for focus group sessions with questionnaire. 
The list of questions constitutes a kind of backbone for 
focus group discussion. All participating roles may comment 
on questions during the focus group session. A comment 
might be an answer to the question, another question, a 
thought, further information about objective and context, a 
reply to another comment or just a note. Even the moderator 
may participate and enter the discussion. However, his or her 
task is to keep the discussion focused on the initial research 
question.  
Asynchronous online focus groups lack the power of 
nonverbal interaction in face-to-face focus groups, e.g., body 
language, facial impressions, approving or disapproving 
nods. A simple mechanism of evaluation helps to overcome 
this disadvantage in some ways. Any participant may assign 
a value of approval to any comment. Values are visible to all 
group members. A participant may never assign a value to 
his or her own comments. Finally, the moderator should not 
assign any values to comments in order to avoid any 
influence on group interaction.  
The model discussed in this chapter tries to keep 
formalization of focus group discussion as simple as possible 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

in order to stay flexible and not to hinder discussion flow. 
Possible model refinements are discussed in Section 5. 
IV. 
PROCESS MODEL 
In this section, a process model for planning and 
conducting asynchronous online focus groups is defined. The 
model supports the discussion model defined in Section 3. It 
is based on findings in [3][10][13] and the principles for 
traditional face-to-face focus groups identified in Section 2. 
 
Step 1: Define online focus group objective.  
The focus group method is well suited to generate ideas 
or discuss concepts [10], but it is not realistic to expect 
explicit and well defined requirements. The objective of a 
focus group for requirements elicitation can be, for example: 
share experience about process, legacy system and system 
context or generate new and exciting ideas for possible 
requirements. Input to this process step is information about 
business objective, system idea and constraints. The result of 
this step should be a clear view on focus group context, focus 
group objective and a coarse questionnaire to guide the 
discussion. Furthermore, focus group composition with 
expected participant profiles and viewpoints should be 
determined. 
 
Step 2: Plan online focus group event.  
Preparing an online focus group event requires several 
organizational tasks. First of all, an online platform for focus 
group discussion has to be set up. This includes setting up a 
new questionnaire with questions and ensuring platform 
availability and access rights to participants. Finally a time-
frame for discussion has to be defined, in particular start, end 
and, duration. Distributed groups will need considerably 
more time to ensure that any participant has sufficient time to 
follow and contribute to the discussion. 
 
Step 3: Define and recruit participants. 
Group size plays a crucial role in focus groups. Small 
groups may be more efficient than large groups. However, in 
case of online focus groups, a higher number of participants 
might be reasonable in order to achieve a lively and more 
fruitful discussion. Finding and recruiting participants for a 
focus group event requires a high amount of effort. This step 
needs to follow a process to determine how to identify 
possible participants and motivate them to engage in the 
focus group event. Recruited participants need access to the 
discussion platform and need to be informed about 
discussion schedule. 
 
Step 4: Conduct and analyze focus group session.  
In online focus groups, not all participants might be 
available at the start of the discussion. The moderator has to 
ensure that any participant receives the information 
necessary to enter the discussion. This includes discussion 
procedure, rules and duration. The discussion itself is based 
on questions and comments. Questions are published by the 
moderator (one at a time or all at the same time), participants 
keep discussing by writing comments on questions and other 
comments. To express agreement with a comment or point 
out its importance any participant may assign a value. The 
number of values assigned to a comment may give a hint 
about its importance with respect to the initial group 
objective and constitutes an important means for focus group 
analysis. 
 
V. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
The model discussed in this paper adapts face-to-face 
focus group methodology as much as possible to online 
focus groups. The main idea behind this approach is that in 
general face-to-face focus groups are the best solution, but in 
some circumstances personal attendance of participants is 
not possible. In this case, online focus groups could be the 
second best solution. However, the question remains if 
online focus groups could be a methodology of their own. 
Research questions are for example: 
1. Asynchronous online focus groups allow a highly 
variable groups size due to their virtual character. There are 
no physical limitations as for example room size. An 
interesting question to investigate would be what is a good 
group size for online focus groups to achieve the best results 
in requirements elicitation? 
2. Group discussions that last over a couple of days may 
have a problem to motivate participants and to keep them 
engaged in focus group discussion. A corresponding research 
question would be how to improve motivation and achieve 
high engagement even over a longer period of time? This 
may include questions about using gamification techniques 
in online group discussions. 
3. Traditional discussion methodology for face-to-face 
focus groups is based on questionnaires. The discussion 
model proposed in Section 3 adapts this approach to online 
focus groups. However, this might not be the best solution. 
Investigation can reveal discussion models more suitable for 
online focus groups. Maybe a more specific approach that 
distinguishes between questions, comments, jokes, answers, 
and so on might be more appropriate. 
4. Focus groups usually use a two-role-model: a 
moderator supervises focus group session and several 
participants take part and discuss. Online focus groups may 
use a different role model. The moderator could for example 
be supported by co-moderators. Another model could use the 
client role as proposed in [7]. Discussion about online focus 
groups could find flexible role models that can be adapted to 
specific focus group events. 
5. The approach presented in this paper addresses 
requirements elicitation in distributed stakeholder teams. 
However, it might as well be suitable for another research 
area that emerged recently: crowd requirements engineering. 
Requirements are elicited via crowd sourcing. The objective 
is to provide the engineering team access to a wide diversity 
of actual and potential users of new products [17]. An 
interesting research question could be how to successfully 
perform online focus group sessions with a potentially 
unlimited number of participants (the crowd). 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

VI. 
RELATED WORK 
Group techniques for requirements elicitation are mostly 
group discussions with a specific discussion methodology. 
Examples are group work, brainstorming, requirements 
workshops or Joint Application Development (JAD) [1]. 
Using these techniques with asynchronous distributed 
stakeholder groups requires suitable tool support. A study 
conducted by Zarinah and Salwah reveals that there is a trend 
towards 
group 
based 
requirements 
elicitation 
tools. 
Discussion technique is mainly group meeting, group 
discussion and participatory design [9]. Group based 
requirements 
elicitation 
tools 
using 
focus 
group 
methodology are rare. The authors of [9] introduce a multi-
viewpoint approach for tool-supported focus groups in 
requirements elicitation based on an iterative elicitation 
algorithm. A similar approach based on chat-messages is 
proposed by Davis [7]. The objective in this case is to 
support marketing research with distributed stakeholders. 
Lloyd et al [16] investigated in a study the effectiveness 
of elicitation techniques in distributed environments. They 
found that requirements elicitation techniques like Question 
and Answer method, Customer Interview or Brainstorming 
were effective in distributed environments. However, the 
authors state that synchronous environments seem to be 
more effective than asynchronous environments. 
The approach proposed in this paper tries to overcome 
this drawback. Presuming that concentration on well-defined 
requirements as a result of online group discussions may 
hinder creativity and group dynamics the approach proposed 
in this paper concentrates on group discussion methodology, 
how to support group dynamics in an online environment 
and how to engage participants that cannot share group 
session in real time. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper proposes a concept to support asynchronous 
online focus group interviews as similar as possible to 
traditional face-to-face focus groups. In the center is a 
discussion model for focus groups based on a predefined 
questionnaire. Group members discuss by commenting on 
questions asked by a moderator. A comment can be any type 
of information: a real answer, a joke, an opinion, information 
or an experience report. Group members can assign marks of 
approval to contributions they think valuable to the topic 
under discussion. Furthermore, the concept defines a process 
model for planning and conducting asynchronous online 
focus groups using the discussion model. 
The concept is still under research. Next steps will be to 
provide an implementation and evaluate the concept in real 
life project environments. Further research questions include 
group engagement and motivation as well as improved data 
analysis. 
 
 
 
 
VIII. REFERENCES 
[1] D. Zowghi and C. Coulin, "Requirements Elicitation: A Survey 
of Techniques, Approaches, and Tools," In: A. Aurum and C. 
Wohlin 
(eds.) 
"Engineering 
and 
Managing 
Software 
Requirements," pp. 19–46. Springer Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg, 
(2005). 
[2] Z. M. Kasirun and S.S. Salim, "Focus Group Discussion Model 
for Requirements Elicitation Activity," In: 2008 International 
Conference on Computer and Electrical Engineering (ICCEE), 
pp. 101–105. 
[3] R. Mazza and A. Berre, "Focus Group Methodology for 
Evaluating Information Visualization Techniques and Tools," 
In: 
2007 
11th 
International 
Conference 
Information 
Visualization (IV '07), pp. 74–80. 
[4] E. Perecman and S. R. Curran, "A Handbook for Social 
Science Field Research. Essays & Bibliographic Sources on 
Research Design and Methods," SAGE Publications, Inc, 2455 
Teller Road,  Thousand Oaks  California  91320  United States 
of America (2006). 
[5] D. L. Morgan, "Focus Groups," Annu. Rev. Sociol. 22, 129–
152 (1996). 
[6] R. A. Powell and H. M. Single, "Focus Groups," International 
Journal for Quality in Health Care 8, 499–504 (1996). 
[7] H. O. Davis, "System and method for conducting focus groups 
using remotely loaded participants over a computer network," 
Google Patents, http://www.google.com/patents/US6256663 
(2001). 
[8] R. Rezabek, "Online Focus Groups: Electronic Discussions for 
Research," Forum Qualitative Social Research 1 (2000) 
[9] M. K. Zarinah and S. S. Salwah, "Supporting collaborative 
requirements 
elicitation 
using 
focus 
group 
discussion 
technique," International Journal of Software Engineering and 
Its Applications 3, 59–70 (2009). 
[10] J. Kontio, L. Lehtola, and J. Bragge, "Using the focus group 
method in software engineering: obtaining practitioner and 
user experiences," International Symposium on Empirical 
Software Engineering, 2004. ISESE '04, pp. 271–280. 
[11] J. D. Langford and D. McDonagh, "Focus groups, Supporting 
effective product development," Taylor & Francis, London, 
New York (2003). 
[12] J. Kitzinger, "Qualitative research. Introducing focus groups," 
British medical journal 311, 299 (1995). 
[13] L. Litoselliti, "Using focus groups in research," continuum 
research methods (2003). 
[14] R. A. Krueger: "Designing and Conducting Focus Group 
Interviews," University of Minnesota (1998). 
[15] "Focus Groups as Qualitative Research," SAGE Publications, 
Inc, 2455 Teller Road,  Thousand Oaks California 91320 
United States of America (1997). 
[16] W. J. Lloyd, M. B. Rosson, and J. D. Arthur, "Effectiveness of 
elicitation techniques in distributed requirements engineering," 
In: IEEE Joint International Conference on Requirements 
Engineering, (2002) pp. 311–318. 
[17] M. Hosseini, K. Phalp, J. Taylor, and R. Ali, “Towards 
Crowdsourcing for Requirements Engineering, “  in Proc. of 
the Empirical Track of REFSQ, (2014) pp. 82–87. 
[18] M. Shitanshu and R. Rekha,” A Software Solution to Facilitate 
Moderation, Observation and Analysis in a Focused Group 
Interview (FGI),” In: IEEE International Conference on 
Technology for Education, (2013) pp. 9-12. 
 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

