Optimizing Remediation of Spatially Dispersed Contaminated Parcels under an 
Annual Budget Constraint
Floris Abrams1,2, Lieve Sweeck1, Johan Camps1 
1Belgian Nuclear Research Centre (SCK CEN), 
Mol, Belgium 
e-mail: {Floris.Abrams, Lieve.Sweeck, 
Johan.Camps}@sckcen.be 
Dirk Cattrysse2, Jos Van Orshoven2 
2Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven) 
Leuven, Belgium 
e-mail: {Dirk.Cattrysse, Jos.Vanorshoven}@kuleuven.be
 
Abstract—In environmental disaster management, due to the 
large impacted area or limited availability of labor and financial 
resources, setting priorities of where, how and when to act are 
indispensable. When prioritized interventions on spatially 
dispersed entities are costly and technically challenging to 
perform, clustering of individual entities in larger homogeneous 
actionable units can improve feasibility and reduce cost of the 
remediation. In this article, a spatio-temporal clustering 
approach under a budget constraint is presented to determine 
homogenous clusters of polygons and interventions to reduce 
cost while still attaining an overall optimal distribution of 
interventions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this 
clustering algorithm with a hypothetical case study of 
contaminated agricultural land in Belgium. Finally, we 
demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed cluster algorithm 
to provide decision makers with a multi-period action plan, 
reducing the cost of intervention while still prioritizing 
resources for the most important sites. 
Keywords-Spatio-temporal clustering; Budget constraint; 
Disaster management; Multi-Attribute Decision Making; MADM. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper extends a previous paper that was originally 
presented at the Fourteenth International Conference on 
Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, 
and Services (GEOProcessing) [1]. 
When dealing with large natural or man-made disasters, 
decision makers are confronted with setting priorities of 
where, how and when to act because of the limited 
availability of labor and financial resources. This priority 
setting is particularly applicable when the impact of remedial 
actions is costly and has long-lasting influences. For spatially 
distributed sites with variable characteristics, priority setting 
among the sites and the determination of the most adequate 
remedial action per site are of major importance. The United 
States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) 
identified the following benefits of these optimization efforts: 
more cost-effective expenditure, lower energy use, reduced 
carbon footprint, improved remedy protectiveness, improved 
project and site decision making, and acceleration of project 
and site completion [2].  
Addressing the questions of where and how to act 
consecutively results in a nested ranking of sites and 
interventions per site. From those rankings, a spatio-temporal 
action plan can be determined. 
To assist decision makers in setting such priorities, spatial 
Decision Support Systems (sDSS) become of importance [3]. 
The effectiveness of related decisions is typically conditioned 
by multiple and often contradicting criteria of economic, 
social, technical, environmental, and human health-related 
nature [4]. These characteristics of the decision problem 
make it suitable for the application of a spatially discrete 
Multi-Attribute Decision Making (GIS-MADM) approach 
[5]. ‘GIS’ points to the spatial aspect of the decision problem, 
while MADM encompasses a subset of Multi-Criteria 
Decision Analysis (MCDA) methods. MADM supports the 
decision-maker 
by 
describing 
and 
evaluating 
the 
performance of a finite number of decision alternatives with 
respect to multiple criteria expressed as attributes of the 
alternatives, representing several points of view. The MADM 
results in a ranking of the alternatives based on the selected 
criteria and their relative importance [3]. The MADM 
framework is often applied because it supports a structured 
and inclusive decision process, addressing a plurality of 
preferences and socio-technical dimensions that cannot 
always be brought to a common monetary scale [6]. 
This paper presents a GIS-MADM approach that provides 
actionable support to decision makers by proposing a 
coherent action plan in space and time for decontamination 
of the agricultural domain in a region affected by the 
deposition of radionuclides. It uses a spatio-temporal 
approach to deal with the clustering of spatially scattered 
polygon-based parcels, whereby a budget constraint limits 
the extent and/or type of interventions that can be performed 
in each time step, i.e., in one year. The paper elaborates on 
the classic region-growing principles, adapted to polygon-
based data structures, and explicitly takes into account the 
attributes of the individual polygons to find the optimal 
compromise attribute for the whole cluster. Because a spatial 
and temporal clustering of sites and actions is likely to create 
“economies of scale” [7], the cost of remediation 
interventions will be lowered, resulting in an overall cheaper 
and faster remediation process.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents related work where MADM is used to support 
prioritization of resources in environmental remediation. 

Section III provides an in depth explanation of the spatio-
temporal cluster approach. In Section IV, the approach is 
illustrated with a case study for an agricultural region in 
Belgium, contaminated after a hypothetical accidental release 
of Caesium-137 from a nuclear power plant. Section V 
discusses the applicability of the algorithm to help improve 
decision making, while Section VI draws the most pertinent 
conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The use of MADM approaches for supporting 
remediation 
on 
a 
regional 
scale 
by 
prioritization 
contaminated sites for decontamination (‘Where to act?’) was 
reported by several authors [8]–[10]. In addition, the support 
on a local scale by prioritization of the remedial technologies 
for a given site (‘How to act?’) was also addressed in several 
publications [11]–[13]. However, no reports were found, 
where MADM was used for simultaneously prioritizing of 
where and how to act decisions into a coherent spatio-
temporal action plan. When both prioritizations are done 
separately, the procedure typically yields a geographically 
distributed set of priority sites as well as neighbouring sites 
with different interventions. Different propositions were 
made to improve MADM on a regional scale, to reduce the 
scattered priorities. For example, by incorporating a 
compactness measure to ensure sites were big enough to 
ensure a feasible intervention [14]. 
MADM approaches have been used with raster as well as 
polygon-based datasets. For this application, it was chosen to 
use polygon-based data because they provide a natural 
representation for many types of geospatial entities, such as 
agricultural parcels, buildings, or polluted sites. In addition, 
these entities form the smallest units used in real-world 
decision making. Therefore, it is interesting to provide 
actionable support to decision makers based on polygon-
based representations. By addressing the problem with 
polygon-based data, the adaptations using compactness 
measures and clustering of entities are more complicated 
compared to raster-based datasets. Because the topology of 
spatially dispersed polygons is less straightforward when 
dealing with unlinked features [15]. 
Further, due to the limited availability of resources, a 
budget constraint limits the extent of interventions possible 
for each period; thus, a multiple-period action plan is 
required. A multi-period decision problem requires a 
Dynamic Multi-Attribute Decision Making (dMADM) 
methodology 
[17]–[19]. 
However, 
the 
majority 
of 
documented MADM applications only address a decision 
problem for a specific time period [16]. In contrast, dMADM 
determines the criteria scores and relative relevance for each 
time period to accurately reflect the decision variables at that 
time. 
Some spatial DSS tools were developed for supporting 
decisions with similar spatio-temporal aspects. These authors 
included a temporal dimension in their approach to determine 
how a set of land use types should be distributed over space 
and time in order to optimize the multi-dimensional land 
performance of a region over a period of 30 years [20]. 
However, they found that their approach, which was based on 
integer programming (IP), resulted in land use plans that were 
too spatially and temporally fragmented for real-world 
application and recommended that a clustering strategy could 
be a suitable next step. 
III. 
PROPOSED METHOD  
The spatio-temporal clustering approach combines a site 
priority score (PPS) and an action priority score (APS), as 
discussed in Section A. The iterative and dynamic cluster 
growing algorithm is discussed in Sections B and C. 
A. Distance based priority scores 
Different implementations of MADM exist, each with 
their own strengths and weaknesses. We opted for a distance-
based MADM, called Compromise Programming (CP), to 
rank the considered set of feasible alternatives [21]–[24]. CP 
uses the distance in the feature space to the so-called ideal 
point of each alternative to rank them. The feature space is 
constructed from independent, operational, non-redundant, 
and continuous attributes [25]. The criteria used vary 
significantly between different case studies, depending on the 
problem, the site characteristics and the available data. For 
each criterion, a weight reflecting the importance of the 
criterion is set by the stakeholders, preferably through a 
collaborative process [26]. This weight takes into account the 
relative importance of the criterion, where its value can be 
understood as a trade-off value between criteria. For this set 
of criteria and corresponding weights, the CP methodology 
determines the optimal point, a vector of performance 
attribute values corresponding to an alternative with the best 
observed performance on each criterion separately. This ideal 
point is mostly hypothetical, because multi-criteria decision 
problems involve conflicting criteria. The ideal point does 
however allow to determine a ranking of the alternatives 
based on each alternative’s distance to the ideal point, 
whereby the alternative that comes ‘closest’ to the ideal point 
is the most preferred. The definition of ‘closeness’ requires 
the formulation of a distance metric (1), where a larger 
distance equals a less optimal alternative [3]. Distances based 
on (1) fall within the range [0-1], with a distance of 0 being 
the best alternative that requires no compromise because it 
outperforms all other alternatives on all criteria. In contrast, 
a distance of 1 reflects an alternative that scores the lowest on 
all criteria. 
 
𝐿 = [∑ [𝑓𝑖
+ − 𝑓𝑖(𝑥)
𝑓𝑖
+ − 𝑓𝑖
− ]
𝑝
𝑛
𝑖
]
1/𝑝
              (1) 
 
 
n is the number of criteria under consideration; 
 
𝑤𝑖  is the relative importance (weight) assigned to 
performance attribute i;  

 
p is a parameter that determines the type of distance 
function, where 2 represents the Euclidian distance; 
 
𝑓𝑖
+ is the optimal value for performance criterion i; 
 
fi(x) is the value of the ith performance criterion 
expressed as a function of the decision variables x; 
 
𝑓𝑖
− is the anti-ideal corresponding to the ith attribute that 
is the “worst” value for this attribute. 
 
To determine the optimal remediation plan for a territory 
of interest two important questions need to be answered. The 
first question is “Where are the sites situated for which 
intervention is most urgent?”. The CP methodology returns a 
distance score for each 
polygon, representing the 
priority/urgency of a polygon to be intervened on. From these 
scores a ranking of the polygons from high priority (small 
distance) to low priority (large distance) can be made. For the 
case study in this paper, this score is referred to as Parcel 
Priority Score (PPS). The second question is “What is the 
most optimal action for each site?”. Therefore, for each 
polygon, the feasible intervention actions need to be ranked. 
In our proposed approach, the ranking of the alternative 
interventions is similarly based on a distance score, computed 
by CP. In the following case study, for each alternative 
intervention on a specific site, the Action Priority Score 
(APS) is calculated. The further clustering of parcels is based 
on the combination of PPS and APS. 
B. Temporal dynamics in MADM 
When actions are postponed in time, the initial decision 
variables (criteria scores for the alternatives and criteria 
weights) may alter, and the decision problem needs to be 
redefined, resulting in a multi-period MADM. The number 
and extent of polygons that can be acted on in each time 
period depends on the budget available in each period, which 
is set to one year in our case study. While performing actions 
on the most urgent polygons first, each of the actions comes 
at a cost. For each intervention, the cost can be calculated 
based on the cost per unit of area and the size of the polygon. 
Interventions can be done in one period until the total cost of 
remediation exceeds the period’s budget. When the budget is 
reached, the remaining polygons become candidates for the 
next period, where changes in the criteria scores and weights 
may occur and should be taken into account. 
C. Spatio-temporal clustering algorithm 
The algorithm operates in a similar fashion as a region-
growing algorithm, where it consecutively checks whether 
one of the neighbouring polygons can be added to the cluster, 
taking the similarity between the priority scores of the seed 
polygon and the neighbouring candidate into account. The 
clustering algorithm is iterative and consists of two phases: 
The cluster initialization phase is followed by the cluster 
growing phase, which ends as soon as one of the stopping 
criteria is met. The procedure is illustrated in Figure 1 and the 
pseudo code is given in Figure 2. 
 
1) Cluster initialisation 
To optimally allocate resources, the most urgent sites 
should be treated first. Therefore, the seed parcel is the one 
with the lowest PPS (smallest distance to the ideal point). 
2) Cluster growing procedure 
After the seed parcel has been determined, the cluster-
growing procedure attempts to find neighbouring parcels that 
can be added to the seed parcel or the growing cluster, where 
parcels in a cluster have the same intervention action to be 
performed in the same period. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1. THE CLUSTER GROWING PROCEDURE APPLIED ON 12 PARCELS, 
CONSIDERING 3 POSSIBLE ACTIONS, RESULTING IN 2 CLUSTERS EACH WITH 
1 ACTION. 
 
  

 
 
FIGURE 2. PSEUDO CODE OF THE SPATIO-TEMPORAL CLUSTER APPROACH, 
DETERMINING THE REMEDIAL TECHNIQUE AND TIMING OF THE CLUSTERS. 
 
Adding more parcels to the cluster enlarges the cluster, 
therefore creating larger actionable units, which are preferred 
from the perspective of reducing the complexity and 
operational cost of the intervention. But since the parcels 
added to the cluster potentially have a different optimal 
action, it is important to find a compromise remediation 
action that minimizes the deviation in performance with the 
parcels considered individually. The cluster growing can be 
subdivided into three consecutive steps that are repeated until 
the constraints for the end of cluster growth are met. 
 
 
Determination of the parcel neighbours 
Compared to a raster dataset, where pixels are spatially 
arranged in a systematic way and neighbours are easily 
defined, in a data set of spatially distributed polygons, 
determining the neighbours is more challenging. To define 
neighbouring polygons, which are not necessarily sharing a 
border but are rather separated by irrelevant space, a 
technique called morphologic tessellation (MT) is used. At 
the core of MT is the Voronoi tessellation (VT), a method of 
geometric partitioning of the 2D space, where a planar set of 
“seed points” generates a series of polygons known as 
Voronoi polygons (VP). Each VP encloses the portion of the 
plane that is closer to its seed than to any other polygon [27]. 
From the partitioned space, the neighbours of a VP can be 
determined by examining the VPs sharing borders. An 
example of the portioning by VPs is given in Figure 3. 
 
 
 To deal with the distributed nature of the polygons, use 
is made of an enclosed tessellation based on the enhanced 
morphological tessellation algorithm (EMT). EMT allows for 
setting limits to the expansion of the MT, limiting the allowed 
distance between polygons that can be considered to be 
neighbours. Furthermore, it allows for the establishment of 
break lines (e.g., rivers or administrative boundaries) beyond 
which the VPs are not permitted to trespass. The VP 
constructed by the EMT algorithm captures the spatial 
configuration of all parcels, from which the neighbouring 
parcels of each parcel can be determined. The EMT algorithm 
is accessible from an open-source Python package 
(http://docs.momepy.org). 
Fleischmann 
(2019, 
2020) 
provides more information regarding the EMT methodology. 
 
 Determining the optimal neighbour 
To determine the neighbouring polygon that is best suited 
for growing the cluster, the sum of the PPS and APS scores 
of each neighbour is considered. Whereby the neighbour 
leading to the lowest increase in the composite score of the 
cluster is added. From this, it follows that adding a parcel to 
the cluster can change the remediation action to be applied to 
all the parcels in the cluster. Moreover, when the best 
candidate is found, it is verified whether the candidate 
neighbour is similar enough to the seed pixel to be added. If 
the similarity threshold is not exceeded, the parcel is added 
to the cluster, and this procedure is repeated; otherwise, the 
 
 
FIGURE 3. INITIAL SET OF DISTRIBUTED PARCELS (A) AND VP 
COMPUTED BY THE EMT, RESULTING IN A PARTITIONED COVERAGE 
(B). 

end of the cluster growing phase is reached. To highlight the 
process of finding a compromise between all parcels on the 
cluster level, five iterations of the growing procedure are 
shown in Table 1 and Table 2. The similarity threshold 
applied is 0.31 for Table 1 and 0.15 for Table 2. The cells 
with the same color show the current parcels in the cluster, 
and the remedial action of the cluster is shown with a 
subscript on the APS. The APS values in bold show the 
optimal action per parcel. Table 1 illustrates that while a 
cluster grows iteratively, the optimal remediation action for 
all parcels combined within the cluster changes. In iteration 
III, the optimal remediation on the cluster level is the worst-
performing action for the seed parcel (A) and the second-best 
action for parcel B. Nevertheless, from the perspective of the 
cluster, action 3 is the best compromise solution. In addition, 
Table 2 shows the impact of the similarity threshold: In 
iteration V, parcel E is not added to the growing cluster due 
to a difference larger than the similarity threshold between it 
and the seed parcel (parcel A). Parcel E will then be selected 
as the next seed parcel. The different cluster configuration (1 
vs. 2) in iteration V for both tables highlights that a lower 
similarity threshold will result in an overall lower (better) 
composite score for the solution.  
 
TABLE 1. THE GROWING PROCEDURE OF A CLUSTER FOR 5 ITERATIONS FOR 
A SIMILARITY THRESHOLD OF 0.3, RESULTING IN ONE CLUSTER  
 
 
 
TABLE 2. THE GROWING PROCEDURE OF A CLUSTER FOR 5 ITERATIONS FOR 
A SIMILARITY THRESHOLD OF 0.15, RESULTING IN TWO CLUSTERS. 
 
 
 
 
 Cost calculation  
Every intervention has a corresponding cost, determined 
by the intervention type and size of the parcel. Discounts can 
be taken into account when a cluster reaches a certain size 
(e.g., a 20% cost reduction for the whole cluster if a cluster 
reaches a size of 5 ha). Before a parcel is added to the cluster 
it is confirmed if there is still enough budget left for 
performing the intervention. If the budget constraint is 
exceeded when the parcel would be added to the cluster, the 
cluster growing is stopped and the remaining budget is 
transferred to the next year’s budget. 
 
3) End of growth 
The end of growth phase is reached when one of the two 
constraints is not met. 
 
 Similarity threshold 
The similarity threshold determines the variability of 
parcels that is allowed within the cluster. By lowering the 
threshold, only parcels with a similar composite score will be 
allowed to enter the cluster, resulting in a more homogenous 
cluster. As a consequence, the growth of clusters is more 
rapidly stopped, and the clusters tend to remain smaller, 
possibly not achieving a large enough size to be entitled to a 
discounted remedial cost. Therefore, the threshold should be 
chosen according to a tradeoff between the homogeneity of 
the clusters on the one hand and the ease and cost of 
implementing the remediation strategy on the other. The 
reasoning behind the threshold setting is that when the 
difference in performance between seed and candidate 
parcels is large, resources will be used for less urgent parcels 
or for suboptimal intervention. When the similarity threshold 
is not met, the cluster growing is stopped and a new seed 
polygon is found for building the next cluster. 
 
 Budget constraint 
The budget constraint limits the amount of resources that 
can be allocated to interventions in each period. The 
implementation of a budget constraint in the spatial clustering 
algorithm ensures that cluster growth cannot lead to exceedi,g 
the budget for the given period. Once the budget is reached, 
the attributes of the remaining (unclustered) polygons are 
adapted to reflect their status for the new period. Next, the 
clustering can be started for the new period. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
To demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed spatio-
temporal clustering model, it is applied to a case study 
addressing the remediation of contaminated agricultural 
parcels. The case study deals with a hypothetical deposition 
of radioactive Cesium-137 on 1257 agricultural parcels 
situated in the Maarkebeek Valley in Flanders, Belgium. A 
remediation plan must be designed for a budget of 500 000 
euros per year to ensure that all parcels are remediated so that 
food can be produced in accordance with the legally set 

contamination limits. In this case study, five possible 
remedial interventions are considered: potassium fertilizers, 
shallow ploughing, deep ploughing, skim and burial 
ploughing and topsoil removal (Table 5). 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4. LAND USE MAP OF THE MAARKEBEEK WATERSHED IN FLANDERS.  
 
A. Determination of the Parcel Priority Score 
A parcel is characterized by a set of attributes such as 
geographic location, environmental characteristics, and 
agricultural practices. These attributes form the basis for the 
decision criteria used for determining the PPS (Table 3). The 
criteria for assessing the priority for remediation of sites with 
polluted soils were determined from a literature review [28]. 
Furthermore, each of the criteria was assigned a relative 
weight based on expert assessment of its importance. The 
weight is expressed by a linguistic score, which corresponds 
to a triangular fuzzy number (TFN). TFN are then converted 
to a quantitative value using the center of gravity method 
[29]. 
 
FIGURE 5. MEMBERSHIP FUNCTIONS OF THE LINGUISTIC EXPERT RATINGS 
USED FOR QUANTIFYING THE CRITERIA WEIGHTS, WITH ABBREVIATIONS VL 
: VERY LOW, L:LOW, ML: MEDIUM LOW, M: MEDIUM, MH: MEDIUM HIGH, 
H: HIGH AND VH: VERY HIGH. 
 
The seven criteria and corresponding weights, shown in 
Table 3, are then used by the CP methodology to determine 
the feature distance of each parcel to the hypothetical parcel 
with the highest societal burden and therefore the need for 
remediation. In Figure 6, the CP methodology, limited to 
three alternatives and two criteria, is illustrated. The priorities 
based on this distance for each parcel are shown in Figure 7. 
Parcels with a low PPS are identified as the most urgent to 
remediate. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6. REPRESENTATION OF A 2 DIMENSIONAL COMPROMISE 
PROGRAMMING DISTANCE FOR 3 PARCELS (BOTTOM) AND ITS GEOGRAPHIC 
REPRESENTATION (TOP). 
 
FIGURE 7. PARCEL PRIORITY SCORE (PPS) FOR THE AFFECTED 
AGRICULTURAL PARCELS, THE LOWER THE PPS THE MORE URGENT THE 
REMEDIATION. 
 

TABLE 3. CRITERIA USED TO DETERMINE THE PARCEL PRIORITY SCORES 
(PPS), WITH THE CORRESPONDING WEIGHTS DETERMINED BY EXPERTS  
 
Criterion 
Description 
Weight 
 
Activity in the 
food products 
The activity of Cs-137 found 
in the crop after harvest from 
this field [Bq/kg] 
VH 
Importance of 
the food in the 
local diet 
The amount consumed of this 
product 
on 
yearly 
basis 
[kg/year] 
M 
Distance to the 
urban 
infrastructure 
Distance to the closest urban 
infrastructure (houses and 
gardens) [meter] 
H 
Distance to 
nature 
reserves 
Distance to the closest nature 
reserve [meter] 
L 
Distance to 
surface water 
Distance 
to 
the 
closest 
surface 
water 
(lake/river) 
[meter] 
M 
Population 
density 
Population density of the 
municipality [pp/km2] 
H 
Erodibility of 
the parcel 
The erosion sensitivity of the 
field [scale (0 : None - 0.5 : 
medium - 1: very high)] 
L 
 
B. Determination of the Action Prority Score 
For the determination of the remedial intervention among 
the five potential remedial actions, six criteria have been 
selected (Table 4). The applicability of the intervention 
depends on the parcel’s contamination level and the crop 
type, because some remedial actions are unsuitable for 
specific agricultural crops or inadequate to reduce the 
contamination levels below the legal permissible levels. For 
example, ploughing actions are unfeasible for parcels with 
perennial crops. The criteria to assess remedial actions can 
vary largely based on the geographical region, contamination 
type, stakeholders, and data availability [28].  
 
TABLE 4. CRITERIA USED TO DETERMINE THE ACTION PRIORITY SCORE 
(APS) OF EACH REMEDIAL INTERVENTION, THE WEIGHTS ARE BASED ON 
EXPERT JUDGMENT. 
 
Criteria 
Description 
Weight 
Feasibility 
The 
probability 
that 
the 
remediation 
strategy 
is 
implemented successfully.  
MH 
Incremental 
Dose 
Exposure dose to the workers 
that need to implement the 
remediation technique.  
MH 
Environmental 
Impact 
Risk or actual impact on the 
living 
and 
or 
non-living 
environment 
due 
to 
the 
remediation.  
M 
Local Impact 
Changes to the landscape/ 
way of life of the population.  
MH 
The cost of 
remediation 
The total implementation cost 
of remediation minus the 
otherwise paid compensation 
to the farmer. The full 
remediation cycle is included 
from 
investigation 
to 
monitoring 
and 
waste 
treatment. [€/ha] 
H 
Reduction 
Effectivity 
Reduction 
in 
activity 
of 
agricultural 
product 
(compared to doing nothing). 
[%] 
VH 
 
The five remedial alternatives are scored on the six 
criteria that produce the alternative-criterion matrix (Table 
5), which is the basis for the distance calculations by the CP. 
More information on the determination of the criteria scores 
in the alternative-criterion matrix can be found in [30].  
 
TABLE 5. ALTERNATIVE-CRITERION MATRIX FOR THE FIVE REMEDIAL 
ALTERNATIVES, SCORING THEM ON SIX CRITERIA. 
Reduction 
Effectivity 
69 
50 
70 
87.5 
93.5 
Direct cost of 
application 
66 (Yearly) 
39 (Single 
time) 
53 (Single 
time) 
95 (Single 
time) 
24490 (Single 
time) 
Local 
impact 
L 
L 
MH 
MH 
VH 
Environ
mental 
impact 
H 
VL 
M 
M 
VH 
Increm
ental 
dose 
L 
MH 
H 
H 
H 
Feasibil
ity 
H 
VH 
M 
L 
L 
 
Potassium 
fertilizers 
Shallow 
ploughing 
Deep 
ploughing 
Skim and 
burial 
ploughing 
Topsoil 
removal 
 
The incorporation of the temporal dynamics in this case 
study is necessary since the values of certain decision 
variables change through time. Because of natural 
attenuation, which causes the mass, toxicity, volume or 

concentration of contaminants in the soil or groundwater to 
reduce over time. This implies that the contamination 
decreases over time without the interference of specific 
remedial actions. For radioactive contaminations the 
reduction of the contaminant is strongly determined by the 
radioactive decay, the radionuclide’s half-live. For a remedial 
action to be considered feasible, it should be able to reduce 
the contamination levels below the legally allowed limits. 
From the dynamic nature of the contamination, it follows 
that, after a certain period of time other remedial options can 
become more effective and outperform the previously 
selected option. Consequently, the remedial actions for each 
parcel should be revised to ensure they are still optimal for 
this time period. For this case study, the weights are not 
considered to change between periods. 
C. Individual per parcel solution 
For each individual parcel and for each time period, an 
APS score for each feasible remediation technique can be 
calculated. This is illustrated in Figure 8 for a cereal parcel. 
For this specific field, only four remedial actions are feasible, 
and deep ploughing is considered the most optimal since it 
has the lowest value. Topsoil removal is the second-most 
optimal remedial technology. 
 
 
 
In Figure 9, the optimal remediation technique for each 
parcel, based on the technique with the lowest APS, is shown. 
  
 
 
FIGURE 9. PROPOSED REMEDIATION PLAN BASED ON THE OPTIMAL 
REMEDIAL ACTION FOR EACH PARCEL. 
 
D. Spatio-temporal cluster solution for the affected region 
With the spatio-temporal cluster approach, a multi-period 
action plan can be designed, taking into account when and 
how to remediate the parcels. For the same area, the model 
proposes a remedial technique and timing. Both can be found 
in Figures 10 and 11, respectively. 
The difference in remedial technologies between Figures 
9 and 10 can be explained by the clustering of parcels and the 
changing of some of the parcel characteristics due to the 
delayed remediation. The remedial action “food restriction” 
found in Figure 10 is for agricultural parcels where, due to 
the physical decay process described above, the food crops 
can be produced with radioactivity below the permissible 
levels without the need for a remedial action given the time 
elapsed since the deposition of the radionuclides. It is clear 
that the model will seek optimal homogenous clusters, where 
the solution is optimal overall and not for each individual 
parcel. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 8. ACTION PRIORITY SCORE (APS) FOR THE DIFFERENT 
CANDIDATE REMEDIAL ACTIONS ON AN AGRICULTURAL PARCEL WITH 
CEREAL CULTIVATION. 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
Potassium fertilizers
Deep ploughing
Skim and  burial
ploughing
Topsoil removal
APS score

 
FIGURE 10: THE REMEDIAL TECHNOLOGIES PROPOSED BY THE SPATIO-
TEMPORAL CLUSTERING ALGORITHM WITH A SIMILARITY THRESHOLD OF 
0.025. 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 11. THE TIMING OF REMEDIATION PROPOSED BY THE SPATIO-
TEMPORAL CLUSTERING ALGORITHM WHEN THE SIMILARITY THRESHOLD IS 
SET TO 0.025. 
 
 
E. Intracluster variability 
The variability of the PPS score within the cluster should 
be as low as possible to make sure that resources are used for 
the most urgent parcels. When the similarity threshold is set 
to 0, as in Figure 12, the clusters consists of only the seed 
parcel. It is clear that as cluster rank increases, so does the 
value of the cluster's PPS score, demonstrating the 
prioritization of resources for the most important parcels. 
 
 
FIGURE 12. PPS SCORE FOR THE 10 HIGHEST RANKED CLUSTERS, WHICH 
ARE EQUAL TO THE 10 HIGHEST RANKED SEED PARCELS FOR A SIMILARITY 
THRESHOLD OF 0. 
 
With an increasing similarity threshold (see Figures 13 
and 14), the variability of the PPS within the cluster is 
allowed to increase. Furthermore, it is important to observe 
the increased presence of outliers due to the higher similarity 
threshold. This can be important when the seed parcel is the 
outlier, because then resources are potentially used on a less 
important site first. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 13. BOXPLOTS REPRESENTING THE VARIABILITY OF THE PPS SCORE 
WITHIN THE 10 HIGHEST RANKED CLUSTERS, WHEN THE SIMILARITY 
THRESHOLD IS 0.025. 
 

 
 
FIGURE 14. BOXPLOTS REPRESENTING THE VARIABILITY OF THE PPS SCORE 
WITHIN THE 10 HIGHEST RANKED CLUSTERS, WHEN THE SIMILARITY 
THRESHOLD IS 0.05. 
 
It is clear that a higher similarity threshold results in more 
resources going to less important parcels, but on the other 
hand, it results in larger clusters and therefore lower 
operational costs. When lowering the similarity threshold for 
more optimal decision making, the overall cost of 
remediation will increase, resulting in more time needed for 
the remediation of the affected region. This effect can be seen 
in Figure 15, where the remediation will take nine years 
instead of seven, increasing the budget by around 1 million 
euros. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 15. THE TIMING OF REMEDIATION PROPOSED BY THE SPATIO-
TEMPORAL CLUSTERING ALGORITHM WHEN THE SIMILARITY THRESHOLD IS 
SET TO 0.01. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This case study shows the complexity of designing spatio-
temporal remedial schemes. Therefore, the use of a GIS-
MADM based DSS, as proposed in this paper, could help 
decision makers find clarity and see the impacts of certain 
decisions. A major benefit of these tools is the ability to do 
scenario analysis and uncertainty analysis. The impact of 
varying degrees of uncertainty in this decision context is 
described in [31]. Further the use of these dynamic MADM 
approaches allows for a shift to a more adaptive management 
paradigm [32]. 
The spatio-temporal MADM relies heavily on the PPS 
and APS of a parcel; therefore, the determination of these 
scores should be done with great care. The determination of 
the specific applicable criteria and weights is not only the 
work of experts, but it is highly suggested to take into account 
all stakeholders to ensure a solution supported by society is 
proposed [28].  
For the purpose of this research, CP was used with a 
Euclidean distance measure, but other distance metrics are 
possible (e.g., Manhattan distance). Because of the use of two 
distance-based metrics with similar range, the composite 
distance score still has a physical meaning (distance to the 
ideal or anti-ideal situation).  
Figures 12 to 14 show the effect of the increasing 
similarity threshold on the variability of PSS scores within 
clusters. A larger similarity threshold allows more variation 
within the cluster; therefore, less optimal clusters are formed 
and more deviation from the optimal per-parcel-solution is 
allowed. However, larger clusters give rise to lower 
operational costs, resulting in cheaper and faster remediation. 
Decision makers can decide what is the best setting for their 
own specific case, but a rule of thumb to determine the initial 
similarity threshold is half of the range of the APS values. 
The budget constraint limits the amount of interventions per 
year, therefore, a lower budget will spread the remediation 
over more years. This increase in remediation time could 
potentially change the remedial actions for parcels because of 
delayed remediation. 
The reduced cost of remediation for larger units is the 
main driver for the introduction of remedial management 
clusters. For this specific case study, expert-based 
estimations for the discounts were used because empirical 
data for these large-scale remedial actions is not widely 
available. Nevertheless, they should be determined with great 
care and potentially adapted during the remedial process to 
improve the model estimations. 
The proposed technical implementation of the budget 
constraint stops the remediation if the most optimal neighbor 
of the cluster with the specific remedial action exceeds the 
available budget, whereby the remaining budget is 
transferred to the next year. This transfer has a low impact, 
when the yearly budget exceeds largely the remediation cost 
of a single cluster. 
When working with polygon-based datasets, topological 
errors, such as gaps, may occur. Relying solely on these 
topological relationships can have major impacts on 
determining the neighbours. Our EMT approach is less 
impacted by these errors.  

Other cases could benefit from a similar approach. For 
example, when afforesting a large region, not all sites can be 
afforested at the same time because it is a very costly and labor 
intensive intervention. Additional, every plot has a certain 
suitability and urgency to be afforested. In addition, 
afforesting connected parcels with a similar tree composition 
would severely reduce the cost of planting and also improve 
the ecological connectivity of the landscape. Therefore, 
finding optimal clusters of parcels to be afforested with 
similar tree compositions could be facilitated with our 
approach. A similar approach for raster datasets was already 
reported by [14]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
With the proposed spatio-temporal clustering approach, 
dispersed polygons can be clustered in space and time and be 
assigned the most optimal intervention type under a budget 
constraint. This allows decision makers to form multi-period 
remedial schemes to address the environmental disaster. The 
approach also gives decision makers the possibility to do 
scenario analysis and uncertainty analysis to better 
understand the impact of the different parameters in the 
model. In addition, the approach shows promise for other 
fields of application. More research on the impact of the 
similarity threshold is needed. In addition, the introduction of 
off-site impacts (e.g., transport and re-deposition of 
contaminated sediment) should be incorporated in the 
MADM criteria [33] to better mimic the contamination 
behavior. Future research should consider 
multiple 
consecutive remedial actions rather than single ones [20], to 
be more in line with the reality of remediation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a PhD grant for Floris 
Abrams from the Belgian Nuclear Research Centre (SCK 
CEN). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. Abrams, L. Sweeck, J. Camps, D. Cattrysse, and J. 
Van Orshoven, “Spatio-Temporal Clustering of 
Polygon Objects and per Object Interventions 
Optimizing Remediation of Spatially Dispersed 
Contaminated Parcels Under an Annual Budget 
Constraint,” 
in 
The 
Fourteenth 
International 
Conference on Advanced Geographic Information 
Systems, 
Applications, 
and 
Services 
(GEOProcessing 2022), 2022, pp. 1–6. 
[2] 
U.S. EPA, “Superfund Optimization Progress 
Report,” 2020. 
[3] 
J. Malczewski and C. Rinner, Multicriteria Decision 
Analysis in Geographic Information Science. 2015. 
[4] 
R. Anderson, J. Norrman, P. E. Back, T. Söderqvist, 
and L. Rosén, “What’s the point? The contribution of 
a 
sustainability 
view 
in 
contaminated 
site 
remediation,” Sci. Total Environ., vol. 630, pp. 103–
116, 2018. 
[5] 
J. Malczewski, GIS and Multicriteria Decision 
Analysis. 1999. 
[6] 
C. D. Gamper and C. Turcanu, “Multi-criteria 
analysis: A tool for going beyond monetization?,” 
Tools Policy Formul. Actors, Capacit. Venues Eff., 
pp. 121–141, 2015. 
[7] 
J. Kingscott and R. J. Weisman, “Cost Evaluation for 
Selected Remediation Technologies,” Remediat. J., 
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 99–116, Mar. 2002. 
[8] 
S. Polat, A. Aksoy, and K. Unlu, “A Fuzzy Rule 
Based Remedial Priority Ranking System for 
Contaminated Sites,” GROUNDWATER, vol. 53, no. 
2, pp. 317–327, 2015. 
[9] 
K. Zhang, G. Achari, and Y. Pei, “Incorporating 
linguistic, probabilistic, and possibilistic information 
in a risk-based approach for ranking contaminated 
sites,” Integr. Environ. Assess. Manag., vol. 6, no. 4, 
pp. 711–724, 2010. 
[10] 
Y. Lin, J. Hoover, D. Beene, E. Erdei, and Z. Liu, 
“Environmental risk mapping of potential abandoned 
uranium mine contamination on the Navajo Nation, 
USA, using a GIS-based multi-criteria decision 
analysis approach,” Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., vol. 
27, no. 24, pp. 30542–30557, 2020. 
[11] 
M. A. B. Promentilla, T. Furuichi, K. Ishii, and N. 
Tanikawa, “Evaluation of remedial countermeasures 
using the analytic network process,” Waste Manag., 
vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 1410–1421, 2006. 
[12] 
I. Linkov, A. Varghese, S. Jamil, T. P. Seager, G. 
Kiker, and T. Bridges, “Multi-criteria decision 
analysis: A framework for structuring remedial 
decisions at contaminated sites,” in Comparative 
Risk Assessment and Environmental Decision 
Making, 2004, vol. 38, pp. 15–54. 
[13] 
L. Rosen et al., “SCORE: A novel multi-criteria 
decision analysis approach to assessing the 
sustainability of contaminated land remediation,” 
Sci. Total Environ., vol. 511, pp. 621–638, Apr. 
2015. 
[14] 
P. Vanegas, D. Cattrysse, A. Wijffels, and J. Van 
Orshoven, “Finding sites meeting compactness and 
on- and off-site suitability criteria in raster maps,” in 
2nd 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and 
Services, GEOProcessing 2010, 2010, pp. 15–20. 
[15] 
M. Fleischmann, “momepy: Urban Morphology 
Measuring Toolkit,” J. Open Source Softw., vol. 4, 
no. 43, p. 1807, 2019. 
[16] 
Z. Xu, “On multi-period multi-attribute decision 
making,” Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 
164–171, 2008. 
[17] 
Y. Chen and B. Li, “Dynamic multi-attribute 
decision making model based on triangular 
intuitionistic fuzzy numbers,” Sci. Iran., vol. 18, no. 
2 B, pp. 268–274, 2011. 
[18] 
M. Karatas, “Multiattribute Decision Making Using 

Multiperiod 
Probabilistic 
Weighted 
Fuzzy 
Axiomatic Design,” Syst. Eng., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 
318–334, 2017. 
[19] 
Q. Dong and Y. Guo, “Multiperiod multiattribute 
decision-making method based on trend incentive 
coefficient,” Int. Trans. Oper. Res., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 
141–152, 2013. 
[20] 
R. Estrella, D. Cattrysse, and J. Van Orshoven, “An 
Integer Programming Model to Determine Land Use 
Trajectories for Optimizing Regionally Integrated 
Ecosystem Services Delivery,” pp. 1–26, 2016. 
[21] 
J. Tian, Z. Huo, F. Ma, X. Gao, and Y. Wu, 
“Application 
and 
Selection 
of 
Remediation 
Technology for OCPs-Contaminated Sites by 
Decision-Making Methods,” Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Health, vol. 16, no. 11, Jun. 2019. 
[22] 
C. A. Salt and M. C. Dunsmore, “Development of a 
spatial decision support system for post-emergency 
management of radioactively contaminated land,” J. 
Environ. Manage., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 169–178, 2000. 
[23] 
A. L. Yang, G. H. Huang, X. S. Qin, and Y. R. Fan, 
“Evaluation of remedial options for a benzene-
contaminated site through a simulation-based fuzzy-
MCDA approach,” J. Hazard. Mater., vol. 213, pp. 
421–433, Apr. 2012. 
[24] 
L. Bai et al., “TOPSIS-Based Screening Method of 
Soil Remediation Technology for Contaminated 
Sites and its Application,” Soil Sediment Contam., 
vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 386–397, 2015. 
[25] 
V. Belton and T. J. Stewart, Multiple criteria 
decision analysis: An integrated approach. 2002. 
[26] 
N. H. Zardari, A. Kamal, S. Sharif Monirussaman, 
and Y. bin Zulkifli, Weighting Methods and their 
Effects on Multi-Criteria Decision Making Model 
Outcomes in Water Resources Management. 2015. 
[27] 
M. Fleischmann, A. Feliciotti, O. Romice, and S. 
Porta, “Morphological tessellation as a way of 
partitioning space: Improving consistency in urban 
morphology at the plot scale,” Comput. Environ. 
Urban Syst., vol. 80, no. May 2019, p. 101441, 2020. 
[28] 
F. Abrams, L. Sweeck, L. Hendrickx, C. Turcanuc, 
R. Estrella, and J. Van Orshoven, “Multi-criteria 
Decision Analysis to Support the Remediation of 
Polluted Soils: a Review,” J. Environ. Plan. Manag., 
2022. 
[29] 
W. J. Wang and L. Luoh, “Simple computation for 
the defuzzifications of center of sum and center of 
gravity,” J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst., 2000. 
[30] 
L. Hendrickx, F. Abrams, L. Sweeck, and J. Van 
Orshoven, “Supporting Remediation of Agricultural 
Land Contaminated With Cesium-137: A Multi-
criteria 
Decision 
Workflow 
Accounting 
for 
Uncertainties,” KULeuven, 2021. 
[31] 
F. Abrams, L. Hendrickx, L. Sweeck, J. Camps, D. 
Cattrysse, and J. Van Orshoven, “Accounting for 
Uncertainty and Disagreement in Multi-criteria 
Decision Making Using Triangular Fuzzy Numbers 
and Monte Carlo Simulation: A Case Study About 
Selecting Measures for Remediation of Agricultural 
Land After Radioactive Contamination,” in Real Life 
Applications of Multiple Criteria Decision Making 
Techniques in Fuzzy Domain, Springer Nature, 2022. 
[32] 
I. Linkov, F. K. Satterstrom, G. Kiker, C. Batchelor, 
T. Bridges, and E. Ferguson, “From comparative risk 
assessment to multi-criteria decision analysis and 
adaptive management: Recent developments and 
applications,” Environ. Int., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1072–
1093, 2006. 
[33] 
R. Estrella, P. Vanegas, D. Cattrysse, and J. Van 
Orshoven, “Trading off Accuracy and Computational 
Efficiency of an Afforestation Site Location Method 
for Minimizing Sediment Yield in a River 
Catchment,” 2014, no. c, pp. 94–100. 
 
 
 
 

