134
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Co-development of a Virtual Reality Tool Designed by and for Students for 
Training in Electrical Hazards: the VirtuElec Project  
 
Jean-Pierre Toumazet, Jean-Yves Laronde 
 Institut Universitaire de Technologie Clermont Auvergne – 
dept. GEII (electrical engineering) de Montluçon 
Université Clermont Auvergne 
Clermont-Ferrand, France 
Email : j-pierre.toumazet@uca.fr 
Jean-François Vérité 
2J Process SAS Company 
Virtual reality development department 
Aix-en-Provence, France 
 
 
 
Abstract - The teaching of electrical hazards for future 
professionals is an important issue. This problem is complex, 
because to train students in risk, it is necessary to confront 
them with dangerous situations, but without making them take 
risks. The VirtuElec project was born in this context: co-
producing, with a company specialized in virtual reality, an 
environment simulating electrical hazards and allowing to 
train according to different scenarios at different levels of 
competence. The originality of the project is to involve the 
students themselves in the construction of this environment. By 
integrating a project team, they worked in a design office to co-
develop this tool and enrich it with video and virtual supports: 
a training support carried out by students and for students. 
Students who participated in this project gained knowledge in 
the areas of electrical hazards, virtual reality, and teamwork, 
but they felt they gained the most proficiency in the last two 
skills. Finally, this tool was implemented within the framework 
of a semi-autonomous training module combining real and 
virtual experimentation, in order to offer students the most 
complete experience possible of the professional situations they 
will face in their future jobs. 
Keywords - Co-design; Electrical hazards Simulation; 
Immersive 
Virtual 
Reality; 
Interactive 
Devices; 
Multi-
disciplinary; Problem-Based Learning; Computer Supported 
Collaborative Learning; Professional gestures 
. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
It is essential for students in the field of competence of 
electrical engineering to have a good knowledge of 
electrical hazards, in order to be able to identify them and 
prevent accidents, which are usually very serious. This is 
indispensable first in the context of their training and for the 
actions they will have to carry out in the professional world. 
This more than true since, with the development of 
apprenticeship 
training 
and 
more 
generally 
the 
professionalization of training, learners are increasingly 
confronted in their training course with situations of 
potential danger in an industrial environment. 
At present, training exists for the students concerned, but 
it takes place under conditions quite different from those 
they will face in their professional activity. Even if some 
interventions are indeed carried out in conditions close to 
the industrial context, on a real electrical cabinet, they 
require the presence of a trainer for a student, due to the 
presence of very real risks. Moreover, this situation is 
stressful for the student faced with the risk (even if all 
precautions are taken) and for the trainer, who assumes a 
heavy responsibility. 
The objective of the project, co-developed with a 
company specialized in virtual reality, was the design of a 
virtual environment presenting different scenarios of 
electrical risks. Depending on the level of expertise of the 
learner, a mission is given to him or her and he or she must 
take the right decisions in terms of choice of intervention 
and protection equipment, of behavior in the face of a risk, 
and of control of professional gestures. 
The objective is to have a unique, innovative, modern 
and efficient tool developed specifically for our training 
needs. This allows learners to be able to train at their own 
pace, on a realistic and secure tool, but also to be able to 
address all aspects of electrical risk, in autonomy and to 
benefit from an individualized experience, with an 
individualized teacher feedback, focusing on the key 
elements related to each situation. The originality of the 
project is that it is a real partnership with a company, really 
involving students who have worked in a design office 
context, co-developing the tool in terms of ergonomics and 
functionality. Because of the health context related to the 
Covid19 pandemic, this collaborative work was necessarily 
more difficult, and it required the use of collaborative work 
tools implementing an Agile method in order to make the 
exchanges more efficient: an educational tool developed by 
students for students [1]. Obviously, the purely virtual 
experience can appear to be a bit reductive compared to a 
real situation. This is why the created tool has been 
implemented in the framework of a new teaching module 
based on experiential learning and aiming at developing 
students' autonomy. The virtual experimentation was thus 
completed by an experimentation on real systems, but 
involving lower electricity power for safety reasons. 

135
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
After a presentation of the context of the use of virtual 
reality for the prevention of occupational risks and the 
modalities of development of the project in Section 2, 
Section 3 describes the methodology followed by the project 
team, the functionalities of the developed tool, and the 
methodology and tools used. Finally, Section 4 presents first 
results of the evaluation of the perception of the project by 
the students who participated in its conception, as well as 
the choice of implementation of the virtual tool in relation to 
real-life experiences, in order to provide the students with 
the most complete experience possible. 
II. 
CONTEXT 
The use of virtual reality for education has been the 
subject of many articles in recent years, addressing both the 
interest of this new tool, but also its limitations [2]-[5]. If 
we refer more specifically to the field of occupational safety 
and health, realistic virtual environments have many 
advantages [6][7]. The first and most obvious is the 
possibility of exploring an environment of potential danger, 
without taking risks, but also without putting colleagues at 
risk or causing damage to equipment. The learner also has 
the opportunity to perform actions and make mistakes 
without risk to him or her, and without feeling the pressure 
of other colleagues or the assessor, as would be the case in a 
real-life scenario [8]. He or she also has the possibility of 
being wrong, without consequence, and as many times as 
necessary. All these conditions lead the learner to be a real 
actor of his or her formation: the solution cannot come from 
elsewhere; the learner is obliged to act, to interact with what 
surrounds him or her, to progress in the mission. 
The specific case of electrical hazards, which currently 
remains one of the main causes of fatal accidents in 
industrial environments, has been the subject of numerous 
studies and developments in the field of virtual reality. In 
particular, we can mention the application of virtual reality 
for the training of electricians working on substations 
[9][10], in the field of construction [11] or power 
distribution networks [12], and more generally in all fields 
where electrical risks are present [13]. These generally 
concern tools for experienced professionals, the aim of 
which is to enable them to train on devices on which it is 
usually difficult, if not impossible, to train, either because of 
their difficult access or because it is impossible to 
manoeuvre on these elements without causing a customer 
blackout. Other types of educational tools exist in the 
context of electrical risk training, the most common being 
based on videos illustrating risk situations and including 
quizzes that allow students to position themselves in terms 
of what to do when an electrical risk appears. Even if these 
tools illustrate realistic situations, the students are always in 
the position of an outside observer, and are never really 
confronted with the potential danger. These learning 
conditions are therefore far from reality. 
The VirtuElec project’s approach is complementary to 
these developments: it aims to enable the training of 
students with no professional experience related to 
interventions on electrical installations. In this context, the 
virtual environment is of course intended to reproduce as 
closely as possible the real environment, but not in order to 
remind the learners of their daily life, but on the contrary to 
make them discover what their real future environment will 
be. In these circumstances, it is important to simplify the 
environment by not including too many non-essential 
elements, so that the learner can quickly focus on his or her 
mission. 
In addition, the target audience is wide, and skill levels 
in electrical hazard situations are very different. It was 
therefore necessary to provide a virtual environment 
compatible with several intervention scenarios. 
This project also fits into the restructuring process of 
university and technological formation in France, now based 
on a competency-based approach. Within this framework, 
teaching methods are expected to evolve significantly, and 
the use of video, virtual reality and augmented reality media 
to help students gain autonomy is logically expected to 
grow and generalize. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The first step in this work to create a virtual environment 
from realistic situations and equipment present at the 
university was to constitute a 'project team'. The work 
carried out is highly multidisciplinary and has been the 
subject of a close partnership between (1) the "Electrical 
engeneering team” including two teachers in the field of 
electrical hazards, two technicians specialized in this field, 
and 9 undergraduate students; (2) the “partner company”, a 
specialist in virtual reality and recipient of several awards in 
this field, (3) the “audio-visual team”, composed of two 
technicians, for the production of audio and video media 
and (4) the “pedagogical engineering team”, made up of two 
pedagogical engineers whose mission is to ensure the 
accompaniment of all the actors in this innovative approach 
(Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Synoptic of the VirtuElec project 
 

136
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The highly multidisciplinary nature of the project 
required the implementation of collaborative tools. This is 
all the more true that the specific context linked to the 
Covid19 pandemic has strongly complicated this process of 
joint work. In addition to the difficulties linked to the highly 
multidisciplinary aspect of the project, there were also 
difficulties in exchanging ideas during meetings, as well as 
the 
complexity 
of 
carrying 
out 
tests 
and 
trials, 
demonstrations of equipment and simulations of the 
modelled equipment as well as the envisaged scenarios. In 
order to be able to work remotely during the containment 
phases, different tools were therefore set up to share 
information, documents and experience. 
The first one consisted in the implementation of the 
Microsoft Teams tool, at the initiative of the project 
manager and the teaching team. Microsoft Teams is the tool 
chosen by our university to ensure pedagogical continuity 
during the containment phases [14]. Within the framework 
of this project, it allowed a collaboration between the 
various 
teams 
involved 
and 
located 
on 
different 
geographical sites in France. The functionalities available to 
them were exploited at several levels: first of all, a 
collaborative space was created, in the form of a 
"VirtuElec" team, in order to allow information exchanges. 
The framework documents of the project (specifications, 
planning, framing document) were thus shared. This space 
was also intended to be a place of exchange, and it was the 
support of our bimonthly progress meetings, involving all 
the participants. Beyond these imposed deadlines, the 
exchange space was also used freely by the students, to 
exchange on the progress of the project, without 
intervention of the technical and pedagogical team. A 
document sharing system was also set up in order to allow 
the co-construction of the different stages of the project, 
with a progress follow-up managed in the form of different 
versions of documents, thus allowing the students to go 
back if necessary.  Finally, during this very delicate period, 
the schedules of all parties were regularly disrupted, and the 
large number of people involved made it difficult for 
everyone to participate in the scheduled meetings. It was 
therefore decided to record videos of the most important 
meetings, with the prior agreement of all participants, in 
order to allow everyone to follow the project. It should 
therefore be noted that, while the Covid19 crisis obviously 
complicated the realization of this work, it also accelerated 
the deployment of tools that were not previously in use and 
that proved to be of real added value for the monitoring of 
the project. 
Another modality has been put in place in order to gain 
efficiency in the monitoring of the project: the Agile method 
[15][16]. This can be defined as a project management 
method that consists of breaking down a project into a 
succession of small, quickly attainable objectives. Each step 
corresponded to a very short period of time, from one to two 
weeks, and was complementary to the overall project 
planning, which spanned three years and included design, 
deployment and feedback. In terms of concept, the Agile 
method emphasizes people and their interactions over 
processes and tools, close collaboration between different 
stakeholders, and adaptation to change rather than following 
a plan. This approach has many advantages. It allowed us to 
adapt to unforeseen circumstances that arose, such as the 
underestimation of the time needed to model the virtual 
environment or the complexity of describing exhaustively 
the different tasks to be performed in each scenario. But the 
most important was the notion of feedback, which is at the 
heart of the Agile methodology. Thus, at each step, a quick 
assessment was made, allowing to orientate the next steps of 
the project. 
From a practical point of view, the virtual environment 
was developed to be implemented on Oculus Quest 2 virtual 
reality headsets, which are autonomous headsets allowing 
greater freedom of movement and better portability of the 
device [17]. The possibility of connecting the helmet to a 
large screen for demonstrations was also provided. Finally, 
the tool made also allows recording the journey of each 
learner in the virtual environment in video format, to be able 
to debrief a posteriori. 
The actions carried out by the students in relation to the 
project teams can be divided into 3 main steps: 
The first consisted of the design of the 3D environment, 
including the virtual electrical cabinet on which the learners 
will have to intervene, but also the operative part, consisting 
of a robotic arm, as well as a intervention preparation room 
where the necessary equipment is available. For more 
realism, a real device present on the training center inspired 
this virtual set. In this context, the students had to imagine 
the virtual electrical installation, draw up the electrical 
diagram, define and then model all the components, and 
finally to design the implementation in the complete virtual 
environment (Figure 2). 
 
The second step was to design the intervention 
scenarios for electrician apprentices, simulating 3 levels of 
competence in a professional environment. The simplest is 
the beginner level, (including two options: step-by-step 
guidance or free learning) during which the operator must 
replace a defective element that was previously indicated to 
him. The most complex is the autonomous level (autonomy 
in actions, alerts are displayed in case of error and aids are 
available) during which the operator must look for the cause 
of a failure and perform troubleshooting. Finally, the expert 
level (anticipation of risks before the intervention) during 
which the operator must manage the safety of a 
teamworking on an installation. For each of these levels, the 
learner is expected to be able to choose the protective 
equipment and tools required for their mission, follow the 
correct procedure, and perform the correct technical actions. 
In order to have a common language between the 
“electrical engineering team” and the “virtual reality team”, 
the scenarios description was developed in Grafcet (graphic 
programming, easily interpretable by all) [18] (Figure 3). 

137
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Actual electrical cabinet (a) and associated VR modelling (b) 
 
For the virtual experience to be realistic, it was essential 
to give the learner the opportunity to make mistakes up to 
virtual electrification, simulated by a vibration. On the 
initiative of the students in charge of the project, these 
possible errors were translated into different colours in the 
graphic. The green colour logically corresponds to the case 
where the operations are performed correctly. The red one 
corresponds to errors that require to stop the current action 
and to start it again (the troubleshooter does not intervene 
on the right element for example). Finally, the orange one 
corresponds to errors that do not have an immediate 
consequence, but will cause an accident in the long term 
(the operator has incorrectly assessed the risk, or poorly 
chooses its protective equipment). In case of false 
manipulation, a vibration of the joysticks and a flash light 
simulates the electric shock (Figure 4). 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Programming of intervention scenarios 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Example of programming scenarios in grafcet language 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Image extracted from a video explaining the voltage measurement 
process 
Finally, to illustrate the complex technical gestures, 
difficult to represent in the virtual environment, because 
demanding in terms of calculation capabilities, videos are 
accessible in the form of help in the virtual environment. 
These videos were shot with immersive cameras to illustrate 
as accurately as possible the technical actions to be 
performed, as shown in Figure 5 in a troubleshooting 
procedure 
The final step, which is still under optimisation process, 
is the encoding of the scenarios algorithm by the partner 
company and their testing in the virtual environment for 
validation. 
 
During the entire development phase of the project, a 
double follow-up was carried out: first, a technical follow-
up, with regular meetings (each week) including the 
different teams involved in the progress made, and a 
pedagogical follow-up in the form of questionnaires offered 
to students in order to collect their feelings on different 
aspects of the project. The areas questioned were the 
evaluation of the accompaniment in the project, the links 
between the project and the teaching, the material and 
technical environment and the contributions for them of the 
project, in particular its multidisciplinary aspect. 

138
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
The pedagogical interest of this project lies at two 
different levels; the creation of a custom VR tool for the 
training of students on the one hand, and the pedagogical 
approach of co-design of this tool, including future users in 
the design of the training tool on the other hand. Now, the 
tool is still under development, and it is therefore too early 
to assess its impact on the electrical risk training of students. 
This analysis will of course be carried out as soon as the 
tool is in place, scheduled for december 2021. Following 
this initial implementation and feedback from the student 
evaluations, we plan to continue to evolve the scenarios and 
to a lesser degree the virtual environment, in order to make 
it even more efficient. This evolution will be based on the 
results of surveys submitted to students in order to analyze 
their appropriation of the virtual reality tool. These tests will 
be carried out at two levels: firstly with beginners, for whom 
the virtual environment will be the only experience of 
electrical risks, but also with final year students, who will 
have had the opportunity to work on real electrical 
installations. The idea behind this double evaluation is to 
assess the tool's ability to address both the problem of 
discovering electrical risks for non-electricians and the 
realism of simulated situations for more experienced users. 
The analysis that we have already been able to do relates 
to the approach of co-designing the teaching support by 
involving the students themselves. The results of the 
evaluations, relating to the items described in the description 
of the method, made it possible to highlight several 
interesting elements. 
First, the students expressed an overall satisfaction level 
of 9.5/10 for this project. They particularly appreciated the 
autonomy they were given (100% satisfaction) as well as the 
support and follow-up (89% very satisfied, 11% satisfied). 
In terms of support, the students did not have any 
difficulty managing the high number of interlocutors around 
them. On the contrary, they appreciated the cohesion and the 
diversity of this team and the associated skills were really 
experienced as an asset. Collaborative work with specialists 
in other technical fields was evaluated as an asset by 78% of 
students, both an asset and a constraint by 11% and neither 
an asset nor a constraint by 11% of students 
In terms of the links between the project and teaching, 
the students' perception is clearly that they have developed 
competence in fields not directly related to their core 
training, electricity: 56% strongly agree and 44% agree with 
this perception. They are also aware that they have made 
progress on aspects related to electrical safety, but less 
noticeably: 0% strongly agree, 78% somewhat agree, and 
22% somewhat disagree with this perception. It is clear that 
in this respect, students are underestimating their rise in 
competence in their field of specialization. To be able to 
write the intervention scenarios in the virtual environment, 
students had to reach a high level of mastery of the 
intervention rules in a context of electrical risk, but this 
essential aspect appeared secondary to the students 
compared to the new skills in virtual reality and video 
production. The reason may be that these two areas are 
completely absent from their initial competency panel, so 
the discovery was total. However, from the teacher point of 
view, it is in the field of electrical risks that the students in 
charge of the project have made the most technical progress. 
In terms of the contribution of the project, the 
multidisciplinary and collaborative dimensions of the 
project were the most appreciated by the students, more than 
the technical contribution on the heart of the subject, that is 
to say the management of electrical risks. The collaborative 
work demonstrated the need to communicate with people 
with other skills, and it was these values of openness and 
communication that were considered the most beneficial 
elements of the project. Thus, to the question of the main 
skill developed in the framework of this project, 56% of the 
students answered the ability to communicate with 
interlocutors from various fields of competence, 33% the 
ability to formalize expectations and only 11% the ability to 
master the technical elements. 
Even if this tool is still in the optimization phase, the 
first version has already been tested as part of the 
implementation of a new pedagogical approach based on 
competency and the increase in student autonomy. This 
approach was initiated this year for students entering the 
university. The aim is to confront students with problems 
similar to those they are likely to encounter in a professional 
environment, and to guide them in their progress while 
leaving them free to develop their own experimental 
methodology, to learn from their mistakes, and thus to 
increase their competence. 
This approach is implemented in particular in the field 
of electrical energy production, and it is in this context that 
the VirtuElec tool makes sense. An experimental learning 
situation has been set up, within the framework of the 
understanding of the functioning of the photovoltaic energy 
production and the implementation of the complete chain of 
production and transformation of the electric energy. The 
idea here is to couple classical experimentation with virtual 
reality: the experimentation is carried out on low-power 
structures, which do not present any electrical risks and 
allow autonomous testing for the students. If it allows to 
understand the operating principles of the various devices, it 
remains however rather far from the conditions of 
implementation of the real systems. The virtual reality tool 
offers here this possibility of change of scale, by authorizing 
the intervention on realistic systems simulating real 
installations. More than the virtual tool itself, it is therefore 
the combination of reality and virtuality that allows us to 
address a wide range of situations and to increase the 
student's competence (Figure 6). 

139
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 6. Description of the experiential learning approach mixing 
virtuality and reality 
 
The first feedback from the students on this approach 
clearly shows the interest of this coupling of real 
experimentation and virtual experimentation. The virtual 
representation only makes sense when it is associated with 
real problems, and identified experimentally. On the other 
hand, experimentation on pedagogical models only makes 
sense when virtual reality allows us to evaluate how to 
transpose these results to a more realistic scale. 
This phase of deployment of the VirtuElec tool has thus 
opened up new perspectives, by federating a larger teaching 
team around these aspects mixing real and virtual 
experimentation. It will also be possible to enrich it with 
another approach, which is still in its infancy and which 
consists of creating digital twins of two experimental 
devices present at the university. The students will thus have 
access to a complete panel of solutions coupling virtuality 
and reality. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The developed system allows the learner to be truly 
immersed in the virtual context. It allows students to project 
into their future professional world, and to progress at their 
own pace, and with a level of autonomy that they can 
manage, by requesting or not to contextual aids present in 
the virtual environment. 
The realization of this project by the students aroused a 
great deal of enthusiasm and the organisation of the project 
team as an engineering office allowed a lot of interaction 
within the micro-enterprise thus formed. While the initial 
idea of involving students in the design of teaching tools 
was primarily intended to enable students to develop 
technical and pedagogical skills, rather, it was found that 
they placed greater emphasis on the opening of their field of 
expertise to virtual reality, video production, and team-
based collaborative work experience. This awareness of the 
perceived gap in the interest of the project between teachers 
and students was only possible thanks to the support of the 
project by the pedagogical team and the associated desire to 
better understand how this type of pedagogical initiative is 
perceived 
by 
the 
main 
stakeholders. 
This 
better 
understanding of the expectations and motivations of the 
various people involved will make it possible to sustain and 
strengthen these actions and better support future initiatives. 
Beyond the development phase of the project, the challenge 
is now to optimise its integration into the existing 
educational context. The choice that has been made is to 
mix virtual and real experience, the virtual experience 
having the aim of allowing the experimentation of 
dangerous situations impossible to manage in a university 
context. Finding the right balance between real and virtual 
experience will require further efforts, so the evaluation of 
the users' perception of the project will continue 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was financed by the French government 
IDEX-ISITE initiative 16-IDEX-0001 (CAP 20-25). In this 
context, the “Learn'in Auvergne”program was launched, 
with the aim of supporting educational teams in the design, 
implementation and evaluation of educational and digital 
innovations. The project presented in this article is the result 
of collective work. Thanks to J-J Diaz and B Beghein from 
the Electical Engineering team, Cauchy and D. Saint-
Gérand from the Audiovisual Team, and the students in 
charge of the project: T. Clair, S. Coletto, C. Duplessy, T. 
Sauvagnat, F. Harduin De Grosville, B. Collet, M. Rumeo, 
M. Poillot, A. Da Costa 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J-P; Toumazet, L. Hamon and C. Robles, “VirtuElec: A Tool 
Designed by and for Students for Training in Electrical 
Hazards”, International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and 
On-line Learning eLmL 2021, July 18, 2021 to July 22, 
2021,Nice, France, pp. 21-24, ISSN: 2308-4367, ISBN: 978-
1-61208-873-0.  
[2] J. Radianti, T. A. Majchrzak, J. Fromm and I. Wohlgenannt, 
“A systematic review of immersive virtual reality applications 
for higher education: Design elements, lessons learned, and 
research agenda”, Computers & Education, vol. 147, 2020. 
ISSN 0360-1315, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103778. 
[3] L. Jensen and F. Konradsen, “A review of the use of virtual 
reality head-mounted displays in education and training”, 
Education and Information Technologies, vol. 23, no 4, 
pp. 1515–1529, 2018. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10639-017-
9676-0. 
[4] J. Martín-Gutiérrez, C. E. Mora, B. Añorbe Díaz, and A. 
González-Marrero, 
“Virtual 
technologies 
trends 
in 
education”, EURASIA Journal of Mathematics, Science and 
Technology Education, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 469–486, 2017. 
 
 

140
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[5] M. Němec, R. Fasuga, J. Trubač and J. Kratochvíl, “Using 
virtual reality in education”, 15th international conference on 
emerging elearning technologies and applications- IEEE, 
pp. 1–6, 2017. 
[6] M. Kassem, L. Benomran and J. Teizer, “Virtual 
environments for safety learning in construction and 
engineering: seeking evidence and identifying gaps for future 
research”, Visualization in Engineering, vol. 5, no. 16, 2017. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40327-017-0054-1 
[7] P. Wang, P. Wu, J. Wang, H.L. Chi and X. Wang, “A critical 
review of the use of virtual reality in construction engineering 
education 
and 
training”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 15, no. 6, 
p. 1204, 2018. 
[8] K. Patel, J.N. Bailenson, S. Hack-Jung, R. Diankov and R. 
Bajcsy, “The effects of fully immersive virtual reality on the 
learning of physical tasks”, Proceedings of PRESENCE 2006: 
The 9th Annual International Workshop on Presence, August 
24 – 26, Cleveland, Ohio, USA, 2006. 
[9] M. Da Silva and M. H.  Cascone, “Immersive Virtual 
Training for Substation Electricians”, IEEE Virtual Reality 
(VR), pp. 451–52, 2017 
[10] E.H. Tanaka, J.A. Paludo, C.S. Cordeiro, L.R. Domingues, 
E.V. Gadbem and A. Euflausino, “Using Immersive Virtual 
Reality for Electrical Substation Training”, International 
Association for Development of the Information Society, 
2015. 
[11] D. Zhao, J. Lucas and W. Thabet, “Using Virtual 
Environments to Support Electrical Safety Awareness in 
Construction”, Proceedings of the 2009 Winter Simulation 
Conference 
(WSC) 
pp. 
2679–90, 
2009. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WSC.2009.5429258 
[12] T.M. Buriol, M. Rozendo, K. De Geus, S. Scheer and C. 
Felsky, “A Virtual Reality Training Platform for Live Line 
Maintenance of Power Distribution Networks”, ICBL2009-
International Conference on Interactive Computer Aided 
Blended Learning, pp. 1–13, 2009. 
[13] M. Halpin, R. Halpin and P. Curtis, “Simulation-Based 
Electrical 
Safety 
Training,” 
IEEE 
15th 
International 
Conference on Environment and Electrical Engineering 
(EEEIC), pp. 1137–1142, 2015. 
[14] E. Hewson and K. W. Chung, “Beyond the VLE: 
transforming online discussion and collaboration through 
Microsoft Teams”, Proceeding of the Online Open and 
Flexible Higher Education Conference of the European 
Association of Distance Teaching Universities, pp. 36-47, 
Madrid, October 2019. 
https://pure.coventry.ac.uk/ws/portalfiles/portal/27637722/Pro
ceedings_OOFHEC2019.pdf#page=4_ 
[15] D. Adamson et al., “Towards an Agile Approach to Adapting 
Dynamic Collaboration Support to Student Needs”. Int J Artif 
Intell 
Educ, 
vol. 
24, 
pp. 
92–124, 
2014. 
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-013-0012-6 
[16] J. Baschin, D. Inkermann, T. Vietor, “Agile Process 
Engineering to support Collaborative Design”, Procedia 
CIRP, Vol. 84, pp. 1035-1040, ISSN 2212-8271, 2019, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2019.05.010. 
[17] C. Hillmann, “Comparing the Gear VR, Oculus Go, and 
Oculus Quest” Unreal for Mobile and Standalone VR”. 
Apress, 
Berkeley, 
CA. 
C., 
pp. 
141-167, 
2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4360-2_5 
[18] G. Barbieri and D. Andres Gutierrez, “A GEMMA-
GRAFCET Methodology to enable Digital Twin based on 
Real-Time Coupling”,Procedia Computer Science, vol. 180, 
ISSN 
1877-0509, 
2021, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2021.01.122. 
 
 
 

