Discovering Hotspots with Photographic Location and Altitude
from Geo-tagged Photographs
Masaharu Hirota
Faculty of Informatics
Okayama University of Science
Okayama-shi, Okayama
Email: hirota@mis.ous.ac.jp
Jhih-Yu Lin
Graduate school of System Design
Tokyo Metropolitan University
Hino-shi, Tokyo
Email: lin-jhihyu@ed.tmu.ac.jp
Masaki Endo
Division of Core Manufacturing
Polytechnic University
Kodaira-shi, Tokyo
Email: endou@uitec.ac.jp
Hiroshi Ishikawa
Graduate school of System Design
Tokyo Metropolitan University
Hino-shi, Tokyo
Email: ishikawa-hiroshi@tmu.ac.jp
Abstract—A hotspot is an interesting place where many people
go sightseeing. A place where many photographs have been taken
(which we call a hotspot) might be an interesting place for many
people to visit. Analyzing such places is important to promote
industries such as those related to tourism. To identify hotspots,
most existing research applies a grid-based or density-based
clustering algorithm, such as density-based spatial clustering
of applications with noise (DBSCAN) or mean shift. When
applying such methods to hotspot detection, the features used for
clustering are latitude and longitude. Therefore, the identiﬁed
hotspots are visualized in a two-dimensional space. However,
large areas, landmarks, and buildings may include elevated
hotspots or multiple hotspots with different altitudes, which
cannot be distinguished by latitude and longitude. Therefore, in
this research, we propose methods for identifying hotspots based
on altitude, in addition to latitude and longitude, and visualizing
these hotspots in a three-dimensional space. We propose two types
of method, based on density-based and grid-based clustering,
that use these features. The ﬁrst method is one that improves
ST-DBSCAN, which clusters data based on spatial and time
features. The other method is an extension of general grid-based
clustering using these features. As an example application, we
classiﬁed the identiﬁed hotspots as shooting spots, observation
spots, areas of interest, and others. We demonstrate our approach
by identifying hotspots in a three-dimensional space using
photographs obtained from Flickr, and discuss the usefulness
of detecting hotspots using altitude in addition to latitude and
longitude.
Keywords–area of interest; density-based clustering; grid-based
clustering; photograph location; clusteing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A considerably shorter pre-version of this paper has already
been published in [1].
Owing to the increasing popularity of mobile devices, such
as digital cameras and smartphones, numerous photographs
have been uploaded to photo-sharing web services, such as
Flickr [2], Instagram [3], and Google Photos [4]. In addition,
these digital devices have recently been equipped with Global
Positioning System (GPS) sensors. Thus, many photographs
are annotated with latitude and longitude information, which
shows the place where the photograph was taken. If many
people take photographs in the same area, this may be an area
of interest. As described in this paper, we deﬁne such areas
as hotspots. The identiﬁed hotspots are used to analyze urban
areas [5] and tourist behavior [6].
Many methods have been proposed to identify hotspots [7],
[8], [9], [10], [11]. Most existing research on detecting hotspots
is based on a density-based or grid-based clustering method,
such as density-based spatial clustering of applications with
noise (DBSCAN) [12] and mean shift [13]. The studies that
apply these methods use latitude and longitude as features to
identify high-density areas as clusters, and the detected clusters
are then deﬁned as hotspots. However, clusters obtained by
such a method, only using latitude and longitude, do not
consider altitude. Therefore, there are some cases where
multiple hotspots, at different altitudes, are identiﬁed as one
hotspot. For example, in a sightseeing location such as the
Eiffel Tower, the latitude and longitude for the observatory
and the area around the tower are almost the same, but there
are several hotspots with different altitudes. Even if the altitude
is different, because these latitudes and longitudes are almost
equal, it is difﬁcult to distinguish between these hotspots.
In our previous research [1], we proposed a method for
detecting hotspots, using ST-DBSCAN [14], which deals with
the time when the photograph was taken, in addition to latitude
and longitude. When we apply ST-DBSCAN in this paper,
we use altitude instead of time to detect hotspots, thereby
considering the height of the hotspot. In this paper, as an
alternative approach, we propose a method using grid-based
clustering. Previous research has been conducted on grid-based
clustering for detecting hotspots in two-dimensional space. In
this paper, we extend the method to three-dimensional space.
In addition, this paper compares the two types of proposed
method, by the visualization results and execution time.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes the difference of extracted hotspots on 2D or
3D. Section III describes work related to this topic. Section
IV presents our two types of proposed method for detecting
hotspots based on altitude. Section V presents several examples
of visualization results, and experiment on execution time by
our proposed methods. Section VII concludes the paper with
a discussion of the results and future work.
322
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. Visualization of photograph location on 2D.
TABLE I. Famous landmarks in London.
Name
Latitude
Longitude
Big Ben
51.500729
−0.124625
London Eye
51.503324
−0.119543
Westminster Bridge
51.500942
-0.121874
II.
EXTRACTING HOTSPOTS ON 2D AND 3D
In this section, we discuss the difference between extracted
hotspots using methods on 2D and 3D.
Figure 1 visualizes the photographs obtained from Flickr.
According to the latitude and longitude, we superimposed
these photographs on a map of OpenStreetMap [15]. These
photographs were taken in London. There are several famous
buildings in this area, which are listed in Table I. The red
points in the ﬁgure show locations of photographs (obtained
from Flickr) that were taken around Big Ben, the London Eye,
and Westminster Bridge. The number of photographs is 5,000,
which we randomly selected from the obtained photographs.
There are some areas around the three tourist attractions that
have a high density of points.
We applied DBSCAN to these data and detected 23
clusters. Figure 2 shows the clustering result. The points in
this ﬁgure show the photograph locations that were classiﬁed
as belonging to clusters. Each color in the ﬁgure represents
one cluster (the colors are only used to distinguish visually
between the clusters). Figure 3 shows the visualization results
of the same photograph location data as in Figure 1, but using
latitude, longitude, and altitude in a three-dimensional space.
The blue points in this ﬁgure show the photograph locations.
This ﬁgure clearly shows the diversity of the altitudes of the
photograph locations. The red points in Figure 1 around the
London Eye have a high density. Figure 3 shows that there are
actually two high-density groups of locations in the area of the
London Eye: at the top of the wheel and at ground level. We
believe that these two groups should be identiﬁed as distinct
clusters. However, in Figure 2, these photograph locations are
regarded as a single cluster. If hotspots are identiﬁed using
latitude and longitude, distinction between those hotspots is
difﬁcult, but using altitude information makes it possible to
Figure 2. Clustering result by DBSCAN.
Figure 3. Visualization of photograph location on 3D.
distinguish them.
Common methods for detecting hotspots such as DBSCAN
and mean shift treat the distance between two points as
one dimensions using latitude and longitude. We believe
that these methods are inappropriate for clustering with
three-dimensional metadata. In this research, we propose
approaches that considers not only the area of a hotspot,
represented by latitude and longitude, but also the height of
the hotspot, by adding the altitude.
Additionally, hotspots can be classiﬁed into three types: an
area of interest, a shooting spot, and an observation spot [16],
[17]. Areas of interest include tourist attractions (for example,
the Colosseum or the Statue of Liberty). In such areas, many
photographs have been taken inside the site or at a nearby
location. However, when people take a photograph of such an
attraction, they will take it at a place that is at some distance
from the attraction itself. Such places are also identiﬁed as
hotspots, and are deﬁned as shooting spots. Finally, observation
spots are hotspots for photographing the surroundings of
the hotspot. In this research, we classify hotspots, detected
considering the altitude in addition to latitude and longitude,
into three classes by considering multiple information sources,
such as the direction of photography, and we then visualize the
results.
III.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss some work related to our
study, including detecting hotspots and analyzing the detected
323
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

hotspots.
A. Detection of hotspots
Various methods have been proposed to detect hotspots
in a large dataset using location information. In the case
of detecting hotspots from large datasets of photographs
annotated with location metadata, two main approaches
are
used:
density-based
clustering
algorithms,
such
as
DBSCAN [12] and mean shift [13], and grid-based clustering
algorithms.
Crandall et al. presented a method to detect hotspots
using mean shift based on many photographs annotated
with photograph location [18]. Kisilevich et al. proposed
P-DBSCAN, an improved version of DBSCAN, for the
deﬁnition of a reachable point, to detect hotspots using
the density of photograph locations [19]. Ankerst et al.
proposed a clustering method OPTICS, which is a variant
of
DBSCAN
used
to
create
a
cluster
using
different
subspaces extracted from various parameters [20]. Sander et
al. proposed GDBSCAN, which extends DBSCAN to enable
correspondence to both spatial and non-spatial features [21].
Shi et al. proposed a density-based clustering method to
detect places of interest using spatial information and social
relationships between users [22]. Chen et al. proposed a
clustering method for massive sets of spatial points based on
density peaks and connect [23]. Yang et al. proposed a method
to identify human mobility hotspots using kernel density
estimation to evaluate convergent and dispersive hotspots [10].
Yang
et
al.
proposed
an
algorithm
to
detect
hotspots
of various sizes using self-tuning spectral clustering [8].
Kulkarni et al. proposed a parameter-free method for detecting
hotspots from spatiotemporal trajectories without any a priori
assumptions [9].
Another famous approach to detecting hotspots is the
grid-based clustering algorithm. In grid-based clustering, the
data space is quantized into a ﬁnite number of cells, which
are formed by the grid structure. Whether a cell is a cluster is
determined by the number of data points included in the cell.
The main advantage of grid-based clustering algorithms is a
fast processing time: most of the algorithms achieve a time
complexity of O(n), where n is the number of data points
(compared with, for example, DBSCAN, whose complexity
is O(n log n) using tree algorithm such as a k-dimensional
tree [24]) [25]. Moreover, the performance of grid-based
clustering depends only on the size of the grid, which is
usually much less than the number of data points [26].
Additionally, most grid-based clustering algorithms are easy
to parallelize because each cell is independent when the
algorithm detects whether the cell is deﬁned as a cluster.
Agrawal et al. proposed CLIQUE, to detect clusters within
subspaces of the dataset using an a priori-like technique [27].
Wang et al. presented STING, which combined grid-based
and density-based approaches [28]. Chang et al. proposed
the axis-shifted grid-clustering algorithm, which performs a
dynamic adjustment to the size of the original cells in the grid
and a reduction in the weakness of the borders of cells [29].
The studies outlined above detect hotspots using a
density-based clustering method, such as DBSCAN, or a
grid-based clustering method, both based on latitude and
longitude. However, in some cases, actual hotspots include
the concept of height and are distributed in three-dimensional
space, rather than a two-dimensional space. In this paper, we
propose two new types of approach to detecting and visualizing
hotspots using ST-DBSCAN or grid-based clustering, by
adding altitude to latitude and longitude.
B. Detecting hotspots based on photograph orientation
As photographs with a photograph orientation have become
more commonly available, photograph orientation has been
increasingly useful for detecting hotspots.
Photograph orientation is an important information source,
because it constitutes information about the user’s interests.
The photographer shoots a subject of his or her own interest
from some location. The direction of the subject is combined
with the photograph location. Therefore, hotspots are likely to
exist in the directions taken by users.
Lacerda et al. proposed a method for detecting hotspots
using photograph orientations [30]. This method calculates
intersections between the lines of the orientations of many
photographs. The intersections are then clustered using
DBSCAN. In addition, Thomee et al. proposed a method
for considering the inaccuracies affecting GPS location
measurements [31]. Hirota et al. proposed a method for
determining the areas of hotspots using the orientation and
angle of view of photographs [32]. This method determines
the area from the overlaps of pseudo-triangles calculated by
photograph orientation, location, and some other metadata.
The above methods focus on photograph orientation
to detect areas where the users’ interest is concentrated.
Therefore, in this paper, our approach classiﬁes the types of
detected hotspots based on the photograph orientation and the
users’ interest.
C. Analysis of detected hotspots
Some researchers have studied approaches to analyze
hotspots obtained from large photograph datasets annotated
with various metadata, such as location.
The method to detect hotspots is used to ﬁnd or
detect geographical characteristics. Spyrou et al. proposed a
method to understand the underlying semantics of detected
hotspots using user-generated tags [33]. Omori et al. evaluated
georeferenced photographs annotated with user-generated tags
related to coastlines, to show the actual coastline [34].
Hu et al. proposed a method to understand urban areas
from detected hotspots using user-generated tags, to choose
preferable photographs based on the image similarity between
photographs of the hotspot [35]. Chen et al. proposed a
framework to detect boundaries of hotspots from geotagged
data, and used them to construct spatiotemporal proﬁles of
areas [36]. Zhu et al. proposed a method for analysis of
emotions of detected hotspots [37].
There are also some methods to detect the relationship
between a hotspot and another hotspot, such as the relationship
between photograph subjects and shooting spots. Shirai et al.
proposed a method to detect a hotspot using DBSCAN and to
calculate the relation between hotspots [38], [16]. To discover a
wide area of interest, this approach infers the relation between
hotspots based on the photograph location and orientation.
Hirota et al. proposed a method to detect and visualize various
relationships between hotspots using photograph orientation
and social tagging [17]. The above researchers have extracted
various relationships from detected hotspots.
The areas of interest detected by our proposed method
represent areas in which many people took photographs. We
324
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

apply these studies to detected hotspots and expect to be able
to analyze the results in more detail.
IV.
PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we describe our two types of proposed
method for detecting hotspots considering the altitude, in
addition to the latitude and longitude, of photographs. We also
describe our proposed method for classifying the hotspots into
three types: area of interest, shooting spot, and observation
spot, using photograph location and orientation.
A. Extracting hotspots with altitude using ST-DBSCAN
Here, we explain why we adopt ST-DBSCAN to detect
hotspots with altitude, in addition to latitude and longitude.
In most of the previous research, DBSCAN has been used
for detecting hotspots. Until now, latitude and longitude have
been used as features for calculating the distance between two
points. Because we now need to consider altitude to detect
hotspots, we infer that neither DBSCAN nor mean shift is
an appropriate method for this purpose. This is because Eps,
which is the parameter of those methods for evaluating the
distance between two points, is a one-dimensional threshold.
As previously described, there are hotspots with different
altitudes but almost equal latitude and longitude. Therefore,
although those methods are appropriate for using latitude and
longitude as one feature for evaluating the distance between
two points, it is not appropriate to add altitude to the feature.
As a result, altitude should be regarded as a different feature
from latitude and longitude, and we adopt ST-DBSCAN to
achieve this.
Moreover, when applying DBSCAN, there is an approach
to evaluate distances between photographs using the three
features
of
latitude,
longitude,
and
altitude
with
one
distance function, and detect the cluster with one Eps
threshold. However, this is an inappropriate approach for our
purposes. The values of latitude and longitude have similar
characteristics, but altitude is different from them. Therefore,
in this paper, rather than considering latitude, longitude, and
altitude as a single feature, we detect hotspots using latitude
and longitude as one feature and altitude as the other feature.
ST-DBSCAN is one of the improved methods of DBSCAN
that considers time in addition to the spatial feature of latitude
and longitude. ST-DBSCAN has three parameters—Eps1,
Eps2, and MinP—where Eps1 is a threshold of distance
between the spatial features of two photographs, Eps2 is
a threshold of distance between other features, such as the
difference between the times when two photographs were
taken, and MinP is a threshold of the number of photographs
included in the cluster.
Here, we describe the procedure of ST-DBSCAN.
•
The method extracts the core data points such that the
number of neighborhood data points within Eps1 and
Eps2 is greater than MinP.
•
The method evaluates the distance between the core
data points and others.
•
If the distance is less than Eps1 and Eps2, these data
points are connected. The method deﬁnes connected
data as a cluster.
•
The data points for which the number of neighborhood
data points (within Eps1 and Eps2) is less than
MinP are deﬁned as noise data and not included in
any cluster.
Figure 4 shows an overview of detecting hotspots using
ST-DBSCAN. In this ﬁgure, the red points are regarded as
core data and detected as a cluster, whereas the blue points
are regarded as noise data
In this research, we apply ST-DBSCAN, with Eps1 as
latitude and longitude and Eps2 as altitude.
In
the
implementation
of
ST-DBSCAN,
we
use
a
k-dimensional tree [24] to search neighborhood data. Here,
because ST-DBSCAN needs two types of distance, this method
constructs two k-dimensional trees: one for latitude and
longitude and another for altitude.
B. Detecting hotspots with altitude using grid-based clustering
Our second method for detecting hotspots uses the
grid-based
clustering
approach.
Figure
5
shows
the
procedure of grid-based clustering. This method constructs
a three-dimensional grid space with latitude, longitude, and
altitude. We map photographs to the grid and count the
number of photographs. We extract voxels that contain many
photographs and connect the extracted adjacent voxels. The
connected voxels are regarded as hotspots.
First, we map the photographs that have a photograph
location to the grid. Using the assigned grid coordinate, we
count the number of photographs. Photograph pi is mapped to
coordinates (xi, yi, zi), as shown below.
zi = Malt − (palt
i
− Altmin) ∗ Malt
Altmax − Altmin
(1)
yi = Mlat − (plat
i
− Latmin) ∗ Mlat
Latmax − Latmin
(2)
xi = Mlng − (plng
i
− Lngmin) ∗ Mlng
Lngmax − Lngmin
(3)
Here, Altmax, Latmax, and Lngmax denote the maximum
values of altitude, latitude, and longitude, respectively; Altmin,
Latmin, and Lngmin denote the corresponding minimum
values. Malt, Mlat, and Mlng are the height, length, and width
of the grid. (This is decided using a parameter m to adjust
the number of cells required in this procedure. In this paper,
we set these parameters to be the same as the ST-DBSCAN
parameters Eps1 and Eps2.) Consequently, each cell in the
obtained grid includes a photograph taken in the range.
Using the obtained grid, we extract the cells for which the
number of photographs included in the cell is greater than the
threshold MinP.
At this stage, having determined whether each individual
cell is a hotspot, we connect any extracted hotspots that are
in adjacent cells. We calculate the distance D(cp, cq) between
cells cp and cq as the Chebyshev distance, as follows.
D(cp, cq) = maxi(∥cpi − cqi∥)
(4)
where cpi and cqi represent the feature value of cp and cq,
respectively, in the i-th dimension. We connect the two cells
if D(cp, cq) is 1, which means that those cells are adjacent;
otherwise the cells are not adjacent.
Finally, each group of joined cells is deﬁned as a hotspot.
C. Classiﬁcation of hotspot
In this paper, a hotspot is classiﬁed as an area of interest,
a shooting spot, or an observation spot (as shown in Figure 6)
using the orientation annotations of the photographs included
325
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 4. An overview of clustering by ST-DBSCAN.
Figure 5. An overview of grid-based clustering.
Figure 6. Classiﬁcation of hotspots.
in the detected hotspots. However, the number of photographs
with a known photograph orientation (in addition to latitude
and longitude) is minuscule compared with the number of
photographs with only latitude and longitude. As a result,
the classiﬁcation of hotspots that have few photographs may
be difﬁcult. Therefore, we classify hotspots into four groups:
areas of interest, shooting spots, observation spots, and others.
In this research, we classify hotspots that have less than 10
photographs with a known orientation as “other”, and we do
not perform the following processes on them.
Figure 7. Inward photograph and outward photograph.
First, we decide whether each hotspot is a shooting spot.
In this case, many photographs are taken with a speciﬁc
orientation. Therefore, we calculate the bias of the photograph
orientation based on its frequency distribution. We divide the
value of the photograph orientation by 10 degrees and count
the number of photographs in each of the 36 classes. We
consider a hotspot to be focused on a speciﬁc orientation if
the largest class includes at least 15% of the photographs
belonging to the hotspot.
In the next step, we classify each remaining hotspot as
either an area of interest or an observation spot according
326
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to the photograph orientation. Moreover, this classiﬁcation is
based on the ratio of inward to outward photographs in the
hotspot. Figure 7 shows examples of inward and outward
photographs. In this research, if the photograph orientation and
the orientation to the center of gravity of the hotspot are close,
we regard the photograph as an inward photograph; otherwise,
we classify it as an outward photograph.
We set the orientation (with the true north as 0◦) of the
photograph to θi. If the coordinates (latitude and longitude)of
the center of gravity of the hotspot are (xh, yh) and the
coordinates of the shooting position are (xi, yi), θd is the
orientation from the shooting position to the center. We
calculate the orientation θd in which (xh, yh) exists using the
following equation:
θd = tan−1
cos yi × sin(xh − xi)
cos y1 × sin yh − sin yi × cos yh × cos(xh − xi)
(5)
Next, we classify each photograph in a hotspot as an inward
or outward photograph based on the difference between θd and
θi, as follows:
inward
|θi − θd| < θ
outward
otherwise
(6)
In this study, we set the threshold for classifying inward
and outward photographs as θ
= 50. If the number of
photographs classiﬁed as inward photographs is larger than the
number of outward photographs, the hotspot is classiﬁed as an
area of interest; otherwise, it is classiﬁed as an observation
spot.
V.
EXPERIMENT
This
section
presents
a
description
of
experiments
conducted using our proposed method. We present and discuss
several examples of detecting hotspots by density-based and
grid-based clustering.
A. Dataset
Here, we describe the dataset for the experiment of
detecting hotspots. Photographs for the experiments were
obtained from Flickr, and included metadata for latitude,
longitude, altitude, and orientation. In this paper, we used
the exchangeable image ﬁle format (Exif) metadata for
latitude (GPSLatitude), longitude (GPSLongitude), altitude
(GPSAltitude), and orientation (GPSImgDirection).
The dataset included photographs taken in
an area
of Westminster in London (latitude: 51.5056 – 51.4979;
longitude: −0.1178 – −0.1299). The size of this area is about
1 × 1 km. We obtained photographs taken between January
1, 2011 and May 10, 2016.
To deal with altitude errors, we set a threshold for altitude
and removed photographs having an altitude higher or lower
than the threshold. In this experiment, we set this parameter
based on the height of buildings around the area to be analyzed.
In addition, we removed photographs with an altitude of 0 m
or less.
Furthermore, we excluded photographs in which the
latitude, longitude, and altitude all overlap in the dataset.
This might occur as a result of an incorrect GPS position
or device conﬁguration. Such points for which there is much
inappropriate metadata is excessively evaluated when detecting
Figure 8. The clustering result in three-dimensional (ST-DBSCAN).
Figure 9. The clustering result in three-dimensional (grid-based clustering).
a hotspot. As a result, the number of photographs used in this
experiment was 13,911.
B. Visualization of hotspots
Figure 8 shows the clustering results by ST-DBSCAN,
based on the latitude, longitude, and altitude of photographs.
The parameters used in ST-DBSCAN and grid-based clustering
were Eps1 = 0.0001, Eps2 = 5, and MinP
= 30,
respectively. Figure 9 shows the clustering results by our
proposed grid-based method. The parameters of this method is
the same as for ST-DBSCAN. The number of clusters detected
by ST-DBSCAN (Figure 8) was 35, and the number detected
by grid-based clustering (Figure 9) was 6. In Figures 8 and
9, photograph locations classiﬁed as noise are not displayed.
In these ﬁgures, each color represents a cluster (the colors are
only used to distinguish visually between the clusters).
Figure 8 shows that some clusters with different altitudes
were detected in areas with almost the same latitude and
longitude. In particular, several clusters were detected near an
altitude of 130 m, latitude of 51.504, and longitude of −0.120.
This is because the highest point of the London Eye is 135 m.
Therefore, many people take photographs around there, and
the area was detected as a hotspot.
Compared with ST-DBSCAN (Figure 8), the detected
clusters were more widespread using grid-based clustering
(Figure 9). However, Figures 8 and 9 show that the detected
hotspots cover almost the same areas. Instead of evaluating the
distance between two photographs by latitude and longitude
in DBSCAN, the grid-based clustering detects hotspots by
327
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 10. The clustering result in two-dimensional (ST-DBSCAN).
Figure 11. Classiﬁcation result of hotspot.
evaluating the relationship between adjacent cells. Therefore,
the photograph locations that were classiﬁed as multiple
clusters by ST-DBSCAN were classiﬁed as one cluster by
our proposed grid-based clustering method. At this stage, it
is not possible to determine which method is better, because
quantitative evaluation has not been performed for either
method. Therefore, as future work, it is necessary to examine
which method can detect hotspots more accurately.
Figure 10 shows a two-dimensional representation of the
clustering result by ST-DBSCAN (i.e., the ﬁgure shows the
clusters in Figure 8 mapped in two dimensions, without
altitude). Some clusters are displayed overlapping in multiple
areas in this ﬁgure. Therefore, in such areas, points with
different altitudes should be identiﬁed as belonging to
distinct hotspots. Naturally, the latitude and longitude of the
photographs taken in such areas are almost equal. Unless
we detect hotspots by considering the altitude, in addition to
latitude and longitude, it is difﬁcult to distinguish between,
and correctly detect, these clusters.
Although it may be possible to distinguish these hotspots
by clustering with only latitude and longitude in some cases,
substantial time and effort would be required to tune the
Eps and MinP parameters in DBSCAN. In addition, when
photographs annotated with latitude and longitude are used,
these metadata often include errors. Therefore, photographs
that should belong to different hotspots may erroneously be
assigned to the same hotspot. Therefore, in Figures 8 and 10,
we show that it is possible to distinguish between hotspots in
areas with similar latitude and longitude by considering the
Figure 12. Clustering result by DBSCAN using latitude, longitude and
altitude.
Figure 13. Histogram of Latitude of photographs.
altitude, even in such a state.
C. Combination of features
Next, we discuss the advantages of our proposed methods,
compared with simply applying DBSCAN and using latitude,
longitude, and altitude as one feature. We applied DBSCAN
to the London dataset using latitude, longitude, and altitude;
Figure 12 shows the clustering results. The parameters of
DBSCAN were the same as ST-DBSCAN, except for the
threshold Eps2 of altitude, and use Euclidean distance to
calculate the distance between each pair of data points. The
number of detected clusters was 15. The clusters in Figure 12
tend to have a ﬂat shape, because the scale of the features
varied greatly.
We show the histograms of latitude, longitude, and altitude
in Figures 13, 14, and 15. In this dataset, the high density area
is around latitude 51.50001 and longitude −0.120, shown in
Figures 13 and 14. The distributions of latitude and longitude
depend on areas of high density included in the dataset.
However, the distribution and the scale of altitude are very
different: altitude varies between about 0 and 140, as shown in
Figure 15. This distribution depends on the area being analyzed
and the height of the landmarks in that area. In most cases,
the distribution of altitude is different from that of latitude and
longitude.
As a result, when measuring the distance between data
points, altitude becomes a more dominant feature than
latitude and longitude. In addition, because the distribution
of these features is very different, it is difﬁcult to handle
them consistently even if the feature values are normalized.
328
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 14. Histogram of Longitude of photographs.
Figure 15. Histogram of Altitude of photographs.
Therefore, when calculating the distance between each pair of
data points in our methods for detecting hotspots, we believe
that latitude and longitude should be treated together, and
altitude treated separately.
D. Execution time
In this section, we compare the execution time for detecting
hotspots by each method. We measured the time of DBSCAN
and our proposed ST-DBSCAN and grid-based clustering.
The experiment used the dataset of London photographs, as
described in Section V-A. We used ﬁve datasets with varying
numbers of photographs, from 2,000 to 10,000. The parameters
of these methods were the same as used in Section V-B.
Figure 16 shows the execution times of the three methods:
these are the median times for performing each method ten
times. In Figure 16, the grid-based clustering is the fastest
of the three methods. This reason is that this method has a
low computational complexity O(n) (while the complexity of
DBSCAN and ST-DBSCAN is O(n log n). Therefore, as the
number of data points increases, the execution time hardly
increases, compared with the other methods.
ST-DBSCAN has a smaller execution time than DBSCAN,
even though the two methods use almost the same algorithm.
ST-DBSCAN uses the latitude and longitude threshold Eps1
and altitude threshold Eps2. In contrast, DBSCAN uses
only the latitude and longitude threshold Eps1. Therefore,
compared with DBSCAN, because ST-DBSCAN needs to
satisfy two conditions when searching for neighborhoods,
fewer photographs are classiﬁed as belonging to a cluster. As a
result, the execution time of ST-DBSCAN is less, because the
number of times the algorithm determines connectivity with
Figure 16. Execution time of each method.
surrounding data is reduced.
From Figure 16, the grid-based clustering method is much
faster than ST-DBSCAN. However, because the grid-based
method needs to map photographs to cells when detecting
hotspots, the detected hotspots are rougher than those of
ST-DBSCAN as shown in Figure 9. Therefore, it is desirable
to select these approaches properly, considering this result.
VI.
VISUALIZATION OF CLASSIFIED HOTSPOTS
In this section, we show the result of classifying hotspots
into four types. Figure 11 shows the result of the classiﬁcation
of hotspots which is detected by ST-DBSCAN. In this ﬁgure, a
green point shows a photograph location in a hotspot classiﬁed
as an observation spot, a red point is a shooting spot, and
an orange point is an area of interest. In Figure 11, many
observation spots were detected: for example, the highest
location of the London Eye is an observation spot. It seems
that people are shooting the view from the top of the Ferris
wheel. In addition, there are two clusters of orange points:
under the London Eye and around Big Ben. These hotspots
should probably be classiﬁed as shooting spots because these
contents of photographs include the landmarks that is these
photographs are shot in the hotspots. The area around latitude
51.502 and longitude −0.121 is detected as a shooting spot
because it includes many photographs of Big Ben. It seems that
other areas are also classiﬁed as shooting spots because they
contain many photographs of landmarks, such as the London
Eye and Big Ben.
In the above description, we explained the classiﬁcation
results regarding hotspots. At this stage, quantitative analysis
of the classiﬁcation has not been performed. In the results,
some hotspots have been misclassiﬁed. Therefore, in a future
study, there is a need to improve the method for, and evaluation
of, the classiﬁcation of hotspots.
VII.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed two types of method for
detecting hotspots using the geographical coordinates of
photographs (latitude, longitude and altitude). The ﬁrst of our
proposed methods uses ST-DBSCAN, which is a density-based
clustering method. The other is a grid-based clustering method.
We visualized the clustering results using those methods based
on the metadata of photographs taken in London. We discussed
the detection of separate hotspots that may be detected as a
single cluster when considering only latitude and longitude.
We compared these proposed methods with DBSCAN, which
uses latitude, longitude, and altitude as a single feature of a
329
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

photograph. As a result, we showed that we can detect hotspots
that overlap when we consider only latitude and longitude.
In addition, we compared the execution time for detecting
hotspots by these methods. Finally, we visualized the clustering
results and classiﬁed hotspots as areas of interest, shooting
spots, and observation spots.
As future work, we aim to compare our approach with
clustering methods other than ST-DBSCAN and grid-based
clustering. In this paper, these methods have been applied
using latitude, longitude, and altitude as features, but it
has not yet been revealed to be superior quantitatively to
other clustering methods, such as DBSCAN and mean shift.
Moreover, our method of grid-based clustering is still naive; we
will improve this method to enable it to detect hotspots faster.
For example, we can consider the characteristics of features
to speed up the decision of whether a cell is a hotspot. We
performed classiﬁcation of hotspots but have not quantitatively
evaluated the result yet. The results obtained suggest that
further improvements in our proposed classiﬁcation method
are necessary.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Numbers 16K00157, 16K16158 and 19K20418, and Tokyo
Metropolitan University Grant-in-Aid for Research on Priority
Areas Research on social big data.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Hirota, M. Endo, and I. Hiroshi, “A proposal for discovering
hotspots using 3d coordinates from geo-tagged photographs,” in
Proceedings of The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced
Geographic Information ystems, Applications, and Services, ser.
GEOProcessing 2019, Feb 2019, pp. 59–62, ISBN:978-1-61208-687-3,
URL:http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
geoprocessing 2019 4 10 30046.
[2]
“Flickr,” URL: https://www.ﬂickr.com [accessed: 2019-07-15].
[3]
“Instagram,” URL: https://www.instagram.com/ [accessed: 2019-07-15].
[4]
“Google
photos,”
URL:
https://photos.google.com/
[accessed:
2019-07-15].
[5]
Z. Xia, H. Li, Y. Chen, and W. Liao, “Identify and delimitate urban
hotspot areas using a network-based spatiotemporal ﬁeld clustering
method,” ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 8, no. 8,
2019.
[6]
Y. Yuan and M. Medel, “Characterizing international travel behavior
from geotagged photos: A case study of ﬂickr,” PLOS ONE, vol. 11,
no. 5, 05 2016, pp. 1–18.
[7]
C.-L. Kuo, T.-C. Chan, I.-C. Fan, and A. Zipf, “Efﬁcient method for
poi/roi discovery using ﬂickr geotagged photos,” ISPRS International
Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 7, no. 3, 2018.
[8]
Y. Yang, Z. Gong, and L. H. U, “Identifying points of interest
by self-tuning clustering,” in Proceedings of the 34th International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, ser. SIGIR ’11.
ACM, 2011, pp. 883–892.
[9]
V. Kulkarni, A. Moro, B. Chapuis, and B. Garbinato, “Extracting
hotspots without a-priori by enabling signal processing over geospatial
data,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, ser.
SIGSPATIAL ’17.
ACM, 2017, pp. 79:1–79:4.
[10]
X. Yang, Z. Zhao, and S. Lu, “Exploring spatial-temporal patterns of
urban human mobility hotspots,” Sustainability, vol. 8, no. 7, 2016.
[11]
D. Laptev, A. Tikhonov, P. Serdyukov, and G. Gusev, “Parameter-free
discovery and recommendation of areas-of-interest,” in Proceedings of
the 22Nd ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in
Geographic Information Systems, ser. SIGSPATIAL ’14.
ACM, 2014,
pp. 113–122.
[12]
M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based
algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,”
in Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’06, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[13]
D. Comaniciu and P. Meer, “Mean shift: a robust approach toward
feature space analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, vol. 24, no. 5, 2002, pp. 603–619.
[14]
D. Birant and A. Kut, “St-dbscan: An algorithm for clustering
spatial-temporal data,” Data & Knowledge Engineering, vol. 60, no. 1,
2007, pp. 208–221, intelligent Data Mining.
[15]
“Openstreetmap,”
URL:
https://www.openstreetmap.org/
[accessed:
2019-07-15].
[16]
M. Shirai, M. Hirota, H. Ishikawa, and S. Yokoyama, “A method of area
of interest and shooting spot detection using geo-tagged photographs,”
in Proceedings of The First ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop
on Computational Models of Place, ser. COMP ’13.
ACM, 2013, pp.
34:34–34:41.
[17]
M. Hirota, M. Shirai, H. Ishikawa, and S. Yokoyama, “Detecting
relations of hotspots using geo-tagged photographs in social media
sites,” in Proceedings of Workshop on Managing and Mining Enriched
Geo-Spatial Data, ser. GeoRich ’14.
ACM, 2014, pp. 7:1–7:6.
[18]
D. J. Crandall, L. Backstrom, D. Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg,
“Mapping the world’s photos,” in Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’09.
ACM, 2009, pp.
761–770.
[19]
S. Kisilevich, F. Mansmann, and D. Keim, “P-dbscan: A density based
clustering algorithm for exploration and analysis of attractive areas
using collections of geo-tagged photos,” in Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference and Exhibition on Computing for Geospatial
Research & Application, ser. COM.Geo ’10.
ACM, 2010, pp.
38:1–38:4.
[20]
M. Ankerst, M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, and J. Sander, “Optics:
Ordering points to identify the clustering structure,” in Proceedings of
the 1999 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, ser. SIGMOD ’99.
ACM, 1999, pp. 49–60.
[21]
J. Sander, M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, and X. Xu, “Density-based clustering
in spatial databases: The algorithm gdbscan and its applications,” Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 2, no. 2, 1998, pp. 169–194.
[22]
J. Shi, N. Mamoulis, D. Wu, and D. W. Cheung, “Density-based
place clustering in geo-social networks,” in Proceedings of the 2014
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, ser.
SIGMOD ’14.
ACM, 2014, pp. 99–110.
[23]
Y. Chen, Z. Huang, T. Pei, and Y. Liu, “Hispatialcluster: A novel
high-performance software tool for clustering massive spatial points,”
Transactions in GIS, vol. 22, no. 5, 2018, pp. 1275–1298.
[24]
J. L. Bentley, “Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative
searching,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 18, no. 9, Sep. 1975, pp.
509–517.
[25]
A. K. Mann and N. Kaur, “Survey paper on clustering techniques,”
International Journal of Science, Engineering and Technology Research,
vol. 2, no. 4, 2013, pp. 803–806.
[26]
M. Parikh and T. Varma, “Survey on different grid based clustering
algorithms,” International Journal of Advance Research in Computer
Science and Management Studies, vol. 2, no. 2, 2014.
[27]
R. Agrawal, J. Gehrke, D. Gunopulos, and P. Raghavan, “Automatic
subspace
clustering
of
high
dimensional
data
for
data
mining
applications,” in Proceedings of the 1998 ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, ser. SIGMOD ’98.
ACM, 1998,
pp. 94–105.
[28]
W. Wang, J. Yang, and R. R. Muntz, “Sting: A statistical information
grid approach to spatial data mining,” in Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, ser. VLDB ’97.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1997, pp. 186–195.
[29]
C.-I. Chang, N. P. Lin, and N.-Y. Jan, “An axis-shifted grid-clustering
algorithm,” Tamkang Journal of Science and Engineering, vol. 12, no. 2,
2009, pp. 183–192.
[30]
Y. A. Lacerda, R. G. F. Feitosa, G. A. R. M. Esmeraldo, C. d. S.
Baptista, and L. B. Marinho, “Compass clustering: A new clustering
method for detection of points of interest using personal collections of
georeferenced and oriented photographs,” in Proceedings of the 18th
330
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Brazilian Symposium on Multimedia and the Web, ser. WebMedia ’12.
ACM, 2012, pp. 281–288.
[31]
B. Thomee, “Localization of points of interest from georeferenced and
oriented photographs,” in Proceedings of the 2Nd ACM International
Workshop on Geotagging and Its Applications in Multimedia, ser.
GeoMM ’13.
ACM, 2013, pp. 19–24.
[32]
M. Hirota, M. Endo, K. Daiju, and I. Hiroshi, “Discovering hotspots
using photographic orientation and angle of view from social media
site,” International Journal of Informatics Society, vol. 10, no. 3, 2019,
pp. 109–117.
[33]
E. Spyrou, M. Korakakis, V. Charalampidis, A. Psallas, and P. Mylonas,
“A geo-clustering approach for the detection of areas-of-interest and
their underlying semantics,” Algorithms, vol. 10, no. 1, 2017, p. 35.
[34]
M. Omori, M. Hirota, H. Ishikawa, and S. Yokoyama, “Can geo-tags on
ﬂickr draw coastlines?” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSPATIAL
International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, ser. SIGSPATIAL ’14.
ACM, 2014, pp. 425–428.
[35]
Y. Hu, S. Gao, K. Janowicz, B. Yu, W. Li, and S. Prasad, “Extracting
and understanding urban areas of interest using geotagged photos,”
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, vol. 54, 2015, pp.
240–254.
[36]
M. Chen, D. Arribas-Bel, and A. Singleton, “Understanding the
dynamics of urban areas of interest through volunteered geographic
information,” Journal of Geographical Systems, vol. 21, no. 1, Mar
2019, pp. 89–109.
[37]
Y. Zhu and S. Newsam, “Spatio-temporal sentiment hotspot detection
using geotagged photos,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGSPATIAL
International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, ser. SIGSPACIAL ’16.
ACM, 2016, pp. 76:1–76:4.
[38]
M. Shirai, M. Hirota, S. Yokoyama, N. Fukuta, and H. Ishikawa,
“Discovering multiple hotspots using geo-tagged photographs,” in
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Advances in
Geographic Information Systems, ser. SIGSPATIAL ’12.
ACM, 2012,
pp. 490–493.
331
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

