261
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Holistic Approach to Energy Efficiency Systems through Consumption 
Management and Big Data Analytics  
Ignacio González Alonso 
University of Oviedo 
Oviedo, Spain 
gonzalezaloignacio@uniovi.es 
María Rodríguez Fernández 
University of Oviedo 
Oviedo, Spain 
rodriguezfmaria@uniovi.es 
 
Juan Jacobo Peralta 
Andalusian Institute of Technology 
Málaga, Spain 
jjperalta@iat.es 
Adolfo Cortés García 
Ingenia S.A. 
Málaga, Spain 
adolfo@ingenia.es 
 
 
Abstract— Improving the energy efficiency is one of the most 
effective ways to increase supply security and reduce Green 
House Gasses emissions. Furthermore, the increased cost of 
energy has encouraged the development of new technologies 
that allow the efficient use of them, such as monitoring the 
final users energy demand; hence, it is possible to have a more 
efficient consumption behavior without lowering the threshold 
of comfort that consumers are used to. The Smart Home 
Energy project makes a profitable use of these technologies by 
allowing the final user to manage, control, plan and, in most 
cases, reduce the electric bill. To facilitate the bidirectional 
interaction between the customer and the devices integrated in 
the smart home communication network it is necessary to 
follow a holistic approach. This proposal aims to go a step 
further by using the massive consumption datasets to predict 
future 
energy 
behaviors, 
offering 
personalized 
recommendations and developing a customized “consumer 
energy knowledge” for every home, through heavily processed 
Machine Learning algorithms. 
Keywords— Digital Home; Energy Efficiency; Smart 
Metering; Cloud; Big Data Analytics 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
From a technical point of view, a home is an extremely 
complex system with many uncertain variables, which can be 
influenced by environmental conditions and human behavior. 
In recent years, the appliances that are being incorporated 
to the households are reaching higher and higher levels of 
energy efficiency. However, these contributions are still not 
enough in the current energy scenario, where external energy 
dependence and indefinite rising prices question the 
profitability of these devices compared to their useful life-
spam and their necessary initial investment. 
In addition, these facts cause that energy saving measures 
and common recommendations (energy-efficient light bulbs, 
electrical appliances A++, awareness campaigns, etc.) are 
increasingly ineffective in achieving a significant reduction 
of the energy costs, stating the need of more advanced 
strategies. 
Therefore, the inclusion of management and control 
systems can represent an adequate line of action to increase 
the energy efficiency at household level. It permits the 
quantification of the home energy demand, recording the 
consumption values and characterizing personalized profiles 
of energy patterns. Based on this information, a set of 
recommendations can be generated, which would modify the 
consumer behavior and ultimately result in reducing the 
electric bill. Other complementary visual tools can help also 
to analyze the consumption and consequently to reduce it. 
Due to the amount of data that these systems has to 
handle is large and expected to keep growing in the future, 
the architecture work presented at ICSEA 2012 [1] has been 
revised and extended with the description of an operational 
system, where the addition of new Big Data based 
components is the key, in order to give the necessary support 
to a massive set of Digital Homes.  
The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, the State 
of the Art is described. The proposed solution is explained in 
Section III. A brief extension of the work focusing on the 
exploitation of the data obtained by the system is done in 
Section IV. In the last section, conclusions are drawn and 
future work is indicated.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
The integration of various automation and control 
technologies in the domestic environment is called “Digital 
Home” [2]. This term is not only applied on the domestic 
tasks performed by smart appliances, but also aims to cover 
specific customer needs of personal assistance, education 
and/or entertainment as well as security and surveillance.  
One of the main objectives of a Digital Home is to design 
an efficient Energy Management System (EMS). Therefore, 
an appropriate starting point is to study the features and 
functionality of Building Management Systems (BMS)  [3] 
such as tasks  related to the Heating, Ventilation, and Air 

262
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Conditioning control, a correct monitoring of lighting, 
allowing a control of consumption and its associated costs. 
In terms of architecture, BMS has a similar structure and 
characteristics to those described on the mentioned home 
environment: hardware components as sensors, computer 
processing power, user interfaces (smartphones, PCs, tablets, 
etc.) as well as means of transmission. However, neither 
control of electrical appliances and service robots, nor the 
integration of smart metering devices, are covered by BMS. 
In the last decades, the integration of Distributed Energy 
Generation Units (DEG) at the household level constitutes 
the latest addition to the in-home EMS [4]. There are various 
types of renewable technologies available to install at homes, 
but solar and wind power energy sources are the most 
popular ones. Due to unpredictable weather fluctuations, it is 
challenging to incorporate this type of energy sources to the 
home systems and elaborate accurate energy productions, 
hence reliable prediction models are a main milestone to 
make these installations profitable. Weather data needed to 
make the consumption predictions are highly variable in a 
worldwide approach, because of its different sources 
(meteorological services and institutions), formats, and 
protocols. Short time meteorological predictions also change 
frequently, where an hourly interval is usual to get new 
predictions for the next 72 hours, meaning that done 
predictions also could be changing hourly. 
After integrating these DEG Units, the more integrated 
and synchronized the home energy systems are, the more 
energy savings are achieved due to self-production 
consumed energy. Additionally, these systems are also 
acceptable to help energy operators to get easily equilibrium 
between the energy demand and supply curve. Finally, due to 
the decentralization of the energy system, the losses inherent 
to its medium and long distance transportation will be 
significantly reduced. 
From a physical standpoint, the different elements that 
compose the EMS, e.g., appliances, domotic control 
elements or renewable energies, may interact with each 
other, exchange heat and an influence in the in-doors 
temperature and humidity, changing comfort conditions. For 
that reason, the accurate quantification and statistical 
analysis of all variables involved in the heat exchange 
together with its possible interactions have to be made in 
order to propose real energy-efficient alternatives within the 
comfort conditions predefined by the user.  
The domain of smart homes develops fast but still many 
restrictions have to be faced: the high cost of certain systems, 
storage and processing limitations, etc.  Nevertheless, the 
most important limitation to solve is the lack of true 
interoperability between systems of different manufacturers, 
which makes them to work independently. That could result 
at the end in a duplication of the performed tasks.  So, it is 
essential to communicate those devices with each other in a 
complementary way, i.e., sharing the services to study what 
is happening around them and take decisions accordingly. 
  The use of an open, extensible and modular protocol 
would resolve that requirement. An open platform to be 
considered is UniversAAL [5], supported by the European 
Commission, which has taken promising steps by aiming to 
design, develop, evaluate, standardize, and maintain a 
common service platform for Ambient Assisted Living.  
Covering a wider field, the standard DHCompliant 
(DHC) [6]  communication protocol at the application level 
of TCP/IP stack offers a cost-effective solution regarding 
other 
protocols, 
such 
as 
technological 
and 
brand 
independence, savings in solution investment and control 
and simultaneous management of service robots and smart 
appliances.  
Regarding the storage and processing of data, and in 
contrast to other researches [7][8], all business logic will be 
in the Cloud. Although it is usual to allow remote control, 
the exploitation of the data is performed locally [9]. 
Commercial solutions, which are typically linked to a 
specific product of smart metering, which allow local 
monitoring of a home, do not allow relating information of 
several houses to extract information collaboratively. 
An energy consumption metering infrastructure generates 
large amount of data per home and the quantity increases 
proportionally with the number of houses sending data 
simultaneously. It should also be taken into account the large 
number of users requesting information. In an acceptable 
time response, the system must be able to acquire, store and 
process large amount of data, and scale horizontally. In the 
gap between the very expensive solutions of specific 
hardware supercomputers and enterprise servers,  Big Data 
techniques are the key for achieving that goal [10].   
Moreover, it provides more capabilities to work with this 
large amount of data. It should be mention the integration 
with Machine Learning algorithms, generation of statistics, 
capacity of mixing varied data such as internal data 
(measurements) and external data (climatology, open data, 
etc.). Although there are precedents of using machine 
learning techniques to improve energy efficiency [11], to the 
best of our knowledge, they are not been applied in a 
collaborative way, i.e., using the data collected from all 
houses that are part of a larger network, known as Smart 
Grid. 
III. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
The  presented solution is framed within the Smart Home 
Energy (SHE) project [12]. The architecture of the system 
was designed following a necessary holistic approach that 
takes into account all the elements involved in a smart 
domestic environment, such as electrical  appliances, 
lighting, people or external conditions, in order to model and 
analyze all contributions and interactions.  
As it is graphically shown in Figure 1, the main 
components of the architecture, which will be explained in 
the following subsections, can be grouped according their 
physical situation: 

263
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1: Smart Home Energy architecture schema 
 
 
 
 
The user home environment, where all the 
appliances and service robots are able to interoperate 
among them by means of the DHC communication 
protocol.  
Specifically, Smart Metering devices and sensors are 
responsible of acquiring the energy-related home 
information such as the power consumption, the 
luminosity or the temperature. Then, the software 
Smart Home Energy Adapter (SHE Adapter) obtains 
the energy data from the mentioned devices and 
sends it to the cloud in a predefined rate. 
 
The cloud [13] infrastructure is based on SuperDoop 
technology, developed by Ingenia [14]. It stores 
large amount of data coming from each home. The 
recommender system works on the data produced 
from the monitored homes in order to generate 
predictions and recommendations through Machine 
Learning methods. Finally, the user can access by 
Internet to the EMS interface, to manage and control 
the operations. For instance, the appliances can be 
remotely turned on and off 
 
 
 
 
These parts – the user home and the cloud environments 
– are going to be described in detail in the next subsections. 
A. User Home Environment 
A Smart Meter is an intelligent measuring device capable 
of measuring, in real time, the power consumption of the 
appliances connected to them [16]. In addition, the type of 
meters used in the project allows to turn them on and off 
remotely.  
 
 
Figure 2: Smart meters (a) EcoManager (Current Cost) and  (b) 
Plugwise  
 

264
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
For instance, the plug-based EcoManager by Current 
Cost [17] and Plugwise [18][19] options shown in Figure 2 
(a) and (b) are already integrated in SHE, although the 
project aims to be independent of the hardware used for 
obtaining the measures. 
Other useful information to define the characteristics of 
the environment (humidity, number of sunlight hours, rain, 
wind, etc.) to improve energy efficiency, is collected from 
the home through a sensor network of different types, such 
as the ones detailed in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3: Carbon monoxide (CO), luminosity and temperature sensors 
 
The 
devices 
integrating 
the 
Digital 
Home 
are 
interconnected through DHC communication protocol. As 
they come from different manufacturers, it is necessary the 
implementation of a specific DHC Adapter for each one. A 
DHC adapter must include the services that are set out 
below: 
 
DHC-Security & Privacy service: prevention of 
fraudulent use, control of the devices, and also, data 
access by unauthorized agents.  
 
DHC-Groups service: coordination of collaborative 
tasks done by different devices belonging to the 
system.  
 
DHC-Localization service: Supplying information to 
locate devices within the home and help them in 
navigation. 
 
DHC-Intelligence service: The intelligence is given 
to the system through the management of rules that 
control the tasks and the Machine Learning 
predictions and pattern recognition. 
 
DHC-Energy service: Incorporation of energy and 
Smart Grid [20] concepts to the DHC protocol, by 
means of allowing the user to know the energy 
consumption 
data, 
analyzing 
 
the 
obtained 
information to improve the energy efficiency of the 
system and thereby generating savings. Those are 
the main motivation of SHE project. 
In order to clarify the performance role of the DHC-
Energy adapter, the main operations are described in detail 
below. 
 
Establishment of the charging settings: The types of 
charging modes (maximum consumption, cost per 
kWh, etc.) are shown to the customer, which will 
select the best rate. For instance, the possibility of 
choosing when a device will have its loading period   
depending on the tasks that have to be performed, 
time of the day and the tariffs to be applied. Figure 4 
shows a sequence diagram describing the process. 
 
 
Figure 4: Sequence diagram: Obtain tariff information. 
 
 
Device status: It is also important to know the 
preferences of the user, and compare it with the data 
that shows the state of the device and the power 
source (either renewable or normal electrical 
supply). The process carried out can be seen in 
Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5: Sequence diagram: Device status 
 
 
Energy profiles: The system allows a set of possible 
energy consumption configurations. When the user 
does not need the device, the power consumption 
should be zero (“Off” profile) or minimum in case of 
awaiting orders (“Stand by” profile).  In the 
operation mode, some devices can be fixed to the 
highest energy saving rate (“Low” profile) or to 
lowest energy saving rate, which operates on a full 
capacity (“High” profile). Some indispensable 
devices can be set to an especial level without caring 
the savings (“Emergency” profile). 

265
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Moreover, if a device remains in an inactive state, 
the device must reduce its energy profile to a lower 
level. The way in which this operation is done is 
shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Sequence diagram: Election of an energy profile 
 
For achieving an optimal performance of the system, it is 
necessary to process the large amount of data generated by 
the different devices in a fast rate. Therefore, Web Service 
for Devices (WS4D) technology [21] has been chosen. The 
main driven behind this selection is that DPWS maintains the 
philosophy of Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) 
combined with the convenience of Web Services. This 
solution means that a Digital Home can transmit the captured 
information through the DHC adapter to the Cloud. 
B. Cloud 
It is necessary to store the information from the Digital 
Home in a centralized way in order to have a database that 
allows comparative and heuristics analysis. From the user’s 
perspective, the stored information needs to be accessed 
from any device, anywhere [22].   
SHE project uses SuperDoop technology [23], which is a 
Hadoop [24] and Storm [25] based Open Source Big Data 
Stack integration, that scales horizontally to solve challenges 
as  acquisition, storage, searching, sharing, analysis and 
visualization of large data sets on a tolerable response time-
frame. This can be used for general-purpose applications, 
such as communications, banking, security, smart cities, 
energy efficiency, emergencies, social networks and many 
others areas. 
SuperDoop fits into Lambda Architecture concepts [26]. 
The designed architecture, which is schematized in Figure 7, 
has the following main components: 
 
The energy measurement reception from the 
environment can be made over different types of 
networks (wired and wireless). Representational 
State Transfer Application Programming Interface 
(REST) API [27] is used for the communication 
between the Digital Home nodes and the Cloud. It 
defines an interface among the software components, 
where an URL represents a resource whose content 
can be accessed via HTTP protocol via. The use of 
this 
technology 
brings 
some 
advantages 
as 
portability between different languages, performance 
and scalability.  
 
Acquisition Layer is an additional layer to solve the 
acquisition of the data used by the Speed and Bath 
layer, described below. This concept has been 
implemented as a prototype in a flexible way for 
SHE project using REST and JSON APIs, a 
temporal storage or cache using MongoDB, and a 
Redis based system for the speed data layer data 
insertion. 
 
The Speed Layer was needed to provide a real time 
monitoring and control services to users through a 
Graphical User Interface. This layer needs to 
aggregate the data, using typical functions as average 
and summarization for each user, group of devices, 
and time intervals, in a continuous computing close 
real time. Finally, this layer provides the information 
to the Service Layer to make it available to the 
interface. 
 
The Batch Layer includes several components to 
store and process the data, applying data mining and 
Machine 
Learning 
algorithms 
to 
acquire 
a 
customized knowledge pool for home energy 
consumption. These algorithms can be executed 
massively for each home or user, many times a day, 
to learn and predict the consumption using a large 
set of data for each execution. 
 
The Service Layer is the closest to the user, and 
includes data publishing through a REST API for 
both layers, the Batch Layer and the Speed Layer, 
allowing the interface to query, receive and show the 
data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

266
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 7: SuperDoop Architecture applied to SHE project 
 
 
The smart meter connector acts as a middleware between 
the SHE Adapter, which is in execution in the user home and 
the SuperDoop platform, in the cloud. 
The stored information is used by the system to generate 
specific recommendations, which will depend on its 
environmental conditions. This is done through an expert 
system that, based on its experience, uses rules to model the 
system.  It integrates a knowledge database of the 
consumption data and a rule editor, which enables the 
customer to test and simulate the rules. The rule execution is 
done with an inference engine based on an execution of rules 
and tree forward. 
Going a step further, this element can also generate 
collaborative recommendations based on actions performed 
in homes belonging to a similar environment profile. For 
making this, it would be necessary to define the way in 
which the distance between two homes or two users is 
calculated. Taking into account that the users can agree 
(value 0) or not (value 1) with the completion of an action, 
the most appropriate algorithms are Tanimoto [28]. The 
distances between all the users are calculated and stored in a 
matrix. When a recommendation is required to be given to 
the user, the algorithm returns the actions that most similar 
users have done, and that the user has not carried out yet. 
It is also possible to extract consumption patterns and 
thus allow making predictions to anticipate and adapt to 
other cheaper options.  
The user can access remotely and from different devices 
to the Energy Management System. Through its interface, 
the consumer is able to manage, control and plan the bill. 
That is to say, the user has a Smart Billing. Furthermore, in 
the user home page, the mentioned energy efficient 
recommendations are offered associated with actions to carry 
them out. 
A complementary useful tool is the incorporation of 
interactive and customizable graphs to show the information 
to the user, who is able to manage the energy consumption 
and consequently improve the energy efficiency. 
As it is shown in Figure 8, the consumption insights 
screen displays the consumption of each day, its distribution 
in the different hourly periods, the accumulated per month 
and the distributed consumption among the various days of 
the week, within the filtering dates, in an interactive and 
visual way.  
 

267
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 8: Interface of SIGE:  Consumption Insights  
 
Other historical information is presented in different parts 
of the interface to analyze it and make comparisons. Visual 
Mining tools are applied to help the user to understand where 
power is consumed, where it is wasted, etc. In Figure. 9 the 
weekly user consumption is represented in a heatmap to 
facilitate the discovering of a behavior pattern visually. 
 
The interface takes into account different aspects of 
usability, accessibility and, of course, the functional aspects 
of providing the user with the information that allows 
monitoring and controlling the appliances presented in the 
Digital Home.  
 
 

268
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 9: Interface of SIGE: Heatmap 
 
IV. 
TEST RESULTS 
After different attempts to match simulated energy 
demand with multivariate regression models, the next step 
was to prove implementation of Artificial Neural Network 
(ANN)  models as suggested in [29]. Several studies about 
prediction of building energy consumption and temperature 
forecaster 
[30][31][32] 
are 
based 
on 
ANNs 
and 
demonstrating a high accuracy in predicting energy demand 
and consumption in buildings. The main drawback is the 
need of a learning process for identifying the particular 
patterns, which define the system performance or behaviour. 
In this case, a simple ANN (3 hidden layers, using a 
symmetrical sigmoid as activation function) has been tested 
with the back-propagation algorithm [33], using as input 
parameters outside temperature, outside humidity ratio, 
previous hourly energy demand, among others. The obtained 
results have satisfied survey expectation since using short-
term ANN for energy demand prediction has shown an 
average error of 3% during a complete year simulation what 
constitutes insignificant deviation compared with typical 
estimations that usually energy experts make in energy audits 
(more than 20%). The comparison between the energy 
demand (heating and cooling) of a small building simulated 
by EnergyPlus ® and the ANN’s outputs is shown in Figure 
10.  
The test was performed with no seasonal discrimination, 
which demonstrates that the results could actually be 
reasonable to predict easily, without high accuracy, the 
energy demand and thus, the energy consumption, in case of 
we know the rated efficiency of domestic facilities. 
Even, the mentioned accuracy has been achieved with 
simple ANN composed by 5-neuron layers designed for 
estimating the thermal energy demand of a house as output, 
paving the way to design a robust energy forecaster. In order 
to include the data in the forecaster, the value of input 
parameters have to be established between 0 and 1 
(dimensionless).  

269
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 10: Comparison building energy demand and ANN prediction 
 
For instance, in this study, the outside temperature 
Tout
, 
humidity ratio   and previous energy demand 
k 1
d  have 
been transformed according with following equations (1), (2) 
and (3): 
 
min
max
min
*
T
T
T
T
T
out
out



 
 
(1) 
 
100
*



 
 
(2) 
 
,
min
max
min
1
*
1
d
d
d
d
d
k
k





 
(3) 
 
Min and max subscripts are related to the minimum and 
maximum historical temperature and potential demand 
respectively. When ANN calculate the current energy 
demand 
*
k
d , the inverse transformation is easy to understand 
according to (3). As mentioned above, ANNs need a learning 
process to modify the synaptic weights that allow the 
network to integrate the performance of a complex system. 
The current assessment did not consider the different 
seasons, months, holidays, etc. in order to obtain greater 
precision since another most sophisticated algorithm called 
support vector machine (SVM) considers the identification 
of behavior patterns, related to the likelihood of an event 
occurs based on input parameters [34]. This mixture of 
artificial intelligent and statistical approach, e.g., regression 
models, confers a highly effectiveness in solving non-linear 
problems, with reduced training data, as our current project, 
what shows this model as the ideal candidate for energy 
consumption prediction in buildings. In addition, due to the 
robustness of this prediction method, potential perturbations, 
which could appear by adapting the smart home system to 
new buildings, will be mitigated as it is mentioned in [35]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The system described in this paper allows to determine 
that an open stage of interaction between devices and the 
Smart Grid can be set by providing more capabilities than 
pure traditional energy efficiency (such as accounting and 
reductions in consumption). It also permits the establishment 
of a consumption profile for the different heterogeneous 
appliances, which a customer has at home, as well as a 
referral system in the Cloud associated with business 
intelligence that allows reducing even more the energy 
expenditure. All this is done in a distributed way but through 
a single point where the user interacts. Decisions could be 

270
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ineffective or even counterproductive if a holistic approach 
would not have considered. 
  
Cloud technology offers an elastic and resilient solution 
without requiring a high-capacity storage infrastructure at 
household level. It also facilitates the management and 
maintenance of the integrity, security and availability of data. 
In addition, this solution provides facilities for transparent 
software updating, because most of the software is 
centralized and non-distributed on each node. 
Specifically, the application of SuperDoop to the 
metering data allows doing both a batch and a continuous 
real-time processing of the measurements, working with a 
large set of data taken along the time from a large set of 
homes and historical database. It facilitates the generation of 
configurable 
and 
customizable 
reports, 
and 
recommendations, among other functions and independent of 
the measuring device. 
The proposed solution applies ANNs and Machine 
Learning algorithms using stored and real-time data, thus can 
be used to acquire personalized consumption knowledge for 
each home. At the beginning of the learning, real data is 
temporally replaced with simulated datasets of homes and 
historical weather data and climate zones, so as the system 
does not have historical data yet. The prebuilt knowledge can 
be applied to a classification algorithm, until the system have 
enough real data, a real customized knowledge progressively 
learns the real behavior and forgets the knowledge based on 
simulated data. Thus, the system would acquire the ability of 
predicting consumption for each home through the 
customized home energy knowledge. 
Summarizing, this technology has advantages over other 
approaches, because it is open, distributed, and scalable. 
Besides, it requires little or no configuration by the end user. 
The use of Big Data techniques does not require initial 
investment. This method and technology can also be used for 
other stakeholder solutions that are beyond the scope of this 
communication. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project is funded by the Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness of Spain (IPT-2011-1237-920000) and 
FEDER funds 
We are also very grateful to all the members of the 
consortium (Ingenia, Satec, Ingho, Tecopysa, Cotesa, IAT, 
and University of Oviedo) and to the programmers of the 
entities participating in the project (Sergio Tudela, José 
Farfán, Consuelo Extremera, Felipe Fresneda, Sergio 
Rodríguez, Manuel Rodríguez, José Antonio Luque, 
Francisco Jurado, Víctor García and José María Ocón). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. González, M. Rodríguez Fernández, J. J. Peralta, and 
A. Cortés, “A Holistic Approach to Energy Efficiency 
Management Systems,” in ICSEA 2012, The Seventh 
International Conference on Software Engineering 
Advances, 2012, pp. 415–420. 
[2] I. González Alonso, O. Álvarez Fres, A. Alonso 
Fernández, P. G. del Torno, J. M. Maestre, and M. 
Almudena García Fuente, “Towards a new open 
communication standard between homes and service 
robots, 
the 
DHCompliant 
case,” 
Robotics 
and 
Autonomous Systems, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 889–900, 2012. 
[3] R. Spinar, P. Muthukumaran, R. de Paz, D. Pesch, W. 
Song, S. A. Chaudhry, C. J. Sreenan, E. Jafer, B. 
O’Flynn, and J. O’Donnell, “Efficient building 
management with IP-based wireless sensor network,” in 
EWSN 2009, 6th European Conference on Wireless 
Sensor Networks, 2009. 
[4] I. Lampropoulos, P. P. van den Bosch, and W. L. Kling, 
“A predictive control scheme for automated demand 
response mechanisms,” in Innovative Smart Grid 
Technologies (ISGT Europe), 2012 3rd IEEE PES 
International Conference and Exhibition on, 2012, pp. 
1–8. 
[5] Universal Consortium, “UniversAAL Website,” 2013. 
[Online]. Available: http://universaal.org/index.php/en/. 
[Accessed: 25-Nov-2013]. 
[6] Infobótica Research Group, “DH Compliant Website,” 
2013. [Online]. Available: http://156.35.46.38/dhc2/. 
[Accessed: 25-Nov-2013]. 
[7] N. Noury, T. Herve, V. Rialle, G. Virone, E. Mercier, 
G. Morey, A. Moro, and T. Porcheron, “Monitoring 
behavior in home using a smart fall sensor and position 
sensors,” in Microtechnologies in Medicine and 
Biology, 1st Annual International, Conference On., 
2000, pp. 607–610. 
[8] P. Dobrev, D. Famolari, C. Kurzke, and B. A. Miller, 
“Device and service discovery in home networks with 
OSGi,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 40, no. 
8, pp. 86–92, 2002. 
[9] N. Noury, T. Herve, V. Rialle, G. Virone, E. Mercier, 
G. Morey, A. Moro, and T. Porcheron, “Monitoring 
behavior in home using a smart fall sensor and position 
sensors,” in Microtechnologies in Medicine and 
Biology, 1st Annual International, Conference On. 
2000, 2000, pp. 607–610. 
[10] I. O. Media, Big Data Now: 2012 Edition. O’Reilly 
Media, 2012. 
[11] Y. Ding, N. Namatame, T. Riedel, T. Miyaki, and M. 
Budde, “SmartTecO: Context-based Ambient Sensing 
and Monitoring for Optimizing Energy Consumption,” 
in Proceedings of the 8th ACM International 
Conference on Autonomic Computing, 2011, pp. 169–
170. 
[12] Infobótica Research Group, “Smart Home Energy 
Project 
Websiste,” 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://156.35.46.38/she/. [Accessed: 25-Nov-2013]. 
[13] J. Rhoton and R. Haukioja, Cloud Computing 
Architected: Solution Design Handbook. Recursive 
Press, 2011. 
[14] Carlos Bentabol, “El concepto Smart City,” Revista 
Ingenia, vol. 57, 2013. 
[15] Ingeniería e Integración Avanzadas S.A. (Ingenia), “IT 
solutions for Smart Cities,” 2011. [Online]. Available: 

271
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
http://www.ingenia.es/en/productos_servicios/it-
solutions-smart-cities. [Accessed: 26-Jun-2013]. 
[16] F. Casellas, G. Velasco, F. Guinjoan, and R. Piqué, “El 
concepto de Smart Metering en el nuevo escenario de 
distribución eléctrica,” Actas del Seminario Anual de 
Automática y Electrónica Industrial, SAAEI, 2010. 
[17] Current Cost, “Reducing your energy bills so you can 
live a greener life,” 2012. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.currentcost.com/. [Accessed: 12-Jul-2013]. 
[18] “Plugwise 
Website,” 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.plugwise.com/. [Accessed: 25-Nov-2013]. 
[19] Plugwise, “The future of energy monitoring in today’s 
buildings,” NRG Magazine Edition, 2013. 
[20] S. Chen, S. Song, L. Li, and J. Shen, “Survey on smart 
grid technology,” Power System Technology, vol. 33, 
no. 8, pp. 1–7, 2009. 
[21] Golatowski, Frank, Bobek, Andreas, and Zeeb, Elmar, 
“Web Services for Devices (WS4D) Website,” 2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://ws4d.e-technik.uni-
rostock.de. [Accessed: 14-Dec-2012]. 
[22] L. 
Spaanenburg 
and 
H. 
Spaanenburg, 
Cloud 
connectivity and embedded sensory systems. Springer, 
2010. 
[23] Ingenia S.A., “Ingeniería e Integración Avanzadas.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ingenia.es/es. 
[Accessed: 14-Dec-2013]. 
[24] K. Shvachko, H. Kuang, S. Radia, and R. Chansler, 
“The hadoop distributed file system,” in Mass Storage 
Systems and Technologies (MSST), 2010 IEEE 26th 
Symposium on, 2010, pp. 1–10. 
[25] V. 
V. 
Khadilkar, 
M. 
Kantarcioglu, 
and 
B. 
Thuraisingham, “StormRider: harnessing storm for 
social 
networks,” 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
21st 
international conference companion on World Wide 
Web, 2012, pp. 543–544. 
[26] N. Marz and J. Warren, Big Data: Principles and best 
practices of scalable realtime data systems. Manning 
Publications, 2013. 
[27] M. Masse, REST API Design Rulebook. O’Reilly 
Media, 2011. 
[28] C. Cechinel, M.-Á. Sicilia, S. Sánchez-Alonso, and E. 
García-Barriocanal, “Evaluating collaborative filtering 
recommendations 
inside 
large 
learning 
object 
repositories,” Information Processing & Management, 
vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 34–50, Jan. 2013. 
[29] R. Parsons, “ASHRAE Handbook Fundamentals,” 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
conditioning Engineers, 1997. 
[30] P. A. González Lanza and J. M. Zamarreño Cosme, “A 
short-term temperature forecaster based on a state space 
neural network,” Engineering Applications of Artificial 
Intelligence, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 459–464, 2002. 
[31] P. A. González and J. M. Zamarreno, “Prediction of 
hourly energy consumption in buildings based on a 
feedback artificial neural network,” Energy and 
Buildings, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 595–601, 2005. 
[32] B. B. Ekici and U. T. Aksoy, “Prediction of building 
energy 
consumption 
by 
using 
artificial 
neural 
networks,” Advances in Engineering Software, vol. 40, 
no. 5, pp. 356–362, 2009. 
[33] R. Rojas, Neural Networks: A Systematic Introduction, 
1st ed. Springer, 1996. 
[34] R. E. Edwards, J. New, and L. E. Parker, “Predicting 
future hourly residential electrical consumption: A 
machine learning case study,” Energy and Buildings, 
vol. 49, pp. 591–603, 2012. 
[35] H. Zhao and F. Magoulès, “A review on the prediction 
of building energy consumption,” Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3586–
3592, 2012. 
 
 
 
 

