25
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Development and Evaluation of Educational Materials on Human-Centered Design 
 
Jun Iio 
Faculty of Global Informatics, 
Chuo University, 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8478, Japan 
e-mail: iiojun@tamacc.chuo-u.ac.jp 
Rika Waida 
CX Studio, 
JVC KENWOOD Design corporation, 
Setagaya-ku Tokyo 158-0097, Japan  
e-mail: waida-rika@jvckenwood.com 
 
Ayano Ohsaki 
Faculty of Data Science, 
Musashino University,  
Nishitokyo-shi, Tokyo 202-8585, Japan 
e-mail: a-ohsaki@musashino-u.ac.jp 
Akira Kambayashi 
Japan R&D Center, 
HP Japan Inc., 
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0051, Japan 
e-mail: kambayashi.akira@hp.com
 
 
Abstract — Human-Centered Design (HCD) is the design prin-
ciple that focuses on the users of services, systems, or products. 
The idea of HCD was proposed more than two decades ago, 
and it has been widely adopted in the information technology 
and design industries. However, entry-level educational mate-
rials are needed to increase the concepts among consumers and 
students who study engineering and industrial design. The 
Human-Centered Design Organization is a specific non-profit 
organization that promotes the idea of HCD in the Japanese 
industry. It has a working group whose members have been 
tasked with developing the required entry-level educational 
materials on HCD and promoting them to the industry. This 
paper describes some of its activities. As per the HCD cycle 
itself, we distinguish between the development and the promo-
tion of the materials. In addition, we explain the relevance of 
the educational materials the working group delivered by illus-
trating the results of the questionnaire administered after the 
introductory seminar to those who are not familiar with HCD. 
Their efforts have been of great value to the people who must 
teach HCD concepts to newcomers. 
Keywords - human-centered design; educational materials; 
HCD cycle. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Human-Centered Design (HCD) is the concept of a de-
sign process where the developers design their services, sys-
tems, or products focusing on their users. That is, HCD is 
considered a user-oriented design process. HCD was pro-
posed more than two decades ago, and it was standardized by 
the International Organization for Standard (ISO) as ISO 
13407 in 1999. Also, it was integrated into ISO 9241 in 2010 
(ISO 9241-210:2010), adding the concept of User Experi-
ence (UX). Subsequently, it was updated to ISO 9241-
210:2019 in 2019 [2]. 
In conventional industrial design, designers tend to focus 
on their design convenience. However, it often leads to the 
users’ inconvenience. HCD solves such problems by priori-
tizing users’ requirements rather than developers’ options. 
In Japan, a non-profit organization, the Human-Centered 
Design Organization (HCD-Net), was established in 2004 [3]. 
HCD-Net aims to assemble knowledge on HCD and to pro-
mote methods and skills regarding HCD. With their long-
term efforts, the concept of HCD has been widely adopted 
among experienced engineers, especially in the information 
technology and design industries. However, it is still not 
popular among consumers. Surprisingly, even students learn-
ing engineering and industrial design are not familiar with 
the HCD concepts [4]. Therefore, entry-level educational 
materials are needed for training newcomers to perform 
HCD processes appropriately. 
Although there are many training services, educational 
materials, books, and seminars for the higher-level training 
on HCD activities, unfortunately, we have few items that can 
be used as the educational material for introducing basic 
knowledge of HCD. 
Several Working Groups (WGs) were established in 
HCD-Net to fill the gap between entry-level and high-level 
education due to the lack of educational materials. The 
members of these WGs have been actively working to 
achieve their goals. “The fostering teachers WG” was estab-
lished in June 2016, and it meets monthly for face-to-face 
discussions. In addition to the meetings, several events have 
been held by the WG, and the work has been actively pro-
gressing [1], [5]-[8]. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, we present the basic idea of the HCD process. In Section 
III, literature reviews are described. In Section IV, the WG’s 
strategies are illustrated. Then, in Section V, we discuss how 
the HCD process worked in the WG’s activities and the val-
ue of the educational materials delivered as their work. In 
Section VI, the evaluation of the educational materials that 
the WG provided is explained. Finally, conclusions, future 
work, and the acknowledgment close the article.  

26
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
II. 
THE HCD PROCESS 
Before explaining the WG’s activity further, we describe 
the basic idea of the HCD process better to understand the 
character of the WG’s work. 
The HCD standard is a process standard, i.e., the standard 
defines several processes to realize an efficient design from a 
user’s viewpoint. The general phases of the HCD process 
can be explained with the following steps: (quoted from [9]). 
• 
Specify context of use: Identify who the primary us-
ers of the product, why they will use the product, 
what are their requirements and under what envi-
ronment they will use it. 
• 
Specify Requirements: Once the context is specified, 
it is the time to identify the granular requirements of 
the product. This is an important process which can 
further facilitate the designers to create storyboards 
and set important goals to make the product success-
ful. 
• 
Create Design solutions and development: Based on 
product goals and requirements, start an iterative 
process of product design and development. 
• 
Evaluate Product: Product designers do usability 
testing to get users’ feedback of the product. Product 
evaluation is a crucial step in product development 
which gives critical feedback of the product. The 
important point is that this cyclical process must be 
repeated several times to satisfy the service level of 
the users’ requirements. 
 
Figure 1.  The WG’s activities, along with the concept of HCD defined in 
the ISO 9241-210. 
WG members oversaw creating the entry-level materials 
and training the trainers who can teach the basic concepts of 
HCD using their materials. 
The fact that their activities themselves were based on the 
concept of HCD should be noted; that is, the designing pro-
cess of their products was as follows: 1. Properties of train-
ees were assumed and specified. 2. Educational materials 
were designed for them. 3. The prototype of materials was 
evaluated by providing it in several trials of seminars. 4. Af-
ter that, the educational materials were updated according to 
the feedback from the previous steps. Figure 1 illustrates the 
processes defined by ISO 9241-210 and the cases adopted to 
WG’s activities in each step, respectively. 
III. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
As the concept of HCD is more widely recognized, HCD 
education is gathering more and more interest from engi-
neers in various fields. Instructors in this field are paying 
particular attention to how to teach UX concepts. Some case 
studies in universities and professional training colleges have 
been reported. However, it remains unclear how to help 
newcomers understand HCD in the entire business field. 
Ito et al. [10] reported their implementation of the e-
learning course on the basics of HCD. They were working 
for a computer-electronics manufacturer, and their e-learning 
course was intended to prevent miscommunication regarding 
user interfaces among the employees. It was an excellent 
example of HCD education conducted in the enterprise. 
Gonzalez et al. [11] surveyed 140 students of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society (HFES) and analyzed 40 
UX job postings. The results show a discrepancy between 
the skills the UX industry expects students to have and the 
skills HFES promotes for a career in UX. They recommend-
ed a focus on increasing HFES’s relevance to students inter-
ested in future UX careers. Vorvoreanu et al. [12] also re-
ported on the UX education for undergraduate students at 
university. 
The concept of “design thinking” is a similar idea to UX 
design. Wrigley et al. [13] focused on surveying the design 
thinking education provided as Massive Open Online Cours-
es (MOOCs). MOOCs are open to the public, and most can 
be participated in for free via the Internet. Therefore, anyone 
who wants to learn about design thinking can acquire 
knowledge by accessing the courses presented on their web-
sites. 
Dirin and Nieminen [14] studied the relevance of User-
Centered Design (UCD) education to a mobile application 
development course implemented in a university. They ana-
lyzed the feedback from students and concluded that UCD 
education had a significant role in the development and im-
provement of students’ capabilities on consulting and user 
study research. 
We can find many other cases where HCD or UCD pro-
cesses were introduced to education programs in various 
fields; Adam et al. [15], Organ et al. [16], and Carter et al. 
[17] reported cases in health and medical education, Harvey 
et al. [18] reported an issue in fashion education, Wilson et 
al. [19] discussed the possibility of applying the UCD ap-
proach to the training environment for aircraft maintenance 
personnel. Bowie and Cassim [20] argued for the HCD 
methodology in contemporary communication design educa-
tion. These papers reveal the presence of a potential need for 
HCD education in various domains. 
Additionally, there are some studies on designing or 
evaluating a curriculum by incorporating HCD processes 

27
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
similar to our approach in creating their educational materi-
als. Altay [21] pointed out a similarity between the learner-
centered approach in education and the user-centered ap-
proach in design disciplines. Altay illustrates this by adopt-
ing a user-centered approach within the human factors 
course as learner-centered instructional methods. Reich-
Stiebert et al. [22] explored robot design education employ-
ing the HCD approach. They investigated students’ prefer-
ences regarding the design of educational robots and evaluat-
ed the course according to the results. Chen et al. [23] re-
ported on evaluating the curriculum using a method of creat-
ing student personas in the field of resource engineering edu-
cation. 
IV. 
THE WG’S STRATEGIES 
The WG’s activities’ starting point was the textbook pub-
lished as the first of the HCD book series. Based on the con-
tents of the book, the WG considered two strategies; one was 
to develop presentation slides and guidebooks as the educa-
tional materials, and another was to foster trainers who could 
provide seminars to newcomers who were not familiar with 
HCD. 
Under these strategies, the WG created two prototypes of 
the educational materials for engineers and salespeople. Fur-
thermore, some simulated seminars were conducted to ac-
quire feedback and opinions to brush up on the materials. 
A. Educational Materials for Engineers 
The first target was newbie engineers who were not fa-
miliar with the concept of HCD. The WG published a beta-
version of the presentation slides in June 2017, after several 
discussions by the WG members. After collecting some 
feedback, the materials were updated, and version 1.0 of the 
document was published in May 2018. 
The presentation materials have 42 slides, which are in-
tended for conducting a seminar of approximately one-and-a-
half hours. An overview of the contents is as follows: 
• 
Case studies 
• 
The concept of human-centered design 
• 
Usability 
• 
Introducing the HCD cycle 
• 
Appendix (good practices) 
Figure 2 shows some examples of the document. The up-
per left of the figure is the cover page, the upper right shows 
a sample from the case studies, the lower-left illustrates the 
HCD cycle, and the lower right is the cover of the appendix. 
As seen from the small icon at the corner of the cover 
page (see the upper left of Figure 2, the materials are pub-
lished under the license of Creative Commons (CC BY-NC-
SA 3.0). Therefore, everyone can share, redistribute, modify, 
and create deliverables based on this product, if they follow 
the conditions defined by the CC license. This licensing 
strategy is beneficial for future trainers, whom the WG also 
wants to encourage because those educators can modify edu-
cational materials as they like. 
 
Figure 2.  Examples of the presentation slide for training engineers. 
B. Educational Materials for Salespeople 
After creating the entry-level educational materials on 
HCD for engineers, the WG started a discussion on another 
version of the educational materials. The members of the 
WG considered that the people in the front office who had 
contact with their customers had to know the HCD concepts. 
Especially in the case of business to business (B2B), such 
businesses require customers’ understanding and cooperation. 
Hence, the WG decided on salespeople as the next target for 
education on the idea of HCD. 
At the beginning of the preparation work, the WG invited 
some salespeople and producers who were using HCD pro-
cesses and worked directly with their customers in their daily 
business activities. The WG members had several interviews 
to learn about their thought processes, how they worked with 
their customers, etc. Also, they invited salespeople who did 
not know the HCD to attend an entry-level HCD lecture so 
that the discussions could be fruitful for both sides. 
Although the base materials were those for engineers, 
minor modifications were made to the original ones. There 
were two significant changes; one is that the thoughts of the 
customer-orientation investigation were introduced instead 
of the case studies. The other was that the discussion on the 
positioning of the HCD was added before the conclusions. 
The latter part also mentions User Experiences (UX) because 
UX is also a key topic for discussing HCD-related issues 
with customers. 
The overview of the contents for salespeople is as fol-
lows: 
• 
Considering the view of the customer-oriented 
• 
The concept of human-centered design 
• 
Usability 
• 
Introducing the HCD cycle 
• 
Positioning of the HCD 
• 
Appendix (good practices) 
The education materials of the HCD for salespeople were 
released in May 2019 (version 1.0). 

28
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
C. Guidebooks 
In addition to providing the presentation slides, the WG 
also supplies a guidebook on how to conduct efficient train-
ing on HCD. Generally, it is not easy to run seminars along 
with the presentation materials when they were created by 
other individuals. Therefore, guidebooks for training courses 
for trainers using two versions (for engineers and salespeo-
ple) of educational materials are also provided. 
 
Figure 3.  Examples of the presentation slide for training engineers. 
Figure 3 shows some examples of the guidebook for the 
educational materials for training engineers. The left figure is 
the cover page, the middle shows the table of contents, and 
the right shows one of the instructional pages. 
As shown on the right in Figure 3, the instructions are 
described for all presentation slides. The guidebook helps 
novice trainers by giving some additional information on 
how to teach the topics, etc. 
All the educational materials (presentation slides) and 
complementary guidebooks are uploaded to the server hosted 
by HCD-Net. These can be downloaded from [24] (for engi-
neers) and [25] (for salespeople). 
D. Simulated Seminars (Trial Events) 
To evaluate the prototype of the educational materials 
and lectures, the WG held five simulated seminars. Table 1 
shows a list of trial events officially announced by HCD-Net. 
TABLE I.  
THE LIST OF TRIAL SEMINARS 
ID 
Target 
Version 
Date 
Participants 
1 
Engineer 
Alpha 
Mar 4, 
2017 
18 pros and 
beginners 
2 
Engineer 
Beta 
Aug 29, 
2017 
10 pros and 
beginners 
3 
Engineer 
Ver. 1.0 
May 25, 
2018 
21 pros and 
beginners 
4 
Salesperson 
Beta 
Jan 19, 
2019 
18 pros and 
beginners 
5 
Engineers & 
Salesperson 
Mofidied 
Dec 19, 
2019 
26 (mainly) 
beginners 
 
The target of the first three seminars (ID 1, 2, 3) was the 
version for engineers. Lectures based on alpha, beta, and 
version 1.0 were examined in each trial, respectively. The 
next one (ID 4) was for salespeople. At that time, the beta 
version of lectures for salespeople was confirmed. We asked 
for HCD professionals to participate in those trials (from ID 
1 to ID 4). Therefore, we could hear various opinions from 
not only beginners but also from professionals. Furthermore, 
the trial seminars were helpful for those professionals be-
cause most of them oversaw human resource development. 
They were motivated to take the contents of the entry-level 
workshops back to their companies. 
V. 
DISCUSSIONS 
As described in the previous section, the WG created the 
educational materials and guidebooks according to the HCD 
processes. This section discusses the compliance with such 
methods and the values of the WG’s products. 
A. How the HCD Process Worked in the WG’s Activity 
Looking back, in this section, we consider how the four 
steps in the HCD cycle were applied to the WG’s activities. 
We recall that the HCD cycle has four phases: specifying the 
context of use, specifying requirements, creating design solu-
tions and development, and evaluating products. 
1) Specify Context of Use: As we described in the 
introduction of this paper, our study aimed to create entry-
level educational materials and encourage the instructors 
who present the training in their organizations. Considering 
the situations and experiences of each WG member [5][6], 
the WG decided on engineers as the first target group of 
trainees and then salespeople as the second target group of 
trainees. 
2) Specify Requirements: Because the educational 
materials are designed to accompany the textbook's 
explanations, the critical part of the WG’s work was to 
decide which components should be selected. Furthermore, 
the course time was considered very short. At the beginning 
of the WG’s discussion, it assumed that the entry-level 
education on HCD would be conducted in one or two hours. 
Therefore, the members tried not to make the contents of the 
materials too complicated. Also, the members discussed 
what the participants of the lectures would consider 
necessary for their studies and their future careers. That is 
one of the essential points of the WG’s activity in the view 
of the HCD concept. 
3)  Create Design Solutions and Development: The 
WG’s process for making the materials was iterative, 
requiring at least two cycles. 
The first cycle started with the prototype of the educa-
tional materials for engineers. The product was firstly pub-
lished in its beta version. The WG then collected feedback 
and comments at the trial seminars (see Section 4.4). After 
that, the materials were published as version 1.0, and current-
ly, it has been updated to version 1.1. 
The second cycle was based on the first one. The proto-
type of materials for salespeople was started from the latest 
version for engineers and then updated according to the 
WG’s interviews and feedback from trial seminars. It was 
published as the beta version, and updated to version 1.0, as 
well. 
4) Evaluate Product: Evaluation by the potential users 
is a critical process in the HCD cycle. In the WG’s activities, 
the members also considered it the principal procedure. As 
described previously, the WG remained focused on the 

29
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
evaluation process with the trial events run to evaluate the 
materials during the design phase. 
The WG’s leading work in 2019 was the evaluation, im-
provement, and investigation of which organizations were 
utilizing their materials. Several new members, who were 
users of the materials, joined the WG in 2019. The educa-
tional materials and the guidebooks were updated according 
to the interviews conducted with them and feedback from 
questionnaires. 
B. Value of the Educational Materials 
The WG aimed to prepare entry-level educational materi-
als and foster instructors who can teach newcomers unfamil-
iar with the concept of HCD. Therefore, it tried to fill the gap 
between newbies and experienced engineers, designers, and 
salespeople by providing the materials. 
A review from Amazon’s sales listing of the textbook 
states that: “It is not easy to understand only by reading. It 
would be worth reading if some lectures were provided using 
this book as its textbook.” We had to agree with this com-
ment. Hence, our decision to provide lectures on entry-level 
HCD knowledge with these materials and guidebooks. 
During the work conducted in 2019, the WG collected 
several opinions and impressions of the products from the 
new members. All of them mentioned that it was helpful, but 
there was still some room for improvement. As the materials 
were provided under the CC license, the users could modify 
the contents to become suitable for their courses. 
VI. 
EVALUATIONS 
We conducted a seminar that introduced the concept of 
HCD to the office staff who were unfamiliar with it to evalu-
ate the education materials. To perform a subjective evalua-
tion, we asked the participants to fill a questionnaire after the 
seminar. 
The 56 participants answered the following questions. 
• 
How to create awareness for the seminar, their pro-
file, and the knowledge levels of the HCD before 
participating in the workshop. 
• 
How much did you understand the concept of the 
HCD?  
• 
How satisfied are you with the seminar? 
• 
The consciousness to learn the HCD more deeply. 
A. The Way to Find the Seminar 
Figure 4 shows the way to find the seminar. It tells us 
that the HCD-Net actively reached the candidates who 
should participate in the workshop. Viral communications 
(friends’ comments in the several SNSs, recommendations 
from friends and colleagues) are unignorable to disseminate 
holding events. 
As it was an introductory course, it was necessary to dis-
seminate broadly, so “word-of-mouth,” such as recommen-
dations from companies and acquaintances, should be used. 
 
Figure 4.  The way to find the seminar. 
B. The Properties of the Participants 
Figures 5 and 6 illustrate the characteristics of the partic-
ipants of the seminar. The former shows the occupations, and 
the latter shows the frequency distributions of their genera-
tion, which indicates that all working ages are interested in 
the HCD seminar. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The occupations of the participants. 
 
Figure 6.  The frequency distribution of participants’ generation. 

30
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
C. Knowledge Levels of the HCD before Participating in 
the Seminar 
The participants’ knowledge levels are shown in Figure 7. 
Approximately one-third, i.e., 32.2% of participants, were 
estimated as beginners—the seminar’s primary target. Fur-
ther, 26.7% of participants were practitioners and not directly 
targeted at this introductory course. However, the results 
imply that they were interested in online seminars and teach-
ing methods, which would also be meaningful. 
 
Figure 7.  The knowledge levels of the HCD before participating in the 
seminar. 
D. How Much Did You Understand the Concept of the 
HCD? 
Figure 8 illustrates the participants’ understanding levels 
by the categories: the basic knowledge of HCD, users, usa-
bility, HCD cycle, and the relation among HCD, design 
thinking, and UX. 
For the basic concept of teaching the knowledge of HCD, 
the seminar should be designed to present HCD issues com-
prehensively; the results shown in Figure 8 imply that it 
achieved the goal successfully.  
In addition, the answers to the question asking did you 
understand the relation between HCD, design thinking, and 
UX showed an excellent score. It was considered that the 
seminar and educational materials focused on the issues and 
that it was effective. 
E. How Much Did You Satisfy the Seminar? 
The satisfaction levels of participants by categories are 
indicated in Figure 9. Apart from the mini work, almost all 
factors affected the impression of the participants. Signifi-
cantly, the fact that they were satisfied with the seminar 
structure and its presentation materials indicates the WG’s 
deliverables were meaningful and relevant to teach the HCD 
concept to beginners. 
F. The Consciousness to Learn the HCD More Deeply 
Figure 10 shows the participants’ awareness to learn 
HCD in depth. The answers varied from level one—which 
meant they did not have any motivation to learn more—to 
level five—who had some zeal to learn HCD in depth. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  The understanding levels of the participants. 
 
 
Figure 9.  The satisfaction levels of the participants.

31
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Do you want to learn more about HCD? (from 1 not at all, to 5 
very likely) 
Figure 10 indicates that the introductory seminar to the 
HCD was completed, and the participants got a positive im-
pression to learn something deeper about the HCD issues. It 
also implied that the educational materials the WG delivered 
had some values to promote the relevance of the concept of 
the HCD. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The human resource development WG members, which 
was set up in HCD-Net to implement the entry-level educa-
tional materials on HCD and foster lecturers who can train 
newcomers in each organization, have been working actively 
during recent years. This paper described their activities and 
provided an overview of their results. The most significant 
feature of their work was that their outcomes, that is, the 
HCD educational materials themselves, were designed ac-
cording to HCD processes. 
The educational materials they created are intended for 
two different target groups: engineers and salespeople. First-
ly, the training materials for engineers were designed. After 
that, based on the prototype, the revised ones for salespeople 
were created. Guidebooks for conducting the training were 
also created to accompany the educational materials to make 
it easier for the lecturers to present them. 
The WG’s main activities in 2019 were conducting inter-
views with the users, delivering questionnaires to them, and 
improving the educational materials according to the feed-
back, as described in the last part of Section 4.1. However, a 
more in-depth analysis of the feedbacks remains to be done 
as part of their future work. 
Several evaluations were performed as part of the HCD 
cycles in the development processes. We conducted a series 
of simulated seminars and interviews with users of the proto-
type versions. After the first publication of those materials, 
an introductory workshop was held for those unfamiliar with 
the concept of the HCD. At the end of the seminar, we asked 
the participants to fill the questionnaire. We analyzed the 
answers subjectively to evaluate and validate the relevance 
of the educational materials. 
However, the lectures using these educational materials 
should be more widespread if we let the HCD concepts pene-
trate all the industries. More and more promotions will be 
needed, and they remain our future work. Furthermore, more 
evaluations to improve educational materials should be con-
ducted. It will be an ongoing task as part of the WG’s future 
activities. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank all WG members and the participants 
of trial seminars and evaluations, the board members of the 
HCD-Net, and collaborators for the activities concerning the 
development of the education materials. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Iio, A. Osaki, and R. Waida, “Development and Promotion 
of Educational Materials on Human-Centered Design, ”  The 
Thirteenth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advances 
in 
Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI2020), pp. 447-451, 
Valencia, Spain & Online, 2020. 
[2] “ISO 
9241-210:2019 
Ergonomics 
of 
human-system 
interaction – Part 210: Human-centred design for interactive 
systems,” https://www.iso.org/standard/77520.html,[retrieved: 
19th Nov 2020]  
[3] Z. Liu, “User Experience in Asia,” Journal of Usability 
Studies, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 42–50, 2014. 
[4] B. B. Hong, E. Bohemia, R. Neubauer, and L. Santamaria, 
“Design for Users: The Global Studio,” The 20th 
International Conference on Engineering and Product Design 
Education (E&PDE18), London, UK, 6–7th September 2018. 
[5] H. Yasu et al., “Framework of Education to Promote HCD 
among Organizations, — Learning from Case Studies —,” 
Bulletin of Human Centered Design Organization, vol. 12, no. 
1, pp. 13–19, 2016. 
[6] H. Yasu et al., “Framework of Education to Promote HCD 
among Organizations — Proposal and Evaluation on Action 
Plans for Each Trainee —,” Bulletin of Human Centered 
Design Organization, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 19–24, 2017. 
[7] R. Waida et al., “Teaching Materials of HCD Introductory 
Course for Practitioners – Activities of Making the Beta 
Version,” Bulletin of Human Centered Design Organization, 
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 24–28, 2018. 
[8] A. Kambayashi et al., “Teaching Materials of HCD 
Introductory Course for Practitioners: Activities of Official 
Version for Engineers and the Beta Version for People in 
Contact with Customers,” Bulletin of Human Centered Design 
Organization, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 9–14, 2019. 
[9] “User-centered design,” From Wikipedia, the free encyclo-
pedia. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User-centered_design, 
[retrieved: 19th Nov 2021]  
[10] J. Ito, A. Ikegami, and T. Hirayama, “Practice of Promoting 
HCD, Education by a Consumer Electronics Manufacturer,” 
M. Kurosu (Ed.): Human Centered Design, HCII 2009, LNCS 
5619, pp. 594–600, 2009.  
[11] C. A. Gonzalez, M. Ghazizadeh, and M. Smith, “Perspectives 
on the Training of Human Factors Students for the User 
Experience Industry,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 1807–
1811, 2014. 
[12] M. Vorvoreanu, C. M. Gray, P. Parsons, and N. Rasche, 
“Advancing UX Education: A Model for Integrated Studio 
Pedagogy,” Proceedings of the Computer Human Interaction, 
CHI 2017, May 6–11, Denver, CO, USA, 2017, DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025726 
[13] C. Wrigley, G. Mosely, and M. Tomitsch, “Design Thinking 
Education: A Comparison of Massive Open Online Courses,” 
The Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation, vol. 4, no. 
3, pp. 275–292, 2018. 
[14] A. Dirin and M. Nieminen, “Relevance of UCD Education to 
Software Development – Recommendation for Curriculum 
Design.” Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Computer Supported Education (CSEDU 2016), no. 2, pp. 
112–120, 2016. 

32
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
[15] M. Adam, S. A. McMahon, C. Prober, and T. Ba ̈rnighausen, 
“Human-Centered Design of Video-Based Health Education: 
An Iterative, Collaborative, Community-Based Approach,” 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 21, no. 1:e12128, 
2019. DOI: 10.2196/12128 
[16] D. Organ et al., “A systematic review of user-centred design 
practices in illicit substance use interventions for higher 
education students,” European Conference on Information 
Systems 2018: Beyond Digitization – Facets of Socio-
Technical Change, Portsmouth, UK, 23–28 June. 2018. 
[17] J. Carter, Y. J. Bababekov, and M. D. Majmudar, “Training 
for our digital future: a human-centered design approach to 
graduate medical education for aspiring clinician-innovators.” 
npj Digital Medicine, vol. 1 no. 1, 2018. https://doi.org/10. 
1038/s41746-018-0034-4 
[18] N. Harvey, P. Ankiew, and F. van As, “Fashion design 
education: effects of users as design core and inspirational 
source.” Proceedings PATT 37: Developing a knowledge 
economy through technology and engineering education, pp. 
203–211, Malta, 3–6 June. 2019. 
[19] C. Wilson, W. Bennett Jr., S. Guarino, K. Bove, and T. L. 
Cain, “Applying a User-Centered Design Approach to 
Developing Game-Based Training Environments for Aircraft 
Maintainers,” End-User Considerations in Educational 
Technology Design, pp. 217–238, 2018. DOI: 10.4018/978-1-
5225-2639-1.ch01 
[20] A. Bowie and F. Cassim, “Linking classroom and community: 
A theoretical alignment of service learning and a human-
centered 
design 
methodology 
in 
contemporary 
communication design education,” Education as Change, vol. 
20, no. 1, pp. 126–148, 2016. 
[21] B. Altay, “User-centered design through learner-centered 
instruction,” Teaching in Higher Education, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 
138–155, 2014. DOI: 10.1080/13562517.2013.827646 
[22] N. Reich-Stiebert, F. Eyssel, and C. Hohnemann, “Exploring 
University Students’ Preferences for Educational Robot 
Design by Means of a User-Centered Design Approach,” 
International Journal of Social Robotics, 2019. https://doi.org 
/10.1007/s12369-019-00554-7 
[23] K. C. Chen et al., “Creating a Project-based Curriculum in 
Materials Engineering,” Journal of Materials Education, vol. 
31, no. 2, pp. 37– 44, 2009. 
[24] Human Centered Design Organization, “HCD training 
materials for engineers ver. 1.1,” https://www.hcdnet.org/hcd/ 
column/materials01/hcd-1177.html [retrieved: 19th Nov 2021] 
[25] Human Centered Design Organization, “HCD training materi- 
als for salespeople,” https://www.hcdnet.org/hcd/column/ 
materials01/hcd-1307.html [retrieved: 19th Nov 2021] 
 

