Governance and Legitimacy of Artificial Intelligence
Olga Gil
Instituto Complutense de Ciencias de la Administración
Departamento de Historia, Teorías y Geografía Políticas
Facultad de Ciencias Políticas y Sociología
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid
olgagil@ucm.es
Abstract - Amids challenges posed to humanity by artificial
intelligence disruptive developments, this work is set to engage
discussants
from
different
perspectives
-encompassing
scientists in different fields, governments, firms and other
social actors- on the topics of artificial intelligence, governance
and legitimacy. The main aim and output of the paper is to
present a dashboard for the analysis of governance and
legitimacy of artificial intelligence. This Dashboard resolves
disputes within the literature on political theory over classical
approaches
to
study
governance
and
legitimacy.
The
Dashboard has also the capacity to allow for comparisons in AI
governance and legitimacy in democratic and non democratic
regimes, at different government levels, both in Western
Countries and in the Global South. An additional output is the
application of the framework to the case of China as a case
study. This analysis is carried out by applying the framework
to take a fresh look at existing data in the Chinese case and
showing its value as a methodological and analytical tool.
Keywords - Artificial intelligence; democracy; ethics; political
theory; governance.
I.INTRODUCTION
This
work
is
an
extended
version
of
“AI
Philosophy: Sources of Legitimacy to Analyze Artificial
Intelligence,” a paper presented to the IARIA Annual
Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and
Applications in 2023 [1]. This extended version aims to
present a general framework to analyze artificial intelligence
(AI), and to discuss legitimacy and governance from
political theory as a stream of philosophy. As such, the work
addresses questions related to governance and legitimacy
that are at the basis of political and social power and of
command and control. At the end of 2020, Pfizer-BioNTech
vaccine based on mRNA molecules made a breakthrough,
allowing for a first treatment against the COVID-19 plague.
The vaccine used modified RNA molecules and ferried
them for the first time as a drug into cells. This vaccine was
made possible with complexity, using algorithms departing
from a strict digital approach to more complex algorithms
incorporating layers, in the same ways that neurons branch
out in the human brain. This fascinating breakthrough
furthers -even more- the appetite for competition among the
big actors: Google, Elon Musk, the Chinese government,
among others, all wanting to reach a trillion operations in
machine learning [2]. The example of the COVID-19
vaccine brings us the evidence of the importance of the use
of algorithms for the good of humanity. From the point of
view of physics and biology, Contera stresses that reality is
not digital, it is analog, and therefore complex: Current
artificial intelligence seeks to achieve this complexity by
including new parameters and new interactions [2]. But
there are limitations to this pattern of development towards
complexity: the first is based on energy reasons - the cost of
computations and the blockchain is very high. The second
limitation is based on geopolitical reasons. Taiwan is
currently
the
only
country
capable
of
producing
a
computing chip below the size of five nanometers [2]. This
makes the United States, Western economies and the global
south heavily dependent on a single company, TSMC, for
the supply of leading edge technology chips. Only TSMC in
Taiwan and Samsung in South Korea can make the most
advanced semiconductors, and this, for the case of Taiwan
exposure to China, is interpreted by the United States as
putting at risk the ability “to supply current and future [US]
national
security
and
critical
infrastructure
needs”
according to María Ryan [3][4]. This is evident when the
United
States
Department of Commerce’s Bureau of
Industry and Security announces the implementation of
export controls to restrict China’s ability to both purchase
and manufacture certain high-end chips used in military
applications on October 7th, 2022. This actually means
restricting China´s ability to obtain advanced computing
chips,
develop
and
maintain
supercomputers,
and
manufacture advanced semiconductors. Similar risks -and
opportunities- are perceived by China. Both risks and
opportunities underlie the Chinese Party Constitutional
amendment made in October 2022, looking forward to
making sustained and steady progress with the One Country,
Two Systems policy, advancing national reunification with
Taiwan [5].
Thus,
this
work
applies
the
political theory
framework to China, bearing in mind the context and very
interesting
issues
at
hand:
competitive
interests
and
domestic
preferences,
economic development, national
security and social control. There are challenges in trying to
tame the beast of reality -as the big actors are seeking to do
204
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

with algorithms- and with the resources and human talent
that are assigned for the task. These challenges make the
study of current changes in artificial intelligence (AI) from
the perspective of social sciences, and in particular from the
perspective of legitimacy and democracy -or the lack
thereof- interesting and acute. Other questions related to
political theory also motivate this study: what can we learn
about the complex reality of AI related to command and
control in China? What may we learn about the future
society and the polity against AI development in China?
And, are there any particular cultural values enshrined in the
country´s AI development?
In the following sections, the methodology is
introduced and a general theoretical framework is proposed,
the case study of sources of legitimacy and control in China
follows, and finally a discussion with conclusion and further
work is presented, followed by acknowledgements.
II. METHODOLOGY
The methodology of this research seeks to bring
basic questions linked to legitimacy - a basis of governance-
into the study of artificial intelligence. The purpose is to
reflect upon how artificial intelligence is going to affect
democratic and non democratic regimes.
The study departs from classical publications in
political theory by Max Weber and Craig Mathesson [6][7],
whose approaches combined allow to draft a table with an
eight dimensional view of sources of legitimacy. These
approaches taken combined, however, are unable to capture
new features linked to legitimacy when artificial intelligence
is taken into account. Searching for what is missing in these
classical inquiries when AI is taken into account a new
theoretical framework is developed. This new theoretical
framework allows for a comparison of national cases, and
eventually,
supranational
and
subnational
cases.
The
selection of studies started by a search in scopus with the
terms artificial intelligence AND China in 2020, 2021,
2022. This brought about 776 articles. The selection was
further refined under the social sciences category, with 170
documents published matching the query. These journal
articles
were
reviewed
looking
for
governance
and
legitimacy
as
topics
for
retrieval
and
further work,
identifying 37 source articles. Once first relevant works
were identified, the reference list of these articles became a
main source of materials -both those that were included in
the scopus database or were not- as detailed knowledge
became crucial to build up the study. Google scholar was
also utilized, searching for the first 10 publications on
artificial intelligence and social sciences, the 10 most cited,
and the ten most recent ones. These works were reviewed
searching for interesting insights. Proquest database has also
been consulted, with the query artificial intelligence in the
Financial Times newspaper. Specific articles on the query
were of value to identify authors with new ideas on artificial
intelligence nowadays and how AI affects governance. As a
result, these searches brought about information from
comparative reports with general information on the United
States [8], the work on Europe [9][10], and on China and
China local AI ecosystems [11][12], which is the focus for
the purpose of this work.
This research and discussion have been pursued
without the aid of artificial intelligences or data bases in the
process of ideas. Research and discussion are the result of a
human mind. There is no use of any big data software,
organic life engineering, or cyborg aid. Thus, at this stage,
the results of the work are solely the responsibility of a
human author´s mind. At a future stage, it could be explored
whether there are interesting possibilities from non natural
intelligences to broaden the scope and findings of this
research.
III. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK OF AI GOVERNANCE: FROM
RELATED WORK TO SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY TO ANALYZE
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The theoretical framework is based on the sources
of legitimacy to analyze artificial intelligence. Here we are
bringing
to
the
fore
political
theory
to
address
a
contemporary problem: AI governance. This is what the
paper tries to achieve, a better understanding of governance
in the context of AI. For this purpose, in this part of the
work, Table I, including an eight dimensional view of
sources of legitimacy is developed. Table I is based on
dimensions, concepts and definitions from classical works
by Max Weber and Craig Mathesson [6][7]. With over five
million mentions in Google Scholar, Weber´s work is a
reference
to
explain politics, society and economics.
Decades
later
Mathesson
includes
democracy
as
a
fundamental axis to review Weber's approach on legitimacy.
The current work argues that there is room for further
improvement, departing from the insights from these two
authors. Improvement is pursued in two steps: Step one is
developing a framework for analysis based on the theories
of these two authors, the eight dimensional view of sources
of legitimacy. Step two, in the following section, follows,
with the next stage, using fundamental questions from
political theory to address the contemporary problem of AI
governance. In doing so, method -as source of change- and
legitimacy are enshrined in the Gil dashboard making up for
an upgraded theoretical framework. The new Dashboard has
been developed in a wider context that is not addressed in
this article: The wider context aims to compare the AI
regulatory framework of China, the European Union and the
United States [8]-[12], which is the endeavor the author is
currently devoted to in a wider research. The current work
focuses
on
the
theoretical
dashboard
that
has
been
developed to make the comparisons. Using a name for the
Dashboard follows the practice of using the name of the
author for scales –such as Sherry Arnstein Ladder of Citizen
Participation, one of the most influential models in the field
of democratic public participation; it also has the purpose of
setting a reference for further discussion across disciplines.
The following work tries to unveil a complex
reality, 1) where there are new rules attached to command
and control derived from the use of AI in political regimes
and 2) to bring to light new ways of thinking about AI,
governance and legitimacy. A framework for analysis, the
Gil dashboard for legitimacy is developed. The dashboard
205
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

allows for comparisons of most similar and most different
cases. The theoretical framework is in the intersection
between values and AI development, and allows to unveil
how AI is mediating problems related to coordination and
control, what uncertainties about the future society and the
polity different countries face against AI development, and
what could we say about different cultural values.
We depart from the work on legitimacy from Max
Weber -for whom there exist three types of domination,
charismatic, traditional and rational or legal [6]. This
framework was revised by Matheson [7] in 1987, nearly a
century after Weber started writing. Matheson qualifies and
opposes Max Weber theory on legitimacy. Later on, and
departing from Matheson, the current work develops a
theoretical framework to allow for the comparison of AI
legitimacy bases in the European Union, the United States
and China - and could be valuable for the analysis of
developing countries, and countries in the global south.
TABLE I. THE EIGHT DIMENSIONAL VIEW OF SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY, BY OLGA GIL
Dimension
Definition of the dimension
Convention
Norms, rules: legal or customary rules that prescribe
forms of behavior
Contract
as
basis
of
legitimacy
Mutual rights and obligations. The theory of consent as
the basis of obligations
Basis
of
legitimacy in
a conformity
with
universal
principles:
natural law
Theories of natural law, aka, the existence of a natural
order superior to man-made law
Sacredness of
authority
Power-holder or his/her norms considered to be sacred
divine right of reigns. For Max Weber it could also be
an attribute of an office rather than a person
Legitimacy
by expertise
Technical
expertise,
in
the
vein
defended
by
Saint-Simon, Taylorian theories, or historic laws
A
popular
mandate in a
constitutional
democracy
Popular mandate: a claim to democratic election in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Based on
constitutionalism, power holders elected in accordance
with
constitutional
procedures.
Here
we
find
a
distinction between populist democracies, where the
will
of
a
majority
rules,
and
constitutional
democracies, were there will of the majority is limited
by a constitution
Personal
relation
Domination, in which there are close ties between
power-holders and power-subjects such as personal
authority or paternal authority relationships
Personal
quality of the
power holder
Domination based on the personal quality of the power
holder, by virtue of which he/she can claim a right of
command
Weber differentiated three types of domination:
charismatic,
traditional
and
rational
or
legal.
This
differentiation
is
based
on
the
legitimacy
of
the
power-holder. The work by Matheson nearly a century later
includes
eight
types
of
domination,
including
the
perspective of both the power holders and the power
subjects. The main critique that Matheson introduces to
Weber's work is that democracy and its effects along the XX
century are not reflected in Max Weber typology. Matheson
reaches new layers of granularity for the study of the polity
and society with his revised proposal. From Matheson´s
critique of Weber Table 1 above is developed: The table
explains visually the eighth types of domination. This would
be an eight dimensional view of sources of legitimacy.
Having AI in mind and looking at this framework
for the analysis of the cases selected, observations about
new sources of legitimacy out of the scope of the table
above can be drawn. A first one would be coercion as an
instrument for legitimacy. A second source of legitimacy
would be AI development outside the umbrella of the state,
based in ethics codes. For instance, an applied comparison
of national AI strategies in nine countries, including China
and the United States finds that national AI strategies have
an approach towards AI governance that entails cooperation
among the public sector, industry and academia and this has
been
based
largely
on
ethics
[8]. Based on ethics,
cooperation
is
achieved
with
voluntary
mechanisms
including best practices, codes of conduct, and guidelines.
At the core of a general approach to use ethical guidelines as
an efficient measure to prevent or reduce harm caused by
AI, the general argument is for its higher flexibility, as
opposed to hard regulations that could represent an obstacle
to economic and technical innovation [8][9], or other means
of legitimacy.
IV. METHOD AS A SOURCE OF CHANGE AND LEGITIMACY
A third source of legitimacy would be linked to
method. Matheson's approach to sources of legitimacy
reviews Max Weber work making important contributions.
But a further contribution is missing: the concept of
improved
democracies
through
method
as
source of
legitimacy. This
type of legitimacy -experimenting with
method, in an active process to reach better results- is not
included in Matheson analysis. Method points out to new
types of democracies that would not be only based on a
popular mandate. Method has been the basis to reach new
knowledge following the scientific revolution in Europe.
Method, in contrast, has not been explored as such to
improve democratic governments. The result is that there
has not been an appraisal of method as a way to reach better
results in democratic regimes. An example of the dangers
and limitations of not including method as a source of
improved legitimacy is the work comparing national AI
strategies in nine countries, including China and the United
States [8], stressing the lack of concrete mechanisms for
inclusion of civic society and public engagement in AI
control.
These new sources of legitimacy -coercion, ethics,
improved method, and legitimation based on algorithms-
will be incorporated in the previous table in order to develop
a new table, the Gil Dashboard, allowing us to analyze
artificial intelligence in case studies, in multilevel analysis
and from a comparative perspectives. The sources of
206
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

legitimacy are incorporated close to the category that is
more akin to the concept, if any. The additions are included
in bold text.
TABLE II. THE GIL DASHBOARD: THIRTEEN SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY TO ANALYZE
AI
Dimension
Definition of the dimension
Convention
Norms, rules: legal or customary rules that
prescribe forms of behavior
Contract as basis
of legitimacy
Mutual rights and obligations. The theory of
consent as the basis of obligations
Basis of
legitimacy in a
conformity with
universal
principles:
natural law
Theories of natural law, aka, the existence of a
natural order superior to man-made law
Sacredness of
authority
Power-holder or his/her norms considered to be
sacred divine right of reigns. For Max Weber it
could also be an attribute of an office rather than a
person
Legitimation by
human expertise
Technical expertise, in the vein defended by
Saint-Simon, Taylorian theories, or historic laws
Legitimation
based on an
algorithm
Legitimation based on macrodata –hindering
the idea of individual liberty and decisions
taken by means of human conversation and
persuasion
A popular
mandate in a
constitutional
democracy
Popular mandate: a claim to democratic election in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Based
on constitutionalism, power holders elected in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Here
we find a distinction between populist
democracies, where the will of a majority rules,
and constitutional democracies, were there will of
a majority is limited by a constitution
Improved
democracies
experimenting
with method
A type of legitimacy based not only in a popular
mandate but also on experimenting with
method and in a continuous process, in order to
reach better results, including accountability
Regimes -non
democracies-
developed
through method
A type of legitimacy based on experimenting
with method and a continuous process to justify
objectives and reached results
Personal relation
Domination, in which there are close ties between
power-holders and power-subjects such as personal
authority or paternal authority relationships
Personal
quality
of
the
power
holder
Domination based on the personal quality of the
power holder, by virtue of which he/she can claim
a right of command
Coercion
The use of power to influence someone to do
something they do not want to do, from exerting
fear to nudging as positive reinforcement
Societal
cooperation,
excluding the
polity
Development of mechanisms of cooperation
among the public sector, industry and
academia: cooperation is achieved with
voluntary mechanisms including best practices,
ethical codes of conduct, and guidelines
V. APPLYING THE DASHBOARD TO STUDY GOVERNANCE,
LEGITIMACY AND CONTROL: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN CHINA
In this section we analyze sources of legitimacy
using the author´s Dashboard in the Chinese case. The work
proceeds first of all with a brief introduction on the
economic governance of AI in China, followed by Table III,
with a quantitative analysis (where 1 is existence and 0
absence), and a qualitative analysis follows. At this stage of
the research using a binary code has the sole purpose to state
existence or absence of a given dimension. The subsections
explain those features that have proved existing. To refine
limitations derived from using binary code, this coding
could be complemented with normalized scales –i.e. Likert
scale- other metrics showing further comparative scalability
for each of the dimensions in the Dashboard, coupled with
in depth dimension studies.
The baseline of the economic governance of AI in
China has laid on the increase of total fiscal expenditures on
science
and
technology
rising
from 48 per cent in
2007-2011 to 59 per cent in 2015-2016 [13]. Provinces and
local
governments
have
significant
autonomy
in the
implementation
of
these
funds,
and
from
different
approaches
[14].
There
are
local
unbalances
in
AI
development, with three cities being home to 70 per cent of
AI firms: Beijing being home to 43 of Chinese firms,
Shanghai at 15 per cent and Shenzhen at 12 per cent [15].
Following with expertise, the mode of economic governance
has not been based on cutting edge technologies in China.
The mode of AI economic governance, instead, has been
based in rapid deployment and scaling of existing AI
technologies [15]. The results have been fusion and speed
over breakthrough technologies, and ensuring the adoption
of existing technologies. Adoption and scale have been the
formulae for AI implementation, both in the private and the
public sector. This is very much in contrast with the case of
European countries, where deployment of AI technologies
at the local level remains very low [9]. An additional key in
economic governance has been the attraction of global and
supra-local linkages by ambitious policy makers searching
for increased access to capital and other AI ecosystems:
Linking to cities such Amsterdam, Barcelona, Stockholm,
and
clusters forming around Cambridge, Oxford and
Manchester –with the AI ecosystem around Manchester
university
and
the
United
Kingdom
government
communications
headquarter.
Another
component
in
economic governance has to do with the objective to reduce
policy fragmentation in China. In order to do so, local
governments are incentivized to develop plans that can be
later used to assess progress and to induce competition
between different regions and localities.
207
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III. THE GIL DASHBOARD: THE GIL DASHBOARD ON SOURCES OF
LEGITIMACY AND CONTROL: AN APPLICATION TO CHINA, CONCEPTUAL,
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS.
Dimension
Quantitative
analysis
Definition of the dimension
Convention
1
Norms, rules: legal or customary
rules that prescribe forms of
behavior
Contract as
basis of
legitimacy
0
Mutual rights and obligations.
The theory of consent as the basis
of obligations
Basis of
legitimacy in a
conformity with
universal
principles:
natural law
1
Theories of natural law, aka, the
existence of a natural order
superior to man-made law
Sacredness of
authority
0
Power-holder or his/her norms
considered to be sacred divine
right of reigns. For Max Weber it
could also be an attribute of an
office rather than a person
Legitimation by
human
expertise
1
Technical expertise, in the vein
defended by Saint-Simon,
Taylorian theories, or historic
laws
Legitimation
based on an
algorithm
0
Legitimation based on
macrodata –hindering the idea
of individual liberty, or
decisions taken by consensus
A popular
mandate in a
constitutional
democracy
0
Popular mandate: a claim to
democratic election in accordance
with constitutional procedures.
Based on constitutionalism,
power holders elected in
accordance with constitutional
procedures. Here we find a
distinction between populist
democracies, where the will of a
majority rules, and constitutional
democracies, were there will of a
majority is limited by a
constitution
Improved
democracies
experimenting
with method
0
A type of legitimacy based not
only in a popular mandate but
also on experimenting with
method and in a continuous
process, in order to reach better
results, including accountability
Regimes -non
democracies-
developed
through
method
1
A type of legitimacy based on
experimenting with method and
a continuous process to justify
objectives and reached results
Personal relation
0
Domination, in which there are
close ties between power-holders
and
power-subjects
such
as
personal
authority
or
paternal
authority relationships
Personal quality
of
the
power
holder
0
Domination based on the personal
quality of the power holder, by
virtue of which he/she can claim
a right of command
Coercion
1
The use of power to influence
someone to do something they
do not want to do, from
exerting fear to nudging as
positive reinforcement
Dimension
Quantitative
analysis
Definition of the dimension
Societal
cooperation,
excluding the
polity
1
Development of mechanisms of
cooperation among the public
sector, industry and academia:
cooperation is achieved with
voluntary mechanisms
including best practices, ethical
codes of conduct, and guidelines
A. Convention
The first source of legitimacy and control that we
can draw from this table and apply to the Chinese case is
convention. It could be argued that in China there are
general changes in convention as a source of legitimacy,
understood as norms, rules –legal or customary rules- that
prescribe forms of behavior.
The mode of social governance has implications in
China's choice of adoption of AI technologies. As Ding
states [11], the State Council’s AI plan sees AI playing an
irreplaceable role in maintaining social stability. In practice,
this is reflected in local-level integrations of AI across a
broad range of public services, including judicial services,
medical care, and public security. Specially affecting the
mode of social governance are two areas, the first one,
concerning privacy, and the second concerning private
companies' participation in social credit systems [16][17].
AI is proved as a good tool to improve efficiency and reach
services, however it is a less desirable tool for complex
areas where context, emotional judgment, flexibility and
moral judgements are crucial.
In the case of the social credit system, Lewis
defines it as an initiative based on a cluster of experiments
harnessing public data with the aim to improve governance
[18].
This
improvement
seeks to boost trust among
government, firms and individuals, and includes larger
national efforts - the Blacklist-Redlist Joint Sanctions and
Rewards
regimes-
as
well
as
smaller
efforts
being
implemented in some cities. Lewis defines it as:
“an overarching policy initiative consisting of multiple
sub-systems (...) with different policy goals and rules, rather
than one distinct system. Ambitiously, it takes aim at nearly
all of China’s development ills – from environmental
protection to IP and financial fraud to academic plagiarism”
all of which the Chinese government believes stems from
firms and individuals not following laws and regulations”
[18].
The intent, according to the Chinese government,
would be to enshrine trust in order to develop a market
economy [18]. An important loophole, however, is that
individuals or firms have little knowledge about the data
collected. Lewis recalls that the black list regime has been
reinforced and had real implications for business and
individuals, but it is difficult to be conclusive about whether
policy is truly achieving the general goal of business and
individuals behaving in a more trustworthy manner [18],
and more generally, whether the system improves trust in
Chinese institutions.
208
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

General changes in convention as a source of
legitimacy, understood as norms, rules –legal or customary
rules- that prescribe forms of behavior are the aim of AI
scoring systems assigning a credit to the population with the
aim, according to the government, to improve societal trust.
Xiamen and Fuzhou are two examples of cities that have
implemented score systems for their population since 2018.
Xiamen has over 85,000 users exchanging their scores to
avail services. Fuzhou has over 1,19 million residents doing
the same. Scores look at the behavior of residents, and the
individual
participation
such
as keeping promises as
measure of responsibility and trust, while a breach of
contracts would be contemplated as unwillingness to obey
the law. A system of credit repair has been invented, with
the
possibility
to
gain
credit
back
through
active
participation in social service, public interest events and
welfare
activities.
These
are
mechanisms
to
change
traditional convention. Other mechanisms are local scores
looking at hard working, observation of ethics and morals,
as defined by the government, delayed payment, the follow
up of administrative regulations and legal duties. Danit Gal
[19] argues that mechanisms of credit scoring exist in other
countries such as the United States, however, the level of
development and deployment in China makes it unique in
scale.
It could be argued that changes in convention and
social cooperation affect innovation ecosystems as well.
Ding remarks how the central government's important
guiding role in China is targeted by other public and private
actors, pursuing their own objectives in AI, including
academic labs, bureaucratic agencies, private companies and
subnational governments [11]. Many actors involved have
resulted in rapid innovation in many fields, based in local
innovation ecosystems. By the end of 2018, 20 provinces
had issued 30 specific AI policies “many forward thinking
local governments implemented AI-related policies that
preceded national government action” [12]. The pragmatic
approach
to
innovation
has
resulted
in
important
developments in the fields of healthcare, medical image
processing and pharmaceutical research. Kim describes the
ecosystem of actors as a hybridized industrial ecosystem
including firms, networks of small and medium enterprises
and research institutes specially adapted to the local
conditions
[20].
Ding
emphasizes
the
importance of
specializing in AI subdomains, and he actually stresses the
importance of specialization in AI subdomains or parts of
the value chain as clues to success [11]. Ding also stresses
that in a new vein, transparent budget disclosures show
allocation
to companies in subdomains ranging from
predictive analytics of smart city data to sign language
translation [12].
An example of a hybridized industrial ecosystem
has been the Hangzhou AI Town opening for business in
July 2017 –inspired by visits from local leaders to Silicon
Valley and searching for similar spillovers. The mission of
this local ecosystem has been to link the e-commerce
company Alibaba and subsidiaries -with more than 90 per
cent of the projects in some categories-, with Zhejiang
university, graduates studying overseas, and local businesses
together in a cluster. The creation of the AI park is housed in
the Hangzhou Future Sci-Tech City, connected to a larger
infrastructure of science and technology parks [11]. This
local
industrial
ecosystem
has
been
designed
with
international linkages in mind, and thus Silicon Valley Bay
area council has an office helping Californian companies to
register enterprises, and Hangzhou AI Town, in turn, has
offered 3 million RMB for settlement expenses, and 15
million RMB in subsidized office space costs [11]. An
additional aim for Hangzhou AI Town managers has been
attracting talent, such as returning Chinese graduates from
international universities [21], but not exclusively Chinese:
recent measures restricting the support of development,
production, and semiconductor fabrication by United States
nationals in China show that global talent attraction was also
a key in this local development model [22]. In Hangzhou AI
Town, Alibaba functioned as anchor tenant, a necessary
condition for AI development success that is also found in
other Chinese local ecosystems [11]. Jeffrey Ding also
speaks of elite universities, such as Zhejiang University as a
glue to hold the ecosystem together, and the existence of
large technology firms such as Alibaba as a requirement to
enhance
productivity
and
local
innovation
[11]. The
involvement of private actors, however, brings in the risk of
inequality [32]. In order to avoid inequalities and the
marginalization of social groups, the adoption of AI
educational tools has been defended as a need, as well as a
source for better comprehension about how innovation may
prevent the marginalization of less favored social groups.
B. Contract
We find that the appeal to contractualism is absent
as an instrument of legitimacy in China -as the search for
related keywords yielded invalid or no significant results.
C. Basic of legitimacy in conformity with a natural law:
Ethics as a set of laws
Legitimacy based in a natural law is the following
category existing in our quantitative analysis. Legitimacy to
set up AI in public services in China has been driven
according to Rogier Creemers by the ideological view that
social order is governed by an objective and a determined
set of laws where AI can solve social problems and help to
understand those laws [19]. In this context, AI is generally
designed to improve existing institutions, not to replace or
reform them, and thus policies integrating AI play an
important role. Policies and public-private partnerships are
at the center of this short of approach, in which national,
local and company levels concur often. Policies focus on
speeding up technology development, data collection and
implementing pilots. Issues such as accountability, data
privacy, and risk management appear to be secondary to
crucial developments. We thus find legitimacy based on
universal principles, ethics in the case of China is linked to
the development of AI outside the umbrella of the state.
This result is consistent with the findings of Gianni et al., in
an applied comparison of national AI strategies in nine
countries, including China and the United States [33] –at
least until the summer of 2023, when the Chinese Minister
209
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of Science and Technology shifts policies on generative AI
towards regulation. The Chinese case reflects that the source
of legitimacy for AI governance entails cooperation among
the public sector, industry and academia. This is AI
development outside the umbrella of the state, based on
ethics codes [31], up to the scope of time covered by this
research. In this particular conception of ethics, cooperation
is achieved with voluntary mechanisms including best
practices, codes of conduct, and guidelines. In general
terms, at the core of a general approach to use ethical
guidelines as an efficient measure to prevent or reduce harm
caused by AI the general argument is for its higher
flexibility, as opposed to hard regulations that could
represent an obstacle to economic and technical innovation
[32][33], or other means of legitimacy.
In China's approach to ethics there is a basis of
legitimacy
in a conformity with a call to universal
principles,
where
harmony,
as
principle
in
Chinese
philosophy for all life forms [31] would be relevant in the
contexts of human-machine interactions [19]. The call to
universal principles making a reference to harmony is
furthered in a new document addressing human-machine
harmony, and more specifically stating in article n. 1:
“AI development should begin from the objective of
enhancing the common well-being of humanity; it should
conform to human values, ethics, and morality, promote
human-machine harmony, and serve the progress of human
civilization;
it
should
be
based
on
the
premise
of
safeguarding societal security and respecting human rights,
avoid misuse, and prohibit abuse and malicious application
[32, their translation].”
Multi-stakeholder committees have been settled
outlining AI ethic principles, many of them according to
global standards [33]. An additional challenge is to bring a
number of relevant stakeholders into key conversations on
AI ethics, both internationally [19] and at the national level.
There
have
been
expert
groups,
including
several
companies,
business
associations
and
expert
groups
releasing principles, and the New AI Governance Expert
Committee,
created
by
the Ministry of Science and
Technology, stating that AI should conform to safeguard
social security and respecting human rights, according to
Creemers [22]. Interpreting this statement would make us
close to Chinese Communist Party ideology, which in the
aftermath of the 20th National Congress of the Chinese
Communist Party closing in 22th October 2022 is driven by
a top down hierarchy, with General Secretary Xi Jinping on
top, and 90 million Communist Party members: As Xinhua
relates, “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese
Characteristics for a New Era (...) should be incorporated
into the Party Constitution (...) with Comrade Xi Jinping at
its core to advancing the Party's theoretical, practical, and
institutional innovations.” [5][16]
D. Sacredness of authority and improvement of democracy
thorough method
Sacredness of authority is absent, as well as
improving democracy through method and personal relation
-as the search for related keywords yielded invalid or no
significant results.
E. Method as a source of legitimacy
Whereas
method
is
the basis to reach new
knowledge following the scientific revolution in Europe,
method, in contrast, has not been institutionally embedded
as a basic feature to improve democratic -or undemocratic-
governments. The result is that there has not been an
appraisal of method as a way to reach better social results in
democracies [23]. The sources of legitimacy linked to
method deserve further elaboration. Matheson's approach to
sources of legitimacy reviews Max Weber work making
important contributions. However, the search of improved
democracies through method as a source of legitimacy is not
included in Matheson analysis. This type of legitimacy is
based on the active involvement of citizens -or residents- in
promoting public values. In this active involvement, there is
a need for a process of social construction. This social
construction would entail employee participation, citizen
involvement, empowerment and consultation at center stage:
not just as outcome, but in the dialectical process of
construing public institutions and a theory where the
emphasis is on the public in the administrative process [24].
This conception of social design includes the general public,
the government, and the public administration. Social design
would be understood as evolutionary, as an integrative
process to build shared realities that could lead to a process
of invention, evolution and self-governance [25]. This is
what the Dashboard refers to as experimenting with
methods and in an active process, not only based on a
popular mandate, to reach better results. The work by
Gianni et al. comparing national AI strategies in nine
countries, including China and the United States stresses the
lack of concrete mechanisms for inclusion of civic society
and public engagement in AI control [27]. This could be
understood as lacking the experimentation with method as a
formula to build better shared realities.
In the case of education we could argue AI
development in China is experimenting with method as a
continuous process, and justifying the reach of better results.
However, as Liu argues, high-quality education involves
creativity, collaboration and critical thinking, and for those
aims, the role of just AI technologies for the next generation
of students is limited [42].
F. Basis of legitimacy in conformity with expertise
Pointing at sources of legitimacy and control in
China, expertise is the following category in our analysis.
Legitimation by expertise is on the basis of economic
governance in China. Legitimation by expertise is heavily
ingrained in the AI strategic plan designed by the China´s
State Council in 2017 [35]. This is also the case in the plan
when calling for the development of a whole range of AI
related healthcare technologies to put cognitive computing
at the service of learning, recalling and appling vast
amounts of text works for medical professionals. Expertise
as a basis for legitimacy is reported by Karen Hao at The
Wall Street Journal:
210
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

“Chinese leader Xi Jinping has packed the top ranks of the
Communist Party with a new generation of leaders who
have experience in aerospace, artificial intelligence and
other strategically important areas (…) Chinese officials
with technical expertise occupy 81 seats, nearly 40% of the
total, in the new Central Committee—the elite body that
decides major national policies—according to data compiled
by the Washington-based Brookings Institution think tank
and shared exclusively with The Wall Street Journal. That
compares with less than 18% in the previous Central
Committee.” [34]
Legitimation by expertise has also been applied to
the judiciary: It is the baseline for System 2016, which is
Shanghai
High
People's
Court
Intelligence
assistive
case-handling system for criminal cases. The purpose of the
system is to improve the quality and reduce false, unjust or
wrong changes and sentences [32]. Eugeniu Han explains
that the system has two components, a cross reference
system using speech recognition to compare different types
of evidence and alert the judge about contradictions in the
judge patterns [32]. The second component is a sentencing
reference tool based on machine learning combining the
defendants basic information and a large database of past
court records to make sentencing recommendations. The
system can also be used to judge the judges and prosecutors
by pinpointing the outliers [32], moreover, applications
within System 2016 could skew a prosecutor or judge to the
detriment of the defendant. Han stresses that defendants and
their defenders may lack the technical knowledge, resources
and access to challenge AI processes for generating a
sentencing reference and assess its potential biases [32]. Gal
suggests another loophole since Alibaba is usually the
defendant in many cases while is also the co-creator of the
Smart Court System 2016: conflicts of interests are clearly
at stake, “exacerbating legal accountability for decisions
made by using these systems” [19]. Gal pinpoints that the
use of AI to support the court system occurs in other
countries, what is unique to China is a “smart court and an
AI judge handling claims against a corporate actor, while
also being developed by the same corporate actor [19].
An additional tool contributing to legitimation by
expertise is City Brain, a system first launched for traffic
management in Hangzhou in 2016 with the aim of tackling
traffic
congestion.
City
Brain was developed by 13
companies together with the city government and based on
Alibaba cloud platform service: The firm optimizing traffic
has developed into a data coordination center consolidating
data from over 700 IT government agencies. This data
coordination center offers services for parking, traffic
management -including ambulances and firefighters- waste
collection and even health monitoring of the city's aging
population [32]. With different modifications City Brain has
been implemented in more than 10 cities in Asia, sometimes
under the umbrella of the Belt and Road initiative of the
Digital Silk Road.
Following expertise as a base for legitimacy, in
2018 the Guangzhou Women and Children Medical Centre
developed an AI prototype using NLP and deep learning to
work with relevant information from 1,4 million patients to
help frontline patient care, for instance triaging patients to
decide degrees of urgency. Some other examples include AI
deep
learning
to
recognize
visual
symptoms:
here
researchers have been using AI to scan and diagnose
congenital cataracts, where an estimated 200.000 children
are bilaterally blind from cataracts annually [33]. In some of
the AI developments blockchain technology is used to
ensure trust in data stored in the system [33]. Andy Chun
explains that Alibaba and Tencent are investing to interpret
scans and to detect early signs of cancer [33]. In July 2019
the Chinese startup JF Healthcare -specialized in providing
remote diagnosis services for rural town hospitals where
radiologists are not available often- was the first to beat
Stanford University radiologists. This approach to AI
development is based on experimenting and innovating first
and it seeks to achieve time to market results in fields as
important as medical care [33] Here AI is seen as a possible
solution to doctor shortage -China has two practicing
doctors for 1000 inhabitants- to scarce medical services in
rural areas, and to highly strained services in rural areas due
to large patient volumes [33].
G. Coercion
In our Dashboard on sources of legitimacy and
control, coercion is the following category existing in
quantitative analysis. For the purpose of our model, albeit
with a difference, we draw a similarity between coercion
and nudging. There is nudging attached to wearable
technology, with over 52 per cent of inhabitants in China
using this technology able to monitor their health. Insurance
companies
such
as
Ping
An Health have integrated
wearables into their offers to facilitate discounts and
rewards to customers sharing data and living healthier
lifestyles [33].
China's privacy is at risk by the lack of rights and
guarantees [41][35]. This draws a fine line with coercion
[43][37][38][39], even though some data privacy efforts
have been addressed in laws and regulations [22][40][41].
AI
education
systems
are
an
example.
Chinese
AI
educational systems have been collecting, storing and
analyzing students' facial expressions without regulation
[19]. Facial information has been also collected through
boards subways, enforced recycling and the obtention of
toilet paper in public toilets, raising many public concerns
and
establishing
a
culture
of
pervasive
individuals
monitoring [19]. There is no limit in government access to
and use of private data. At the same time, without
transparency of knowledge about how the variables to
calculate scores work, the possible divide between low and
high scores may increase.
H. Personal relations and personal quality of the power
holder
Both traits, personal relations and personal quality
of the power holder, are part of the model developed to
explain legitimacy and governance of AI. However, for the
case of China the author finds that both features lack power
to explain AI development, as the search for related
keywords yielded invalid or no significant results. Thus,
211
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

both features rank as absent in Table III, defining sources of
legitimacy and control applied to China.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The work presented in this article allows us to
unveil a complex reality from the perspective of philosophy,
political theory and sociology, where AI brings new rules
attached to command, control and governance in general.
One of these new rules is human pace in decision making, in
contrast to decisions being made quickly, as they are
generally in AI frameworks [43]. The article presents the
Gil Dashboard to show how AI is mediating problems
related to governance and legitimacy. The Dashboard brings
to light new ways of thinking in methodological terms and
in comparative perspective about artificial intelligence in
different political and social settings. The article argues that
the theoretical Dashboard is useful to apply in case studies,
multilevel analysis and for comparative perspectives; in
countries in Asia, western countries and countries in the
global south.
Once the Dashboard is presented, it has been
applied empirically to the case of China. Firstly, using a
binary code with the sole purpose to state existence or
absence of the dimension studied. Additionally, with the
references and works covered by the author analyzing 170
documents matching the query, the following conclusions
are highlighted for this particular case: Researching on
convention, a focus on local-level integrations of artificial
intelligence across a broad range of public services has been
founded, including judicial services, medical care, and
public security. The use of AI for these services affect the
mode of social governance on privacy, limiting it. The use
of
AI
for
services
also
affects
private
companies'
participation in social credit systems. Artificial intelligence
scoring systems are being used to assign credit to the
population with the aim, according to the government, to
improve societal trust albeit with limited usefulness, and
with associated pitfalls linked to privacy. Contractualism
has been found absent as an instrument of legitimacy in
China. Legitimacy in conformity with a natural law has
been found linked to ethics as a set of laws -an appeal that is
shared by private companies in western countries as a main
resource towards a self legitimation of artificial intelligence
use. A broad development of artificial intelligence is found
outside the umbrella of the Chinese state, based on ethics
codes. In China's approach to ethics, legitimacy is attached
to harmony as a principle in Chinese philosophy for all life
forms. At the economic level, multi-stakeholder committees
have outlined artificial intelligence ethical principles, many
of them according to global standards. Both sacredness of
authority and improving democracy through method have
been found absent as legitimacy resources. In contrast,
legitimation by expertise is deeply ingrained on the basis of
economic governance in China. Legitimation by expertise is
heavily linked to the artificial intelligence strategic plan
designed by the China's State Council in 2017, and to
subsequent developments: Chinese officials with technical
expertise occupy 81 seats, nearly 40% of the total, in the
new Central Committee elected in 2023—the elite body that
decides major national policies, up from 18% in the
previous Central Committee. Legitimation by expertise is
also on the basis of the judiciary, with the creation of
System 2016, the contentious Shanghai High People's Court
Intelligence assistive case-handling system for criminal
cases. Finally, artificial intelligence in the form of NLP and
deep learning have also been used extensively to work with
relevant information from 1,4 million patients to help
frontline patient care, including artificial intelligence deep
learning to recognize visual symptoms.
Future works may refine limitations derived from
using binary code when the Dashboard proposed is applied
to particular cases. In order to avoid this limitation, this
coding could be complemented with normalized scales –i.e.
Likert scale- and other metrics showing further comparative
scalability for each of the dimensions in the Dashboard.
Future works may also consider the shift of the Chinese
government towards regulation of generative AI, with the
new policies of the Chinese Minister of Science and
Technology in the summer of 2023. This is an important
departure from previous hands off policies towards AI
regulation.
For
future
works
and
research,
the
Gil
Dashboard presented may further help to ask relevant
questions
on
challenges
in
current
societies;
from
uncertainties that countries face against AI development to
challenges based on cultural values including those related
to democratic realms, and challenges due to the intersection
between local values and AI development.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wants to thank María Llanos Robledano for the
revision of the final manuscript. The author acknowledges
the comments of five anonymous reviewers, which helped
to improve the final version when the paper was accepted
for presentation at IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in
Science, Technology, Services, and Applications, Venice,
Italy April 24 - 28. The author also wants to acknowledge
the comments of three anonymous reviewers, which helped
to improve the final manuscript for the journal. The author
also wants to acknowledge the inspiration and lessons
learned from Prof. Joaquín Abellán, teaching together at the
Master on Political Theory and Democratic Culture at UCM
in the 2000-2022 editions, and to thank Prof. Carmelo
Moreno´s comments to earlier work at the 2022 AECPA
Congress in Girona (Spain).
REFERENCES
[1] Gil, Olga. AI Philosophy: Sources of Legitimacy to Analyze
Artificial Intelligence. The Sixth International Conference on
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ICDS - ACHI 2013)
IARIA, April 24-28, 2023 - Venice, Italy. 2023, ISSN: 2308-4138,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-250-9, doi: 10.31219/osf.io/39njx
[2] Contera, Sonia. (2022, February 22) La nanotecnología llega a
la vida [video]. https://youtu.be/vAYAnI6kqrY. Last retrieved
November 14th, 2023.
212
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[3] US Department of Commerce. Commerce Implements New
Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductor
Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of China (PRC).
October 7, 2022.
[4] Ryan, Maria. How Taiwan's tiny chips are quietly shaping US
geopolitics,
The
Conversation.
22
August,
7
https://interestingengineering.com/culture/taiwan-tiny-chips-shape-
us-geopolitics. Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[5] Xinhua, (CPC Congress) Full text of resolution on Party
Constitution
amendment.
Oct.,
22th.,
2022.
https://english.news.cn/20221022/fea670f419d7426ab564a795d57
37b52/c.html. Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[6] Abellán, Joaquín. El político y el científico: Weber. Madrid,
Alianza Editorial. 2021.
[7] Matheson, Craig. Weber and the Classification of Forms of
Legitimacy. British Journal of Sociology, pp. 199-215, 1987.
[8] World Bank Group. Harnessing artificial intelligence for
development in the post-covid-19 era. A Review of National AI
Strategies and Policies. May, 2021.
[9] Eichler, William. Shockingly small number of councils
embrace
automation.
LocalGov.
10
May
2019.
https://www.localgov.co.uk/Shockingly-small-number-of-councils-
embrace-automation-study-reveals/47387 Last retrieved November
14th, 2023.
[10] Justo-Hanani, Ronit. The politics of Artificial Intelligence
regulation and governance reform in the European Union. Policy
Sciences, vol. 55, no 1, pp. 137-159, 2022.
[11] Ding, Jeffrey. Promoting nationally, acting locally: China´s
next generation AI approach. In NESTA. The AI Powered State.
China´s Approach to public innovation, pp. 11-17, 2020.
[12] Ding, Jeffrey. Deciphering China’s AI Dream: The Context,
Components, Capabilities, and Consequences of China’s Strategy
to Lead the World in AI. Future of Humanity Institute, Oxford
University. 2018
[13] Hillman, Noel L. The Use of Artificial Intelligence in
Gauging the Risk of Recidivism, The Judges, Journal 58, no. 1, pp.
36-39, 2019.
[14] Naughton, Barry. Chinese Industrial Policy and the Digital
Silk Road: The Case of Alibaba in Malaysia, Asia Policy 27, no. 1,
pp. 23-39, 2020.
[15] Brandt, Loren, and Rawski, Thomas G. Policy, Regulation,
and Innovation in China’s Electricity and Telecom Industries, in
Policy, Regulation and Innovation in China’s Electricity and
Telecom Industries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 13,
pp. 1-51, 2019.
[16] Creemers, Rogier. The ideology behind China´s AI strategy.
NESTA. The AI Powered State. China´s approach to public
innovation. 2020.
[17]
Creemers,
Rogier, Triolo, Paul and Webster, Graham.
‘Translation: Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China
[Effective June 1, 2017]’, DigiChina for New America, updated 29
June
2018,
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blo
g/translation-cybersecurity-law-peoples-republic-china.
Last
retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[18] Lewis, Dev. Separating Myth from Reality: How China’s
Social Credit System uses public data for social governance. In
NESTA. The AI Powered State. China´s Approach to public
innovation. 2020.
[19] Gal, Danit. Perspectives and Approaches in AI Ethics: East
Asia, in Oxford Handbook of Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, eds.
M. Dubber, F. Pasquale, and S. Das, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2020.
[20] Kim, Sung-Young. Hybridized Industrial Ecosystems and the
Makings of a New Developmental Infrastructure in East Asia’s
Green Energy Sector, Review of International Political Economy
26, no. 1, pp. 158-182, 2019.
[21] ECNS, Hangzhou Leads Nation in Attracting Overseas
Returnees,
ECNS
Wire,
28
June
2018,
http://www.ecns.cn/news/cns-wire/2018-06-28/detail-ifyvrptq6363
759.shtml Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[22] Creemers, Rogier. The Ideology Behind China’s AI Strategy.
In NESTA. The AI Powered State. China's Approach to Public
innovation. 2020.
[23] Gil, Olga. Philosophy and Public Administration in China and
Western Countries. Intel Prop Rights. Vol. 11 Iss. 1 No: 1000216,
2023, pp. 1-11.
[24] Ongaro, Edoardo. Philosophy and Public Administration. An
Introduction. Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing. 2018.
[25] Jun, Jong S. Social Construction of Public Administration,
The: Interpretive and Critical Perspectives. SUNY Press, 2012, pp
83.
[26] Stanley, Isaac, Alex Glennie, and Madeleine Gabriel. How
inclusive is innovation policy, Insights from an international
comparison, London: Nesta, 2018.
[27] Gianni, Robert, Santtu Lehtinen, and Mika Nieminen.
"Governance
of
responsible
AI: from ethical guidelines to
cooperative policies." Frontiers in Computer Science 4, 2022.
[28] Roberts, Huw, Josh Cowls, Emmie Hine, Jessica Morley,
Vincent
Wang,
Mariarosaria
Taddeo,
and
Luciano
Floridi.
Governing artificial intelligence in China and the European Union:
comparing aims and promoting ethical outcomes. The Information
Society, pp. 1-19, 2022.
[29] von Carnap, Kai, Shi-Kupfer, Kristin. Values as a Quality
Seal: Germany Should be More Active in Shaping Cooperation
with
China,
MERICS blog: European Voices on China, 4
September 2019, Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS),
https://www.merics.org/en/blog/values-quality-seal-germany-shoul
d-be-more-active-shaping-Cooperation-china
Last
retrieved
November 14th, 2023.
[30] Laskai, Lorand and Webster, Graham. Translation: Chinese
Expert Group Offers Governance Principles for Responsible AI,
DigiChina
for
New
America,
17
June,
2019,
213
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blo
g/translation-chinese-expert-group-offers-governance-principles-re
sponsible-ai/ Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[31] Li, Chenyang. ‘The Ideal of Harmony in Ancient Chinese and
Greek Philosophy’, Dao 7, pp. 81-98, 2008.
[32] Laskai, Lorand and Webster, Graham. Translation: Chinese
Expert Group Offers Governance Principles for “Responsible AI,
DigiChina
for
New
America,
17
June
2019,
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blo
g/translation-chinese-expert-group-offers-governance-principles-re
sponsible-ai/. Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[33]
State
Council,
New
Generation
Artificial
Intelligence
Development
Plan,
2017.
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/blog/chinas-p
lan-lead-ai-purpose-prospects-and-problems/
(Full
English
translation by a group of experienced Chinese linguists with deep
backgrounds on the subject matter, see this document from the
New America foundation). Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[34] Hao, Karen. China’s Xi Stacks Government With Science and
Tech Experts Amid Rivalry With U.S. Wall Street Journal, Nov.
18,
2022,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/chinas-xi-stacks-government-with-sc
ience-and-tech-experts-amid-rivalry-with-u-s-11668772682?utm_s
ource=substack&utm_medium=email
Last retrieved November
14th, 2023.
[32] Han, Eugeniu. From Traffic Management to Smart Courts:
China’s approach to smart cities, in The AI Powered State. In
NESTA. China´s Approach to public innovation, pp. 35-41, 2020.
[33] Chun, Andy. Breaking the iron triangle: AI in China's
healthcare system.
In NESTA. The AI Powered State. China's
Approach to Public innovation. pp. 19-27, 2020.
[34] Hu, Minghe. China Issues Rules to Stop Apps from Abusing
User’s Personal Information in Latest Data Privacy Effort, South
China
Morning
Post,
31
December,
2019,
https://www.scmp.com/tech/apps-social/article/3044051/china-issu
es-rules-stop-apps-abusing-users-personal-information.
Last
retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[35] State Council, Planning Outline for the Construction of a
Social Credit System (2014-2020), China Copyright and Media, 14
June
2014,
updated
25
April,
2015.
https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2014/06/14/planni
ng-outline-for-the-construction-of-a-social-credit-system-2014-202
0/ Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[36] Chinoy, Sahil. The Racist History Behind Facial Recognition’,
New
York
Times,
10
July,
2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/10/opinion/facial-recognition-ra
ce.html. Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[37]
Elgan,
Mike.
‘Uh-oh:
Silicon
Valley
is
Building
a
Chinese-Style Social Credit System’, Fast Company, 26 August
2019,
https://www.fastcompany.com/90394048/uh-oh-silicon-valley-is-b
uilding-a-chinese-style-social-credit-system.
Last
retrieved
November 14th, 2023.
[38] Chokshi, Niraj. Facial Recognition’s Many Controversies,
From Stadium Surveillance to Racist Software, New York Times,
15
May,
2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/15/business/facial-recognition-s
oftware-controversy.html. Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[39] White, Geoff. Use of Facial Recognition Tech “Dangerously
Irresponsible,
BBC
News,
13
May,
2019,
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-48222017. Last retrieved
November 14th, 2023.
[40] Shi, Mingli, Samm Sacks, Qiheng Chen, and Graham
Webster,
Translation:
China’s
Personal
Information Security
Specification, DigiChina for New America, 8 February 2019,
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blo
g/translation-chinas-personal-information-security-specification/.
Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[41] Hu, Yue, Changfeng Chen, Hongnan Liu and Kai Zhou,
Research on the Impact of AI and Big Data on the Trade Between
China and other Countries along the Belt: Take the Application of
Medical Economy as an Example, Changchun: SSER, 2019.
https://webofproceedings.org/proceedings_series/ESSP/SSER%20
2019/SSER30212.pdf Last retrieved November 14th, 2023.
[42]
Liu,
Yi-Ling.
The Future of the Classroom? China’s
experience of AI in education, in The AI Powered State. China´s
Approach to Public Innovation, pp. 27-34, 2020.
[43] Gianni, Letizia. Democratic Accountability in Stressful
Times: When Decisions Must Be Made Quickly. Penn State
Journal of Law & International Affairs, vol. 11, no 1, p. 1, 2023.
214
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

