 
 
Open Data Based Digital Platform for Regional Growth and Development in 
Norway: A Heuristic Evaluation of the User Interface  
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Even though a homogenous growth is more desired 
and expected, socio-economic disparities can still be observed 
across different regions of a country. Measuring regional 
growth is essential for the regions that are falling behind or 
struggling to achieve desired growth. While there exists 
different statistics of regional growth data, there is a lack of 
digital tools that represent the growth data in a visual friendly 
manner to the different stakeholders involved in the region.  We 
have developed a digital platform to address this issue for a 
region in Norway. The platform is developed to use open data 
from different sources that is presented in five major groups 
related to growth: goals, premises or prerequisites for growth, 
industries, growth, and expectations. The platform helps to 
improve decision-making and transparency, as well as provide 
new knowledge for research and society. Compared to other 
similar digital platforms from Norway, our platform has the 
strength of providing more options for visualization that makes 
the statistics more comprehensive. However, we believe that 
proper usability of the tool can be improved by getting feedback 
from real users. Therefore, a heuristic evaluation is conducted 
in order to find out the usability issues and further improve the 
tool for its users. In this article, we report the results of 
evaluation and implications for the future improvement along 
with the presentation of our tool. 
Keywords-digital platform; growth barometer; regional 
growth; open data; analytics; visualization; usability; heuristic 
evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper is an extended version of our previous work [1], 
where we presented Vekstbarometer, an open data and 
analytics driven digital platform for regional growth and 
development used in a municipality in Norway. Open data 
nowadays 
represent 
an 
indispensable 
source 
for 
governments’ strategy when it comes to coping with many 
innovation challenges of the future. In addition, open 
innovation philosophies and approaches are continuously 
being initiated and ratified by public sectors in many different 
countries [2][3].  
In Norway, many governmental agencies have adopted the 
open data initiative and are making data accessible for 
general use. Hence, in order for many businesses and even 
citizens to create innovative value-added products and 
services, they can now access and utilize these open data 
resources [4]. Businesses while relying on open data 
resources can make more intelligent and effective moves by 
performing data analytics on top of open data.  
When defining the meaning of open data, we use the 
definition provided by Open Data Institute, which defines 
open data as “data that is made available by government, 
business and individuals for anyone to access, use and share” 
[5]. It is worth noting that the global economic potential value 
of open data has been estimated to $3 trillion [6]. However, 
the potential and advantage of Open Government Data 
(OGD) for improving services in different economic sectors 
has not been realized to a large extent [7].  
Vekstbarometer is an application that documents and 
illustrates our effort of using open data provided by Statistics 
Norway [8], Real Estate Norway [9] and the Brønnøysund 
Register Centre [10], to create an analytics-driven web 
application that presents regional indicators together with 
research-based knowledge relevant and applicable to regions’ 
growth. As illustrated with the conceptual model shown in 
Figure 1, regional growth correlates with growth in Value 
Creation, Employment, Workplace and Population. A 
region’s growth is often measured by growth in GDP (Gross 
Domestic Product). Nonetheless, the main goal of the policy 
is to contribute to higher welfare and transform the region 
into better place to live and run business. In order for the 
growth barometer to be able to clarify developments and 
provide compatible information connected to political and 
business decisions, a comprehensive definition of growth is 
therefore necessary. The indicators are based on open data 
while statistical visualizations can be created also for 
purposes other than regional growth. In this study, we have 
focused in the region of Ringerike, located in the southeastern 
part of Norway, which has recently seen a decline in the 
number of jobs and insufficient economic growth. To the best 
of our knowledge, there is no similar system developed so 
far, which includes research-based knowledge on a regional 
level in Norway.  
In a national level, one can encounter various digital 
platforms, but they are all different in the sense that they are 
using different data categories, but also, they have different 
purposes. Above all, they provide a limited set of key 
indicators, which visualize, and, are associated with regional 
growth and development.  
A considerable number of regions have business 
barometers based on survey data, gathered on yearly basis 
and register data. They can predict the national and regional 
Salah Uddin Ahmed1, Fisnik Dalipi2, Steinar Aasnass1  
1University of South-Eastern Norway, Hønefoss, Norway 
2Linnaeus University, Kalmar, Sweden 
E-mail: {salah.ahmed, steinar.aasnass}@usn.no; fisnik.dalipi@lnu.se 
239
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
business trends. One such example is Konjukturbarometer 
Østlandet [11], a digital platform that contains, inter alia, a 
knowledge-based 
database 
covering 
information 
on 
developments in the counties of Hedmark, Oppland, Oslo, 
and Akershus. The Confederation of Norwegian Enterprise 
(NHO), which is Norway’s largest organization for 
employers and the leading business lobbyist, represent 
another 
case 
of 
digital 
platform. 
Their 
platform, 
Økonomibarometeret [12] encompasses the current market 
situation, operating profit, investments, and employment on 
a county and national level.  
The main objective behind developing our innovative 
system, which can be accessed at vekstbarometer.usn.no or 
with the path vekstbarometer.usn.no/ringerike, is to offer 
public sector organizations and local businesses a 
management tool with key indicators related to the region’s 
growth. Besides having the feature of improving public 
sectors’ transparency and engagement of civil society, our 
system can also add value towards enhancing economic 
growth via processing, interpreting, and illustrating regional 
open data in a comprehensive and meaningful way. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II presents related work while Section III informs the 
research context: Ringerike region’s need of a digital 
platform for its development. Section IV introduces the 
Vekstbarometer system and the technology used for its 
development, along with its strength and impact for regional 
growth.  Section V presents the heuristic evaluation of the 
user interface of the application and lastly, Section VI 
concludes the paper and provides some insights about 
potential future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
As a result of the emergence and pervasiveness of ICT, 
many governmental institutions across the globe have been 
embracing initiatives to transform themselves into e-
governments [13], and consequently are encouraging citizen 
participation in governments. OGD represents one of the 
main extensions of such e-government initiatives [14]. OGD 
is making data freely available to all with the sole intention 
to ensure public accountability and transparency [15], to 
boost innovation in various economic sectors and to increase 
efficiency in administration.  
But, notwithstanding this, for the stakeholders to derive the 
public value out of the open data, it is of paramount 
importance for the data sets to be re-usable, comprehensive, 
interpretable, complete, and permit user-friendly interface. 
Also, government authorities should be proactive to ensure 
that the data sets are in harmony with the stipulated norms, 
such as preserving personal and private information of the 
users, or protecting and prohibiting the publishing of 
sensitive data associated to national security. In that regard, 
the government has created the Norwegian License for Open 
Government Data (NLOD) and have recommended all data 
owners in the public sector to apply the license, which 
contains, 
among 
others, 
information 
on 
preserving 
confidential and personal data [16]. When it comes to global 
status and trends of open data in the context of readiness, 
implementation and impact, Norway ranks among the top ten 
best countries in the world [17]. 
In the state-of-the-art literature, there exist two categories 
of OGD research. The first category is mainly based on 
conceptual models and frameworks including theoretical 
proposals [18, 19], also incorporating studies, which are 
discussing the main stages of the OGD life cycle [20]. The 
second category, where our work belongs, incorporates 
studies that are taking place in different geographical 
locations by using OGD at the state or local level. 
Additionally, one important characteristic of this category is 
the open data exploration and exploitation. Here, the data 
generated by multiple sources of governmental institutions 
are processed and visualized for different purposes. This 
includes conducting various analysis, creating mashups, to 
improve the interpretability of open data, or even innovate 
upon the open data.   
Recently, multiple applications have been successfully 
implemented and developed based upon the open data sets 
across the world, focusing primarily on larger cities, such as 
Chicago [21][22], New York [23], Dublin [24], St. 
Petersburg [25], Singapore [26]. 
However, despite the interest and the rapid proliferation of 
open data platforms, many challenges remain when it comes 
to the accessibility and usability of platforms using open data, 
data quality and completeness, and interpretability of open 
data. As far as enhancing the interpretability of open data is 
concerned, the authors in [21][22] run a case study to analyze 
the open socioeconomic data released by the city of Chicago, 
where they use different visualizations adjusted for 
univariate, bivariate and multivariate analysis. This approach 
implies that delving into open urban data can lead to more 
effective data interpretation and analysis. Regarding the 
usability aspects for user interface design of open data 
platforms, a case study scenario also including a 
transportation challenge in Dublin City identified important 
patterns for highly usable open data platforms for open data 
policy [24]. This study recommends that these platforms 
should adopt user-friendly technology and social media 
platforms. From architectural standpoint, in the literature 
there is an interesting and relevant work presented by [26]. In 
this work, an open data platform prototype is developed to 
illustrate the requirements and the architecture of open real 
time digital platform. The main aim behind developing this 
platform is to serve as a base for programming the city of 
Singapore, and generate visual data analytics in a city 
context.  
Nonetheless, none of the mentioned research works was 
related to comprehensive visualization of growth data fetched 
from open governmental datasets in a regional context. 
Therefore, we aim to fill this gap by developing 
Vekstbarometer, an open data driven digital platform which 
will aid businesses in making more intelligent and strategic 
moves. The platform will also help businesses to perform 
240
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
informed decision making and will increase transparency for 
citizens. 
III. 
RESEARCH CONTEXT: REGION’S NEED FOR A 
DIGITAL PLATFORM 
The Vekstbarometer application was developed for 
Ringerike region as a response to deal with the regions falling 
growth. Many key factors related to growth and welfare 
pointed out lack of desired growth in the region. 
Ringerike has around 43,000 inhabitants. Over the last 10 
years, as mentioned in [27], the number of total new 
employment for the region was only 145 while at the same 
time the number of jobs decreased was 321. Besides, value 
creation for the region's business sector has also shown a 
weaker development compared to other neighboring regions 
that are natural competitors for Ringerike having, similar 
background, assets and distance from capital city. If this 
negative tendency is not reversed in near future, Ringerike 
region will face the consequences of declining private and 
public welfare. This will make the region a less attractive 
place to live. However, politicians and businesses in the 
region are optimistic in terms of the future. New four-lane 
highway and new high-speed railway from the capital Oslo to 
Ringerike region’s main city Hønefoss is planned to be 
completed around 2028. This gives enormous opportunities 
for Ringerike to reverse the negative trend and generate new 
growth that will ensure future welfare and good living 
conditions in the region. Nevertheless, in order to accomplish 
this growth, it requires good decisions from the region's public 
authorities and industry. A growth barometer that monitors the 
growth and significant conditions for growth in the region 
could provide a useful management tool for strategic 
decisions.  
The target user group for the barometer are politicians, 
municipality administration, business and the community. 
 Large amounts of statistics and information related to growth 
and development for municipality regions already exists from 
different sources. However, there is a need that these statistics 
and information are provided in a customized way targeted for 
the use in Ringerike region besides developing new and better 
statistics for the region, and breaking them down at regional 
and local level. In our search of finding similar tools or 
platforms as growth barometer for other regions in Norway, 
we found quite a few solutions, but none with the approach 
and objectives that we mentioned here. We believe that a 
digital platform like growth barometer could give Ringerike 
region a significant competitive advantage over other regions, 
which are also seeking regional growth and development. 
A. The logical model of Barometer 
The conceptual model behind the growth barometer is 
given in Figure 1. The objective of regional development is 
given through the points in (A), i.e., higher value creation, 
employment, jobs and higher populations. In the national 
level, there will always be a number of people and businesses 
considering to "relocate". A region will compete with other 
regions as a national competition to get these businesses and 
individuals to establish themselves in its own territory. Here, 
conditions for regional growth (B) and local industry's 
contribution to local growth (C) can serve as lucrative points 
for capturing a good share of the influx of national movements 
of persons and businesses. If the conditions (B) and the local 
business sector's efforts (C) are large, this portion will be 
large. The result will be a major influx of businesses and 
individuals. We assume that growth targets mentioned in (A) 
can be achieved together with regional economic dynamics 
linked to business development, housing construction, etc. 
 
 
 
  
Figure 1. The logical model behind the Vekstbarometer 
241
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
IV. 
VEKSTBAROMETER - THE DIGITAL PLATFORM 
TECHNOLOGY 
Vekstbarometer, which in Norwegian stands for “growth 
barometer” is a digital platform that provides the 
development trends in the regional context in a visual and 
user-friendly way. The platform uses data from different 
sources, these data are presented mainly in five main groups: 
i) Goals, ii) Premises or Prerequisites for growth, iii) 
Industries, iv) Growth, and v) Expectations. 
Each group consists of several categories and each 
category contains several variables, which actually holds the 
statistical data. The groups and the categories form the 
information architecture of the digital platform, which is 
shown in the Figure 2. 
The group Goals contains the following categories: 
Population, Value Creation, Employment, Jobs, and Welfare. 
Each of these categories contains a number of variables, 
which for the sake of simplicity, are not shown in the figure. 
These variables represent the data analyses and are used to 
generate the visual representations in the form of charts, 
graphs, and diagrams. For example, the category Population 
contains ten variables, some of which are: total inhabitants, 
age-wise population, population change trends, net 
population change etc. Each variable is represented by a 
number, for example total inhabitants is presented by 1, age-
wise population is presented by 25. The numbers are not 
assigned in any particular order; rather they were assigned 
when the statistics of the variables were being added in the 
system. 
The variable number can be seen from the URL; when 
browsing a certain statistic from the navigation menu the 
URL gets changed with the variable number such as 
https://vekstbarometer.usn.no/statistic/25. 
 
 
Figure 2. Information architecture of the application 
 
Thus, the statistic variable 25 can be accessed from the 
navigation menu, as well as from the URL by appending the 
variable number (25) after the URL given at [28]. 
In addition to presenting open data, Vekstbarometer also 
presents survey data from the local industries that reflects the 
expectations and assumptions of the local entrepreneurs and 
business owners. The application consists of mainly three 
parts: backend, presentation and database. The system 
architecture of Vekstbarometer application is given in Figure 
3.  
Backend is mainly responsible for processing requests 
from the presentation layer. Based on the requests, it retrieves 
raw data from the database, sort them and send them to the 
presentation layer. Backend collects data from external data 
storage such as open data that are provided by others (such as 
Statistics Norway) through APIs. It also processes other input 
data to the system and the survey data. Data from external 
sources are retrieved in the desired formats and are saved in 
the database for storage. Different external data are updated 
in different periodic intervals, such as quarterly, half-yearly 
and yearly. These data sources are fetched periodically to 
keep the main database updated. 
 
 
Figure 3. Vekstbarometer system architecture 
 
Presentation takes care of conversion of data transmitted 
from backend, transformation of these data and displaying 
on-screen to end-user. This is the main part of the application 
that the user sees and interacts with.  
The database holds the persistent and transient data that 
are critical for running the application. At the beginning, we 
have used MySQL databases for the persistent storage, which 
was later migrated to MariaDB. We have used Angular 2 for 
presentation and frontend, and PHP for the backend. 
While developing the digital platform, at first the relevant 
growth indicators and variables were carefully selected and 
matched with the region’s context. Relevant indicators were 
chosen based on our previous research and then they were 
matched with regional contexts through several meetings 
with local stakeholders, key business people and municipality 
administrators. The relevant regions to which Ringerike’s 
statistics are compared with were also selected through these 
meetings. 
Later on, based on the variables, suitable data providers 
were searched and identified for them. In case of selecting a 
data provider, the accuracy and trustworthiness were 
prioritized. When multiple providers were found for a single 
242
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
variable, the originality or the owner of the data was sought. 
In order to avoid any discrepancy, we followed the principle 
of collecting data from the original providers and in case of 
multiple sources of some data; we collected all similar data 
from a single source to have validity of comparisons among 
them.  
Most of the data used in the platform is collected from 
Statistics Norway, which provides data from country level to 
municipality level for all municipalities in Norway. It 
provides an API service to query through its 6000 tables and 
output is provided in JSON-stat, csv, and .xlsx formats. 
For the initial phase of the application, we collected the 
desired data for one or more municipalities of the barometer 
by using Statistics Norway’s API console, and stored them in 
the application’s database. Subsequently, an admin panel was 
added in the application from where admin can update these 
tables whenever new data is available in the source providers.  
A. Data 
The growth barometer application Vekstbarometer is a 
data visualization platform. It deals with several kinds of data 
some of which are sensitive data and some are not sensitive 
data. Data that are already presented as open data by other 
sources, such as Statistics Norway are non-sensitive. Since 
these data are already available and open for public, we do 
not have any restrictions on showing them in raw format or 
in any modified format. Apart from non-sensitive data, there 
are data or part of data which contain some sensitive 
information about people or businesses that should not be 
made publicly available, e.g., a person’s personal number 
(social security number) or a business’s sales and marketing 
plans, confidential customer or supplier information, etc. 
Vekstbarometer also stores and shows data collected 
through surveys. These surveys are done anonymously and 
therefore personal information and anonymity should be 
handled as sensitive. Besides, we follow the EU General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) rules when collecting data 
from local businesses.  
Data that are collected from other sources are mostly 
obtained by running some data processing operations such as 
filtering or making queries in order to fit our local needs that 
are represented by the statistics variables. Referring to the 
Article 4 EU GDPR definitions, we can say that data 
processing is a broad term that includes several operations 
such as collection, recording, organization, structuring, 
storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, 
disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise 
making available, alignment or combination, restriction, 
erasure or destruction etc. [29]. Being a data driven platform, 
Vekstbarometer includes lot of these data processing 
activities as the data provided by the sources come in various 
formats, various shapes and they require to be adapted to a 
standard format before being stored in the application’s 
database. 
 
Vekstbarometer, 
though 
mostly 
presents 
selected 
variable/indicator’s data from other sources in suitable visual 
friendly graphical presentations, it also provides the users 
some pre-selected operations such as selecting and 
deselecting range of parameters and regions for a certain 
statistic variable. Besides, the growth barometer has the 
capability to show some newly created data that are not 
available in any other data sources. 
B. Visualizations  
Data in the growth barometer is presented using different 
kinds of charts and diagrams which include line charts, bar 
charts, stacked columns, stacked percentage column, column 
with drill down, pie charts etc. For visualizations, we have 
used a JavaScript library called Highcharts. With 
Highcharts, it is possible to create charts in many shapes, like 
heat maps, waterfall series and more. In addition, the charts 
are highly configurable, customizable and interactive. 
 
 
Figure 4. Age wise population chart for all regions, variable 25 
 
When we say configurable and customizable, we mean 
that values can be added and removed to the charts on the fly. 
As an example, if we take a look at Figure 4, which presents 
the graph for variable 25 and shows the age-wise population 
comparisons in different regions; we can choose the age 
groups that will be presented in the graph. The graph shows 
not only the percentage of an age group, in addition, it also 
the absolute value of that group in a tooltip text when mouse 
is hovered over on that group. Besides these customization 
features, the regions in the x-axis is linked to a detailed view 
of the age wise population chart for only that region (Figure 
5), thus making the visualization configurable and interactive 
at the same time.  
 
243
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 5. Age wise population chart for a specific region, variable 25 
 
The visualization of a statistic variable is further 
complemented by some additional information such as: i) 
textual description of the variable, ii) links to related 
documents iii) links to related variables. Besides, each 
variable 
presentation 
is 
provided 
with 
alternative 
graph/presentation 
options. 
 Accompanying 
textual 
description gives a brief introduction of the variable for a 
better understanding of the variable and its usage. Users can 
read the links to related documents for further understanding 
of the concepts. By using the links to related variables, users 
can navigate to related statistic variables directly from a 
specific variable’s page. The Alternative graph option lists a 
number of options, and by selecting one of those options, the 
user can view the same statistical variable in a different form 
of presentation, for example in linear chart, bar chart, pie 
chart etc., which could give another view and perspective of 
the variable.   
C. The Strength and Impact of the platform 
As reported in our previous study [1], the growth 
barometer digital platform shows data in an easy, 
comprehensible and meaningful way. Although some data 
that our platform presents are already provided by other data 
outlets, our platform adds extra value by making a better 
presentation of the data. Furthermore, in contrast to other 
platforms, such as [30][31][32][33][34], where the data is 
presented as raw data or with basic level of presentations, our 
platform has the advantage of providing a range of options 
for 
visualization 
that 
makes 
the 
statistics 
more 
comprehensive. Even in case where the platform is showing 
existing data from other sources, still we add value on it. 
In addition to showing already existing data, the platform 
shows some new data as well. The new data can be of two 
types: i) newly formed data, ii) newly created data. Newly 
formed data is created by combining and filtering data from 
multiple sources where the data were partly available but not 
in the exact form that is presented here in the growth 
barometer. 
On the other hand, newly created data refers to the case where 
we create, collect or gather new data that were not available 
or presented in any other platform.  As an example of newly 
formed data, we can mention “future population growth”, 
which is represented in our platform as statistical variable 56 
(see Figure 6). Here, the expected future population growth 
is taken from three different sources: Statistics Norway 
estimation, political estimation and housing building 
estimation. This new variable shows the gap or surplus of 
housing capacities with the Statistics Norway estimation or 
political assumptions and gives a good indication whether the 
assumptions or planning are feasible or not compared to the 
housing capacities that are planned for the region.  In addition 
to showing the statistics in visual form, the platform also 
provides the option to download data and images. It has the 
options to download data in multiple formats such as csv, pdf, 
xls, and the images in png, jpeg and svg vector image formats. 
It also provides the option of printing the chart and view the 
data of the chart in tabular forms. All these options increase 
the usability of the tool and facilitates multiple use cases for 
the users of the system. Users of Vekstbarometer can use 
customized graphs and charts from the platform and include 
them in their presentations or documents. 
 
 
Figure 6. Future population growth, variable 56 
 
The Vekstbarometer digital platform is a constituent part 
of the five years long Vekstbarometer Project, which is 
managed by the Regional Development Group at the 
University of South-Eastern Norway (usn.no). Since the 
initiation of the project, a status report is planned to be issued 
every year presenting the current growth status of the region. 
Ringerike region also has a business policy strategy which 
sets the premises for how business policy is to be pursued to 
create growth in the region's business community. The 
Vekstbarometer platform helps to create the strategy and 
present the annual results of the regional growth according to 
the growth objectives given at Figure 1. Moreover, the 
244
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
municipality authorities can rely on Vekstbarometer data in 
order to define their targets and priorities and make better 
decisions. 
V. 
HEURISTIC EVALUATION 
In order to perform the heuristic evaluation of the 
Vekstbarometer’s 
interface, 
we 
have 
followed 
the 
methodology proposed by Jacob Nielsen and Robert L. Mack 
[35], by having each evaluator inspect the interface 
independently. As it is recommended by Nielsen on this 
seminal work, for performing a heuristic evaluation, three to 
five evaluators are sufficient. In our experiment, four users 
are involved to examine and evaluate the interface and assess 
its compliance with recognized usability principles described 
in [35].  
A. Procedure and Data Collection 
The evaluators were contacted by phone and were sent 
information about the survey as well as the questionnaire. 
Four people were asked and all agreed to participate. The 
respondents were selected on the basis of their central role in 
the regional development and their perceived benefit of this 
application. One of the authors of this paper has also had a 
dialogue with these people and have understood they have 
used and were familiar with Vekstbarometer web application. 
The users have been instructed about how the interfaces work 
and were informed for the purpose of the app, i.e., the 
evaluators were provided with hints on using the interface. 
All the evaluators were asked to evaluate Vekstbarometer 
independently. They were very informative and had a lot of 
relevant feedback as well as the rating of the various criteria 
in the Nielsen checklist. Duration of the survey including 
information and some "short discussions" was between 30 
and 40 minutes. When it comes to various assessment criteria 
of the application interface, users were asked to assess the 
severity of any errors based on the scale given in Table II. In 
Table I, we present the results from the Nielsen’s heuristic 
evaluation framework for Vekstbarometer. 
B. Findings and Discussion 
Generally, the results from the user evaluation of 
Vekstbarometer indicate positive attitude and experience 
from our evaluators. All the four evaluators unanimously 
agree that out of 23 heuristic sub-principles in the checklist, 
there is no usability problem at all (scale 0) for 1a, 2a, 4a, 5a, 
7c, 7d, and 9a, 9b, 9c, which corresponds to the following 
sub-principles in Table I:  
 
Visibility of system status/The app provides feedback 
about status (1a),  
 
Match between system and real world/Clear 
terminology/no jargon (2a), 
 
Consistency and standards/Links are clear and follow 
conventions (4a), 
 
Error prevention/Error message problem (5a), 
 
Flexibility and efficiency of use/Consistent way to 
return to Home Menu (7c), 
 
Flexibility and efficiency of use/Simple navigation 
menu (7d). 
The overall evaluation results presented in Figure 7 show 
that the majority of experienced usability problems by all 
evaluators correlate with heuristic principles 3 (user control 
and freedom), 6 (recognition rather than recall), 8 (aesthetic 
and minimalist design), and 10 (Help and documentation). As 
far as the first evaluator feedback is concerned (E1), there is 
no usability issue (scale 0) identified in 19 sub-principles i.e., 
1a, 2a, 2b, 3a, 4a, 4b, 4c, 5a, 6b, 7a, 7b, 7c, 7d, 8a, 8b, 8d, 9a, 
9b, and 9c from Table I. He identified no cosmetic problems 
that need to be fixed (scale 1). Three minor usability 
problems with low priority to be fixed are identified (scale 2), 
which correspond to principles 3a, 6a, 6c, and only one major 
usability problem with high priority to be fixed (scale 3) 
corresponding to 10a.  
TABLE I.  
HEURISTICS EVALUATION RESULTS FOR 
VEKSTBAROMETER 
 
Heuristic evaluation checklist 
Evaluators 
 
 
E1 
E2 
E3 
E4 
1 
Visibility of system status 
 
 
 
 
a 
The app provides feedback about system 
status 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
Match between system and real world 
 
 
 
 
a 
Clear terminology, no jargon 
0 
0 
0 
0 
b 
Content is clear and follow conventions 
0 
0 
2 
0 
3 
User control and freedom 
 
 
 
 
a 
Logical structure of the app 
0 
0 
2 
2 
b 
Effective internal search 
2 
1 
3 
0 
4 
Consistency and standards 
 
 
 
 
a 
Links are clear and follow conventions 
0 
0 
0 
0 
b 
Various app functions are well integrated 
0 
0 
2 
0 
c 
Clear 
and 
consistent 
navigation 
throughout the app 
0 
0 
3 
0 
5 
Error prevention 
 
 
 
 
a 
Error messages problem 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6 
Recognition rather than recall 
 
 
 
 
a 
Objects, actions and options are visible 
2 
1 
3 
2 
b 
Organization of information makes sense 
0 
1 
2 
0 
7 
Flexibility and efficiency of use 
 
 
 
 
a 
Very easy to use and interact 
0 
0 
2 
0 
b 
Provides shortcuts for frequent tasks 
0 
0 
3 
0 
c 
Consistent way to return Home/Menu 
0 
0 
0 
0 
d 
Easy to identify current location 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
Aesthetic and minimalist design 
 
 
 
 
a 
Clean and simple design 
0 
0 
2 
0 
b 
Text and colors are consistent 
0 
0 
2 
0 
c 
Images are meaningful and serve a 
purpose 
2 
0 
0 
0 
d 
Simple navigation menu 
0 
0 
3 
0 
9 
Help users recognize, diagnose and 
recover from errors 
 
 
 
 
a 
(Error) Messages are explained in a plain 
language 
0 
0 
0 
0 
b 
Any problem is precisely indicated 
0 
0 
0 
0 
c 
A potential solution is constructively 
suggested 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
Help and documentation 
 
 
 
 
a 
Help or Tips are available and clear 
3 
0 
3 
3 
 
 
245
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
TABLE II.  
RATING SCALE 
Scale 
Meaning 
0 
Not a usability problem at all 
1 
Cosmetic problem only, need not to be fixed 
2 
Minor usability problem, low priority to be fixed 
3 
Major usability problem, high priority to be fixed 
4 
Usability catastrophe, imperative to fix this before product can 
be released 
 
When it comes to the second evaluator’s (E2) results, no 
usability problems at all (scale 0) were identified in 20 sub-
principles, i.e., 1a, 2a, 2b, 3a, 4a, 4b, 4c, 5a, 7a, 7b, 7c, 7d, 
8a, 8b, 8c, 8d, 9a, 9b, 9c and 10a. 
This evaluator was the only one to discover cosmetic 
problems (scale 1) relating to principles 3b, 6a, and 6b. No 
minor usability issues (scale 2) and no major usability 
problem with high priority that need to be fixed (scale 3) were 
identified in the rest of 20 heuristic sub-principles. 
On the other hand, the third evaluator’s (E3) results seem 
to be more criticizing from the rest of the participants, when 
it comes to heuristic evaluation of Vekstbarometer interface. 
The feedback from E3 indicate that there are no usability 
problems at all (scale 0) in 10 out of 23 principles, i.e., 1a, 2a, 
4a, 5a, 7c, 7d, 8c, 9a, 9b, and 9c.  
 
 
Figure 7. Distribution of usability problems per heuristic principle 
 
Whereas no cosmetic usability problems were identified, 
still there are 7 minor usability problems (scale 2) discovered 
in 2b, 3a, 4b, 6b, 7a, 8a, and 8b. Furthermore, this evaluator 
also identifies 6 major usability problems with high priority 
of fixing (scale 3), which are corresponding to sub-principles 
3b, 4c, 6a, 7b, 8d, and 10a. 
Lastly, regarding the fourth evaluator (E4) feedback, only 
three heuristic sub-principles received usability problem 
related points. No usability issues at all (scale 0) and no 
cosmetic problems that need to be fixed (scale 1) were 
identified in the rest of the 20 heuristic sub-principles. Two 
minor usability problems with low priority of fixing (scale 2) 
were identified in sub-principles 3a and 6a, and only one 
major usability problem with high priority of fixing (scale 3) 
was identified for 10a.  
As can be seen from Table III, none of the feedback from 
the four evaluators relates to severity scaling 4 of the 
Nielsen’s heuristic principles, which means that no usability 
catastrophe is found with this prototype of Vekstbarometer. 
On the other hand, there were altogether 23 usability 
problems experienced by the 4 participants in heuristics 
evaluation, of which 3 were cosmetic, 12 were minor, and 8 
were major usability problems.  
TABLE III.  
FREQUENCY OF A SEVERITY SCALE USED 
Severity scale 
E1 
E2 
E3 
E4 
Total 
0 
19 
20 
10 
20 
69 
1 
0 
3 
0 
0 
3 
2 
3 
0 
7 
2 
12 
3 
1 
0 
6 
1 
8 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
C. Comments from evaluators 
In this section, we present some of the comments of the 
evaluators for the readers. All of the four respondents pointed 
out that the solution contained highly relevant and useful 
information relevant to their job. However, all of them 
mentioned that they had to spend a lot of time getting to know 
the solution and its functionalities.  
“We regularly use Vekstbarometer at meetings. Here we 
get information that helps us to better understand the 
connection between different goals set by the municipality.” 
Evaluator #3.  
“By using Vekstbarometer we have gained a greater 
understanding of the factors that are important for the 
municipality for transforming it into a better place to live.” 
Evaluator #2. 
“The Vekstbarometer helps us to see the market potential 
of our products by studying indicators that describe the 
business structure of the region.” Evaluator #1 
 “Still many variables of Vekstbarometer application are 
not fully explained and therefore they make it somewhat 
unclear.” Evaluator #4. 
The users were also aware that the solution needed 
improvement related to help and tips related to navigating in 
the solution. Since users were familiar with the solution, they 
found the information they wanted, but were aware that for 
new users, improved help and tip functionality would be 
required. 
“The search function is bad. It is important and needs to 
be improved. However, in the meantime, I have become 
familiar with the content and the functionalities of the 
246
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
application, so I can manage to find the stuffs that I want.”  
Evaluator #3   
“Since the content of the Vekstbarometer is good, I had 
great motivation to find relevant information from the system 
despite some weak functionalities.” Evaluator #3 
“After 
having 
a 
detailed 
explanation 
of 
the 
functionalities, I see that I have not been able to find all the 
relevant information. This means that the functionalities 
needs to be improved.” Evaluator #4  
The four respondents were respectively a business 
manager (evaluator 1), an elected representative/politician 
(evaluator 2), a municipal employee (evaluator 3), and a 
private consultant (evaluator 4). In overall, they represented 
well the target group of the Vekstbarometer. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have presented the Vekstbarometer 
digital platform and the heuristic evaluation of its user 
interface.  Inspired by the developments in the field of open 
data initiatives, we developed the platform to combine 
multiple open data sources to generate various visualizations. 
This gives insights into the regional growth and development, 
and demonstrates the usefulness of open data in regional 
context. Furthermore, it also helps to improve decision-
making and transparency, as well as provide new knowledge 
for research and society. The platform was well accepted by 
the regional stakeholders.  For the purpose of successfully 
running our experiment, we involved four active users of 
Vekstbarometer to conduct a heuristic evaluation of the tool. 
The evaluation indicated that the tool has mostly high 
usability features with a minimal set of major usability 
problems. Even though the usability problem issues are 
minimal and mostly coming from one user, still this is a good 
indication for our future improvement. The application is 
relatively complex and deals with a lot of statistical 
parameters and indicators of which many are very similar or 
has only slight differences among them. Therefore, it is very 
important to have a well-organized content structure and easy 
to follow navigation. The evaluation also revealed some of 
our drawbacks, such as lack of effective internal search, 
which will help us to focus on our future work.  
We also take the positive findings of the heuristic’s 
evaluation as an indication that the Vekstbarometer 
application has been able to provide desired information and 
interactions to its users and has a good potential for the 
regional stakeholders.  
As a future work, we intend to expand the functionality of 
the platform by expanding the dataset and focus on 
converting the digital platform into a fully-fledged and 
mobile-friendly application. Besides, as a takeaway from the 
evaluation, we would like to further improve the content 
structure of the application and implement the internal search 
options. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors greatly acknowledge the grant from Sparebank1 
Ringerike Hadeland, which kindly supported this project, and 
the important contribution given by Knut Johan and Emil 
Kalstø in implementing the digital platform. We would also 
like to extend our gratitude to the evaluators who took their 
time to complete the heuristic evaluation. Last but not least, 
we would like to thank the reviewers for their thoughtful 
comments towards improving this article.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S.U. Ahmed, S. Aasnass, F. Dalipi, and K. Hesten, “Analytics-
Driven 
Digital 
Platform 
for 
Regional 
Growth 
and 
Development: A Case Study from Norway”. In Proceedings of 
The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and 
eGovernments, Athens, Greece, 2019, pp. 56 – 62. 
[2] T. Nam, “Suggesting frameworks of citizen-sourcing via 
Government 2.0”, Government Information Quarterly, vol. 29, 
pp. 12-20, 2012. 
[3] S.M. Lee, T. Hwang, and D. Choi, “Open innovation in the 
public sector of leading countries”, Management Decision, vol. 
50, pp. 147-162, 2012. 
[4] “Norwegian Directorate for Management and ICT”, URL:  
https://www.difi.no/fagomrader-og-tjenester/digitalisering-og-
samordning/apne-data [accessed 2019.12.07]. 
[5] “Open Data Roadmap for the UK”, 2015, The Open Data 
Institute, URL: theodi.org/article/open-data-roadmap-for-the-
uk-2015/ [accessed 2019.12.07]. 
[6] J. Manyika, M. Chui, P. Groves, D. Farrell, S.V. Kuiken, and 
E.A. Doshi, “Open data: Unlocking innovation and 
performance with liquid information”. Technical report, 
McKinsey & Company, 2013. 
[7] M. Janssen,Y. Charalabidis, and A. Zuiderwijk, “Benefits, 
adoption barriers and myths of open data and open 
government”. Information Systems Management, vol. 29, no. 
4, 2012, pp. 258–268. 
[8] “Statistical Bureauf of Norway”, URL:https://www.ssb.no/ 
[accessed 2019.12.08]. 
[9] “The 
Norwegian 
Housing 
Price 
Statistics”, 
URL:   
http://eiendomnorge.no/ [accessed 2019.12.08]. 
[10] “Brønnøysund Register Centre”, URL: https://www.brreg.no/ 
[accessed 2019.12.08]. 
[11] “The 
Business 
Barometer 
Konjuktur”, 
URL:  
https://konjunkturbarometer1.no/ [accessed 2019.12.08]. 
[12] “Barometer of the Confederation of Norwegian Enterprises”, 
URL:  http://okonomibarometer.nho.no/ [accessed 2019.12.07] 
[13] M. Mpinganjira, “Use of e-government services: the role of 
trust”, International Journal of Emerging Markets, vol. 10 no. 
4, 2015, pp. 622-633. 
[14] T. Jetzek, M. Avital, and N. Bjørn-Andersen, “Generating 
sustainable value from open data in a sharing society”, in B. 
Bergvall-Kåreborn, and P. Nielsen, (Eds), Creating Value for 
All Through IT. TDIT 2014.  IFIP Advances in Information 
and Communication Technology, vol. 429. Springer, Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
[15] R.E. Sieber and P.A. Johnson, “Civic open data at a crossroads: 
dominant models and current challenges”, Government 
Information Quarterly, vol. 32 no. 3, 2015, pp. 308-315. 
[16] “Norwegian License for Open Government Data (NLOD 1.0)”, 
URL:  https://data.norge.no/nlod/en/1.0 [accessed 2019.12.08]. 
[17] E. F. Ramos, “Open Data Development of Countries: Global 
Status and Trends”, ITU Kaleidoscope: Challenges for a Data-
Driven Society (ITU K), 27-29 Nov 2017, Nanjing, China. 
DOI: 10.23919/ITU-WT.2017.8246984. 
247
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
[18] B.W. Wirtz and S. Birkmeyer, “Open government: origin, 
development, and conceptual perspectives”, International 
Journal of Public Administration, vol. 38, no. 5, 2015, pp. 381-
396.  
[19] P. McDermott, “Building open government”, Government 
Information Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 4, 2010, pp. 401-413. 
[20] J. Attard, F. Orlandi, S. Scerri, and S. Auer, “A systematic 
review of open government data initiatives”, Government 
Information Quarterly, vol. 32 no. 4, 2015, pp. 399-418. 
[21] R. Barcellos, J. Viterbo, L. Miranda, F. Bernardini, C. Maciel 
and D. Trevisan, “Transparency in practice: using visualization 
to enhance the interpretability of open data”. In Proceedings of 
The 18th Annual International Conference on Digital 
Government Research, Staten Island, NY, USA, June 07-09, 
2017. 
[22] M. Kassen, “A promising phenomenon of open data: a case 
study of the Chicago open data project”, Government 
Information Quarterly, vol. 30, no. 4, 2013, pp. 508-513. 
[23] M. Sutherland and M. Cook, “Data-Driven Smart cities: A 
closer look at organizational, technical and data complexities”. 
In Proceedings of The 18th Annual International Conference 
on Digital Government Research, Staten Island, NY, USA, 
June 07-09, 2017. 
[24] E. Osagie, M. Waqar, S. Adebayo, A. Stasiewicz, L. Porwol, 
and A. Ojo, “Usability Evaluation of an Open Data Platform”. 
In Proceedings of 8th Annual International Conference on 
Digital Government Research, Staten Island, NY, USA, June 
2017  
[25] S.S. Dawes, L. Vidiasova, and O. Parkhimovich, “Planning and 
designing open government data programs: an ecosystem 
approach”, Government Information Quarterly, vol. 33, no. 1, 
2016, pp. 15-27. 
[26] K. Kloeckl, O. Senn, and C. Ratti, “Enabling the Real-Time 
City: LIVE Singapore!”, Journal of Urban Technology, vol. 19, 
no. 2, 2012, pp. 89-112. 
[27] “Veksbarometer for Ringerike Regionen” 2018, URL: 
https://vekstbarometer.usn.no/assets/documents/2018.pdf  
[accessed 2019.12.08]. 
[28] “Veksbarometer for Ringerike Regionen” 2018, URL: 
https://vekstbarometer.usn.no/statistic/25 
[accessed 2019.12.08].  
[29] “Article 4 EU GDPR Definitions”, URL: http://www.privacy-
regulation.eu/en/article-4-definitions-GDPR.htm/  
[accessed 2019.12.08]. 
[30] “Barometer of Telemark County in Norway”, URL:   
http://www.telemarksbarometeret.no/ [accessed 2019.12.08] 
[31] “Barometer of Hordaland and Sogn and Fjordane County in 
Norway”, URL: http://www.naringsbarometeret.no/  
[accessed 2019.12.06]. 
[32] A. Bruvoll and S. Pedersen, “NHOs KommuneNM 2016”, 
Report 
from 
Vista 
Analyse, 
URL: 
https://legacyweb.nho.no/oppsiden/ny/html/files/VA-
rapport_2016-31_NHOs_KommuneNM_2016.pdf [accessed 
29.10.2018]. 
[33] “Innovation 
Norway, 
tool 
for 
municipalities”, 
http://www.innovasjonnorge.no/no/regional-
omstilling/verktoy/naringsvennlig-kommune/ 
[accessed 
2019.12.08]. 
[34] “Confederation of Norwegian Enterprices, Municipal NM”, 
URL:http://www.nho.no/Politikk-og-analyse/Offentlig-sektor-
og-naringslivet/kommunenm/ [accessed 2019.12.08] 
[35] J. Nielsen and R.L. Mack, “Usability Inspection Methods”, 
John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1994. ISBN: 0-471-01877-5, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/ 259963.260531. 
 
 
248
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

