The ICT Measurement System 
Definition, components and a maturity evaluation approach. 
Roberto Meli 
CEO 
Data Processing Organization Srl 
Rome, Italy  
email: roberto.meli@dpo.it
Abstract— The measurement of ICT (Information & 
Communication Technologies) processes and related products / 
services is often experienced, by the organizations which make 
them for themselves or for the market, as a too expensive 
activity that slows down the primary production activities. 
Nevertheless, the "measurement of  ICT" can give a strong 
support to its governance. Rarely measurement is perceived as 
an opportunity, most often as a threat. Many measurement 
initiatives, in the past, were not successful in becoming stable 
frameworks for supporting software processes. A formalized 
ICT-Measurement System (ICT-MS) can facilitate to position 
the "seemingly expensive" measurement activities in the 
context of corporate governance which, at least, makes them 
more justified, productive and interesting for the management 
and for the other involved stakeholders. An ICT-MS is a 
governance tool for both the contractual relations between 
customers and suppliers and the internal production processes. 
This paper outlines the rationale for the construction of an 
ICT-MS; it focuses on the differences between a Measurement 
System, a Measurement Program and a Measurement Plan; it 
analyzes the ICT-MS into its constituent parts; it provides 
useful indications for a custom path of construction of the ICT-
MS. At the end, a simple maturity model is sketched to allow 
assessing the maturity and adequacy of an ICT-MS as a 
function of specific context variables. 
Keywords- ICT Measurement System; Metrics Program; 
maturity model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The measurement of ICT processes and of their related 
products / services is often perceived, by people in charge of 
production, as an unnecessary activity disturbing the primary 
workflow of system deployment. If it is practiced, it is often 
done to fulfill contractual obligations, sometimes to formally 
answer to necessary requisites for a certification of quality or 
of a maturity level (i.e., CMM-I model). Measurement is 
rarely perceived as a management opportunity, more often as 
a threat. It is not easy to win this prejudice if measurement 
remains a facultative and naive task left to the personal 
initiative of individual analysts or project managers. 
A formalized ICT Measurement System allows to 
position this "apparently useless" measurement activity in a 
context of business governance that, if nothing else, makes it 
explicit, integrated into the production processes, cost 
effective and valuable for the management and for the other 
involved stakeholders. Measurement may be done at 
different levels in the ICT organization: at a project level it 
gives information about the progress and the state of a 
specific project; at the portfolio level it gives information 
about the global usage of organizational resources and the 
progress and the state of the totality of interacting projects; at 
the process level, it gives information about the general 
behavior of projects and the statistically derived trends over 
time, at the Organizational Unit it gives information about 
the efficiency and effectiveness of the structure. 
It is essential, in our opinion, to recognize that 
"measurement of  ICT" can give a strong support to its 
governance and that, in most organizations, any activity 
which is not continuously fed with resources and managerial 
attention is destined to decline or to rapidly reach the 
cemetery of good ideas and intentions. This is why it is 
preferable to speak about a "Measurement System" more 
than a "Measurement Program". As defined in [1], a Program 
is "a group of related projects, subprograms and programs 
activities managed in a coordinated way to obtain benefits 
not available from managing them individually." A Program, 
by definition, has a start and an end point for activities; it is 
not a permanent endeavor. On the contrary, measurement 
should be conceived as a permanent service for the 
organization so it should be associated with a stable 
structure. The present paper is composed of seven sections 
plus references: Section 1 is the introduction; Section 2 is the 
definition and qualification of an ICT Measurement System; 
Section 3 is devoted to the description of the main available 
resources and standards; Section 4 describes the several 
components of an ICT-MS; Section 5 is centered on the ICT-
MS life cycle from start-up to on-going operations; Section 6 
presents a draft  of a capability model for ICT-MS; Section 7 
contains a short Case Study description; Section 8 presents 
the conclusions. 
II. 
ICT MEASUREMENT SYSTEM DEFINITION 
Very 
often, 
terms 
like 
Metrics 
Program 
and 
Measurement Plan are used by the software engineering 
community [1]-[8], but what are the differences among a 
Metrics Program, a Measurement Plan and an ICT 
Measurement System?  
A Metrics Program is an initiative to promote the usage 
of a measurement process in the organization: it is a project 
oriented effort; in other words, it is temporary. A 
Measurement Program has a specific and obtainable set of 
goals to be achieved within a limited and predefined budget 
and time. Resources are not assigned to a specific 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

permanent organizational unit on a repetitive and regular 
base but dynamically allocated to the Program according to 
a specific plan. A Metrics Program usually deploys 
deliverables and not continuous services. 
A Measurement Plan is a project related document 
describing all that is needed to implement the measurement 
process within a specific ICT project. It lives with the 
associated project and does not survive to it. 
Fredreiksen H.D. and Mathiassen L. in [7] stated that 
"To be successful, a metrics program should be planned in 
context with an organization’s processes, structures, climate, 
and power". This leads toward a more extensive approach to 
the subject, an approach which is not limited by the projects 
constraints and capable to survive to its start up phase. 
An ICT Measurement System is something more than a 
process: it may be defined as a living operational 
sociotechnical system deputed to the management of the 
measurement aspects of the ICT processes and products / 
services [9]. It represents a governance tool both of the 
contractual relationships between clients and suppliers and 
of the internal production processes. An ICT-MS 
contributes to the enhancement of the processes involved in 
the management, design, implementation and delivery of 
projects and ICT services. Its purposes are mostly devoted 
to support process improvement, the governance of the 
incoming / outgoing supplies, benchmarking, calculating 
and monitoring of productivity, cost, time and quality. 
The adoption of a metrics system involves the definition, 
collection and use of a set of metrics and rules of use related 
to the various organizational levels which will be composed 
in such a way as to favor the understanding of the business 
performance. The ICT-MS is the best tool to develop the 
culture and practice of measurement of ICT business in 
organizations and include them in their 'genetic code'. 
An ICT Measurement System (Figure  1) is composed of 
various elements: Processes, Methods, Techniques, Tools, 
Infrastructures, 
Information 
Systems, 
Organizational 
Structures, 
Competencies, 
Motivations. 
An 
ICT 
Measurement System is the only permanent entity capable 
to supply adequate measurement services to the staff that 
needs them. 
 
 
Measuring ICT systems and related services thus 
requires dedicated resources, expertise, time, equipment and 
organization. This activity is often seen as a too expensive 
task that slows down the primary development activities. 
Just because of the actual difficult market conditions, 
unfortunately, public and private organizations are less 
motivated to stake resources to ensure the performance of 
the measurements, without having a confidence about the 
extent of the economic return associated with such 
resources. A paradoxical situation,  then, occurs: not 
investing resources in the culture and practices of measuring 
generate wastes in the management of projects that affect 
willingness and capability to invest in areas that are not 
clear in terms of returns, thus creating a vicious cycle that is 
difficult to break. A formalized ICT-MS can facilitate to 
position the "seemingly expensive" measurement activities 
in the context of corporate governance which, at least, 
makes them more justified, productive and interesting for 
the management and for the other involved stakeholders. 
 
III. 
RELEVANT RESOURCES AND STANDARDS FOR AN ICT 
MEASUREMENT SYSTEM 
Several detailed resources are available to guide the 
implementation of a measurement process. Unfortunately, 
they do not cover adequately the constitution of the ICT-MS 
as a company’s permanent system but are, anyway, precious 
sources of information for some of the major components of 
that system. Specifically, there are some de facto and de jure 
standards helping the identification of: stakeholders, 
information requirements, activities, tools, deliverables of a 
measurement process. Figure  2 clarifies the relationships 
among the main standards and models. 
 
 
 
 
 
The ISO/IEC 15939 standard [10] and the Practical 
Software Measurement framework (PSM) [7], describe a 
Measurement Process and 
its 
related Measurement 
Information Model (MIM). These models are the reference 
guides for anyone involved in the field. They outline a 
project oriented measurement process in terms of 
information models, activities and results. Other important 
available resources are: the Capability Maturity Model 
Integration (CMM-I) [11], the “Guidelines to Software 
ISO/IEC 
25040:2011
ISO/IEC 
14143
ISO 
9001:2015
ISO/IEC 15504
ISO/IEC 
15939:2007
ISO/IEC 
12207:2008
ISO/IEC/IEEE 
15288:2015
ISO/IEC TR 9126
ISO/IEC 250XX
 
Figure  2. Available Standards & Models for ICT measurement 
Tools /
Infrastructures
Methods & Techniques
Organizational
Structures
Motivations
Information 
Systems
Competencies
Processes
Measurement System
 
Figure  1. ICT Measurement System components 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

Measurement” by IFPUG [4] and the Software Engineering 
Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK) [12]. 
A. ISO/IEC 15939 
Figure  3, extracted from the standard documentation, 
shows the flow of activities and their relations. 
  
 
 
The ISO approach muddles up activities needed to build 
up a permanent ICT-MS with activities needed at the 
temporary project level. Actual practices suggest to keep 
them separate to be more effective and efficient. The cycle 
shown in Figure  3 could be covered at various levels: the 
project level and the portfolio level (both of them being 
temporary), the functional level and the ICT-MS level (both 
of them being permanent). Information needs are different at 
all levels and feedback loops have different timings. 
 
B.    Practical Software Measurement (PSM) 
In this model, the differentiation between actions at the 
system level and actions at the project level is clearer 
although a permanent system is not explicitly identified and 
suggested. Section 5 of the First Part of the Practical 
Software and System Measurement guide is devoted to the 
'Enterprise and Organizational Context' from which the 
following Figure  4 has been extracted. PSM approach is 
still very “project” oriented and the global organizational 
context is not completely covered at the same detailed level 
as the project is. 
 
C. CMM-I. 
CMM-I is a set of best practices used to help an 
organization succeed. Best practices are grouped by 
activities 
(Process 
Areas) 
like 
Requirement, 
Risk, 
Configuration, Planning, etc. One of the Support Process 
Areas is “Measurement & Analysis”, whose purpose is to 
develop and sustain a measurement capability that is used to 
support management information needs. This area is 
positioned at Maturity Level 2. This means that it is 
considered as a basic subject that should be metabolized by 
most organizations. Also this framework is process / project 
oriented (Figure  5) and it is not centred on permanent 
structures to perform measurement activities. 
 
 
 
D. Guidelines to Software Measurement (IFPUG) 
This document has a section named " Implementing and 
Sustaining a Software Measurement Program", which 
"provides guidelines for both implementing and sustaining a 
software measurement program using a project based 
approach. " The main sections are: 
 
• 
Introduction 
• 
Stakeholders and Participants 
• 
Features, Benefits and Applicability 
• 
Implementation Methods 
• 
Considerations and Issues 
• 
Sustaining a Software Measurement Program 
 
In this document, too, a project oriented approach is 
outlined. No information about how to build and run a 
permanent measurement system. 
E. SWEBOK 
The Software Engineering Body of Knowledge 
(SWEBOK) covers the measurement theme in a light way. 
The measurement issues are embedded into the Engineering 
Foundations and in other related areas like Software 
Requirements, 
Software 
Engineering 
Management, 
Software Quality  but a general framework is missing and a 
"project/process" view is adopted. 
 
Figure  4. Enterprise & Organizational Context 
 
Figure  3. Measurement activities according to ISO/IEC 15939 
 
Measurement
Plan
Measurement
Repository
Procedures
& Tools
Measurement
Indicators
 SP 1.1
Establish
Measurement
Objectives
 SP 1.2
Specify
Measures
SP 1.3
Specify
Data Collection
Procedures
 SP 1.4
Specify
Analysis
Procedures
SP 2.4
Communicate
Results
 SP 2.3 
Store Data
& Results
 SP 2.2 
Analyze 
Data
 SP 2.1 
Collect
Data
 
Figure  5. CMM-I – PA “Measurement & Analysis” 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

F. Resources Summary 
To summarize, it is possible to state that there is a large 
amount of useful information and models about how to run 
a Metrics Program or initiative and about how to measure 
and analyse specific products and processes, but there is less 
documented knowledge about the building of permanent 
ICT-MS. Specifically, the following points are not clearly 
addressed: 
• support a project manager in using measures to 
manage a project; 
• support a service manager in using measures to 
manage continuous services 
• support a line manager to use measures to manage the 
business units 
• create and maintain a permanent structure capable to 
supply measurement services in an explicit and 
recognizable way and to evolve itself to follow the 
business needs. 
 
This paper describes a model/framework that could help 
organizations in defining their own paths to achieve 
permanent results in the goal of adopting measurement as a 
common practice to make ICT governance. 
IV. 
ICT-MS COMPONENTS 
In this section, the main components of  an ICT-MS 
(Figure  6) will be highlighted: Services, Processes, 
Methods & Techniques, Tools, Information System, 
Organization, Competencies and Motivations. 
 
 
A. Services 
An ICT-MS should supply, as a priority, the following 
general services:  
 
• identification of indicators and metrics required at various 
levels of the organization 
• choice of measurement standards and definition of internal 
guidelines 
• maintenance of measurement processes and tools 
• creation and maintenance of the database of ICT measures 
• management of a metrics documentation centre (paper / 
intranet) 
• active promotion and dissemination of standards, methods 
and tools 
• internal promotion and search for consensus on 
measurement initiatives 
• on line helpdesk 
• internal / external (suppliers) auditing 
• collection, processing and interpretation of the collected 
data (reports, statistics, studies, analysis, benchmarking) 
• modelling 
productivity 
and 
internal 
/ 
external 
benchmarking 
• reports to the Management and Organizational Units 
• overall improvement of the metric system itself (model of 
productivity calibration, development of procedures, 
guidelines update, etc.) 
and hopefully: 
• research / testing / publication in measurement subjects 
• external representation 
• participation in technical conference events and external 
initiatives 
 
The main services to the project and ICT service 
management should be the following: 
 
• sizing Products and ICT Services 
• supporting effort, time, cost and staff forecasts 
• consulting projects or service units on measurements, 
estimates, surveys of interest on projects and applications 
• support in the drafting of documents for (active and 
passive) procurement and contracts 
• support in the negotiation and management of disputes 
 
The main services to the top management should be the 
following: 
• internal benchmarking 
• external benchmarking 
• asset sizing 
• multilevel reporting 
• feeding of Balanced Scorecard or dashboards 
 
B. Processes 
The processes of a ICT-MS should be identified, shared 
and described in documents of the Quality Management 
System. Documenting an ICT-MS requires both writing 
specific procedures and changing those ruling the 
production and delivery of ICT products and services. If 
measurement is integrated in the usual production processes 
then more reliable data will actually be collected. If 
measurement is perceived as a task that does not contribute 
to the project then involved stakeholders may resist 
providing reliable data. 
Tools /
Infrastructures
Methods & Techniques
Organizational
Structures
Motivations
Information 
Systems
Competencies
Processes
Measurement System
Figure  6. ICT-MS on-going components 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

C. Methods, Techniques and Tools, Infrastructures 
The choice of methods, techniques and tools must be 
done in strict accordance with the goals and objects of 
measurement. The techniques are specific business 
approaches, described by objectives, deliverables, work 
steps, means, standards used etc. that can achieve limited 
results within a broader methodological framework. For 
example 'the structured interview' is a technique for data 
collection that can be adopted in different methodological 
framework. Tools are usually software applications that 
support the use of techniques and methods or they are 
collections of templates or documents.  
Organizations often reverse the correct sequence that 
starts from information needs, derives necessary metrics, 
sets out the responsibilities of measurement and identify the 
techniques and tools needed. 
Pressed by market forces and victims of too simplified 
approaches, so captivating as inconclusive, the manager 
who is not particularly well-informed believes that with the 
purchase of last generation tools, all the problems of 
measuring ICT are automatically and magically solved. 
Despite the bitter disappointments in the ICT history 
when technologies have substituted "system thinking",  it is 
always much easier to acquire a tool than designing a major 
organizational change. 
 
If properly attributable to the role for which they were 
born - helping and not replacing human expertise - the tools 
are invaluable for several reasons: they 
• 
ensure greater uniformity and standardization of 
measurements made in different contexts; 
• 
can automate repetitive and boring work parts of 
measurement, accelerating related processes and 
making them, consequently, less expensive; 
• 
can automatically detect some measures from the 
products or services; 
• 
allow cross-checks that are difficult to achieve 
manually; 
• 
reduce the possibility of errors and render the 
measurement more reliable; 
• 
can 'capture' knowledge and make it available to people 
with little experience. 
    
According to the PSM framework, tools can be 
classified as follows: 
 
 
D. Information System 
The information system of the organization should be 
prepared or modified to permit, as smoothly as possible, the 
collection, processing and distribution of basic data and 
indicators. Sometimes it is necessary to juxtapose "official" 
data and "unofficial but real" data. This is why the 
connection between business information systems and 
support systems for measurement can not be mechanistic 
but should have to be flexible and configurable. For 
example, it is possible that in some organizations it is not 
officially allowed to register and charge the staff overtime to 
the projects, however, this does not mean that the overtime 
is not done. Very often professionals are involved beyond 
the pure material compensation and they prefer to release a 
good product even if it will cost some or many hours of 
unpaid work. In this way the accounting figure does not 
keep track of what actually happens and the apparent 
productivity will be better than the real one. In this way the 
estimates that will be made on future projects from the 
current 
actual 
data 
will 
contain 
a 
systematic 
underestimation. 
 
Since there are many stakeholders in the process, the 
tools should be modular: 
 
TABLE 1 CLASSIFICATION OF TOOLS TO SUPPORT THE 
MEASUREMENT FUNCTIONS 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

 
 
If we have a look at Figure  7, [13] and we start from the 
bottom, we can identify: 
 
Data Collections Services: in any office environment 
there are a lot of sources which can provide data. There will 
be many Excel files, sometimes some XML or Text files 
(CSV), usually a lot of data bases (ERP, etc.), and a lot of 
tools 
(configuration 
management, 
change 
request 
management, planning,  requirement management, test, ….). 
It is very important that the M&A solution provides 
services that help one easily build a new data collector and 
reuse it at any time. It should be possible to adapt it to a new 
situation. The data collector should automate the collection 
of data, as frequently as one needs, and wherever the 
sources are. 
 
M&A Repository: this is the knowledge database. 
Histories of projects will help to predict the future with 
accuracy. In general, this is an SQL database. 
 
Indicators Library: once an indicator is specified, it 
must be possible to reuse it on another project. The other 
project could also reuse an extractor. The entire M&A 
system must be designed with a "reuse" approach. In large 
organizations having a lot of projects and a good level of 
process maturity, it is important to build a project dashboard 
in a few seconds. In the Library, it should be also possible to 
find templates of indicators, like curves’ profiles. 
 
Publication services: the purpose of this component is 
to provide the information products to the allowed people, 
with security management. The dashboard must be 
accessible through the web, wherever the user is, always 
updated. 
 
E. Organization  
The organization of an ICT-MS can take different forms 
and structures depending on a number of variables to be 
considered. The main structural options concern the degree 
of centralization / decentralization of the measurement 
function with respect to the production structures, its size in 
terms of human resources and the mixture of insourcing / 
outsourcing. 
A centralized function concentratesamong 
 under one manager all the necessary professional 
resources devoted to the provision of metrological services, 
has a budget for the procurement of products and consulting 
and is particularly suitable to attract and retain talent in the 
field of software measurement. A structure of this type 
provides services to the rest of the organization as any other 
supporting techno-structure. It can define service level 
agreements and internal protocols of services engagement.  
 
Among the advantages of a centralized organization, 
with respect to a distributed one, we include the following 
points: 
• guarantee of greater consistency in measurement 
• development of specific professional roles 
• better management of interproject priorities 
• reduction of redundant costs 
• easy sharing of the know-how 
 
Among the disadvantages: 
• greater organizational effort 
• dependence of the projects by an "external" body 
• greater complexity of planning 
• less awareness on the issues of measurement by 
productive staff 
• possible rejection as a "foreign body" by the production 
facilities 
 
With respect to the dimensioning of the measurement 
organizational units, observe that it must be calibrated in 
function of the requests for service which, in turn, depend 
on the number of projects / services to be performed, the 
degree of maturity of the processes, from the extension of 
the field of application of measures / estimates, the number 
of measures to be taken, the degree of turbulence of the 
processes, the degree of formality of the contractual aspects 
associated with products / services ICT and other factors. 
Finally, regarding the mixture of outsourcing / 
insourcing options, it can be said that, being the 
measurement service associated with a process that does not 
belong to the repertoire of "core processes" and being very 
easily measurable in itself, it is an ideal candidate for a full 
outsourcing. Any choice, going from a total delegation to an 
exclusively internal service, is possible. Full outsourcing 
may be a starting point in order to have a very quick 
activation of the system using external expertise. As soon as 
the maturity of organization and internal skill grow up at a 
sufficient level it is possible to internalize many activities. A 
balanced outsourcing may be an arrival point using external 
resources to complement internal capabilities for peak 
Publication services
Indicators Library
M&A Repository
Data Collection Services
Excel
XML
CSV
Data
Bases
Tools
Direction
Project
Quality & SEPG
Integrator
 
Figure  7. Information System architecture 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

workloads or the provision of very specialized and unusual 
skills at the state of the art. In any case the government of 
the whole process must remain an internal capability. 
 
Factors to consider when choosing organizational 
options are: 
 
• Company size 
• Frequency of use of the measures 
• Average level of measurement experience  
• Cultural maturity in measurement subjects 
• Level of awareness and managerial support 
• Specificity of application domains 
• Resources overload  
• Confidentiality domain. 
 
In an ICT Measurement System, there are at least 3 
categories of persons. 
 
• 
Project : People who are developing and maintaining 
the software or system 
 
o 
Provide objective information 
o 
Provide subjective information 
o 
Attend training 
o 
Produce lessons-learned experience 
o 
Use provided processes and models 
 
• 
Measurement 
& 
Analysis 
Team: 
people 
who 
understand, assess and refine the ICT-MS 
 
o 
Analyse experiences 
o 
Develop models and relationships 
o 
Produce standards and training 
o 
Provide measurement services 
o 
Provide feedback 
 
• 
Technical 
Support: 
people 
who 
maintain 
the 
information repository 
 
o 
Write data collection procedure 
o 
Establish database structure 
o 
Quality Assurance 
o 
Archive data and documents 
 
F. Competencies 
Staff skills are critical to the success of the measurement 
process. Depending on the adopted organizational solutions 
it may be possible to engage new already trained personnel 
otherwise it will be necessary to identify internal candidates 
and to develop their professional skills. The level of rapid 
obsolescence of the industry is such that training must be 
continued and implemented both through traditional 
classroom interventions and through e-learning and self-
training options. It is often necessary or appropriate to 
pursue certification of competencies regarding specific 
methods. Of course, the learning path will be different for 
every position in the ICT-MS.  
To be able to manage its tasks, the M&A team should 
have a lot of technical skills for building measurement 
plans, Balanced Score cards, Tableaux de Bord, GQ(I)M 
(Goal Question (Indicator) Metric), SPC (Statistical Process 
Control), ETL (Extract Transform Load Techniques), 
Estimate, benchmark, causal analysis, Function Point 
Analysis, SLOC (Source Line Of Code), Earned Value 
Analysis, etc. 
In addition to technical competencies it should be 
considered that the measurement professional must play a 
consultant role interacting with people not often very happy 
to be involved and sometimes impatient to go back to 
programming and "producing". Soft skills are then as 
important as technical knowledge. 
 
G. Motivations 
As written, a metric system that does not provide 
motivation (rewards and penalties), for the application of 
measurement procedures will not be used reliably. We must 
develop the whole project of creation of the Metric System 
around the understanding of the true goals of the people 
involved, their interests, attitudes, approaches, cultural and 
operational needs. The measures, once developed the correct 
preparation of the field, may also become an instrument of 
evaluation of individual performance, but this takes time 
and organizational maturity: it is not advisable to start with 
this goal in mind, it is an arrival point and not a starting 
point. The system of measures should be designed so that all 
persons involved in the process of collecting, processing and 
distribution of information and metrics understand why and 
what they are doing and, possibly, what benefits brings 
them. 
 
V. 
ICT-MS LIFE CYCLE 
As we have seen, an ICT-MS is a permanent entity that 
provides services throughout the organization on an ongoing 
basis. No organizational system, however, is created and 
evolves on its own, there must be an organized and 
temporary effort whose purpose is the design, construction 
and start-up of the system itself. The supporting activities 
that have not responsible in the organization and resources 
allocated to them tend to fall on deaf ears after an initial 
period of general curiosity. A key to success, for the 
establishment of an ICT-MS, is the ability of the sponsor to 
set a credible cost / benefit analysis. We need to imagine the 
extent of intervention on ICT business support as a systemic 
initiative in which the various cultural, organizational and 
technical elements are combined in a harmonious and 
structured way. So the evolution of the ICT-MS, once 
started, will be guaranteed by specific improvement 
initiatives, i.e., change projects (Figure  8).  
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

 
 
 
The basic prerequisites for the success of an ICT-MS 
are: 
• the metric system and its objectives are supported by the 
management; 
• measurement must provide added value to all parties 
involved in the collection, measurement and analysis 
of historical data; 
• the ICT-MS must cooperate and do not come into 
conflict with other operating systems in an 
organization, reusing as much as possible of existing 
assets. 
 
A master plan for a metrics program (building an ICT-
MS) may include the following points: 
• Setting goals and benefits of the metrics system and its 
creation project 
• Identification of the relevant stakeholders 
• Obtaining sponsorship 
• Communication and promotion of the initiative 
• Identify roles and responsibilities of project 
• Preliminary definition of the metrics to be adopted 
• Defining procedures and measuring tools 
• Definition and management of training plans 
• Releasing into operations the ICT-MS 
VI. 
ICT-MS CAPABILITY ASSESSMENT 
As in many other ICT areas, it is possible and useful to 
define a model to assess the capability of an ICT-MS. 
Currently, there is no specific model for Measurement 
Systems but measurement is present in many frameworks to 
assess the global capabilities of ICT organizations  like 
CMM-I, OPM3 [14], Prado [15]. A capability assessment is 
useful to benchmark an organization in this area and to 
design an evolutionary path for improvement. 
A. Capability 
Measurement capabilities depend significantly on how 
the ICT-MS was designed and created, but also by the three 
other factors shown in Figure  9: commercial practices, 
competitive context and managerial commitment. 
 
  
 
 
The first factor is the mode of relationship between 
customers / suppliers. If they are focused on management of 
social relational and adaptive behaviour based on mutual 
compromises and agreements of a 'political' type, hardly the 
measure will emerge as a real need, because it takes away 
flexibility in the implicit/explicit negotiations. Conversely, 
if the relationships are based on the clear identification of 
the reciprocal rights / duties and explicit assessment of the 
interdependence of the factors of negotiation then the 
measure will become essential to give practical support to 
the negotiation process. 
The second factor mentioned is the competitive context 
in which a company or public administration is immersed. 
Monopolistic demand or supply can lead to the superfluity 
of the measure while the presence of a high number of 
competitors pushes up the mechanisms of transparency and 
quantitative comparison. 
Finally, the orientation of management is crucial to 
ensure sponsorship and directions for practical use of the 
resources made available by the ICT-MS. 
B. Maturity and Adequacy 
Maturity is a general level of evolution of the system, 
which is demonstrated by the possession of some practices 
and properties considered as advanced by general 
consensus. Adequacy is a different concept. It is related to 
the relationship with the environment and its requests on the 
organization but it is also a measure of internal consistency 
of the different ICT-MS components. To be adequate means 
to be consistent with the environment requests and that the 
different components show an homogeneous level of 
evolution. If the context of customers and rulers is informal 
then a too formal measurement process is a threat instead of 
an opportunity. The reverse is true too. If we have very 
skilled measurement professionals but no defined processes 
and no measurement tools then the ICT-MS is not adequate. 
In order to be adequate, the organization must be flexible in 
terms of the system components. Maturity and Adequacy 
are not related one to each other: it is possible to be mature 
 
Figure  8. start up and improvement of an ICT-MS 
 
Figure  9. Measurement Capability 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

and not adequate or the opposite or any combination of the 
two variables [16]. 
VII. A SHORT CASE STUDY 
The framework outlined in this paper has been adopted 
by the largest Italian regional ICT public company. In 2010 
it started a project to build up an ICT-MS outsourcing the 
services to start up the system and involving heavily internal 
resources to go live with the system. The management was 
satisfied with the results and after 5 years of life the ICT-
MS is a stable part of the organization. All the components 
of the system were addressed properly starting from 
knowledge evolution (traditional training and on the job 
training) for more than 140 staffing units and progressing to 
process and methods definition, tools adoptions, a partially 
distributed organization (a central competence reference 
staff and a distributed responsibility in organizational units), 
administrative data definition, data collection procedures, 
links to requirements management and analysis, formal 
outsourcing documents and processes. Measurements goals 
were added to  Management By Objective (MBO) 
framework to assess manager's performance over the years. 
The initial start up project ended after 2 years but the 
measurement activities are part of the ordinary production 
processes and supported by ordinary budget. The evolution 
of the ICT-MS is granted by the central functional staff. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has presented a relatively new concept named 
ICT-MS, which is different from Metrics Program that is 
largely described in literature and standards. The highlight is 
on the systemic approach and the permanent nature of the 
system with respect to the "project" oriented approach. An 
ICT-MS is crucial for the exploitation of the ICT 
governance because it gives evidence, objectivity and 
independence from individuals. Any organization interested 
in the incorporation of measurement in its core processes 
should devote adequate resources to the set up and 
maintenance of  an ICT-MS taking care of all the 
components in an integrated way. To help grow in the most 
efficient and effective way an ICT-MS Capability Model 
may help in defining the "as is" situation as well as an 
evolutionary path for improving. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] PMI, "A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK Guide, 5th edition), PMI, pp. 9-10, 2013. 
[2] IFPUG, "IT Measurement: Practical Advice from the Experts", 
Addison-Wesley, ISBN: 020174158X, Part II Measurement Program 
Approaches, 2002. 
[3] IFPUG, "The IFPUG Guide to IT and Software Measurement", 
Auerbach 
Publications, 
ISBN-10: 
1439869308, 
Section 
V 
Measurement Programs, 2012. 
[4] IFPUG, "Guidelines to Software Measurement", release 2, 2004. 
[5] Pressman R.S., "Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach," 
Sixth ed: McGraw-Hill, Chap. 2, 6, 7, pp. 22-26 , 2004. 
[6] Fenton N.E., Pfleeger S.L., "Software Metrics: A Rigorous & Practical 
Approach", 2/e, International Thomson Computer Press, Chap. 1-14, 
1998. 
[7] Fredreiksen H.D. and Mathiassen L., Information-centric assessment 
of software metrics practices, IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management, 52(3), 350–362, August 2005. 
[8] Practical 
Software 
and 
Systems 
Measurement, 
PSM 
Guide, 
http://www.psmsc.com/, Nov 2015. 
[9] GUFPI-ISMA, Metriche del software. Esperienze e ricerche, Roberto 
Meli, "The Metric System as a tool to regulate the processes of ICT 
production and services ", ISBN: 9788846471390, Franco Angeli, 
2006. 
[10] ISO/IEC 15939:2007, http://www.iso.org/, Nov 2015. 
[11] CMMI Institute, CMMI® for Development (CMMI-DEV), Version 
1.3,  http://cmmiinstitute.com/cmmi-models, Nov 2015. 
[12] SWEBOK project, http://www.swebok.org, Nov 2015. 
[13] Hamon Patrick, Meli Roberto, A successful roadmap for building 
complex 
ICT 
indicators, 
SMEF 
2007, 
Rome 
(IT), 
http://www.dpo.it/smef2007/, Nov 2015. 
[14] PMI, Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3®) – 
Third 
Edition, 
2013, 
http://marketplace.pmi.org/Pages/ProductDetail.aspx?GMProduct=001
01463501, Nov 2015. 
[15] Prado, 
PMMM 
model, 
http://www.maturityresearch.com/novosite/en/index.html, Nov 2015. 
[16] R.Meli, "Adequate maturity in Project Management", Il Project 
Manager, Franco Angeli, fascicolo 2, 2010. 
   
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-458-9
SOFTENG 2016 : The Second International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

