Enabling Innovations in Mobile-Learning: A Context-aware and Service-based
Middleware
Sergio Martin, Elio Sancristobal, Rosario Gil,
Gabriel Díaz, Manuel Castro and Juan Peire
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
UNED (Spanish University for Distance Education)
Madrid, Spain
{smartin, rgil, elio, gdiaz, mcastro,
jpeire}@ieec.uned.es
Mihail Milev, Nevena Mileva
Electronics Department
University of Plovdiv
Plovdiv, Bulgaria
mmilev@dipseil.net, nmileva@uni-plovdiv.bg
Abstract— Development of mobile learning projects involves
addressing many challenges, from pedagogies (e.g., what must
students learn? and how?) to technical issues (e.g., use of
context-awareness, use of communication or collaboration
methods, mash-up of information). This paper introduces a
framework intended to provide different educational tools and
information to mobile learning programmers and designers in
order to simplify and reduce the project development. The
paper offers an overview of the state of the art of mobile
learning applications, focusing on some of its problems: lack of
interoperability and difficulty of using advanced technologies,
such as location-based systems. It also addresses why most of
the m-Learning applications do not make use of the existing
services and knowledge of the Learning Management Systems,
which are in fact the real pillars of the e-learning methodology.
The framework design is guided by a new paradigm for
development of e-learning tools and platforms: Learning as a
Service (LaaS). The main contribution of this framework is to
provide contextual information from different sources and
sensors (e.g., geographical, motion); and integration of many
existing services from e-learning platforms.
Keywords-
context-awareness,
e-learning,
framework,
location, LMS, mobile learning, ubiquity
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays mobile technologies are being applied on
educational environments quite successfully. One of the
main reasons of this success is the improvement of the
technical features of the devices. New generations of mobile
devices have wider and touchable screens; built-in digital
cameras; and connectivity not only with GPRS but also with
Wi-Fi or 3G. In some of them it is even possible to find
GPS receivers, RFID, NFC readers or smartcards integrated.
All these new technologies inside a small and portable
device are giving rise to a new generation of applications in
all kind of environments. These kinds of applications are
called mobile learning (M-Learning) inside the educational
environment.
Here,
mobile
devices
are
supporting
collaborative and mobile work and enabling students to
learn
anytime
anywhere,
especially
through
games,
applications or courses designed for these small devices.
Actually location-based and context-aware systems can
give a very interesting added-value to M-Learning, because
they allow the creation of mobile context-aware application
that lets students interact with their environment in a totally
new way. For instance, a student in a canteen will have
different needs than in a laboratory or in a secretary; or a
teacher in a classroom will need different information than
in an office. It is possible to offer personalized learning
through the mobile device depending not only on his/her
profile but also on the moment and his/her location.
The other focus of the paper is over the integration and
interoperability
of
the
existing
e-learning
tools
and
applications with the mobile learning environment, giving
rise to a complex mobile digital ecosystem of educational
applications.
The paper might be of interest for those involved in the
development of mobile learning applications, since the
introduced framework could become a powerful and useful
tool for them; for those also designing supportive tools to
simplify the development of mobile learning applications;
and in general for those involved in the development of any
kind of e-learning or m-learning application, since the paper
introduces
a
service-oriented
methodology
for
the
development of applications.
The paper is structured as follows: Chapter II offers an
overview of the main goals of the system. Chapter III
describes
what
the
authors
consider
m-learning,
and
provides a mobile learning classification. This chapter is
complemented with the learning theories and methodologies
of Chapter IV. In chapter V, the necessity of the integration
of the new technologies related to location systems into the
m-learning environment is addressed. Chapter VI offers an
overview of the Learning as a Service (LaaS) methodology
used
in
the
project
design.
Chapter
VII
shows
the
importance of the interconnection between the e-learning
platforms and the m-learning applications, according with
the LaaS paradigm. Finally, chapter VIII describes the
design of the proposed middleware. Chapter IX offers an
175
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

overview
of
related
works;
and
Chapter
X
some
conclusions.
II.
GOALS
The aim of the paper is the description of a framework
developed recently by the authors that supports and simplify
the creation of M-Learning applications: M2Learn [1].
The
main
contribution
of
this
architecture
is
the
combination of ubiquitous and context-aware technologies
with the Learning as a Service (LaaS) paradigm, which will
be introduced in the following chapters. The result is an
easily-extended framework that offers useful services and
information to high-level applications. Thus, developers
using this framework will see their work considerably
reduced.
Although there are many other frameworks to help in the
creation of context-aware systems and mobile applications,
this development supposes an improvement of the state of
the art. The reason is because M2Learn is particularly
focused on the learning environment, as its design is closely
related with the existing e-learning platforms and tools. As a
summary, the main features that the framework includes are:

Context-awareness. Developed mobile applications
will easily incorporate information about user’s
geo-location, which is useful for personalizing the
services and activities offered to students; or for
having
a
log of
their
movements
in
certain
activities. Currently the location methods supported
by the M2Learn framework are Global Positioning
System (GPS), triangulation of Wi-Fi access points,
and
identification
through
Radio
Frequency
Identification (RFID). The framework also monitors
student’s hand movements through motion sensors.
It offers a more natural way of interacting with
technology, giving rise to a new kind of engaging
applications. Other relevant piece of information to
compile the student context is the academic profile
(e.g., degree, subject, or preferences), since it can
be used to personalize services and information
according with their interests. Finally, the user’s
context contains the user’s activities history (log),
which can be useful to study user preferences (e.g.,
applications used, information accessed, etc), and
movements in an environment (Figure 1).
Figure 1.
Offering personalized services and information depending on
user’s contextual information..

Communication tools (e.g., forum, chats) from e-
learning platforms
(e.g., dotLRN or Moodle).
Lately much effort has been undertaken to develop
useful e-learning tools but most of the new mobile
applications leave them aside, with almost no
interoperability with other systems. For that reason,
authors have developed interfaces between many e-
learning services and the M2Learn framework.
These interfaces let students access the e-learning
contents and services not only anytime, but also
anywhere, and with any kind of device. These
interfaces also give the opportunity of integrating
information from the mobile applications to the e-
learning platforms.

Collaboration.
The
framework
supports
the
incorporation of Web-based tools for collaborative
work such as Google Docs. This feature let the
developer create mobile learning applications that
include for example a text document that will be
created collaboratively among the students.

Knowledge. M2Learn framework manages different
formats of knowledge representation, e.g., PDF, and
DOC. But the framework also gives support to the
integration of knowledge from search engines, web
sites (e.g., Wikipedia) or Learning Management
System’s (LMS) FAQ.
In the development of this middleware, some issues have
been considered, such as which is the best model of m-
learning application: learning on the move or learning with
mobile devices?; which is the kind of mobile applications
that provides an added-value in the educational experience?;
how the new features can be implemented inside these new
kind of applications?; and why is better to include the
existing
e-learning
resources
into
the
mobile-learning
paradigm instead of doing everything again from scratch?.
III.
IS M-LEARNING LEARNING WITH MOBILE DEVICES OR
LEARNING ON THE MOVE?
When we talk about mobile-learning, it is possible to
assume that m-Learning is all kind of activity carried out in
an educational environment with a mobile device. This trend
basically moves the traditional learning, with a teacher
giving a master class in a classroom, towards the mobile
world. Many examples can be found, for example in [2]
where an application on a mobile device reads a chapter of a
book in a karaoke-style; or the MPSS project [3], where
students must follow some courses and are evaluated through
some test exercises using the mobile device.
On the other hand there are other m-learning projects
oriented towards outdoor learning. This is a totally different
point of view, due to the fact that in these projects the idea is
not to try to apply the old methodology into the new
technologies, but they try to develop new environments
where mobile devices offer an added value to students’
education. These environments do not try to supplant the
master class. They just complement the traditional and more
formal education, opening a new range of possibilities to
Contextual
information
Middleware
Services in
e-learning
platforms
Contextual
Games
Knowledge
Interchange
(P2P)
Contextual
information
Geographical
Services
176
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

students. For example, Bouvin [4] worked in a prototype
where learners should explore and document parts of a city
for later presentation in plenum. Other project more oriented
to the context-awareness is a prototype developed by
Bomsdorf [5] allowing learning materials to be selected
depending on a given situation – this takes into account
learner profiles such as their location, time available for
learning, concentration level and frequency of disruptions.
Similarly, a context-aware mechanism has been developed
by Bouzeghoub et al. [6], which takes into account time,
place, user’ knowledge, activity, and environment together
with the device capacity for adaptation to the user.
After many years of researching in this field our point of
view is that m-Learning must complement both e-learning
and traditional learning, because in our opinion each
methodology has its own place.
Thus, from our study [7], the most spread m-Learning
applications
can
be
classified
into
several
kinds
of
applications depending on its functionality:

Learning on the move: Intended to education out of
class, not replacing the face-to-face class, but
complementing it, and providing different ways of
learning on the field. There, m-learning seems to
cater for certain specialties more than others such as
agronomy, biology, geology, archaeology, tourism,
etc.

Location-sensitive. Location-based systems provide
a very interesting added-value to mobile learning
applications. They allow the creation of context-
aware applications that lets students interact with
the environment in a totally new way. This kind of
applications
react
specifically
to
their
current
location, time and other environment attributes and
adapt their behavior according to the changing
circumstances as context data may change rapidly.

Mobile review: Mobile devices offer very good
results for quick reviews of aspects that the students
have previously learnt in class. This is typically
useful for example in the train. This model is often
presented
for
both
review
of
contents
with
documents or notes; and auto-evaluation with quiz
tests.

Collaboration:
Development
of
collaborative
exercises together with other students, giving rise to
applications such as mash-up systems (based on
geographical
information
services),
Wikis,
or
games.

Services from e-learning tools. For instance, quick
accesses to services of a LMS, for example, check
the messages in the LMS forum of a course; or
access a Virtual Lab.

Podcast
allows
ubiquitous
learning
whereby
students can access a variety of educational material
anywhere, anytime on iPods, MP3 and MP4 players
or
mobile
phones.
Podcasts
allow
anywhere,
anytime learning. They permit students to access
educational materials at home, while travelling to
university or work, or doing any activity they
choose. They can play the recordings at any time,
which is convenient to them rather than be confined
to set class times. Podcasts in the educational
setting allow students on-demand access to audio or
video-recordings
of lectures or other
learning
materials
at
their
convenience.
But
although
Podcast is a very in-fashion methodology, does not
really suppose a revolution in education. It only
applies the same methodology (a master class given
by a lecturer) to a new format. It presents an
important disadvantage that avoids its generalized
use in education: it is one-way.

Augmented Reality is a technology that basically
merges information or images with video-streaming
from a Web-cam. The result is similar to virtual
reality but using real-world images in real-time.
Some
of
the
many
potential
revolutionary
applications in education are related for example
with
the
study
of
architecture,
art,
anatomy,
decoration, or in general anything that a graphic, a
simulation or a 3D model could improve the
comprehension of the concepts.

Games can be one of the most powerful tools for
learning. Students are easily engaged with them,
especially with those that use natural interaction,
such as motion recognition (e.g., puzzles; or
question-based contests using the mobile device as
a pointer).

Other
useful
m-learning
applications
are
for
example reminders or schedulers of the learning
process. This applications helps students to remind
some events at certain moments and places, e.g.,
“Remember take the Math’s book from the Library”
when the student is walking nearby.
The proposed framework has had in consideration the
different possible applications that a mobile learning project
includes, so it can offer useful information and services to
them, simplifying considerably its development.
IV.
LEARNING METHODOLOGIES AND THEORIES APPLIED
TO MOBILE LEARNING
From the educational point of view, the different learning
methodologies and theories have also been taken into
account in the design of the M2Learn framework. The
objective was to design a framework to give support to
different
kinds
of
applications,
not
only
from
the
functionality point of view, but also from the educational.
According with the literacy, there is no academic theory
or methodology specifically developed for mobile learning,
addressing assessment, pedagogy and instructional design
issues. In its place, the traditional learning theories are being
applied with more or less success depending on the kind of
application and environment. The following points describe
the main theories, methodologies and paradigms.
A.
Behaviorism
Learning theory mainly developed by Skinner. It is based
upon the idea that all behaviors are acquired through
conditioning [8]. The other important exponent of this theory
177
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

is Pavlov. According with Pavlov, behavior becomes a reflex
of a given stimulus [9], as in the case of Pavlov’s dogs. In
this theory, learning is based on a stimulus (problem), its
response (solution) and the reinforcement given (feedback).
This reinforcement can be presented as a comment, an award
or a punishment.
Mobile learning examples can be found in applications
devoted to deliver content, get the learners’ response and
provide constant feedback:

Classroom response systems [10].

Mobile Performance Support System for Vocational
Education and Training (MPSS Project) [11].

Content delivery by SMS.
Roschelle describes as a benefit of the implantation of this
theory in mobile learning the anonymity in the students’
responses [12]. Thanks to technology students do not feel
worried about consequences of bad answers. It helps the
teacher in understanding the classroom’s knowledge level
[13].
Although this approach is widely used in e-learning and
has
some
advantage
in
m-learning,
it
finds
several
disadvantages such as the use of limited displays and
restricted input methods when it is used as a way to deliver
content.
B.
Constructivism
Constructivism views learning as a process in which the
learner actively constructs or builds new ideas or concepts. It
is often associated with pedagogic approaches that promote
active learning, or learning by doing. In this theory, learning
is viewed as a process where learners actively construct new
concepts from their experiences (previous and current
knowledge) [14] through two processes:

Accommodation. The process of reframing the
mental representation of the external world to
fit new experiences. It also promotes that
failure leads to learning. Along these lines,
when we act on the expectation that the world
operates in one way but it does not happen, we
accommodate this new experience and reframe
our model of the way the world works. So
learning comes from the experience of failure,
or others' failure.

Assimilation. It is the incorporation of new
experience into an already existing framework
without changing that framework. This may
occur
when
individuals'
experiences
are
aligned with their internal representations of
the world, but may also occur as a failure to
change a faulty understanding. For example,
they may not notice events, may misunderstand
input from others, or may decide that an event
is not important as information about the
world.
In
contrast,
when
individuals'
experiences
contradict
their
internal
representations,
they
may
change
their
perceptions of the experiences to fit their
internal representations.
In this theory, such as Bruner points out, instructors
encourage students to discover principles by themselves,
helping them to move from passive listeners to active
constructors of knowledge by working to solve realistic
problems [15].
Constructivism itself has many variations, such as Active
learning, discovery learning, and knowledge building. Other
branch is social constructivism that defends that knowledge
is built when learners interact with others through talks and
activities about shared problems or tasks. Here, learning is
supported by more skilled members.
Regarding mobile learning, one of the most relevant
applications within this learning theory is any kind of
application based on role-games. To that effect, some
educational games fit perfectly with this theory. Educational
games provide an immersive experience that helps learners
to act in the educational environment (virtual world) as an
active. It provides a better knowledge acquisition, because
they can manipulate the virtual world without the fear of a
failure. Games also allow interacting with other learners
collaborating to achieve a particular task.
Other kind of application that matches with this theory is
the location-based systems aimed to facilitate learning out of
the classroom, for example in an art or archaeological
museum.
Finally, participatory simulations are also related to this
theory [16]. This kind of applications proposes immersive
recreation of real situations to become part of the process.
Here learners do not watch a simulation, but they are part of
it [13].
C.
Situated learning
This paradigm promotes learning within an authentic
context with social interaction [17] [18]. In this case,
teachers propose problems to be solved (Problem and case-
based learning) to students in real environments, where they
feel immersed in an authentic environment that helps a better
acquisition of knowledge. It fixes perfectly with mobile
learning through the context aware and location-based
systems [19] [20].
D.
Observational Learning or Social learning theory
This kind of learning occurs when an observer’s behavior
changes after viewing the behavior of a model [21]. Thus,
this paradigm is based on imitation of a model that the
observer finds interesting, attractive or desirable in some
way.
Although this approach does not necessarily imply
interactivity, it is widely used in mobile learning through the
use of Video-based systems (e.g., web-based video systems,
mobile TV or Podcast), that transmit knowledge to learners
through the use of videos. Other mobile applications that
make use of this paradigm are those where authentic
situations are described to show how to react in certain
situations.
E.
Collaborative learning
This
paradigm
promotes
learning
based
on
social
interactions [22]. In this environment, there must be a
178
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

dynamic interaction among instructor, learners and the
proposed activities to help them creating their own truth
thanks to the interaction with the others.
This approach also fits perfectly with mobile learning,
because
handheld
devices
can
offer
synchronous
and
asynchronous communication methods. In addition, the Web
2.0 concept is arriving also to the mobile environment,
supporting collaborative work such as edition of on-line
documents, creation of wikis, blogs, virtual boards, etc.
V.
NEW LEARNING NEEDS NEW TECHNOLOGIES
Once we determine the way to go inside m-Learning,
other aspects must also be considered. Mobile devices are
getting better everyday, incorporating new functionalities,
such as GPS receivers, motion sensors, Wi-Fi connectivity,
etc. These new features must be included inside the
educational environment; especially those related with geo-
location, due to the fact, knowing where students are in each
moment can be used for offering them personalized services
[23].
It is a fact that the main and most widely used location
method in mobile devices is the Global Positioning System
(GPS). This technology offers a quite reasonable accuracy at
outdoor environments. Each GPS satellite transmits data
that indicates its location and the current time. Signals,
moving at the speed of light, arrive at a GPS receiver at
slightly different times because some satellites are farther
away than others. The distance to the GPS satellites can be
determined by estimating the amount of time it takes for
their signals to reach the receiver. When the receiver
estimates the distance to at least four GPS satellites, it can
calculate its position in three dimensions.
However, the use of this technology inside buildings is
not possible (without the use of GPS repeaters, which are
not very spread) because the receiver needs to have direct
contact with the satellites. For that reason, technologies such
as Wi-Fi, Cell towers or RFID are appearing in location
systems for indoor environments.
In the Wi-Fi based location the mobile device recollects
different levels of noise and power that the access points
spread in an environment (at least 3 access points are
required) every few milliseconds. This information is
processed to obtain the user’s coordinates [24].
This same philosophy is being applied with Cell Towers
instead of using Wi-Fi. This is the case of the new iPod that
is revolutionizing the mobile market thanks to its great
interface features and location capabilities [25] [26].
On
the
other
hand,
Radio-frequency
identification
(RFID) is a technology that is being used in more
environments, and is one of the pillars of the called “Internet
of Things”. It is an automatic identification method,
consisting in storing and remotely retrieving data using
devices called RFID tags or transponders [27]. This
identification is usually used for identification [28], as the
substitute of bar codes, tracking any kind of products or
even animals or people. Some tags can be read from several
meters away and beyond the line of sight of the reader. In
addition this identification method can also be used to locate
people in an area, but it only locates people when the RFID
reader identifies the tag that the user carries.
VI.
LEARNING AS A SERVICE (LAAS)
But innovation in mobile learning, besides hardware, also
requires new methodologies and paradigms that guide the
development of new projects.
In our case, during the last years we have been
developing the Learning as a Service (LaaS) paradigm,
which is an extension of the widely extended Software as a
Service (SaaS). SaaS is based on the idea of having different
services available on the Internet (on the Cloud) that can be
used and integrated regardless of physical location. In the
case of LaaS, these services will come mainly from e-
learning
applications,
as
we
work
in
the
education
environment. As examples of services provided by e-
learning applications and used in our middleware we can
find: forum rooms and chat from LMS, Wikis, Blogs,
collaboration tools, etc.
LaaS is based on the concept of modelling the educative
services
with
the
objective
of
providing
better
interoperability capabilities in different levels: service-
service, platform-platform, and service-platform. Equally it
is based on the encapsulation of learning objects services.
The aim is to develop autonomous and self-contained
services
that
can
be
easily
integrated
in
different
environments such as Learning Management Systems and
mobile learning environments.
The main objective of this paradigm is the reuse of
existing services, providing interoperability of services
among platforms and applications. This methodology has
been coined as a consequence of the important efforts
already done in the e-learning field, and the fact that new
mobile learning applications usually leave them aside.
Figure 2.
Different applications and LMS in an educational environment
with replicated services.
179
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

New mobile developments tend to create everything from
scratch, giving rise in one hand to a very spread student’s e-
portfolio. On the other hand, both economic and time project
efforts are considerably higher than if services were designed
for service reutilization and interoperability among platforms
and applications (Figures 2 and 3).
Figure 3.
Reuse of service. Utilization of LMS’s services in external
applications, including games and mobile learning applications. Other
applications such as games could include also services in the LMS.
As a consequence, LaaS methodology promulgates the
creation of learning services that could be integrated in other
applications
and
services.
Thus,
M2Learn
framework
includes interfaces to externalize many LMS’s services, such
as forum rooms, and FAQs to be easily integrated in mobile
learning
applications;
games;
or
any
other
kind
of
applications. LaaS also remarks the importance of integration
of
external
services
into
the
LMSs,
extending
its
functionality.
As a consequence, other result of the application of LaaS
in our project is that the monitoring activities of mobile
learning applications can be integrated into the LMS. Thus,
teachers will have the opportunity to check the whole e-
portfolio of the student, no matter if the information comes
from the LMS, from a mobile application, or other service.
In addition, there is another surrounding concept to this
methodology within educative services: Digital Educative
Ecosystems [29]. This concept is based on the idea of
creating environments made of different integrated systems
(mobile clients, applications, services and other tools)
devoted to improve the learning experience by supporting
communication and collaboration. One of the bases of this
concept is the use of SOA (Service-oriented architecture)
technologies such as SOAP [30], Web Services [31], ESB
(Enterprise Service Bus) [32] or REST [33]. Actually, most
of the developed services in the project follow the REST
methodology.
VII.
CONNECTING WITH THE LEARNING REPOSITORIES:
SERVICES IN LMS
Reading
the
m-Learning
bibliography,
most
of
applications do not have any relation with the already
existing LMS. Some examples are in [34], where a prototype
was developed in order to use Moodle through Smartphones.
Basically they changed the three-frame template of Moodle
for a one-frame template to allow users to visualize better the
content. Finally it did not offer the whole functionality of
Moodle because many features did not work properly in a
smartphone.
Other example can be found in [35] where a web service-
based architecture is proposed to move some of the Moodle
functionalities into a mobile device. This also allow to re-use
some of the existing services in LMS, such as authentication,
monitoring, etc., so it is not necessary to create them again.
Thus, excepting some prototypes, most of m-Learning
systems are isolated and autonomous applications that do not
make any use of the knowledge stored in them. These
platforms are in fact the real support of the e-learning
methodology, but it seems like we wanted to let them out of
the m-Learning paradigm.
That is why we also try to interconnect these e-learning
platforms with the mobile devices, in order to take advantage
of all the services and knowledge already existing in them.
Our middleware interacts with the university LMS also
through a set of RESTful Web Services, providing an
interface to implement some functionalities in a mobile
device, such as, access to forum rooms, content or FAQs. In
addition, as we have cited before, there are other advantages
related to the re-use of services instead of creating them
again: authentication, tracking activities, evaluation, content,
etc.
In addition, the LMSs can provide very useful contextual
information.
For
example,
for
many
context-aware
applications knowing the courses where a student is signed
in can be very useful in order to personalize the offered
services. For example, by using the credentials (login and
password) it is possible to retrieve information about his/her
educational environment, e.g., accessing to the university’s
e-learning platform. In this case the system can know the
student’s degree or subjects, and provide this information to
higher level applications that will use it to personalize the
services provided to the student.
VIII.
MIDDLEWARE DESIGN
Once we have achieved all these conclusions we are
prepared to design the middleware that will make easier the
creation
of
context-aware
m-learning
applications,
interconnecting
them
with
the
already
existing
LMS
services.
Firstly, the architecture of the system must ensure it is
possible
to
use
several
sensor
networks
to
provide
contextual information about the user [36] [37].
For that
reason several sensors controllers have been developed in
order to understand the information provided by physical
sensors (level 1 at figure 4). At this stage we are working
180
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

with GPS, RFID and Wi-Fi, but the system is designed
using open interfaces so that it is easy to add new location
methods, such as cell towers, Bluetooth, infrared, etc.
The proposed architecture can be studied as a stack of
services, protocols and applications. At the top level is the
context-aware application (level 6 at figure 4) that uses the
contextual information provided by sensors to access to
particular services such as information in a LMS, e-mail, etc
(level 5 at figure 4).
Figure 4.
Architecture scheme
The most important level in the stack is the adaptation
middleware (level 4 at figure 4) that is a homogenizer layer
that offers an interface to the applications. The context-
aware application will not have to interact with the sensors,
and
even
it
will
not
know
from
which
sensor
the
information comes from at this time. This interface provides
all the contextual information in a transparent way, ensuring
the
applications
will
not
have
to
worry
about
the
implementation of the lower layers. This is the same
philosophy than the TCP/IP levels.
It is based on a set of wrappers (or controllers) that
interact with the physical devices and offer homogeneous
information about not only geo-location, but also about the
user’s context (Figure 5).
The main goal of this interface is to use the information
retrieved from the location technologies to obtain more
information about the user. For example, from a particular
user is possible to know basic information like the geo-
coordinates and the name. It is also possible to know
information about the device and the operating system.
On the other hand, the framework uses a communication
manager that is in charge of the management of the external
communication services and tools. For example, one of the
developed wrappers is an interface to a forum room in
dotLRN, so the developer can easily create applications that
read or write messages in a forum, so the teacher will be
able to see the activity in the mobile application through the
LMS. This particular interface has been developed creating
a REST-like Web Service that wrap the complexity of the
dotLRN forum management. The M2Learn framework
connects with this service to offer this functionality to the
mobile application developer.
Other example of service integrated in the framework is
an
intelligent
question-answer
system
that
retrieves
information from different sources to answer students’
questions. This service can be configured to access to Web
Sites such as Wikipedia or the university site; institutional
databases; or search engines to look up for answers.
Finally, the top level applications use all this information
provided by the interface, but without knowing from which
source it comes. The fact is that there is a lot of contextual
information about the user and services that can be used to
improve the learning experience.
Figure 5.
Architecture to provide interoperability between different location technologies and retrieve contextual information for M-Learning applications.
181
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

All these modules make up the M2Learn Unit (Figure
5). It is the API that higher level applications use to access
the contextual information and personalized services.
This interaction is achieved through a set of Web
Services. They provide an interface to implement mobile
device functionality, such as for example, access to forum
rooms, content, or FAQs. In addition, there are other
advantages related to the re-use of services instead of
creating them again: authentication, tracking activities,
evaluation, content, etc. The LMS can also provide very
useful contextual information.
However, a mobile learning environment is not made up
of a single user, but is complex digital ecosystem with
different kind of users (students, teachers, and staff),
services, applications and platforms. That is why our
scenario envisages the coexistence of several M2Learn
Units communicating and collaborating simultaneously.
From a general overview, the mobile digital ecosystem
built around the M2Learn framework contemplates the co-
existence
of
(Figure
6):
M2Learn
units,
e-learning
applications, and LMS.
From a development point of view, there are two possible
ways
of
building
applications
using
the
M2Learn
framework:

A mobile client built over the M2Learn framework,
using its API to access the information and services
available in the mobile digital ecosystem.

A Mash-up system that retrieves the information of
the mobile clients in the environment through the
Context-Hub.
The interaction in this mobile digital ecosystem is
possible thanks to two important modules:

Context Hub. This module receives the user’s
contextual information and allows its distribution
(Figure 7). Using the Context-Hub module users
can discover information about other surrounding
users. In addition, this module is also fundamental
to support the development of mash-up systems. It
provides contextual information of all the mash-up
system
users,
which
can
merge
location,
preferences, history and other services.
Figure 7. Several M2Learn Units sending their context to the Context-Hub.
The Unit B retrieves all the context to allow high-level applications its use.

Context Directory Service (CDS). This service is a
central directory where all the external services
must be registered in order to be available for the
M2Learn Units. Later, applications built over the
M2Learn framework access the CDS requesting the
available services in this environment (Figure 8).
Figure 6. Interconnection of modules through the Contextual Directory Service. Some applications make use of the Context-Hub to get other users’
contextual information. Application A is built in a mobile device over a M2Learn Unit, while the applications B in a Web-based Mash-up system that
retrieves information of the mobile digital ecosystem and matches with a service from an e-learning tool.
182
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 8. A service provider register a service in the CDS. Later a mobile
application request the CDS the list of available services.
IX.
EVALUATION
Evaluation has been conducted using students of a
“Professional Expert Course on Mobile Programming”. They
have developed several applications using the framework.
Later, students completed a questionnaire on user satisfaction
and
the
simplification
degree
obtained
through
the
framework’s use.
Within this experience, students easily developed a
mobile context-aware application that loaded different LOM-
based resources depending on their location and profile. One
of these resources was a simulation of a virtual laboratory of
thermodynamics. The development of this application was
effortless, and required very few lines of code thanks to the
use of M2Learn.
X.
RELATED WORK
In the following section other context-aware frameworks
are described intended to create not only m-learning
applications, but any kind of context-aware system. But any
of them offer the same set of features than our framework,
due to the fact that it offers information and services not
only from the mobile device (contextual information) but
also from the university LMS and from other external
services.
A.
HyCon Framework
The HyCon framework [38] was developed to provide a
general platform suitable for experiments with hypermedia
mechanisms in a context-aware and mobile environment.
HyCon encompasses an infrastructure for implementing
context-aware services and applications and a framework,
which can be used by applications programmers to build
such services and applications.
B.
Stick-e Note Architecture
The Stick-e note software [39] infrastructure developed
at the University of Kent and provides one of the first
approaches to support the development of context-aware
applications.
The aim of the infrastructure is to simplify the creation
of
context-aware
applications
using
the
electronic
equivalent of a Post-it note and, as such, it focuses on
information presentation and in particular discrete context-
aware applications, i.e., those in which the information
presented to the user does not change continuously.
In such applications, separate pieces of information are
attached to specific contexts (location, states, temporal
ranges, and adjacency) and are presented to the user when
the appropriate context is entered.
The infrastructure is aimed at mobile users carrying
small computing devices, such as PDAs, enhanced with
environmental sensors, but is essentially an on-line system
and does not explicitly address mobility issues.
C.
The Context Toolkit
The Context Toolkit [40] is an architecture developed at
the Georgia Institute of Technology that aims to provide
reusable solutions to the problems of developing context-
aware applications. The main aim of the toolkit is to free
developers from having to deal with the low-level details of
context acquisition and allow them to concentrate on the
specification of higher-level application behaviours.
The toolkit is inspired by the success of toolkits for
Graphical User Interface (GUI) development and is based
on the GUI concept of a widget as a reusable component for
abstracting away from and hiding the specifics of a physical
device. Through the widget abstraction, the Context Toolkit
aims to enable context data to be handled in the same way
user input is currently handled.
The Context Toolkit provides useful domain-specific
abstractions for the incorporation of context data garnered
from sensors into applications, through the use of the widget
abstraction, and this is its major strength. In addition, the
interpreter abstraction of the toolkit provides a means to
convert sensor data to higher-level context.
D.
MiLK: The Mobile Informal Learning Kit
MiLK [41] is a support tool that allows teachers and
students to develop event paths that consist of a series SMS
question and answer messages that lead players through a
series of checkpoints between point A and point B. These
event paths can be designed to suit desired learning
scenarios and can be used to explore a particular place or
subject. They can also be designed to facilitate formal or
informal learning experiences.
E.
The Context Fabric
The Context Fabric project being carried out by the
Group for User Interface Research at the University of
California at Berkeley [42] proposes a novel approach to
providing support for context-awareness in the form of a
service infrastructure model. This model attempts to shift as
much of the task of context-aware computing as possible to
a network-accessible middleware.
This
approach
aims
to
aid
the
development
of
applications based on a diverse and constantly changing set
of sensors and devices by providing uniform abstractions
and reliable services for common operations. The Context
183
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fabric provides sensor abstraction and is one of the few
projects providing an explicit treatment of proximity as a
useful concept in context-aware computing. Sensor fusion
as an approach to managing the uncertainty of sensor data is
not dealt with in the project.
XI.
CONCLUSSION
M2Learn project gives a solution to the development
problems within the mobile learning field. At the same time,
this project promotes the creation of innovative applications
and provides the guide for the development of new
applications based on the new key factors of mobility in
learning:
context-awareness,
social
interaction
and
integration of e-learning resources.
Mobile devices are a very familiar tool for learners.
Their experiences are closer to the use of videogames;
watch videos; communication via mobile devices; and use
of collaborative technologies (e.g., blogs, wikis, mash-ups
and social networks) than to be a mere listener in a master
class given by a teacher. Therefore, thanks to the use of
these devices, students will take an active role in the
learning process in a more interactive and according way to
what they are accustomed to use. Learners will feel more
motivated and engagement with learning. This idea was
remarked by Elliot Soloway, an expert in mobile learning
from the University of Michigan: “The kids these days are
not digital kids. The digital kids were in the ‘90s. The kids
today are mobile, and there’s a difference. Digital is the old
way of thinking, mobile is the new way.”
M2Learn project is intended to give a step further in the
state of the art of design of mobile learning applications. It
supports the development of innovative mobile learning
applications that really complement and enrich the learning
experience. This is a learner-centred paradigm that really
encourage the “anywhere, anytime”, improving the social
interactions, providing a personalized educative experience
to each learner, and reaching to places where traditional or
on-line learning cannot reach. M2Learn Middleware is
devoted to help mobile learning to find its place in
education, as a complement to traditional and on-line
learning instead of replacing them and promoting blended
approaches.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Authors would like to acknowledge the Spanish Science and
Education Ministry and the Spanish National Plan I+D+I
the support for this paper with the project TIN2008-06083-
C03/TSI
“s-Labs – Integration of Open Services for
Remote and Virtual Labs”; and the European Union for the
Leonardo
Project
142788-2008-BG-LEONARDO-LMP
“mPSS – mobile Performance Support for Vocational
Education and Training Project” and the ERASMUS Project
141944-LLP-1-2008-1-ES-ERASMUS-ECDSP
“IPLECS
Internet-based Performance-centered Learning Environment
for
Curriculum
Support”.
Finally
authors
want
to
acknowledge the support provided by e-Madrid Project,
S2009/TIC-1650,
“Investigación
y
Desarrollo
de
tecnologías para el e-learning en la Comunidad de Madrid”.
REFERENCES
[1]
Martin, S., Gil, R., Sancristobal, E., Díaz, G., Castro, M., Peire, J.,
Milev, M., and Mileva, N., “Middleware for the development of
context-aware applications inside m-Learning: Connecting e-learning
to the mobile world”, Proceeding on The Fourth International Multi-
Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology.
ICCGI 2009. August 23-29, 2009 - Cannes/La Bocca.
[2]
Almirall,
M.
and
Rivera,
J.M.,
“Automatic
Mobile
Learning
Contents,”
Proceedings
on the 2009
IADIS
Mobile Learning
Conference, Jan. 2009, Barcelona (Spain).
[3]
Mobile Performance Support System (MPSS): http://mpss.ath.cx/
[4]
Bouvin, N., Brodersen C., Hansen, F. and Iversen, O., and Nørregaard
P., “Tools of Contextualization: Extending the Classroom to the
Field,” Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Interaction design and
children. Boulder, Colorado, Pages: 24 – 31, 2005.
[5]
Bomsdorf, B. (2005) “Adaptation of Learning Spaces: Supporting
Ubiquitous Learning in Higher Distance Education”, Dagstuhl
Seminar
Proceedings
05181
Mobile
Computing
and
Ambient
Intelligence: The Challenge of Multimedia.
[6]
Bouzeghoub, A., Do, K., and Lecocq, C., “Contextual Adaptation of
Learning
Resources”,
IADIS
International
Conference
Mobile
Learning, pp. 41-48, 2007.
[7]
Castro, M., Colmenar, A., and Martin, S. (2010) “Trends of Use of
Technology in Engineering Education”, Proceeding on the I IEEE
Conference on Engineering Education. April 2010, Madrid (Spain)
[8]
Skinner, B. (1968). The Technology of Teaching. New York:
Appleton-Century- Crofts. 1968
[9]
Bower, G. H. and Hilgard, E. R. (1981). Theories of Learning, Fifth
Edition, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc.
[10] Dufresne, R. J. (1996). Classtalk: A Classroom Communication
System for Active Learning. Journal of Computing in Higher
Education. 7 (2), pp. 3-47
[11] Martin, S. et al (2009), "Work in Progress: A Mobile Performance
Support System for Vocational Education and Training," Proceeding
on the 2009 Frontiers in Education Conference, San Antonio TX
(USA). October 2009.
[12] Roschelle, J. (2003). Keynote paper: Unlocking the learning value of
wireless mobile devices. Journal of Computer Assisted learning,
19(3), 260-272.
[13] Naismith, L., Lonsdale, P., Vavoula, G., and Sharples, M.. Literature
review in mobile technologies and learning. NESTA, 2004. Futurelab
series, report 11. Bristol: NESTA Futurelab
[14] Piaget, J. (1929). The Child’s Conception of the World. New York:
Harcourt, Brace Jovanovich
[15] Bruner, J. S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction. Cambridge,
Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University
[16] Colella, V. (2000). Participatory simulations: building collaborative
understanding through immersive dynamic modeling. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 9(4): pp. 471-500
[17] Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate
Peripheral Participation. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
[18] P. J. Brown, J. D. Bovey, and X. Chen. Context-aware Applications:
from
the
Laboratory
to
the
Marketplace.
IEEE
Personal
Communications, 4(5):58{64, October 1997.
[19] Lonsdale, P., Baber, C., Sharples, and M., Arvanitis, T. A context-
awareness architecture for facilitating mobile learning. In Learning
with mobile devices, research and development, 2004. Edited by
Attawell, J. & Savill-Smith C., pp. 79-85.
[20] Rogers, Y., Price, S., Harris, E., Phelps, T., Underwood, M., Wilde,
D., Smith, H., Muller, H., Randell, C., Stanton, D., Neale, H.,
184
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Thompson, M., Weal, M., and Michaelides, D. (2002). Learning
through digitally augmented physical experiences: reflections on the
Ambient
Wood
project.
Equator
Technical
Report,
pp.
1-19
http://www.informatics.sussex.ac.uk/research/groups/interact/papers/
pdfs/Rogers_Ambient_Wood2.pdf. Queried on July 2009.
[21] Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A
social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
[22] Vygotsky,
L. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher
Psychological Processes. Edited Cambridge Mass, London: Harvard
University Press. 1978.
[23] Martín, S., Bravo, J., Hervás, R., Sancristobal, E., Gil, R., Díaz, G.,
Losada, P., Castro, M., and Peire, J., “Location-based Services for
Mobile Devices at University”, IMCL, International Conference on
Interactive Mobile and Computer Aided Learning, pp. 1-7, April 16 -
18 2008, Amman (Jordan).
[24] Borenovic, M.N., Simic, M.I., Neskovic, A.M., and Petrovic, M.M.,
(2005). Enhanced Cell-ID + TA GSM Positioning Technique. The
International Conference on Computer as a Tool, 2005. EUROCON
2005. Volume 2, pp. 1176 – 1179.
[25] Youssef, M.A., Agrawala, A., and Udaya Shankar, A., 2003. WLAN
location determination via clustering and probability distributions.
Proceedings of the First IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications (PerCom 2003), pp.143-150.
[26] Su, W., Lee, S.-J., and Gerla, M., (2000). Mobility prediction in
wireless
networks.
21st
Century
Military
Communications
Conference (MILCOM 2000). Volume 1, 22-25 Oct. 2000 pp. 491 –
495.
[27] Polito, S., Biondo, D., Iera, A., Mattei, M. and Molinaro, A., 2007.
Performance Evaluation of Active RFID Location Systems based on
RF Power Measures. IEEE 18th International Symposium on
Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2007 (PIMRC
2007). pp. 1-5.
[28] Bravo, J., Hervás, R., and Chavira, G., "Ubiquitous Computing in the
Classroom: An Approach through Identification Process." Journal of
Universal Computer Science 11(9): 1494-1504, 2005.
[29] Cheung. B., Stewart. B., and McGreal, R., “Going Mobile with
Moodle: First steps,” IADIS International Conference on Mobile
Learning 2006.
[30] Conde, M., Casany, M.J., Alier, M., and García, F.J., “Back and
forth: From the LMS to the mobile device. A SOA approach,“ 2009
IADIS International Conference Mobile Learning, Barcelona (Spain).
[31] Martín, S., Diaz, G., Sancristobal, E., Gil, R., Castro, M., and Peire,
J., “Supporting M-learning: The location challenge”, Proceedings on
the 2009 IADIS Mobile Learning Conference, Jan. 2009, Barcelona
(Spain).
[32] Martín, S., Sancristobal, E., Gil, R., Díaz, G., Castro, M., and Peire,
J., “A context-Aware Application based on Ubiquitous Location”,
UBICOMM 2008. The second International conference on Mobile
Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies, October
2008, Valencia, (Spain).
[33] Hansen, F., and Bouvin, N., “Mobile Learning in Context — Context-
aware Hypermedia in the Wild“, International Journal of Interactive
Mobile Technologies (iJIM), Vol 3, No 1 (2009).
[34] Pascoe, J., “The Stick-e Note Architecture: Extending the Interface
Beyond the User”, 1997 International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces, pages 261-264, ACM Order Department, PO Box 12114,
Church Street Station, New York, NY 10257, January 1997. ACM,
ACM.
[35] Salber D., Dey, A., and Abowd, G., “The Context Toolkit: Aiding the
Development of Context-Enabled Applications”, Proceedings of the
1999 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI),
Pittsburgh, PA, pages 434-441, May 1999.
[36] Polson, D., and Morgan, C., “MiLK: The Mobile Informal Learning
Kit.Collaborating to design succesful mobile learning applications“,
IADIS International Conference Mobile Learning 2007.
[37] Hong J. I., and Landay, J. A, “An Infrastructure Approach to Context-
Aware”, Computing. Human-Computer Interaction, 16(2-4):287{303,
2001.
[38] Hansen, F., and Bouvin, N., “Mobile Learning in Context — Context-
aware Hypermedia in the Wild“, International Journal of Interactive
Mobile Technologies (iJIM), Vol 3, No 1 (2009).
[39] Pascoe, J., (1997). The Stick-e Note Architecture: Extending the
Interface Beyond the User, 1997 International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces, pages 261-264, ACM Order Department,
PO Box 12114, Church Street Station, New York, NY 10257, January
1997. ACM, ACM.
[40] Salber D., Dey, A., and Abowd, G., (1999). The Context Toolkit:
Aiding
the
Development
of
Context-Enabled
Applications.
Proceedings of the 1999 Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI), Pittsburgh, PA, pages 434-441, May 1999.
[41] Polson, D., and Morgan, C., (2007). MiLK: The Mobile Informal
Learning Kit.Collaborating to design succesful mobile learning
applications. IADIS International Conference Mobile Learning 2007.
[42] Hong J. I., and Landay, J. A, (2001). An Infrastructure Approach to
Context-Aware Computing.
Human-Computer
Interaction, 16(2-
4):287{303, 2001.
185
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

