Improving a Travel Management Procedure: an
Italian Experience
Antonello Calabró∗, Eda Marchetti∗, Giorgio Oronzo Spagnolo∗
Pierangela Cempini†, Luca Mancini†, Serena Paoletti†
∗Software Engineering Area
†Administrative Staff
Institute of Information Science and Technologies“A. Faedo”
Italian National Research Council (CNR)
via G. Moruzzi, 1 - Pisa, Italy
Email: firstnames.lastname@isti.cnr.it
Abstract—Recently, a lot of attention has been dedicated by the
Public Administrations to reduce/optimize the costs of travel
management. Indeed, automatic support may increase the quality
of the proposed services, drastically decreasing the time required
for document production and validation, and promoting the
integration with different PA (Public Administration) systems
and services. However, due to the critical nature of the exchanged
data, the interaction with the customers (personnel and citizens),
the complexity of the considered procedures, the quality aspect
becomes a crucial point to be considered during the development
of automatic supports. In this paper, we focus on the quality
aspects of the PA travel management automation, and we present
the evaluation of a prototype implementation of a framework for
automating the travel management process adopted inside an
Italian PA. The experience highlighted important challenges in
the application of automatic facilities for the travel management
and nd allowed the detection of inconsistencies and improvements
of the process itself.
Keywords–usiness process; Monitoring; Adequacy Criteria;
Learning assessmentusiness process; Monitoring; Adequacy Cri-
teria; Learning assessmentB
I.
INTRODUCTION
Automatic support is currently consolidated practices for
increasing the quality of services provided by administrations
and drastically decreasing the time required for documents
production and validation. In line with this policy, the Italian
Public Administrations (PAs) are currently moving towards
the “digital maturity”, i.e., massive adoption of Information
and Communication Technologies) facilities to increase the
quality and efﬁciency of their internal procedures, integrating
the different PA services and speeding up the overall PA
management [1]. However, due to the critical nature of the
exchanged data, the interaction with the customers (personnel
and citizens), the complexity of the considered procedures,
the quality aspect becomes a crucial point to be considered
during the development of automatic supports. In this paper
we focus on the PA travel management automation, which
has been recognized as one of the PA hot topics for cost
reduction, according to a recent research of the School of
Management in collaboration with AirPlus [2]. In particular,
this analysis evidenced that only one third of the considered
PAs has an accurate, organized, quality satisfactory travel man-
agement system. Most of the times, only a partial automation
is provided and the single employees are forced to organize
their travels with the help of on-line travel services.
The main issues of the existing facilities have been iden-
tiﬁed into the persistency of: an hard copy collection of
travel documentations; an inaccurate, incomplete or erroneous
collection of travel data; a manual checking and validation of
the produced travel documentation by the administrative per-
sonnel. A more satisfactory travel management system could,
on one hand drastically reduce the time and effort necessary
for the procedure completion, and from the hand, provide
optimized travel schedule, conventions with public transports
accommodations and digitalization of travel documentation. A
preliminary analysis of the impact of the adoption of proper
automatic support for the travel management on the PAs overall
costs can be summarized as:
•
n evident increase of the quality of the ﬁlled modules
due to the reduction in the number of errors and
inconsistencies inside them;
•
an accurate collection and cataloguing of data, avoid-
ing loss of documentations;
•
a reduction of the time required for checking and
validating the different costs and expenses;
•
automatic and periodic statistical travel reports use-
ful for the stipulation of conventions with travel or
accommodation companies;
•
an accurate and more organized annual budget analysis
useful for a faithful schedule and planning of PA costs;
•
an integration with the different PA systems and
services, with an important decrease in the cost and
effort necessary by the administrative staff to process
the documentation, record travel data information and
complete the overall travel refund.
On the basis of the above considerations, and continuing
a preliminary work presented in [3], this paper presents the
procedural steps followed from requirements elicitation to
the deﬁnition of a speciﬁc quality model and the relative
customized software measurement plans for its internal travel
management system of an Italian PA: the Institute of Informa-
tion Science and Technologies “A. Faedo” (ISTI) of the Italian
National Research Council (CNR) in Pisa 1. In collaboration
with the administrative staff of such institute, we analyzed
the possible quality improvements starting from three points
1http://www.isti.cnr.it/
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-553-1
SOFTENG 2017 : The Third International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

of view: the technical position, related to the quality of the
systems itself; the view of the user, which is more related
to the usability experienced and the quality level obtained in
the fulﬁlment of his/her tasks; and ﬁnally, the view of the
PA personnel, which is interested in the maximization of the
revenues in management.
Thanks to our previous experience in different context
domains, [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], we followed a storytelling ap-
proach [8] [9] to collect through interviews the most important
requirements, quality attributes, interesting behaviors and crit-
ical activities of the travel management process. Then, using
the basic guidelines of the Business Process Management [10],
we developed a Business Process Model (BPM) representing
the steps that have to be performed by the different participants
(people, teams distributed organizations or systems) during the
execution of the travel management process. This approach
allowed us to focus on important quality aspects and an easy
model for the travel refund process. Concise deﬁnitions have
been used both during discussions with the ISTI administration
and for the preliminary validation of the executable framework,
called COSO (COmpilazione miSsiOni) [11], implementing
the process itself. n particular, to simplify the quality attributes
measurement, track activities evolution and the information
exchange, monitoring capabilities have also been included in
the developed framework.
Recently BPM modeling has been adopted in many sectors,
such as ﬁnancial services, business services and construc-
tion, manufacturing, public sector and healthcare, retail and
wholesale, and telecommunications. Especially in the public
administration, many governments are taking advantage of the
multiple beneﬁt that BPM software solutions offer [12]. There
are various examples of successful BPM adoption in public ad-
ministrations like for instance those experienced in Germany,
Switzerland, Austria [13] and Sweden [14]. In particular, the
authors in [15] describe the BPM System for benchmarking,
monitoring, simulation and redesigning processes, that will
be deployed into the Greek government agencies. However,
despite the importance of the topic, there is very little attention
paid on the deﬁnition of precise quality aspects useful both for
guiding the development and subsequent assessment of such
system.
The experience of this paper highlighted that the identiﬁ-
cation of the proper quality attributes, as well as the BPM ele-
ments can be a key factor for the ﬁnal results. It also revealed
important challenges in the application of automatic facilities
for the travel management in a speciﬁc PA context and and
revealed the detection of inconsistencies and improvements of
the process itself.
Summarizing, the contribution of this paper is: the BPM
modeling of the natural language rules of the CNR manual for
travel management process, the deﬁnition of a quality model
focused on productivity, efﬁcient time management, usability
and performance aspects, and the feedbacks and results of the
preliminary assessment of the COSO framework.
In the rest of the paper, some background concepts are
presented in Section II, while in Section III, the procedure
followed for deriving BPM is presented. The set of quality
attributes used for the COSO assessment is schematized in
Section IV, while the main COSO components are introduced
in Section V. Preliminary assessment results are collected in
Section VI and discussion and conclusions follow in Section
VII.
II.
BACKGROUND
In this section, we brieﬂy provide some details about the
CNR travel management procedure. The formalism chosen to
represent this procedure is the Business Process Model and
Notation (BPMN) [16], which is the de facto standard for
process modeling. It is indeed a rich and expressive but also
complex language to be used for the tasks associated with
process modeling [17]. Usually, the BPMN refers to any struc-
tured collection of related activities or tasks that are carried
out to accomplish the intended objectives of an organization.
Tasks within a business process may represent steps that can
be performed manually by a human or automatically by an IT
system [18].
As any other PA, ISTI and more in general the CNR, has
a well-deﬁned collection of travel policies and procedures.
According to CNR rules, the travel expenses have to be
previously authorized using a speciﬁc authorization module.
Once travel has been completed, the expenses have to be
reported into a speciﬁc refund module, supported by appropri-
ate documentation and legitimated by the administrative staff.
Variations from the established policies represent exceptional
cases and have to be approved by the authorized department
approver (Director). One of the main traveler’s responsibility
is to be familiar with, and strictly follow, the policies and
procedures speciﬁed in the manual. It is out of the scope of
this paper to provide a detailed rules list; in the following we
only mention the most important ones. Additional information
regarding travel authorization, reimbursement process as well
as accounting practices and procedures is available in [19].
Authorization: The travel should be authorized by the
Director, and an authorization module should be produced
at least ﬁve working days before departure. Travelers should
provide their personal details, the motivation of the travel, the
location, and an estimated amount of the total travel cost.
Transportation: Class depends on the category of travelers
and varies from national to international transportation.
Accommodation: Type of allowed accommodation depends
on the category of travelers.
Reimbursing Travel Related Expenses: Rules vary in case
of national or international travels an reported through speciﬁc
module.
Meal expenses: Only two meals are allowed and the total
meal expenses for day are limited by speciﬁc boundaries.
Documentation: Original receipts for all expenses must be
submitted to administrative staff and PDF copy provided.
Mileage Reimbursement Rate: Reimbursements for mileage
are made following speciﬁc mileage reimbursement rate in
effect at the time of the trip.
Reimbursable Expenses: Reimbursable travel expenses also
include: airline baggage fees, automobile rentals and meeting/-
conference fees.
However, the Italian legislation about PA travel man-
agement is continuously modifying and due to its natural
language speciﬁcation, it often rises misunderstandings and
misinterpretations. Being informed and knowledgeable about
the travelers management evolution is one of the most difﬁcult
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-553-1
SOFTENG 2017 : The Third International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

points for the travelers. Therefore, the documentation provided
both for travel authorization and travel refund are often full of
errors and inconsistencies.
III.
MODEL CREATION
In this section, we brieﬂy present the method used require-
ment elicitation. The requirements have been then translated
into the Business Process Models of the ISTI travel manage-
ment process, called ISTI Travel Model (ITM). In order to
develop the ITM, we followed a storytelling methodology [8],
[9]. Therefore, through interviews with ISTI personnel and
domain experts, we collected the most interesting behaviors
and critical activities of the travel management process.
The method is summarized in Figure 1, where three main
stakeholders are: the Tellers, who are asked to describe their
activities explicitly through stories; the Facilitators, who pro-
vide support to story tellers for producing coherent stories
and to modelers for the deﬁnition of the ﬁrst abstraction of
the models; Modelers, who are the process analysts deﬁning
the graphical models on the bases of information collected
from the tellers and facilitators. Following the storytelling
methodology three speciﬁc phases, each one involving all the
roles, have been executed as brieﬂy described in the rest of
this section.
BPM
Experts
Institute
Employees
ISTI Travel Model
Travel
Docs
Facilitators
I Phase
collect stories about Refund Travel
III Phase
build workﬂow rapresentation
II Phase
discuss and create abstraction
Law
Travel
Operational 
Manual
Administrative
Staff
Modelers
Tellers
Figure 1. Methodology to create the model
At the end of the three phases of the storytelling methodol-
ogy, we have produced one high-level model that describes the
main process of the ITM and sixteen lower level models that
describe in details the sub-processes. For simplicity, we report
in Figure 2 just the high-level model of the ITM concerning
reimbursement of travel related expense.
As in the Figure 2, the actors interact with the COSO
framework according to the following procedure: (1) The
employee authenticates himself/hersef though COSO and starts
a request of travel refund expenses; (2) Using an Identity
Provider (IdP is responsible for providing identiﬁers for users
looking to interact with a system) COSO identiﬁes the users;
(3) GEKO [20], the ISTI internal Internet service managing
administrative projects funding, sends to COSO the data
related to the selected travel; (4) the employee ﬁlls/uploads
and accepts travel data and documents. The COSO framework
aids the employee in the module completion implementing the
rules and policies of the CNR travel management procedure
concerning the accomodations, transportation, meal expenses;
(5) Finally, the refund request is printed and sent to the SIGLA
framework [21], which is the ofﬁcial CNR system for the
management of the accounting and ﬁnancial reporting.
IV.
QUALITY ASPECTS
Nowadays, modern societies and administrations take more
and more in consideration quality aspects of their business
process and try to improve them by the adoption of automatic
support. The International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) in its deﬁnition for quality, namely “(the) degree to
which an inherent characteristic (a distinguishing feature)
fulﬁls requirements (a need or expectation that is stated,
generally implied or obligatory)” [22]. Thus, an important
aspect becomes the possibility of evaluating both the user
satisfaction and the quality of the proposed service in terms
of parameters that can be obtained by directly measuring the
business process. Considering in particular the PAs business
processes, they involve several collaborative activities shared
among different, possibly many, ofﬁces, personnel, companies.
Moreover, the introduction of laws/regulations concerning the
improvement of automatic documentations management as
well as the necessity of costs reduction provide new challenges
for the enactment and automation of PA business process such
as productivity, timeless, and usability and performance.
In this section, considering the speciﬁcity of the ISTI travel
business management, the information collected in the phase
2 of the storytelling methodology (see Section III), and the set
of attributes expressed in the ISO/IEC 25010 standard [23],
a customized set of quality attributes has been selected and
adapted for assessing the COSO framework.
In the following subsections, the quality model is brieﬂy
presented considering the attributes divided into ﬁve target
perspectives: business, security, performance, conﬁguration
and enhancement.
1) Business Perspective: The attributes considered accord-
ing to the business perspective are:
Suitability: Degree to which the system provides a set of
functions that meet the ISTI personnel requirements (both from
administrative and user perspective). It is measured in the
number of requirements implemented into the speciﬁcations.
Accessibility: Degree to which the system can be used by
people with the widest range of characteristics and capabilities
to achieve a speciﬁed goal in a speciﬁed context of use.
Two measures are associated to this attribute: the number
of functions a user with a physical handicap can access; the
number of different categories of ISTI personnel mapped into
the system.
Learnability: Degree to which the system can be used by
the ISTI personnel to learn the rules of the CNR travel manage-
ment procedure. It is measured in terms of the completeness
of user documentation and /or help facilities.
User error protection: Degree to which the system protects
users against making errors. It is measured in terms of the
number of rules of the CNR travel management procedure
implemented in the system.
Adaptability: Degree to which the system can effectively
and efﬁciently be adapted to different or evolving rules of
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-553-1
SOFTENG 2017 : The Third International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

Figure 2. COSO high-level Model
CNR travel management procedure. It is measured in terms of
number of implemented rules per functionality in the system.
Modularity: Degree to which new features or customization
can be added to the system. It is measured in terms of the
average number of dependencies between system components.
2) Security Perspective: The attributes considered accord-
ing to the security perspective are related to the degree to
which the system protects travel information. Therefore, the
ISTI personnel or other interacting systems should have the
degree of data access appropriate to their types and levels of
authorization. It is evaluated in terms of:
Conﬁdentiality: The system ensures that data are accessible
only by the ISTI authorized personnel. It is evaluated in terms
of the possibility to control system accesses.
Integrity: The system prevents unauthorized access or mod-
iﬁcations. It is measured in terms of the possibility to avoid
data corruption.
Non-repudiation: Degree to which actions or events can
be proven to have taken place. It is measured in terms of the
possibility to use digital signature.
Accountability: Degree to which the actions of an entity
can be traced. It is measured in terms of the possibility to use
audit trail.
Authenticity: The system can prove the identity of a subject
or resource. It is measured in terms of the use of the possibility
to authenticate the identity of a subject or resource.
3) Performance Perspective: The attributes considered ac-
cording to the performance perspective are related to the
resources and the behaviour of the system. In particular, the
considered attributes are:
Time behaviour: Time necessary to compile the modules
for the travel authorization or refund. It is measured in terms
of the mean time necessary for a module completion.
Capacity: Maximum amount of simultaneous accesses to
the system. It is measured in terms of how many online
requests can be processed per unit of time.
4) Conﬁguration Perspective: The attributes considered
according to the conﬁguration perspective are related to the
structure of the system. In particular, the considered attributes
are:
Compatibility: Degree to which the system can exchange
its results with other available systems or components. It is
evaluated in terms of how ﬂexible is the system in data sharing.
Interoperability: Degree to which the system can use (or
produce) information from (for) other systems. It is evaluated
in terms of supported data exchanged format.
5) Enhancement Perspective: Additional quality attributes,
not included in the considered standard, have been deﬁned for
the framework assessment. In particular:
Traceability: Degree to which the system can keep track of
a given set or type of information to a given degree. Specif-
ically the system should log and trace activities execution
according to user deﬁned speciﬁc rules. It is measured in terms
of number of tracking and storage facilities included into the
system.
Customizable data collection: Degree to which the system
can provide statistical analysis on the basis of travel data
collection. It is measured in terms of the number of user
deﬁned statistical analysis the system can produce.
V.
FRAMEWORK
For completeness, in this section we provide a short de-
scription of the automation of the CNR travel management
procedure, thought the COSO framework, is provided. More
details can be found in [3]. As described shown in Figure
3, the framework collaborates with the three main software
products of ISTI that are SIGLA [21], for the management
of the accounting and ﬁnancial reporting, GEKO [20] for
the management of funding and Identity Provider to manage
authentication. However, during the development and vali-
dation stages, the prototype has been forced to work as a
stand-alone framework. In Figure 4, additional architecture
details of the COSO component are shown. To improve the
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-553-1
SOFTENG 2017 : The Third International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

Employees
Refund
Travel Report
Existing IT System 
G.E.K.O
S.I.G.L.A.
t
Identity 
Provider
Process Analytical 
Reporting
BPM System Co.So.
Process Engine
Process Monitoring and 
Exception Handling
Process 
Data
Figure 3. Overview of the high level architecture
Figure 4. Overview of the architecture
adaptability, modularity and learnability of the proposal, ﬁve
main components have been identiﬁed:
•
the editor: it provides facilities both for creating
and modifying the models representing the business
process.
•
the front-end: it is composed of several web-forms
and help facilities. It provides both documentations
and suggestions to the user and contributes to decrease
the number of errors in module fulﬁlling.
•
the monitoring: it keeps track of models execution
and collects speciﬁc travel data useful for statistical
analysis.
•
the message broker: it deals with the communication
between different components.
•
the BPM engine: it executes the BP model relative
the CNR travel management process.
VI.
ASSESSMENT
According to the quality attributes deﬁned in Section IV,
the following sections recap how and where these attributes
have been addressed. For the assessment, the speciﬁcation de-
scribed in section III and its current prototype implementation
into the COSO framework [11] have been considered.
A. Business Perspective Assessment
Suitability: During the three phases of the storytelling
methodology a set of functional and non functional require-
ments has been collected. In the model creation, these require-
ments have been mapped and realized into one or more activ-
ities or tasks of the BP model. Consequently, all the identiﬁed
requirements have been implemented into the speciﬁcations.
Accessibility: The current implementation of COSO pro-
totype provided a set of facilities speciﬁcally designed for
administrative and research staff. Additional categories of ISTI
personnel, such as external or associated staff, have still to be
included in the implementation. The percentage of different
categories of ISTI personnel mapped into the system is cur-
rently around 70%. Speciﬁc facilities for users with physical
handicaps are currently under development and, therefore, this
measure was not evaluated.
Learnability: A set of user documentation and help facil-
ities has been deﬁned in collaboration with Administrative
Staff to make easier the learning of the rules of the CNR
travel management procedure. In particular, for each of the
activities and tasks of the derived BP model the front end of
COSO framework provides a help menu reporting meaningful
example, rules description and speciﬁc constraints.
User error protection: The BP model implements all the
rules and policies deﬁned in CNR travel management pro-
cedure [19]. Moreover, the front-end application of COSO
framework has been developed to prevent rules violation or
common users mistake.
Adaptability: During the BP model derivation, the process
has been stiletted into more sub-processes, each one associated
to a (or a restricted group of) requirement(s) so to simplify the
maintenance or upgrading of the the framework. Moreover, the
editor associated to the COSO framework allows to update the
models in case of new requirements or rules.
Modularity: The development of the COSO framework fol-
lowed the Model-View-Controller paradigm. The stand alone
components as well as the use of messages paradigm and
REST invocations guarantee the independency between system
components.
B. Security Perspective Assessment
The attributes related to the security perspective, i.e conﬁ-
dentiality, integrity, non-repudiation, authenticity, are covered
by the ISTI authentication system, and ISTI intranet in gen-
eral, on which the users must authenticate themselves before.
In particular, ISTI implements the authentication procedures,
policies and the architecture required by the GARR consortium
(Rete italiana dell’istruzione e della ricerca - Italian network
for the research and instruction) [24], which is the top Italian
Guarantor for the research networks, in order to protect data
from any intruders. Moreover, to better focus on these quality
aspects, as depicted in Figure 2, in the BP model a speciﬁc
task has been entirely dedicated to the security aspects.
C. Performance Perspective Assessment
Time behaviour: We are currently collecting data for the
complete evaluation of this attribute. However, the introduction
of an automatic framework provided a drastic reduction in
the time required for checking and validating the different
costs and expenses. Before the introduction of the COSO
framework the process was manually completed. Preliminary
results evidenced that the time behaviour can be reduced to
one third of the mean time required for a completion of
a travel authorization and refund (currently estimated into
3 and 1.5 hours respectively). Moreover, the possibility of
simultaneous accesses of from different users reduced the
interactions and communications between the ISTI personnel
and the Administrative staff.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-553-1
SOFTENG 2017 : The Third International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

Capacity: We do not have a statistical signiﬁcant number or
data to estimate this attribute. However, considering that inside
ISTI the average number of travel authorizations and refunds
per years is around 1500 this can represent a considerable
budget and effort reduction for the overall institute.
D. Conﬁguration Perspective Assessment
From the conﬁguration perspective, the automatic frame-
work provides the integration with GEKO, the ISTI internal
internet service managing administrative projects funding, and
SIGLA, the ofﬁcial CNR system for the management of the
accounting and ﬁnancial reporting. This decreases considerably
the cost and effort necessary by the administrative staff to
process the documentation, exchange personnel information
and modules, record travel data, and complete the overall travel
refund.
Finally, considering the enhancement perspective the mon-
itoring component included in the framework, allows to log,
trace and store activities execution according to speciﬁc rules
deﬁned in collaboration with ISTI administrative staff. The
purpose is to improve costs management and predictions;
establish a better distribution of ISTI budget and possibly
establish speciﬁc (accommodation/transportation) conventions.
In addition, monitoring component includes the possibility to
deﬁned customizable rules and store the relative data so to
improve user deﬁned statistical analysis. This guarantees a
satisﬁed level of the enhancement quality attribute implemen-
tation.
VII.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper presented the procedure adopted for the BPM
modeling of the natural language rules of the ISTI-CNR travel
management manual and the deﬁnition of a quality model
useful for the development and assessment of its automatic
implementation. Preliminary feedbacks and results have been
collected during the evaluation of the COSO framework. The
lessons learned by this experience are: the model must be
ﬂexible enough to accommodate modiﬁcations and situations
that are not explicitly described by the regulations; the model
must be simple and intuitive to make easier its understanding;
quality aspects are difﬁcult to be deﬁned and formalized by
not software engineering expert and many times a mediator
is necessary. As a future work, we will continue the COSO
implementation and the collection of assessment results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Claudio Montani, Director
of the ISTI-CNR in Pisa, for his hints, incitements and useful
discussions.
REFERENCES
[1]
Italian Parlament, “Codice dell’amministrazione digitale,” http://www.
parlamento.it/parlam/leggi/deleghe/05082dl.htm, [retrieved: Feb-2017].
[2]
AirPlus, “Il Travel Management nella Pubblica Amministrazione,”
https://www.airplus.com/it/it/news_153185_172508/,
[retrieved:
Feb-
2017].
[3]
G. O. Spagnolo, E. Marchetti, A. Coco, P. Scarpellini, A. Querci,
F. Fabbrini, and S. Gnesi, “An experience on applying process mining
techniques to the tuscan port community system,” in Software Quality
Day 2016, 2016, pp. 49 – 60.
[4]
A. Calabró, F. Lonetti, and E. Marchetti, “Monitoring of business
process execution based on performance indicators,” in The Euromicro
Conference series on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications
(SEAA), 2015, pp. 255–258.
[5]
A. Calabrò, F. Lonetti, and E. Marchetti, “KPI Evaluation of the
Business Process Execution through Event Monitoring Activity,” in ES,
2015, pp. 169–176.
[6]
S. Zribi, A. Calabrò, F. Lonetti, E. Marchetti, T. Jorquera, and J.-P.
Lorré, “Design of a simulation framework for model-based learning,” in
Proceedings of International Conference on Model-Driven Engineering
and Software Development, 2016, pp. 631–639.
[7]
G.
O.
Spagnolo,
E.
Marchetti,
A.
Coco,
and
S.
Gnesi,
“Modelling
and
validating
an
import/export
shipping
process,”
ERCIM
News,
vol.
2016,
no.
105,
2016,
[retrieved:
Feb-
2017]. [Online]. Available: http://ercim-news.ercim.eu/en105/special/
modelling-and-validating-an-import-export-shipping-process
[8]
F. M. Santoro, M. R. S. Borges, and J. A. Pino, “Acquiring knowledge
on business processes from stakeholders’ stories,” Advanced Engineer-
ing Informatics, vol. 24, no. 2, 2010.
[9]
J. C. de A. R. Gonçalves, F. M. Santoro, and F. A. Baião, “Business
process mining from group stories,” in CSCWD, 2009, pp. 161–166.
[10]
J. Jeston and J. Nelis, Business process management. Routledge, 2014.
[11]
A. Calabró, E. Marchetti, G. O. Spagnolo, P. Cempini, L. Mancini,
and S. Paoletti, Towards the Automation of the Travel Management
Procedure of an Italian Public Administration.
Springer International
Publishing, LNBIP 269, 2016, pp. 175–187.
[12]
N. Zhang and X. Hou, “Government Process Management under
electronic government and its application,” in E-Business and E-
Government (ICEE), 2011 International Conference on, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[13]
N. Ahrend, K. Walser, and H. Leopold, “Case Study of the Imple-
mentation of Business Process Management in Public Administration
in Germany, Switzerland and Austria,” in ECEG2013-13th European
Conference on eGovernment: ECEG 2013.
Academic Conferences
Limited, 2013, p. 11.
[14]
P. Wohed, D. Truffet, and G. Juell-Skielse, Business Process Manage-
ment for Open E-Services in Local Government Experience Report.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 1–15.
[15]
S. Gayialis, G. Papadopoulos, S. Ponis, P. Vassilakopoulou, and I. Tat-
siopoulos, “Integrating process modeling and simulation with bench-
marking using a business process management system for local gov-
ernment,” International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering,
vol. 8, no. 6, 2016, p. 482.
[16]
OMG, “Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN),” 2011, 20th
ed.: Object Management Group.
[17]
J. Recker, “Opportunities and constraints: the current struggle with
BPMN,” Business Proc. Manag. Journal, vol. 16-1, 2010, pp. 181–201.
[18]
C. Gerth, Business Process Models. Change Management, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science.
Springer, 2013, vol. 7849. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38604-6
[19]
Roberto Tatarelli and Fabiana Carinici, “Le spese di trasferta - criteri
e modalitá di corresponsione del trattamenti di missione e dei rimborsi
spese,” http://www.urp.cnr.it/documenti/c14-015-a.pdf, [retrieved: Feb-
2017].
[20]
Institute of Information Science and Technologies (ISTI), “Gestione
Commesse,” http://geko.isti.cnr.it:8180/CNR/, [retrieved: Feb-2017].
[21]
Italian National Research Council (CNR), “Sistema Informativo Ges-
tione Linee di Attivita,” http://contab.cnr.it/portale/, [retrieved: Feb-
2017].
[22]
International
Organization
for
Standardization,
“Quality
manage-
ment
principles,”
http://www.iso.org/iso/pub100080.pdf,
[retrieved:
Feb-2017].
[23]
International Organization for Standardization, “Systems and software
Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE),” http://www.iso.org/
iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=35733, [Online; accessed 19-Feb-
2017].
[24]
Gruppo per l’Armonizzazione delle Reti della Ricerca (GARR),
“Acceptable
Use
Policy,”
http://www.garr.it/it/documenti/
2133-acceptable-use-policy-eng-version, 2016, [retrieved: Feb-2017].
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-553-1
SOFTENG 2017 : The Third International Conference on Advances and Trends in Software Engineering

