Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines for Mobile Health and Wellness Apps 
for an Aging Population Including People Aging with Disabilities
Ljilja Ruzic, Christina N. Harrington, and Jon A. Sanford 
The Center for Assistive Technology and Environmental Access (CATEA) 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA, USA 
e-mail: ljilja@gatech.edu, cnh@gatech.edu, jon.sanford@design.gatech.edu 
 
Abstract—The usability of mobile interfaces for older adults 
is becoming more important as the population ages and their 
use of technology increases. Whereas a few design strategies 
have been developed to guide the design of the mobile 
interfaces for an aging population, these strategies and their 
related principles and guidelines are focused on either older 
adults or individuals with disabilities. The size of the 
population aging with disabilities is growing. However, there 
are no guidelines that include this end-user population. 
Adaptation and integration of the existing strategies were 
necessary to create an inclusive and comprehensive set of 
guidelines for interactive mobile interfaces for older adults 
that includes people aging with disabilities. The paper 
presents an overview of the Universal Design Mobile Interface 
Guidelines, UDMIG, for an aging population and individuals 
aging with disabilities, and the related evaluation checklist. 
UDMIG v.2.2 and the checklist were developed to ensure 
usability of future mobile technologies by older adults 
through a universal design strategy that accommodates all 
users to the greatest extent possible. Moreover, the paper 
details the application of the guidelines to the design of the 
mobile health and wellness self-management app for 
individuals aging with multiple sclerosis, MS Assistant. 
Additionally, it reports the results of an expert review with 
the purpose of evaluating the effectiveness of implementing 
UDMIG v.2.2 in the design of MS Assistant.  
Keywords-aging; 
aging 
with 
disabilities; 
design; 
evaluation; guidelines; mobile interfaces. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This research paper is based on the previously reported 
contribution on the design and evaluation of mobile 
interfaces for an aging population [1]. 
Older adults encounter many barriers while interacting 
with mobile applications [2]-[5]. Lack of physical space 
(e.g., small touch and physical buttons), confusion with 
their location within the context, use of menus that require 
precise movements, use of small fonts, content placement, 
and use of large contents that require memory recall, are 
some of the barriers that lead to longer and less successful 
task completion [6][7].   
The usability of mobile interfaces for older adults is 
becoming more important as the population ages and 
seniors’ use of technology increases. To ensure usability of 
new technologies for older adults, a number of design 
strategies have been proposed.  While these strategies may 
adequately address the usability issues for people 
experiencing the normal aging process, they do not address 
the increasing number of usability barriers experienced by 
people aging with disabilities, a user population that is also 
growing at a rapid pace [8][9].  
To be inclusive of people aging with and into disability 
in the design of interactive mobile interfaces, the Universal 
Design Mobile Interface Guidelines (UDMIG), was 
developed.  The UDMIG is a comprehensive set of usability 
guidelines based on four established design strategies for 
desktop and mobile user interfaces, including, Universal 
Design (UD), Design for Aging (DfA), Universal Usability 
(UU), and Handheld Mobile Device Interface Design 
(MID).  
This paper describes the development of the UDMIG 
and its associated checklist to ensure usability of future 
mobile technologies by older adults through a universal 
design strategy that accommodates all users to the greatest 
extent possible. In addition, it details the application of the 
guidelines to the design of MS Assistant, a mobile health 
and wellness self-management app for individuals aging 
with multiple sclerosis.  
This paper is organized into six sections. Section II 
provides a background of the four design strategies that 
formed the basis of the UDMIG. In addition, it describes the 
current evaluation tools used for the assessment of mobile 
touchscreen interfaces for an aging population. Section III 
describes the three prototypes of the mobile interface 
guidelines for an aging population and their refinement, to 
include individuals aging with disabilities in UDMIG v.2.2. 
Section IV identifies the specific design criteria derived 
from UDMIG v2.2, which should be applied to the 
development of the mobile applications for older adults 
with disabilities. Section V describes the development of 
MS Assistant, a mobile health management application for 
people with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) based on the design 
criteria.   Section VI presents the results of an expert review 
to evaluate the effectiveness of implementing the UDMIG 
design criteria in the design of MS Assistant. Finally, 
Section VII provides a discussion of the current state of MS 
Assistant and proposes future work.  
II. 
BACKGROUND: DESIGN FOR AGING 
There are four widely accepted strategies that are 
applied to the design of desktop and mobile user interfaces 
that are relevant for the target population.  These include 
UD, DfA, UU, and MID.  
UD is the design everyday products that are usable by 
everyone (to the greatest extent possible).  By doing so, UD 
372
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

facilitates usability, thereby eliminating physical barriers to 
usability (and inclusivity) that would be experienced by any 
individual, including older adults and people with 
disabilities [10][11]. The Principles of UD [12][13] consists 
of seven principles and twenty-nine guidelines. Although 
originally developed to apply to physical products, the 
Principles of UD are equally applicable to the design of 
digital technologies.  
In contrast to UD, DfA [14] specifically addresses the 
specific functional limitations associated with aging and 
user interfaces. DfA identifies the factors that constrain the 
use of products and user interfaces by older adults, as well 
as aspects of human-computer interface design that 
accommodate older users with age-associated disabilities 
and limitations [15]. It has fifty-two design guidelines 
grouped into six categories that cover design of visual, 
auditory, and haptic presentation of information, input and 
output devices, and effective interface design.  
UU is comprised of eight guidelines, called the Eight 
Golden Rules of Interface Design.  Whereas UD was 
initially developed for the design of physical environments 
(e.g., buildings, spaces, products, graphics), UU is intended 
to support usability, inclusivity, and utility of information 
and communication technologies [16].  Based on UU, the 
MID [17] modified and extended the eight golden rules to 
provide general design guidance for the usability of mobile 
platforms (Table I).  
TABLE I.  
DESIGN STRATEGIES, THEIR TARGET AUDIENCE AND 
DESIGN  
Design Strategy 
Target Audience 
Target Design 
UD 
All Users 
Physical Environments 
DfA 
Seniors 
User interfaces 
UU 
All Users 
ICT  
MID 
All Users 
Mobile Interfaces 
 
While each of the four design strategies is commonly 
used to guide the design of mobile interfaces, none are 
sufficiently comprehensive to ensure that mobile user 
interfaces will be usable by older adults. Clearly, the first 
three strategies, UD, DfA, and UU, which were developed 
prior to the proliferation of mobile interfaces, are not 
specific to this platform.  In contrast, whereas the MID is 
the mobile platform-specific, DfA is the only population-
specific (i.e., a focus on older adults) strategy. Moreover, it 
is also the only strategy that clearly links individuals’ needs 
and abilities to design solutions. As such, it provides both 
an understanding of what the functional problems of older 
adults are and guidance on how design can be used to solve 
those issues. This person-environment (P-E) fit approach 
[18] not only provides an understanding of why interface 
design needs to be different to be usable by older adults but 
also the tools to create unique and innovative interfaces 
without relying on a rigid set of prescriptive rules. 
With the lack of an aging-relevant set of usability 
guidelines for mobile interfaces, there is a similar lack of a 
comprehensive evaluation tool to assess the usability of 
mobile touchscreen interfaces for this population. Existing 
assessment tools were either designed for other scales of 
design (e.g., products, services, spaces, buildings), 
developed to support the design of web interfaces for 
individuals with disabilities, or created for an evaluation of 
user interfaces for the general population.  Five tools, the 
UD Checklist, Universal Design Performance Measures for 
Products, Product Evaluation Countdown, Universal 
Design Assessment Protocol and GUDC Guidelines are 
intended to assess the physical environment based on the 
UD principles.    
The UD Checklist [19][20] assesses design based on 
both UD principles and ranges of users’ abilities (i.e., 
vision, 
hearing, 
speech, 
cognition, 
dexterity, 
communication, balance, stature, upper and lower body 
strength and mobility, lifespan) to indicate the degree to 
which the outcome met the criteria for each design principle 
and each type of ability, respectively. This tool was 
intended to evaluate architectural spaces.  It does not assess 
the specific design features, and it only evaluates the 
proposed design, not actual designs in use. The Universal 
Design Performance Measures for Products [21] uses 
twenty-nine UD guidelines as performance measures, and 
the five-point rating scale from strongly disagree to strongly 
agree, with a choice of not applicable to identify strengths 
and weaknesses of a product. It is intended to evaluate the 
usability of products throughout their life cycle, develop 
usability testing and focus groups, and identify and promote 
UD features of products. The second version of this tool 
called the Product Evaluation Countdown [22], was 
developed for use by end-users with their ranges and levels 
of abilities to test the actual demands of products. Universal 
Design Assessment Protocol (UDAP) [11][23] assesses UD 
principles by ability as well as across the range of abilities, 
evaluating design at the level of each UD guideline, thus 
providing a more precise analysis. However, the tool proved 
to be very complex and impractical to quantify UD with its 
six hundred and twelve-cell matrix. The Global Universal 
Design Commission, Inc. (GUDC) created GUDC Rating 
System that covers design process, site and building 
elements, customer service, and facilities management, 
which is building-type specific [11].  
In addition to UD-derived evaluation tools for the 
physical environment, the Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 Checklist was developed by the 
Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) of the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C) [24] to evaluate the accessibility of web 
pages and HTML content for users with disabilities.  
However, the tool is neither specific to mobile devices nor 
does accessibility necessarily equate to usability.  Finally, 
although a number of other evaluation checklists and 
frameworks for testing the usability of mobile apps have 
been proposed [25]-[28], these tools are intended for the 
general population and do not recognize a variety and 
ranges of limitations an aging population faces. 
III. 
UNIVERSAL DESIGN MOBILE INTERFACE 
GUIDELINES, UDMIG 
The first version of the guidelines, UDMIG v.1.0, which 
has been previously reported [29][30], was created by 
applying DfA, UU, and MIG to the seven Principles of UD. 
This version relied too much on principles and guidelines of 
373
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

universal design as the underlying basis for the UDMIG.  As 
such, it failed to incorporate P-E interaction approach that 
was a unique contribution of DfA, contained inconsistent 
language and level of specificity, and needed further 
refinement.  
A. UDMIG v.2.0 
To overcome problems with UDMIG 1.0, UDMIG v.2.0 
[31] was developed within a framework based on the P-E 
fit model [18] as an organizing principle (Fig. 1).  
Figure 1.  Structure of UDMIG v.2.0 based on P-E Model and its 
person, environment, and fit components. 
The P-E fit approach [18] assesses the match or fit 
between a person’s ability and the demands of the 
environment to promote healthy aging. Usability of mobile 
applications is achieved when there is a match between a 
person’s ability and the design of the interface. In UDMIG 
v.2.0, the fit between the range of human abilities and the 
environment is manifested as a set of performance 
guidelines.  These guidelines cover both the contextual 
environment of the interface and the physical environment 
in which the interface is used.  For purposes of designing 
interfaces only guidelines specific to the interface 
environment, itself, were considered in the development of 
UDMIG. Moreover, the interface environment can be 
further differentiated by those guidelines that address the 
design of the interface structure (e.g., layout and 
navigation), as well as those that guide the design of the 
specific design elements (e.g., buttons and text) (Fig. 1).    
B. UDMIG v.2.1 
UDMIG v.2.0 failed to include the people aging with 
disabilities. Whereas data indicate that this is a growing 
population of potential users [8][9], the guidelines did not 
address the types of impairments and comorbidities 
experienced by these individuals.  
To expand UDMIG v.2.0 to include individuals aging 
with disabilities, a study with people with multiple sclerosis 
(MS) was conducted [32]. MS was taken as an example of 
aging with disability. People with MS were chosen as an 
ideal end-user population as they represent a diverse user 
group that has symptoms that vary widely from an 
individual to an individual, but also within individuals over 
time. Moreover, MS presents with chronic symptoms that 
share many of the functional limitations associated with 
aging, including a decline in muscle strength, problems with 
balance, weakness, fatigue, reduced sensation, vision 
impairments, bowel and bladder dysfunction, cognitive 
impairment, pain, osteoporosis and sleep disturbances [33]-
[36]. In addition, a majority of individuals diagnosed with 
MS experience major decline in their abilities due to the 
progression of MS after five years post-diagnosis [37]. 
Following this period, they need to learn how to cope with 
the functional limitations caused by the disease and how to 
age with MS. 
The study [32] evaluated the usability of two health and 
wellness 
self-management 
mobile 
applications 
for 
individuals with MS and one health app for the general 
population. The three apps were evaluated by older adults 
and individuals with MS to identify the effectiveness of app 
attributes.  
Study participants reported a number of additional 
recommendations for the design of mobile health and 
wellness applications:  
• 
Navigation needs to be clear, intuitive, consistent, 
and easy to understand; 
• 
Locating pages needs to be easy and intuitive; 
• 
Task completion needs to be evident and bold so 
that users know they have accomplished their tasks 
and they can continue with the subsequent 
activities; 
• 
Provide specific and clear instructions for every 
step of the actions; 
• 
Font, buttons, and icons size (screen characters and 
targets) should be large enough to be usable by the 
end-users; 
• 
Color contrast needs to be very high to allow for 
ease of use and legibility of information; 
• 
Avoid use of scrolling and spinner. 
This set of evidence-based design recommendations is 
intended to assist with the future development of health and 
wellness mobile interfaces for older adults, including 
people aging with disabilities.  
The recommendations represent the most important 
design elements that need to be considered for the 
development of mobile interfaces for an aging population 
and present the main considerations when designing for this 
specific population. 
Based on the results of the reported study [32], the 
design recommendations were used to prioritize UDMIG v. 
2.1 as eight essential guidelines and the rest as 
optional/advisory guidelines. Among these eight essential 
design guidelines, six refer to the interface structure and two 
to the design elements. In addition, Same Means of Use 
 
374
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

guideline was added as the ninth mandatory guideline 
because it is the only UD principle that is essential to 
inclusivity and participation (Table II).  
TABLE II.  
UDMIG V.2.1 
Design Elements Guidelines  
Interface Structure Guidelines 
Essential Guidelines 
1. Accuracy and precision  
 
1. Same means of use 
2. Informative feedback 
 
2. 
Clear 
and 
understandable 
navigation structure 
 
3. Consistency with expectations  
 
4. Simple and natural use  
 
5. Dialogs that yield closure 
 
6. 
Maximized 
"legibility" 
of 
essential information 
 
7. Range of literacy and language 
skills 
Advisory Guidelines 
3. Choice in methods of use  
 
4. Minimization of hazards and 
unintended actions  
5. Different modes of use 
 
6. Easy reversal of actions 
8. Internal locus of control 
9. Adaptation to users’ pace 
10. Multiple and dynamic contexts 
11. Design appealing to all  
12. Right-, left- or no-handed use 
13. Low physical effort 
14. Variations in hand and grip size 
15. Natural body position 
 
These first nine design guidelines (i.e., the first two 
design elements guidelines and the first seven interface 
structure guidelines) should be used as the mandatory 
guidelines when designing for an aging population, 
including individuals aging with disabilities. The rest of 
UDMIG v.2.1 should be used as the recommended best 
practices. 
IV. 
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR MOBILE APPS 
Based on the UDMIG v.2.1, design criteria for a health 
and wellness self-monitoring mobile application for 
individuals aging with MS were developed. Each design 
guideline resulted in one or more corresponding design 
criteria, which were specified to be implemented in the app 
design. 
UDMIG v.2.1 represent a set of performance guidelines. 
However, among the four founding design strategies, DfA 
is the only one that included prescriptive guidelines. 
Therefore, a number of design criteria are presented as 
prescriptive, and the majority as performance-based. 
Although the objective of both prescriptive and 
performance design criteria is to achieve usable design 
outcomes, they do so in very different ways. Prescriptive 
criteria focus on means and methods of achieving usability 
by dictating what must be done to achieve a usable outcome. 
This is largely achieved without specifying what the design 
of the outcome might look like. As a result, the more 
prescriptive design criteria are, the fewer design alternatives 
there are and therefore fewer ways to achieve a usable 
outcome. For example, DE guideline Accuracy and 
Precision provides a specific design criterion that the size 
of the buttons should be at least 16.5mm diagonally and 
11.7mm square. In addition, it dictates the minimum 
contrast based on the WCAG 2.0 1.4.3 [24] level AA and 
level AAA. In contrast, performance design criteria focus 
on the product or results of the design process. 
Performance-based criteria suggest what the usable 
outcome should be without regard to how that outcome is 
achieved. As a result, performance design criteria provide 
greater flexibility in design outcomes by providing 
opportunities for designers to rely on their own 
interpretation and creativity to achieve a usable outcome. 
For example, IC guideline Dialogs that yield closure 
provides a design criterion that the related information 
should be grouped together and the most frequent 
operations should be highest on the menu structure. The 
later one focuses on the design outcome and leaves it up to 
the designer to determine what the related information is 
and how to group it, and what the most frequent operations 
within the design are.  
A. Design Elements (DE) Guidelines and Criteria 
Essential Guidelines 
1. Accuracy and precision  
a. 
Size of the buttons is at least 16.5mm 
diagonally and 11.7mm square [38]; 
b. Minimum contrast: the visual presentation 
of text and images of a text should have a 
contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1 (Level AA), 
preferably 7:1 (Level AAA) except for the 
following:  
i. Large Text: Large-scale text and 
images of large-scale text should 
have a contrast ratio of at least 
3:1; 
ii. Incidental: Text or images of text 
that are part of an inactive user 
interface component, that are 
pure decoration, that are not 
visible to anyone, or that are part 
of 
a 
picture 
that 
contains 
significant other visual content, 
have no contrast requirement; 
iii. Logotypes: Text that is part of a 
logo or brand name has no 
minimum contrast requirement 
(WCAG 2.0 1.4.3) [24]; 
2. Informative feedback  
a. For every operator action, there is a 
system feedback, such as a beep when 
pressing a key or an error message for an 
invalid input value [16]; 
375
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

b. Provide a feedback about a confirmation 
of an activity and a current state [14][32]; 
c. 
For each icon provide a text description 
[38]; 
Advisory Guidelines 
3. Choice in methods of use  
a. 
Provide an option to select or deselect all 
user preferences such as voice input (e.g., 
Siri, voice control) in Settings, available 
as accessibility features in iOS [11][17];  
4. Minimization of hazards and unintended actions 
a. Provide text warnings as opposed to 
symbols and icons [14]; 
b. Avoid short-duration menu displays [14]; 
c. 
Frequent and important actions should be 
visible and easily accessible [11][14]; 
d. Tap targets on touchscreens should be at 
least 16.5mm diagonally and 11.7mm 
square [38]; 
e. 
Tap targets should be in colors that stand 
out, and arranged in linear order [30][39]; 
f. 
Avoid 
use 
of 
attention-catching 
techniques, such as flashing and scrolling 
text and images in the periphery [14]; 
5. Different modes of use 
a. Use alternative interaction modes such as 
sound, vibration, and light [11];  
b. Provide both tactile/haptic and auditory 
feedback with keypads [14]; 
c. 
Provide several alternative voices [17]; 
d. Provide redundant visual presentation of 
essential information (e.g., color, icons, 
and text) [11]; 
6. Easy reversal of actions 
a. Provide “Are you sure?” prompts for 
important actions that can be disabled in 
Settings [11][14][30];  
b. If an error is made, the system should be 
able to detect the error and offer a prompt 
message for handling the error (e.g., if an 
entry for weight is skipped, provide a text 
message “Please enter a target weight”) 
[16]. 
B. Interface Context (IC) Guidelines and Criteria  
Essential Guidelines 
1. Same means of use 
a. 
Eliminate specialized design and language 
[11]; 
b. Provide one hardware and software 
application that allows individualized 
preferences [11][40]; 
2. Clear and understandable navigation structure 
a. Use the same design elements for the 
navigation from page to page, such as next 
and back buttons or similar [30] [32][39];  
b. Have navigation assistance (e.g., menu, 
instructions) for how to navigate to 
specific points in the system, which 
includes navigation to not only the home 
page, but also any relevant page [14]; 
c. 
Provide specific, clear, and evident 
instructions for every step of the actions, 
and 
allow 
users 
to 
disable 
these 
instructions in Settings and on the 
instructions page [32];  
d. Provide more than one way to go to 
different 
pages 
while 
keeping 
the 
consistency [32];  
3. Consistency with expectations 
a. Identical terminology is used in prompts, 
menus, and help screens [14]; 
b. Consistent commands are employed 
throughout (e.g., Next, Back) [14]; 
c. 
Ensure standardized format and keep 
consistent location of target items within 
(e.g., navigation buttons, Settings button, 
and error messages should always appear 
at the same location) [14]; 
d. Provide the icon with the title of the 
current functional feature at the top 
navigation bar on every page; 
4. Simple and natural use 
a. 
Frequent and important actions should be 
visible and easily accessible (e.g., Next 
and Back buttons on the lower left and 
right side, Home page button on the upper 
left corner) [14]; 
b. Avoid use of the picker [32]; 
c. 
Avoid scrolling text because it is difficult 
to process, especially horizontal formats; 
use a slow scrolling rate if it cannot be 
avoided [14][32]; 
5. Dialogs that yield closure 
a. 
Group related information and have most 
frequent operations highest on the menu 
structure [14]; 
b. Indicate clearly on the middle of the top 
navigation bar where the user currently is 
at any point of time (e.g., diary, reports, 
games, symptoms) [14]; 
c. 
After users save any data, provide the 
information that their records have been 
saved and secured [16][32]; 
d. Make it clear how to navigate to all main 
points of the interface from the homepage 
(i.e., main functional features on the home 
page), and how to go back to homepage 
from any other page (i.e., home page 
button on every page) [32]; 
e. 
Provide an obvious feedback (visual, 
audio, and/or tactile) when a target is 
selected [14]; 
f. 
Make it clear which option is active (i.e., 
selected state) and what the consequences 
of an action are (i.e., by pressing the 
selected button and Next button the 
selected feature page will open) [14][32]; 
376
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

6. Maximized "legibility" of essential information 
a. 
Size of the buttons is at least 16.5mm 
diagonally and 11.7mm square [38]; 
b. Whenever possible use 14-point and 
bigger serif or sans serif fonts (i.e., use 
Helvetica primarily, and use Arial and 
Times Roman as secondary options), and 
use at least 12-point when not [41]; 
c. 
Avoid cursive and decorative fonts and 
use of all uppercase letters [14]; 
d. Provide good structure (e.g., grammar) in 
spoken and written text [14]; 
e. 
Provide video conferencing in addition to 
talking on a phone [14]; 
7. Range of literacy and language skills 
a. 
Avoid use of technical language [14]; 
b. Keep reading level of text material at 
grade 10 or below [14]; 
Advisory Guidelines 
8. Internal locus of control 
a. 
Provide a choice of linear vs. random 
access [30][39]; 
9. Adaptation to users’ pace 
a. 
Profile provides personalization option for 
users’ skill levels: novice to expert users 
[16][17];  
10. Multiple and dynamic contexts 
a. Users can configure input and output to 
their needs and desires (e.g., text size, 
brightness) in Settings [17]; 
b. Allow for a configuration of the context, 
such as environmental conditions (e.g., 
brightness, noise levels, weather), and 
presence of strangers and locations that 
restrict use of some app features (e.g., 
speech input and output in libraries) [17]; 
11. Design appealing to all 
a. Provide color palette that can be used by 
colorblind users [17]; 
12. Right-, left- or no-handed use 
a. 
Place main navigation buttons of equal 
importance accessible for both right- and 
left-handed users (e.g., Next and Back 
buttons at the lower left- and right-hand 
side) [39]; 
13. Low physical effort 
a. 
Avoid double-clicking and use single tap 
instead [14]; 
b. Minimize steps (i.e., basic tasks) when 
possible [14]; 
14. Variations in hand and grip size 
a. 
If the targets are large enough (at least 
16.5mm diagonally and 11.7mm square), 
a spacing between them can be zero 
[14][38]; 
b. If targets are small, make spacing between 
them visible (e.g., 3mm) [14][38]; 
c. 
If possible, place tap targets near the 
center or the bottom of the screen [38]; 
15. Natural body position 
a. 
Place main navigation buttons of equal 
importance at the bottom of the screen 
(e.g., Next and Back buttons at the lower 
left- and right-hand side) [39]. 
V. 
MS ASSISTANT: A MOBILE HEALTH MANAGEMENT 
APPLICATION 
Based on the UDMIG v. 2.2 design criteria, a mobile 
health and wellness app, MS Assistant, was developed to 
enhance health self-management for people with MS. The 
app was designed to provide eight functions, to allow for 
personalization, and to assist with medication adherence 
and other daily tasks with alert/reminder systems. These 
eight functions were selected based on the findings of a 
qualitative study [40], which was conducted to identify the 
specific needs for self-management of health and wellness 
among people with MS and to recognize the opportunities 
to meet those needs through mobile apps. A number of 
preferred functions were identified and grouped into eight 
categories (i.e., daily self-reporting of health and wellness, 
keeping and communicating health and wellness records, 
education, social support, alert and reminder systems, 
virtual reality games, telehealth, personalization).  
Functions. The eight functions include diary, reports, 
MS friends, games, education, goals, vitals, and emergency.  
Diary provides a comprehensive tool for understanding 
the disease on a daily basis and over time, and how best to 
manage it through everyday self-management tasks, such as 
mood, symptoms, energy level, activity, sleep length and 
quality, and diet.  
Reports allows users to compile their health 
management data into useful reports that can be shared 
electronically with healthcare providers and caregivers.  
MS Friends is a social support feature that connects 
users with other people with MS to share their experiences 
and everyday challenges.  
Games features VR games that would enable users to 
perform real-world activities that they might find 
challenging. In addition, this feature has cognitive and 
classic games that help people with MS with cognitive 
functioning, and physical games, which help them with the 
balance.  
Education provides the latest news and research about 
MS as well as health and wellness tips.  
Goals enables users to set up their personal health and 
wellness goals to keep them motivated and inspired.  
Vitals offers remote health and wellness monitoring 
through the Bluetooth connected devices, such as blood 
pressure monitoring devices, scales, sleep and activity 
trackers (e.g., Fitbit), and similar.  
Emergency lets users place calls directly to their 
healthcare providers, caregivers, and 911.  
Structure. MS Assistant provides two types of 
navigation: linear and random access. Linear interaction 
allows users to go through the pages by making or skipping 
a selection and pressing the Next button. Users can go 
through the whole interface in a linear fashion by using the 
Next and Back buttons on every page, which provides 
377
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

consistency and simplicity. After a selection is made, the 
Next button takes users to the following page of the 
interface.  When the user taps on any button, the button 
changes to the selected colored background and white text 
that visually emphasizes the selection (Fig. 2). To change 
the selection, a user can tap the button again to deselect it.  
For navigating through the pages, the user can tap on the 
Next and Back buttons located at the bottom corners of the 
screen (Fig. 2). For example, after tapping on the Diary 
button users are taken to the first Diary page where they can 
select the Mood. The selected state of the Mood button 
confirms the selection, and Next button takes users to the 
Symptoms page. Users are through all the Diary pages by 
tapping the Next buttons. After making the final selection 
on the Diet pages, users are taken to the Home Page. In 
addition, for the expert users and ones who prefer a direct 
selection, all of the functional features are accessible from 
the Home page. Moreover, every page has the Home and 
Back buttons to allow an easy random access. Back button 
takes users to the main Diary page and directly make 
selections. 
Figure 2.  Linear interaction on the Reports page. 
Design Decisions.  Design decisions for MS Assistant were 
based on the UDMIG v.2.2 and corresponding design 
criteria. 
A. Design Elements (DE) Guidelines 
Essential Guidelines 
1. Accuracy and precision  
To facilitate the accuracy and precision required to 
accommodate different abilities, preferences, situations, 
contexts of use, ages, novice and expert users, and enhance 
users’ experience, provided screen characters and targets 
are designed to be conspicuous and accessible (e.g., font 
size is at least 14-point and higher, the button size is at least 
16.5mm diagonally and 11.7mm square [36]). In addition, 
every function is presented by its color of the touch buttons 
on the Home Page and throughout the app (Fig. 3a). The 
color scheme for the Home Page buttons (i.e., functional 
features) is chosen to pass the assessment against the 
WCAG 2.0 1.4.3 [20] color contrast success criteria. 
Contrast is maximized by using black on white text. 
2. Informative feedback  
When the user taps on any button to make a selection, 
the button changes to the selected state button with a 
colored background and white text that visually emphasize 
the selection. An error message shows up on the screen after 
the user creates an invalid input value. Top navigation bar 
provides information about the current functional feature by 
providing a title with an icon (e.g., Diary with its icon, 
Mood with its icon, etc.). After users finish all the tasks in 
the last section of the Diary, which is the Diet, they are taken 
to the Home page by tapping on the Next button. 
Advisory Guidelines 
3. Choice in methods of use  
Different inputs and choices of input to accommodate 
variations in abilities, preferences, situations, and contexts 
of use are available in Settings as Input and Touch 
selections. For example, speech input through Siri and voice 
control is available for users. 
4. Minimization of hazards and unintended actions 
Text warnings, as opposed to symbols and icons, are 
provided in the form of prompts that can be disabled in 
Settings. Frequent and important actions are visible and 
easily accessible by placing the Home button on the 
navigation top bar and the Next and Back buttons on the 
bottom of the screen on every page (Fig. 3b).  
Figure 3.  Homepage (3a) and Diary page (3b). 
Short-duration menu displays are eliminated because of 
the slower processing speed of an aging population. Instead, 
after the user taps on any button, the button changes to the 
    
 
378
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

selected state that lasts until the user taps on the Next button 
or he or she decides to deselect it.   
5. Different modes of use 
Different modes (pictorial, verbal, tactile) for redundant 
presentation of essential information to accommodate 
different abilities, preferences, and contexts of use are 
available and can be selected and deselected in Settings as 
Output and Touch accommodations. For example, 
alternative interaction modes such as sound, vibration, and 
light, haptic and auditory feedback with keypads, and 
several alternative voices can be selected. In addition, all 
touchscreen buttons provide redundant visual cues through 
color, icons, and text. Because of the limitations of iPhone 
6, vibration (haptic) feedback is not available for this 
version and can be turned on for the iPhone 7 version and 
above. 
6. Easy reversal of actions 
Fail-safe features are provided to minimize hazards and 
errors. The units of reversibility are a single action, a data 
entry, or a complete group of actions. For example, “Are 
you sure you want to send the reports to the selected 
contacts?” is a confirmation message after a user selects the 
reports and contacts, with reversion back to the contacts 
screen when users press “No” (Fig. 4b). Easy reversal of an 
action is provided through the option to cancel unwanted 
task in this prompt message if the list of contacts is wrong. 
Similarly, if a target weight is skipped in the Goals, a text 
message “Please enter a target weight” shows up to remind 
the user to fill out the weight.    
B. Interface Structure (IS) Guidelines 
 Essential Guidelines 
1. Same means of use  
The design goal is one mobile health and wellness app 
for all users, rather than accessible design for people with 
disabilities. As a universally designed system, the app 
design avoids segregating or stigmatizing users and 
provides participation by providing the same hardware and 
software application that allows individualized preferences.  
2. Clear and understandable navigation structure 
Users can choose to have linear navigation using the 
same type of linear navigation (e.g., Next and Back buttons) 
on every page or they can go back to the Home page and 
use random access navigation to go directly to a function. 
Navigation assistance is provided with instructions for how 
to navigate to specific points in the system and the Home 
page button on every page. Specifically, every functional 
feature has an instruction page that explains the content and 
interactions. For those who no longer need instructions, 
they can be disabled on the Instructions page itself and in 
the Settings. 
3. Consistency with expectations 
Consistent sequences of actions are required in similar 
situations. For example, users make a selection by tapping 
the button when the selected state of the button appears and 
navigate to the next page by tapping the Next button on 
every page. Identical terminology is used in all screens, 
prompts, error messages, text messages, and information 
screens. Consistent commands are employed throughout the 
interface (e.g., Next and Back buttons, Homepage button). 
Moreover, 
names, 
titles, 
color 
schemes, 
screen 
appearances, “look and feel,” standard layouts, fonts, and 
font sizes are consistent throughout the app. In addition, 
consistency with pre-existing expectations is provided. For 
example, Next button is placed on the right-hand side, the 
Back button is located on the left-hand side, and selection is 
made by tapping a button. Information is arranged 
consistent with its importance by having the icon and the 
title of the current functional feature at the top navigation 
bar together with the Home page button (Fig. 4a). 
Figure 4.  Sleep page (4a) and Activity page with “Are you sure?” 
prompt message (4b). 
4. Simple and natural use 
Complexity is eliminated by having simple screen 
designs that require a single task per screen (Fig. 5b). The 
Next and Back buttons are placed on the bottom of the page 
to allow for the natural use and navigation. Use of the 
scrolling is eliminated by having the single task on one 
screen. In addition, use of the picker is eliminated, and a 
slider, keypad, and buttons are used throughout the 
interface. Moreover, navigation is simple for novice users 
and those with cognitive limitations (linear navigation) as 
well as a for expert/advanced users (random access). Use of 
all attention-catching techniques is avoided. 
5. Dialogs that yield closure 
Screens are designed in a way that the related 
information is grouped, and the most frequent operations 
are placed highest on the menu structure. For example, on 
the Activity page, its icon and the title are highest on the 
screen and placed on the top navigation bar, start and end 
time is at the top of the page after the name of an activity, 
followed by the distance. The comments section is at the 
bottom of the screen. Related information is grouped, such 
that every functional feature has its own pages and colors 
that add to the differentiation between the selections. In 
 
379
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

addition, it is clear and simple to navigate to all main points 
of the interface from the Home page (e.g., Diary, Reports, 
MS Friends, Games, Education, Goals, Vitals, and 
Emergency), and to go back to Home page from any other 
page (e.g., Home page button, Next and Back buttons). It is 
clearly indicated which option is active by having the 
selected state of the tapped buttons, and what the 
consequences of an action are. For example, by tapping on 
the Next button after making a selection, the next page will 
open. An obvious visual feedback is provided when a target 
is selected together by changing the color of the button to a 
color of the outline of the selected button. A vibratory 
feedback was not possible to implement on iPhone 6, which 
is a major drawback of this model. However, it is highly 
recommended, and it is possible to implement it on iPhone 
6s and iPhone 7 devices.   
Figure 5.  Diary Instructions page (5a) and Reports page (5b). 
6. Maximized "legibility" of essential information 
Screen characters and targets are designed to be 
conspicuous and accessible by designing the icons and 
buttons to be large enough to select easily. Helvetica 14-
point font and bigger was the only font used.  
7. Range of literacy and language skills 
Research suggests that technical language might be 
difficult for older adults, as their educational attainment 
levels may be lower than that of younger adults [12]. 
Therefore, simple conversational language is used for all 
text material, and reading level of text material is kept at 
grade 10 or below (Fig. 5a). 
Advisory Guidelines 
8. Internal locus of control 
The system should be designed such that users initiate 
actions rather than respond to them [14]. In addition, users 
can choose a navigation system and various preferences, 
such as linear vs. random access and novice vs. expert user 
navigation.  
9. Adaptation to users’ pace 
The adaptable pace is provided in Settings and Profile 
to accommodate novice and expert users, different ages, 
abilities, preferences, situations, and contexts of use. Users 
can choose to navigate the app as novice or expert users, 
and they can personalize the app in the Settings. Pop-up 
menu durations are designed to be controlled by the user 
and require their confirmation (e.g., press “OK”, “No”, 
“Yes”) to continue carrying out the commands. 
10. Multiple and dynamic contexts 
The Settings feature enables users to customize the input 
and output modalities to their needs and desires (e.g., text 
size, brightness) as well as the context, such as 
environmental conditions (e.g., brightness, noise levels, 
weather), presence of strangers and locations that restrict 
use of some app features (e.g., speech input and output in 
libraries) [39][40]. 
11. Design appealing to all 
The app was designed to be appealing to all to enhance 
usability and marketability [14][15]. Color and its 
manipulation are important considerations for visual 
interfaces. MS Assistant has a color scheme that can be used 
by colorblind users. 
12. Right-, left- or no-handed use 
MS Assistant is designed to provide a right or left-
handed access and use by having the main navigation 
buttons of equal importance at the lower left- and right-hand 
side (i.e., Next and Back buttons). 
13. Low physical effort 
The app is designed to minimize repetitive actions and 
sustained physical effort to provide ease of use, efficiency, 
comfort, and minimize fatigue [11] by using only single-tap 
[12] and by minimizing navigation steps. 
14. Variations in hand and grip size 
Large keys and appropriate inter-key spacing on a 
keypad are used to allow ease of use [12]. For the small 
targets (less than 16.5mm diagonally and 11.7mm square), 
a spacing between them is designed to be visible (e.g., 
3mm) [12][36]. For the large targets, preferred is to provide 
the spacing between them although it can be zero. In 
addition, the tap targets are placed near the center or the 
bottom of the screen [36]. 
15. Natural body position 
MS Assistant has the main navigation buttons at the 
bottom of the screen to provide comfort and minimize 
fatigue [37]. 
VI. 
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE IMPLEMENTING THE 
UDMIG V.2.2 
For the purpose of evaluating the effectiveness of 
implementing UDMIG v.2.2 in the design of MS Assistant, 
we conducted an expert review to identify design elements 
that needed improvement to successfully apply the 
guidelines and recommend possible refinements. 
A. Methods 
Participants 
Ten researchers and/or designers with experience in 
aging, accessibility, human-computer interaction, human 
 
380
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

factors, industrial design, universal design, and/or usability 
participated in the study. Inclusion criteria were individuals 
18+ years of age who have more than three years of 
experience in one or more of the areas of expertise 
described 
above. 
Participants’ 
expertise 
included 
accessibility (n=8), usability (n=8), aging (n=7), human 
factors (n=6), universal design (n=6), human-computer 
interaction (n=5), and industrial design (n=2) respectively. 
The mean number of years of their working experience was 
13 years. 
Experts rated their familiarity with user interface design 
for people with MS, dexterity, cognitive, and visual 
limitations on a scale of “not familiar” to “somewhat 
familiar” to “very familiar.” For familiarity with interface 
design for people MS, 3 respondents were not familiar and 
10 were somewhat familiar. Regarding the design of 
interfaces for individuals with dexterity limitations, 1 expert 
was not familiar (n=1), 5 were somewhat familiar and 4 
were very familiar. For interface design for people with 
cognitive limitations, 8 experts were somewhat familiar and 
2 very familiar. Finally, 3 participants were somewhat 
familiar and 7 were very familiar (n=7) with interface 
design for people with vision limitations. 
Procedures 
After signing the informed consent form approved by 
the Georgia Tech Institutional Review Board (IRB), experts 
completed a demographic questionnaire about their areas of 
expertise and a number of years they have worked in the 
field. Experts then performed directed tasks using MS 
Assistant without any training or assistance. They received 
a simple script that included entering health and wellness 
data (i.e., mood, symptoms and related difficulties, energy 
level, daily activity, sleep length and quality, and diet), 
emailing the reports, calling MS friend, finding virtual 
reality games, reading the MS news, setting up the weight 
goal, inputting the blood pressure, calling the healthcare 
provider, entering the personal information, and increasing 
the text size. Experts then used the UDMIG v.2.2 checklist 
to rate how well each guideline was implemented, identified 
design elements needing improvement, and provided 
recommendations for their refinement.  
UDMIG v.2.2 Checklist 
Prescriptive design guidelines and standards are easy to 
interpret and to objectively assess. Assessment of 
performance guidelines is multidimensional since it 
incorporates both activity and participation [11]. All 
performance-based guidelines are subject to interpretation 
by experts as well as end-users to a certain extent, which 
makes objective measurement slightly difficult. UDMIG 
v.2.2 Checklist rates agreement with achieving each of the 
design guidelines using the 5-point Likert scale where 1 = 
strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree with each of the 
applicable design criteria. It is intended to be used by end-
users and to assist designers to think about the needs of 
potential users who would interact with their mobile 
touchscreen applications. 
The complete checklist used for this expert review has 
50 items (i.e., design criteria). An example of the checklist 
based on some of the design criteria (e.g., one design criteria 
per guideline) used for the expert review is presented in 
Table III. 
TABLE III.  
UDMIG V.2.2 CHECKLIST 
Design Elements Guidelines  
Interface Context Guidelines 
This application provides… 
1. The button size of at least 
16.5mm diagonally and 11.7mm 
square. 
1. The same means of use for all 
users, by eliminating specialized 
design and signage. 
2. Feedback about a confirmation 
of my activity and a current state. 
2. The same design elements for the 
navigation from page to page (e.g., 
Next, Back Home page buttons). 
3. Alternate methods of input and 
use, such as speech input. 
3. Standardized format and keeps 
the consistent location of target 
items 
within 
(e.g., 
navigation 
buttons, and error messages). 
4. Text warnings as opposed to 
symbols and icons. 
4. Visible and easily accessible 
frequent and important actions 
(e.g., a location of Next, Back, 
Homepage button). 
5. Different modes of feedback, 
such as sound, vibration, or light 
feedback. 
5. A clear indication on the middle 
of the top navigation bar where the 
user currently is at any point in time 
(e.g., diary, reports, games). 
6. Easy reversal of my actions if I 
make a mistake, such as “Are you 
sure you want to send the reports 
to the selected contacts?”, with 
reversion back to the contacts 
screen when I press “No.” 
6. The minimum contrast between 
the background colors against the 
images and text based on WCAG 
2.0 1.4.3 Level AA, and preferably 
Level AAA. 
 
7. Reading level of text material at 
grade 10 or below. 
8. A choice of linear vs. random 
access. 
9. Personalization option to change 
my skill level from a “novice” to an 
“expert” user. 
10. A configuration of the output to 
my needs and preferences (e.g., text 
size, brightness). 
11. An aesthetically plausible color 
scheme that can be used by 
colorblind users. 
12. Main navigation buttons of 
equal importance accessible for 
both right- and left-handed users 
(e.g., Next and Back buttons at the 
lower left- and right-hand side). 
13. Use of a single tap throughout 
the app instead of double-clicking. 
14. The spacing between the small 
targets visible (e.g., 3mm).  
15. Main navigation buttons of 
equal importance at the bottom of 
the screen (i.e., Next and Back 
buttons). 
 
Data Analysis 
Mean and standard deviation for the rating of each 
guideline were calculated, as well as the mean and standard 
deviation of ratings for each participant. 16 ratings for the 
participant number 8 were excluded because they skipped 
the page with ratings of the guidelines IC5d to IC13d.  
381
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Results 
10 participants rated 50 items on the checklist. The total 
number of responses is 484, with 16 missing responses that 
were not used in the analyses.  
The mean of all the ratings for design criteria per 
participant is within a range of 3.90 – 4.89. The design 
criteria DE6b (i.e., This app provides the system which can 
detect the error and offer a prompt message for handling it; 
if an entry for weight is skipped, provide a text message 
“Please enter a target weight”) had the lowest mean of the 
ratings equal to 3.90. This was the only mean value lower 
than 4. Participants stated that the app provided a prompt 
message for handling an error. However, the prompt should 
“offer options to submit data without all responses 
submitted.” Current prompts informed the users that they 
need to enter missing information and did not offer an 
option to skip certain fields. They made users fill out all the 
information on the page.  
Out of a total of 484 responses, almost 70% (n=332) of 
the design criteria were rated as a 5.  An additional one-
quarter (n=126) were rated as a 4. The lowest rating for any 
criterion was 2 (n=6) and an additional 20 were rated as a 3.   
Among the 10 participants, mean ratings ranged from 
3.86 – 4.92. The participant with the lowest overall mean 
ratings (mean = 3.86) did not give a rating higher than 4 to 
any individual criterion with 44 rated as a 4 and 6 rated as 2 
or 3. 
In addition, participants identified specific usability 
issues with the design of some of the interface elements and 
structure, including navigation, labeling, scrolling while 
using a keyboard, color contrast, same means of use, page 
layout, and miscategorization. (Table IV).  
Design of the elements of the user interface was the 
largest category with a total of 16 participants reporting 
usability problems in 3 subcategories. 8 participants stated 
that Profile and Settings should be redesigned to “stand out” 
and “look more prominent.” Design in Adobe Illustrator 
presented in this paper followed the guidelines strictly and 
made a distinction between the name of the app, MS 
Assistant, and Profile and Settings buttons on the first page 
(Fig. 3). However, because of the limitations of iOS and the 
size of the top navigation bar, there was no space for the 
Profile and Settings icons because of the minimum font size 
dictated by the UDMIG v.2.2. Participants suggested that 
those two buttons should “look like buttons” with possibly 
adding a black border to them or a background color so that 
those look like the other buttons on the home page. In 
addition, 6 participants reported that top navigation bar 
icons that represent a title of the current page, including the 
weather icon, “look clickable” (Fig. 3b, Fig. 4, and Fig. 5). 
During the design phase, Adobe Illustrator prototypes made 
a clear distinction between the design of the home button 
and the title of the current page (e.g., Diary, Mood, Vitals, 
etc.). However, since the iOS limited the size of the top 
navigation bar and there was no compromise on the side of 
the font size, those two looked the same. Thus, the current 
title of the page looked “like a button.” Participants 
recommended that “header should look different than the 
home button.” Moreover, 2 participants commented that the 
design of the slider used on the symptoms, difficulties, and 
sleep pages probably needs redesign because of the 
problems with motor control in individuals with MS, and 
possible use of the stylus. 1 participant commented that the 
“numbers on the bottom should be on top of the slider.” 
TABLE IV.  
USABILITY PROBLEMS 
Categories 
Usability problems 
Number of 
participants 
Design of user 
interface 
elements 
Profile, Settings not prominent 
8 
Top navigation bar icons look 
like buttons 
5 
Use of slider 
3 
Navigation 
Having “to press on Next after 
a choice is made” 
9 
Labeling 
Input, Output buttons 
6 
Education button 
5 
Speech button 
4 
Emergency button 
2 
Energized button 
2 
Lack of page 
scrolling while 
using a keyboard 
Scrolling disabled 
5 
Color contrast 
White on grey (instructions 
page) 
2 
Green on grey (Do not show 
this again button in selected 
state) 
1 
Same means of 
use 
Next, Back buttons 
2 
Page layout 
Spacing between the top 
buttons and buttons below 
2 
View Reports button is bellow 
Email Reports button 
2 
Miscategorization 
Mood in Diary 
1 
 
9 participants reported problems with navigation due to 
having “to press on Next after a choice is made,” which 
“was not clear at first.” They either “expected to double 
click” or just click on the selection to open that particular 
page. However, all of them understood that this way of 
navigation is beneficial to an aging population that uses this 
app as a novice user. 
Labeling was a category that included suggestions to 
rename “Input” and “Output” categories of Settings into a 
non-technical language (n=6). 4 of them thought that 
“Speech” should be renamed into “Audio” because it 
represents the settings for the sound coming from the 
device. Another suggestion was to rename “Education” into 
“Digest” or “Resources” because “News” category did not 
belong in there (n=5). It was not clear that a healthcare 
provider would be listed under Emergency functional 
feature (n=2), but there was no agreement on the alternative 
location for it. 1 participants suggested that it should be 
moved under Reports as an additional sub-feature named 
Contacts. The other participant stated they “didn’t want to 
click because I thought it would call 911,” but did not think 
any other location would be more suitable for it. Mood page 
had an “Energized” icon, which was confusing labeling to 
2 participants because of Diary category “Energy level.” 
382
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

They suggested that “Anxious and Excited are missing” and 
that “Energized could be elsewhere.” 
Lack of page scrolling while using a keyboard was 
found problematic (n=5). Participants recommended to 
”add scrolling where additional input is needed.” Scrolling 
was disabled throughout the interface because of the IC4c 
design criteria requirement. 
Color contrast on the instructions pages with white on 
grey was not high enough to 2 participants, and “Do not 
show this again” button in a selected state with green text 
on grey background did not have high enough contrast to 1 
participant. 
Same means of use category has 2 participants who 
reported that “Next” and “Back” buttons look like a part of 
the specialized use and design. 
Page layout category included a recommendation to 
move “View Reports” button above “Email Reports” button 
(n=2), and to increase the spacing between “Week”, 
“Month”, and “Year” buttons, and the other selection 
buttons on the Reports pages and between “Manual input” 
button and the rest of the screen on Vitals page (n=2). 
Miscategorization was reported by 1 participants when 
they were not sure if Mood should be on Diary page. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
UDMIG v.2.2 and the related evaluation checklist were 
developed to ensure usability of future mobile applications 
by older adults, including individuals aging with 
disabilities. A universal design approach was used to 
accommodate all users to the greatest extent possible. Based 
on each UDMIG v.2.2 guideline and its design criteria, a 
representative statement with the 5-point Likert scale was 
created. The purpose of the checklist is to rate the agreement 
with each of the guidelines. It was developed for the end-
users and usability experts to evaluate the usability and 
equitability of the mobile interfaces for an aging population. 
The application of UDMIG v.2.2 to a mobile health and 
wellness app design was presented to illustrate and 
showcase the possible uses of the guidelines for a 
population of individuals aging with disabilities. eHealth 
mobile application for individuals aging with MS, MS 
Assistant was developed for this purpose. People with MS 
represent an ideal user group for application and evaluation 
of UDMIG v.2.2 and the checklist. They are a diverse user 
group with symptoms that vary widely from individual to 
individual and within an individual over time. 
The study was conducted with the purpose to have 
expert evaluators rate the extent to which each guideline 
was implemented in the mobile app MS Assistant, to 
identify design elements that need improvement, and to 
suggest their possible improvements. Overall, this 
implementation of the guidelines to the design of the mobile 
app scored well. All mean values of the participants’ ratings 
were equal to 4 or higher, except for the one equal to 3.86. 
The results of the study confirm that MS Assistant 
effectively implemented UDMIG v.2.2. There was a 
number of recommendations related to the minor usability 
problems found in the app. 
The future work will require a refinement of the mobile 
app design based on those recommendations from the 
expert reviewers. Moreover, a usability testing of MS 
Assistant with individuals aging with MS will be conducted 
to assess the overall usability of the app to determine the 
effectiveness of UDMIG v.2.2 in producing a universally 
usable product. User outcome measures, such as a number 
of errors, completion time, and satisfaction ratings will be 
collected.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by a grant from the 
National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and 
Rehabilitation 
Research 
(NIDILRR 
grant 
number 
90RE5016-01-00) under the auspices of The Rehabilitation 
Engineering Research Center on Technologies to Support 
Successful Aging with Disability (RERC TechSAge). 
NIDILRR is a Center within the Administration for 
Community Living (ACL), Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS). 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Ruzic, C. N. Harrington, and J. A. Sanford, "Design and 
Evaluation of Mobile Interfaces for an Agign Population," 
The Tenth International Conference on Advances in 
Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI2017), Mar. 2017. 
[2] A. Holzinger, G. Searle, and A. Nischelwitzer, "On some 
aspects of improving mobile applications for the elderly," 
International Conference on Universal Access in Human-
Computer Interaction (HCII2007), Springer, Jul. 2007, pp. 
923-932. 
[3] M. Ziefle, "The influence of user expertise and phone 
complexity on performance, ease of use and learnability of 
different mobile phones," Behaviour & Information 
Technology, vol. 21, pp. 303-311, Jan. 2002. 
[4] M. Ziefle and S. Bay, "How older adults meet complexity: 
aging effects on the usability of different mobile phones," 
Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 24, pp. 375-389, 
Sep. 2005. 
[5] M. Ziefle, S. Bay, and A. Schwade, "On keys' meanings and 
modes: The impact of different key solutions on children's 
efficiency using a mobile phone," Behaviour & Information 
Technology, vol. 25, pp. 413-431, Sep. 2006. 
[6] A. Chadwick-Dias, M. McNulty, and T. Tullis, "Web 
usability and age: how design changes can improve 
performance," Conference on Universal Usability (CUU 
2003), Nov. 2003, pp. 30-37. 
[7] S. A. Becker, "A study of web usability for older adults 
seeking online health resources," ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI 2004), Dec. 2004, 
vol. 11, pp. 387-406. 
[8] D. Sheets, "Aging with disabilities: ageism and more," 
Generations, vol. 29, pp. 37-41, 2005. 
[9] G. Anderson, "Chronic Care: Making the Case for Ongoing 
Care," Partnership for Solutions, 2010. 
[10] C. M. Law, J. S. Yi, Y. S. Choi, and J. A. Jacko, "A 
systematic examination of universal design resources: part 
1, heuristic evaluation," Universal Access in the Information 
Society, vol. 7, pp. 31-54, Apr. 2008. 
[11] J. A. Sanford, Universal Design as a Rehabilitation Strategy: 
Design for the Ages. New York, NY: Springer Publishing 
Company, 2012. 
383
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[12] B. R. Connell, Principles of Universal Design NC State 
University.[Online].Avalable:https://projects.ncsu.edu/ncsu
/design/cud/about_ud/udprinciples.htm [Accessed: 20-Jan-
2017]. 
[13] M. F. Story, "Maximizing Usability: The Principles of 
Universal Design," Assistive technology, vol. 10, pp. 4-12, 
1998. 
[14] A. D. Fisk, W. A. Rogers, N. Charness, S. J. Czaja, and J. 
Sharit, Designing for older adults: Principles and creative 
human factors approaches. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 
Taylor & Francic Group, 2009. 
[15] M. Zajicek, "Interface design for older adults," Proc. The 
2001 EC/NSF Workshop on Universal Accessibility of 
Ubiquitous Computing: Providing for The Elderly 
(WUAUC'01), ACM, May 2001, pp. 60-65. 
[16] B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant, Designing the user 
interface: 
strategies 
for 
effective 
human-computer 
interaction. Pearson Education India, 2010. 
[17] J. Gong, and P. Tarasewich, "Guidelines for handheld 
mobile device interface design," Proc. DSI 2004 Annual 
Meeting, Citeseer, Nov. 2004, pp. 3751-3756. 
[18] M. P. Lawton and L. Nahemow, "Ecology and the aging 
process," The psychology of adult development and aging, 
pp. 619-674, 1973. 
[19] G. Finkel and Y. Gold, "Actualizing universal design," 
Journal of Leisurability, vol. 26, pp. 25-30, 1999. 
[20] The Executive Policy Committee, "Universal Design 
policy," vol.5, Dec. 2001. 
[21] M. F. Story and J. L. Mueller, "Universal Design 
Performance Measures for Products to Support the Practice 
of Universal Design," Proc. Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society Annual Meeting (HFES), SAGE Publications, Sep. 
2004, pp. 1116-1120. 
[22] E. Mpofu and T. Oakland, Rehabilitation and health 
assessment: applying ICF guidelines. Springer, 2010. 
[23] J. Sanford, E. Mpofu, and T. Oakland, "Assessing universal 
design in the physical environment," Rehabilitation and 
Health Assessment, pp. 255-278, 2010. 
[24] Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 Overview. 
[Online].Avalable:https://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag.ph
p [Accessed: 20-Jan-2017]. 
[25] M. de Sá and L. Carriço, "An evaluation framework for 
mobile user interfaces," 12th IFIP Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, Springer, Aug. 2009, pp. 708-721. 
[26] Y. G. Ji, J. H. Park, C. Lee, and M. H. Yun, "A usability 
checklist for the usability evaluation of mobile phone user 
interface," International Journal of Human-Computer 
Interaction, vol. 20, pp. 207-231, Jul. 2006. 
[27] J. Heo, D. H. Ham, S. Park, C. Song, and W. C. Yoon, "A 
framework for evaluating the usability of mobile phones 
based on multi-level, hierarchical model of usability 
factors," Interacting with Computers, vol. 21, pp. 263-275, 
Aug. 2009. 
[28] D. H. Ham, J. Heo, P. Fossick, W. Wong, S. Park, C. Song, 
and M. Bradley, "Conceptual framework and models for 
identifying and organizing usability impact factors of mobile 
phones," Proc. The 18th Australia Conference on Computer-
Human Interaction: Design: Activities, Artefacts and 
Environments (OZCHI ’06), ACM, Nov. 2006, pp. 261-268. 
[29] L. Kascak, C. B. Rébola, and J. Sanford, "Integrating 
Universal Design (UD) Principles and Mobile Design 
Guidelines 
to 
Improve 
Design 
of 
Mobile 
Health 
Applications for Older Adults," Proc. IEEE International 
Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI 2014), IEEE 
Press, Sep. 2014, pp. 343-348. 
[30] L. R. Kascak, E. Y. Liu, and J. A. Sanford, "Universal 
Design (UD) Guidelines for Interactive Mobile Voting 
Interfaces for Older Adults," Proc. 9th International 
Conference on Universal Access in Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCII2015), Springer, Aug. 2015, pp. 215-225. 
[31] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Universal design mobile 
interface guidelines (UDMIG) for an aging population," in 
CFP Mobile EHealth, Springer, in press. 
[32] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Usability of Mobile Consumer 
Applications for Individuals Aging with Multiple Sclerosis," 
9th International Conference on Universal Access in Human-
Computer Interaction (HCII2017), Springer, Jan. 2017, pp. 
258-276. 
[33] M. Stern, "Aging with multiple sclerosis," Physical medicine 
and rehabilitation clinics of North America, vol. 16, pp. 219-
234, 2005. 
[34] M. Stern, L. Sorkin, K. Milton, and K. Sperber, "Aging with 
multiple sclerosis," Physical medicine and rehabilitation 
clinics of North America, vol. 21, pp. 403-417, 2010. 
[35] W. E. Fleming and C. P. Pollak, "Sleep disorders in multiple 
sclerosis," Seminars in Neurology, pp. 64-68, 2005. 
[36] M. Finlayson, "Health and social profile of older adults with 
MS: Findings from three studies," International Journal of 
MS Care, vol. 4, pp. 139-151, 2002. 
[37] E. E. Gulick, "Symptom and activities of daily living 
trajectory in multiple sclerosis: a 10-year study," Nursing 
Research, vol. 47, pp. 137-14, 1998. 
[38] J. Johnson and K. Finn, Designing User Interfaces for an 
Aging Population: Towards Universal Design. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2017. 
[39] S. T. Lee, Y. E. Liu, L. Ruzic, and J. Sanford, "Universal 
design ballot interfaces on voting performance and 
satisfaction of voters with and without vision loss," Proc. 
The 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI2016), ACM, May 2016, pp. 4861-4871. 
[40] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Needs Assessment: Functional 
Features in Mobile Health and Wellness Self-Monitoring 
Applications for People with Multiple Sclerosis," Journal of 
Healthcare Informatics Research, 2017, in press. 
[41] L. Kascak, C. B. Rébola, R. Braunstein, and J. A. Sanford, 
"Icon Design to Improve Communication of Health 
Information to Older Adults," Communication Design 
Quarterly Review, Vol. 2, pp. 6-32, Nov. 2013, 
doi:10.1145/2559866.2559867 
[42] P. Tarasewich, "Designing mobile commerce applications," 
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 46, No. 2, pp. 57-60, 
Dec. 2003. 
[43] H. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Lee, M. Chae, and Y. Choi, "An 
empirical study of the use contexts and usability problems in 
mobile Internet," Proc. The 35th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 
2002), IEEE, Jan. 2002, pp. 1767-1776. 
 
384
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/software/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

