Evaluation set up for a Regional Social Network 
Service 
Assessing content, social networks and user attitudes of the Austrian SNS “Sankt Onlein” 
 
Isabel Anger, Thomas Rößler, Christian Kittl 
evolaris next level GmbH 
Graz, Austria 
thomas.roessler@evolaris.net, christian.kittl@evolaris.net, isabel.anger@evolaris.net 
 
 
Abstract— Social Network Services (SNSs) are vastly popular 
and used by millions of people worldwide. A few years ago, 
research has begun to analyze these platforms as well as the 
social networks and social interactions that are enabled by 
these technologies. Many of the well-known and popular SNSs 
such as Facebook or YouTube have already been analyzed and 
profiled under numerous different aspects. However, regional 
SNSs have largely been disregarded. In this work in progress 
paper, we introduce a newly launched regional SNS from 
Austria, outline the particularities of this regional social 
networking platform, set up first hypotheses and outline our 
evaluation approaches to analyzing this service. It is our 
believe that by putting the particularities of a regional SNS in 
focus, and by using an interaction graph that visualizes 
intimate social links instead of the commonly used classical 
social network analysis, valuable insights on the connection of 
online networking activities and offline social interactions as 
well as on the users’ perception of familiarity and place can be 
obtained. The paper illustrates the particularities of regional 
SNS and describes an evaluation set up to gain more insights 
into this specific type of networking platform. 
Keywords - Social Network Service; social network analysis; 
content analysis; evaluation; measurement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Close to 900 million people actively use Facebook every 
month. The need for using digital SNSs to share content and 
interact with other people seems to be consistent. Facebook 
is, however, struggling with extensive privacy and data 
mining discussions and also globalizes social interaction 
possibilities, making it thus more complex to connect online 
social networks with offline social networks. This fuels the 
development of alternative, local SNSs that encompass 
country- or region-specific differences in their functionalities 
and the language used in the user interface. An example of a 
very successful and well-established regional SNS is Qzone, 
a platform developed for Chinese users with an estimated 
number of 480 million users of whom 150 million users 
update their accounts at least once a month [1]. Qzone 
provides blogging, media sharing, and social networking 
functions additionally to an instant messenger which is 
deemed to be one of the key success factors of the platform. 
Another factor of success is deemed to be the fact that Qzone 
is reserved for Chinese users, supporting the Chinese 
language only. Thus, this regional SNS can hardly be 
compared with Facebook: Although the platforms partially 
offer the same functionalities to their users, the boundaries of 
the two SNSs differ in terms of language and cognitive 
confinements. Whereas Facebook is open to any Internet 
user above the age of 13 with a valid email address, 
supporting a broad selection of languages and users from all 
over the world, Qzone demands first and foremost the 
knowledge of the Chinese language of the user. 
This concept seems to be a factor of success: As reported 
by analysts and industry professionals, Qzone is more 
important than Facebook in China. Apart from the example 
Qzone, other regional-specific SNSs have established 
themselves in confined regions all over the world, among 
them vkontakte in Russia, Odnoklassniki in the Ukraine and 
Kazakhstan, and Mixi in Japan [2]. 
This leads to our research questions: Is a local, language-
specific or regional-specific SNS more appealing to users? 
Does a regional SNS enable a deeper connection of their 
online social network with offline social activities? Can a 
regional SNS be characterized by more intimate node 
connections and thus more interaction-intensive social 
networks? 
In order to verify our assumptions, we plan to conduct 
several evaluations which will be outlined in this work in 
progress paper. At first, the functionalities and characteristics 
of a regional SNS will be described in more depth; then, 
state-of-the-art evaluation methods for social networks will 
be presented, and in the third part, the planned evaluation set 
up will be explained. Finally, we provide an outlook on 
further research topics connected to this topic. 
II. 
SANKT ONLEIN: A REGIONAL SNS 
In order to verify our hypotheses, we chose to analyze 
Sankt Onlein, a SNS which launched in 2011 and can be 
described as a profile-centric, identity-driven SNS [3]. Just 
as the very successful Qzone, Sankt Onlein is set up for a 
specific target group, which is comprised of the Austrian 
population. This limitation is, however, not forced by 
regulatory restrictions but instead promoted with the 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

proposition as being the “digital capital of Austria”. This is 
underlined by signature terms from typical Austrian 
vocabulary being used for different functionalities and 
descriptions. The Austrian idioms are dialect forms of 
standard German, belonging to Bavarian family of languages 
for the most part. 
Sankt Onlein also tries to diversify itself from other 
networks by providing a comprehensive set of privacy and 
data protection settings to its users, thus setting up a more 
trustful environment for social interaction. For example, 
Sankt Onlein promises to erase all user data and interaction 
records whenever a user chooses to delete his or her account. 
Additionally, Sankt Onlein strives to draw a greater value 
from user-generated content. With “Der Onleiner”, Sankt 
Onlein has created a user-generated online newspaper that 
draws its contents from the platform’s members. Sankt 
Onlein is currently used by more than 10.000 users situated 
in Austria. Mobile applications for smartphones are also 
offered: They provide the same functionalities as the website 
and are available for iOS devices and Android phones. 
Users on Sankt Onlein are able to set up a profile for 
themselves, share media such as photos, add other platform 
members to their contacts, and interact with these contacts in 
a private or semi-public manner. Public posting, i.e., so that 
individuals who are not registered on the platform can view a 
message, or seeing a user’s profile without registration is not 
possible. A user can choose to categorize his contacts into 
three privacy circles. This enables him to choose which 
circle a status message or shared medium is addressed to. 
Interaction possibilities include semi-public messages on the 
user’s stream as well as comments on posted semi-public 
messages and published photos – this content appears on the 
user’s “Schaukasten” a stream of activities on the user’s 
profile page. Additionally, it is possible to send private 
messages, and finally, special, non-written messages in form 
of interaction buttons that allow a user to “wink at”, “pad 
shoulder of”, and “flirt with” another user. 
Additionally to these user-to-user interactions, Sankt 
Onlein also provides a tool for creating community pages for 
companies, clubs, and other organizations. Users can express 
their sympathies for such a page by clicking the 
corresponding button and interacting with the community 
members afterwards. 
 
III. 
THEORETICAL BASIS AND THEORETICAL BASIS 
At the present, SNSs are beginning to be of rising interest 
to the research community. Various studies have profiled 
different platforms such as YouTube, Flickr, and Orkut [5] 
and used classical social network analysis methods for 
gaining deep insights. In this approach, individuals are nodes 
in a network where links between nodes are formed through 
the state of being a “contact”, “friend”, or “buddy”. One of 
the most comprehensive social graphs is the visualization of 
data from Microsoft Messenger which shows 180 million 
nodes and 1.3 billion undirected edges [6]. 
For the evaluation of Sankt Onlein, we have chosen a 
slightly different approach that also encompasses other 
methods of evaluation and therefore broadened the 
theoretical basis as follows. 
The characteristics described in the prior chapter 
(regional focus, use of dialect forms, and self-positioning of 
the platform) imply that Sankt Onlein and the interests of its 
users are focused on Austrian users, culture, and news. This 
leads to our first hypothesis: 
H1: Members of the SNS Sankt Onlein primarily discuss 
topics that focus on Austrian users, culture, and news. 
 
Recent studies [4] have shown that in large SNSs such as 
Facebook, most users only interact with about 50 percent of 
their contacts (so-called “friends”, however, this term does 
not infer to a real friendship underlying the connection). 20 
percent of a Facebook user’s friends are responsible for 70 
percent of all interactions on the platform. This observation 
can be applied to about 90 percent of all Facebook users. 
This corroborates the findings that networks on Facebook are 
very widespread across regional, linguistic and interest 
fields. A regional SNS such as Sankt Onlein on the other 
hand, has by our definition more defined boundaries, 
limiting possible social actors to a regional and linguistic 
group. We assume that this prohibits a direct comparison of 
Facebook and Sankt Onlein and thus formulate our second 
hypothesis: 
H2: In local SNS, social networks and social interactions 
shift from a global level to a more regional level, resulting in 
a higher number of and more intimate node connections. A 
regional SNS acts primarily as a tool and enabler for 
interactions in the offline sphere. 
Digital social networking platforms or communities may 
be classified in two main categories in terms of the structure 
of social networks on the respective platform [3]. On the one 
hand, there are networks focused on facilitating novel 
acquaintances through shared interests or shared objectives, 
e.g., dating communities or passion-driven special interest 
communities. On the other hand, there are networks that 
enable transferring existing social networks and node 
connections onto a digital platform. Profile-centric platforms 
that are not focused on special interests fall under this 
category. Sankt Onlein can also be positioned here, although 
it does indicate some functions (e.g., “wink at”, “flirt with”) 
used for 
making first 
contact with possible new 
acquaintances. Sankt Onlein as a local, profile-centric SNS 
with more intimate node connections thus has another 
implication which we summarize under the following 
hypothesis: 
H3: Consequently to H1, local SNS facilitate a better 
connection of online networks and activities; and offline 
networks and activities. 
In their theory of virtual space and place [7], the authors 
show how the perception of space and place inside virtual 
worlds influence actions and enjoyment of the users. 
Continuing our assumption of Sankt Onlein to be a local 
SNS with the above-mentioned cognitive limitations, it can 
be positioned as a confined areal within the web. The 
platform’s own slogan “Austria’s digital capital” also 
indicates a certain positioning as a defined space. The third 
indicator for Sankt Onlein to be a confined place rather than 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

an open space as per definition in [7] is the fact that Sankt 
Onlein does not offer platform-enabled functionalities 
outside of its website. While large services such as Google or 
Facebook are ubiquitous in the web, enabling registration, 
logging in, commenting and sharing functionalities on third-
party platforms, Sankt Onlein users can only interact and use 
the platform’s functionalities while using the SNS itself. This 
eventually creates a homely atmosphere of familiarity [8]. 
Thus, our third hypothesis is as follows: 
H4: Sankt Onlein is a confined areal within virtual space 
and can be considered a place which eventually evokes an 
atmosphere of familiarity. 
 
IV. 
EVALUATION SET UP 
For evaluating and verifying our theses, our evaluation 
set up contains three different aspects that reach from content 
analysis to a quantitative and qualitative social network 
analysis. In detail, our evaluation set up is as follows: 
A. Part 1: Content Analysis 
In order to verify our first hypothesis that Sankt Onlein is 
indeed focused on Austrian news, culture and content, and 
thus qualifies for a region-focused SNS, a content analysis of 
shared messages will be conducted. The status messages 
posted on the users’ “Schaukasten” will be sampled, 
unitized, and coded manually. The decision to complete the 
content analysis manually instead of using automated text 
mining and entity extraction is based on the fact that 
automatic content analysis for German texts is not yet 
sophisticated enough to produce viable results – especially in 
case of Austria-specific idioms. In the final analysis, the data 
are assessed quantitatively and qualitatively. As a result of 
the analysis, we hope to find whether there is a significant 
tendency for Sankt Onlein users to converse about Austria-
specific topics. Through the qualitative analysis of the 
sample we also hope to see first indicators of whether the 
dialect currently used on the platform to describe 
functionalities and trigger actions is the same dialect as used 
in the user-produced content. 
B. Social Network Analysis 
In order to verify our second hypothesis that a regional 
SNS facilitates social networks with a higher number of and 
more intimate nodes, a social network analysis will be 
conducted. Not only will the amount of social links be 
analyzed, but also the quality of the links measured in user 
interactions. For this purpose, we plan to base our study on 
the concept of interaction graphs as presented in [4]. The 
expected results will provide insights on the network 
structure on Sankt Onlein. These results may be compared to 
data extracted from Facebook to underline the differences 
between the two SNSs. An especially interesting topic in this 
context is the comparison of an individual’s network on 
different platforms, e.g., on Facebook and on Sankt Onlein, 
to find usage patterns and first qualitative insights into 
discussed topics. 
C. Online User Survey 
In the last part of the evaluation set up, an online user 
survey will be conducted. Through questioning users of 
Sankt Onlein about their usage patterns of the platform and 
their attitude towards this SNS, we hope to gain more 
qualitative insights and verify our theses 3 and 4. For 
designing the survey, we will build upon the use of the 
expectation disconfirmation theory (EDT) as presented by in 
[9] in the context of IT systems. In this approach, cognition 
and behavior is taken into account as well as temporal 
changes in technology acceptance models. We plan to survey 
two different user groups: One group G1 which is already 
familiar with the platform and has been using it for some 
time; and one group G2 which is new to the platform. The 
questionnaires will be sent to the users at two different points 
in time t1 and t2, and will survey perceptions, attitudes, and 
satisfaction of the users. The questionnaire for G2 at time t1 
assesses the perceptions and attitude towards the SNS prior 
to use. The data gained in this first survey will be compared 
to the information gained from the questionnaire at t2, in 
which disconfirmation, satisfaction and modified perceptions 
and attitudes as well as behavioral changes are surveyed. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this short paper, the regional SNS Sankt Onlein was 
introduced and preliminary hypotheses on the usage 
characteristics of this platform were proposed. We presented 
our planned research activities concerning this regional SNS 
in hope of gaining valuable insights for learning more about 
this special type of SNS, as we have realized in our research 
and literature review activities, most research work focuses 
on large social network such as Facebook. A focus on 
smaller, regionally bordered SNSs may help to delve deeper 
into psychological, socio-scientific, and interaction issues 
that arise in the crossover zone between online social 
interaction and offline social interactions. These insights 
could be helpful for researchers and practitioners seeking to 
use regional SNS for e-commerce activities alike. 
However, our approach represents only a small aspect of 
the many different research aspects of this SNS and can be 
seen as the first step towards deeper investigations. 
Comparison studies of other SNSs as mentioned in the 
introduction (vkontakte, Odnoklassniki, Mixi) could provide 
insights on generalization of regional SNS characteristics. 
However, possible limitations caused by data availability 
must be dealt with. 
Also, individual aspects could be assessed in more detail. 
For example, linguistic research within the platform could 
result in first indicators about changes, shifts, and/or 
unifications of Austria-specific idioms. 
Future work could also include a view on the mobile 
application of Sankt Onlein. Mobile penetration in Austria 
currently amounts to about 150 percent and mobile usage of 
SNS is constantly rising (as can be observed with Facebook 
and mobile-specific networks, e.g., Badoo). These statistics 
could suggest that the connection of online and offline social 
networks and interactions may be facilitated by the mobile 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

phone and SNS applications. As the mobile phone is “always 
on”, it creates a state of ubiquitous social networking 
activities. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. N., “The others: The world’s other social media sites”, The 
Financialist, 
14 
June 
2012, 
retrieved 
from 
http://www.thefinancialist.com/the-others-the-worlds-other-
social-media-sites/. 
[2] V. Cosenza, “World Map of Social Networks”, VincosBlog, 
11 June 2012, retrieved from http://vincos.it/world-map-of-
social-networks/. 
[3] D. Boyd and N. Ellison, “Social Network Sites: Definition, 
History, and Scholarship”, Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication 
Vol. 
13, 
2008, 
pp. 
210-230, 
doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00393.x. 
[4] C. Wilson, B. Boe, A. Sala, K. Puttaswamy, and B. Zhao, 
“User 
Interactions 
in 
Social 
Networks 
and 
Their 
Implications”, Proc. ACM European Conference on Computer 
Systems (EuroSys 09), ACM New York, 2009, pp. 205-218, 
doi:10.1145/1519065.1519089. 
[5] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K. Gummadi, P. Druschel, and B. 
Bhattacherjee, “Measurement and Analysis of Online Social 
Networks”, Proc. Internet Measurement Conference (IMC 
07), 
ACM 
New 
York, 
2007, 
pp. 
29-42, 
doi:10.1145/1298306.1298311. 
[6] J. Leskovec and E. Horvitz, “Planetary-Scale Views on a 
Large Instant-Messaging Network”, Proc. International World 
Wide Web Conference (WWW2008), ACM New York, 2008, 
doi: 10.1.1.133.6614 
[7] C. Saunders, A. Rutkowski, M. van Genuchten, D. Vogel, and 
J. Molina Orrego, “Virtual Space and Place: Theory and 
Test”, MIS Quarterly Vol. 35 Nr. 4, December 2011, pp. 
1079-1098. 
[8] D. Gefen and D. Straub, “Consumer Trust in B2C E-
Commerce and the 
Importance of Social Presence: 
Experiments in E-Products and E-Services”, Omega 32 Nr. 6, 
December 2004. 
[9] A. Bhattacherjee and G. Premkumar, “Understanding 
Changes in Belief and Attitude Toward Information 
Technology Usage: A Theoretical Model and Longitudinal 
Test”, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 28 Nr. 2, June 2004, pp. 229-254. 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

