The Effects of Travel Information Sources on Traveller’s Resonance and The Travel
Destination Decision-Making Process
Masayuki Kaneko∗, Lourdes Morales-Villaverde†, Katsuko Nakahira T.∗, Makiko Okamoto∗
∗Nagaoka University of Technology
Niigata, Japan,
Email:s123355@stn.nagaokaut.ac.jp
†University of California, Santa Cruz
USA
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a method to estimate the
relationships between‘ information acquisition ’and‘ decision-
making ’. The method used is based on the‘vacation sequences ’
described by van Raaij which consist of ﬁve stages: (1) general
decision; (2) information acquisition; (3) decision-making; (4)
participation; and (5) satisfaction or complaints. The method
proposed in this paper focuses on steps (2) and (3), which involve
active processes performed by a traveller. While performing
information acquisition and decision-making processes, a traveller
decides where to go according to his/her motivation for travel.
These results should be guided by the degree of ‘ resonance ’
between the available travel information and his/her motivation.
The detailed structure of resonance might be different from
traveller to traveller due to each traveller ’s distinct personal
characteristics. We assume that activities which involve destina-
tion determination are analogous to people’s purchase behaviors
as described by Howard’s model. In this paper, we incorporate the
steps from the purchase model into steps (2) and (3) by expanding
them appropriately to propose a new model with two elements for
information acquisition and three elements for travel destination
recognition. The strengths of resonance are measured for steps
(2) and (3) as the external information and their relationships
are examined.
Keywords–Travel-destination information; empathy; motivation;
decision-making.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we focus on the relationships between
information sources available to the traveller and how well
they resonate with him/her in order to understand how these
resources affect his/her destination decision-making processes.
Since the 1990s, the Japanese government has placed
emphasis on tourism by initiating such programs as ‘Welcome
Plan 21 (1995)’ and ‘Visit Japan Campaign (2003–)’ for
foreign visitors, or ‘Egg of Columbus (2002–)’[1] for domestic
visitors. In response to these programs, many regions in Japan
have begun to share information on regional tourist destina-
tions via information media such as ‘analogue’ booklets and/or
‘digital’ web pages. As the amount of tourist information from
a variety of sources increases, it becomes easier for tourists to
obtain the necessary information to make decisions concerning
their tours. On the other hand, these diverse sources with
distinct characteristics in terms of the types of information
each conveys may have different effects on decision-making
processes as each tourist may have a different processing
strategy or preference for information receipt. This should be
supported by the following observation. With the growth of
the Internet, it is reported that within the current generation
(often called the ‘smart phone native generation’), the number
of cases in which travellers made decisions regarding travel
destinations based on information they found on the Web
(either from enterprise or past travellers) has increased. As a
result, the information provided by travel information sources
on the Web can have a tremendous impact on the travel
destination decision-making process. We assume this diverse
information resonates with their travel destinations, and this
resonance offers a strong motivation to travel.
In previous study, the role of social media, such as twitter
or blog discussed in the viewpoint of the relation between
information ﬂow and construction of human network.
In our research, we treat consumers’ information in the
Internet with words of mouth. In the Internet world, all Internet
users can send information with their viewpoints. Recently,
social media spread rapidly, and it makes virtual human
connection via users’ own murmur, which regards as words
of mouth. In the sense, words of mouth is the information
provided by consumer without seeking beneﬁt. SNS is a
service which promotes connection between people through
comments or picture provided by them.
From these behavior, SNS provides words of mouth in the
Internet, and it has impact on consumer who want to buy new
products.
In this paper, we propose a method for estimating the
impacts of the strengths of resonance between a traveller’s
personal characteristics and travel destination characteristics
on the motivational aspect of the travel destination decision-
making processes. This includes the motivation behind the
decision on which destinations to visit, traveller’s use of
different information sources for leisure travel plans, and the
information from enterprises or past travellers. We constructed
the method by applying the following two processes: (1)
measure travellers’ personal characteristics to identify distinct
decision-making categories, (2) measure the relationship be-
tween the type of information acquired and travel destination
recognition in terms of the degree of ‘resonance’ between
them. These results and the ‘travel destination decision-making
process’ introduced by [2] are combined to estimate the effects
of travel information sources on traveller’s resonance and travel
decision-making processes. In Section II we introduce the
basic theory that this paper is based on and related works.
In Section III we explain the method for measuring resonance
derived from acquired information types and travel destination
recognition. In Section VI we summarize the proposed method
and describe the future plan.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

II.
RELATED WORKS
In this section, we introduce related works with several
topics.
A. Importance of the Internet study for tourism
The Internet is said to be important for marketing to
attract people. Research on tourist destinations using social
networking services (SNS) was studied by Milli [3]. The
research target was the Split-Dalmatian County in the Republic
of Croatia. This county has been using their own website
for advertising since 2008 and they have had a presence on
Facebook since 2010. The Facebook advertising campaign was
recognized in other countries: Germany, Austria, the Czech
Republic, Hungary, and Slovenia. This campaign triggered an
increase in the total number of website fans from 5900 to over
10,000. This indicates the importance of the Internet and SNS
for tourism. But the difference of inﬂuence on the words of
mouth through websites and SNS is not clear.
B. Word of mouth
Word of mouth has been studied frequently in recent years.
With growth of the Internet and SNS, word of mouth is an
anticipated marketing method. Michael and Jeremy [4] studied
word of mouth through the American buzz marketing site
Yelp.com on which users evaluate restaurants. According to
the results they obtained, restaurants increased their number
of reservations by 19 percent when they received an extra half
star rating on the site. This result indicates that information
spread through word of mouth can possibly inﬂuence decision
making. Judith and Dina [5] also studied word of mouth
through Amazon.com and bn.com. They found that one-star
reviews have a greater impact than ﬁve-star reviews on the
same site. These two previous studies indicate that reviews
have signiﬁcant impacts on either increasing reservations or
book sales. We already know that word of mouth has a
tremendous impact on purchasing. However, we do not know
how effective it is in the travel ﬁeld. Also, the difference of
inﬂuence from HP is not clear Therefore, we investigated this
using the information provided by enterprises and consumers.
C. Resonance
Resonance is one of the important factors used in previous
studies on decision making [6]. The Model Human Processor
with Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT) reacts to input from ex-
ternal environments and internal generated input to make deci-
sions and select action at any moment. MHP/RT processes four
types of events: future events (consciously or unconsciously) or
a past events (consciously or unconsciously). In the process of
‘past/conscious’, by reacting to activated pieces of knowledge
through resonance processes, it reﬂects on and elaborates on a
certain symbolic event. In our study, we positioned resonance
as the positive or negative emotional result achieved when a
person receives information or knowledge. Previous studies on
the inﬂuence of SNS primarily focused on its characteristics
such as how it can be used for global advertising or on
its technical aspects. However, there are very few previous
studies that have focused on personal characteristics in terms of
SNS information. Therefore, our investigation centered on both
personal characteristics and information source characteristics.
D. Travel destination decision-making process
In order to understand travellers ’resonance and motiva-
tion(s), we described the travel destination decision-making
process by incorporating Shimizu’s [7] model of the purchase
decision-making process into van Raaij’s‘vacation sequence ’
[8].
Shimizu compared the information provided by consumer
and the information provided by enterprise on observing pur-
chasing behavior. Previous study indicated that the information
provided by consumer does not play a big role on products
recognition. But Shimizu suggested that the information pro-
vided by consumer was effective on the stage of products
recognition. We considered travel action as one of purchasing
behavior and we observed them. Our consideration is that
information provided by consumer also has a big impact on
the unknown place.
When describing the travel destination decision-making
process, we assumed that the person already had the desire to
travel in order to better describe the process between the infor-
mation acquisition and decision-making stages. Selecting the
travel destination is generally treated as a purchase behavior.
This makes the travel destination decision-making process eas-
ier to understand based on the ideas suggested for information
processing in the purchase decision-making process. Howard’s
model is one of the most well-known purchase behavior
models and it shows the decision-making process that leads
to the purchase behavior after receiving external information
as a source of stimulation [7]. Moreover, Howard’s model is
a comprehensive model for predicting consumers’ action [7].
In [7] Shimizu expands Howard’s decision-making model in
terms of the source of the information. When incorporating
Shimizu’s model into van Raaij’s‘ vacation sequence ’, we
considered two sources of information as equally important:
consumers (i.e. previous travellers) and enterprises (e.g. travel
agencies, travel destination sites, government sites, etc.). The
travel destination decision-making process as we described
it consists of the following elements: ‘ certitude ’, which
represents the traveller ’s self-conﬁdence in how much he/she
will enjoy traveling based on the travel information he/she
received;‘ attitude ’, which represents the traveller ’s attitude
towards the travel destination based on the travel information
he/she received; and‘ travel destination recognition ’, which
represents the traveller’s recognition of a destination as a travel
destination after receiving (travel) information. (These depend
on description of [7] Figure 1 shows a part of the travel desti-
nation decision-making process. In the work presented here we
assume that the travel destination decision is made based on
the motivation that results from the strength of the traveller ’
s resonance. Traveller ’s resonance refers to the traveller ’s
action for resonance when they obtain travel information. What
is more, the traveller’s resonance can be inﬂuenced by personal
characteristics (e.g. travellers ’formative experiences, travel
objectives, etc.) when he/she is provided with various kinds
of information regarding travel destination candidates (e.g.
their function, contents, etc.). The strength of the resonance
is considered an important factor when deciding on the travel
destination. Knowing the strength of the resonance and under-
standing the relationship between the personal characteristics
of the traveller (e.g. formative experiences, travel objective),
the environmental characteristics of the travel destination (e.g.
its function, contents, etc.), and the acquired information (pro-
vided by consumers or enterprises) can help determine how to
effectively attract individuals to travel destinations. (The table
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Figure 1. A part of travel destination decision-making process
of resonance presents this relationship and the resulting reso-
nance.) Here we will focus on the travellers’resonance during
the travel destination decision-making process, especially from
the information acquisition stage to the travel decision stage.
We will consider the strength of each element shown in Figure
1. First, let ’s discuss the meaning of letters. In here, c, e,
and T indicate consumer, enterprise, and travel destination
recognition. The sufﬁx c, t, and a represent certitude, travel
destination recognition, and attitude. (e. g. ct indicates the
resonance from consumer to travel destination recognition).
The resonances are the strength of connection between each
element shown in Figure 1. (cc, ec, ct, et, ca, ea, Tc, Ta)
These strength of resonances result from the combination
of personal characteristics and environmental characteristics.
Thus, we need to measure travellers ’personal characteristics.
They cannot be measured by numbers. Therefore, we need to
conduct the experiment based on psychology.
E. Study 1 Ttravellers’ Personal Characteristics
In order to better understand travellers’personal character-
istics as they relate to the travel destination decision-making
process, we conducted a questionnaire with 43 questions, in
both open and closed format. This questionnaire was admin-
istered to 165 students in Nagaoka city (Niigata Prefecture).
The questionnaire is consisted with the following question
items regarding to personal characteristics of travellers. 1）
view of self (independent or interdependent)[9] 2)potential
travel objective[10] 3)previous travel experience(s),（type：
either family/friends or independent, objective : chosen from
stimulation, cultural observation, communicate with local peo-
ple, restore/improve health , have a new/unpredictable ex-
perience, experience nature, self-improvement, and develop
personal relations, place, duration of travel 4)desires regarding
future travel experiences(Except for duration, same items 　 as
3)).
The objectives could be categorized into four factors
by factor analysis. There were positive correlations between
2 of factors: ‘expanding original experience’ and ‘have a
new/unpredictable experience’ and ‘individual recognition’ and
‘the strength of assertion’.
We attained the following results. For past experiences,
most of the participants travelled with their families or friends.
Since the participants were young (15 to 20 years old), it is
suggested that past travel experiences were mostly family or
school trips. For the inﬂuence of past experience, the travel
objective for past experience and future desired travel was
matched. It was considered that the past experience became
an anchor to make a decision. These results indicated that
characteristics have some inﬂuence on decision making.[11]
In our study, we choose group of highly educated students
as survey participants because they frequently use the Internet
or SNS, so they have very small psychological and physical
resistant for IT technology.
F. Study 2 Information acquisition and Resonance
In study 2 we investigate the strength of the connection
between certitude, travel destination recognition, attitude; and
travel intention when they receive travel information from
different sources, enterprise or consumer(i.e. other travellers).
We considered travel action as one of purchasing behavior
and we considered both of information provided by enterprise
or consumer as travel information sources. From Shimizu’s
study, she showed that there is a big impact from the infor-
mation provided by consumer on the products established as
a bland. So we predicated that the information provided by
consumer is also stronger for the unknown place and it may
show similar results.
Procedure: To measure the effects of travel information
sources on traveller’s, we prepared two kinds of stimuli, which
were related to cultural objective. Each set will consists of the
following: Two pictures of the same travel destination(already
known place and unknown place), one from the public website
of the speciﬁc travel destination (enterprise) and the other from
a traveller ’s Twitter account (consumer).
We consider that the combination of source of the travel
information and travel destination as shown in Table I have a
different effect on the strength of the traveller’s resonance. We
focused on two of travel destination(already known place and
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

(a)
consumer
enterprise
enterprise
travel-destination 
recognition
travel-destination 
recognition
certitude
certitude
attitude
attitude
consumer
enterprise
enterprise
travel-destination 
recognition
travel-destination 
recognition
certitude
certitude
attitude
attitude
consumer
enterprise
enterprise
travel-destination 
recognition
travel-destination 
recognition
certitude
certitude
attitude
attitude
(c)
(b)
Figure 2. (a) visit historical sites, (b) experience nature, (c) stimulation
unknown place) because already known place and unknown
place is on different situation that already known place is
already constructed as a bland, but unknown place is ongoing
to consist as a bland. So we considered that 2 of the travel
destination also inﬂuence on traveller’s resonance.
Question details: The items of the questionnaire was as
follows. 1) Questions on participants ’knowledge: This ques-
tion asks whether or not the participants are familiar with the
travel sites. 2) Questions on travel destination recognition: This
question asks what information (provided by the enterprise
or consumer) is a frequent source for new information for
travel destination. 3) Questions on certitude: This question
asks what information (provided by enterprise or consumer)
invokes more conﬁdence in the estimated value of the travel
destination. 4) Questions on attitude: This question asks what
information (provided by enterprise or consumer) suggests that
the travel destination is a good place to visit. 5) Questions
for intention: This question asks what information (provided
by enterprise or consumer) invokes a desire to visit the
travel destination. 6) Questions on satisfaction: This question
asks what travel objectives will be satisﬁed from the travel
information provided.
Through this method, we will estimate the relationship of
resonance in terms of the source (enterprise vs. consumer)
and the obscurity (already known place vs. unknown place).
We conducted a questionnaire with 5 point scale of -2 to
2. We gave participants two pieces of information provided
by enterprises and consumers. The objective was selected
from the ﬁrst survey. We focused on investigating of cultural
observation. We analyzed travel intention by using a chi-square
test. We attained the following results. For already known sites,
participants attached more weight to the information provided
by enterprises than that from consumers. For unknown sites,
participants used both types of information. We considered
that for already known sites, participants would like proper
knowledge of the sites. For unknown place, participants would
TABLE I. THE PATTERNS FOR QUESTIONNAIRE. E REPRESENTS
“ENTERPRISE” SOURCE, AND C REPRESENTS “CNSUMER” SOURCE
Travel objectives
Already known
Unknown
E
C
E
C
Cultural observation
A1
A2
A3
A4
like to gather information including proper knowledge from
the enterprises and comments from consumers who previously
traveled there.[12]
III.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THEIR DESIRE AND
INFORMATION ACQUIREMENT : ON THE VIEW POINT OF
RESONANCE
Combining both results of study 1 – their objective for
future desired travel – and study 2(resonance), we ana-
lyzed the relationships in terms of their characteristics(the
objective for future desired travel) and travel information
sources(enterprise/consumer).
We extrapolate about the connections for each of the
objectives on which we focused. We believe that we will attain
the following results as shown in Figure 2 (a) to (c). Each
ﬁgures consists of two blocks: information resource (enterprise
and customer) and travel destination recognition. These blocks
are generated by the balance of certitude and attitude. Three
lines are shown in Figure. 2: the dashed line, narrow line,
and thick line. Hence, each line is deﬁned as follows: the
narrow line represents a normal strength of resonance, the
dashed line represents a weak strength of resonance, and
the thick line represents remarkable strength of resonance.
This ﬁgure indicates the strength of resonance between the
information (enterprise and consumer) and elements (certitude,
attitude and travel destination recognition). If the travellers ’
objective is to‘ cultural observation ’, then their resonance
will be indicated as having remarkable strength based on the
information provided by enterprise, as they would like to
have reliable historical information. This suggests that their
condition would be represented as shown (a) in Figure. 2. If
the travellers ’objective is to‘ experience in nature ’then
their resonance will be indicated with almost equal strength
for both information sources. They may want to know how
good this site is from travellers who have previously visited the
place, while they also want detailed information such as what
kind of ﬂowers can be observed. In this case, their condition
would be represented as shown in (b) in Figure. 2. Finally, if
they wish to travel without certain travel information provided
by the enterprise in order to have a stimulating experience,
their resonance will be indicated by remarkable strength for
the information provided by consumers. In this case, their
condition is represented as (c) in Figure. 2. In (c), the role
of consumer’s information is very important. Consumers’
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Figure 3. The result of the strength of resonance
TABLE II. THE RELATION BETWEEN SURVEY 1 AND 2
The objectives
Already known place
Unknown place
Stimulation
0.333
0.333
Experience nature
0.167
-0.333
Visit historical sites
0.100
-0.200
information is aggregated by many methods, but most popular
way is social media. Currently, many people are able to update
their comments, photos, videos, or audios on the Internet. They
submit this content to blogs, Facebook, or many kinds of social
media. Most social media contents can be searched with ease
by Internet users. In a sense, social media is one of useful
ways to aggregate consumers’ tourism contents. This means
the information acquirement layer in Figure. 1 is tremendously
diverse and there are many resonance patterns found in the
information. Hence, observing travellers ’resonance patterns
is important to estimate the travel destination decision-making
process.
For conducting surveys, we followed the research ethics
guide line published in Nagaoka University of Technology.
IV.
RESULTS
First we separated participants data(survey 1) with the
objectives(future desired travel) of stimulation, cultural obser-
vation, and experience nature. We calculated the average points
of survey 2 and we compared each of them. The results are
shown in Table II and Figure 3.
In Figure 3, “A K”, “U K”, “E” and ”C” represent Already
known, Unknown, Enterprise and Consumer. In the ﬁgure,
there are four levels of thickness for directional line; from
thickest to thin, these represent more than 0.3 points of average
score, from 0.2 to 0.3 points of average score, from 0.1 to 0.2
points of average score. And dashed directional line represents
less than 0.1 points of average score. Although not observed
signiﬁcant difference for subjects was small, following trends
were observed. 1) Participants whose objective was stimulation
had more intention from the information provided by enterprise
in either already known and unknown place. 2) Participants
whose objective was experience nature had more intention
from the information provided by enterprise for already known
place and had more intention from the information provided
by consumer for unknown place. 3) Participants whose objec-
tive was cultural observation had almost same results of the
objective of experience nature. But for the participants whose
objective was cultural observation got weaker result.
V.
DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss resonance reactions that were
observed in our two participants groups: stimulation and
cultural-observation-participants.
A. Resonance reactions by stimulation-participants
The degree of resonance shown by the participants who had
the objective of “stimulation” was stronger toward enterprise-
information than that of resonance toward Twitter. The result
was true for both already-known-place and unknown-place.
Firstly, resonance would not occur when there is mismatch
between the provided information content and the interest that
a participant has. And therefore the stimulation participants
showed little resonance toward the contents related to the
objective of cultural observation.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Secondly,
the
amount
of
information
provided
by
enterprise-information was richer than that provided by SNS.
The former uses such media as bigger pictures, texts with
a lot of words, and so on. Stimulation would be positively
related with the amount of information. And therefore the
stimulation participants showed stronger resonance towards
such enterprise-information.
B. Resonance reactions by cultural-observation-participants
The degree of resonance shown by the participants who
had the objective of “cultural observation” was stronger toward
consumer-information such as Twitter than that of resonance
toward enterprise-information about unknown-place.
As described before, the necessary condition for resonance
reaction is the provision of matched information. A participant
would examine the information he/she is interested in and
he/she might induce a big resonance. However, even if the
provided information matches the interests of the participant,
it is not enough to induce resonance reaction: if the provided
information does not have any useful and valuable “new”
information to him/her, it should be estimated as worthless
because it just provide the opportunity of just checking his/her
experience pf ’having been the place’ and little resonance
would be induced. We had the results that this is true for HP
and SNS for already-known-place.
On the other hand, we found that cultural-observation-
participants showed stronger resonances with the information
provided by “consumer without seeking beneﬁt” for unknown-
places. This is because the participants had tendency to relay
on the information provided by “consumer without seeking
beneﬁts.” In sum, the cultural-observation-participants res-
onated differently depending on the nature of the information,
whether it is about already-known-place or unknown-place.
This result is consistent with the one provided by Shimizu[7]
who studied purchasing behavior.
VI.
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we explained the travel destination decision-
making process in order to understand how travellers decide
upon their travel destination. Travellers need to be motivated
to travel. We assumed that the motivation is provided by the
strength of resonance. It was suggested that personal char-
acteristics need to be investigated in order to understand the
travellers ’travel destination making-process. In the process,
we focused on the information acquirement process and travel
destination making-process. Between these two steps, humans
have many thoughts, but they are biased by human personal
characteristics for information acquirement process, and many
levels of resonance based on information type or contents
itself. Considering this, we propose a method for measuring the
effects of resonance strength on the relationships among des-
tination decision factors. Our method is the means to acquire
the diversity derived human and to estimate travel destination
decisions. We administered the questionnaire to 165 students
from Nagaoka city who are ﬂuent in Japanese (not all were
Japanese), under the supervision of their class advisors. We
gave them two types of pictures based on information from the
following combinations: enterprise, consumer, already known
place, or unknown place. We focused on investigating travel
intentions for cultural observation. We received the following
results. For already known sites, participants attached more
weight to the information provided by enterprises and for
unknown sites, participants regarded both types of information
equally. Finally, we conducted an analysis of the relationship
between survey 1 (characteristics) and survey 2 (resonance).
We attained the following results. The participants whose
objective was stimulation attached more weight to the infor-
mation provided by the enterprises. The participants whose
objective was to experience nature and cultural observation
attached more weight on to the information provided by
consumer on the unknown sites.
Our future work will be the investigation of resonance of
the people whose objective is stimulation, cultural observation
or experience nature when the travel information which has a
characteristics of stimulation or experience nature was given.
Also, the study group for this study was limited. Thus, we
will conduct survey with considering age, gender, occupation
and etc.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
bers 25350367, 15H02784.
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.mlit.go.jp/common/000132607.pdf,2007,
accessed
2015.07.12 in Japanese.
[2]
Masayuki Kaneko, Katsuko Nakahira, and Makiko Okamoto, ”The
description of the traveler’s decision making process induced by in-
teraction of man - environment - information”, Proc.77th National
Convention of Information Processing Society of Japan, Vol.1, 2015,
pp.409-410.
[3]
Mili Razovi´e, ”Social Network and Promotion of Tourist Destination”,
in Proceedings of the 22nd Cromar Congress, Marketing Challenges in
New Economy, 2011, pp746-766.
[4]
Michael L. Anderson and Jeremy Magruder, ”Does Yelp Affect Restau-
rant Demand?”, Giannini foundation of Agricultural Economics, Vol.16,
No.5, 2013, pp. 1-4.
[5]
Judith A. Chevalier and Dina Mayzlin, ”The Effect of Word of Mouth on
Sales”, Online Book Reviews. Journal of Marketing Research, August
2006, Vol. 43, No. 3, 2006, pp. 345-354.
[6]
Muneo Kitajima and Makoto Toyota, ”Decision-making and action
selection in Two Minds: An analysis based on Model Human Processor
with Realtime Constraints”, Extended versions of selected papers from
the Third Annual Meeting of the BICA Society, Vol.5, 2013 pp. 82-93.
[7]
Mai Shimizu, ”The Effect of CGM on Consumer Information Pro-
cessing: Comparison of Consumer Generated Media with Corporate”,
Journal of Commerce, Vol.81, 2013, No3, pp. 93121, 2013.
[8]
W. Fred van Raaij, ”Consumer research on tourism mental and behav-
ioral constructs”, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol.13, No1, 1986, pp.
119.
[9]
Toshitake Takata, ”On the scale for measuring independent and inter-
dependent view of self”, Bulletin of Research Institute , No8, 2000, pp.
145-163.
[10]
Yoshifumi Hayashi and Takehiro Fujihara, ”The Effects of the Evalua-
tion of Travel Experiences on Tourist Satisfaction: From the Viewpoints
of Tourism Motives and Past Travel Experiences”, SHAKAIGAKUBU-
KIYO School of Sociology and Social Work Journal, No.114, 2012, pp.
199-212.
[11]
Masayuki Kaneko, Katsuko Nakahira, and Makiko Okamoto, ”The
effects of traveler’s empathy states for individual travel information
sources on travel destinations decision processes”, Forum on Informa-
tion Technology, vol.1, 2015, pp. 149-152.
[12]
Masayuki Kaneko, Katsuko Nakahira, and Makiko Okamoto, ”Inﬂu-
ences of Acquired Tourism Information on Resonance and Travel-
Destination Decision-Making Process”, IEEE shin-etsu Session, 2015,
p. 168.
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

