How Much do Digital Natives Disclose on the Internet –
A Privacy Study
Erik Buchmann, Klemens Böhm
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany
{erik.buchmann|klemens.boehm}@kit.edu
Abstract—With the advent of social services on the Internet
that encourage the disclosure of more and more personal infor-
mation, it has become increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd out where
and for which purpose personal data is collected and stored.
The potential for misuse of such data will increase as well, e.g.,
due to the ongoing extension of social sites with new features
that make it more appealing to reveal personal details. In order
to research and develop approaches that give way to privacy on
the Internet, it is important to know which kind of information
can be found, who has been responsible for publishing it,
the age of the information, etc. This paper describes a user
study about the personal information available about Digital
Natives, i.e., young people who have grown up with the Internet.
In particular, we have guided 65 undergraduate students to
search the web for personal information on themselves by
using various search engines. Our students have completed
302 questionnaire sheets altogether. We have analyzed the
questionnaires by means of statistical signiﬁcance tests and
cluster analysis. As a part of our results, we have found out that
today’s personal search engines like 123people.com do not ﬁnd
much more information than general-purpose search engines
like google, and that today’s Digital Natives are surprisingly
aware of the information they are willing to disclose.
Keywords–privacy; user study; digital natives.
I. INTRODUCTION
At this moment, more than 200 social networking sites
exist [1] that encourage the disclosure of personal informa-
tion about the daily life, hobbies and interests, work-related
information, etc. Furthermore, more and more classical web
forums, photo-sharing portals, news portals and other sites
offer “social” features, e.g., allow to share and comment
digital objects of interest. In consequence, it has become
more and more tempting for individuals to disclose personal
details, with unpredictable consequences for privacy.
The potential for misuse of such data depends on how
it can be found. While general-purpose search engines like
Google or Bing search for any kind of information, people-
search engines like 123people or Yasni are tailored to search
for personal details, e.g., from web forums, social network
sites or commercial portals.
In this article, we investigate which personal information
is typically available on the Internet. We study who has
published this information and how our participants assess
the impact of its availability on their privacy. From related
research (see Section II) and privacy issues on public media,
we have developed four classes of research questions:
A1: Information characteristics This class subsumes the
extent of personal data available on the Internet, the age of
the data and parties who have uploaded it.
A2: Search characteristics This class covers the inﬂuence
of the search engine and the search terms on the search
result, and the amount of ambiguous information.
A3: Impact on privacy This class considers if people are
content with the fact that the personal information they have
found on themselves has been uploaded and is available on
the Internet, and how sensitive they deem this information.
A4: Patterns and rules The fourth class addresses rela-
tionships between the characteristics of the information. In
particular, we look for clusters of people with similar privacy
attitudes and privacy behavior.
We have conducted a user study with educated Digital
Natives, i.e., with people grown up with the Internet. Digital
Natives are relevant for our study, because those people have
integrated the Internet into their daily life. A very large share
of the adolescents and young adults belong to this group.
We have decided in favor of a qualitative study, i.e., a very
detailed questionnaire and an intensive supervision of the
study participants. Over a period of three years we have
guided 65 undergraduate students of computer science to
search for personal information about themselves by using
various search engines. We have asked them to state who has
uploaded this information, the age of the data, who would
be able to ﬁnd it, etc.
As a part of our results, we have found out that today’s
Digital Natives are very aware of the information they are
willing to disclose. Nevertheless, despite the fact that names
can be ambiguous (“John Smith”), all of our participants
found at least some information about themselves on the
Internet, and they disagreed or strongly disagreed with the
availability of about one fourth of this information.
Paper Structure: The next section reviews related work.
Section III describes our study methodology. The study is
presented in Section IV, followed by a discussion of the
study results in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper.
An extended version of this paper that includes more
analyses and discussions is available as a technical report [2].
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we explain the privacy paradox, we outline
studies on Internet privacy in different use cases, and we
discuss privacy perception and user categories.
Privacy Paradox: Our survey is motivated by the
privacy paradox [3]: This paradox means that the attitude
towards privacy and the daily behavior of individuals is
inconsistent in many cases. For example, a study about
anonymous and personalized gift cards [4] shows that people
tend to assign a high price to the protection of a certain
information, but in fact accept a much lower price to actually
sell the same information. In contrast, we want to ﬁnd out
if there is a discrepancy between the personal information
Digital Natives have explicitly published and the information
they would tolerate to be disclosed. The privacy paradox
can be modeled as a function of costs and beneﬁts, which
is maximized by each individual [5]. The costs include
the risks of identity theft, marketing, stalking or negative
reputation. Beneﬁts include social aspects like relationships,
collaborations, friendships or positive reputation in general.
Related to the privacy paradox is the privacy awareness,
i.e., the individual attention and motivation regarding the
whereabouts of personal data. Privacy awareness inﬂuences
individual decisions about publishing data [6].
Studies on Internet Privacy: Comparative privacy stud-
ies consider different use cases on the Internet:
Social Networks A study on information disclosure in social
networks like Facebook or Myspace relates experience and
behavior of users to the amount of private information that is
disclosed [7]. Another study focuses on the privacy settings
that control which information from the personal proﬁle is
shown to others [8].
eCommerce Privacy studies on customer data in eCom-
merce focus on the relationship between privacy and sales.
A customer cannot observe if an online dealer follows the
privacy policy on the shopping web site. Thus, a study [9]
investigates the trust of the consumers in the willingness and
ability of the dealer to handle personal data with care.
Personalization Many commercial web sites generate cus-
tomer loyalty by personalization. This requires the customer
to reveal personal details. The tradeoff between personaliza-
tion and privacy is known as the online consumer’s dilemma,
which has been studied according to user value [10], trans-
parency and willingness [5], and other impact factors [5].
The studies show that users tend to reveal information
only if they see a direct use for it. For example, customers of
a web shop do not disclose religious information [11]. This
is important for our survey, because it shows that Internet
users do not publish information indiscriminately.
Privacy
Behavior
and
Privacy
Perception:
Sur-
veys [12] about privacy behavior investigate the relationship
between the perception of risks [13], e.g., identity theft, and
the use of privacy-enhancing technologies. The studies show
that the perception of privacy risks varies widely, but privacy
behavior has been comparable among all participants.
Categories of Users: We are interested in identifying
user groups that differ with respect to the personal informa-
tion available on the Internet. An email survey of Internet
users [14] has computed a score for privacy concerns on
the Internet from questions about typical situations, e.g.,
if an individual registers for a company web site when
receiving an unsolicited email about a new product. The
survey has identiﬁed the categories “unconcerned user”
(16%), “circumspect user” (38%), “wary user” (43%) and
“alarmed user” (3%). Studies that directly inquire the privacy
behavior from the users are prone to the privacy paradox.
Our study in turn looks at this problem from a different
perspective: we analyze personal information disclosed on
the Internet.
III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we compile concrete research questions
and we describe our study methodology.
A. Research Questions
To investigate the personal information that is available
on the Internet, we have come up with speciﬁc research
questions, as follows:
A1: Information characteristics
• How much personal information is available?
• How old is the information?
• Who has made the information available?
A2: Search characteristics
• Which search terms have yielded most information?
• How much does the search result depend on the search
engine?
A3: Impact on privacy
• Have our participants been surprised to ﬁnd a particular
piece of information?
• Had our participants given permission to upload the
information?
• How sensitive do the participants deem the information
they have found?
• Do the participants approve that this information is
available on the Internet?
• Who is able to ﬁnd which kind of information?
A4: Patterns and rules
• Do groups of individuals with different privacy percep-
tion and behavior exist?
B. Study Participants
We have tested our research questions on educated Digital
Natives, i.e., on people who have grown up with the Internet,
for two reasons. First, these individuals use the Internet fre-
quently, and they are aware of the social beneﬁts of sharing
personal information, e.g., to keep contact with friends and
relatives, or to ﬁnd individuals with similar interests and
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

attitudes. Second, Digital Natives can be assumed to be able
to develop strategies, e.g., using different pseudonyms and
email addresses for different purposes, to prevent someone
from learning personal details which are not for the eyes
of others. We have conducted our study with 65 German
undergraduate students of computer science. Since we had
announced an anonymous study and demographic data is a
quasi identiﬁer [15], we did not collect such information.
C. Study Procedure
We have conducted our study in three tranches with
different participants over a period of three years. In the
ﬁrst step of each tranche, we have described the purpose of
the study to our participants. Furthermore, we have handed
out a guideline how to search for personal details on the
Internet by using different search engines, and by reﬁning
the search term if a search returns only results that do not
have any relationship to the searcher.
In a second step, we have handed out a number of
identical questionnaires to each participant. We have guided
our participants to search for personal information, i.e.,
we have provided hints and support if necessary. We have
asked our participants to answer one questionnaire sheet
for each distinct search result, i.e., each answer sheet has
been obtained using a different set of search terms and/or
a different search engine. To avoid erroneous data, we have
told our participants to omit questions when they do not feel
comfortable to provide us with correct answers. Guideline
and questionnaire are available at [2].
D. Questionnaire
In this subsection, we brieﬂy introduce our questions. All
questionnaires contained the following questions:
Q1 Which search engine did you use?
Q2 Which search terms did you use?
Q3 Which people know the search terms used?
Q4 Does the search term itself contain private information?
Q5 Which kind of information is on display on the ﬁrst 20
hits of the search results?
Q6 How much information about yourself is displayed?
Q7 How old is the information found?
Q8 Who has uploaded the information?
Q9 Estimate the sensitivity of the information.
Q10 Do you approve that this information is available?
Three new questions have been asked in 2010 and 2011:
Q11 Have you been surprised to ﬁnd this information?
Q12 Did you allow that this information was published?
Q13 What is shown on the images in the search results?
Depending on the question, we had allowed predeﬁned
categories of answers, free-text or a ﬁve-point Likert scale.
We explain our questions in detail in the next section.
IV. STUDY
We have obtained 58 questionnaires from 10 participants
in 2009, 137 questionnaires from 21 participants in 2010
Question
Number
Q6
How much information about yourself is displayed?
123
Q9
Estimate the sensitivity of the information.
65
Q10
Do you approve that this information is available?
60
Q12
Did you allow that this information was published?
49
Q11
Were you surprised to ﬁnd this information?
44
Table I
TOP-5 OF THE QUESTIONS THAT HAVE REMAINED UNANSWERED
and 107 questionnaires from 34 participants in 2011. Thus,
65 participants provided us with 302 questionnaires, and
each questionnaire contains information about one distinct
search result. 152 questionnaires contained one or more
questions that have not been answered. 51 participants
always answered all questions on each questionnaire. Table I
shows the top-5 of questions that have not been answered,
and the number of questionnaires where the question has
been left unanswered. Note that Q11 and Q12 were not part
of questionnaires from 2009.
A1: Information Characteristics
How much personal information is available on the
Internet?: We have asked our participants to categorize the
information that was on display on the ﬁrst page of the
search results or within the ﬁrst 20 hits (Q5). We have
provided the following categories: “Memberships” means
that the search results indicate that the person concerned
is a member of an online community or a social network.
The class “Postings” refers to content generated by the
person, e.g., a product review on Amazon. “Photos” means
that the search result contains pictures showing or made
by the searcher. “Locations” refers to places related to
the searcher, e.g., the place of living. “Addresses” means
telephone numbers, email addresses, etc. “Hobbies” and
“Employment” indicates leisure and professional activities,
and “Friends” refers to information about social contacts.
For the years 2010 and 2011 we have also asked for the
content of images in the search results (Q13).
Figure 1.
Which and how much personal information is found?
Figure 1 shows that the majority of the textual information
available on the Internet refers to hobbies, followed by
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Year of the Study
2009
2010
2011
Minimal Age
0.97 (1.67)
1.19 (2.76)
1.54 (2.12)
Average Age
2.07 (1.60)
2.38 (1.85)
3.16 (2.13)
Maximal Age
3.18 (1.80)
3.91 (2.74)
4.65 (2.54)
Table II
AGE OF THE INFORMATION
Uploader
Myself
Friends
Colleagues
Unknown
Number
170
59
101
44
Percent
45%
16%
27%
12%
Table III
UPLOADER
employment, locations and memberships. The distribution of
the information categories found on images is similar to the
textual results. The information found is well balanced over
almost all categories we have provided. Only hobbies seem
to be over- and friends underrepresented. Besides our ques-
tionnaires, we asked our participants where this information
has come from. Important sources of information were
student-research papers (recall that our participants were
students), web sites of schools and sport clubs that publish
awards, placements and team lists, and private homepages.
How old is the information?: Since we were interested
to ﬁnd out if the information found might be out of date,
we have asked our participants to write down the range of
the age of the information displayed on the ﬁrst page of the
query result (Q7). Table II shows the minimal, average and
maximal age of the information found, together with the
standard deviation (in parentheses). The table shows that,
from year to year, the oldest information in the search result
gets older. We speculate that publishing personal information
regarding our participants at a large scale might have started
around 2007, e.g., as a result of online communities like
Facebook becoming more and more popular.
Who has made the information available?: From a
privacy perspective, it is different if the individual concerned
or someone else has uploaded the information. We have
asked our participants which category of people might have
been responsible for uploading (Q8). “Myself” means that
our study participant has uploaded the information she
has found. “Friends” subsumes friends, acquaintances and
relatives. “Colleagues” means that the information has been
uploaded with a relation to professional activities, e.g.,
education, employment or studying. Table III reveals that
most of the information our participants have found on
the Internet has been uploaded by themselves. Furthermore,
a lot of information has been uploaded from colleagues.
This observation complements Figure 1, which tells us
that “Employment” is the second most-frequent category of
information found. A small part of the information has been
uploaded by unknown parties.
A2: Search Characteristics
Which search terms have yielded the most informa-
tion?: Our participants have searched for personal details by
using various search terms. In particular, we have encour-
aged them to search for combinations of the following terms:
ﬁrst name, last name, parts of the postal address of their
home and workplace, employment details, email addresses
and login names used for instant messaging services or
online communities. Note that our participants have ﬁlled
out questionnaires only for combinations of search terms that
have returned at least some personal information. Thus, we
have not collected information about inconclusive searches.
Figure 2.
Search terms and information found
Figure 2 shows components of the search term together
with the category of information returned. The ﬁgure in-
dicates that search terms including at least a part of the
real name ﬁnd most personal details, i.e., user pseudonyms,
nicknames, login names etc. play a less important role.
However, knowing the login name of a person might be
helpful to obtain information related to hobbies, online
community memberships and online forum postings which
might not be associated with his or her real name.
How much does the search result depend on the search
engine?: Our participants were free to use various search
engines. To provide a starting point, we have suggested
Google.de (general purpose search), Images.Google.de (im-
age search), Yasni.de and 123People.com (person search).
Figure 3 shows which search engines have found which
information. In contrast to general-purpose engines, person-
search engines should produce more personal results, since
they are able to search for semantic information in structured
databases, e.g., address registers, indexes of social networks,
and in electronic market places like Amazon.com or eBay.
Thus, we have expected that person-search engines would be
heavily used during our study. However, we have observed
the opposite: Provided with the search term “ﬁrst name last
name” (cf. Figure 2), Google has found more information
than person-search engines. Only one participant did not
ﬁnd any personal information with Google, but with a
person-search engine. The search results of the person-
search engines Yasni and 123People were strikingly similar.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Figure 3.
Search engines and information found
A3: Privacy Issues
Have our participants been surprised to ﬁnd a partic-
ular piece of information?: To ﬁnd out if our participants
were able to control which personal information is shown
to others, we have asked them if they were surprised by the
availability of the information found (Q11). This question
was answered on 200 questionnaires. Figure 4 shows that, in
most cases, the participants found the information they had
expected. However, in 20% of all searches our participants
were at least surprised by the result, i.e., a signiﬁcant
share of information is available on the Internet without the
individuals concerned knowing about it.
Figure 4.
Surprise to ﬁnd an information
Had our participants given permission to upload the
information?: In 2010 we have asked if the information
our participants have found has been uploaded with their
permission (Q12). In 2011, we have reﬁned this question.
Now we have asked which share of the information has
been uploaded with permission. Our participants were asked
to regard information they have uploaded themselves as
“upload with permission”. We have obtained 99 answers
to this question in 2010, and 96 in 2011. Table IV shows
the results for both years. 15% to 20% of any information
found has been uploaded without consent of the individuals
concerned. The more detailed results from 2011 indicate
that approximately 50% of all searches returned at least
a few results where the data has been uploaded without
consent. These ﬁndings also correspond to Figure 4, where
our participants were at least surprised about 20% of the
information found.
Year
With Permission
Number
Percentage
2010
no
15
15%
yes
84
85%
2011
none
20
21%
few
4
4%
average
11
11%
many
13
14%
all
48
50%
Table IV
UPLOAD WITH PERMISSION
How sensitive do the participants deem the information
they have found?: In order to estimate the impact of the
information available, we have asked our participants about
the sensitivity of the information they have found (Q9). This
question was answered on 237 questionnaires. As Figure 5
shows, approximately one-ﬁfth of the information found was
deemed to be either private or secret, i.e., the participants
appraised a signiﬁcant impact on their privacy.
Figure 5.
How sensitive is the information?
Do the participants approve that this information is
available on the Internet?: As a follow-up question to the
last one, we have asked if our participants could tolerate
that the information found was on display on the Internet
(Q10). This question was answered on 228 questionnaires.
Since one-ﬁfth of the information has been uploaded without
permission, and the same share of information has an impact
on the privacy of the participants, we expect that our
participants disagree with the availability of at least one-
ﬁfth of the information.
Figure 6.
Agreement with availability
As Figure 6 points out, our participants disagree or
strongly disagree with the availability of one-fourth of the
information. We have calculated the empirical correlation
coefﬁcient between the sensitivity of the information (Q9)
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

and the approval of its availability (Q10) by regarding the
answers to these questions as interval-scaled variables. Both
variables are correlated; the correlation coefﬁcient is 0.78.
This means that in many (but not in all) cases a participant
who thinks that an information is sensitive does not want
this information published on the Internet.
Who is able to ﬁnd which kind of information?: Since
the information found depends on the search term, it is
important to know who would be able to ﬁnd which kind
of information, i.e., who knows which search term. For
example, we know from personal observations that many
people do not tell vague acquaintances details about their
employment or their place of living, which would enable
them to ﬁnd some information (cf. Figure 2). Figure 7 shows
the search terms used together with the categories of people
who know these terms. The ﬁgure shows that ﬁrst name and
last name are generally known to many categories of people.
Locations, employment details, login names and other kinds
of identifying information are known to much fewer people.
Furthermore, the ﬁgure tells us that our participants have
shared email addresses and login information with more
friends and acquaintances than relatives or other people. We
see this as an indication to prevent people like parents or
colleagues from learning some information.
Figure 7.
Who knows which search term?
A4: Patterns and Rules
Do groups of individuals with different privacy percep-
tion and behavior exist?: In order to design appropriate
privacy mechanisms, it is important to identify groups of
people with similar attitudes towards personal information
on the Internet. Considering that participants have returned
different numbers of questionnaires, we have decided for a
two-stage procedure: First we apply a clustering approach on
all questionnaires. In the next stage, we assign people to each
cluster. In particular, we derive a feature vector from each
of our 302 questionnaires. The feature vector models the
answers of questions about search terms, privacy attitudes
and the amount of information available (Q2, Q4, Q6, Q9,
Q10). We have regarded the answers as interval-scaled fea-
tures where unanswered questions are an additional interval.
Since it allows us to inspect clustering results of varying
size, we have applied a hierarchical clustering approach.
In detail, we have used between-group linkage [16] that
starts with one cluster for each feature vector and iteratively
combines two clusters with the smallest average distance
between all group members in each step. We have used the
square Euclidean distance. Due to the hierarchical clustering
approach, all questionnaires will be assigned to a cluster.
Finally, we have assigned a participant to a cluster if all but
at most one questionnaire are a member of the same cluster.
We have manually interpreted cluster sets from 10 to
two clusters. According to our interpretation, the most
meaningful set consists of four clusters:
Cluster 1: Restrained Publishing This group (105 ques-
tionnaires, 18 participants) has found only little information
on the Internet, and has not found anything that would
have had a severe impact on their privacy: From a privacy
perspective, all search results were deemed harmless. The
data available has been published with the consent of the
individuals. We conclude that this group of people controls
very well which information is published on the Internet.
Cluster 2: Incomplete Questionnaires The second group
(103 questionnaires, 6 participants) has returned question-
naires that have been ﬁlled out incompletely. Because of the
anonymity of the study itself, we could not ask the partic-
ipants for further explanations. We have spent much effort
in supervising our participants, and we suppose that they
have understood the questionnaire. However, the participants
might have found nothing about themselves on the Internet,
or they might not have wanted to disclose their results.
Cluster 3: Surprised Individuals from the third group
(62 questionnaires, 8 participants) have been negatively
surprised about the kind and the extent of personal infor-
mation they have found about themselves on the Internet.
The information has been published without consent of the
individuals, or they have published the information without
remembering that the data would be available for anybody
later on. We assume that this group is less careful in
managing their personal data than the ﬁrst group.
Cluster 4: Generous Publishing This group (32 question-
naires, 3 participants) did ﬁnd a lot of information about
themselves, but does not see this as a problem. The members
of this group were not surprised about the kind and extent
of the information available. We conclude that this group
has a less restrained attitude towards publishing personal
information, but manages very well which information may
be available to others.
The clustering indicates that many of today’s Digital
Natives control very well which personal information is
published on the Internet. Only eight participants (Cluster 3)
were negatively surprised about most search results.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

V. DISCUSSION
We were surprised to see that the personal information
found on the Internet is well balanced over almost all
categories we have provided. Only hobbies seem to be over-
and friends underrepresented (cf. Figure 1). Furthermore, we
were surprised to see that our participants found nothing
unexpected in about 80% of all searches (cf. Figure 4), at
least nothing they would deem problematic from a privacy
perspective. Nevertheless, we have observed that a certain
fraction of information has been uploaded by unknown
people and without consent and knowledge of the individuals
concerned. Our participants also disagree with the general
availability and traceability of some information on the In-
ternet (cf. Figure 6). Furthermore, we have observed that the
privacy paradox holds, but to a limited extent: Although most
information has been uploaded either by or with consent of
the study participant, they disagree with the availability on
the Internet of only one fourth of the information.
VI. CONCLUSION
Due to the advent of social networking sites on the
Internet it has become increasingly tempting for individuals
to disclose personal details. The potential for misuse of such
information is high. To facilitate the design and realization
of future privacy approaches, it is important to know the
extent and the characteristics of personal data available on
the Internet. In this article we have studied which personal
information Digital Natives can ﬁnd about themselves on
the Internet. In particular, we have guided 65 undergraduate
students of computer science to search for personal infor-
mation. We have studied the inﬂuence of the search engine
on the search result, and we have inquired the impact of
personal information publicly available on the privacy of
the individuals concerned.
As one result, we have gained evidence that Digital Na-
tives are well-adapted to the privacy problems of the Internet.
Our explorative study has shown that privacy perception and
privacy behavior is different from individual to individual.
In particular, we have observed that different search terms
return different results, but different search terms are also
known to different people. We interpret this as a trend
towards managing different digital identities in order to stay
in contact with different persons. It might be an interesting
topic of research to design privacy approaches that support
different digital identities.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We like to thank Victoria Kayser for her data analyses.
REFERENCES
[1] D. M. Boyd and N. B. Ellison, “Social Network Sites:
Deﬁnition, History, and Scholarship,” Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, vol. 13, no. 1, 2007.
[2] E. Buchmann and K. Böhm, “How Much do Digital
Natives Disclose on the Internet – a Privacy Study,” in
Karlsruhe Reports in Informatics 2012/15, ISSN 2190-4782,
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://digbib.ubka.uni-karlsruhe.de/volltexte/1000029029
[3] P. Norberg et al., “The Privacy Paradox: Personal Information
Disclosure Intentions versus Behaviors,” Journal of Consumer
Affairs, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 100–126, 2007.
[4] A. Acquisti, L. John, and G. Loewenstein, “What is Privacy
Worth?” in Proceedings of the 21th Workshop on Information
Systems and Economics (WISE’09), 2009.
[5] N. F. Awad and M. S. Krishnan, “The Personalization
Privacy Paradox: An Empirical Evaluation of Information
Transparency and the Willingeness to be Proﬁled Online for
Personalization,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 30, 2006.
[6] S. Pötzsch, Privacy Awareness: A Means to Solve the Privacy
Paradox?, ser. IFIP Advances in Information and Communi-
cation Technology, 2009, vol. 298, pp. 226–236.
[7] C. Fuchs, “StudiVZ: Social Networking in the Surveillance
Society,” Ethics and Information Technology, vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 171–185, 2010.
[8] K. Lewis, J. Kaufman, and N. Christakis, “The Taste for
Privacy: An Analysis of College Student Privacy Settings in
an Online Social Network,” Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 79–100, 2008.
[9] J.-Y. Son and S. S. Kim, “Internet Users Information
Privacy-Protective Responses: a Taxonomy and a Nomologi-
cal Model,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 503–529, 2008.
[10] R. K. Chellappa and R. G.Sin, “Personalization versus Pri-
vacy: An Empirical Examination of the Online Consumer’s
Dilemma,” Information Technology and Management, vol. 6,
pp. 181–202, 2005.
[11] Universität
St.
Gallen,
“Abschlussbericht
des
Projekts
Sicherheit vs. Privatheit - Vertrauensfaktoren im Umgang
mit Daten und Konsequenzen für die digitale Identität,”
http://isprat.net/isprat-projekte, 2011.
[12] M. Kurt, “Determination of in Internet Privacy Behaviours of
Students,” Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 9,
no. 0, pp. 1244 – 1250, 2010.
[13] I. Oomen and R. Leenes, Privacy Risk Perceptions and Pri-
vacy Protection Strategies, ser. IFIP International Federation
for Information Processing, 2008, vol. 261, pp. 121–138.
[14] K. B. Sheehan, “Toward a Typology of Internet Users and
Online Privacy Concerns,” The Information Society, vol.
18:21/32, 2002.
[15] L. Sweeney, “k-Anonymity: A Model for Protecting Pri-
vacy,” International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and
Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 557–570, 2002.
[16] L. Rokach, “A Survey of Clustering Algorithms,” in The
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Handbook, 2nd ed.,
L. Rokach and O. Maimon, Eds., 2010, ch. 14, pp. 269–298.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

