Managing Role Identities on Various Social Network Sites 
Analysis of the Use of Social Network Sites by Latvian Youth 
Velta Skolmeistere 
Faculty of Social Sciences 
University of Latvia 
Riga, Latvia 
email: velta.sk@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Since the beginning of the Web 2.0 era, social 
network sites have been an important method of self-
presentation in the digital environment. Although the result of 
self-presentation is often reduced to a distinct digital identity, it 
can also be seen as a reflection of the complexity of the 
individual’s self, which includes various role identities one can 
possess. What makes social network sites as a research field 
interesting is the potential of context-collapse. In opposition to 
real life, where one can organize different flows of behavior for 
different audiences and situations of role identity activation, 
this environment exposes the individual to a combination of 
various audiences, thus, it is the individual's choice to select 
which role identities will be presented. This article offers a 
pilot research that focuses on the habits of presenting role 
identities on various social network sites, aiming to understand 
which role identities (for example, being a student, an 
employee, a friend, etc.) are more likely to be presented on 
which of the most popular social network sites (Facebook, 
Instagram, Snapchat). The methodology includes an assisted 
paper-based survey (n = 76, first-year college students in 
Latvia), consisting of production task and Likert scale 
statements. The results offer an evaluation of the potential of 
the tested methodology and give insight into some differences 
between various social network sites in the context of role 
identity presentation, as well as help to understand some of the 
challenges of self-presentations that are perceived by the youth 
when trying to take care of their digital self. 
Keywords-role identities; self-presentation; social network 
sites; youth. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent times, society has become much more complex; 
people tend to get involved in various activities and take on 
many status roles, therefore the number of life decisions to 
be made also continues to increase [1]. As education is 
available at various stages of life, multiple workplaces can be 
combined, and people can network while pursuing a 
common hobby or volunteering project. The increasing 
complexity of the society is tightly connected to the 
development of the social network culture where people 
maintain a few long-lasting ties and many accidental or 
temporary ties [2]. 
At the same time, the social media era has given a 
platform to social network sites that help individuals to 
construct their selves in the digital environments, as well as 
to build virtual connections with people significant to them 
[3]. 
The theoretical approach of symbolic interactionism 
states that the individual chooses which part of self to 
communicate depending on the conversational partner [4] or 
the public; also, the performance of one’s role depends on 
the presence of one’s counter-part [5]. 
Yet, the communication environment defined by the use 
of social network sites makes the picture more complicated, 
as it is often described by using the term context-collapse 
[6], meaning that the social and physical borders of various 
groups of people disappear, thus the individual is exposed to 
an unknown audience, causing overlap of different social 
circles. At the same time, people, especially youth, often use 
more than one social network site; this leads to the fact that 
there are multiple facets of self presented on social network 
sites. 
Taking into account the above-mentioned points, this 
paper advances the following research questions: 
1. Which role identities are more likely to be 
presented on which social network sites (Facebook, 
Instagram, Snapchat)? 
2. How do the youth perceive the presentation of role 
identities, maintaining a coherent image and 
avoiding contradictions between the meanings 
implied by the various roles? 
3. How is the view of the youth influenced by the 
multiplicity of the social network sites they use? 
This being a pilot research, the sample consists of 76 
first-year college students in Latvia, all being 18 – 20 years 
old. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 
2, the theoretical background of the research is described, 
which consists of the ideas of symbolic interactionism 
regarding self and identities, as well as differing approaches 
on separating digital self from real-life self. Section 3 offers 
an outline of the methodology used. Section 4 presents the 
most important findings of the pilot research. In section 5, 
the conclusion is given, as well as the limitations, and the 
advantages of the current research are evaluated. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
The approach chosen for the paper is based on symbolic 
interactionism (opting for its structural direction, instead of 
the traditional one), as well as key insights about digital self 
and self-presentation on social network sites. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

A. Multiplicity of Self and Role Identities 
Symbolic interactionism sprung from the ideas of G. H. 
Mead [4], who spoke of self as a social structure born in 
social experience and reflected in communication. Although 
the meanings are conveyed through communication and 
conversation, later on, it can be a mere cognitive process, as 
the individual already has ideas about how he/she is 
perceived. What Mead also stated was that, in the 
communication, the individual does not reflect all of self, but 
rather a part of self - the aspect of the self that is relevant to 
the context. 
Being affiliated to a group was defined by G. Simmel [7] 
not only as a component for the formation of an objective 
group, but also a forming aspect of one’s personality, as each 
individual realized the participation in a group in a unique 
way; thus, the combination of multiple groups one is 
affiliated with “creates in a turn a new subjective element”. 
The idea of the role as a basis for an identity (a subunit of 
a multifaceted self [5]) was taken up by G. J. McCall and J. 
L. Simmons, who described role-identity as an imaginative 
view of a person of oneself that is based on what one thinks 
of oneself as an occupant of a specific position [8]. 
Regarding the specific meanings, each role identity includes 
idiosyncratic 
and 
conventional 
meanings, 
thus, 
the 
individual, on one hand, follows some of the societal norms, 
and, on the other hand, creates one’s own performance of the 
role. 
B. Digital Self and Presentation of Identities on Social 
Network Sites 
The approaches on how to differentiate the digital self (or 
identity) from the “real-life” self have changed over time, as 
the role of social media in everyday life has increased and 
the meanings of both environments almost completely 
overlap. Yet, it is important to mention one of the first 
explanations of identity in cyberspace, given by S. Turkle. 
She used a metaphor of windows to emphasize that any 
opened site can offer a possibility of self-transformation and 
development of a new self, which is a great alternative to 
having just one real-life self [9]. However, when keeping in 
mind the complex personality one has described in the 
previous sub-section, it might be more rational to stick to the 
view of S. Zhao who used the term “digital self” to address 
the self, expressed in the digital environment, yet, which is 
not considered as a different part of a person, rather a 
dimension of communication [10]. 
All that being said, when an individual acknowledges the 
presence of various social groups in social network sites, 
he/she must make a decision (even if unconscious) of which 
role identities to present and fulfill in each of the sites, at the 
same 
time 
working 
his/her 
way 
through 
possible 
discrepancies. This problem is the focus of the paper. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The research uses a survey conducted in person. Because 
of the complexity of questionnaire design, in person 
communication was needed. The sample consists of 76 first-
year college students (18 – 20 years old). 
The first part of the survey consists of a production task – 
a table where each person was asked to fill in the roles he/she 
considered to possess and all of the social network sites 
he/she used on a regular basis. Then, each person was asked 
to select which identity they considered they presented on 
each of the social network sites; also, each person was asked 
to evaluate how important each of the identities was (using a 
scale from 1 to 10). 
The second part of the survey included 24 statements 
about the process of maintaining a coherent image on social 
network sites to be evaluated using a Likert Scale. Among 
them, there were statements about maintaining a united 
image, being aware of contradictions between various roles, 
trying to present most of the roles one possesses, as well as 
whether or not one reflects about the possible reactions of 
various audiences, etc. 
IV. 
EARLY RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
When considering the differences between various social 
network sites, some peculiarities could be observed. 
Facebook was most likely to be used for presenting the 
student role (92% of students using it considered this identity 
as presented there; whereas, for Instagram it was 64% and 
for Snapchat – 67%), as well as for professional, volunteer, 
child and relative identity. Yet, speaking about professional 
identity, it could be observed that when a person considered 
this identity to be important, he/she was more likely to 
present it on Facebook. In turn, if the importance of the role 
was evaluated as low, he/she was more likely to present it on 
both Instagram and Snapchat. This fact could be interpreted 
as willingness to complain about having a boring work or 
other similar messages to peers, instead of presenting oneself 
in a professional context (here, it should be mentioned that 
very 
few 
respondents 
claimed 
to 
use 
LinkedIn). 
Consequently, the representation of a specific role may rely 
on one’s relationship with the role or attitude toward its 
realization. 
Also, there were some significant correlations between 
some of the statements and the facts drawn from the 
production task. For example, people who tended to agree 
with the statement “It is complicated to take care of one’s 
image in the digital environment” were also more likely to 
provide a greater number of various social network sites they 
used for self-presentations (.308; sig.=.007; here and further 
the Spearman correlation coefficient is used, where the first 
number is the correlation coefficient, while the second 
number describes the significance level – the smaller, the 
more significant), and to agree with the statement “Some of 
the roles I possess restrict what I can / want to post on social 
network sites” (.284; sig.=.011). It was also visible that more 
youth (52%) tended to agree with a statement that they feel 
worried about reactions to their content by people they did 
not want to show the content to, yet, fewer of them (37%) 
were worried that there were strangers who saw the content. 
This goes together with the view of D. Boyd [6], who 
emphasized that the youth see privacy as being protected 
from being observed by people they know (mostly 
authorities, for instance, parents or teachers), meanwhile 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

striving for publicity and being seen by broader audience of 
people they do not know. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The correlations help to understand that the maintenance 
of a coherent digital self is considered as a more complex 
task when more role identities and more social network sites 
are involved, as well as when this process is rather conscious 
(people tend to reflect about it).  
However, the stage of life when one starts to attend a 
college is also a period when the set of role identities is not 
stable yet and a lot of transformation is experienced. 
Although these youth have more potential role identities than 
previously, during the school years, adults could have a 
wider range of role identities and a more complex approach 
to control their presentation. Having said that, a broader 
sample could bring many interesting findings, yet, the 
interpretation of the current results makes it clear that, in 
order to explore the process that regards identities, an 
integration of qualitative methods would be helpful to assign 
meaning to the various approaches of the individuals 
revealed by the quantitative data. Analysis of the content 
posted by the individuals to present each of the roles also 
could be of interest to gain more concrete insights. 
Having that said, the pilot research aims to find a way to 
analyze the interaction and presentation of all the role 
identities one possesses, rather than focusing on some 
distinct ones. The data gathered serves as first insight in the 
exploration of the topic and can be used to understand the 
way the youth treat their digital self, possession of various 
roles, and being aware of the social network audience.  
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by the Advanced Social and 
Political Research Institute project “The social aspects of 
the interaction between individuals and technologies” (Riga, 
Latvia; Project No. lzp-2018/2-0260). 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. C. Cuff, W. W. Sharrock, and D. W. Francis, “Perspectives in 
Sociology,” London: Routledge, pp. 194, 2005. 
[2] A. Pescosolido and B. Rubin, “The Web of Group Affiliations 
Revisited: Social Life, Postmodernism, and Sociology,” American 
Sociological Review, vol. 65, pp. 52 – 76, 2000. Available from: 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2657289 [Retrieved: September, 2020] 
[3] B. Light, “Disconnecting with Social Networking Sites,” Hampshire: 
Plagrave Macmillan, pp. 12 – 13, 2014. 
[4] G. H. Mead, “Mind, Self and Society from the Standpoint of a Social 
Behaviorist,” Chicago, IL: University of Chicago, 1934/1967. 
[5] S. Stryker, “Symbolic Interactionism: A Social Structural Version,” 
Caldwell, NJ: The Blackburn Press, 1980. 
[6] D. Booyd, “It’s Complicated: The Scoail Lives of Networked Teens,” 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Pres, 2014. 
[7] G. Simmel, “Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliation,” Glencoe, 
IL: The Free Press, pp. 140 – 141, 1955. 
[8] G. J. McCall and J. L. Simmons, “Identities and Interactions: An 
Examination of Human Associations in Everyday Life,” New York, 
NY: The Free Press, pp. 57, 1966/1978. 
[9] S. Turkle, “Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet,” 
New York, NY: Simon & Shuster Paperbacks, pp. 192, 1995. 
[10] S. Zhao, “The Digital Self: Through the Looking Glass of 
Telecopresent Others,” Symbolic Interaction, vol. 28, pp. 387 – 405. 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1525/si.2005.28.3.387 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

