Towards a Social Media Research Methodology: Defining Approaches and Ethical 
Concerns 
James Baldwin, 
Department of Computing, 
 C3RI, Sheffield Hallam University,  
Sheffield, United Kingdom, 
email: j.baldwin@shu.ac.uk 
Dr Teresa Brunsdon &  
Dr Jotham Gaudoin, 
Department of Engineering and 
Mathematics,  Sheffield Hallam 
University, United Kingdom 
email: t.m.brunsdon@shu.ac.uk 
j.gaudoin@shu.ac.uk 
Dr Laurence Hirsch, 
Department of Computing, 
 Sheffield Hallam University,   
United Kingdom 
email: l.hirsch@shu.ac.uk 
Abstract— 
Social 
media 
research 
and 
suitable 
methodologies and ethical approaches for analysing social 
media data are still emerging. This paper presents a 
methodology for projects using social media data alongside 
consideration of ethics within the social media analysis 
context. Earlier stages of the methodology will be expanded 
to develop a strategy for examining ethics alongside 
consideration of the relevant analysis techniques that may be 
employed.  This will provide a comprehensive methodology 
that will provide a springboard for the clear and ethically 
sound scrutiny of social media data.  We aim to present the 
challenges of using social media data, while the inclusion of 
ethical and legal aspects in this paper aim to draw 
researchers' attention to the peculiarity issues involved with 
dealing with social media data. 
Keywords—social media; methodology; strategy; methods; 
ethics; legal; lifecycle. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Since 2011, interest has grown in social media from 
both the academic and industrial perspectives [1].  For 
example, Law Enforcement Agencies substantially 
increased their usage of social media data, with policy 
changes being implemented to adapt to social media and 
its possible uses after the 2011 London riots occurred 
[2][3].  This interest has to some extent been driven by the 
rapid increase in usage of social media networks and of 
internet accessibility; the internet was used daily or almost 
daily by 82% (41.8 million) of UK adults, compared with 
78% (39.3 million) in 2015 and 35% (16.2 million) in 
2006 [4].  Organisations now have social media teams to 
monitor events and actively release information, quickly 
reacting to situations of widespread interest [1]. A great 
deal of research both has helped to shape the future of 
social media research, but this remains in its infancy.  
Examples of this inside the UK include the Government 
Social Researchers [1], a research team within the UK 
government "ensuring ministers and policy makers have 
the data to understand social issues [5] and evaluating the 
policy responses to them", the Economic and Social 
Research Council, Ipsos MORI [6] and the Centre for 
Analysis of Social Media - part of a cross-party charity-
run think tank DEMOS [7]. Outside the UK there are such 
things the Big Boulder Initiative [8] located in the United 
States, which markets itself as the “first trade association 
for the social data industry” and European Citizen Science 
Association in Europe that is looks to "connect citizens 
and science through fostering active participation" 
whether that is using social media or other platforms [9]. 
The Big Data characteristics of social media data as 
regards their volume, velocity and scope has created a 
need for methodological innovations that are suited 
towards investigating social media data and their overall 
lifecycle and which apply both qualitative and quantitative 
approaches [10].  Quantitative methods seem to be the 
most popular in research to date, but analyses are certainly 
not restricted to this approach [10].  For example, new 
approaches in qualitative research are being formed in 
areas ranging from narrative analysis, to so-called thick
data that document human behaviour and the context of 
that behaviour, to the analysis of non-verbal data such as 
sound and images, to combining and linking data - both 
text and interactions - from different platforms across 
times and contexts. Given this vast, expanding area of 
research, scholars will need to acquire new skills to 
explore, analyse and visualise their findings and situate 
them into their appropriate contexts [10], and will also 
need to be able to make appropriate ethical considerations 
for their research.  
There is a need for further development of a clear 
methodology drawing together the already extant building 
blocks of good practice displayed both in researchers' 
papers [11] and by organisations, such as Canadian’s 
government "Social Media Data Stewardship" (SMDS) 
project, that reduce the bias and flaws in social media data 
analysis. SMDS focuses on the data management 
processes applied in the context of using social media 
data. In the methodology section, we will discuss 
difficulties that are encountered when trying to find a 
social media lifecycle that has a clear defined strategy 
from start to finish, as without a clear approach to follow, 
such research can be a difficult experience for scholars 
embarking on work in this field. 
The ethical perspective of extracting and collecting 
social media data in particular demands further 
consideration [10]. This is very important as it ensures the 
public’s data are protected and are represented in a fair 
and respectful manner, whereby a tweet or post is not 
been taken out of context or used inappropriately. Ethics 
must be taken into consideration when going through each 
stage of the methodological framework.  This paper will 
focus on the social media research methodology process, 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

while simultaneously considering the relevant ethical 
concerns. 
The sections to be covered in this paper will be in 
accordance with the social media project lifecycle 
presented in Section 2. This will look to build upon 
existing methodological frameworks for social media 
research and, in particular, the GSR's social media 
lifecycle. This lifecycle was not originally designed for 
research purposes, and so must be modified to be fit for 
such a purpose, but it will be seen that it provides us with 
a good starting point from which to begin.  Other 
approaches will also be considered and these will be 
merged in order to create a hybridised lifecycle that forms 
the essence of the methodology presented here.  In 
Section 3, we will discuss the ethical concerns that can 
impact the social media research strategy and its lifecycle. 
In Section 4, conclusions will be drawn from the paper.   
II.
METHODOLOGY
Section 2 discusses a series of social media research 
strategies and how they are integrated into our social 
media lifecycle. 
A. Social Media Research Strategy 
Upon reviewing a wide range of papers, it was noted 
[11]-[13] that some provided an excellent, thorough 
description of the steps they took in their research.  
However, it was often found that the initial stages of the 
research that would be needed for a complete addressing 
of any research question were poorly defined.  The 
available literature tends to be project specific in its 
approach and is therefore not immediately suitable for 
generalisation to other research - not unexpected, given 
that social media research methodology is a topic still in 
its infancy.  From an early researcher’s standpoint in 
particular, it may be difficult to know where to start in the 
area and to identify what decisions need to be taken to 
form a social media methodology for the project in 
question.   
The research community and other organisations are 
trying to come up with better ways to express their social 
media strategies, such as the SMDS project, which 
“focuses on studying practices behind and attitudes 
towards the collection, storage, use, reuse, analysis, 
publishing and preservation of social media data” [14]. 
SMDS has produced a social media data process that aims 
to clarify for researchers the layout and order of each phase 
that may be required in a social media data project. SMDS 
focuses on the data management process of social media 
data and aims to help researchers to consider their attitudes 
towards the data they wish to work with [14]. What we 
aim to do in this paper is to identify a complete set of 
stages for any social media research project lifecycle to 
follow, including within this the SMDS insights into data 
management, as these touch on highly pertinent points 
within the overall process.  
Having found the nascent SMDS data management 
paradigm, we continued the search for a full social media 
project lifecycle.  While this proved impossible to source 
as no such lifecycle yet exists, we did encounter a 
somewhat developed social media research project 
lifecycle created by the UK Government Social Research 
(GSR) service.  The GSR based its lifecycle on the 
Cabinet Office framework for data science projects, as it 
had “numerous parallels here” [1, p8].  This lifecycle has 
been tested on two social media projects within 
Government, namely, using Twitter to predict cases of 
Norovirus and assessing the experiences of the 20th
Commonwealth games held in Glasgow, producing 
reports on the analysis of broadcast and online coverage. 
There is no publically available information on whether or 
not this social media lifecycle was in fact a success. 
However, GSR produced outcomes that may be a measure 
for potential successes. For example, the Commonwealth 
games on Twitter were in the top 10 highest sporting 
event hashtags of the year, generating a highly positive 
contribution to Scotland and Glasgow both internationally 
and within the rest of the UK [15].  Furthermore, GSR 
identified that between 14/06/14 to 06/08/14, there were 
3.2 million mentions of the Commonwealth Games on 
social media in the English language. There were other 
positive outcomes, but what this allows GSR to do is to 
identify where future improvements can be made with the 
organisers in raising the profile for relevant cities and 
events [1] [15].  In the sequel, we shall aim to integrate 
aspects of the GSR service lifecycle and the SMDS data 
management process alongside our own insights into the 
social media project lifecycle. 
B. Our integrated social media project lifecycle 
  The GSR social media project lifecycle [1] consists 
of seven stages: Stage 1: Rationale – Business/Citizen 
Need, Stage 2: Data, Stage 3: Tools and Output, Stage 4: 
Research 
Phase, 
Stage 
5: 
Implementation/Publication/Action, Stage 6: Evaluation 
and finally Stage 7: Business as Usual.  While this is a 
useful basic framework that will help to guide researchers 
through their social media projects, it still requires further 
development and refinement as the considerations 
outlined at each stage are given in little detail.  
Furthermore, this lifecycle is applied in a commercial and 
governmental context, which can make it difficult to know 
what to do at each step from a research perspective. 
Nevertheless, we have chosen to adopt this framework as 
a starting point as it proved itself helpful in structuring our 
own initial social media research project. The research we 
are conducting aims to enhance the analysis of social 
media in the context of public (dis-)order events.  This 
investigates how social media data are stored (big data 
issues), collected, analysed (text mining and sentiment 
analysis) and then disseminated (to the police, to help 
predict when disorder may occur). This will form part of 
the creation of a model to analyse social media data to try 
to predict the escalation of such events and our research is 
presently ongoing. We will adapt the GSR lifecycle to suit 
the needs, aims and goals of research projects (as opposed 
to governmental projects), and a diagram showing the 
relevant adaptations is displayed in Figure 1.   
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Figure 1. Social media research project lifecycle  
The steps in the lifecycle are explained below. We will 
outline the purpose of each step and show where 
modifications have been made to the GSR lifecycle. The 
lifecycle explained below will be informed by the pilot 
study we conducted, which has involved analysing 
Twitter data around the time of the Baltimore riots, with 
the aim of developing models to identify potential riots 
before they occur.   
1) In [1], stage 1 (Rationale – Business/ Citizen 
Need) is described as a need to think about social 
media’s attributes (e.g. speed, cost, real-time 
production).  On the basis of these attributes, there 
are suggestions for the business or citizen’s need to 
be based on: “using insight to deliver a more 
timely service to the citizen with fewer resources 
through the support of social media analysis than 
would have been possible with traditional means.”
[1, p9].  To measure if the project is delivering a 
timely and resource efficient service to the citizen 
can be difficult to determine in some cases without 
actually conducting the project.  A rationale for the 
research must be established, as without this the 
project will likely lack focus and be too broad, 
weakening any results or insights obtained. This 
means that valuable resource that could potentially 
be better utilised elsewhere is being wasted. While 
nothing new has been added to this section 
compared to the GSR lifecycle, we have placed 
into the appropriate research context. This stage in 
our process is important, as one must have a 
question to drive the collection and analysis of data 
in research and, as outlined by [10], one should not 
let the data drive the researcher. Without a suitable 
research question, the project would lack purpose. 
The rationale for the project we carried is outlined 
above. 
2) Stage 2 is a new step which has been introduced 
called “Selection of Potential Method(s)s”. This 
step is required to help adapt this commercial 
lifecycle 
into 
a 
research 
context 
where 
consideration must be given as to which methods 
(for example, case study or archival research) will 
be applied in the research process.  This must be 
decided early on in the process, so that the 
following stages can take this into account when 
making relevant decisions in the latter phases of 
the lifecycle.  If this step is not undertaken 
explicitly in a research context then results may be 
obtained that are of a particular nature, without 
account having been taken of the fact that the 
nature of the methods employed is inextricably 
linked with one’s research outputs.  This may 
cause a loss of momentum in the stages ahead, 
where special account would have to be made for 
the method or methods employed.  For our 
particular research, we selected a case study-based 
approach to allow us to work with particular 
disorder events immediately and then attempt to 
generalise these to the wider public order context. 
3) "Data" is now stage 3 of the lifecycle. In [1, p9] it 
is emphasised that “The primary purpose of this 
data is not for research so consideration should be 
given to representativeness, robustness and 
ethics.” This statement is confusing, as the same 
level of rigour would apply in a research context. 
In this section, the researcher must justify the 
datasets to be used in the project and examine any 
necessary ethical considerations regarding the use 
of the social media data in question in their 
research. The original purpose of this section 
remains the same as in the original GSR lifecycle. 
This phase considers which dataset(s) may be 
explored to answer the research questions of the 
project. There is extra emphasis on selecting the 
correct data as cost may well be an issue here, 
more so than for a government entity, depending 
on the size of dataset required for the research, 
given the finite nature of research grants in 
particular. This step is also useful in providing 
time to think carefully about the selection of data-
sets. If the data are chosen without due care then 
this will impact the cleaning, analysis and output 
of the project, though given the emerging nature of 
social media technology, it can of course be 
difficult to fully understand the range of data and 
metadata that are available before one already has 
a sample to hand.  To that end, collection of a 
small pre-sample of data can also be a useful initial 
substage here.  The dataset used for the pilot study 
is based on collecting live data from the 2015 
Baltimore riots, USA.  This pilot study will help to 
inform the collection of further datasets, on which 
the pre-processing and data manipulation scripts 
developed for the Baltimore data can be re-run.  
4) Stage 4, “Tools and Outputs” is named the same as 
in the original GSR lifecycle.  In this phase, the 
use of specialised social media tools can help to 
make cleaning and analysis of the collected data 
easier for researchers. Furthermore, social media 
data may require manipulation to “render it useful 
in a social research setting” [1, p9].  The outputs 
from analysis of these data can range from 
traditional reports showing present findings to 
predictive models designed to solve real time 
problems.  GSR's process for this step is kept, but 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

in addition to this, the researcher must outline their 
data collection strategy to show how relevant data 
in relation to any research questions will be 
obtained, as well as considering how those data 
will be stored and whether single or multiple 
platforms are to be used as this will have an effect 
on the tools chosen. There are a plethora of tools 
available for data acquisition, processing and 
analysis and the tools to be used must be selected 
with care to ensure that they are both suitably 
secure and efficacious for the data in question, 
otherwise, time will be invested in tools that are 
not appropriate for large scale data retrieval (not 
all return the same metadata, for example), 
cleaning and/or analysis.  The tools selected will 
depend upon the platform from which data are to 
be extracted.  In our case, since we are dealing 
with Twitter data we chose NVivo NCapture to 
extract a live sample of data from the Baltimore 
riots and used R for data manipulation.  For the 
retrospective datasets that we collect in the future, 
we will instead be using DiscoverText for 
acquisition.  This tool is widely used in the 
research community because it provides access to 
one of the cheapest ways to retrieve a complete 
historical record from Twitter’s official provider 
GNIP.  Even though the extraction and analytical 
tools are being selected at this stage, the actual 
techniques for analysis will be investigated in stage 
5. 
5) Stage 5 was originally named “Research Phase” in 
the GSR lifecycle [1], rather than “Analysis”. 
Clearly, given that we are aiming to develop a full 
research lifecycle, the former name is no longer 
appropriate.  This step emphasises that care must 
be taken regarding the representativeness of data to 
mitigate any bias in the analysis. Lastly, “Care 
should be taken to ensure research generates a 
dataset of a size which can be handled by the 
subsequent analytics programs.” [1, p10].  This is 
an important aspect to consider, as the volume of 
data produced can be on a very large scale.  This 
could break the confines of some analytical 
programs' 
constraints. 
Other 
Big 
Data 
characteristics (namely: variety, veracity, velocity 
and virtue) and the type of techniques applied by 
the researcher can have an influence on the choice 
of analytical tool adopted to achieve their aim(s) 
[10].  The naming of this section has been selected 
to align with its focus on preparing the data for the 
analysis, helping to identify whether the chosen 
analytical tools need to be changed to handle the 
dataset(s) in question and to establish which 
techniques 
(in 
our 
case, 
change 
point 
identification, sentiment analysis and machine 
learning) should be applied to analyse the data to 
assist in responding to a research aim and 
answering 
relevant 
research 
questions. 
The 
selection of techniques to analyse the data is a 
complex process that is dependent on the 
investigators' level of experience of the techniques 
in question while also ensuring that they will suit 
the dataset(s) chosen.  For example, in our pilot 
study, 
the 
selection 
of 
sentiment 
analysis 
techniques for a newcomer to a developing field 
can be fraught with difficulties as different papers    
suggest different techniques to use and most do not 
provide a concrete path to understanding the basics 
before choosing what path to follow.  Social media 
analysis is a developing area and at present one 
does wonder if the techniques available are 
effective enough for any given specific domain, 
whereas in other fields techniques may well have 
been tried and tested over many years.  In our 
experience within the pilot study, this led to it 
taking a considerable length of time to make a 
decision, which is why it's appropriate for this 
consideration to have a stage of its own.  Another 
consideration to make at this stage is whether the 
researcher has the appropriate equipment to 
process Big Data and explore the intricacies of the 
dataset chosen using the desired tools.  For 
example, initially within our research, using the R 
language presented some issues when processing a 
large amount of data, as R Studio is single 
threaded. This meant the PC being used was 
inadequate and required an upgrade due to poor 
single threading performance.  An assessment must 
be made early on as to whether the PC or Cloud 
selection has the processing power to analyse the 
data in a reasonable amount of time (or indeed at 
all if there are memory considerations). 
6) Stage 6 was originally entitled “Implementation/ 
Publication/Action” and has been renamed to 
“Implementation” here.  In [1], it is originally 
emphasised that social media research is in its 
infant stages and that the likelihood is that the 
work being carried out will be exploratory.  Any 
successful “outcome or otherwise should be 
communicated” 
[1, 
p10] 
to 
the 
interested 
communities to build on this in future work, which 
is the same in business as in research.  To assist in 
these steps the researcher can include the good 
practice from the SMDS approach on “publishing” 
to 
“reuse/sharing” 
and 
“preservation” 
[14].  
Publication is one of the steps in this section as 
dissemination of research is clearly vital.  The 
GSR lifecycle emphasises successful outcomes, 
but as this is now named "Implementation", there 
is a new focus, more appropriate for research, on 
making 
sure 
the 
project 
requirements 
and 
specifications as previously outlined above are 
implemented in practice so as to achieve the aims 
of the project.  For example, in this step we 
extracted the data with NVivo NCapture, cleaned 
them and analysed them to detect the sentiment 
within each Tweet and identify significant changes 
of sentiment within the timeframe over which the 
data were collected by using R.  It was appropriate 
that this all took place within this phase, as one 
step flowed to the next with purpose and direction 
to contribute to the aim of the project.  In addition, 
to this, ethical consideration must be given further 
thought at this phase to how any data are shared 
and preserved, but this data management process 
will not be discussed in this paper, as we shall 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

focus on the legal and ethical considerations of 
social media data usage, which will look in 
particular at publication dilemmas. Publication is 
included in the last phase of the lifecycle instead as 
we must implement and (in particular) evaluate 
before we can publish within the research context. 
In our own context, had we attempted to include 
publication here alongside analysis, this stage 
would have become confused by the lack of 
evaluation.  Furthermore, given the paucity of the 
quality of social media data, we required additional 
focus on relevant cleaning of the data and 
attempting to consider publishing at the same time 
would have resulted in a loss of momentum.  
7) Stage 7 (Evaluation) is included in the lifecycle 
due to the immaturity of social media research 
compared with other more established research 
fields. In [1], there is a focus on the evaluation of 
exploring what value there is in social media 
research compared to traditional methods. It 
suggests that this stage will confirm whether not 
social media was specifically required “to respond 
to a business or citizen need” [1, p10].  This stage 
will remain the same as outlined in GSR’s lifecycle 
but with a rather different focus.  Where the GSR 
strategy considers whether or not there was value 
in the use of social media data, the researcher's 
focus will be on how effective the use of such data 
was in addressing the research aims and questions. 
A stage devoted to evaluation is important, as 
through evaluation we can identify whether our 
techniques have been effective in answering any 
research questions.  For example, in our case, we 
aim to consider whether using a lexicon dictionary 
approach over machine learning for detecting 
sentiment provides a greater level of accuracy 
within the framework we have set.  We have not 
yet completed this section of the lifecycle for our 
own work on social (dis-)order, but this stage of 
the pilot study has shown us which techniques are 
less effective (e.g. Latent Dirichlet Allocation) for 
this specific study and allowed us to apply a 
greater 
focus 
on 
others 
(e.g. 
Changepoint 
identification).   
8) Stage 8 has been renamed from “Business as 
Usual” as it is in the GSR lifecycle [1] to 
“Knowledge Management” in order to fit the 
research context.  The original purpose of this 
phase remains, but with the addition of publication 
to emphasise its importance in this context.  This 
phase re-evaluates research techniques in order 
keep research up-to-date with any modern research 
techniques and to think how about how any 
knowledge gained about social media research 
methods themselves can be transferred to others to 
instil good practice.  This stage can be commenced 
once a significant part of the cycle is completed.  
Publications are crucial way of sharing good 
practice within the research community and can 
then lead to subsequent further research after 
interactions with the community, leading us back 
to stage 1 to begin a new project and frame 
suitable new research questions.  The pilot study’s 
outcome has informed us that this original lifecycle 
with a series of changes can be placed into a 
research context that is effective in guiding social 
media projects. These findings will be shared in 
the form of publications and with other researchers 
through other means of communication such as 
conferences.  
It is important to note the lifecycle is not only to be 
used as a single iteration.  A researcher can go repeat 
stages to develop the project through one or many 
iterations. Furthermore, this lifecycle itself will be further 
evaluated when cycling through it again within the rest of 
our research project.  Having outlined a possible lifecycle 
for social media research, in the next section, we discuss 
the ethical and legal considerations that must be made 
throughout the social media research lifecycle.   
III.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
Technological 
advancements 
are 
outpacing 
developments in research governance and what is agreed 
as good practice.  The ethical code of conduct that we rely 
on for guidance for collection, analysis and representation 
of data in this digital era is not up-to-date [16][17].  Social 
media is ethically challenging because of its openness in 
relation to the availability of data.  The Terms and 
Conditions of these platforms (including Twitter, 
Facebook, YouTube, Weibo, Qzone, Reddit, LinkedIn and 
other global social media platforms) state that users' data 
is available for third parties, so in accepting these, users 
are giving legal consent for their data to be made available 
[18].  As [19] outlines “Just because it is accessible 
doesn’t mean using is ethical”, which means that 
researchers must evaluate their positions carefully, as to 
whether using the data is or is not ethically sound. 
Datasets with this scale of social interaction, speed of 
generation and level of access are unprecedented in the 
social sciences.  This has led to many published papers 
that include complete tweets and/or usernames without 
informed consent [18].   This seems to have happened 
because of the openness of some social media platforms, 
thus leading to assumptions that these are ‘public data’ 
and that projects using such data therefore do not require 
the same level of scrutiny by an ethics panel as do studies 
using data collected by more standard methods, such as 
interview or questionnaires [18].  Some universities may 
have not caught up with the pace of technology and this is 
often reflected in their ethical policies and within their 
forms dealing with ethical considerations.  Even where 
ethics panels have already scrutinised such data, they may 
still deem it to be ‘public data’ due to the lack of a 
suitable framework to evaluate the potential harm faced 
by those whose ostensibly public data is used in the 
research in question [17].  In some cases, ethical approval 
is not required per se, but it is suggested by a given 
university's policy that researchers consult resources, such 
as the Association of Internet Researchers, that can help to 
ensure that any social media data are used in an ethical 
fashion [17] [20].   
Despite noting above that some ethical panels are not 
making much consideration about the ethical use of social 
media data, there is some evidence to suggest that a 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

number of universities are making strides towards 
updating their ethical guidelines with regards to social 
media data. As one such example, the University of 
Sheffield has a research ethics policy note that raises 
many important points that can be considered in other 
institutions [21].  This note indicates that research must 
have ethical approval before a dataset can be extracted.  
However, this may pose both a financial and a 
contemporaneity problem.  If the researcher wants to use 
historical data that will in any case come at a cost then 
this will be the case with or without prior ethical 
authorisation.  However, if the data cannot be extracted 
on-the-fly because ethical approval is taking time to 
obtain, then the institution's budget would have to be 
prepared to pay for those data in the long term. 
Furthermore, if the researcher is considering topics of 
current interest and wishes to amend their search criteria 
as data come in, it may not in fact even be possible to seek 
suitable a priori approval.  Of course, planning in advance 
is well advised here, but there are times when one cannot 
predict the topics of research interest that will arise today, 
tomorrow or in many weeks’ time, which makes it 
difficult to plan such requests in advance.  This policy is 
thought provoking, as it makes the researcher think about 
the importance of ethics in the very early stages of their 
research and the requirement for ethical approval for 
social media research is clearly a step in the right 
direction towards ensuring high ethical standards.  
However, as noted above, it may be financial unviable, or 
prevent the collection of data required for some projects.  
To that end, we would recommend that perhaps there be a 
fast track ethical approval system for time-critical social 
media data projects so that on the one hand they receive 
suitable ethical scrutiny, while on the other they can also 
proceed in a timely manner, enabling researchers to react 
to current events of public interest. 
According to a series of survey findings from [22] and 
[23], it appears that there is a disconnect between the 
practices of researchers in publishing content on social 
media posts and “users' views of the fair use (includes 
accuracy) of their online communications in publications 
and their rights as research subjects.” [17].  The 
decision-making process in one’s ethical approach to 
social media data must consider the expectations of social 
media users as regards their personal privacy.  In addition 
to this, the researcher must review the nature of the 
information from a user on social media alongside its 
originally intended purpose.   
Users on social media “may not intend for their data 
to be used for their [researchers'] purposes” [24] and 
have, therefore, not consented to it being used for 
research. Considerations must be given to possible risks to 
the users whose data are being employed in any research. 
We must recognise that social media research transcends 
the usual boundaries of geography and standard 
methodologies. This means that a scholar’s research 
design must ensure that it satisfies the legal regulations 
and terms of service of each platform as well as those 
platforms' hosting countries' laws and the laws where the 
researchers are based.  This also includes institutional 
guidelines, the privacy and expectations of users and their 
vulnerability from publications covering their activities, 
the reuse and publication of data and how users' 
contributions are anonymised [24].  The application of 
ethics must consider the concerns raised above. If 
researchers and organisations are not careful in their 
approach, the disconnect between researchers and users 
may grow further.  A lack of action regarding such ethics 
could lead to a series of undesirable consequences, such 
as users calling on social media platforms for changes in 
their terms of service to restrict the use of their data.  The 
impact of this may make it extremely difficult to use 
social media data for research designed for the public 
good. 
Social media research ethics as specified above 
requires further development and awareness to ensure that 
the public’s data are represented in their context in an 
accurate, respectful and fair way [10] [25].  Ethics of 
social media data analysis is of significant importance and 
is hotly debated in the research community (by 
organisations such as, the Social Research Association 
[26], the Academy of Social Sciences [27], and the New 
Social Media, New Social Science [28]) and outside of it, 
where improvements are continually being made to 
relevant ethical frameworks [10].  Ethics could be applied 
in the sense of one’s own morality and standard of ethics, 
but the problem with this is that not everyone may have 
the same high ethical standards. Indeed, one may think 
that they have a high set of standards when in actuality 
their standards are lower than they believe and overall this 
is a slippery slope as it is open to suggestions of improper 
usage as there is no conformity to an agreed set of rules.  
Current ethical guidelines are an ongoing area of 
development amongst research institutes and other 
organisations.  There are a series of organisations that 
have produced a set of guidelines to follow, all of which 
support a high standard of ethical practice in social media 
research.  Some examples of these organisations and 
efforts are provided below.   
•
A Canada Research Chair has emerged from a 
five-year partnership with SMDS. This project 
aims to address the concerns of incoherent and 
inadequate practice in social media research and 
suggests a set of guidelines for conducting large 
scale and aggregated analysis through social 
listening [14] on sensitive topics, such as medical 
and religious data [29].  
•
Ipsos MORI (funded by institutes such as the 
EPSRC, ESRC, CASM and DEMOS) is a market 
research organisation in the UK that is "curious 
about people, markets, brands and society", where 
they “deliver information and analyses by making 
it faster and easier to navigate our complex world 
and aid clients in making better decisions.” IPSOS 
MORI produced a guide that examines and reviews 
the ethical, legal and regulatory framework for 
embedding ethics in social media research [30].  
When considered alongside the SMDS framework, 
these provide a comprehensive set of user-driven 
principles to help manage all aspects of social 
media data in research, such as how to decide and 
handle the use of reproduced tweets - especially 
those that concern sensitive topics.   
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

•
The Economic and Social Research Council 
(ESRC) has an “ESRC Framework for research 
ethics”, which contains a few social media 
guidelines [20] that can be put into practice.  As 
social media ethics develops, we would suggest 
that the ESRC might wish to consider the addition 
of further guidance aimed towards helping social 
media researchers, particularly newcomers to the 
field, to navigate the uncertainty and confusion of 
this nascent field to help to ensure that they meet a 
high standard of ethics. 
•
The Government Social Research (GSR) team 
used a data science framework and incorporated a 
social media element into this directly.  This report 
shows some pertinent core principles for the 
researcher 
that 
must 
be 
considered 
when 
conducting any social media research [1].  There 
are many important ethical considerations given, 
such as “Core principle 4: Avoidance of personal 
and social harm” [1, p20] and “Core principle 5: 
Non-disclosure of identity” [1, p20] which are 
straightforward and clear to understand. 
The above ethical guidelines cover different areas, for 
example, the SDMS guidelines are focused on the actual 
conduct of social media analysis, the IPSOS MORI 
framework covers legal and regulatory issues, the ESRC 
guidelines are rather generic and do not yet constitute a 
concrete approach while the GSR team have simply 
appended to their current ethical framework a social 
media element, so that the framework is more specialised 
towards social media [25]. There are calls from [25] for 
institutions’ ethics committees to integrate requirements 
into the approvals documentation (by specifying which 
ethical guidelines would be applied in one's research); as 
[25] suggests there is a low level of ethical awareness 
amongst researchers applying social media data mining in 
their studies. 
Now, all these guidelines provide very important 
points, but their multiplicity creates difficulties for the 
researcher as there are still uncertainties around the ethics 
of social media research in part because these guidelines 
do not always agree.  Of course, this area is still in its 
early stages of development.  In addition, what makes this 
area even more difficult is the terms and conditions set by 
the individual social media platforms.  These can be hard 
to interpret because of the legal terminology or may be 
otherwise ambiguous and different platforms have 
different terms of service, such that it can be difficult for 
multi-platform 
research 
to 
adhere 
to 
them 
all 
simultaneously.  Moreover, the terms and conditions can 
create ethical concerns for publication - for example, 
Twitter will not allow tweets to be presented without 
usernames [10], which can make it difficult to protect 
participants from potential harm. If the data are highly 
sensitive and the username is published, then the effect of 
linking the user to these data and the research may cause 
an effect within the public sphere.  For example, the 
subject may receive positive responses, thereby boosting 
their reputation, or, perhaps more seriously, highlighting 
negative tweets may damage the mental or physical 
wellbeing of those mentioned within them.   
Online research poses a greater risk to upholding 
confidentiality than does protecting offline research [18]. 
One reason for this is that at present there is a permanent 
record of what has been posted online. For instance, any 
quotation used can lead directly back that user in question 
with the use of a search engine [18].  This raises concerns 
over the anonymity of data. For example, as noted above, 
Twitter’s data sharing licensing policy allows the sharing 
of Tweet IDs only, to ensure the data collection process is 
reproducible [18].  Using the identification ID provides a 
way to obtain the same dataset from Twitter’s API. These 
IDs are unique and are easily searchable on the web to 
locate each tweet.  This can be a cause for concern as it 
makes it easier to de-anonymise the data, so if the data are 
highly sensitive then a choice has to made as to whether 
that ID should be excluded from being shared if it causes 
an ethical concern [18].  Furthermore, the anonymisation 
techniques we can apply now may become easier to 
deanonymise in the future due to technological 
advancement. 
In the UK, we must also take other laws into 
consideration, such as the Data Protection Act 1998, as 
researchers need to comply fully with the data protection 
principles laid out therein. Section 33 of the Data 
Protection Act 1998 allows exemptions to be made in 
accordance with principles 2 and 5 of the act for personal 
data used in research [31].  Recent developments within 
the UK Government suggest they are looking to form a 
council of data ethics “to address the growing legal and 
ethical challenges associated with balancing privacy, 
anonymisation of data, security and public benefit.” [32] 
and also to implement the General Data Protection 
Regulation on the 25th of May 2018 [33].  Researchers 
will have to take these developments into account in their 
future practice as it may impact their social media 
research. Even after Brexit, the General Data Protection 
Regulation (which includes similarities with the existing 
UK Data Protection Act 1998) will be adopted into UK 
law [33].  It is essential that researchers keep abreast of 
any legal developments and keep up-to-date with good 
practise in their relevant area so as to make the best 
possible ethical use of social media data. 
The concerns outlined above regarding the ethical 
challenges of using social media data can make for a 
difficult challenge for the social media researcher.  The 
best course of action the researcher community can take is 
to address concerns and difficulties on case-by-case basis, 
thereafter trying to update guidelines and frameworks to 
deal with such cases.  Genuine mistakes might have been 
made in the research community, which both individual 
researchers and the community as a whole can learn from.  
If a researcher has made a genuine ethics-related mistake 
in their work and has demonstrated remorse, then we as a 
community need to forgive and look to further strengthen 
the ethical standards and frameworks available to us. 
Indeed, ethical concepts are not just hoops to jump 
through in the early phases of research, but concepts 
requiring ethical inquiry [18], which may in itself take 
time. Mistakes may not be recognised until well after they 
have occurred and numerous judgements are possible, 
which can provide uncertainty and ambiguity, but this is 
likely to apply to any research [18].  Ethical 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

considerations will be in a constant state of assessment 
throughout any project and each case that arises during the 
research process can be worked through using a set of 
context-specific decisions.  In addition to this, researchers 
must be guided by core ethical principles set by their 
employing organisations and external bodies, while also 
employing an appropriate mixture of the frameworks as 
laid out above, to ensure that the highest ethical standards 
are followed in any research.   
There is a need to improve ethical assessment and one 
way to do this is to create a value-based ethical culture 
and practices in the research community and within other 
organisations for the development and deployment of 
intelligent systems both within the UK and elsewhere.  
This is known as Value Based Design (VBD) [34]. To do 
this, one must identify, enhance and ultimately embrace 
management strategies and social processes that facilitate 
value-based ethics within their design process. This could 
be included as an additional step in the framework in a 
future development, as it may provide a way to ensure a 
higher standard of ethical practice in the future. 
IV.
CONCLUSION
This paper has taken an existing methodology, the 
GSR lifecycle, and created from it a new social media 
lifecycle suitable for the research context.  This was 
illustrated via a new diagram (Figure 1) that contains steps 
adapted to incorporate changes that are required for use in 
a research context. Alongside this, a number of ethical 
concerns have been explored and we have highlighted a 
series of pertinent points to consider in any future social 
media research project.  Overall, this paper has sought to 
provide an easier way for researchers to enter the domain 
of social media research and then conduct relevant 
research, while providing an insight into the importance of 
the relevant ethical considerations in this area.  Future 
research directions could include widening the framework 
beyond the UK, to other domains such as the wider 
European Union, the United States and Canada in a more 
detailed fashion and further thought could be given to how 
to expand the framework to include VBD. 
REFERENCES
[1]
"Using 
social 
media 
for 
social 
research: 
An 
introduction", Assets.publishing.service.gov.uk, 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/syste
m/uploads/attachment_data/file/524750/GSR_Social_Media_Resea
rch_Guidance_-_Using_social_media_for_social_research.pdf. 
[Accessed: 09- Aug- 2018].  
[2]
J. Crump, "What Are the Police Doing on Twitter? Social Media, 
the Police and the Public", Policy & Internet, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1-
27, 2011.  
[3]
M. Downes, "UK Police Forces using Social Media: Twitter, 
facebook, YouTube, Google+ and Hangouts On Air - The January 
2013 Survey by Mike Downes", Whatsinkenilworth.com, 2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.whatsinkenilworth.com/2013/01/uk-police-forces-
using-social-media.html. [Accessed: 08- Aug- 2018]. 
[4]
"Internet access – households and individuals, Great Britain - 
Office for National Statistics", Ons.gov.uk, 2016. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/househol
dcharacteristics/homeinternetandsocialmediausage/bulletins/interne
taccesshouseholdsandindividuals/2016. [Accessed: 08- Aug- 2018]. 
[5]
"Government Social Research Service | Civil Service Fast 
Stream", Faststream.gov.uk, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.faststream.gov.uk/government-social-research-service. 
[Accessed: 22- Aug- 2018].  
[6]
"Global market and opinion research specialist | 
Ipsos 
MORI", Ipsos.com, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ipsos.com/ipsos-mori/en-uk. [Accessed: 22- Aug- 
2018].  
[7]
"Big Boulder Initiative, Big Boulder Conference Big Boulder 
Initiative", Bbi.org, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.bbi.org/. 
[Accessed: 08- Aug- 2018]. 
[8]
"Demos", Demos.co.uk, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.demos.co.uk/. [Accessed: 22- Aug- 2018]. 
[9]
"About us", European Citizen Science Association (ECSA), 2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://ecsa.citizen-science.net/about-us. 
[Accessed: 08- Aug- 2018]. 
[10] A. Quan-Haase and L. Sloan, The SAGE handbook of social media 
research methods. Los Angeles: Sage Publications, pp 1-9, 2017. 
[11] D. Ruths and J. Pfeffer, “Social media for large studies of 
behavior,” Science, vol. 346, no. 6213, pp. 1063–1064, 2014. 
[12] R. Procter, F. Vis and A. Voss, "Reading the riots on Twitter: 
methodological 
innovation 
for 
the 
analysis 
of 
big 
data", International Journal of Social Research Methodology, vol. 
16, no. 3, pp. 197-214, 2013. 
[13] Y. Theocharis, W. Lowe, J. van Deth and G. García-Albacete, 
"Using Twitter to mobilize protest action: online mobilization 
patterns and action repertoires in the Occupy Wall Street, 
Indignados, 
and 
Aganaktismenoi 
movements", Information, 
Communication & Society, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 202-220, 2014.
[14] "About – Social Media Data Stewardship", Socialmediadata.org, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://socialmediadata.org/about/. 
[Accessed: 09- Aug- 2018].
[15] "Analysis of XX Commonwealth Games Host Broadcast Coverage, 
Online Media and Official Digital Channels", Gov.scot, 2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gov.scot/Resource/0048/00482015.pdf. 
[Accessed: 
09- Aug- 2018].
[16] M. Williams, P. Burnap and L. Sloan, "Crime Sensing with Big 
Data: The Affordances and Limitations of using Open Source 
Communications to Estimate Crime Patterns", British Journal of 
Criminology, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. Pages 320–340, 2016. 
[17] "Ethics Resources – Social Data Science Lab", Socialdatalab.net, 
2018. [Online]. Available: http://socialdatalab.net/ethics-resources. 
[Accessed: 08- Aug- 2018].  
[18] K. Beninger. Social Media Users' Views on the Ethics of Social 
Media Research. In: A. Quan-Haase and L. Sloan. (eds.) The SAGE 
handbook of social media research methods. Los Angeles: Sage 
Publications, p.53–73, 2017. 
[19] D. Boyd, "Privacy and Publicity in the Context of Big 
Data", Danah.org, 
2010. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.danah.org/papers/talks/2010/WWW2010.html. 
[Accessed: 08- Aug- 2018].  
[20] "ESRC Framework for research ethics Updated January 
2015", Esrc.ac.uk, 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.esrc.ac.uk/files/funding/guidance-for-applicants/esrc-
framework-for-research-ethics-2015. [Accessed: 08- Aug- 2018]. 
[21] "The University of Sheffield Research Ethics Policy Note no. 14, 
Research Involving Social Media Data", Sheffield.ac.uk, 2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/polopoly_fs/1.670954!/file/Research-
Ethics-Policy-Note-14.pdf. [Accessed: 08- Aug- 2018].  
[22] M. Williams, "Towards an ethical framework for using social 
media data in social research", Socialdatalab.net, 2015. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://socialdatalab.net/wp-
content/uploads/2016/08/EthicsSM-SRA-Workshop.pdf. 
[Accessed: 07- Aug- 2018].  
[23] K. Beninger, A. Fry, N. Jago, H. Lepps, L. Nass and H. Silvester, 
"NatCen Social Research, Research using Social Media; 
Users", Natcen.ac.uk, 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.natcen.ac.uk/media/282288/p0639-research-using-
social-media-report-final-190214.pdf. [Accessed: 07- Aug- 2018].  
[24] A. Bruns, "Challenges in Social Media Research Ethics | 
Snurblog", Snurb.info, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://snurb.info/node/2227. [Accessed: 07- Aug- 2018]. 
[25] J. Taylor and C. Pagliari, "Mining social media data: How are 
research 
sponsors 
and 
researchers 
addressing 
the 
ethical 
challenges?", Research Ethics, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1-39, 2017. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[26] "The SRA | Home of the Social Research Community", The-
sra.org.uk, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://the-sra.org.uk/. 
[Accessed: 03- Oct- 2018]. 
[27] "Academy of Social Sciences", Acss.org.uk, 2018. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.acss.org.uk/. [Accessed: 03- Oct- 2018]. 
[28] New 
Social 
Media 
New 
Social 
Science, 
“#NSMNSS", Nsmnss.blogspot.com, 2018. [Online]. Available: 
http://nsmnss.blogspot.com/. [Accessed: 03- Oct- 2018]. 
[29] E. Yom-Tov, D. Borsa, I. Cox and R. McKendry, "Detecting 
Disease 
Outbreaks 
in 
Mass 
Gatherings 
Using 
Internet 
Data", Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 16, no. 6, p. 
e154, 2014. 
[30] H. Evans, S. Ginnis and J. Bartlett, Ipsos.com, 2015. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/migrations/en-
uk/files/Assets/Docs/Publications/im-demos-social-ethics-in-
social-media-research-summary.pdf. [Accessed: 07- Aug- 2018].  
[31] W. Ahmed, "Ethical Challenges of Using Social Media Data In 
Research", YouTube, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VeFMqL4Hj60. 
[Accessed: 
07- Aug- 2018]. 
[32] "Government agree to set up 'Council of Data Ethics", UK 
Parliament, 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-
z/commons-select/science-and-technology-committee/news-
parliament-2015/big-data-dilemma-government-response-15-16/. 
[Accessed: 07- Aug- 2018]. 
[33] "Overview 
of 
the 
General 
Data 
Protection 
Regulation 
(GDPR)", Ico.org.uk, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://ico.org.uk/media/for-organisations/data-protection-
reform/overview-of-the-gdpr-1-13.pdf. [Accessed: 05- Aug- 2018]. 
[34] "Methodologies 
to 
Guide 
Ethical 
Research 
and 
Design", Standards.ieee.org, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://standards.ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/ead_methodologies_re
search_v2.pdf. [Accessed: 05- Aug- 2018]. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

