Technological Accessibility for People with an Intellectual Disability: A model for 
Organizational Support 
 
Dany Lussier-Desrochers, Martin Caouette, and Marie-Ève Dupont 
Department of psychoeducation 
Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières 
3351, boul. Des Forges, C.P. 500 
Trois-Rivières, Québec, G9A 5H7 
Dany.Lussier-Desrochers@uqtr.ca, Martin.Caouette1@uqtr.ca, Marie-Eve.Dupont@uqtr.ca 
 
 
Abstract—For a few years, technology has created an effective 
revolution in the field of intervention among people with 
intellectual disabilities. The use of such technology contributes 
to social inclusion and participation of the people in their 
community. Unfortunately, several obstacles are encountered 
by social services during the implementation of technologies 
among people with intellectual disabilities. A research with 
new ideas and new results was conducted with 11 managers in 
the field of social services to identify their needs and 
expectations as well as the difficulties they encounter in 
deploying technology during intervention. This research  
documents the mechanisms for social services and more 
specifically the elements that promotes an optimal access to 
technology. Results have allowed the creation of a management 
model supporting the application of technology in the field of 
social services which is called the Multidimensional Model of 
Organization’s Support. The model is based on three 
fundamental and interrelated dimensions (management, 
clinical and technical) and 3 parameters (the user profile of a 
technological innovation, the type of technology and the life 
cycle of technologies). Preliminary results confirm the 
importance of providing different forms of support to 
clinicians in each dimension according to the identified 
parameters. 
Technological accessibility; intellectual disability; social 
services; organization 
I. 
TECHNOLOGY AT THE SERVICE OF THE PERSON WITH 
DISABILITIES 
Recent studies have shown that Information and 
communication technologies (ICT) have the potential to 
create a revolution in the different ways to assist people with 
an intellectual disability (ID) and to support them [1]. These 
technologies serve two major functions, to deputize for 
certain disabilities of the person and to promote the learning 
of new skills [2][3][4]. Currently, research results 
demonstrate the positive impacts of technologies when 
applied in intervention with people with ID. These 
technologies allow people to communicate, to have a 
valuable employment, to have access to independent 
apartments, to learn, to establish and maintain social 
contacts, to travel, etc. [4][5][6]. Their use promotes the 
inclusion of the people in their community and is a crucial 
determinant associated with social participation. Currently in 
Canada, these discoveries generate a lot of interest in the 
field of social services. The use of technology with people 
with intellectual disabilities is a real innovation for clinicians 
as far as it allows the development of practices that are more 
effective. A strong will, therefore, emerges in order to 
integrate these different technologies to intervention 
practices in intellectual disability so that more people can 
enjoy the benefits associated with the use of these 
technologies. However, the implementation of technology in 
the social field requires the consideration of a number of 
essential conditions. 
A. Conditions associated with the implementation of 
technology in the field of social services 
Although these technologies can create a revolution in 
specialized intervention, the social field intervention 
environments have only very little information on the 
conditions to be put in place in order to deploy adequately 
and successfully these different technological solutions. 
Many managers mistakenly believe that the only layoff 
technologies in their organization will be associated with an 
increased use by clinicians [7]. However, a successful and 
sustainable implementation of technologies requires the 
consideration of many factors (establishment of a vision on 
the role of technology, specific goals for implementation, 
precise evaluation of necessary resources (technical and 
professional), risk assessment, setting up an effective 
communication system, etc.) [8][9][10]. Moreover, it is 
essential to consider the technical characteristics of the 
technology to deploy, the user profiles and the life cycle of 
the technology. To effectively implement the technology in 
their 
organization, 
managers 
should 
review 
their 
management frameworks. 
Unfortunately, managers do not have models to guide 
them in the deployment of technology in their organization. 
Therefore, the use of technology is achieved by a few 
clinicians on an individual basis and approaches are mostly 
"trial and error" procedure type. This approach is 
unfortunately not viable for a large-scale deployment of 
technologies in rehabilitation centers. The absence of a 
framework and guidelines for the management of 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

technologies used in the social services field is currently the 
main obstacle to implement the technology in these 
environments. The social service field should then develop 
management 
strategies 
to 
ensure 
efficiency 
while 
integrating these technologies without adding a financial 
burden to develop the practice in a context of fiscal restraint, 
taking into account the fragility of the process associated 
with the implementation of technological innovation. 
Research results shows that if those conditions are not taken 
into account, the technology will be implemented with a lot 
of difficulty and it will easily be untended by clinicians. 
The paper will first present the qualitative research 
conducted with managers of rehabilitation centers. In a 
second section, the model developed by the research team is 
presented. The 3 dimensions and the 3 parameters are then 
described. The article concludes by presenting the next steps 
of the research project. Results and the model are briefly 
discussed in the conclusion. 
 
II. 
PERCEPTIONS OF MANAGERS ON THE ROLE OF 
TECHNOLOGY IN THE FIELD OF SOCIAL SERVICES 
In the next subsections we will present the objectives of 
the research, the method for data collection and results 
synthesis. 
A.  Research goal 
The goal of this research is to develop and implement a 
business model guiding the implementation of technological 
innovation in Rehabilitation Centers for Intellectual 
Disabilities. This research is done in three phases. Phase 1 
(2010-2011). Develop the management model based on 
interviews conducted with managers from Rehabilitation 
Centre for Intellectual Disabilities. Phase 2 (2012-2013). 
Implement the model through a pilot test in two 
Rehabilitation Centers for Intellectual Disabilities. Phase 3 
(2012-2014). Documenting the implementation of the model 
and assess the impact of the technology use by the clinicians. 
B. Method of Phase 1. 
 The paper presents the results of the first phase. This 
phase was carried out in two stages. First, interviews were 
conducted with managers. In a second step, a model was 
developed from the results obtained. 
C. Interviews with managers 
Our team conducted a survey with 11 executives from 
five Rehabilitation Centers for Intellectual Disabilities [11]. 
The purpose of these was to develop a managing model 
tailored to these fields of intervention. The research 
participants are managers who hold senior executive 
positions. On average, they were occupying this position for 
2 years. However, they had in average 19.5 years of 
experience within their organization. The research used a 
convenience sampling. Telephone interviews of 25 to 40 
minutes were conducted during summer of 2011 and winter 
of 2012. The interview had two major themes: the role of the 
technology in the organization and the conditions to be put in 
place to promote the implementation of technologies. 
In order to fully explore the perceptions of senior 
executives, a qualitative approach was preferred. From the 
verbatim transcription, a thematic analysis was conducted. 
This form of analysis consisted at "proceed systematically in 
the identification, grouping, and, alternatively, discursive 
examination of topics in a corpus" [12]. The thematic 
analysis allowed us to identify relevant themes that were 
related to the objectives of our research and to document the 
importance of certain themes in our data corpus [12]. 
Analyses were performed using the software QSR N'Vivo 8 
[13]. 
D. Main results obtained from the managers. 
In general, senior managers have a positive perception of 
the potential of technology, but find that the implementation 
within their organization is still in its infancy. They identify 
problems in three dimensions: technological, clinical and 
management. 
When considering the technological aspect, managers 
report that they are having inadequate knowledge of all the 
technology products available. Similarly, they are in lack of 
the equipment that is necessary (devices, incompatible 
computer systems). The choices to be made on the preferred 
technologies are also a problem, since they do not have 
accurate assessment of the potential of each technology to 
support clinical interventions. The clinical support for the 
staff on the technological dimension is also a major 
difficulty. 
In terms of management, managers are finding that 
technology deployment within their organization is not done 
consistently and without a real structured action plan. Thus, 
they realize that they do not have a clear vision on the role of 
technology in their organization or specific goals of 
implementation. In addition, they operate in a context of 
fiscal restraint, which does not favor the investments in the 
technological dimension. 
When considering the clinical aspect, managers realize 
that they do not have in their organization, clinical staff with 
the skills needed to implement and to use effectively various 
technologies. Moreover, there is only a small amount of 
training available to them on this dimension. Similarly, the 
social field has an insufficient number of professionals in 
order to explore possible avenues with technology. 
Consequently, managers also report the need to structure 
the implementation of technologies in relation to these three 
dimensions. Furthermore, it appears necessary to define 
guidelines for the selection and purchase of technologies. 
Adequate support for clinical staff on the technological 
dimension is also majorly needed. Finally, managers want 
the technology implementation in their organization to be 
accompanied by an ongoing evaluation of the whole process. 
E. Developing the management model 
The first phase of the study made it possible to highlight 
some aspects to consider while implementing these 
technologies in those organizations. Consequently, these 
elements have permitted us to propose a multidimensional 
model of organizations for the implementation of supporting 
technologies. As mentioned earlier, managers had no 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

management structure in order to support technology 
deployment. The contribution of the research is to develop a 
customized model from an analysis of the situations faced by 
the professional in the social field services that works with 
developmental disabilities. The construction of this model 
was also the achieved by a literature review on the conditions 
to be deployed to ensure a successful implementation of 
technological innovation. The contribution of the model is 
the fact that it considers theories in all the dimensions such 
as marketing, management, information technology and 
intervention. The model is then located at the confluence of 
these disciplines. More precisely, it responds to the concerns 
of managers who recommend intervention in terms of 
clinical, technological and management aspect. The 
following sections present the dimensions of the model 
developed during the first phase. 
III. 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODEL OF ORGANIZATION’S 
SUPPORT 
The proposed model allows implementing all the 
conditions that will support a successful deployment of 
technology in an organization providing services to people 
with intellectual disabilities. This model takes into account 
three dimensions that needs to be consider in order to ensure 
a successful implementation of technologies named as: 1. 
The clinical dimension, 2. The management dimension and 
3. The technical dimension. These three dimensions are 
constantly interacting with each other. The proposed model 
allows to coordinate the actions of all the key actors 
involved. It also formalizes the role of a techno-clinical 
counselor whose primary mandate is to coordinate the 
implementation of technologies taking into account these 
three dimensions. The purpose of the implementation 
process is to make the organizations autonomous when 
integrating different technologies to intervention practices in 
intellectual disability. 
A. The management dimension 
In terms of management, the model allows the 
organization to define a vision of the role of technology with 
people with disabilities and to implement the various 
processes necessary to maintain this vision. Thus, it allows to 
structure the ongoing integration of technological innovation 
within the organization. In order to achieve this goal, it 
promotes the establishment of a management structure that 
allows the evaluation, planning and reallocation of human, 
financial and technical resources that are necessary. The 
developed management tools allow managers to quickly 
assess the potential of technology, to make strategic choices 
while purchasing these technologies and to optimize the use 
of available computing resources. 
B. The clinical dimension 
Clinically, the model takes into account the contribution 
that technology can have on the quality of life and social 
participation of the people. It promotes the development of 
clinical intervention process that takes into consideration the 
technologies that are available. It has a structuring effect 
since it promotes a synergistic work with all the actors 
involved in order to develop and implement strategies to 
support the appropriation of technological innovations that 
consider the type of user, the type of technology, the life 
cycle of the technological innovation and time of 
appropriation. These support strategies can take the form of 
community of practice, communication tools, group of 
practice analysis, training, consultations, etc.. Thus, the 
model allows to set up boundaries so that the Organization 
can, independently and continuously, develop and adapt 
strategies of intervention according to the various types of 
technologies available. 
C. The technical dimension 
Technically, the model takes into account different 
technological parameters that must be considered in order to 
use technology in an effectively way. It also structures the 
ongoing and individualized support that must be offered to 
people who use technology in a clinical intervention 
perspective. This support guides managers during the budget 
planning and purchasing of computer equipment to support 
the intervention. The technical dimension also provides a 
constant update of the technology and a rapid replacement in 
case of broken hardware. These two elements are essential in 
order to prevent technical reasons that could lead to a 
cessation of the services provided to the people using 
technology in their daily lives which could have serious 
consequences for people with intellectual disabilities. 
Finally, the model formalizes procedures that facilitate 
testing, the use and loan of computer equipment to support 
the intervention. 
D. The 3 parameters of the Multidimensional Model of 
Organization’s Support  
To effectively support actors working on these three 
levels, three parameters are considered: the type of 
technology, the user profiles and the life cycle of 
technologies. The user profile of a person influences his use 
of technology, but also his interest to make it accessible to 
others. Similarly, the type of technology modulates the 
energy that needs to be deployed in order to make the 
technology available to people. Finally, the life cycle of 
technology can target the times when the promotion of a 
technology must be achieved and when it should be 
abandoned.  These parameters allows to modulate the type 
of support that will be offered: (communication, training, 
coaching the purpose and use, practice analysis, etc.). 
Fig. 1 shows that in the context of the technologies 
deployment in an organization providing services to people 
with intellectual disabilities, the complexity lies in the 
establishment of a process taking into account not only the 
three parameters but also the dynamic process between them 
(adapted from Berkowitz et al. [14]). The establishment of a 
supporting targeted process is then the preferred solution. 
On one side, we should avoid putting into the hands of 
reluctant clinicians (minority appart) technologies that are 
radically changing their intervention process (long learning 
technologies); in those situations, technologies without a 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

learning process will be favored (e.g., a software available 
online). Conversely, clinicians with an innovative profile 
will be attracted to more complex technologies (long 
learning) and have an interest in the technologies that 
requires a longer period of exploration or appropriation (eg 
iPad). 
On the other hand, the field of technological innovation 
is an area of development at "high speed". The products are 
often replaced by new ones and life cycle of technological 
innovation is well known, as shown in the last component of 
the model, and it is essential to consider this fact. In the 
introductory phase, the technology reaches the market and 
the growth phase is then associated with the increasing 
presence of the product. During the maturity phase, the 
technology is used by many people who have integrated it 
into their lifestyle. In the decline phase, the technology is 
often replaced by a new product more powerful and more 
efficient. Schilling and Thérin (2006) [15] estimate the 
lifetime of a technological innovation (introduction to 
decline) to less than 5 years. In the field of social services, it 
means that the exploration phase and the training must take 
place in the growth phase. The application of the technology 
with the users must absolutely take place early in the 
maturity phase. This cycle needs to be performed again with 
a new technology during the declining phase of the first. 
The success is partly determined by a crucial strategic 
planning common to the managers and clinicians. Moreover, 
the life cycle of technology needs to be considered for 
people with intellectual disabilities, since it is necessary to 
establish specific procedures to ensure maximum stability 
against different types of intervention proposed. 
E. Phases 2 and 3 (2012-2014) 
The team is currently conducting Phase 2 by doing the 
implementation of the model in two rehabilitation centers. 
The validation of the management model is associated with a 
strategy of an action research in order to evaluate each step 
of the process (on-going evaluation process over two years to 
ensure a readjustment of the ways of supporting as needed). 
Indicators are then evaluated based on four pivotal concepts: 
1) the level of ownership of the technological innovation 
through experimentation, 2) the impacts on intervention 
practices, 
3) 
learning 
achievement 
regarding 
the 
technological innovation, and 4) the knowledge transfer and 
the impact of multipliers agents in the organization. At the 
end of the process, the tools for evaluating indicators will be 
reusable across all the organizations wanting to integrate the 
technological innovation. This ongoing evaluation of the 
process is carried out with clinicians and managers. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In the last few years, the social work field had to face a 
massive influx of the implementation of supporting 
technologies used for diverse intervention with people with 
an ID. For these people, the impacts of these technologies 
on their lives are considerable. This research conducted with 
11 managers demonstrated the importance of promoting the 
multidimensional implantation, taking into account three 
fundamental elements. This research has then allowed 
developing a model supporting the implementation of 
technologies in these environments. This model takes into 
account the clinical dimension (user profiles, the type and 
the life cycle of the technology), the technological 
dimension (support and up-to-date computing equipment) 
and the management dimension (assessment, planning, risk 
management and optimization). This model ensures that the 
organization remains master of the work process and it 
supports the key players in the development of new 
expertise. The model finally ensures a sustainable and 
successful implementation of technologies in support of the 
intervention. The model is a first step in the midst of social 
services allowing the efficiently implementation of the 
technology. This model will not only overcome the 
obstacles identified but it will also ensure an optimal use of 
technologies by people with intellectual disabilities. These 
Figure 1.    Multidimensional Model of Organization’s Support  
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

technologies will then have the effect of promoting social 
participation of the people and to reduce the negative 
impacts associated with digital exclusion of persons with 
disabilities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Lussier-Desrochers, Y. Lachapelle, C. Consel, and D. 
Lavergne, “Utilisation de la domotique afin de promouvoir 
l’autodétermination et l’accès au milieu résidentiel pour les 
personnes présentant une déficience intellectuelle,” Recueil 
annuel d’ergothérapie, vol.3, 2010, pp. 9-20. 
[2] D.K. Davies, S. E. Stock, and M. L. Wehmeyer, "Enhancing 
Independent Time-Management Skills of Individuals with 
Mental Retardation Using a Palmtop Personal Computer," 
Mental Retardation, vol. 40, Oct. 2002, pp. 358-365. 
[3] S. E. Stock, D. K. Davies, M. L. Wehmeyer, and S. B. 
Palmer, "Evaluation of Cognitively Accessible Software to 
Increase Independent Access to Cellphone Technology for 
People with Intellectual Disability," Journal of Intellectual 
Disability Research, vol. 52, Dec. 2008, pp. 1155-1164, 
Doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2788.2008.01099.x 
[4] Y. Lachapelle, D. Lussier-Desrochers, and H. Pigot, "Des TIC 
en soutien à l’autodétermination des personnes présentant une 
déficience intellectuelle," Revue québécoise de psychologie, 
vol. 28, 2007, pp. 111-123. 
[5] M. M. L. Verdonschot, L. P. de Witte, E. Reichrath, W. H. E, 
Buntinx, and L. M. G. Curfs, "Impact of Environmental 
Factors on Community Participation of Persons with an 
Intellectual Disability: A Systematic Review," Journal of 
Intellectual Disability Research, vol. 53, Jan. 2009, pp. 54-64, 
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2788.2008.01128.x.  
[6] D. Zisimopoulos, J. Sigafoos, and G. Koutromanos, "Using 
Video Prompting and Constant Time Delay to Teach an 
Internet Search Basic Skill to Students with Intellectual 
Disabilities," Education and Training in Autism and 
Developmental Disabilities, vol. 46, Jun. 2011, pp. 238-250. 
[7] S. Parsons, H. Daniels, J. Porter, and C. Robertson, "The use 
of ICT by adults with learning disabilities in day and 
residential 
services," 
British 
Journal 
of 
EducationalTechnology, vol. 37, Jan. 2006, pp. 31-44, 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2005.00516.x 
[8] G. Corriveau, "Exceller dans la gestion de projet". Montréal, 
Qc : Collection Entreprendre, 2010.  
[9] D. Lussier-Desrochers, M. Caouette, and M-E. Dupont, 
"Gestion de l’innovation technologique : défis et modalités 
d’accompagnement," Rapport de recherche adressé aux 
gestionnaires des CRDITED du Québec, Université du 
Québec 
à 
Trois-Rivières. 
Repéré 
à 
http://www.chairetsa.ca/journeetsa/Implantation.html , 2011. 
[10] M-È. Dupont, "Identification des conditions de succès liés à 
l'implantation et à la périnité d'un site internet spécifiquement 
adapté aux personnes qui présentent une déficience 
intellectuelle" (Mémoire de maîtrise inédit). Université du 
Québec à Trois-Rivières, QC, 2012.  
[11] D. Lussier-Desrochers, and M.  Caouette, "Pourquoi la 
technologie en soutien à l’intervention ne s’implante-t-elle 
pas plus rapidement dans les milieux d’intervention?" Revue 
du CNRIS, (submitted).  
[12] P. Paillé, and A. Mucchielli, "L'analyse qualitative en 
sciences humaines et sociales" Paris: Armand Coli, 2008, 
pp.162.  
[13] QSR International Pty Ltd. NVivo 8. Australia. 2008. ABN: 
47 006 357 213  
[14] E.N. Berkowitz, F.G. Crane, R.A. Kerin, W. Rudelius, D. 
Pettigrew, S. Gauvin and W. Menvielle. Le marketing. 
Montréal, QC: Chenelière McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
[15] M. Schilling and F. Thérin, "Gestion de l’innovation 
technologique". Paris : Maxima, 2006 
 
 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

