E_Universities Services in the New Social Eco-systems: 
Using Conversational Agents to Help Teach Information Security Risk Analysis 
Stewart Kowalski, Robert Hoffmann, Rohan Jain, Majid Mumtaz 
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University,  
Stockholm, Sweden 
stewart@dsv.su.se, robe-hof@dsv.su.se, roha-jai@dsv.su.se, mmumtaz@dsv.su.se  
 
 
Abstract— New social eco-systems and globalization are 
creating new challenges to educational institutions. Teachers 
need now not only to consider personal differences among their 
students, but also to take care of different cultural behaviors. 
Teachers are now expected to provide both a standardized and 
individual knowledge transfer to their students. This conflict 
may be resolved by utilizing results from artificial intelligence 
research, in particular chat bots. By giving the teacher a 
virtual assistant who can take care of the basic knowledge 
provisioning, the teacher has more freedom to handle the 
complex situations. In this paper we provide a short overview 
of relevant research that we used to build our own knowledge 
bot. The results from using the bot in teaching a undergrad 
class in Sweden is presented, together with an analysis and 
some suggestions for future work. 
 
Keywords -AI; knowledge bot; learning; teaching 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
New and developing global social eco-systems are 
creating new challenges for educations institutions. The 
globalization of knowledge creation and transfer now means 
that educational institutions now must compete for students 
from around the world. These global students expect 
definitive answer and to be educate anywhere and at any-
time. University educators now must not only adapt their 
teaching to different learning styles they must also take care 
of different cultural behaviours and in real time. In this 
paper, we describe an attempt to deal with the problem faced 
by  these new e-learners as they learn to us an artificial 
intelligent conversational agent to assist in teaching a course 
in information security organization and management. 
Students were given the opportunity during the course to 
work with the courses content either via a wiki page 
moderated by a teaching assistant or through discussion with 
the AI conversational agent. Findings from the analysis of 
the student activity logs suggest that most of the students 
seem to preferred the AI conversational agent to the wiki 
work process. 
In the first part, we will describe the theoretical aspects 
of using bots in teaching and existing research. The second 
part discusses our own bot and our experiences from using it. 
The paper ends with a conclusion and suggestions for further 
work. 
II. 
THEORETHICAL ASPECTS 
A. Cultural issues in teaching 
As a result of increasing globalization, we live in a world 
where we are surrounded by people of different origins with 
their own different cultures. Universities are a good example 
of such a place where we encounter people from different 
parts of the globe working and interacting in the same 
environment. To work with such an international audience as 
a teacher and express ones own thoughts and ideas is a 
challenge in itself. An even bigger problem however arises 
when the audience needs to interact with the teacher by bring 
forward their own opinions and questions.  
We have observe during lectures that, whenever a teacher 
poses an open question in front of the class, that a large 
majority of the students remain silent. Research that was 
done in the USA [1] indicated that culture plays a vital role 
in influencing how a individuals is either too open or too shy 
towards the world. For example, in Asian countries, people 
tend to be much shyer as compared to those in western 
occidental countries. One of the possible rationalizations 
behind this fact is that most of the times, a person's success is 
credited externally to his family, parents, teacher or others, 
while his failure is entirely blamed on him. 
B. Chat bots 
A chatterbot, chatbot or conversation agent is a software 
program developed to imitate human like conversation, 
either in text form or via audio. This fast growing technology 
already plays an important role in various fields such as help 
desk tools or customer support. Some chat bots provide 
online 
help, 
personalized 
services 
and 
information 
acquisition services, which requires them to be rather 
sophisticated in processing natural language. But the 
common technology is based on pattern matching such as 
those of the ALICE systems, which use the AIML computer 
language [2]. 
Chat bots can play a useful role for educational purposes, 
because they are an interactive mechanism as compared to 
traditional e-learning systems. Students can continually 
interact with the bot by asking questions related to a specific 
field. Although chat bots have been around since the middle 
of 1960's, only few of them have been used for educational 
purposes and all were related to specific subjects. The 
Virtual Patient bot (VPbot) is an example of an educational 
bot used at the Harvard Medical School. Medical students 
91
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

could interact with the bot and asked him for medical 
knowledge, whereupon the VPbot would answer them via 
audio or text [3]. 
Another Chat bot used for educational purposes was 
Sofia [4]. It was developed for the mathematics department 
of Harvard. The main purpose of this bot was to teach 
algebra. Students interacted with Sofia by asking specific 
questions related to mathematics and teachers could at the 
same time improve the bot's knowledge. This was done 
through analysing the chat logs to see which types of 
questions the students asked frequently and which questions 
needed better answers. This analysis was not only very 
helpful in improving the bot, but also the teachers improved 
their teaching patterns in classes as well [3][4]. 
C. Use of bots in learning and information 
1) Advantages of using bots 
Chat bots are not only an interesting way of providing 
knowledge to the audience, but they can also be the enabler 
to allow the audience to participate. By talking to a neutral 
entity the students might be less inhibited and will show 
more participation. An experiment where a chat bot was used 
to teach English as a foreign language resulted in 85\% of the 
students preferring the bot over a human teacher [6]. 
The bot can also help the teacher to become more 
efficient. By answering recurring questions and providing 
basic knowledge it can take a certain amount of the workload 
away and thereby enable the teacher to focus on more 
specialized or complicated questions. Furthermore can the 
bot collect anonymous questions and forward them to the 
teacher. This lowers the barrier for the students to ask 
questions and bring in opinions. 
2) Creating believable bots 
For a bot to seem real and thereby accepted as a 
conversation partner he has to behave in a social way. 
Previous research in this area [7] tries to show how one can 
make the bot more realistic and believable during a 
conversation by adding some parameters related to general 
awareness. The authors demonstrate different kinds of 
parameters that define environmental, self and interaction 
awareness in the conversational agents. To test their theory, 
they performed an experiment where the test users were 
made to interact with some conversational agents as well as 
humans in a virtual world simulation and hence had to 
deduce if they were talking to a human or a robot. Their 
experiment was quite successful and demonstrated that it 
was much more difficult for the participants to differentiate 
between an aware conversational agent and a human. Hence, 
it was concluded that by adding such parameters to an agent, 
we can create a strong and much more believable bot tool for 
effective conversations. 
3) Two corporate case studies 
One of the authors has previously evaluated the use of 
chat bots for security training in an enterprise environment 
[8]. 
In the first case study the design and usage of a chat bot 
was investigated from an end user perspective. The author 
conducted a survey by dividing the end users into two 
groups. One group was given the chat bot while the other 
group was exclusively using an e-learning product. The main 
goal of the education was to teach knowledge, attitude and 
behavior in regard to security issues. As the result of this 
case study it was shown that the group which had used the 
chat bot showed better results than the e-learning users. It 
can therefore be concluded that the chat bot was the more 
effective technology for creating security awareness among 
users. 
The second case study was performed on security 
specialists. They were divided into two groups and one was 
asked to use the bot for a period and then post their views 
about information they got from it. Although both groups 
showed the same level of knowledge afterwards, the group 
that used the bot reported a better learning experience and 
was eager to use it again. 
4) Using bots in the classroom 
The paper by Knill investigates the benefits and risks in 
pedagogic environment [4]. The main aim of using media 
and technology in classroom is to provide interaction choices 
for students and teachers, and also to have access to 
knowledge 24x7. But there are also risks. If used 
inappropriately in the classroom, the technology can be used 
to perpetuate the old model of teaching and learning. And 
there are also new risks such as equipment failures, bugs in 
software and hardware, security vulnerabilities, compatibility 
issues, and human issues. 
The Freudbot is another example of a successful bot 
usage [9]. The aim of this text based chat bot was to let 
psychology students interact with a virtual Sigmund Freud. 
They could discuss Freudian concepts, theories and 
biographical events. It was an attempt to use technology for 
improving distance education. In the survey that was taken 
after the experiment the students gave a very positive 
feedback and especially valued the feeling of talking to the 
real Freud. 
5) Pedagogical challenges 
New technology cannot simply be introduced into a 
learning environment, but rather has to be adapted to the 
needs of the student and the teacher, as Laurillard shows in 
her paper [10]. She explains that in order to exploit the 
technology in teaching, we need to define the different 
pedagogical challenges. She also considers how the needs of 
both teachers as well as learners can be represented with 
respect to collaborative learning and hence provides a 
"Conversational Framework" explaining how one can use a 
pedagogical framework and integrate it with technology to 
deliver an interactive and genuinely enhanced learning 
environment for people. The full framework embraces all the 
elements prioritized by each of the main pedagogic 
approaches such as instructionism, constructionism, social 
learning and collaborative learning and demonstrates the 
complexity of what it takes to learn: a continual iteration 
between teachers and learners, and between the levels of 
theory and practice. 
6) Automated social engineering 
Unfortunately can bots also be misused as Huber shows 
in his master thesis [11]. Social engineering attacks are 
prevailing these days in the internet world via various social 
networking services such as Facebook, MySpace etc. In his 
92
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

thesis, the author describes different principles that are 
involved along with various techniques adapted by the 
attackers. But his main task was to perform an automated 
social engineering attack on an organization using a chat bot. 
To conduct the experiment, the author created two fake 
profiles called "Julian", managed by a human and "Anna", a 
chat bot. A group of test persons were instructed about the 
experiment and then had to communicate with a randomly 
chosen profile. Their task was to deduce if they were 
communicating with the human or the bot. 
The results showed that the users were able to 
differentiate successfully between a human and machine. 
However, this thesis also showed that social engineering 
attacks are possible today and can pose a serious threat to an 
organization. This kind of threat is relatively new and no 
strong security measures are adopted by companies to handle 
them. 
III. 
USING A BOT TO TEACH RISK ANALYSIS 
Similar to the Sofia bot and Freudbot, our team 
developed a bot for information security students, called 
Octavius. He was used as an aid in teaching the OCTAVE 
risk analysis method [12], hence his name. 
The whole system is web based and consists of the chat 
bot and also a Wiki site. The bot itself is based on the ALICE 
system and therefore AIML. But it was extended to be able 
to open Wiki pages as part of the answer, if appropriate. This 
allowed the bot to give short and precise answers, but at the 
same time also provide in depth information through a Wiki 
page. 
The students were introduced to the bot at the beginning 
of the 10 weeks course, and its knowledge was improved 
over time through a continuous log file analysis. All 
participants were aware that their conversations and IP 
addresses were logged, but also that there was no interest in 
identifying the actual users. This created an anonymous 
environment in which the students could openly chat with 
the bot. 
Also had the students the choice of using the bot, only 
the Wiki or neither. 
A. Technical environment 
The client side was written in HTML and JavaScript and 
served through a regular Apache web server using HTTPS. 
The server side bot engine was written in Python, based 
on the PyAIML interpreter [12] by Cort Stratton. It was 
extended with multi-processor capabilities, load balancing 
and statistics generation. 
OpenBSD 4.8 (http://www.openbsd.org) was used as the 
operating system, running on an Intel quad-core CPU. This 
gave a sustained performance of more than 20 answered 
questions per second and less than 0.2 seconds answer time 
per question, which resulted in an immediate feedback for 
the user. 
The default AIML set as provided by the ALICE project 
[2] was slightly modified and extended with specific 
OCTAVE knowledge. 
B. Student reactions 
63 sessions were done with the bot, in which he was 
asked 510 questions. The median session time was 35 
seconds. Based on the evaluated log files we can see that this 
resulted often from insufficient flexibility of the bot. The 
users often could see that they were talking to an artificial 
being. It is planned to mitigate this effect in the future 
through refined AIML sets. One of the main problems in this 
regard is from our experience the balance between small talk 
and specific know how. Too much of the former results in a 
bot without value, whereas too little of it makes the bot seem 
unnatural. 
But still the bot provided a positive learning experience 
for the students. While they had the choice between the bot 
or the Wiki alone, nearly all of them preferred to talk to the 
bot. This shows that the provisioning of such a system alone 
already encourage interest in it. 
During an informal discussion with the students after the 
course, the general feedback was positive. They encouraged 
the usage of the bot, given that the knowledge base is 
improved so that he becomes more valuable in terms of a 
time spent versus knowledge gained decision. 
C. Conclusion 
There will be an increasing demand for IT based 
teaching, especially on university in the new developing 
social eco-systems. The different cultural backgrounds, and 
therefore learning styles and behaviors, require the teacher to 
focus more on the needs of his students. Given his limited 
time and resources, this can be supported by moving the task 
of basic knowledge transfer to an automated system or 
knowledge bot. This allows him to spend his efforts on high 
value interactions and newly upcoming questions, while still 
providing all necessary knowledge to his class. 
We have shown by various examples that students can 
benefit from such a system and usually are very open minded 
in using it. But still a considerable effort has to spend on 
creating such a system in a way that makes it look real to the 
audience. 
1) Future work 
We will continue to improve Octavius, and at the same 
time branch off the system into other bots for different 
subjects.  On the theoretical side have we identified the need 
for research into utilizing AIML. Only by fully exploiting the 
possibilities of the language will it be possible to create 
realistically behaving ALICE bots. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. Henderson and P. Zimbardo, “Shyness”, Encyclopedia of 
Mental Health, 1996. 
[2] R. Wallace, “Artificial Linguistic Internet Computer Entity”, 
The A.L.I.C.E. AI Foundation, 1995. 
[3] B. A. Shawar and E. Atwell, “Chatbots: Are they Really 
Useful?”, LDV-Forum, vol. 22, pp. 22-49, 2007. 
[4] O. Knill, and J., Carlsson, Andrew Chi and Mark Lezama, An 
artiﬁcial intelligence experiment in college math education, 
http://www.math.harvard.edu/~knill/preprints/sofia.pdf,, 
accessed,  
Sept  2011. 
93
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

[5] O. Knill, “Benefits and Risks of Media and Technology in the 
Classroom”, ICTCM, 2007. 
[6] L. Fryer and R. Carpenter, “Emerging Technologies: Bots as 
Language 
Learning 
Tools”, 
Language 
Learning 
& 
Technology, nr. 3, vol. 10, pp. 8-14, 2006. 
[7] B. Reeves, “The Benefits of Interactive Online Characters”, 
Stanford University, 2000. 
[8] S. Kowalski, K. Pavlosvska and M. Goldstein, “Two Case 
Studies in Using Chatbots for Security Training”, Royal 
Institute of Technology Stockholm, 2009. 
[9] B. Heller, M. Procter, D. Mah, L. Jewell and B. Cheung, 
“Freudbot: An Investigation of Chatbot Technology in 
Distance Education”, Athabasca University, Canada, 2005. 
[10] D. Laurillard, “The pedagogical challenges to collaborative 
technologies”, Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 
vol. 4, pp. 5-20, 2009. 
[11] M. Huber, “Automated Social Engineering: Proof of 
Concept”, Royal Institute of Technology Stockholm, 2009.  
[12] OCTAVE, http://www.cert.org/octave, access ed Sept 2011. 
[13] C. Stratton, PyAIML, http://pyaiml.sourceforge.net, acessed 
Sept 2011.  
 
 
 
94
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

