The Social Responsibility of Online Charge-free Service Providers 
Accountability for use of the term "free" 
 
Kazuyuki Shimizu 
School of Business Administration, Meiji University 
Tokyo, Japan 
shimizuk@kisc.meiji.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In an autonomous market economy that has long 
been separated from other economies, price-signal information 
such as profit, cost, productivity, or competition tends to be 
regarded as a matter of concern, and other information 
regarded only as noise. In the current business environment, 
where market-economy principles have spread globally, the 
majority of business scholars and practitioners seem to believe 
that only price-signal information is relevant and significant 
for business organizations. This is epitomized by excessive 
greed demonstrated by some hedge funds, based on their belief 
in a neo-liberal law of the jungle. The development of 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has made 
it possible for business organizations to handle huge amounts 
of personal data (now referred to as big data) to streamline 
business operations and enhance customer satisfaction. It has 
also shortened the life cycle of products and services. Business 
people in this environment feel it is not fair to handle 
personal/privacy information data properly, unless it generates 
short-term profits. In fact, many business people, especially in 
Japan, consider personal data/privacy protection to be a cost 
factor and view regulations as an impediment to industry 
development. This study examines whether privacy could be 
adequately protected in this socio-economic environment.  
Keywords-personal data/privacy protection; market system; 
corporate governance; charge free; dilemma. 
I. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE 
One of the main research-question for this study was “Is 
the claim of online charge-free services true?” The current 
market economy is based on price, and price is decided by 
supply and demand. According to Adam Smith [1], an 
invisible hand determines optimal price. Why then, are there 
numerous online charge-free service providers in the digital 
world? People are fascinated by the magical words “charge 
free”. 
There is a system behind charge-free services. People 
who need services provide their personal data, which have 
enormous value. Service providers insist that personal data 
will be managed very carefully, but they are also concerned 
with maximising profits. Thus, “charge free” does not mean 
that value is not exchanged because value is not only 
represented by price systems; rather, this means that privacy 
equals money.  
Recently, the information technology is developing 
unpredictably fast. A visible or invisible hand (technology 
and software) could control the optimal price, and also 
people’s mind. 
II. 
STATISTICS-ORIENTED MARKETING 
METHOD 
Research by the Academy of Management (AOM) [2], 
which always uses a statistics-oriented marketing method, 
has demonstrated that online charge-free services providers 
transfer collected personal data to marketing and advertising 
companies. 
These 
data-research 
companies 
calculate 
consumer demand using a statistics-oriented marketing 
method to identify exact needs. Personal data are obtained by 
online charge-free services providers, because of consumer 
fascination with the magical words “charge free”. 
This recent way of thinking is a neo-liberal idea based on 
rational expectation theory in which an agent’s expectations 
equal true statistically expected values. An examination of 
corner advertisements on “Facebook” webpages revealed 
that companies placed advertisements that exactly fit the 
consumer profile of the “Facebook” holder. These 
advertising firms use rational expectation theory.  
If the market system were working fair, then the neo-
liberalistic idea could fit onto this rational expectation theory. 
However, there is an idea of counter party, such as the social 
market economy in Northern Europe. 
III. 
THE PROBLEM WITH THE CURRENT MARKET 
ECONOMY, AND SUGGESTION FOR THIS SITUATION 
A. Corporate Governance 
Corporate governance is distinct from management in 
that it is concerned with how corporate entities are governed 
rather than with how business entities within those 
companies are managed. Corporate governance addresses 
issues facing the board of directors, such as interaction with 
top management, and relationships with others interested in 
the affairs of the company, including owners, creditors, debt 
financers, analysts, auditors, and corporate regulators. 
Corporate 
governance 
affects 
performance 
through 
involvement with strategy formulation and policy making 
and with corporate conformance through top management 
supervision and accountability to the stakeholders [3]. 
In general, there are three theoretical tendencies about 
corporate governance. Firstly, it is shareholders value theory 
[4], which has been dominant also, aimed maximizing their 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

wealth. The opposite and alternative theory is stakeholder 
value theory, which includes not only shareholders interest 
but also stakeholders. Currently, another variety of corporate 
governance theories [5] has been developed, such as 
enlightened shareholder value [6] or stewardship theory [7], 
and so on. This current situation of this tendency shows that 
one more dimension has been added to business activity, 
namely the moral one [8]. Such a corporate governance 
theory includes this ethical idea, which is affecting not only 
performance but also decision-making. 
B. The Case of Edward Snowden 
This case shows a good example about the failure of 
bureaucracy. The organization of bureaucracy is good 
example when we think about the function of governance. 
Individual privacy protection distracts from the prevention of 
international terrorism. Government is also seeking their rent 
from the people. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Responses from 92 people to the question, “Is privacy 
protection important?” . 
Edward Snowden is an American, a former technical 
contractor for the United States National Security Agency 
(NSA), and former employee of the Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA), who leaked details of several top-secret US 
and British government programs to the press. Does a 
democratic ideal entail ensuring people’s freedom? This is a 
highly controversial question.  
Following the Snowden case, I conducted a survey of 92 
male and female students in my lecture at Meiji University 
asking their opinions on the necessity of privacy (see Figure 
1). Results of the survey indicated that 81% of respondents 
valued privacy protection above freedom. These results not 
only represent a controversial point of view, but also 
illustrate a fascinating contrast to the popularity of online 
charge-free service providers. In fact, the point is that we 
need to explain what “charge-free” means. It shows that 
there is insufficient disclosure of information from online 
service providers. 
C. Dillemma 
Internet users need to be more careful when submitting 
their personal data to the databases of charge-free service 
providers. Government agencies could easily access these 
personal data using regulations, such as the US Patriot Act 
[9]. 
The conflict between personal freedom and privacy has 
always presented a dilemma. One example was mercantilism 
(absolutism) versus physiocracy in the 16th century [10]. 
The father of price theory, Adam Smith, resolved this 
dilemma using the price system and the invisible hand [11]. 
Mercantilism proposed economic internationalization, and 
Smith wanted to find a compromise with economic 
localization, which becomes available through the use of 
internet (techno-globalization and localization both ways).  
This dilemma between freedom and privacy is also 
illustrated by considering the example of secrecy at Swiss 
banks (German word; “Bankgeheimnis”). Following World 
War II, Switzerland developed a bank system that carefully 
protected bank account privacy, even from prosecutors. This 
created a tax-haven problem, with people sending their 
fortunes to Swiss banks to evade their tax duty [12]. These 
are not “charge-free” services. 
D. Varieties of capitalism 
References to “varieties of capitalism” point to the 
coexistence of two types of capitalism, such as Liberal 
Market Economies (LME) and Coordinated Market 
Economies (CME). The phrase “varieties of capitalism” 
reflects a new framework for understanding institutional 
similarities and differences. There is a discussion about the 
two types or models of capitalism [13]. This suggests the 
possibility of multiple and divergent forms of capitalism.  
This governance point of view, the people’s freedom and 
privacy must be recognized by contemporary capitalism. 
Therefore, governance should not follow only one “best 
way”, but should be open to the idea of “varieties of 
capitalism”, becoming more diverse and open to many best 
ways.  
Also, corporate governance is affected by two capitalism 
ideas. Boubaker et al. [8] argues that the ethical idea from 
the profit-oriented companies is the only way to sustain their 
activities. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper discussed the social responsibility of online 
charge-free service providers. There is a consumer 
fascination with magical words “charge free”. Therefore, 
online charge-free service providers need to be more 
accountable about their use of the word "free".  
Finally, we need to mention that the several private 
security companies for the digital world, such as “VeriSign” 
[14], that provide consultation services to private companies 
on how to introduce and operate a privacy policy. Many 
profit-oriented companies feel they do not need to implement 
fair handling of personal data and proper protection of 
personal data/privacy. However, an examination of one’s 
“Facebook” page or the Snowden case does not support this 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

perspective. This private security companies are also profit-
oriented companies. 
This paper discussed the following: 
1) Research Background and Objective: Research 
question; “Is the claim of online charge-free services true?” 
There is a profit system behind the charge-free claim. 
Service providers sell privacy data to advertising companies, 
which means the charge-free unidentical no value. 
2) Statistics-oriented marketing method: The rational 
expectation 
theory 
estimate 
in 
which 
the 
agent’s 
expectations constitute  true statistically expected values. 
However, it impose many preconditions, such as the fair 
market condition. Therefore, it is important to accept the 
idea of social market economy. 
3) Problems of the current market economy and 
suggestion of this situation: 
a) Corporate Governance: There are three theoretical 
tendencies about corporate governance, such as shareholders 
value theory, stakeholder value theory and enlightened 
shareholder value or stewardship theory. Those current 
tendency shows that the moral is important for business 
activity. 
b) The Case Study of Edward Snowden: People value 
privacy protection above freedom!? If this is a case one 
question will come up, why the neo-liberal law has been 
spreaded out globally. This is a highly controversial 
question. 
c) Dilemma: Swiss banks create a tax-haven problem, 
where individuals hide their fortunes to avoid their tax duty. 
These are not “charge-free” services and offer a good 
example of this dilemma. 
d) Varieties of capitalism: Rather than converging on 
one best way, the idea of “varieties of capitalism” suggests 
seeking divergence into many best ways. 
Figure 2.  Conceptual diagram 
This paper also discussed the coordination between 
people’s rights (privacy protection) and the power of the 
state (against freedom or control). Increased regulation of 
online charge-free service providers is needed to promote 
and insure social responsibility (see Figure 2). There has 
always been a fascination with the magical words “charge 
free”. However, when considered from the economic 
viewpoint of free market, where always under the condition 
of hard competition and strict regulation. Therefore, online 
charge-free service providers need to be more accountable 
for the use of the term "free". Also be fair handling of 
personal data or proper protection of personal data/privacy 
unless it generates short-term profits. 
Figure 2 shows the concept of this paper. If personal 
privacy is protected, internet technology could ease this 
protection instead there control. The main dilemma would be 
easier to solve if online charge-free providers would be more 
ethical also accountable for use of magical word “charge-
free”. It is also very important to think about how to best 
regulate these service providers because it will require 
international coordination among regulatory systems, i.e., a 
hybrid system that accommodates many best ways of 
practicing capitalism. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Smith, “An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of 
Nations” Volume 1 Paperback, Liberty Fund, Inc. USA, 1982. 
[2] D. Malhotra and F. Lumineau, “Trust and Collaboration in the 
Aftermath of Conflict: The Effects of Contract Structure,” Academy 
of Management Journal, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 981–998. 2011, 
[3] R. I. Tricker, “International Corporate Governance,”  Prentice Hall, p. 
xi, Blackwell Pub, USA, 1994. 
[4] M. C. Jensen, “Value Maximization, Stakeholder Theory, and the 
Corporate Objective Function,” Harvard Business School, USA, 
Working Paper No. 01-01, 2001. 
[5] M. 
Aoki, 
“Corporations 
in 
Evolving 
Diversity: 
Cognition, 
Governance, and Institutions (Clarendon Lectures in Management 
Studies),” Oxford University Press, USA, 2010. 
[6] D. Millon, “Enlightened Shareholder Value, Social Responsibility, 
and the Redefinition of Corporate Purpose Without Law,” 
Washington & Lee Public Legal Studies Research Paper Series, 
Working Paper, Virginia, 2010. 
[7] R. I. Tricker, “Corporate Governance: Practices, Procedures and 
Powers in British Companies and Their Boards of Directors,” 
Ashgate Publishing Limited, UK, 1984. 
[8] S. Boubaker, B. D. Nguyen, D. K. Nguyen, “Corporate governance : 
recent developments and new trends”, Springer, Cambridge., S. 
Andreadakis, “Enlightened Shareholder Value: Is It the New Modus 
Operandi for Modern Companies?”, pp. 415-432, 2012. 
[9] O. J. Kirkaldy, “Privacy & the New Panopticon: Lawful Access and 
The Race Between Law and Technology in the War on Terror”, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,  2008. 
[10] K. Saeki, “Made a mistake in Adam Smith’s calculation,” PHP Books, 
Japan, 2009. 
[11] K. Saeki, “Prediction of J. M. Keynes,”  PHP Books, Japan 1999. 
[12] P. A. Hall and D. Soskice, “Varieties of Capitalism: The institutional 
foundations of comparative advantage,” Oxford University Press, 
New York, 2001. 
[13] C. 
Buechenbacher, 
“Tatsachen 
ueder 
das 
Schweizerische 
Bankgeheimnis,” Marcel H. Huber, Zürich, 1977. 
[14] Yohko Orito, Kiyoshi Murata and Yasunori Fukuta, “Do Online 
Privacy Policies and Seals Affect Corporate Trustworthiness and 
Reputation?,” International Review of Information Ethics, vol. 19, pp. 
52-65, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
  
Privacy 
 
Internet 
Charge-free 
service providers 
 
(Neo-) 
Liberal law 
Control 
Ethical 
   Accountability 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

