Mapping Competences of Distance Education Students 
  
Ketia Kellen Araújo da Silva, Patricia Alejandra Behar  
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul 
UFRGS 
Porto Alegre, Brasil  
e-mail: ketiakellen@gmail.com, pbhear@terra.com
Abstract— This article aims to present a mapping of the 
competences needed by students of Distance Education. 
The study establishes a relationship between competences 
and 
students 
of 
distance 
education, 
highlighting 
knowledge, competences and attitudes linked to this mode 
of learning. The qualitative-quantitative approach 
employed presents an explorative and unique case study. 
As part of the study, a Learning Object was developed 
and subsequently validated through an extension course. 
The course was one of the strategies used to map 
competences and was complimented by interviews and 
questionnaires. Analysis consisted of an evaluation of the 
data and a description of the competences. The final 
competence map was organised using a twelve-part 
diagram presenting the following competences: digital 
fluency, 
autonomy, 
organization, 
planning, 
time 
management, 
communication, 
reflection, 
virtual 
presence, self-evaluation, self-motivation, flexibility, and 
teamwork. 
  
Keywords - Distance Education; Competences; Distance 
Education students 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The advance that Distance Education has made in the 
Brazilian context in recent years is undeniable. One of the 
key factors in this phenomenon is the development of 
technology, in particular Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT). The introduction of ICT in education has 
meant a reduction in distances, which in turn has favoured 
Distance Education and thus new opportunities for creating, 
storing and transmitting data. 
Technology has generated a profound social change 
whereby, increasingly, the generation born and living in this 
new age of technology, develops new ways of acting, 
thinking, learning and being [1][2]. All of these 
transformations have had a huge impact on education, 
modifying learning environments and the resources used for 
teaching and molding the profile of the students themselves. 
These peculiarities of Distance Education require those being 
taught to demonstrate unique knowledge, abilities and 
attitudes, which can be identified as specific competences. 
Thus, both the teacher and student of Distance Education 
must possess knowledge of technology and its potential [3]. 
In the Brazilian education system, Distance Education was 
regulated in law in 1996 through the so called Lei de 
Diretrizes e Bases da Educação National (LDB) n 9.394 [4]. 
In 2005, with the updating of the LDB, Distance Education 
was defined as: [...] a type of education whose pedagogical 
didactic is characterized by the use of information and 
communication technology where students are found in 
diverse places or times. 
In 2007, the Brazilian Education Ministry (MEC) 
released guiding principles of the process of Distance 
Education in tertiary education systems, with the intention of 
informing the evaluation, organization, supervision and 
wider role of this mode of education. With this in mind, 
Distance Education can be seen as having significant 
potential to democratize and elevate the standard and quality 
of Education in Brazil. 
Students, the focus of this study, possess characteristics 
in transformation, most apparent in the way they behave and 
act through technology [5]. There exists a broad spectrum of 
individuals who have had different experiences and relations 
with ICT, while not all Distance Education students will have 
a natural affinity with the use of technological resources [6]. 
For students to drive their learning, it is necessary to 
understand what competences, knowledge and attitudes are 
needed to undertake study in Distance Education, as opposed 
to in traditional classroom learning. Paloff and Pratt, state that 
[...] with the freedom and flexibility of the on-line 
environment comes responsibility [7]. In other words, the 
student becomes responsible for his individual study plan as 
Distance Education course planning is more open and 
flexible regarding the distribution of reading hours, 
assignments and other activities. In classroom learning, these 
considerations are strongly guided by the classes attended 
and by direct engagement with the teacher. 
It is in this context that discussion surrounding the basic 
skills essential for students in Distance Education is set. 
Sections II and III of this article contain a brief bibliographic 
revision, focusing on themes relating to competences, their 
elements and students of distance education. Following this, 
the research itself is presented in Section IV, while Section V 
covers the conclusions of the study.  
II. COMPETENCES 
The term competence initially originated in the business 
world, where it denotes someone capable of completing 
certain activities efficiently. Etymologically, competence 
shares its Latin roots with competition, both words coming 
from the Indo-European expression pot (pet), meaning to put 
oneself against and compete, to find oneself at the same point, 
to be adequate, to bring together circumstances. There is, 
therefore, a relation to the professional world in which there 
is the need for competitiveness. As such, people are not 
resources, which the organization consumes, uses and which 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
produce costs, but rather they constitute a competitive factor 
in the same way as do the market and technology [8]. 
Being professional, competitive and competent is linked 
to those most capable and efficient - those who achieve the 
most in professional terms. Competence is knowing how to 
act responsibly and to be recognized by others. It implies 
knowing how to mobilize, integrate and transfer knowledge, 
resources and skills in a given professional context [9]. For 
Fleury and Fleury it is an underlying characteristic of 
someone who is related to a higher performance in the 
realization of a task or in a specific situation. The job market 
is based on a process of preparation for operational roles and 
functions. Thus, those that have greater formal education 
achieve management positions or higher hierarchical levels 
[10]. 
From an educational perspective Gaspar [11] states that 
the concept of competence arises from studies carried out in 
Canada, Switzerland and Belgium at the start of the 1990s, 
where actions go beyond knowledge, aptitude or ability. 
Competence is understood as the mobilization of these 
resources 
depending 
on 
personal 
experience, 
one’s 
psychological, cognitive and affective background and the 
situation in which the individual is placed.  
Even today, there exists a great deal of uncertainty about 
the nature of competences and how they are being applied in 
education, as at times they have different meanings and show 
contradictions. For Perrenoud [12] competence is the aptitude 
to effectively confront a range of situations, mobilizing the 
conscience more and more quickly and creatively. For Zabala 
and Arnau [13] present the concept of competence that is 
adopted in this study as being the capacity or ability to carry 
out tasks or act in a range of situations in an effective way in 
a given context. It is necessary to mobilize attitudes, abilities 
and knowledge at the same time and in an interrelated way. 
In Brazil, the concept focused on education was 
incorporated in 1996 through the Lei de Diretrizes e Bases 
(LDB) nº 9.394 [4], which states that the curriculum of 
secondary schools should be aimed at the development of 
competences for citizenship. 
 The CNE/CEB 16/99 report, which deals with curricular 
directives for professional education, presents curricular 
reform in a professional way. Here, the concept of 
competence is understood as “[...] the capacity to articulate, 
mobilize and put into action values, knowledge and skills 
necessary for the efficient and effective development of the 
required activities in a given working environment.” [14]. 
In 2001, the CNE/CP 9/2001 report surrounding teacher 
training, has the development of competences as its central 
focus. The report states that: “It is not enough for a 
professional to possess knowledge about their job. It is 
fundamental that they know how to summon this knowledge 
and transform it into action.” [15]. 
The Brazilian national secondary school examination 
known as ENEM (Exame Nacional do Ensino Médio), 
administered by the Brazilian Ministry of Education (MEC) 
since 1998 is applied with the aim of evaluating the 
performance of students. This evaluation is based on five 
competences: 1 - Mastering languages; 2 - Understanding 
phenomena; 3 - Problem solving; 4 - Constructing arguments; 
5 - Elaborating proposals. 
There is an exaggerated use of the term competence, 
which can lead to incorrect use and confusion. It is therefore 
necessary to be able to truly understand the changes and new 
perspectives brought by the concept of competence in 
education.  
As such, with the aim of contextualizing and using the 
term coherently in education, one must understand the 
context of the competence. This is particularly salient given 
that, naturally, the great challenge in education remains the 
association of competences with the final performance of the 
student. In education, one must consider the entire process of 
development and mobilization of competences and not only 
the result.  
With these different definitions of competences in mind, 
it is possible to see commonalities such as:  
!
The behaviour of students in new and complex 
situations; 
!
The mobilization of resources, depending on the 
willingness or not of the student to solve problems, 
i.e., with specific attitudes and intention; 
!
The command of the procedures in the action being 
carried out;  
!
The action must be inter-related as it depends on the 
gathering of resources or command of the student, 
not only in terms of knowledge but also in experience 
and attitude etc.; 
!
The resources are, therefore, composed of three 
fundamental elements: knowledge, ability and 
attitudes.  
The analysis of these points forms the concept of 
competence, as it is necessary to understand the composing 
elements: knowledge, abilities and attitudes. It is thus not 
sufficient to merely understand what a competence is but also 
to understand the wider process, beginning with its elements 
as described below. 
III. ELEMENTS 
The elements of competences correspond to the joining of 
the elements that an individual has at their disposal.  “[...] 
competences presuppose the existence of resources [...]. No 
resource belongs exclusively to a competence in that it can be 
mobilized by others.”[16]
The majority of our resources can be used or reused in 
different contexts, i.e., they are at the service of a range of 
different intentions. The dynamic character of competences 
relates to the elements, which modify or transform them 
according to socio-cultural changes. Thus, it is important to 
understand each element and their characteristics. 
A.! Knowledge 
Knowledge is constructed through contact with one’s 
environment and is not synonymous with information or 
wisdom. This study understands knowledge in terms of  
Piaget’s constructivist vision [17]: “[...] the essential point of 
our theory is that knowledge is the result of interactions 
between the subject and the object, which is richer than what 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
objects can supply by themselves.” This perspective holds 
that the construction of knowledge is attained through the 
interaction between the student (subject) and the environment 
(object) and its structures. As such, the acquisition of 
knowledge depends on both the cognitive structures of the 
student and their relation with the object. The construction of 
the subject’s knowledge of the object is therefore achieved 
through construction and reconstruction in constant spiral 
movement. 
B.! Ability  
Ability is the element of competence which demonstrates 
what the student knows and can learn. It is related to the 
application of knowledge, can be constructed through 
practice and can suffer alterations according to the socio-
cultural and cognitive context of the student. 
The concept of ability also has different perspectives. 
Perreound [16] states that “[...] in general, an ability is not as 
broad as a competence, that is why it is understood by many 
authors to be one of the elements of competence.” Thus 
different abilities form one or more competences, i.e., they 
are used in different situations. In this way, abilities are both 
those which present mental/cognitive processes and those 
which present motor and technical processes. Indeed, 
different abilities form one or more competences in that they 
are used in different situations [16]. 
C. Attitude 
Attitudes determine how individuals position themselves 
in relation to others and to wider circumstances. They also 
serve to evaluate feelings, behaviour and choices. A number 
of studies have exhaustively demonstrated that attitudes are 
behind behaviour. An attitude is a state of readiness organised 
by experience which exercises a guiding and dynamic 
influence over the responses of an individual vis-a-vìs given 
objects or situations. Thus, attitude can be understood as the 
motivation behind an action. 
Following an understanding of the link between 
competences and their elements, it is necessary to understand 
the characteristics of distance learning students. 
IV. THE DISTANCE LEARNING STUDENT 
The range of changes generated by technology have had 
a significant impact on education, modifying learning spaces, 
educational environments and teaching resources, as well as 
the profile of the student arriving at school. As such, distance 
education has also been reorganized to include technology 
and has redefined its structure.  
The profile of the student has also changed, given the 
nature of the moment of transition and the fact that not all are 
born and raised in contact with technology. Pozo and 
Monereo [6] call this phenomenon the digital divide, as, just 
as there exist young people who remain distant from ICT, 
there also exist those in the older generation who have had 
close contact with the latest technology from the outset and 
whose current modes of working, communicating and 
thinking are guided by computer systems. Thus, there is a 
great diversity of students with different profiles, tastes, 
knowledge, background and ideas [6].  
According to the Quality References for Higher Distance 
Education (Referenciais de Qualidade para Educação 
Superior a Distância) [18], the student is the centre of the 
educational process. When distance education first emerged, 
all attention was focused on the teacher and technological 
resources while the student was marginalized. Today the 
student is regarded as the centre and focus of on-line learning 
[19]. 
The course, materials and structure are created with the 
virtual student in mind.  Paloff and Pratt [7] present the 
following as necessary resources for students: connection 
with technology; training and support on the use of course 
technology; access to services, such as those found on the 
university campus; support services and feedback and 
evaluations. 
The virtual student cannot always adapt to this mode of 
education. In addition to personal issues, experience in using 
technology can also influence and present difficulties for 
students. [3] 
Prensky [1] describes the relationship that people have 
with technology by characterizing two types of people: 
Digital Natives and Digital Migrants. These terms distinguish 
those who came into contact late with digital technology, 
migrating from technology based on conventional texts, from 
those that have been raised with these technologies as their 
“natural” environment of development. The profile of 
distance learning students dealt with in this study is largely 
that of the digital migrant, previously used to printed linear 
and statistical texts.  
In Brazil, data from the 2008 Higher Education Survey 
published by the Brazilian National Institute of Studies and 
Research (Inep) show that there were 115 institutions with 
647 undergraduate distance courses, a total of 727.961 
students enrolled and 70.068 graduates of these courses. 
Research released in 2010 by the Brazilian internet 
regulator CGI (Comitê Gestor da Internet no Brasil) shows 
that more than seven million Brazilians have already taken 
distance courses using the internet. This study excludes those 
who have completed courses using other technological means 
such as video and radio. 
This suggests that the number of distance education 
students and distance courses has risen rapidly. Thus, it is 
important to attract students, present the innovations and 
opportunities of distance education and identify the  
necessary skills in this process. In this way, it will be possible 
to anticipate and reduce future conflicts and problem 
situations, increasing motivation – so essential in the process 
of teaching and learning. The focus of this study is on adult 
learners undergoing post-graduate study in a distance 
learning format. 
 The following section discusses the methodology used in 
this study to carry out the mapping process. 
V. DELINEATING THE MAPPING 
This research was carried out over a two year period in 
which time, during the first year, a Learning Object was 
constructed. This Learning Object was called CompMap – 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
Competence Mapping of Distance Education students 
(Mapeamento de Competências dos alunos da EAD). The 
main function of the object was to act as a digital resource 
with a content specially developed for the mapping of 
competences and with a focus on Distance Education 
students. The content and activities of the Learning Object 
were developed with a focus on the mapping of competences 
and the Object was employed with post-graduate students in 
an extension course; the intention being to map the 
competences of these students. 
During the second year, the process of data collection was 
completed using Questionnaires, an Extension Course and 
Interviews. The Questionnaire was given to distance learning 
students, teachers and tutors and was developed in an on-line 
form using Google Docs. Through this source, it was possible 
to obtain information on the profile of the distance education 
students and their skills, tying in with relevant studies and 
literature. In total, 17 tutors, 2 teachers and 7 students who 
participated in the extension course responded to the 
questionnaire The extension course was given to post-
graduate distance learning students who were doing teacher 
training. The theme of the course was distance learning 
competences and consisted of 40 hours, over 7 weeks with 3 
traditional face-to-face classes (at the start, middle and end of 
the course) and 4 distance classes. The extension course used 
the UFRGS AVA Moodle tool as well as the OA CompMap. 
During this time, participating students completed activities 
aimed at mapping their competences. In order to obtain the 
final 
mapping, 
comparisons 
were 
made 
between 
competences noted in relevant academic literature, the 
answers given by teachers and tutors and the result of the 
mapping carried out during the course.  Finally at the end of 
the course, some of the participating tutors and students were 
interviewed. The interviews were performed with students 
who participated in the extension course, and with tutors who 
did not answer the initial questionnaire. A total of five tutors 
and three students were interviewed for more than 30 minutes 
each and the interviews were transcribed. 
VI.!
COMPETENCE  MAPPING 
Mapping was carried out using an analysis of two 
categories created from the data collected. The categories 
were: 1. Distance Education students and 2. Competences of 
Distance Education students. Mapping in the former category 
was noteworthy in demonstrating issues with technology, 
time management and communication. Moreover, adults 
enrolled in this class work 40 to 60 hours a week. It was noted 
that, just as students in the classroom require competences 
which allow them to act like students, distance education 
students also require skills to face their difficulties and 
discover the opportunities presented by technology. The 
quotes below were taken from responses to the questionnaire 
and reveal some of the principal characteristics of the of the 
profile of the students. 
 
For a distance learning student  who works from 40 to 
60 hours is difficult to take traditional classes, said a 
student 4. 
People who work for 40 hours dont have the time to go 
to a University. It is much more comfortable to study at 
home, a student 5 commented.  
 
Todays distance learning students were formed through 
the traditional classroom model throughout their learning 
process. As adults, they are not very familiar with technology 
and have trouble feeling responsible for their own learning. 
Moreover, for a long time they had only been content 
reproducers rather than producers. This is illustrated in the 
following quotes from students: 
 
“The distance education student depends on a physical 
professor, has some difficulty to interpret the tasks 
proposed, as well as to be able to use the Virtual Learning 
Environment well,” student 1 stated. 
 “My biggest challenge as a distance learner was the lack 
of physical contact, the exchange of looks, facial 
expressions, and other non-verbal communication that 
just does not happen in distance learning,” student 2 said. 
 
It is therefore necessary for students to construct new 
identities –that of a virtual student. In order to do so, one 
must remodel what has already been elaborated in the face-
to-face classroom environment. This process is not only a 
cause or product of interaction but must be a constant 
transformation. 
In order to develop a new identity, three fundamental 
points are necessary. The first is strategic action: time 
management, ways of communicating, disposition and 
motivation. The second is an understanding of the 
characteristics of the group and of the tasks, objectives and 
wider context of the course. The third is the technological 
conditions available to the student, such as reliable Internet 
connection, the use of tools and familiarity with technology, 
shown in Fig. 1. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Representation of the Identity of the Virtual Student 
 
To begin with, students can take their real world 
experiences to the virtual world along with the understanding 
of strategies, characteristics and technology. Students can 
also start to create a type of hybrid or blended learning [20]. 
This convergence of real world and virtual experiences 
will unlock the students’ style and behaviour in each 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
situation, be it face to face or virtual. It can be concluded that 
the profile of distance education students is composed of 
three 
interlinked 
contexts/dimensions, 
those 
being:  
social/family related, professional and academic. Technology 
is transversal and permeates all other contexts owing to its 
daily presence in the life of the student. However, technology 
is not a resource with which this student is familiar, being a 
context under construction and which, owing to experiences 
and time, will go through transformations with different 
results for each student. 
Having raised and organized the profile, it was possible 
to present and list the competences of these students. This is 
the subject of the next section. 
 
VII.! COMPETENCES OF DISTANCE LEARNING STUDENTS 
Basic competences of students of distance education were 
identified through analyzed data. These competences derive 
from an initial mapping of the relevant literature, which was 
subsequently compared with the data obtained from students 
taking the course and statements given by teachers and tutors. 
From this, text extracts were taken in which the research 
subjects indicated the competences that a distance learning 
student should have. The extracts below are the tutors’ 
opinions about the students.   
 
“The competences required are: Autonomy, discipline, 
reflective reading, suitable production of writing, proper 
reference of other’s texts,,” said tutor 1. 
“The student has to be autonomous, be able to manage his 
time, have basic knowledge of computing, know the 
virtual environment that he will use,” tutor 3 said. 
“[...] the student should have knowledge about computer 
tools and computing itself, and be autonomous,” stated 
tutor 7. 
“The student must be organized and disciplined, and 
should seek a theoretical base from the classes’ suggested 
readings.,” tutor 20 said. 
 
The following extracts reveal the students and tutors 
answers about the competences the students had during the 
course.  
I think that the group I classified as knowing more about 
technology had technological competences but no 
communicative competences. Yet, the other group had 
more difficulties with technological issues. Both groups 
lacked good time management strategies,” tutor 4 stated. 
“There are cases in which students didn’t have any of this 
competence [technological]. In this case, the focus has to  
be to invested in the student’s digital literacy, which I 
think is a very important,” tutor 5 said. 
“I believe I have the main competences, though due to the 
everyday rush, I end up falling behind on my 
homework/readings,” student 1 stated. 
The mapping itself, shown in “Fig. 2”, demonstrates the 
organization of the twelve competences listed in this study 
together with the profile of these students. While many other 
competences of course exist, the students in this study 
showed little familiarity with distance learning, thus 
generating a list of basic competences.  
The results obtained show that there exists a gradual 
transition, beginning with competences of digital fluency and 
ending with team work. This analysis, based on levels of 
difficulty, was made possible via the statements made by 
statements as well as by activities undertaken on the course. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Twelve Competences of the Distance Learning student  
 The full competence mapping, and their elements 
(Knowledge, Abilities and Attitudes), will be presented 
below. 
A.! Digital Fluency 
Digital Fluency is linked to the use of technology 
whereby the student feels an active participant in advances in 
digital technology. Fluency makes possible not only the use 
of technology but also the creation of content and materials. 
Knowledge: Theoretical and technological knowledge of the 
tools. Abilities: The ability to use, search for, select and 
produce. Attitudes: Having the initiative to seek innovations 
and keep up to speed with technological advances at all times. 
B.! Autonomy 
For Piaget, autonomy is being governed by oneself. It is 
the opposite of heteronomy which is where one individual is 
governed by another. Knowledge: Knowledge of social and 
cultural norms, moral values and ethics. Abilities: The ability 
to analyse and interpret data and situations, making complex 
choices, anticipating situations, selecting, systemising, 
relating and interpreting data and information and making 
decisions. Attitudes: Having self-control and being 
responsible, self-critical, proactive, committed and ethical. 
C.!  Organization  
Organization is related to the ordering and structuring of 
activities, materials and groups. Knowledge: Having self-
knowledge, being able to plan and being aware of deadlines. 
Abilities: Creating strategies, systemising, ordering and 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
classifying. Attitudes: Being engaged, involved and 
proactive, taking decisions and being persistent. 
D.!
Planning 
Planning is based on the establishment of priorities, goals 
and objectives. In education, planning is also having the 
necessary conditions to create learning situations and apply 
learning strategies. Knowledge: Knowledge of types of 
planning, context, opportunities, weaknesses and audience (if 
applicable). Abilities: Systemising, evaluating and analysing. 
Attitudes: Being proactive, objective and methodical. 
E.! Time management 
Time management is necessary in fulfilling diary 
commitments, organizing and managing activities and 
fulfilling priorities, goals and objectives. Knowledge: 
Knowledge of deadlines, methods of organization and self-
knowledge. Abilities: Using time efficiently, establishing 
limits, deadlines and priorities, ordering actions and 
identifying objectives. Attitudes: Being proactive, objective 
and focused. 
F.! Communication 
Communication is founded in the clarity and objectivity 
of oral, gestural and written expression. Knowledge: 
Linguistic knowledge, understanding rules of behaviour, 
forms of communication and different audiences. Abilities: 
The ability to write clearly, objectively and coherently, to 
interpret messages received, and knowing how to use ones 
voice, articulate words and use appropriate language. 
Attitudes: Being expressive, empathetic, cautious and 
articulate. 
G.! Reflection 
Reflection is based on being able to reflect on and 
critically analyse situations, activities and ways of behaving. 
Knowledge: Knowing the object in question and its different 
aspects. Abilities: This consists of analysing and interpreting 
data/facts and situations. Attitudes: Being proactive, critical 
and reflective and having self-control and the ability to self-
teach. 
H.! Virtual presence 
Virtual Presence is the concept of being present in the 
virtual environment through interaction with classmates and 
the carrying out of activities. Knowledge: Knowledge of the 
virtual environment and its tools, forms of communication 
and deadlines. Abilities: Using virtual environment tools 
efficiently for communication and the sending of activities. 
Attitudes: Being proactive, analytical, having insight and 
being willing to participate. 
I.! Self Evalaution 
Self-evaluation is having knowledge about ones own 
learning processes and thus being able to colaborate in or 
evaluate the activities proposed. Knowledge: Knowing ones 
learning needs, ones learning processes and the ways of 
evaluating. Abilities: Being able to analyse the learning 
process, systemise activities, mediate and take into 
consideration ones individual characteristics. Attitudes: 
Having self-control, being critical, being up to date with 
developments and being receptive. 
J.!  Self-motivation 
Self motivation is establishing the conditions to be able to 
maintain motivation amongst peers and with oneself and 
being a facilitator in the process. It is being able to be 
receptive to the difficulties being faced by others and 
encouraging peers to continue and conclude an activity, being 
active and participating. Likewise, it is being able to deal with 
ones 
own 
difficulties. 
Knowledge: 
Self-knowledge, 
knowledge about others and about motivational mechanisms. 
Abilities: Insight and ability to criticise, analyse and face 
obstacles. Attitudes: Having self-esteem and self-confidence, 
being open, engaged, participative, receptive, empathetic, 
open to exchanges and being able to put oneself in the place 
of others. 
K.! Flexibility 
Flexibility is being able to deal with a range of needs, 
examining and interpreting the opportunities presented by 
actions as well as by changes of opinion and attitude. 
Knowledge: Knowledge of interpersonal relations, knowing 
how to deal with socio-cultural differences. Abilities: Being 
able to identify situations, analyse possible solutions and 
mold situations. Attitudes: Being ethical and responsible and 
knowing how to change ones posture. 
L.! Teamwork 
Teamwork relates to intra and interpersonal relations 
which allow individuals to effectively express and 
communicate 
their 
feelings, 
desires, 
opinions 
and 
expectations. Teamwork also requires interpersonal conduct 
and dexterity to interact with others in a socially acceptable 
way so as to bring benefits to participants in moments of 
interaction. These elements can also be complimented by an 
affective perspective as the complexity of social relations 
also demand the capacity to notice and make distinctions in 
mood, intentions, motivations and in the feelings of others. 
Knowledge: Knowledge of types of teams and the parts 
which compose a team. Abilities: Adapting intra and 
interpersonal actions, creating strategies and articulating 
communication with others. Identifying the profile and needs 
of the team in which one is placed, knowing how to work in 
a fair environment, articulating conflicts, negotating, 
communicating, collaborating, cooperating, being able to 
adapt to new situations and deal with different situations. 
Attitudes: Being concerned to reach team objectives, being 
flexible and open to criticisms and suggestions, knowing how 
to listen to others and being collaborative and cooperative. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The focus of this study was to relate studies of distance 
education competences with the aim of identifying 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
competences, which may be able to help students in the 
learning process. The final objective was to map these 
competences and their elements. By analyzing the student of 
this education method, the necessity for new educational 
opportunities was apparent. The competences relate to these 
opportunities seeking, via the input of students and their 
trainers, to uncover solutions, which can provide action and 
change, above all, in the challenges faced by students who 
begin their education in the distance education format. 
In this context, it is more necessary than ever for students 
to have adequate skills to manage their own learning, aiming 
to learn through autonomy. 
Distance courses demand a great deal of organisation and 
flexibility on the part of the student. Thus, understanding the 
competences and elements that can facilitate the learning 
process for students would appear essential for those 
participating in this process.  
It is therefore believed that the results of this study can 
bring about reflections relating to best practice in distance 
education as well as to new ways of teaching and learning. 
A continuation of this research will therefore map the 
digital competences of these students, focusing on 
technological questions, so as development of these 
competences at the beginning of distance learning course. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]!
M. Prensky, Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants, In: On the Horizon. 
NCB University Press, n. 5, v. 9. 2001, pp.1-6.  
[2]!
C. Coll, C. Monereo, The studente in virtual environments: conditions, 
profile and competences, Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2010. 
[3]!
M. Moore and G. Kearsley, Learning distance education: an integrated 
view, S
o Paulo: Thomson Learning, 2008. 
[4]!
BRASIL. Law n. 9.394, Guidelines and Bases of National Education, 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/Leis/L9394.htm>. [retrieved: 
september, 2015]. 
[5]!
S.D. Gilbert, How to Be a Successful Online Student New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2001.  
[6]!
C. Monereo, Internet and basic competences, Barcelona: Gra, 2005. 
[7]!
R. Palloff and K. Pratt, The Virtual Studente, Porto Alegre: Artmed, 
2004. 
[8]!
I. Chiavenato, Introduction to general theory of administration, 6. ed. 
Rio de Janeiro: Campus, 2000. 
[9]!
G. Le Boterf, The competence, Paris: Quatrime Tirage, 1995. 
[10]! A. Fleury and M. T. Fleury, Building the concept of competence, 
2001: 
<http://www.scielo.br/pdf/rac/v5nspe/v5nspea10.pdf>. 
[retrieved: september, 2015]. 
[11]! I. M. Gaspar, Competences in questions, Portugal, 2004. 
<http://repositorioaberto.univ-
ab.pt/bitstream/10400.2/158/1/Discursos%E2%80%93Forma%C3%A
7%C3%A3o%20de%20Professores55-71.pdf> [retrieved: september, 
2015]. 
[12]! P. Perrenoud and M. G. Thuller, The competences to teach in the XXI 
century, Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2002.  
[13]! A. Zaballa and L. Arnau, How to learn and to teach competences, 
Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2010. 
[14]! BRASIL, Notion CNE/CEB n  16/99, National Guidelines for 
Professional 
Education 
Technical 
Level 
<http://portal.mec.gov.br/setec/arquivos/pdf/PCNE_CEB16_99.pdf>. 
[retrieved: september, 2015]. 
[15]! BRASIL, ______. Notion CNE/CP 9/2001, National Curricular 
Guidelines for Teacher Training of Basic Education at a higher level, 
Braslia: 
http://portal.mec.gov.br/cne/arquivos/pdf/009.pdf>. 
[retrieved: september, 2015]. 
[16]! P. Perrenoud, Build competenes from scholl, Porto Alegre: Artmed, 
1999a. 
[17]! J. Piaget, The intelligence born in children, Sua: Guanabara, 1987.  
[18]! BRASIL, Quality benchmarks for Higher Distance Education, 
Braslia: Ministrio da Educa
o, Secretaria de Educa
o a 
Dist	ncia, 
2007. 
<http://portal.mec.gov.br/seed/arquivos/pdf/referenciaisead.pdf>. 
[retrieved: september, 2015]. 
[19]! M. R. Notare and P. A. Behar, The mathematical communication 
online through ROODA Exact, Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2009. 
[20]! R. Tori, Without distance education:interactive technologies to reduce 
in teaching and learning, S
o Paulo: Senac S
o Paulo, 2 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

