United Kingdom Local Authority Challenges in the use of Twitter and Other Social 
Media 
Darren Mundy, Qasim Umer 
University of Hull 
Scarborough, GB 
d.mundy@hull.ac.uk;q.umer@2008.hull.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—Social media networks (such as Twitter) provide 
new opportunities for local government agencies to engage 
with citizens in their local communities. However, there are 
substantial challenges for such agencies to deal with in these 
social spaces. This paper provides a critical perspective on the 
challenges presented in the results of a focused research 
project on governmental communication through Twitter over 
a three month period from October to December 2011. The 
research presented in this paper, contributes to the growing 
number of research papers related to the effective use of social 
media platforms in governmental, organisational and other 
community spaces. Social media platforms are no silver bullet 
providing only another channel of communication with the 
customer. However, the identification of ways of using social 
media for transformative purposes in local government 
scenarios, are worth identifying and exploring. 
Keywords-social media networks; social network analysis; 
eGovernment; communication channels 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In March 2012, Facebook reported a worldwide audience 
of almost 836 million users [1]. In the same month, Twitter 
reported 140 million active users with 340 million tweets per 
day [2]. These statistics demonstrate the global presence of 
networks that have only been in existence for less than ten 
years. These global audiences may be dispersed, and not 
always balanced across local communities. With such large 
user bases, companies are exploring how they can best 
engage users on these platforms, and leverage a return on 
investment, from time committed to social media spaces. 
Social media platforms such as those named above 
provide opportunities for individuals to collectively discuss, 
share, participate, produce, and respond to specific materials 
dependant on platform (e.g., videos on YouTube and short 
text messages on Twitter). Many of the social media 
platforms provide an opportunity for individuals to provide a 
picture of themselves (often through a profile), and 
opportunities to obtain and engage with information, often in 
real time. 
UK government is managed through a mixture of 
national government departments and local government 
authorities. A primary requirement of the UK democratic 
system is a need to engage with, and listen to, constituents 
through a multitude of different access channels. Recently, 
with the austerity measures imposed across the whole of 
Europe, and other parts of the world, the UK has had to look 
again at the delivery of public services. These austerity 
measures have impacted on local government funding, 
meaning in places, cuts in front line services. 
Organisations (including local government authorities) 
recognise the benefits that shifting customer enquiries from 
physical face to face customer contact centres, to online 
provision, can bring. These benefits include: reductions in 
the cost per transaction of customer enquiries; and where 
front end services are directly connected to back end services 
the potential for disintermediation. Social media platforms 
have been identified as platforms through, which to engage 
in providing front end service information, and in answering 
customer enquiries in cost effective processes.  
Local councils in the UK, are present across a range of 
social media spaces with many individual councils engaging 
across multiple spaces. In addition to staff within local 
authorities engaging within social media spaces, many other 
publically funded organisations are also using these 
networks, as mechanisms to engage the local taxpaying 
public. This network of public sector engagement provides 
the citizen with direct access to queries about public sector 
services, and mechanisms for obtaining current localised 
information. 
This paper builds on the research results presented in 
Mundy and Umer [3]. The previous paper presented the 
findings from a study focused on the engagement of ten local 
UK councils within the Twitter network. The paper outlined 
a range of quantitative statistics regarding the study and 
indicated a number of issues discovered within the textual 
analysis of the tweets. The aim of this paper is to explore the 
deeper challenges presented from the data, determined from 
detailed textual analysis of the tweets collected for the study. 
Whilst the study focused on Twitter many of the challenges 
presented within this paper, can be easily applied to other 
social media networks. The paper contributes to a growing 
number of research papers related to the effective use of 
social media platforms in governmental, organisational, and 
other community spaces.  
This introduction has provided an overview of the 
importance of social media networks, and the potential for 
social media networks to impact on the government: citizen 
relationship. Section II gives an overview of literature in the 
area 
of 
social 
media 
communication, 
particularly 
highlighting the effective use of social media in government 
spaces. This is followed by a detailed review of the 
methodology 
used 
to 
analyse 
local 
government 
conversations in the ‘Twitterverse’. These conversations are 
then used to identify clear challenges in the use of Twitter, 
and other social media platforms to engage the citizen. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Finally, a series of recommendations linked to the challenges 
are provided and the paper closes with a conclusion and the 
identification of further work.  
II. 
SOCIAL MEDIA AND UK GOVERNMENT 
The growth of social media is impacting the ways in 
which communities work, communicate, and socialize. 
According to Landsbergen [4] social media platforms can 
help to fulfill the needs of rapid communication, to engage 
individuals with multimedia artefacts and problematically to 
blur what is private and what is public. Similar to the 
demands imposed by users of the short messaging service 
(SMS) on mobile phones, social media networks demand 
prompt response, knowledge of and continued engagement 
with the platform. Twitter, Facebook and YouTube are 
examples of three multilingual social networking websites 
launched since 2004 that respectfully provide forums for 
social networking, micro blogging, and multimedia content 
sharing (text, video and photos). They give users the 
opportunity of being real time in a virtual world [5], and 
enable users to create their own accounts, content channels 
and interest group sites. Different governments, channels and 
groups also have their own individual pages and accounts on 
social media networking sites.  
This paper focuses on the use of and challenges in the use 
of social media, in particular, Twitter by local government in 
the UK. Research into the use of social media networking 
sites by national governments, and organisations across the 
world continues to grow, as we continue to look for how 
transformative communication can be provided through such 
channels. Recently, Stephen Goldsmith used the term 
‘government by network’ [6] to describe how online 
communication channels were being used at different levels 
of government, to engender a greater sense of participative 
relationship with citizens. In addition, there is evidence that 
social media networks when employed effectively have the 
power to create change in relation to political discourse, 
encouraging individuals to re-engage with democratic 
systems [7] and create a greater sense of the citizen voice [8]. 
Research in the area of government use of social media 
networks can be broken down into two primary areas of 
interest:  
 
Analysis at national level of how parties and 
political leaders utilise these communication 
channels to engage citizens with national and 
international political issues.  
 
Engagement 
with 
how 
local 
government 
organisations are using such platforms to engage 
citizens with local services and issues. 
Research related to local government usage of Twitter is 
not as well established as national level research, as the 
national issues often generate more substantial interest. In 
this national space, the most interesting study to date has 
focused on how Barack Obama (current president of the 
USA), utilised the web and social media networks in his 
historic election victory in 2008 [7]. Other researchers have 
focused on an analysis of the use of social media networks in 
relation to encouraging political dialogue [9], the use of 
social media for political public relations [10] and analysis of 
social media channels as political communication channels 
[11]. Researchers have found from a national perspective 
that broadcast information over these channels is broadly 
favoured, and that individual channels are not in themselves 
‘game changers’, but merely an additional communications 
channels for contact with citizen groups [9]. From a national 
perspective, it is useful to note Tumasjan et al. [11], which 
suggests that these network channels can be used to provide 
a prediction on the results of national elections. This in itself 
is not unique (given perhaps we could also use analysis of 
party prevalence in other forms of media or surveys), it does 
suggest that political discourse at the national level is 
frequent, and the size of it is nationally relevant on social 
media channels. 
Whilst national issues are of interest this paper focuses 
primarily on investigating local government discourse. One 
of the key issues for local government is engendering citizen 
interaction in positive, and progressive ways. Social media 
platforms can offer opportunities for individuals within local 
communities to provide their view on a local issue, report a 
broken street light, or to simply interact with a local 
councillor. Researchers such as [6][12][13] have indicated 
that these channels can enable a transformation in the way in 
which local government, and citizens communicate leading 
to transformative relationships developing. In particular, 
Danis et al. [13] argues that these networks can enable “an 
atmosphere of co-operation” as citizens work with local 
government in developing better physical communities. 
A barrier to the co-operative atmosphere highlighted in 
the above paragraph, arises in the ways in which local 
government utilise social media spaces. Rooksby and 
Sommerville [14] suggest that the ways in which many local 
government 
organizations, 
manage 
their 
information 
technology infrastructure, and the ways in which local 
government service structures are established, can limit the 
ways that such organisations are able to utilise social media 
systems. They state within these circumstances the use of 
social media channels “can only practically be used to 
broadcast announcements rather than to interact with 
people”. As a practical example one could posit the 
traditional ways in which customer service interaction, and 
public relations are managed in local government 
organizations, can often lead to uncertainty with regards to 
the translation of such services on to social media platforms.  
Noting the growth in usage, by local government of 
social media, recently research has been published to try to 
provide such organisations with a framework of good 
practice [15]. However, this area continues to evolve and 
further work is needed to understand where local 
government is now with its engagement in social media 
spaces, what the challenges are with regards to this 
engagement, and how such engagement can continue to 
evolve. This paper represents work towards establishing a 
response to the above, highlighting in particular, the 
challenges to local authorities effective use of social media 
platforms such as Twitter, Facebook and YouTube.  
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Over the period October – December 2011, tweets related 
to ten local councils in the UK, were analysed. The councils 
selected for analysis were drawn from a group of UK 
councils with active accounts within Twitter. Therefore, the 
analysis focused only on those councils who were 
experimenting with this social media network, and were 
already engaging in some way, with their local populace in 
the ‘Twitterverse’. 
Tweets were collected from within defined council 
spaces and from outside of defined council spaces. This 
effectively translates through to collection of tweets that each 
council had made, collection of citizen tweets to the council, 
and tweets made which made reference to the council or the 
local community. It should be noted that no collection was 
possible for those communications happening within Twitter 
through private communication channels (e.g. through 
Twitter’s direct messaging system). 
The aggregated data collected provided quantitative 
metrics covering aspects such as: 
 
The number of tweets; 
 
The number of followers; 
 
The number of re-tweets etc…  
In addition, the text within each tweet was analysed in 
relation to:  
 
Categorising the focus of the content;  
 
The direction of the communication (e.g., 
whether it was just broadcast or a response to 
another Twitter user); 
 
An indication of the feel of the tweet (e.g., 
whether it expressed positive, negative or 
neutral emotions); 
 
A detailed content analysis of the messages 
contained in the tweet content. 
In relation to the detailed analysis of the messages in the 
tweet content, each tweet was read, and broader issues were 
identified within the tweet content. This paper provides a 
critical analysis of these broader issues, and identifies the 
challenges presented by these.  
There were a number of limitations presented in the 
research data gathered within this project. The main issues 
were linked to the choice of councils, the time of year 
studied, and the maturity of various councils’ use of Twitter 
as a communication channel. However, these limitations 
have limited impact on the broader challenges presented 
through this analysis work. 
In addition to this direct identification of challenges from 
analysis of the research data, a reverse approach has also 
been used. Conversation with individuals responsible for 
social media management in local authority spaces has 
helped to inform and identify other challenges present within 
the research dataset.   
In total, 1,565 tweets, were analysed from within council 
defined spaces in Twitter. In addition to this, a substantial 
number of tweets were also reviewed in spaces outside of 
council control. Content from the tweets analyzed can be 
found throughout Section IV in providing evidence, to 
support the challenges identified.   
Mundy and Umer [3] provides initial analysis of the 
study detailed above.  General information about the study is 
presented including the number of tweets analysed (n= 
1565), no of followers for each council, and total number of 
re-tweets made in the sample set (n=191).  Detailed 
quantitative 
analysis 
is 
also 
provided 
regarding 
categorisation of the content of each tweet and the 
directionality of the communication. 
It was found that the most popular reason for councils to 
make announcements through Twitter is to publicise 
entertainment, sport or leisure activities occurring in the 
local area.  In addition, the focus of re-tweets made by local 
councils centred on those services that individual councils 
wished to highlight most in their local area.  For example, 
Newcastle upon Tyne City Council highlights local library 
services, Salford City Council highlights local health related 
services, and the City of Lincoln council highlights local 
business services.  The ways in which many councils 
engaged with responsive texts were fairly limited, or in some 
cases non-existent.  The most popular categories for 
responsive tweets from UK Councils were centred on 
transportation, entertainment, waste and housing services. 
Finally, within Mundy and Umer [3] analysis is provided 
of a range of conversations which occurred within the 
council Twitter spaces.  These conversations point to issues 
regarding the type of conversation which occurs through 
Twitter, the presence of offensive content, Twitter best 
practice, and individual privacy issues.  This follow on paper 
focuses on a deeper critical analysis of the challenges 
presented within qualitative Twitter content analysed in the 
earlier study. 
IV. 
LOCAL AUTHORITY CHALLENGES 
The next few sections will take an in-depth look at 
challenges identified in the analysis of the tweets, contained 
within the study.  
A. Transforming Broadcast Communication 
As noted by Rooksby and Sommerville [14], there are 
significant challenges in transforming different elements of 
local government services, away from broadcast only models 
of communication. Social media communication platforms 
provide direct public channels of communication between 
citizens and local government. This can lead to citizens 
directly criticising decisions made in local communities, and 
the transparency of local government [3]. It can also lead to 
citizens raising issues about local service provision or issues 
related to local areas. The problem is how to construct these 
social media channels such that appropriate individuals 
receive the messages related to their particular services, and 
how to manage this communication within these channels. In 
other circumstances, often the conversation is less public and 
more easily controlled – this leads to local government 
organisations (similar to other commercial organisations) 
approaching two way conversation in social media spaces, 
with some trepidation. However, where local government is 
engaging directly in this form of practice, there is ample 
evidence that citizens are appreciating this service, with 
some commenting that social media platforms are the most 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

effective ways in which they have communicated with 
government services. 
B. Frontend to Backend Integration 
Local government must take clear steps to manage the 
social media channels they are using from the perspective of 
understanding information flow. Tweets show evidence that 
for some councils citizens see their twitter spaces as the most 
effective way to gain answers to questions posed. However, 
there were a number of cases of citizens not obtaining the 
information they required. One solution may see customer 
service staff taking responsibility for the engagement in 
answering citizen questions, within social spaces, and other 
specific staff (e.g., marketing) taking responsibility for 
highlighting council achievements. In addition, customer 
requests coming in through social media spaces, must be 
tracked to help to facilitate knowledge of return on 
investment, as highlighted in Section III.C.  
C. Leveraging Return on Investment 
With government austerity measures in force, and a 
reduction in funding to local government in the UK, local 
councils are busy reducing inefficiencies. Therefore, for 
social media channels to be embraced they must make clear 
demonstrable impacts on local citizen engagement. One way 
in which this can occur, is by moving transactions from more 
expensive channels (e.g., face to face services) to online 
information provision. This is where it is important to ensure 
that the social network spaces are joined up to local 
government services; otherwise, the cost of a transaction and 
speed of reply may be similar to other channels particularly 
if answers are not clear or incorrect. The most effective 
councils using these platforms make use of the private 
messaging spaces within social media platforms to provide 
targeted complete answers to citizen questions.  
D. Engaging the Citizen 
Engaging the citizen will be helped by a transformation 
of broadcast communication, but this is not the only 
challenge to providing an engaging service. Social media 
platforms are often at their best when the channel providers 
are utilising the channel effectively by posting new 
interesting content. Often, individuals will post content that 
is delivered across multiple social media channels this can 
cause problems when users are signed up for multiple 
services, each service needs to be distinctive, and different to 
engender different user communities. Whilst platforms can 
be transformative in providing a greater relationship between 
citizen, and government, they can also be transformative in a 
negative way, if the use of the channel does not meet with 
citizen expectations; for example, if the channel is used to 
broadcast less meaningful information.  
E. Privacy Challenges 
Social media platforms are not private and often citizens 
within these spaces are not completely anonymous. This 
presents a clear challenge in ensuring details of customer 
cases, are kept out of the public domain. In one particular 
poor example of this, a council engaged across multiple 
tweets in detailing reasons for action, in a specific 
individual’s case. This could be deemed to infringe on data 
protection when specific details are discussed. 
The counter concern is where customers are willing to 
discuss their individual personal circumstances across public 
spaces. Councils must learn when to move conversation into 
more private spaces, and to find ways of educating local 
citizens about problems related to providing too much 
personal information within public social media spaces. 
F. Engaging with the Conventions 
Social media spaces are not the same, all have particular 
nuances, and the community within different spaces behaves 
often in particular ways. Understanding the nuances of the 
platform will lead to greater success in platform use. For 
example, Twitter encourages users to follow other users and 
build networks through interconnections of individuals, the 
community also has established conventions like #FF, which 
is short for #FollowFriday (Twitter users use this at the end 
of a week to suggest other individuals to follow). 
Recognising, understanding and using the structures 
available can help councils to fit into the community and be 
seen as an interesting component part.   
G. Small Numbers 
At present, council social media spaces have relatively 
small numbers, in terms of percentages of citizens within 
local communities engaging with the service offered by and 
through them. However, as councils gain a better 
understanding of how to use and market their presence on 
social media networks effectively then these numbers should 
grow. It may well be for certain community groups 
engagement through social media spaces is the only way to 
engage these groups in conversations about local council 
spaces, and services. 
More mature use of social media within council spaces is 
looking directly at how networks are forming in social media 
spaces, around the council. Understanding the community in 
terms of the different types of user present, and engaging in 
the space, is extremely important. Equally, using the 
community as a network to advertise the strength of the 
service should be one thing councils look to do. 
H. Endorsement or Community Building 
It is evident from the research that the practices that 
councils are using in building communities within social 
media spaces differ. Decisions such as whether the council 
should ‘follow’ other users or ‘join’ other groups are not 
always that simple. However, social media networks are 
often formed from practices of engaging in community 
building. For example, presence as a friend may highlight 
your presence to other users who are interested in you. 
Similarly engaging in the process of #FF, or re-tweeting 
content, also provides a sense of social media community 
engagement, and may influence others in passing on your 
content. Another example is the highlighting of other videos 
for consumption within your YouTube channel. However, 
these community ideals come at a risk, the risk that the 
content you highlight, are associated with, or pass on is 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

inappropriate or legally problematic. There is a question over 
whether associating local councils with other information or 
users provides a form of endorsement of them or their 
services, and therefore, whether such endorsement is 
appropriate given the linkage to public services. 
I. 
Answering the Difficult Questions 
Social 
media 
spaces 
provide 
direct 
lines 
of 
communication to the general public, which are open 24/7 
and easily communicable. These spaces are used by 
individuals for a variety of purposes from communication 
about particular things happening within local communities, 
through to information discovery about other places before 
travel. This creates complications regarding the types of 
issues raised within these spaces. In many ways, they are the 
most transparent places for citizens to find out more about 
what is happening within local communities direct from 
other citizens. This obviously means that some of the 
positives will be highlighted, but it also means that many of 
the issues often kept outside of general knowledge may also 
be highlighted, and associated with the spaces. For example, 
conversations about local drug use, anti-social behavior, 
areas of violence, and other criminal activity.  
J. 
What is the difference? 
Many of the above points raised as challenges for local 
authorities in these spaces can also be linked directly to 
challenges for large organisations. However, the interesting 
question is whether there is anything that distinguishes the 
challenge for e-government. In this area, there are thought to 
be two major differences.  
The first is the increased transparency and profile of the 
service, money to fund engagement of councils within social 
media spaces comes directly from the UK public purse. The 
service needs to have a clear demonstrable impact for 
citizens within the local community to deem this as 
successful.The UK press are quick to highlight customer 
service faillings in online spaces; take, for example, 
Tameside Council’s experimentation with a virtual customer 
helpdesk in Second Life described as “absolutely barmy” 
[16]. Although the value has to be demonstrated in large 
private organisations, they are not forced to be as 
transparent; for example, with detail regarding cost of 
service. 
It is interesting to see citizens commenting on the state of 
local government transparency through social media spaces, 
e.g., “#organisation is in breach of international law, but 
wants 
the 
£4.7bn 
contract 
for 
N 
London 
waste. 
Tell #Camden council 'No' #Palestine #Gaza@” and “People 
getting turned away... doesn't feel like an 'open council' 
tonight. #newcastle” These suggest that UK citizen’s are 
willing to use the service directly to let councils know when 
they seem to be doing things thought not to be in the public 
interest. 
The second percieved significant difference is that 
councils could be deemed to have a requirement to engage 
the citizen, whether this is in citizen democracy, or in 
conversation 
regarding 
quality 
of 
services. 
Other 
organisations may choose to engage customers but local 
councils need to engage citizens. Therefore, understanding 
where particular customer groups are conversing, and using 
up to date mechanisms for engaging citizen groups should be 
a clear part of the strategic engagement for all local councils.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The challenges outlined above demonstrate that councils 
need to think carefully about the ways that they use social 
media channels to engage the citizen. Arising from the 
analysis, recommendations can be formed as to what 
councils should consider in having a presence, within these 
spaces. The recommendations themselves are not new but it 
is evident from the research that councils are not completely 
engaging 
in 
understanding, 
and 
applying, 
the 
recommendations in practice. 
Understand the channel – Each channel has particular 
nuances, those councils who understand how these work 
seem from the data analysis to be perceived more preferably 
within the social media community. In addition, those 
demonstrating an understanding of the channel seem to 
obtain the greater amount of participation and the greater 
amount of two way communication. 
Engage the citizen – From the research there was 
evidence that some councils are still not engaging in any 
form of two way dialogue, within social media spaces. Those 
councils who were engaging in a conversational manner with 
constituents, seem to have been generating a positive 
response to their social media engagement. 
Develop policy – It was evident within the research that 
few councils had developed a charter for their and their 
citizens engagement within social media spaces. Developing 
clarity over what is and what is not acceptable in the spaces, 
may form a barrier to conversation but would provide a 
clearer sense of the general rules of engagement within the 
space. One argument may be that the spaces themselves 
often have guidance over what should and should not occur 
within the social media channel, however, in some cases, this 
may not be restrictive enough. 
Advertise the channel – The best form of advertising in 
social media spaces, is the citizen. However, many 
organisations are finding innovative ways to highlight their 
involvement within the spaces. For example, Marseille FC 
offered their fans the opportunity to design a shirt if they 
gained a set number of Facebook followers. The best advert 
for any social media channel is the value added to customer 
experiences. If the channel is perceived as useful then it is 
likely that individual users will pass on that information, 
whilst if the channel provides in the main useless 
information, then it is likely to be ignored. 
Integration – As outlined as a channel above, integration 
is extremely important for local councils. Managing the ways 
in which information flows into (in the form of physical 
posts), and out of the social media space is crucial (in the 
form of citizen driven requests or data). Social media use 
should not be in the hands of a singular person tagged with 
the responsibility of a social media producer, or equivalent. 
However, the ways in which councils, are represented within 
the space, is extremely important. There is a clear balancing 
act between bring overly prescriptive and transparent (e.g., 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

tagging each post with a service representatives name) 
through to allowing for total freedom of employee 
engagement within the space. In addition, there are 
significant questions, which arise linked to whether 
engagement within social media spaces should be part of the 
role of senior figures such as chief executives of local 
councils.   
Withdrawal – It is evident over the past ten years that 
developed spaces will fall in, and out of popularity. Early 
providers of social media platforms are finding reduced 
network engagement over time whilst newer platforms have 
come in, and filled their spaces. Therefore, councils need to 
manage their portfolio understanding how decisions are 
made to engage within particular spaces and when decisions 
should be made to withdraw from engagement within the 
space. This is a particularly complicated problem if there are 
constituent groups who maintain loyalty to particular social 
media spaces. In this space, councils should also consider 
audit and control mechanisms. If particular networks were to 
be forced to close it would be problematic if materials stored 
within those spaces were not stored in one form, or another. 
In addition, ensuring that any information that would 
generally be stored for legal purposes in the physical space, 
can be retrieved when engaging in virtual spaces. 
The analysis, which led to the indication of challenges 
for local councils in engagement in social media spaces, did 
in itself, demonstrate a lack of lack of true engagement at 
present in these spaces. A particular problem for councils is 
moving away from the broadcast model given the often 
fragmented nature of services, and the traditional customer 
service mechanisms used. The analysis highlighted that 
councils need to do more to understand the types of data 
customers want to see within these spaces, and a need to 
understand more appropriate strategies for managing 
public:private communication through the different channels. 
These findings should be of use and relevant to national and 
international managers of e-Government web services, 
government 
legal 
teams 
and 
senior 
managers 
in 
eGovernment. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Internet 
World 
Stats, 
“Facebook 
Growth 
Stats”, 
http://www.internetworldstats.com/facebook.htm 03.08.2012. 
[2] Twitter 
Blog, 
“Twitter 
turns 
six”, 
http://blog.twitter.com/2012/03/twitter-turns-six.html 
03.08.2012. 
[3] D. Mundy and Q. Umer, “An Analysis of UK Council use of 
the Social Network – Twitter,” Proceedings of the 12th 
European Conference on E-Government, Barcelona, 2012 pp. 
502-511. 
[4] D. Landsbergen, “Government as Part of the Revolution: 
Using Social Media to Achieve Public Goals,” Electronic 
Journal of e-Government, Volume 8 Issue 2, 2010, pp135-
147. 
[5] J. J. Zhao and S. Y. Zhao, “The Impact Of E-Government Use 
Of Social Networking Media On Government Transparency 
And Public Participation,” Télescope, Vol. 18, 1-2, 2012, pp. 
44-61. 
[6] R. Cole, “Social media: what does it mean for public 
managers?,” PM Magazine, Volume 91, Number 9, 2009. 
[7] J. Hendricks and R. Denton, Communicator in Chief, 
Lexington Books, 2010, ISBN-13: 978-0739141052. 
[8] J. Skinner, “Social Media and Revolution: The Arab Spring 
and the Occupy Movement as Seen through Three 
Information Studies Paradigms,” Sprouts: Working Papers on 
Information Systems, 11(169), 2012. 
[9] G. 
Gulati 
and 
C. 
Williams, 
“Communicating 
with 
Constituents in 140 Characters or Less: Twitter and the 
Diffusion of Technology Innovation in the United States 
Congress,” Presented at the Midwest Political Science 
Association, Chicago, Illinois. 
[10] R. Waters and J. Williams, “Squawking, tweeting, cooing, 
and hooting: analyzing the communication patterns of 
government agencies on Twitter,” Journal of Public Affairs, 
Volume 11, Issue 4, 353–363, 2011. 
[11] A. Tumasjan, T. Sprenger, P. Sandner, and I. Welpe, 
“Predicting Elections with Twitter: What 140 Characters 
Reveal about Political Sentiment,” Proceedings of the Fourth 
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social 
Media, Washington, D.C., 2010, pp. 178-185. 
[12] R. Romsdahl, “Political Deliberation and E-Participation in 
Policy-Making,” CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and 
Culture, Purdue University Press 7(2), 1-1, 2005, pp. 1-11. 
[13] C. Danis, M. Bailey, J. Christensen, J.Ellis, T. Erickson, R. 
Farrell, and W. Kellogg, “Mobile Applications for the Next 
Billions: A Social Computing Application and a Perspective 
on Sustainability,” 2nd Workshop on Innovative Mobile 
Technology and Services for Developing Countries (IMTS-
DC 09), 30-31 July, 2009, Kampala, Uganda. 
[14] J. Rooksby and I. Sommerville, “The Management and use of 
Social Networks in a Government Department,” Journal of 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), October 
2012, Volume 21, Issue 4-5, pp 397-415. 
[15] N. Williams, “Template Twitter strategy for Government 
Departments,” 
http://neilojwilliams.net/missioncreep/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/17313280-Template-Twitter-
Strategy-for-Government-Departments.pdf 03.08.2012. 
[16] The Telegraph, “Council scraps £36,000 virtual town hall in 
second 
life”, 
21 
July 
2010, 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/internet/7901312/Cou
ncil-scraps-36000-virtual-town-hall-in-Second-Life.html 
03.08.2012. 
 
 
 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

