Distribution of Municipal Services Access Points
over a Territory in a Scenario with Restricted
Information
Mariuxi Montes∗, Miguel Angel Pe˜na†, Susana Mu˜noz Hern´andez‡
Facultad de Inform´atica
Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
∗ Email: maria.montes.chunga@alumnos.upm.es
†Email: m.pena@upm.es
‡Email: susana@ﬁ.upm.es
Abstract—In developing countries we face not only technical
issues, but also the lack of basic data that we are obly to obtain
by using alternative paths. In the context of a local government
on a developing country, this work shows two results. The ﬁrst
one is the procedure to obtain or deduce the needed information
from alternative data sources. The second one is how to use
genetic algorithms (whose input is obtained from the ﬁrst result)
to conﬁgure a distribution of access points for eGovernment
services.
Index Terms—eGovernment, Genetic Algorithm, developing
countries, access to eGovernment services
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper proposes a solution to a problem faced when
planning eGovernment services for citizens of a municipality
with characteristics such as: high rural population, very dis-
perse towns, low Internet penetration and low incomes. First,
the topic of eGovernment is discussed. Next, the problem
facing the Santa Elena municipality is detailed. Finally, genetic
algorithms are introduced as a tool to ﬁnd a solution to this
problem.
A. eGovernment
To successfully implement eGovernment initiatives, an eval-
uation of involved subsystems such as social, technical and
environmental ones is needed [1]. eGovernment is not only
about delivery, it is also about a cultural change in how citizens
relate with the government [2].
In developing countries where access to Internet is re-
stricted, delivery of eGovernment services raises an important
question: how can it be made accessible to citizens?
B. The case of Santa Elena Municipality - Ecuador
The Municipality of Santa Elena is on the coast of Ecuador
(see Fig 1.). It has a population of 144,076 where almost 72%
of it is rural. These rural zones are very dispersed and every
concentration of people is called a ”comuna”. There is only
one ”large” city, the municipal capital, and encompasses a bit
more than the 30% of the total population.
According to data from the Integrated System of Social
Indicators of Ecuador - 2010, 76% of the population of the
Fig. 1.
location of Santa Elena Municipality. Figure based on graphics
obtained from www.hoy.com.ec and www.wikipedia.com
province live in poverty (as measured by the satisfaction of
basic needs including housing, health, education and employ-
ment). 63% of the population has completed basic education
and 9% have obtained higher education.
There are 59 comunas distributed throughout the geographic
territory according to the ”Federaci´on de Comunas de Santa
Elena”. However, lower concentrations of people still exist.
These are known as ”recintos”, but any accessible formal
statistics about the number of recintos in the territory are
unavailable.
The majority of comunas are located on the coastline and
they have good road access with the capital. However, the
inner comunas have major access problems between them
as well as with the capital due to a poor secondary road
network. In addition, the connections between inner comunas
are inadequate because of a lack of maintenance of existing
roads.
Internet penetration in Ecuador, according to data from
December 2008, is 12.3%, compared to the South American
average of 30%. This ranks Ecuador 8/10 in South America
[3]. The ”Superintendencia de Telecomunicaciones” [4] es-
timates that 37,46% of the total population in Ecuador are
Internet users. The province of Santa Elena represents 0,75%
of this number. These percentages are growing every year, but
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

these numbers are still too low.
Due to these statistics, it is necessary to take into account
this low penetration when offering eGovernment services in
this territory. One option for facing this issue is to use the
strategy shown on [5], which is to use service access points
(SAPs) to assure that citizens have access to eGovernment
services. SAPs will manage the problem of low Internet
penetration and make access to eGovernment services more
readily available to citizens in this area. These SAPs would
be geographically distributed over the territory in a way that
efﬁciently covers the entire Municipality. This option allows
the best coverage for the majority of the population instead of
having all services centralized in the municipal capital.
How can this distribution be achieved across this territory?
Distribution refers to the quantity and the location of the SAPs
throughout the area. This is the question that guides this study.
To answer this question, a Genetic Algorithm is used to show
an adequate distribution.
C. Genetic Algorithm
Genetic algorithms are adaptive methods and can be used
to solve search and optimization problems. John Holland
introduced the term ”Genetic Algorithm” in his publication
”Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems” [6]. These
algorithms are well deﬁned in texts like ”Genetic Algorithms
in Search, Optimization & Machine Learning” [7] or ”Modern
Heuristic Techniques for Combinatorial Problems” [8].
Genetic algorithms try to mimic the genetic process of living
organisms, which evolve generation after generation under the
principles of natural selection and survival of the ﬁttest based
on Darwin’s Theory of Evolution. These algorithms create the
most adaptable solutions for the proposed problems.
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
This section will show how data was obtained, with an
emphasis on the difﬁculty of obtaining it and the process used
to acquire it. The ﬁtness equation used to get a response to
the question will also be explained.
A. Obtaining the Data
To address this task, we need some basic information. In
the context of a developing country, this is the ﬁrst and major
problem to face because it is not always possible to obtain the
necessary data.
The ”Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas y Censos” (INEC) is
the institution in charge of maintaining and offering informa-
tion about the demographics of Ecuador. INEC publishes this
information in detailed level, including: national, provincial,
cantonal and parochial. For the purposes of this study, a lower
level, the zonal level, is needed to know the population of
every comuna and recinto. To obtain the information needed
for this level, the census database of the province was down-
loaded. Although this database detailed the population at the
zonal level, a problem was encountered with this information.
Because every zone is identiﬁed through census codes and not
by name, it was impossible to obtain the census codes for all
Fig. 2.
Distribution of comunas through Santa Elena Municipality - Ecuador
comunas and recintos. Thus, only those comunas and recintos,
which were identiﬁable through census codes were used.
Figure 2 shows an image of the Municipality and distribu-
tion of the comunas and recintos throughout it. On this map we
can see colored points where each color represents a speciﬁc
parish. There are 7 parishes that encompass a total of the 56
comunas and recintos selected to carry out this study. This
ﬁgure only represents the comunas and recintos selected and
not all of the existing comunas.
To measure the distances between points (comunas, recintos
and crossroads), maps from Google Maps were used because
of the layout of the main roads. However, Google Maps
does not lay out the secondary roads and thus the use of
maps in PDF format of every parish was necessary. All of
these maps were downloaded from the INEC webpage. This
data was obtained manually, using the measurement tools
provided by Google Maps as well as by Adobe Acrobat, to
measure distances between comunas and recintos and between
crossroads that establish different roads to reach a determined
comuna or recinto.
The identiﬁed communication roads are from various levels:
(1) There is one main road connecting comunas settled on the
coastline; this road is part of the E1 national highway. This
road is in excellent condition and has continuous maintenance
work. It is usable all year at a maximum velocity of 100Km/h.
(2) There is a part of this E1 national highway that connects
other groups of coastal comunas but its maximum velocity is
reduced by 10 Km/h, resulting in a maximum velocity of 90
Km/h all year. (3) There are secondary roads, which connect
inner comunas and recintos that are not settled on the coastline.
These roads are usable all year, although they do not have
good maintenance. These roads are narrower than the roads
mentioned above and thus their maximum velocity is 60 Km/h
usable all year. (4) Finally, there are ”summer roads” that are
usable in dry season but during rain season it is difﬁcult to
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

drive over these roads. These roads have a maximum velocity
of 30 Km/h. The Figure 3 details the kind of maps used to
measure distances between points and the levels (types) of
existing communication roads between them.
An approximation of the time needed to communicate
between each comuna and recinto was made. This was done
considering the distance between comunas and recintos and
the road level (maximum velocity) that communicates them.
To make this approximation, the Floyd-Warshall algorithm [9]
was used. This process is use to assure the lowest commu-
nication time between two towns amongst all the possible
communication options available.
Fig. 3. Map, which details roads that connect comunas. Santa Elena - Ecuador
There is useful information about bus routes and frequencies
that was unavailable.
B. Personalizing the Genetic Algorithm
It is necessary to establish a representation of the problem
using the data about th number of selected comunas. Every
individual has 56 genes (l=56), one for each comuna or recinto
that would be able to host one SAP. If the gen is OFF, it is
equivalent to a speciﬁc comuna or recinto with no SAP, and
when the gen is ON, it is equivalent to a speciﬁc comuna
or recinto with a host SAP. One possible conﬁguration of an
individual chromosome would be:
1100011100000000000000000000
0000110001000000111000000000
Then, the objective function is deﬁned. To deﬁne it, in-
formation on the population of comunas or recintos and
displacement times is considered. This function has to achieve
a balance between citizens displacement time to the closest
SAP and the cost of implementing a SAP.
An adjustment has been made to work with two distinct
units: the population that moves and the cost of having more
access points. The function punishes these two possibilities:
moving the entire population to the main town or putting an
access point in each town.
A weighting was made, giving more weight (0.6) to SAP
implementation cost and a lower weight (0.4) to the citizens’
displacement time.
The objective function is:
0, 4
 Pl
i=0(populationi ∗ distance(i, CloserSAP))l
Pl
j=0(populationj ∗ distance(j, MainCity))
!
+ 0, 6(TotalSAP)
(1)
where l = 55 (total number of comunas and recintos)
• Initial population would be λ = 2l, as suggested by
Alander in [10]
• Stop or the maximum number of iterations is conﬁgured
on 200
• Crossover method selected was one point cross.
• Replacement method is partial change, where a part (2
individuals) of the parents is maintained and the other
part is of the children.
• Mutation method is aleatory mutation.
• Mutation probability is 1/l like De Jong suggest in [11].
III. RESULTS
The ﬁrst execution time took 3 seconds, and after running
the algorithm, it gave a solution with a ﬁtness value of 7.47
represented like:
0000000000000000000000100010
0000000000000000010010000100
Five comunas were selected to host a SAP from the total of
56. Translating this numerical representation to a map, the
ﬁgure 4 shows a graphic where the selected comunas are
highlighted.
Fig. 4.
Selected comunas to host a SAP
After this ﬁrst execution, the algorithm was run more
times, obtaining similar ﬁtness values. Figure 5 shows that
the solutions given by the genetic algorithm are improved with
every iteration (population).
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Fig. 5.
Solutions improved with every iteration (population)
IV. CONCLUSION
Our ﬁrst goal was obtaining a good distribution for public
services at developing countries. Technically, the use of ge-
netic algorithms is appropriate, but the major difﬁculties that
we have found to use our algorithms is the inherent lack of
basic information at these countries.
In Section II-A shows how the data to work with the
genetic algorithm was obtained. This process makes possible
to apply the algorithm to countries when the informatios is
absent (general case in developing countries). One of the major
problems is the rather availability of information about the
public transport that connects all isolated places.
Evaluating this solution with the additional common sense
based on the knowledge of the studied zone can add some
deduced information. Of course, the obtained solution can be
improved by adding more related information to our objective
function. We can select one solution (the best) among the
group of alternatives that we obtain from the algorithm.
According to Figure 5, the results are improving with the
iterations of the algorithm. This is notable from the ﬁrst
iteration until around iteration thirty, later the solution keep
stable. So, a limit of 30-50 iterations in the algorithm seems
to be enough to obtain good results.
In this work, we exposed a basic study case where there
is not previous constraints like existing points that must be
inserted in the ﬁnal solution. For future work, more compli-
cated cases can be analized through inserting restrictions in
time, distance, applying political criteria, etc.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thanks to:
• Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid, through its ”‘XII
call for subsidies and grants for cooperative action”’
that is ﬁnancing the project 29 TEDECO E-GOV-EC.
”Identiﬁcaci´on de la realidad del Municipio de Santa
Elena (Ecuador) para la implantaci´on de e-Government”
• Government of Ecuador through ”Secretaria Nacional de
Educacion Superior, Ciencia, Tecnologia e Innovacion”
(SENESCYT) to support this work.
REFERENCES
[1] G.
Khan,
J.
Moon,
H.
Park,
B.
Swar,
and
J.
Rho,
“A
socio-technical perspective on e-government issues in developing
countries:
a
scientometrics
approach,”
Scientometrics,
vol.
87,
pp.
267–286,
2011,
retrieved:
june,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11192-010-0322-5
[2] J.
Esteves
and
R.
C.
Joseph,
“A
comprehensive
framework
for
the
assessment
of
egovernment
projects,”
Government
Information
Quarterly,
vol.
25,
no.
1,
pp.
118
–
132,
2008,
retrieved:
june,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0740624X07000603
[3] H.
Carrion,
“Internet.
calidad
y
costos
en
ecuador,”
2009,
retrieved:
june,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.imaginar.org/docs/interne 2009.pdf
[4] SUPTEL,
“Datos
de
cuentas
y
usuarios
de
internet,”
December
2011,
retrieved:
june,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.supertel.gob.ec/pdf/estadisticas/acceso internet 2011.xls
[5] P. S. Bhatnagar, “Egovernment: Lessons from implementation in
developing
countries,”
eSocialSciences,
Working
Papers
id:3274,
December
2002,
retrieved:
june,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://ideas.repec.org/p/ess/wpaper/id3274.html
[6] J. H. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems, M. Ann Ar-
bor, Ed.
University of Michigan Press, 1975.
[7] D. E. Goldberg, “Genetic algorithms in search, optimization & machine
learning,” Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA., 1989.
[8] C. Reeves, Modern heuristic techniques for combinatorial problems.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA., 1993.
[9] R. W. Floyd, “Algorithm 97: Shortest path,” Commun. ACM, vol. 5,
no. 6, pp. 345–, June 1962, retrieved: june, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/367766.368168
[10] J. T. Alander, “On optimal-population size of genetic algorithms,”
Computer Systems and Software Engineering, vol. 1, pp. 65–70, 1992.
[11] K. A. De Jong, “An analysis of the behavior of a class of genetic adaptive
systems.” Ph.D. dissertation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 1975, aAI7609381.
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

