Technical Aspects of Sustainable Digital Archives 
Cheng-Hung Li1, Wei-Chun Chung1, Shiang-An Wang1, Chia-Hao Lee1  
Chi-Wen Fann1, Lee-Hom Lin1, Jan-Ming Ho1,2 
1Research Center for Information Technology Innovation 
2Institute of Information Science 
Academia Sinica 
Taipei, Taiwan 
{chli, wcchung, sawang, chahao, fann, monica, hoho}@iis.sinica.edu.tw
 
 
Abstract—In Taiwan, the National Digital Archives Program 
was initiated in 2002. It was subsequently integrated with the 
National Science and Technology Program for E-Learning into 
the Taiwan e-Learning and Digital Archives Program 
(TELDAP) on January 1, 2008. The program has created 
hundreds of professional digital archives, websites, and 
databases to store and manage these valuable national cultural 
and ecological artifacts. These websites and databases are open 
to the public. TELDAP will celebrate its 10-year anniversary 
and recess at the end of 2012. In this paper, we will present 
efforts made by the Digital Archive Architecture Laboratory, 
Academia Sinica, for preserving and maintaining accessibility 
of contents through previously developed systems. We will 
primarily focus on the reliability of the archive system and the 
promotion of its diverse contents. Our long-term preservation 
procedure includes both data and software. In the area of 
preservation, we recommend digitization guidelines for data 
formats so that these valuable artifacts can be digitized at a 
level that is equivalent to state-of-the-art display quality. We 
will also provide format conversion services to convert digital 
objects to the latest common open format. The digital archive 
developed and proposed 9 standard operating procedures for 
each stage in the development of the digital archive system. In 
practice of software maintainability, we will preserve the 
design documents at each stage of development. Currently, we 
are developing a management framework on the basis of 
distributed virtualization technology to host digital archive 
systems so that management cost can be minimized while 
systems can remain operational. 
Keywords-digital archive; digital preservation;long-term 
preservation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Preservation of human knowledge for long-term 
accessibility is one of the missions of an institution of 
cultural and ecological heritage. For thousands of years, 
paper has been the preferred medium for storage of text and 
images. Currently, due to the rapid development of 
information technology, numerous objects (e.g., books, 
cultural relics, paintings, calligraphy, etc.) have been 
archived in digital form for their dissemination, backup, and 
reuse [1][2]. However, whether institutions decide to use 
either analog or digital approaches to archiving, they will 
need to employ comprehensive preservation strategies for 
sustainability so that archived objects will remain readable 
[3][4]. 
The TELDAP [5] is a joint project between scholars in 
the fields of humanities and technology. It has built a 
platform known as the portal of TELDAP [6] to preserve the 
artifacts of Taiwan’s rich cultural heritage in digital form. 
This program functions through the collaborative efforts of 
19 organizations and government agencies. It has archived 
over 5 million digital objects, along with metadata annotated 
by domain experts. In addition, it has created hundreds of 
professional digital archives, websites, and databases to store 
and manage these valuable national cultural and ecological 
artifacts. We must address three types of problems that affect 
the preservation of these systems: physical deterioration, 
technology obsolescence, and improper management. The 
first two problems are similar to problems that occur during 
traditional digital preservation. Both processes involve 
difficulties related to the preservation of format materials. In 
addition, inadequate management of existing systems can 
cause gradual system loss. In the past, when archiving 
institutions outsourced their systems, they did not insist on 
comprehensive analysis and planning of system requirements. 
Most of these systems lacked architectural flexibility. 
Therefore, expansion and data integration of these systems 
were difficult. Some systems had to be closed due to a lack 
of standard maintenance and development processes. We 
hope to improve the reliability, overall representation, 
scalability, quick response, and user-friendly, value-added 
environment for these valuable archives through the 
development of a complete suite of standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) that can be used to fully integrate and 
preserve these websites, systems, and databases. 
In this paper, we propose a plan that details preservation 
strategies for digital archives. Through the standard process 
of formulation, an archive system can be developed through 
standardization. Thus, the system can be preserved 
completely through short-term system migration or long-
term preservation. 
This paper is organized in the following manner. In 
Section II, we review literature related to our plan. We also 
review relevant strategies for archive system preservation. In 
Section III, we provide detailed explanations of architecture 
of the sustainable digital archives we have developed. 
Finally, in Section IV, we present our conclusions. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we introduce several issues and 
techniques that relate to the preservation of digital 
information. Digital Preservation involves a set of processes, 
activities, and management of digital information that is 
conducted over time to ensure the long-term retention and 
accessibility of archived information. Hence, it is not just the 
product of a program. It is an ongoing process. Functions 
within this process include management of object names and 
locations, updates of the storage media, and documentation 
of content and tracking of hardware and software changes to 
ensure availability and comprehensibility of objects [7]. The 
Research Libraries Group [8] defines Digital Preservation as 
a series of activities conducted to ensure that digital data can 
be maintained and queried continuously. The American 
Library 
Association 
(ALA) 
briefly 
defined 
Digital 
Preservation as a series of policies, strategies, and actions 
employed to ensure access to the digital contents over time, 
despite the challenges presented by media failure and 
technological change. Although there has been progress in 
the field of Digital Preservation, many tasks remain undone: 
Professionals must decide which types of file formats should 
be preserved and agree on the level of preservation needed. 
Further, in order to promote responsible stewardship of 
digital information, professionals must also agree to comply 
with standards. Presently, data can be preserved for as little 
as five years or for as long as more than ten years [10]. In 
fact, some scholars believe that the preservation period 
should last more than a lifetime.  
Therefore, it is evident that the accessibility of digital 
information is extremely vulnerable in today’s rapidly 
evolving technological environment. A majority of the 
selected research stated that the field of digital preservation 
faces 
three 
major 
obstacles: 
physical 
deterioration, 
technology obsolescence, and the rapid growth of 
information. The problems inherent in the preservation of 
archival objects in both digital and traditional print form are 
rather distinct. Therefore, preservation strategies must be 
studied and evaluated; further planning is necessary [11]. 
The National Archives of UK suggested a number of criteria 
for selection of file formats for long-term preservation: 
ubiquity, support, disclosure, documentation quality, stability, 
ease of identification and validation, intellectual property 
rights, 
metadata 
support, 
complexity 
interoperability, 
viability, and re-usability [12]. In 1995, in order to address 
the issue of Long-term Digital Preservation, the International 
Standard Organization (ISO) established The Consultative 
Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS). In 2003, this 
committee formulated the Open Archival Information 
System (OAIS, ISO14721:2003) to provide a complete 
reference model of digital preservation architecture [13].  
Knowledge storage institutions face a common dilemma: 
How can digital information sustainability be preserved? In 
the fight against the loss of digital information, several 
technical approaches have been proposed: refreshing; 
migration; emulation; standardization; system (technology) 
preservation; encapsulation (data description); replication 
(redundancy); and conversion to paper or analog media. 
Several researchers have examined migration, emulation and 
system preservation as strategies for digital preservation,  
[14][15][16][17]. Each of the aforementioned traditional 
approaches or strategies suggest that preservation of 
information can be achieved by the use of technology.  
In addition, the aim of the research of the Software 
Sustainability Institute was to raise awareness and build 
capacity throughout the Further and Higher Education 
(FE/HE) sector through engagement in preservation issues as 
part of the process of software development [18]. They 
provided a breakdown of the different approaches used in the 
achievement 
of 
software 
sustainability: 
technical 
preservation 
(techno-centric), 
emulation 
(data-centric), 
migration (functionality-centric), cultivation (process-centric) 
hibernation 
(knowledge-centric), 
deprecation, 
and 
procrastination. The success of each of these approaches 
depends on many factors: the importance of the software, the 
maturity of the software, the size of its community, and the 
availability of resources needed to achieve sustainability. 
The suggested framework can help groups of developers to 
understand and gauge the benefits of ensuring that 
preservation measures are built into software development 
processes and the benefits of active preservation of legacy 
software. 
III. 
OUR ARCHITECTURE 
The purpose of TELDAP is to build a flexible 
architecture that emphasizes interoperability, continued 
maintenance, and continuous development. Most of 
TELDAP’s digital archives systems are software-based 
projects that include four elements: hardware, system 
software, application, and data. Based on the properties of 
these elements, projects can be divided into different 
sustainable 
levels 
for 
each 
element 
(e.g., 
service 
sustainability, 
software 
sustainability, 
and 
data 
sustainability). In Figure 1, the hardware and system 
software are categorized under service sustainability and the 
application and data are categorized under software 
sustainability and data sustainability, respectively. 
In order to ensure digital archives sustainability, we 
composed a set of rules to manage the processes of a given 
software-based project. We formulated complete Standard 
Operating 
Procedures 
(SOPs) 
for 
digital 
archives 
sustainability for different levels and tasks: Digitization (DP); 
Development of Software Project (DSPP); Metadata 
Interoperability (MIP); Intellectual Property Inventory (IPIP); 
User Account and Single Sign-on (UASSP); Website 
Identification (WIP); Website Traffic Observation (WTOP); 
Catalog Index and Data Exchange (CIDEP); and Long-term 
Service Preservation (LSPP). As we can see in Table 1, each 
task among the different levels of digital archives 
sustainability needs different SOPs to maintain its integrity 
and interoperability. The service sustainability level includes 
hardware and system software. Therefore, the procedures of 
LSPP, WTOP, and UASSP must be considered when this 
project needs to host, validate, or migrate. The main 
procedure in software sustainability level is DSPP, which 
helps the content provider control the development flow of 
software. For data sustainability, the MIP and CIDEP are 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

major procedures used in validation and migration tasks. 
Table 2 shows the combination of the framework of the 
Software Sustainability Institute and OAIS with our 
proposed architecture. In this paper, we will discuss DSPP, 
CIDEP, and LSPP in software sustainability, service 
sustainability, and data sustainability, respectively. 
 
Figure 1.  The Architecture of Sustainable Digital Archives 
TABLE I.  
THE SOPS WITH THE DIGITAL ARCHIVES SUSTAINABILITY 
 Levels 
Task 
Service 
Sustainability 
Software 
Sustainability 
Data 
Sustainability 
Hosting 
LSPP 
WTOP 
UASSP 
Documents 
(Application) 
Documents  
(Data format) 
IPIP, WIP 
Validation 
DSPP 
MIP, CIDEP 
Migration 
TABLE II.  
THE SOPS WITH THE FRAMEWORK OF SSI AND OAIS 
Subjects 
Task 
Service 
Sustainability 
Software 
Sustainability 
Data 
Sustainability 
Hosting 
Emulation 
Hibernation 
Validation 
N/A 
OAIS 
Migration 
Migration 
 
A. Development of Software Project Procedure (DSPP) 
In this section, we aim at discussing the improvement of 
the quality and performance of the software development 
process and ensure flexibility, scalability, and completeness 
for the digital archive system. As shown in Figure 2, we 
applied the Verification and Validation in process area of 
CMMI—level 3 and ISO/IEC 15504 in order to integrate the 
development flow of software project with the participant 
and related output development documents. This procedure 
defined the development flow and documents to help the 
content providers (Digital Archives Systems) control the 
processes in each step and confirm the results when 
completed by the plan and development groups. 
B. Catalog Index and Data Exchange (CIDEP) 
TELDAP continuously archived over one million digital 
objects and approximately 100 websites with databases. In 
the process, TELDAP digitalized a large amount of data that 
contained information on a variety of cultural heritage, 
historical files, and archaeological artifacts. These are 
distributed as heterologous website systems. The task of 
integration, preservation, and popularization of these cultural 
objects from different websites that were constructed by 
different institutes is both important and enormous. As 
shown in Figure 3, we implemented an integrated platform 
for the cross-directories’ knowledge retrieval platform on the 
basis of an intelligent crawler that used the behavior analysis 
of the digital archive users.  
 
Figure 2.  The development flow of software project 
 
Figure 3.  The architecture of the catalog index and data exchange 
This framework used an intelligent crawler and the 
integration of heterologous data, indexing and search, and 
knowledge retrieval. In addition, it presented a user interface 
that offers search objects to the general public and provides 
opportunities for the public to study the information in these 
archives. Based on the achievements of this framework, 
individuals can easily enjoy the treasures of 5000 years of 
Chinese civilization. They can also learn about Taiwan's 
ecology and history. 
  
 
DB 
 
Doc 
System 
 
 
DB 
 
Doc 
System 
 
System 
 
 
DB 
Integration Module 
Intelligent Crawler 
Integration from 
heterologous data 
DB-level 
Structure 
analysis 
Semantic-level 
Structure 
analysis 
Universal XML 
Indexing 
and 
Search 
Module 
Knowledge Retrieval 
Module 
General data structure 
Conversion 
Cross-directories 
Search 
SEO 
Recommendation 
 
 
 
Indices 
… 
… 
Digital Archives 
Sustainability 
Hardware 
System 
Software 
Application 
Data 
Software/Data Sustainability 
Service Sustainability 
Environment, Platform, etc. 
 
* Shadow means the state we may need backup procedure 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

C. Long-term Service Preservation (LSPP) 
In system preservation, we must consider website 
migration, duplication, and emulation. Migration is used to 
ensure usability between generations of media. Migration 
also insures that a content object can be sustained in new 
generation media. Duplication is usually employed for the 
fault-tolerance of contents. Creation of an off-site backup 
can improve error recovery and ensure the availability of 
content. We believe that duplication is a basic element of 
preservation. Through emulation, a system can be 
maintained in a stable state. There are two types of emulation: 
static and dynamic. For a website that contains static pages, 
preservation by snapshot is recommended. When a crawler is 
employed, the contents of the site can be retrieved and saved 
by using a particular format. 
For the dynamic-type system (e.g., page content within a 
database), we recommend the use of emulation or 
virtualization. An emulator is used to simulate hardware 
devices on the software platform. It causes the guest 
Operating System (OS) to run as a Personal Computer (PC). 
Virtualization, a state-of-the-art computer science strategy, is 
used to allow a guest OS to access (and/or share) hardware 
with a monitor (a hypervisor) on a host’s OS. The choice of 
strategy 
involves 
trade-offs 
between 
performances, 
flexibilities, scalabilities, security, etc. Combinations of 
migration, duplication, and emulation can be used to fulfill 
the many requirements of digital preservation. As Table 3 
indicates, these combinations can simultaneously meet the 
needs of a variety of websites and their availabilities. 
TABLE III.  
STRATEGIES OF PRESERVATION 
Method 
Description 
Duplication Emulation Migration  
V 
 
 
The foundation of digital preservation 
V 
V 
 
Snapshot: For static-typed website 
Virtualization: For dynamic-typed website 
V 
V 
V 
Ensure contents can be read in the future 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed strategies for the improvement 
of the reliability, overall representation, scalability, quick 
response, and friendly value-added environment for valuable 
archival objects. We hope to assist institutions involved in 
digital archiving to formulate a standard process for system 
analysis, planning, development, testing, and acceptance. In 
addition, we aim to provide technical consultation to these 
institutions to help them provide specifications and advice to 
outsourced vendors on the development of a standard digital 
archive system. We also provide guidance on the best way to 
draft a document to outline standard digital archiving 
procedures. Overall, we have provided a number of 
strategies that can help digital archiving institutions develop, 
manage, and preserve digital archive system sustainability 
However, there are several areas for improvement. Until 
now, digital archiving institutions have faced many 
limitations in the areas of operation and innovative 
techniques. We need to develop new preservation strategies 
to address these new technologies. We must also provide 
ways for institutions to improve their operations so that they 
synchronize with standard processes. In the future, we hope 
to provide more developed plans for the improvement of the 
interoperability and integration of the wide range of available 
archiving systems. In doing so, we hope to preserve the 
integrity of current information for use in the future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported in part by Taiwan E-
learning and Digital Archives Programs (TELDAP) 
sponsored by the National Science Council of Taiwan under 
NSC Grants: NSC101-2631-H-001-005, NSC101-2631-H-
001-006 and Academia Sinica. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hedstrom and S. Montgomery, Digital Preservation Needs and 
Requirement in RLG Member Institutions, Report, A Study 
Commissioned by the Research Libraries Group, Dec. 1998. 
[2] F. Moore, “Long term data preservation,” Computer Technology 
Review, Third Quarter 1999, pp. 32-33. 
[3] D. A. Kranch, “Preserving electronic documents,” Proceedings of the 
Third ACM Conference on Digital Libraries, May 1998, pp. 295-296. 
[4] E. Cooly, and N. Chip, “Integrating solutions: examining the 
collection management process using OCLC’s firstsearch electronic 
collections online,” Library Acquisitions: Practice & Theory, Vol. 22, 
No. 1, 1998, pp. 97-102. 
[5] Taiwan e-Learning and Digital Archives Program, http://teldap.tw. 
[6] TELDAP Resources Portal, http://digitalarchives.tw. 08.15.2012 
[7] DigitalPreservationEurope, http://www.digitalpreservationeurope.eu. 
08.15.2012 
[8] RLG/OCLC, 
"Trusted 
digital 
repositories: 
attributes 
and 
responsibilities: an RLG-OCLC report," RLG/OCLC Working Group 
on Digital Archive Attributes, May. 2002, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.rlg.org/en/pdfs/repositories.pdf. 08.15.2012 
[9] American Library Association, Definitions of Digital Preservation. 
Definitions of Digital Preservation, 2007, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ala.org/alcts/resources/preserv/defdigpres0408.  
08.15.2012 
[10] I. Verheul, Networking for Digital Preservation. Current Practice in 
15 National Libraries, IFLA Publication Series, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ifla.org/VI/7/pub/IFLAPublication-No119.pdf. 
08.15.2012 
[11] TG. Beamsley, “Securing digital image assets in museums and 
libraries: a risk management approach,” Library Trends, Vol.48, No. 
2, Fall 1999, pp. 359-378. 
[12] The National Archives, Digital Preservation Guidance Note: 
Selecting File Formats for Long-Term Preservation, 2008,  [Online]. 
Available:http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/documents/selecting-
file-formats.pdf. 08.15.2012 
[13] Wikipedia, 
”Open 
Archival 
Information 
System,” 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAIS. 08.15.2012 
[14] A. Waugh, R. Wilkinson, B. Hills, and J. Dell'oro, “Preserving digital 
information forever,” Proc. of the Fifth ACM Conference on ACM 
2000 Digital Libraries, June, 2000, pp. 175-184. 
[15] Andrew K. Pace, “Digital preservation: everything new is old again,” 
Computer in Libraries, Vol. 20, Issue 2, Feb. 2000, pp. 55-57. 
[16] Wiggins, Richard. “Digital Preservation Paradox & Promise,” Library 
Journal, Vol. 126 Issue 7, Spring 2001, pp. 12-15. 
[17] A. Muir, “Legal deposit of digital publications: a review of research 
and development activity,” Proc. of the First ACM/IEEE-CS Joint 
Conference on Digital Libraries, Jun. 2001, pp. 165-173. 
[18] Software Sustainability Institute, http://software.ac.uk. 08.15.2012 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

