Open Data from Social Media as Tool for Better Understanding Complex Territory 
Application through Photos Data in Calabria
Alexandra Middea, Silvia Paldino, Sara Maria Serafini 
Università della Calabria 
Arcavacata di Rende (Cs), Italy 
email: alexandra.middea@me.com, silvia.paldino@unical.it, saramariaserafini@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Data 
are 
becoming 
increasingly 
important 
nowadays, 
because 
they 
represent 
a 
 
concrete 
and 
inexhaustible 
source 
of 
information, 
which 
could 
be 
transformed into knowledge. Then, knowledge is synonymous 
with resource, because it represents a source of personal and 
community enrichment and, at the same time, it allows to 
accomplish more aware actions and to take advantage of every 
moment of freedom that comes from it. Thanks to today's 
technology, that creates services in response to the growing 
needs of citizens, public administrations and companies, the 
value of these data is finally disclosable in simple and 
immediate ways. An important tool, particularly with regard 
to more precise issues, such as security, economy or quality of 
life, is Geographic Information System, since it allows not only 
to represent the collected data in an immediate way, but above 
all to provide it with georeferencing, and, then, to spread it 
through mappings, easily interpreted also by non-experts. 
In particular, research is always more interested in big and 
Open Data; for this reason, the present work aims to analyze a 
significant amount of information on geo-referenced data in 
order to provide a broad view on issues related to tourism 
flows, in a reality such as Calabria, an Italian region, which is 
configured as a territory characterized by complex interactions 
and dynamics. 
Keywords-Big Open Data; collective sensing; community; 
territory. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The meaning of Open Data can be clarified by using one 
of the commonly accepted definitions provided by the Open 
Data Manual, the “Bible” for anyone who wants to embrace 
this philosophy, which describes it as: 
“[...] data that can be freely used, reused and 
redistributed, with the only limitation - at most - of the 
request for allocation and the redistribution of the author in 
the same way, so without any change.” 
As highlighted above, we talk about “open” data, i.e., 
freely transmitted and distributed information, that is 
exchanged in the network in ways that provide for the total 
absence of forms of control (such as copyright and patents) 
and other restrictions that may limit the use, integration and 
reuse. 
Starting from the concept of open knowledge as outlined 
by the Open Knowledge Foundation (a no-profit foundation 
founded on 24 May 2004 in Cambridge with the aim to 
promote open content and Open Data), Open Data can also 
be characterized by the same principles: 
 
availability and access: data must be available in a 
convenient and modifiable form, preferably by 
downloading it from the Internet. Data must be 
available in a useful and editable format; 
 
reuse and redistribution: data must be provided so 
as to allow its reuse and redistribution, this includes 
the ability to combine it with other databases; 
 
Universal participation: everyone should be able to 
use, redistribute and reuse data, without any 
discrimination towards application areas or people 
or groups. 
Open knowledge is a prerequisite for collective 
intelligence, through which it is possible to implement the 
main practical advantage of the opening that is to 
exponentially increase the ability to control, certify, explore 
and combine different databases and then develop new 
products and services [1]. 
The use of Open Data is also connected to the tools used 
for its cataloguing, processing and representation. Since most 
data are equipped with a system of coordinates that make the 
data itself georeferenced, it is logical to connect the subject 
with the Geographic Information System (GIS), a system 
designed to receive, store, process, analyze, manage and 
display data geographically; GIS, in fact, allows to work on 
maps and to show, through an endless series of layers, all the 
features that are highlighted in a given territory. 
But why should research about urban planning be so 
much interested in these technologies? 
1. Because, in the short period, the distance between 
the digital and the real world becomes shorter and 
shorter; 
2. Because researchers have been very good in the 
last few years at talking about new technologies, 
but not as good at understanding how these 
technologies can actually improve our lives.  
It is time to explore these issues, so, the question should 
be: How can we extract added value from these datasets that 
are constantly increasing? Everything comes together for 
creating abundance of data. 
Collective sensing is focused on the human aspect that 
can be drawn from this data, and it would be quite interesting 
to understand how data can be representative of some 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

collective phenomena, such as mobility, transportation, 
tourism, etc. 
One area that has much interest in Big Data and 
Collective Sensing is, in fact, tourism. As it will better 
explained later, tourism in Italy represents 10% of the 
national Gross Domestic Product (GDP). However, nobody 
knows how many tourists are present at a given time in a 
specific area of our nation. These details can be retrieved 
only with great expense in terms of time and costs, and after 
a certain period; it is the same case of a company that does 
not know who its users are, it is unfamiliar with its 
production cycles, and that, by working in this way, is bound 
to fail [2]. Big Data can help in this situation, providing 
knowledge about what happens and also analyzing it. 
The work presented is divided as follows: Section II 
explains the importance of Big Data to analyze complex 
cities and to help decision makers to invest in and improve 
this kind of cities; Section III describes how GIS can be used 
as a tool to mapping Open Data, Section IV provides an 
example of the application is presented, and Section V 
concludes the work with some considerations. 
II. 
THE USE OF BIG DATA FOR THE COMPLEX CITIES 
“Big Data” is a huge collection of such complex datasets 
as to require the use of different tools as compared to 
traditional ones in all phases of the process: acquisition, also 
through sharing, analysis and visualization. The increasing 
size of the dataset is related to the need to analyze a single 
dataset, with the aim of extracting additional information as 
compared to what could be obtained by analyzing just small 
series of data, for example, the analysis to gauge the “mood” 
of the markets and trade, and thus, the overall trend of the 
company and the flow of information travelling and passing 
through the Internet. 
Big Data also represents the interrelationship of data 
from potentially disparate sources; these are structured set of 
data, such as databases, but also unstructured ones, such as 
pictures, emails, Global Positioning System (GPS) data, as 
well as information taken from social networks. So, we can 
talk about “Big Data” when we have a large dataset which 
requires unconventional tools to extract, manage and process 
information within a reasonable time [3]. This issue is ever 
changing because machines are getting faster and datasets 
are getting bigger. According to a 2001 study [4], the analyst 
Doug Laney defined the growth model as a three-
dimensional one (model of “3V” [5]):  
 
volume: is the size of the data set; 
 
velocity: is the velocity of generation of the data; 
there is a tendency inherent in making analysis of 
the data in real time or nearly so; 
 
variety: refers to the various types of data from 
different sources (structured and unstructured); 
This model, summarized in Figure 1, is still valid, 
although in 2012 the model was extended to a fourth variable 
V to indicate the veracity of the data [6], i.e., the informative 
value that you can extract. 
Over time the model was extended, adding the following 
features: 
 
variability: this feature can be a problem because it 
refers to the possibility of inconsistency of data; 
 
complexity: the huge size of the dataset increases 
the complexity of the data to be managed; the most 
difficult task is to link the information to obtain 
interesting outputs. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The four V’s of Big Data, source IBM. 
 
With 7 billion people on the planet, who access about 1.2 
billion personal computers and 1.5 billion smart phones, 
growing at a rate of about 30% annually, the scale of data 
being generated by these devices is daunting [7], but it is 
important that Big Data are not turned into Bad Data [8]. In 
fact, the possibility to collect digital traces on a massive 
scale could be transformed from a tool of potential liberation 
— the fuel that drives Open Data initiatives in cities and 
states across the world — into an instrument of abuse, 
surveillance and asymmetrical control.  
Yet, Big Data still hold many promises, not only for the 
private but also for the public welfare. In cities, Big Data is 
making a tremendous impact across a broad spectrum: it is 
helping to imagine a more efficient  mobility [9], reducing 
pollution [10], showing humanity patterns [11]-[13], from 
energy [14] to waste [15]; moreover, understanding city 
patterns is a useful instrument for urban planning in general 
[7]. It is a silent tool that can promote new forms of civil 
engagement. Nonetheless, a new way to frame the 
relationship between individuals and Big Data is urgently 
needed, to move beyond today's pseudo-feudal system of 
trading personal information for a service. 
The challenge, of course, is that Big Data will shortly 
provide new ways to analyze topical issues of the world, 
offering new immediate solutions.   
Big Data is certainly enriching our experiences of how 
cities function, and it is offering many new opportunities for 
social interaction and more informed decision-making with 
respect to our knowledge on how to better interact in cities. 
However,  it is important to use it properly and respecting 
everything, keeping in mind that citizens are essentially 
people and not only data.  
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

III. 
MAPPING OPEN DATA WITH GIS 
GIS is a system designed to capture, store, manipulate, 
analyze, manage, and present all types of spatial or 
geographical data. The acronym GIS is sometimes used for 
geographical information science, or geospatial information 
studies to refer to the academic discipline, or career of 
working with geographic information systems, and it is a 
large domain within the broader academic discipline of 
Geoinformatics [16]. In a general sense, the term describes 
any information system that integrates, stores, edits, 
analyzes, shares, and displays geographic information. GIS 
applications are tools that allow users to create interactive 
queries (user-created searches), analyze spatial information, 
edit data in maps, and present the results of all these 
operations [17]-[19]. Geographic information science is the 
science underlying geographic concepts, applications, and 
systems [20]. GIS is a broad term that can be referred to a 
number of different technologies, processes, and methods. It 
is attached to many operations and has many applications 
related 
to 
engineering, 
planning, 
management, 
transport/logistics, 
insurance, 
telecommunications, 
and 
business [18]. For this reason, GIS and location intelligence 
applications can be the foundation for many location-enabled 
services that rely on analysis and visualization. GIS can 
relate unrelated information by using location as a key index 
variable. Locations or extents in the Earth space–time may 
be recorded as dates/times of occurrence, where x, y, and z 
coordinates represent, longitude, latitude, and elevation, 
respectively. All Earth-based spatial–temporal location and 
extent references should, ideally, be relatable to one another 
and ultimately to a “real” physical location or extent. This 
key characteristic of GIS has begun to open new avenues of 
scientific inquiry. The GIS tool allows to map the territory 
and to have a complete visualization of the overall situation 
of a determined phenomenon. 
The importance of the localization component, i.e., the 
possibility to have geographical knowledge and information 
detailed up to the urban level, is often an essential element of 
the knowledge base of businesses, institutions, local 
administrative bodies, and public and private operators, 
providing services in many areas; moreover, with the greater 
interest in economic, social, political and environmental 
issues, the availability of data and information, that could be 
traced on a geographical basis, is increasing. 
For example, GIS is a fundamental tool for smart cities, 
as explained in the book “Geographic information systems 
for Smart Cities” by Professor Vinod [21], focusing on how 
the future development of GIS will be triggered by Smart 
City challenges. In order to explain how GIS system 
performs, GIS experiences in conjunction with Smart Cities 
from many countries are shared by GIS experts who have 
designed and maintained it for several years. GIS is 
employed for sea erosion issues, urban resilience issues, 
slum rehabilitation (for example in India where slums 
represent one of the most important social aspects to be 
considered in the urban planning) and state perspective; GIS 
is also used for smart growth and transport planning, for land 
use allocation and also for community planning and so on.  
The investigation about smart cities requires an 
integrated approach through innovative, sustainable and 
inclusive dimensions with knowledge across green energy, 
sustainable transportation, quality environment and smart 
building, risk and resilience and many other different 
domains in which geospatial data and GIS are fundamental 
elements. 
IV. 
THE USE OF OPEN DATA FOR THE ANALYSIS OF 
TOURIST FLOWS  
As discussed in Section III, the availability of digital 
geographic information at different scales (national, regional 
and urban) has produced a crucial transformation in the use 
of spatial data in recent years, with important benefits for 
organizations, institutions, governments, public and private 
operators in the different sectors of economy and services. 
It is sensible to assume that the possibility of operating in 
a relatively simple way with geographically related 
information, i.e., “geo” information linked directly to the 
territory, and “graphic” information based on the effective 
graphical representations of digital mapping, can produce 
benefits in several application areas, with research or 
operational purposes, resulting from enhanced possibilities to 
integrate databases and from their use “on site” (by their 
direct acquisition), and/or “on line” (through the construction 
of databases that make information available on the web 
immediately accessible). 
GIS applications are those traditionally used for the 
production and use of digital maps, such as monitoring and 
mapping 
territorial, 
environmental 
protection, 
urban 
planning, design and operation of road networks, stations 
and, more generally, technological networks. 
Recently, the use of GIS and spatial data has become 
more popular and widespread; therefore, GIS applications, 
often integrated with simulation and visualization tools, are 
covering new areas, such as telecommunications, but little 
has been done in the cultural and tourist sector so far. 
Our country is universally recognized for its great 
cultural heritage: 3.609 museums, nearly 5.000 cultural sites 
(including monuments, museums and archaeological sites), 
4.000 entertainment places, 49 UNESCO sites, hundreds of 
festivals, traditions and cultural events.  
Tourism is a key sector for our economy (10% of GDP), 
but beyond figures and statements about our tangible and 
intangible heritage, the truth is that culture is not considered 
as a priority in the political choices for the development of 
the country [22].  
For several years, the cultural sector has been suffering 
due to a serious decrease in resources, that was the 
consequence of a substantial absence of active investment 
policies for the development of cultural, creative and artistic 
activities, and of a renunciation to an effective protection and 
enhancement of our heritage. Moreover, the interest people 
have in heritage and cultural activities in general, is 
progressively increasing, surely thanks to a medium level of 
culture, that has improved considerably as compared to the 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

past, but also thanks to an instinctive attraction to beauty, 
which leads us to approach, look at and understand it.  
These statements are supported by data provided by the 
National Statistical System (SISTAN) and Statistical Office 
of the Ministry of Heritage and Culture (MIBAC); from the 
analysis, it is clear that the number of museum visitors 
(including also monuments, archaeological sites, etc. in this 
category) is steadily increasing. In fact, cultural tourism 
remains a key segment of the tourism industry, which 
accounts for about 35%; moreover, 17.6% of the Italian and 
foreign expenditure in our country in 2012 (i.e, 12.6 billion 
euro), was represented by expenses made for cultural 
activities.  
The increasing diffusion of social networks, internet, the 
use of new technologies and strategies of digital 
communication, have generated deep changes and imposed 
new rules, new speed and new spaces. Essentially, we have 
created new ways of interaction and relationship with end-
users, users themselves and between users and cultural 
institutions; a new communication space, made not only of 
exclusive content, created ad hoc, but mainly based on 
sharing, discussions, constant feedback and interaction with 
users, before, during and after the experience of enjoyment 
[23]. Therefore, we should reconsider everything. And we 
should do it fast. 
Based on the data provided by Globalwebindex 2014, 
Figure 2 shows the daily hours spent on social media by the 
people who use them in different countries. Italy, with 2.5 
hours / day, perfectly ranks in the middle between the 
minimum value of 0.7 hours / day in Japan, and the 
maximum value of 4.3 hours / day in Argentina and the 
Philippines. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Average number of hours / day spent by users on social media 
(this figure only applies to people who use social media, not who do not 
use them), source Globalwebindex 2014. 
Although our country has the highest concentration of 
cultural heritage, certainly it does not stand out for a 
promotion activity able to communicate with the new 
generations, exploiting the full potential of digital channels, 
starting with the name of the museum that we seek in the 
web. The Uffizi Gallery, for example, is one of the most 
famous museums in the world, but on the search engine 
Google it ranks third among the research results; first of all, 
the name of the website is polomuseale.firenze.it, the website 
is translated in English only, the graphical interface is not 
attractive, the Facebook page has only 28.794 “likes” and 
only 117 people who “are talking about it”, nothing as 
compared to the British Museum, that has 468.747 “likes”, 
and 12.057 people who “are talking about it” [24].  
Heritage and cultural activities, by their nature, are 
perfect candidates to support an effective endogenous 
development, however, art can help the economy grow if a 
proper strategy [25] is conceived.  
The convenience to invest in the cultural field, therefore, 
lies not in an immediate economic advantage, but in the 
utilities flow generated by the use, research, and propagation 
of the heritage and territory where cultural heritage is 
located. 
It is clear how much social media can help promote a 
territory rather than another. In fact, people buy through the 
social and choose clothes, shoes and accessories for the car 
through Facebook and Twitter, and of course, they also plan 
their vacations by using the same media. So, we can say that  
by studying social network information, it is possible to have 
a general idea of people perceptions.  
The big novelty of this study does not only lie in 
mapping Big Data in GIS, since there are many examples of 
that in the literature, but in the particular kind of data 
considered. 
In the large variety of social networks, we have chosen 
Flickr, the most famous social for picture sharing. We 
focused on geo-tagged photos because photography is a 
disciplined way of viewing and investigating landscapes, 
able to inform about design and planning in a more 
“qualitative” way. Residents and visitors take photos in 
particular places they consider important for some reasons. It 
could be very useful to understand what we like in our cities, 
in our territories, what we are interested in, or also where 
residents or tourists want to go. In turn, understanding this 
could provide important indications for urban innovation. 
For this reason, photography is already considered a good 
mean of inquiry in architecture and urban planning, being it 
quite useful for understanding the landscape [26]. 
As we can see in Figure 3, for Globalwebindex, in 2014, 
Flickr has been the first social network dedicated to sharing 
photographs. 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Main social networks used in Italy, source Globalwebindex 
2014. 
Flickr photos are publicly available, and there are many 
“Applications Programming Interfaces” (APIs)  allowing the 
download of picture-related data. To carry out this study a 
tool was prepared, connected with flickr.photos.search API. 
Through this, we had the possibility to insert the name of the 
place we were interested in and download the information 
related to the pictures shared for that place.  
Regarding the “spatial” issue, we have chosen to consider 
the poorest Italian region, Calabria: a land of seas, of 
mountains, of emigrants, of social, economical and 
geological problems, nevertheless a wonderful land. 
Regarding the “temporal” issue, we have chosen to consider 
data related to the last 5 years, i.e. the time-span from 2010 
to 2014. Then, collecting data on pictures in Calabria related 
to these 5 years, we obtained a large amount of information. 
We have chosen to consider only spatial coordinates, i.e., the 
longitude and latitude of places where the picture was taken, 
year by year, and, for each year, month by month. Thanks to 
this approach, we were able to geo-localize our Big Data on 
a map, using a GIS tool, which can read and elaborate our 
files. Thanks to the GIS tool, the interaction between our 
cleaned Big Data from Flickr and the effective GIS in a map 
become possible. 
The idea is to be able to describe the tourist potential of 
an area, and consequently its weaknesses in terms of 
attractiveness, through the study and revision of data 
collected from users who visited the territory, and to 
represent them through the use of GIS. In order to do it, as 
explained, we elaborated maps year by year, using different 
colors, and then we overlapped all of them in one single map 
(Figure 4). 
Until now, in the literature, we can find studies about a 
particular event in a particular area of a city [27], or in three 
consecutive years in ten of the most famous and attractive 
cities of the world [13]. In this study Big and Open Data 
from photography is used for the first time to understand 
people perceptions in a poor region, so different in each of its 
own areas, including relatively small cities, little events, sea 
and mountains, and in such a large temporal range.  
Referred to the Map of Attractiveness [13], we created 
the Map of Attractiveness of Calabria for each year, and at 
the end, instead of different categories of users, we 
overlapped the years, comparing what happened each year. 
and the attractiveness evolution. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Calabria (Italy),  representation of Open Data from Flickr -  
series 2010/2014, and overlapping of several years, processing by GIS. 
We think that this visualization can be considered as 
representative of the popularity rating of people, who, 
satisfied after visiting a place, want to preserve the memory, 
and then take a picture and share it on the social. 
Through the downloaded Data, the origin of the users can 
be traced, information for year can be classified, and the 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

geographical coordinates of the place where it was taken can 
be associated to each photograph; thanks to this approach it 
was simple to recognize the most popular tourist sites, the 
months of the year when tourist flows are greater, and to try 
to create attractions that enhance tourism itself; but above all, 
it becomes clear the need to analyze the deficiencies of the 
territory, which are immediately visible by the mapping of 
the area, and suggest strategies to overcome the gaps found. 
In particular, by the analysis carried out in the years 
2010/2014, shown in Figure 4, a repeated pattern for each 
year stands out: the predominance of the coast respect to the 
hinterland. This is not related to a particular period or month, 
even if it is clear, through the temporal analysis, that the 
most attractive period is summer.  
The hinterland is almost completely unknown, despite 
the presence of three National Parks (Aspromonte, Pollino, 
Sila), a Regional Park (Serre) and numerous reserves. Also, 
as far as the coast is considered, each year the Tyrrhenian 
coast is more attractive than the Ionian one. These are the 
macro considerations relative to what happens in the whole 
region, considering coast and hinterland. We also want to 
underline what happens, at regional scale, in the different 
cities. 
The experiment showed that out of 409 towns divided 
into five provinces (Catanzaro, Cosenza, Crotone, Reggio 
Calabria, and Vibo Valentia), the popular and well-known 
places are less than 70. These information indicate an 
isolation of some towns, a tourism flow which is limited to 
certain nationally known and well advertised places, 
probably included in the catalogues of travel agencies. But 
Calabria is also made of smaller and typical towns, of 
characteristic places full of traditions, which should be 
valued and handed down.  
The idea was to compare the Data from the last five years 
to assess the possible evolution of the interest and the 
attractiveness of the Calabria region;  overall the results 
indicated it as an interesting place and with a good tourism 
potential, in fact the tourists’ interest is generally constant, 
although the region faces some problems, which we have 
already mentioned above, probably related to poor 
accessibility of the hinterland, and to the inadequacy of the 
infrastructure network and of the media system. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we introduced and explained two new tools 
that are becoming fundamental in the new approach to 
observation of cities and territories in general: Big Data and 
GIS. These tools are also mutually related, because the term 
Big Data also indicates Open Data, the latter are most of all 
georeferred data, particularly in the cases we are interested 
in, like cities. With them it is possible to conduct analyses 
applying the complex theory that better responds to city 
descriptions, revealing patterns and predicting phenomena 
that can allow to improve everyone’s life. These geotagged 
data can be spatially visualized on maps to have a complete 
and immediate vision of the situation we are talking about, 
thanks to the GIS. 
Both tools are rapidly becoming necessary in space and 
territory related researches. However, we are quite at the 
beginning of such explorations, therefore research has to 
advance more and more in order to improve and maximize 
the huge potential of these instruments minimizing the 
controversies and the problems that a wrong use of the same 
can generate. Therefore, it is correct to affirm that GIS and 
Big Data suggest a future in which experiences of common 
citizens, and of true tourists, can be used for better 
understanding people’s taste. Data give a “safe surprise”, i.e., 
information about a reality away from home. Predicting that 
consumers will prefer a place instead of another one, or eat 
more in a restaurant rather than a pub, does not sound like a 
Big Data issue; nevertheless, by giving exact information 
about the favorite places, seasons, or hours of the day, it 
represents a new and powerful tool for fine-tuning and 
maximizing the tactical brand decisions. For instance, the 
capacity to adjust prices, mobility, services, in a quick and 
competitive way and in response to an analytically 
predictable change in tourist vocations, is clearly a 
significant tactical power. Thus, also through these 
predictions, Big Data will greatly enhance the capabilities of 
travel companies, tour operators and urban planners. 
Previous studies on tourism, retrieved from the Internet 
or from scientific articles, are mostly based on surveys and 
interviews with experts carried out by the Ministry of 
Industry, 
Energy 
and 
Tourism, 
the 
main 
public 
organizations, or private companies; in this particular case 
this indicates that the industry does not have real data about 
tourists and it can only take samples from the population as a 
whole. In contrast, the innovative approach achieved and 
proposed through this study, specially through the use of 
photos and GIS for localization, is to introduce data based on 
real actions of users and not on surveys. In other words, real 
actions have been analyzed instead of stated intentions or 
answers to questions, that can be interpreted through a 
subjective vision and can be, therefore, less useful for 
business and development. 
This study has involved many different indicators, useful 
to carry out more precise contributions, such as: 
• 
Visitors’ main country of origin; 
• 
Geographical position. 
Based on the conclusions drawn from data analysis, the 
study ends with a series of tactical and strategic 
recommendations for managers. These recommendations 
focus on: 
• 
Attracting more customers and pinpointing the 
countries where it is recommended to focus on marketing; 
• 
Detecting areas of the city in which commercial 
transactions are carried out, specially, those referring to 
accommodation; 
• 
Ensuring an attractive product suited to customers’ 
true needs (ideal length of package offers, information about 
complementary services demanded by nationalities, etc.). 
It is realistic to believe that a new frontier of social, 
territorial and economic retraining, could be based on open 
source data and geographic information, along with the use 
of information technology-based GIS. 
The analysis of the vast amount of data produced by 
digital activities, opens up a wide range of opportunities for 
companies, for enhancing the services they offer and for the 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

management of their business. This study is a first step for 
understanding the possibilities of Big Data, especially in 
Calabria region, where the potential is enormous. In this 
specific case, we are trying to contribute and add value to 
what is a key sector for the Calabrian economy, underlying 
that there are places already discovered and appreciated by 
tourists, such as coasts and the Sila area, but that there are 
also suggestive and unexplored towns. Moreover, this kind 
of study could become a replicable model, useful for 
analyzing other economic and social sectors, or other 
territories. 
For sure digital traces we leave every day on social 
media will increase, providing a very accurate representation 
of what we do. Social media are a kind of expression of 
people and crowds participation because they reveal 
interests, tastes and perceptions of the community. 
Therefore, we can use these data to know, understand and 
analyze our collective behavior and, as a function of them, 
we can imagine better spatial planning in the territories 
where we live, by taking into account what each of us 
spontaneously shares and expresses on social media every 
day.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors want to acknowledge Stefano Vena – PhD -  
for kindly offering his technical support in downloading 
Flickr data. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Aliprandi, “Il Fenomeno Open Data: Indicazioni e Norme 
per un Mondo di Dati Aperti”, Ledizioni, 2014. 
[2] Euro Beinat speech, Academy dell’Innovazione Urbana, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PXSjlGFPYzg, 
[retrieved: January, 2013]. 
[3] C. Snijders, U. Matzat, and U. D. Reips, “Big Data: Big gaps 
of knowledge in the field of Internet”, International Journal of 
Internet Science, 7, 1-5. International Journal of Internet 
Science, Volume 7, Issue 1, 2012, pp. 1-5. 
[4] D. Laney, “3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, 
Velocity and Variety”, META Group Research Note 6, 2001, 
p. 70. 
[5] M. Beyer, “Gartner Says Solving Big Data Challenge 
Involves More Than Just Managing Volumes of Data”. URL 
http://www. gartner. com/newsroom/id/1731916 (2011). 
[6] Villanova University, “What is Big Data?” 
[7] L. M. A. Bettencourt, “The Uses of Big Data in Cities Big 
Data”, March 2014, 2(1), pp. 12-22. 
[8] Conference “Engaging Data 2013 - Big Data or Bad Data”, 
MIT SenseABLE City Lab, 15 November 2013 
[9] M. Batty, “Big Data, smart cities and city planning”, 
Dialogues in Human Geography n.3,  2013, pp. 274-279. 
[10] C. Ratti, S. Di Sabatino, R. Britter, M. Brown, and F. Caton, 
“Analysis of 3-D urban databases with respect to pollution 
dispersion for a number of European and American cities”, 
Water, Air and Soil Pollution: Focus, no. 5-6, 2002, pp. 459-
469. 
[11] M. C. Gonzalez, C. A. Hidalgo, and A. L. Barabasi, 
“Understanding individual human mobility patterns”. Nature 
453, no. 7196, 2008, pp. 779-782. 
[12] C. Ratti, S. Williams, D. Frenchman, and R. M. Pulselli, 
“Mobile landscapes: using location data from cell phones for 
urban analysis”, Environment and Planning B Planning and 
Design 33, no. 5, 2006, p. 727. 
[13] S. Paldino, I. Bojic, S. Sobolevsky, C. Ratti, and M. C. 
Gonzalez, “Urban magnetism through the lens of geo-tagged 
photography”. EPJ Data Science 4, no. 1, 2015, pp. 1-17. 
[14] C. Ratti, N. Baker and K. Steemers, “Energy consumption and 
urban texture”, Energy and buildings 37, no. 7, 2005, pp. 762-
776. 
[15] H. Shahrokni, B. Van Der Heijde, D. Lazarevic, and N. 
Brandt, “Big Data GIS Analytics Towards Efficient Waste 
Management in Stockholm”. In Proceedings of the 2014 
conference ICT for Sustainability, 2014, pp. 140-147. 
[16] Fully Web-Based Geographic Information System (GIS) and 
Mapping, PolicyMap – Retrieved, 11 Feb 2015. 
[17] H. K. Clarke, “Advances in geographic information systems, 
computers, environment and urban systems”, Vol. 10, 1986, 
pp. 175–184. 
[18] V. Maliene, V. Grigonis, V. Palevičius, and S. Griffiths, 
“Geographic information system: Old principles with new 
capabilities”, Urban Design International 16 (1), 2011, pp. 1–
6. doi:10.1057/udi.2010.25. 
[19] A. Asgary and A. Middea, “Modelling Community 
Resilience: An Agent Based Approach”, Proceedings of 
Design for Urban Disaster Conference, Harvard – May 2014. 
[20] M. F. Goodchild, “Twenty years of progress: GIScience in 
2010”, Journal of Spatial Information Science 1, 2015, pp. 3-
20. 
[21] T. M. Vinod Kumar, “Geographic Information System for 
Smart Cities”, Vol.1, Copal Publishing Group, 2013.  
[22] S. M. Serafini, “Il paesaggio agrario come bene da tutelare e 
risorsa economica. Il museo del territorio e le politiche di 
crescita legate al luogo”, Una politica per le città italiane - 
Urbanistica Informazioni, pp. 162-165, INU Edizioni, ISSN: 
0392-5005, 2014. 
[23] M. Gerosa, Milano, R., “Viaggi in rete. Dal nuovo marketing 
turistico ai viaggi nei mondi virtuali”, Franco Angeli Edizioni, 
Milano, 2011. 
[24] F. Dallari and S. Grandi, “Economia e geografia del turismo: 
l'occasione dei Geographical Information System”, Pàtron, 
2005. 
[25] A. Pschera, edizione italiana a cura di Villani Lubelli, U., 
“Dataismo. Verso i Big Data: Critica della morale anonima”, 
goWare, 2013. 
[26] A. Spirn, The language of landscape, Yale University Press, 
1998, pp 3-81. 
[27] F. Girardin, A. Vaccari, A. Gerber, A. Biderman, and C. Ratti, 
Quantifying urban attractiveness from the distribution and 
density of digital footprints. International Journal 4, 2009, 
pp. 175-200. 
 
 
 
 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

