Brave New World? Political participation and new 
media 
 
Maria João Simões 
Department of Sociology 
University of Beira Interior, Covilhã 
Researcher at Research Centre of Social Sciences (CICS), 
University of Minho, Braga  
Portugal 
e-mail: mariajoaosimoes@sapo.pt 
Antónia do Carmo Barriga 
Department of Sociology 
Researcher at UBI_CES 
University of Beira Interior 
Covilhã, Portugal 
e-mail: acab@ubi.pt
Nuno Amaral Jerónimo 
Department of Sociology 
Laboratory of Online Communication 
University of Beira Interior 
Covilhã, Portugal 
e-mail: nunoaj@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— This paper intends to highlight the role played by 
new social media upon citizens’ political participation, their 
challenges and inequalities, like what has been thoroughly 
studied for traditional media. New media, also called social 
networks, like Twitter or Facebook, have been glorified as the 
universal public sphere, a promising new "café". This paper 
intends to discuss, in a more realistic and reflexive way, the use 
of some internet platforms, contradicting the excessive 
optimism that always arises whenever a new ICT (information 
and communication technology) emerges. We intend to 
reposition the social conditions that impact on digital political 
participations, namely the historical context, the social 
inequalities and the role of traditional media on political 
participation. Acknowledging the theoretical proposition 
stating that political participation (both in real or digital 
worlds) is stratified, this paper states that there is also a 
stratification of social media, regarding different levels of uses 
and goals, and that participation skills needed before social 
media ever existed are still necessary to participate via new 
media, an undervalued issue in new media studies. Similarly to 
other tools, Facebook and Twitter do not change the political 
situation by themselves. Although this transformation can be 
enabled by those tools, it all depends on the social, political and 
historical contexts. Finally, it is recognized that traditional 
media are also important to make political participation 
through social networks relevant in the real world. 
Keywords – political participation; new social media; social 
inequalities 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When a new technology appears in the field of 
information and communication, a broaden debate about its 
democratic potential is inevitable. It happened with the ICTs, 
the forums, the blogs and it is happening now with the Web 
2.0, also designated social media. We face theoretical 
frameworks with opposite thesis, from optimistic authors, 
namely Rheingold [1] and Dahlgren [2], who pointed out the 
transformation of the field of political participation through 
the use of new technologies, to pessimistic authors, namely 
Moore [3] and Sunstein [4], who referred that (new) ICTs do 
not produce significant changes in political participation. 
At the empirical evidence level, several researches point 
out to contradictory results. Thus, within the field of the 
impacts of (new) ICTs in political participation and 
democracy it seems that there is a long way to go, either 
from the theoretical and the empirical point of view. Thus, 
our contribution intends to discuss in a more realistic way the 
use of some internet platforms, contradicting the excessive 
optimism underlying technological deterministic approaches 
that do not take into account social and power inequalities as 
well as social and historical environments, both of which 
contribute to unequal uses of these technologies. 
We will focus the analysis upon two levels. First, we will 
discuss that human societies are structured according to 
gender, age, income, social and professional category and 
ethnic group, and we will observe that the interest to 
participate and the necessary skills for (e-)participation are 
also unequally distributed. Second, it will be argued that new 
media are responding to new forms of political participation 
which are mediated by social and historic environment, 
clarifying the constraints of these forms of participation in 
digital environment; also, it shall never be forgotten how 
traditional media are still decisive to political participation. 
 
55
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

II. 
 POLITICAL PARTICIPATION: FROM OLD TO NEW 
SOCIAL INEQUALITIES 
A crucial issue in political sociology is the inequalities 
regarding political participation. Therefore, it would be a 
paradox if this paper did not approach these inequalities also 
in the virtual political participation field. 
A. Social inequalities in political participation 
In western democracies, the recognition of political rights 
and political equality before the law exist together with a 
structured social hierarchy around several social factors as: 
gender, age, income, education, social and professional 
category, ethnic group, residence and so on [5]. The interest, 
the sense of duty to participate and the political competences 
and efficiency are also unequally distributed [6].  
For Memmy [7], these inequalities can be found in all 
political activities, reproducing also in political parties 
themselves and even within the same socioeconomic group. 
Verba and Nie’s studies [8] in the United States, establishing 
a 
relationship 
between 
political 
participation 
and 
socioeconomic condition, and Bourdieu’s [9] in France, 
focusing in competences and interest for politics, are very 
illustrative in this matter.  
The researches about political (in)competences are 
influenced, to a large extent, by the crucial role of education 
in political involvement, very well explicit in the theoretical 
proposition “all political practice has a character eminently 
intellectual, it consists, in most part of cases, in the use of 
words and concepts” [10]. For the author, the political 
initiative and practice come from a reduced number of 
individuals and consists in discourse production and 
reproduction. 
This relationship between political skills and political 
participation variables implies the definition of scales/kinds 
of political participation that can go from degree zero – the 
more simple activities as voting – to more complicated – as 
writing a discourse or a petition or actively participate in a 
political organization, being the political activities allocated 
on the top of the scale more skill demanding than the 
allocated ones on the basis. 
Despite the impact of social inequalities in political 
participation, it would be simplistic not to list other social 
factors that may influence political participation and reduce, 
to a certain extent, the referred inequalities. Among those 
factors are the valued and conscious belonging to a 
community, the organization of political systems, the stimuli 
to participate and the citizenship model (liberal or active). 
Some authors – the most optimistic towards new 
technologies – underestimate or do not even take into 
account in their researches the crucial issue of political skills 
regarding 
political 
participation. 
According 
to 
their 
technological deterministic approach, new technologies are 
just enough to create political involvement. 
B. From citizens’ political participation inequalities to 
new media segmentation, according to those divisions 
Should the unequal distribution of political participation 
be mitigated or reinforced by the employment of ICTs? For 
Dijk [11] there are strong probabilities for the second to 
occur, albeit this thesis can only be tested through researches 
carried out for several years. Nevertheless, Dijk’s doubts are 
still very optimistic, as no technology can extinguish any 
major social inequality. 
In the top of the scale rests an active political elite, who 
uses the more advanced electronic tools to improve their 
political activity, contributing with ideas and solutions, 
actively participating in decision-making and using different 
tools, among other activities. A large agglomerate of people 
is placed in the bottom of the scale, fitting in the last levels 
and kinds of political participation, which we can name as 
“mouse click” participation, i.e., voting in electronic polls, 
which is seldom reflexive and often immediate (Figure nº 1). 
 
Below the latter layer, out of the participation scale, there 
are the actual excluded: those to whom ICTs are not 
accessible. 
A research on digital political participation in Portugal 
carried out by Simões [13], between 1998 and 2002, 
confirms and enlarges Dijk’s thesis according to the 
following propositions. 
First, digital political participation is socially stratified, 
like in real world context, allowing, in the case of digital 
political participation, to highlight added and more selective 
processes of social filtering. 
Second, social differentiation factors, as gender, 
academic qualifications and professional category filter 
citizens who participate both in the real world politics and in 
the digital one. Those factors are also liable for socially 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OWN 
INICIATIVE 
AND 
ACTION 
REQUIRED 
 
HIGH 
 
Running as a 
candidate for a seat or 
office; 
Active membership of 
a political 
organization; 
Writing an opinion 
text or petition; 
Arguing and counter-
arguing; 
Having a say in a 
political or social 
issue; 
Mobilizing people; 
Voting; 
Signing a petition; 
Responding to opinion 
polls 
 
LOW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SKILLS 
REQUIRED 
  
Figure 1.  Adapted  [12] 
56
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

stratified access to ICTs, thus pointing to a double filtering 
process regarding digital political participation. The 
distribution of skills to operate electronic devices is also 
stratified; the skills of those inquired cybercitizens are higher 
with 
common 
tools, 
decreasing 
as 
technological 
sophistication increases, idea also stated by Breindl [14].  
Third, we should not ignore the filters that have been 
placed before and after, like the attempts to control speech, 
the surveillance processes and the increasing trend to paid 
contents, being the first two a significant threat to autonomy, 
a fundamental basis to the free expression of ideas [15], and 
the last one a reinforcement of information access 
inequalities [16]. 
To each of the differentiated political uses, which kind of 
electronic tool do cybercitizens use? 
The reflection about the online tools chosen for different 
types and levels of political participation suggests that, in 
spite of the multifunctional character of some electronic 
tools, these are, to a large extent, being placed in a hierarchy 
according to types and levels of political participation. 
At the top of the scale there are the e-NGO’s, e.g., 
Avaaz.org – The World in Action. This is actually a political 
organization, 
which 
implies 
the 
involvement 
and 
mobilization of its members, with its cognitive resources and 
skills to engage in political participation. Those resources are 
crucial to create political discourse, to organize and lead 
struggles at a global scale using a permanently updated 
website, which is the basis for mobilizing citizens for 
concrete actions, often with joint organizations for particular 
deeds, including drafting petitions or letters in order to send 
them to international organizations or national governments. 
Below that, we find the layer of blogs centred in a more 
systematic, more argumentative and deeper level of political 
opinion and discussion [17]. These are tools created and used 
most of the time by skilled individual users, with expertise in 
producing and reproducing political discourse, being most of 
these individual initiatives. 
Descending the scale, we find Facebook, Twitter and 
other social media. As seen in several countries and recently 
in Northern Africa they might have had an important role for 
mobilizing and organizing social protests [18]. Facebook, as 
noted before, might be the most multifunctional tool 
available on the web. Nevertheless, the most predominant 
political activity on Facebook has been writing short texts 
mobilizing and organizing social protests. These short texts 
do not require the same producing and reproducing skills 
referred above. 
Finally, there are online contexts calling only for 
“mouse-click participation”. 
 
III. 
CITIZENS’ POLITICAL PARTICIPATION IN SOCIAL 
MEDIA 
Some theories alert to the elitist character of 
representative democracy and to the not fulfilled promises or 
even the paradoxical character of real democracy [19]. 
Blumler, cited by Bryant [20] argued that political decisions 
are largely influenced by how they are represented in the 
media and understood by the public; that politics is presented 
like a game, undervaluing the substance of politics; that the 
personalization of politics is enormous, as personal traits are 
easier to publicize than serious issues or policies; that media 
promote the increase of negative messages circulation about 
politics and its actors, thus resulting in the increase of 
cynicism and the decrease of political information provided 
to citizens. 
Nowadays, there is a significant enthusiasm with the 
potentialities that new social media can bring to political 
participation. Likewise the traditional media, old constraints 
are still held and new ones emerge, and new hopes arise. 
Some of these questions are to be discussed in the following 
paragraphs. 
 
A. Social media facing  new forms of political 
participation 
The debate over political participation has seen, in the 
last three decades, two major sets of thought: those who 
outline the decrease of participation and those who say that 
only the classical forms of participation suffer from it, rather 
than new forms of political engagement, which have been 
increasing [21]. These new forms of political participation 
quickly emerged in new ICT.   
In the contemporary West, fragmented lives lead to an 
increasing individualism, as traditional institutions liquefied, 
which created unprecedented individual pursuits [22]. Thus, 
citizens are called to reinvent new forms of political and 
civic participation. As Beck [23] referred, citizenship 
participation became subpolitical, which differs from the 
political in two aspects: (i) allowing the access to the public 
sphere to agents outside the political system and (ii) 
permitting that people are granted access as individuals, not 
only as members of organizations. The purpose of action 
might not therefore be a collective struggle, but a 
personalised form of intervention [24]. 
Secondly, the purpose of political action is, in large 
extent, not embedded in a more general, programmatic and 
long term action, often having a sporadic and very specific 
character. People engage with small causes, very often 
particularistic ones (e.g., defending a single woman against 
being stoned to death instead of defending equal rights to 
women).  
As an example, on March, the 12th, 2011 around 300,000 
people – one of the biggest political protests in the 
Portuguese contemporary history – marched the streets of 
Lisbon and Oporto answering to an appeal of a 40,000 
members’ Facebook page. The idea was born and grown 
within the Facebook community and nurtured by the national 
televisions. The immediate cause for this manifestation was 
“discontentment” and each one of those 300,000 people 
might have had too many different reasons for being 
“discontent”. This believed political engagement was shown 
only during this manifestation and the aftermath brought 
nothing of the sort of a political party or even a collective 
movement. In the general elections held on June of 2011, this 
movement did not present itself in either real or virtual 
contexts, it did not come forward with its goals and reasons 
for discontentment nor did it contribute to the public debate. 
57
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

Thirdly, the action within political parties is now seen as 
a falsehood; however, without political mediation the 
singularisation of the political action ends up denying the 
very purpose of it [25]. The crucial issue about these new 
forms of political participation is, in fact, their continuity 
while the intended goals are not achieved. While new ICTs 
have the potential to perform classical permanent political 
roles, the new forms of political participation have the 
opposite characteristics, namely its sporadic form. 
B. New public space? 
 
A long way from the “old” public space, as Habermas 
conceived it, we live nowadays in a “new hyper-mediated 
public space” that continues to reconfigure, recompose and 
“contradict” itself, adapting Dominique Wolton’s [26] 
expression. If the contemporary public space has become 
undoubtedly larger than the classical by the action of 
traditional media, emerging social media has broadened it 
even further. 
And yet, as Habermas [27] wrote, the echoing of a 
cultivated social layer has been long gone in the public use 
of reasoning; the public has become divided, on the one 
hand, into expertise minorities which use of reason is not 
public, and another in the great mass of consumers. It should 
be recognized that the public space has become plural and 
heterogeneous (Habermas himself recognized it); and that it 
has been long since the spatial structures of communication 
are convulsing, as Keane [28] wrote, assisting the dilution of 
ancient hegemony of public life (limited by territory, 
structured by the state, mediated only by conventional 
media). The conventional ideals of a unified public space 
where citizens struggle for a public cause lead to the 
overlapping and interconnection of several public spaces. 
In this context where public space becomes increasingly 
fragmented, “virtual communities” have been emerging and 
strengthening themselves on a daily basis, which can be 
observed looking to social networks such as Facebook or 
Twitter. New arenas that, some authors say, have been 
crucial to the “staging” of mobilizing people to decisive 
political actions like the ones staged in Northern Africa on 
February and March 2011.  
In this section, this approach intends to confront the 
dominant excessive optimism with a more realistic analysis 
of the political participation through social media. 
Weblogs have been on the rise as political media for the 
last decade, but these tools also show the inequalities 
discussed before. While some bloggers produce highly 
elaborated discourses, arguing and counter-arguing, most 
political blog users are just readers or produce nothing more 
than simplistic and short comments or confidences, which 
often are not even argumentative. 
On the other hand, there might be a reconfiguration of the 
public sphere as we find a wider interaction between blogs 
and traditional media. Some recent news have been brought 
up firstly in the blogosphere (in Portugal, the minor political 
issue about the Prime Minister’s university degree was first 
discussed within the political blogs); on the other way, the 
daily discussion on the blogs is centered mainly upon the 
printed (or published on the web) stories of the traditional 
media. 
Moreover, although the newer social media are in the 
spotlight, the highly optimistic approaches should not be 
overrated and may even be criticized as they are somewhat a-
historical: most of them try to understand the importance of 
social networking without considering the social and 
political history of those using the technology, as well as the 
profiles of users and those on the leading roles. They also 
tend to be a-cultural, disregarding the cultural traits of the 
societies where these new media platforms are being used. 
Facebook is new in combining several online possibilities, 
but those who use it are still social and cultural beings, thus 
making its content a mirror of their representations. This 
critique regards carefully the political participation in its 
wider meaning via social networks. 
History has shown people uprising against tyrants or 
undesired social conditions, whether in pre-industrial France, 
in industrial England or in post-industrial Czechoslovakia, all 
of which happened before internet. Even the Tiananmen 
riots, albeit the use of fax and Xerox machines, were mainly 
set up with face-to-face interaction. The fall of the Berlin 
Wall, in 1989, had a technology push, as the incidents were 
started with a televised declaration (by mistake, we 
understood later), but the people went out of their homes in a 
completely unorganised way. 
We are yet to know exactly how the Egyptian and the 
Tunisian mobs were organized. But we do know that the 
major feeders on Tweeter and Facebook were “old” 
bloggers, protesting against Mubarak regime since back in 
2004. The ties between these bloggers might have been 
stronger than just a Facebook click. If we are to stress the 
role of online tools, we should regard all of them. The 
Internet penetration rate in Egypt doesn't surpass 25% [29] 
and the Facebook users are merely 7.7% of its entire 
population [30]. People would not take serious risks if they 
were not committed to each other. Besides, we should not 
underestimate the involvement of labour unions in these 
insurrections in Northern Africa.  
Social networks provide weak ties between people, as 
they do not have to seriously engage in any question they are 
asked to. Facebook has a multiple set of interactive 
possibilities, but it was not designed with any political aim. 
Most of the interaction on Facebook is personal and 
recreational, and the political possibilities of Facebook or 
Twitter are similar of those presented by blogs, forums or e-
mails. “These established social networking sites are not 
major hotbeds of political activity” [31].  
There are also some signs of dissonant attitudes between 
public opinion, civic participation or electoral behaviour and 
online political expressions. Certainly, these new media 
platforms amplify the visibility of one cause, but they do not 
necessarily make people engage in real causes in the real 
world. The Facebook page Save Darfur Coalition has almost 
1.5 million “friends”. And yet, the average amount of money 
donated to help the refugees in South Sudan was nine cents 
of dollar [32]. The optimistic view about political 
participation via new social media must be toned down with 
the knowledge that online participation does not mean real 
58
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

participation, and politics still is a real-world activity [33]. 
The click of one button is much simpler than protesting on 
the streets, especially if state powers (police, armed forces) 
are to impose some violence on the protesters, or even if the 
action might bring any kind of personal cost. 
As another example, in the Portuguese presidential 
election of 2011, a company made a content analysis study 
of the internet platforms, to understand what the internet 
users were saying about all the candidates. Using 
“Prophesee”, the researchers analysed the amount and 
content of the online dialogue for the electoral campaign 
period. Fernando Nobre, who came third on the actual ballot, 
was the candidate with the highest positive feelings towards 
him and the one with the biggest digital “buzz” of those 
weeks. He also was “elected” as the Facebook president, as 
he had 38,584 “likes” opposing Cavaco Silva, the candidate 
who actually won the election, who only had 28,964 [34]. 
Anyway, although losing in the digital field, the elected 
president used as much as eight different platforms during 
his campaign. These new media, such as Facebook, can up 
being used as publicity platforms to conventional politics, as 
they are used almost only during election campaigns or 
combined with the “old” media that still set the news agenda. 
The online social networks provide their members the 
information about so many civil and political actions at the 
same time that if they are not filtered by any other medium 
(usually newspapers or television), the myriad of information 
and political causes can undermine the ability to significantly 
adhere to any of them. “The growth and broader 
dissemination of knowledge paradoxically produces greater 
uncertainty and contingency rather than providing a 
resolution of disagreements or the basis for a more effective 
domination by central societal institutions” [35].  
It seems that the outcome of political activities depend, to 
a large extent, upon the articulation between new social 
media and traditional ones. On the one hand, these new 
social media can be used to express opinions, mobilize and 
organize people for action. They have higher mobilization 
abilities, as they do not have time and space constraints and 
are at better odds to faster organize political actions. Thus, 
new social media introduce some changes in political 
activity. But, on the other hand, traditional media recount 
and give visibility to what is happening in the realm of social 
networks. Hence, traditional media give real existence to 
new social media. 
 
IV. 
FINAL REFLECTIONS 
The “newer” new media, alike other media and 
technologies that created similar expectations did not solve 
“old” social problems. Those new media have been 
challenging the seductive image of digital citizens who, 
regardless of their social condition, would be able to use the 
powerful technological resources, turning them into 
autonomous citizens, politically active and systematically 
controlling 
their 
political 
representatives’ 
activities. 
Therefore, they might not fulfill the democratization and the 
massification previously promised. 
Like political participation in the real world, digital 
political participation implies political skills. These are also 
socially stratified, attending to a double filtering process: the 
same social factors which determine a stratified political 
participation also promote a stratified use of the ICTs. This 
stratification is also reinforced by inequalities registered at 
computer literacy level and by all-pervading inequalities of 
power. 
Our opinion is that these kinds of stratification have lead 
to the construction of a hierarchy of the different media, 
according to the different kinds and levels of participation, 
i.e., some being used more for simpler forms and other to 
more complex forms of political participation, both being 
capable of obtaining different levels of efficiency. We do not 
forget that the participation skills needed before the 
appearance of the new media are still necessary to participate 
via new media, which reflexes the frailty of the idea of a 
brave new world. 
And yet, we address traditional media still showing their 
importance, turning real what happens in the virtual world, 
revealing much of what is generated in the new media, 
keeping, at a large extent, their traditional agenda-setting 
function. The traditional media keep their agenda setting 
power intact, not only in their own means (printed or 
broadcasted), but also in the social networks, where those 
can influence the stories being discussed. 
The interconnection between traditional and new media 
news agendas may indicate we are facing a reconfiguration 
of the public space rather than the creation of an entirely new 
one. This reconfiguration might be of interest to further 
investigations. 
Given the recent nature of social manifestations emerging 
from new media, deeper and more empirical investigations 
are the next step needed to understand the social context and 
the goals of these ICTs, the social consequences of their use, 
the sustainability of online initiatives regarding the reach of 
the established objectives, separating what is perennial from 
what is ephemeral; finally it would be useful to create a 
typology of “participation profiles” that contemplated the 
multifaceted and more complex nature emerging from these 
new contexts, helping us repositioning the political 
participation concept. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. 
Rheingold, 
Electronic 
Democracy 
Toolkit, 
in 
www.well.com/user/hlr/electrondemoc.html, 
06-09-2000, 
1996 
[2] P. Dahlgren, “The Internet, Public Spheres, and Political 
Communication:Dispersion and Deliberation”, in Political 
Communication, nº 22, 2005, pp. 147-162 
[3] R. Moore, “Democracy and cyberspace” in B. Hague and B. 
Loader (eds.) Digital Democracy: Discourse and Decision 
Making in the Information Age, Londres: Routledge, 1999, 
pp. 39-59 
[4] C. Sunstein, Republic.com. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 2001 
59
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

[5] D. Memmi, “L’engagement politique”, in M. Grawitz and J. 
Leca, Traité de science politique, vol. 3: Action Politique, 
Paris : PUF, 1985, pp. 310-366 
[6] D. Memmi, “L’engagement politique”, in M. Grawitz and J. 
Leca, Traité de science politique, vol. 3: Action Politique, 
Paris : PUF,1985 pp. 310-366 ; P. Bourdieu, La Distinction. 
Critique Sociale du Jugement, Paris : Minuit., 1979 ; N. 
Mayer, Nonna and P. Perrineau, Les comportements 
politiques, Paris : Armand Colin, 1992 
[7] D. Memmi, “L’engagement politique”, in M. Grawitz and J. 
Leca, Traité de science politique, vol. 3: Action Politique, 
Paris: PUF, 1985, pp. 310-366 
[8] Verba, S. and Nie, N.,  Participation in America: Political 
Democracy and Social Equality, Nova York: Harper and 
Row, 1972 
[9] P. Bourdieu, La Distinction. Critique Sociale du Jugement, 
Paris : Minuit, 1979 
[10] D. Memmi, “L’engagement politique”, in M. Grawitz and J. 
Leca, Traité de science politique, vol. 3: Action Politique, 
Paris : PUF, 1985, p. 338 
[11] J. v. Dijk,  “Widening Information Gaps and Policies of 
Prevention”, in K. Hacker and J. v. Dijk (eds.), Digital 
Democracy, Londres: Sage, 2000, pp. 166-183 
[12] J. v. Dijk,  “Widening Information Gaps and Policies of 
Prevention”, in Kenneth Hacker and J. v. Dijk (eds.), Digital 
Democracy, Londres: Sage, 2000, p. 176 
[13] M. J. Simões, Política e Tecnologia – Tecnologias da 
Informação e da Comunicação e Participação Política em 
Portugal, Oeiras: Celta, 2005 
[14] Y. Breindl, “Critique of the Democratic Potentialities of the 
Internet: A Review of Current Theory and Practice”, in 
tripleC 8(1): pp 43-59, at http://www.triple-c.at, (06-04-11), 
20110 
[15] M. J. Simões, Surveillance: A (Potential) Threat to Political 
Participation? ICDS 2011: The Fifth International Conference 
on Digital Society,  pp.94-99,   Copyright (c) IARIA, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-003-1, 
2011, 
available 
at 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&arti
cleid=icds_2011_3_40_10096 
[16] M. J. Simões, Política e Tecnologia – Tecnologias da 
Informação e da Comunicação e Participação Política em 
Portugal, Oeiras: Celta., 2005 
[17] A. Barriga, Media, Política e Opinião: uma tríade Complexa - 
Uma abordagem à opinião publicada em Portugal, Lisboa: 
ISCTE-IUL, ISBN: 978-989-8154-55-2, 2007, available at 
http://hdl.handle.net/10071/1381 
[18] J. H. Price, The New Media Revolution in Egypt: 
Understanding the Failures of the Past and Looking Towards 
the Possibilities of the Future, in Democracy & Society 
Volume 7, Issue 2, Democrats, Dictators, and Demonstrators 
Conference Issue, 2010; S. Shangapour, S. Hosseini, H. 
Hashemnejad, Cyber social-networks and social movements 
Case study: Tehran, International Journal of Scientific & 
Engineering Research, Volume 2, Issue 1, January-2011 
1ISSN 2229-5518, 2009-10 
[19] N. Bobbio, La teoria delle forme di governo nella storia del 
pensiero politico, Giappichelli, 1976; N. Bobbio, II futuro 
delia democrazia. Una difesa delle regole dei gioco. Torino: 
Giulio Einaudi Editore S.P.A., 1984 
[20] J. Bryant and D. Zillmann,  Los efectos de los medios de 
comunicación. Investigaciones y teorias, Barcelona: Ed. 
Paidós, 1996 
[21] D. Memmi, “L’engagement politique”, in Madeleine Grawitz 
and Jean Leca, Traité de science politique, vol. 3: Action 
Politique, Paris: PUF,1985, pp. 310-366 ; N. Mayer, Nonna 
and P. Perrineau, Les comportements politiques, Paris: 
Armand Colin, 1992; P. Perrineau,  L’engagement politique – 
Déclin ou mutation?, Paris: Presses de la Fondation Nationale 
des Sciences Politiques, 1994 
[22] Z. Bauman, Liquid Times, Cambridge: Polity Press, 2010 
[23] U. Beck, The Reinvention of Politics – Rethinking Modernity 
in the Global Social Order, Cambridge: Polity Press (2ª ed.), 
1999 
[24] P. Perrineau,  L’engagement politique – Déclin ou mutation?, 
Paris: Presses de la Fondation Nationale des Sciences 
Politiques,1994; J. Ion, “L’évolution des formes de 
l’engagement public”, in P. Perrineau (dir.), L’engagement 
politique – Déclin ou mutation?  Paris: Presses de la 
Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques, 1994, pp.23-39; 
S. Duchesne,  “Engagement ou politique: la paradoxe de la 
citoyenneté”, in  P. Perrineau (dir.), L’engagement politique – 
Déclin ou mutation, Paris: Presses de la Fondation Nationale 
des Sciences Politiques, 1994, pp. 185-214 
[25] A. Muxel,  “Jeunes des années quatre-vingt-dix: à la 
recherche d’une politique «sans étiquette» ”  in P. Perrineau 
(dir.) L’engagement politique – Déclin ou mutation, Paris: 
Presses 
de 
la 
Fondation 
Nationale 
des 
Sciences 
Politiques,1994, pp. 239-266 
[26] D. 
Wolton, 
"As 
contradições 
do 
Espaço 
Público 
mediatizado", in Revista Comunicação e Linguagens, nº 21-
22, Lisboa: Cosmos, 1995 
[27] J. Habermas, História y crítica de la opinión pública, 
Barcelona: Gili, 1982, pp 203 - 233  
[28] J.Keane, A Democracia e os Media, Lisboa: Temas e Debates, 
2002 
[29] International 
Communication 
Union, 
2009, 
at 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/icteye/Reporting/ 
ShowReportFrame.aspx?ReportName=/WTI/InformationTech
nologyPublic&ReportFormat=HTML4.0&RP_intYear=2009
&RP_intLanguageID=1&RP_bitLiveData=False 
[30] F. Salem and R. Mourtada, “Civil Movements: The Impact of 
Facebook and Twitter” in Arab Social Media Report, Vol. 1, 
No. 2, Dubai School of Government, May 2011 
[31] B.Cogan and T. Kelso, Encyclopedia of Politics, the Media, 
and Popular Culture, Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood Press, 
2009, p. 180 
[32] M. Gladwell, “Small Change” in The New Yorker, October 4, 
2010 
[33] M. E. Kann, J. Berry, C. Gant, P. Zager, “The Internet and 
youth political participation” in First Monday, volume 12, nº 
8, 2007, available at http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/ 
bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1977/1852 
[34] Diário Económico, January, 31st, 2011 
[35] N. Stehr, “Modern Societies as Knowledge Societies” in G. 
Ritzer and B. Smart, Handbook of Social Theory, Londres: 
Sage Publications, 2001, p.502 
 
60
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

