Everywhere Race!: A Social Mobile Platform for Sport Engagement and Motivation
Fabrizio Mulas ∗, Paolo Pilloni∗, Salvatore Carta∗
∗Dept. of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Cagliari via Ospedale 72 09124 Cagliari, Italy
Email: {fabrizio.mulas, paolo.pilloni, salvatore}@unica.it
Abstract—A lot of medical researches demonstrate that in
the last decades there has been a serious increase of chronic
diseases such as obesity, diabetes and correlated pathologies.
These studies emphasize the key role of a healthy lifestyle in
the prevention and cure of these kind of health problems.
A healthy lifestyle can be broadly summarized in terms of
regular physical activity, a balanced diet, a positive outlook and
absence of harmful substances such as alcohol and tobacco.
Researchers around the world are experimenting with new
techniques and technologies to support and motivate people
in their daily physical activity. Ubiquitous mobile devices and
their intrinsic relationship with social networks are becoming
one of the most popular persuasive technologies adopted in
this research area. In this paper we present and evaluate
an innovative mobile Android application, called Everywhere
Race!, designed to motivate people in a wide range of speed-
based sport activities. The peculiarity of the application consists
in its groundbreaking way to engage people in sports. Thanks
to an intensive usage of social networks and its fun-oriented
design it makes it possible, for the ﬁrst time ever, to compete
in real-time with people from all over the world as in a
real competition. A preliminary evaluation of the application,
conducted on 35 users, shows that the application motivates
both non-habitual sportsmen to start working out and habitual
ones to keep on exercising.
Keywords-Sport; Healthy Lifestyle; Motivation; Engagement;
Gamiﬁcation; Serious Game; Human Computer Interaction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Thousands of medical studies have put in evidence the
beneﬁts of regular physical activity. These studies demon-
strate that a healthy lifestyle is a predominant factor for
people well-being. It helps in the prevention of several
chronic diseases and it is closely related to a wide array
of mental health beneﬁts (see for example, [2][3]).
Despite these scientiﬁc results, millions of people world-
wide conduct a sedentary lifestyle. Data collected during the
years 2008-2010 by the World Health Organization (WHO)
reveal that we are living in a sedentary society. These
statistics speak clearly [4]:
• In 2008 1.4 billion adults were overweight
• Nearly 40 million children are overweight
• 65% of world population lives in countries where over-
weight and obesity kill more people than underweight
WHO suggests some guidelines to be followed in order
to overcome or prevent health problems. Here are some
proposed tips:
• Engage in regular physical activity
• Limit energy intake from total fats
• Increase consumption of fruit and vegetables, as well
as legumes, whole grains and nuts
In the last years, a conspicuous number of research teams
and famous sport brands were and still are involved in
studying and developing new techniques to motivate people
to pursue a more active lifestyle. Many of these studies
share a common approach: the exploit of new technologies,
such as smartphones and social networks, as primary means
of promoting an active lifestyle especially among young
people.
As stated by Batussi et al. [5] the products developed by
these researches can be grouped in three main categories:
• Computer-supported physical games
• Virtual trainers
• Mobile applications and devices
The last category seems to be the most promising one if
we consider both the high number of related researches and
the solutions developed. One key success factor is certainly
due to the high potentialities of new technologies.
Mobile devices are highly portable and this allows users
to be assisted everywhere and every time they need it. For
example, Mulas et al. [17] exploit a mobile application that
behaves as a virtual personal trainer for supporting and
motivating people in their running activities.
Most of the proposed applications, however, try to mo-
tivate users focusing mainly on people performance rather
than the social and ludic aspects of sport. In some cases this
can be a limiting factor especially when the aim is to attract
non-habitual sportsmen.
Everywhere Race! (EWR) has been designed to overcome
these limitations. Its main purpose is to allow users from all
over the world to compete against each other in different
speed-based sports.
The application, in a completely different way than other
existing applications, allows real-time virtual competitions
among participants.
A virtual race is similar to a real one in the sense that it
has a priori known start time and distance and both are the
same for all the participants, no matter where they are.
The application is designed to promote a strong social
interaction among users by means of the famous social
network Facebook.
Indeed a user can easily check all races where its friends
are enrolled in and join them. Alternatively, it can create a
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

new race and, perhaps, invite its friends. Furthermore, EWR
highlights friends activities, such as their last race results
and classiﬁcations, in order to foster social engagement.
Once a user chooses the race that best meets his pref-
erences, he only has to wait till the scheduled start time.
A few minutes before it, EWR begins a countdown for the
user, so that all participants will start racing at the same
time, wherever they are in the world.
During the competition the application records and shows
to the user his race data – such as the covered distance
so far, the average speed/pace and his current position in
the competition – and those of their opponents in terms of
position and distance from him as in a real event.
When all participants ﬁnish the race, the application es-
tablishes and publishes the ﬁnal classiﬁcation, with arriving
positions, times and speeds, as in a real race (Figure 6).
If the user wants, his result will be posted on his Facebook
wall.
Everywhere Race! offers another innovative feature: it is
even possible to associate to a real sport event (such as a
marathon) a virtual one. In this way people that can not
be present at the real event can virtually participate and
compete against all other participants. For example, imagine
to take part at the New York Marathon without being
physically there, perhaps running in your city park or in your
treadmill (indeed modern smartphone are equipped with
accelerometers that can be exploited to realize a pedometer).
Promising results coming from the relatively new serious
game research area (see for example, [7][8]) suggested us
to develop the application leveraging the importance of fun
and social relationships as a means to promote the sport in
as many people as possible.
With respect to the state-of-the-art solutions, our appli-
cation offers users the opportunity to compete in real-time
virtual races that are very similar to the real ones. At the
same time the deep integration with Facebook community
makes sport practice even more engaging. These factors help
to push people toward a healthy spirit of competition that is
a well known strong motivation element.
Other existing solutions do not offer users the possibility
to perform real-time competitions with other people. The
most common case is to allow a user to compete against his
past performances as a means to improve himself. To the
best of our knowledge there is only one application, named
Softrace [23], similar to Everywhere Race!. The application
allows users to take part in a virtual real-time competition.
Anyway it differs from EWR mainly because it does not
follow the common rules of a real race (see Section II).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
surveys the state of the art in the ﬁeld of pervasive com-
puting. Section III details the application design while sec-
tion IV reports preliminary test results. Section V concludes
the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, with no claim to being exhaustive, we will
report some examples of technological systems developed to
support people during physical activities.
Hoysniemi [9] illustrates some results regarding the use
of the famous dance video game Dance Dance Revolution.
In this paper the author investigates the positive effects
of gaming with regard to motivational, physical and social
factors.
Jayant et al. [10] studied the effects of using human
movements as game controller. To achieve this they have
developed MarioFit, a system to play the Nintendo game
Mario Bros on a PDA.
IJsselsteijn et al. [11] propose a study on intrinsic motiva-
tion enhancement. The research is based on the experimen-
tation with a virtual coach system on users while cycling
on a stationary bike. The virtual coach, developed by the
Philips Research Centre, is projected on a screen surrounded
by a naturalistic landscape. Their results show a good users
reaction to the stimuli provided by the virtual coach with
some other interesting results about the effectiveness of
informations provided by the coach during the workouts.
Your Shape Fitness Evolved [12] is a ﬁtness game de-
signed for Microsoft Kinect. The software guides users step
by step during indoor workouts and let them customize
their workouts in terms of goals to reach. The game allows
users both to keep track/share their statistics through the
community and to challenge other users.
Batussi et al. [5] developed a PocketPC application called
Mobile Personal Trainer (MOPET) aimed to support users
during their workouts. MOPET uses GPS device and vocal
cues during training sessions. The application makes use of
an embodied virtual trainer that guides users showing the
proper execution of exercises.
Toscos et al. [13] propose Chick clique that aims to push
teenage girls to adopt a correct lifestyle. The application
collects informations about the caloric content of popular
foods and the amount of steps necessary to burn them. The
software promotes social interactions by means of SMS to
boost a friendly competition among users.
Consolvo et al. [14] have developed a mobile application
called Huston that, through a pedometer, counts and records
the number of steps done. The results collected during Hus-
ton’s experimentation are very interesting. Authors derived
four key design requirements that may help developing such
applications:
• Users want accurate measurements of their activities
• Deep use of long-term statistical reports
• Strong social interaction support
• Applications must be developed taking into account
users lifestyle habits
Oliveira et al. [15] presented TripleBeat a mobile phone
application that makes use of both an ECG and an ac-
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

celerometer to push runners to achieve their goals in terms
of a certain heart rate. The results of the experimentation
have revealed the importance of a well-designed and intuitive
graphical interface to improve self-awareness and the effec-
tiveness of virtual competition to enforce users motivations.
Mulas et al. [17] propose an Android-based mobile ap-
plication called Everywhere Run! that aims at motivating
and supporting people during their running activities. The
application behaves as a virtual personal trainer helping
runners to keep a predeﬁned pace. With respect to other
similar applications, Everywhere Run! is designed to pro-
mote interactions between users and real coaches by means
of a community of runners.
Nike+GPS [16] as been designed by Nike for the IOS
operating system. It is one of the most complete and popular
applications in sport and health area. Some of the most
important strengths are:
• Intensive use of social networks
• A well-designed system for the management of vocal
cues and music
• A dynamic web community where users can create
their workouts and at the same time interact with other
sportsmen
There are a number of applications similar to these ones.
Just to name a few (see Section “References” for websites):
Runtastic, Endomondo, RunKeeper, MapMyFitness, Adidas
miCoach and so on. All these products provide more or less
the same features:
• Route and workout data tracking
• Workout statistics
• Results sharing through social networks
The last application we will discuss is the most similar to
our proposal; it is called Softrace [23]. In this application,
in addition to the just discussed features, users can compete
with other people in a sort of real-time competition.
The trait that sets us apart from this proposal is the totally
different implemented concept of real-time race. In Softrace
a user can start his race when he wants. He then races against
other people that are already running at that moment. Thus,
there is not a real concept of “race”. Our application instead
implements a race in its classical meaning, thus with both a
priori known start time and distance, both the same for all
the participants. Furthermore, in Softrace, there is not the
concept of virtual events associated with real ones.
III. EVERYWHERE RACE!
Everywhere Race! is an Android application (version
1.6 and newer compliant) designed to motivate people to
exercise regularly. It is already available in the Google
Play Store [24]. It engages people through the totally new
concept of real-time virtual competition deeply based on
fun and social interactions. The software, for the ﬁrst time
ever, makes it possible to create a real-time race in the
Figure 1.
Main menu
Figure 2.
Create new race menu
classical sense of the word. Users can choose almost any
kind of speed-based sports and challenge their friends and
other people from all over the world seamlessly from the
application.
It follows a more detailed description of Everywhere
Race!. Figure 1 shows the main race menu. From here the
user can create a new race, perform a search for existing ones
based on common attributes (e.g., sport, distance, starting
time and so on) or directly search for races in which
his friends are involved in. As it is possible to see from
the screenshot, the application automatically displays the
remaining time to the upcoming user’s race. In this example,
the next user’s race will be in a little more than a day.
From the “Create new race” menu (see Figure 2), it is
possible to create a new race by choosing the wanted race
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Figure 3.
Search results
parameters such as, for example: name, length, number of
opponents and start time. As stated above, the application
allows two kinds of searches that return a list of races
matching the query parameters. An example of search result
is shown in Figure 3.
The user’s membership state, the start time, the distance
and the number of opponents enrolled so far are shown for
every returned race. It is possible to have more details by
tapping on the row corresponding to a race. We have just
described the steps needed to create/ﬁnd an existing race in
order to enroll on it.
Let us speak now about the funniest and more important
feature provided by the application, the race. As clearly
stated in the top of the screen in the Figure 1, a countdown
will automatically start if the next user’s race begins in less
than thirty minutes. Figure 4 shows that case, where a race
will start in less than four minutes.
Note: to avoid misunderstandings, till the end of this
section, we will use the word “user” for indicating the user
of the current smartphone and the word ”opponents” for
indicating the other remote users (his competitors).
Figure 5 shows the user screen during a race. The most
important information needed while racing is reported on
this screen. Starting from the top of the screen, the user
can see the race nominal distance and some other data like
the GPS signal strength and the meaning of the colours
that may appear while racing to report the state of the
opponents. The rest of the screen shows a snapshot of the
race at a certain point in time. In this particular case (see
Figure 5) it is reported the state of the race among three
contenders at about two minutes from start. The ﬁrst row
reports data of the current ﬁrst player. In this case the ﬁrst
player corresponds to the current user and this explains why
the row is bigger than others. The cell reports the user’s
Figure 4.
Countdown dialog
Figure 5.
Ongoing race
position, race time, distance and the average speed. The
other two rows show data of the current second and third
player with their gap (expressed as a distance) from the user,
respectively.
As soon as the current user covers the whole race distance,
the race for him is ﬁnished, as in a real one. At this point,
the user can choose whether to publish his race result in
his Facebook wall or not. Finally, EWR shows the actual
classiﬁcation (see Figure 6). Note that other opponents
can be still racing (again, as in a real event), thus the
classiﬁcation can be not ﬁnal yet.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed application
we submitted a subjective evaluation test to a sample of 35
volunteers that used Everywhere Race! for 30 days.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Figure 6.
Race results screen
The sample was composed of 25 male users and 10 female
users aged between 19 and 40. Ten users regularly practiced
sport at amateur level (6 males, 4 females), whereas the
remaining testers were mostly sedentary. Among active users
4 exercised about four times a week, while the others from
two to one times a week for an average training session
duration of 30 minutes. Twenty-seven users (5 females and
22 males) were non-technical and they had never used before
any application as a support to physical activity whereas the
remaining part of testers already had some experience with
such kind of applications.
With these evaluation tests, we wanted to investigate the
inﬂuence of our application on users motivation in order
to both validate current application features and understand
how to proceed for future developments.
There are several deﬁnitions of motivation:
the psychological process that gives behavior pur-
pose and direction (Kreitner)
a predisposition to behave in a purposive manner
to achieve speciﬁc, unmet needs (Butford, Bedeian
and Lindner)
an internal drive to satisfy an unsatisﬁed need
(Higgins)
the will to achieve (Bedeian)
Ryan et al. [25] propose the following subclassiﬁcation
of motivation:
• Intrinsic motivation: refers to doing something because
it is inherently interesting or enjoyable
• Extrinsic motivation: refers to doing something because
it leads to a separable outcome
Vallerand et al. [26] studied the differences between
intrinsic and extrinsic motivational factors in sports. They
claim that intrinsic motives are generally considered to be
more relevant than extrinsic ones especially for non-habitual
sportsmen. These results are generally considered valid,
although other studies (see [27]) show that the user’s gender
may affect the predominant motive. Females appear to have
more intrinsic motives than males which, vice-versa, have
more extrinsic motives than females.
The description of how Everywhere Race! impacts on
motivational aspects has been evaluated follows. For this
purpose, we chose to adopt the Exercise Motivations Inven-
tory - 2 (EMI-2) developed by Markland et al. [28]. EMI-2
is composed of 51 items belonging to 14 scales. Testers are
asked to rate each item on a ﬁve-point scale ranging from 0
(“not at all true for me”) to 5 (“very true for me”).
Scale scores are obtained by calculating means for each
item belonging to the appropriate scale. The graphic in
Figure 7 shows the obtained results.
Figure 7.
EMI-2 results
All the scales received good scores meaning that the
application is a valid mean to help people to start working
out. Some of the most important scales that we wanted to
test were those related to enjoyment, challenge, afﬁliation
and competition. This is because we aimed at evaluating
the innovative features provided by Everywhere Race! in
order to understand if our application is evolving in the right
direction.
We submitted an additional questionnaire to deeper in-
vestigate the effects of the application on users sport habits.
Testers were asked to rate each question with the same scale
(ranging from 0 to 5) used to rate the EMI-2 items.
Here are the questions:
1) “Did EWR help you to improve performances?”
2) “Were social features important to improve your per-
formances?”
3) “Did EWR change your sport habits?”
4) “Will you continue to use EWR in the future?”
The average results shown in Figure 8 put in evidence
that the majority of users perceive the application as a valid
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Figure 8.
Questionnaire results
tool that helps to achieve sport goals in a more enjoyable
and regular manner.
As it is possible to see, despite the limited sample of
test users, we have obtained encouraging preliminary results.
The positive trend emerging from our tests shows that the
application may help to increase motivational factors through
this new engaging and social way of active gaming.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Nowadays, many studies have been carried out trying to
ﬁnd possible solutions to the alarming increase of health dis-
eases. These pathologies are mainly related to an unhealthy
lifestyle often due to a lack of physical activity.
In this paper, we presented Everywhere Race!, a smart-
phone application that aims at attracting as many people as
possible to start working out in a totally engaging and social
fashion. For the ﬁrst time ever, users can challenge people
from all over the world in real-time races very similar to
real ones directly from a smartphone. It is like a game, but
the participants can move for real! All participants start the
race at the same time wherever they are. At any moment in
time, all players can see both their position in the race and
that of their opponents. At the end of the race, Everywhere
Race! shows the ﬁnal classiﬁcation with arriving positions,
times and speeds as in a real race.
As proven by our tests, one of the strengths of the
application is its fun and social-oriented design. These
features allowed us to exploit the complex social dynamics
that has been proved to be very important and effective for
people engagement, especially in sports (see, for example,
[29][30]).
To evaluate the effectiveness and ease of use of Every-
where Race!, we have conducted some preliminary tests
with a group of 35 volunteers. The tests have been designed
to actually prove the beneﬁts of our software to users
motivation. Our results showed that the majority of people
that in the past had a sedentary lifestyle got motivated
to working out more often. All these beneﬁts, as shown
by numbers, have a close relationship with the innovative
features of the application.
Our research will proceed in several directions. First, we
are currently developing a web community associated with
the application to enforce social interaction among users.
Second, we plan to add new features to the application.
Among the most forthcoming: more detailed users and com-
munity statistics, more social functions and speech synthesis
support. Thanks to these improvements we aim to gain a
greater visibility on Google Play Store in order to perform
more accurate tests on a more statistically meaningful sam-
ple of users.
REFERENCES
[1] Android.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.android.com
[2] D. Warburton, C. Nicol, and S. Bredin, “Health beneﬁts of
physical activity: the evidence,” CMAJ, vol. 174, no. 6, mar
2006.
[3] R. Pate, M. Pratt, and S. B. et. al., “Physical activity and
public health. a recommendation from the centers for disease
control and prevention and the american college of sports
medicine,” JAMA, vol. 7, 1995.
[4] WHO-ObesityAndOverweight. (2012, May). [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/
[5] F. Buttussi, L. Chittaro, and D. Nadalutti, “Bringing mobile
guides and ﬁtness activities together: a solution based on an
embodied virtual trainer,” MobileHCI 06: Proceedings of the
eighth conference on human computer interaction with mobile
devices and services, ACM Press, pp. 29–36, 2006.
[6] Facebook.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.facebook.com/
[7] S. Senevirathne, M. Kodagoda, V. Kadle, S. Haanke, T. Se-
nior, and B. Heller, “Application of serious games to sport,
health and exercise,” Proceedings of the 6th SLIIT Research
Symposium, 2011.
[8] J. Sinclair, P. Hingston, and M. Masek, “Considerations
for the design of exergames,” in Proc. 5th international
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques
in Australia and Southeast Asia, pp. 289–295, 2007.
[9] J. Hoysniemi, “International survey on the dance dance rev-
olution game,” Computers in Entertainment (CIE) - Theoret-
ical and Practical Computer Applications in Entertainment,
vol. 4, Apr 2006.
[10] C. Jayant and T. S. Saponas, “Marioﬁt: Exercise through
mobile entertainment,” 2005.
[11] W. IJsselsteijn, Y. de Kort, J. Westerink, M. de Jager, and
R. Bonants, “Fun and sports: Enhancing the home ﬁtness ex-
perience,” In ICEC 2004: Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Entertainment Computing, Springer, pp. 46–
56, 2004.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

[12] YourShapeFitnessEvolved.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://your-shape-ﬁtness-evolved.ubi.com/2012/
[13] T. Toscos, A. Faber, S. An, and M. P. Gandhi, “Chick clique:
persuasive technology to motivate teenage girls to exercise,”
CHI ’06 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing
systems, Montral, Qubec, Canada, April 2006.
[14] S. Consolvo, K. Everitt, I. Smith, and J. A. Landay, “De-
sign requirements for technologies that encourage physical
activity,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
Factors in computing systems, Montral, Qubec, Canada, April
2006.
[15] R. de Oliveira and N. Oliver, “Triplebeat: Enhancing exercise
performance with persuasion,” Proceedings of the 10th in-
ternational conference on Human computer interaction with
mobile devices and services, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
September 2008.
[16] Nike+GPS.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://nikerunning.nike.com
[17] F. Mulas, S. Carta, P. Pilloni, and M. Manca, “Everywhere
run: a virtual personal trainer for supporting people in their
running activity,” Proceeding ACE ’11 Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Advances in Computer Enter-
tainment technology, ACM Press, Nov 2011.
[18] Runtustic.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.runtastic.com/
[19] Endomondo.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.endomondo.com/
[20] RunKeeper. (2012). [Online]. Available: http://runkeeper.com/
[21] MapMyFitness.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.mapmyﬁtness.com/
[22] miCoach.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.adidas.com/ﬁ/micoach/
[23] SoftRace.
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.softrace.net/
[24] EverywhereRace!
(2012).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.everywhererace.com/
[25] R. Ryan and E. Deci, “Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations:
Classic denitions and new directions,” Contemporary Educa-
tional Psychology, no. 25, pp. 54–67, Jan 2000.
[26] R. Vallerand, E. Deci, and R. Ryan, “Intrinsic motivation in
sport,” Exercise & Sport Sciences Reviews, vol. 15, pp. 389–
426, Jan 1987.
[27] M. Fortier, R. Vallerand, N. Brire, and P. Provencher, “Com-
petitive and recreational sport structures and gender: A test
of their relationship with sport motivation,” International
Journal of Psychology, no. 26, pp. 24–39, 1995.
[28] D. Markland and D. Ingledew, “The measurement of exercise
motives: Factorial validity and invariance across gender of
a revised exercise motivations inventory,” British Journal of
Health Psychology, no. 2, pp. 361–376, 1997.
[29] B. Schellenberger, “The signiﬁcance of social relations in
sport activity,” International Review for the Sociology of
Sport, vol. 16, pp. 69–77, Jan 1981.
[30] A. Sato, A. Wilkinson, and L. Koehly, “Social inﬂuence and
motivation to change health behaviors among mexican-origin
adults: Implications for diet and physical activity.” American
Journal of Health Promotion, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 176–179, Jan
2012.
[31] A. Wroblewski, F. Amati, M. Smiley, B. Goodpaster, and
V. Wright, “Chronic exercise preserves lean muscle mass in
masters athletes,” The Physician and Sportsmedicine, vol. 39,
no. 3, Sept 2011.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

