Study of Sociocultural Ontology
Papa Fary Diallo, Seydina Moussa Ndiaye and Moussa Lo
Laboratoire d’Analyse Numérique et d’Informatique (LANI), 
UFR SAT – Université Gaston Berger, 
Saint-Louis –BP 234, Sénégal. 
fary85.diallo@gmail.com, seydina.ndiaye@ugb.edu.sn, moussa.lo@ugb.edu.sn 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we propose a process of sociocultural 
ontology development to popularize and perpetuate the culture 
of a country through a sharing of customs and history of 
different localities. It can be compared with the construction of 
a platform that would be straddled between “corporate 
memory” and a “social network”, but applied in the context of 
a country. This process is based on the theory of Russian 
psychologist Lev Vygotsky called “Vygotskian Framework”. 
This process allowed us to model our ontology in three axes - 
Community, Artefact and Infrastructure -, which allowed us to 
have two levels of social network analysis. An intra-community 
level allows us to have knowledge within a community and 
inter-community level, through our index of "similarity of 
interest," allows us to form clusters of our network. 
Keywords-Social 
Network; 
Social 
Network 
Analysis; 
Semantic Web; Ontology; Activity Theory. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For lack of knowledge of the Africans territories, it is 
very common to meet African youth knowing more about the 
geography of the West than their own countries. Thus, to 
refresh the memory of our fellow citizens and revive the 
many stories that accompany the creation and daily life of 
the 
different 
African 
territories, 
we 
initiated 
the 
establishment of an online sociocultural encyclopedia.  
Our goal is to develop a distributed infrastructure that 
will allow the Senegalese communities to share their 
sociocultural knowledge, tourist, economic, educational, 
agricultural, etc. The infrastructure developed can be 
compared with a platform which would be straddled between 
a "corporate memory" (or "memory organization") and a 
"social network", but applied to the context of a country.  
We propose to have a new point of view of the concept 
of community in the context of the social Web where the 
community typically represents a set of individuals sharing 
the same aspirations. Our approach is less focused on 
individuals (which are classically central points) than on the 
beliefs and knowledge they share. This shift of view allows 
us to approach a community as an atomic entity and focus 
this time on the sharing of knowledge between communities. 
Semantic representation is based on a sociocultural 
ontology of which development is the objective of this paper. 
The term “ontology” is borrowed from philosophy, 
where an ontology is the study of existence. According to 
[1], in the context of knowledge engineering, ontology “may 
take a variety of forms, but necessarily it will include a 
vocabulary of terms, and some specification of their 
meaning. This includes definitions and indications of how 
concepts are interrelated which collectively impose a 
structure on the domain and constrain the possible 
interpretations of terms”. Such characterization accounts of 
various objects such as glossaries, terminologies, thesauri 
and ontologies (in the strict sense), implemented by various 
professionals (knowledge engineers, librarians, translators) 
and distinguished according to whether the focus is on the 
terms and their meanings.  
The construction of our ontology is structured around the 
process "Vygotskian Framework" [2] proposed by the 
Russian psychologist Lev Vygotsky. This process examines 
relationship between knowledge and the development of a 
society in three areas: a) human (subject), b) objects 
(buildings, park, etc.) and c) artefacts (abstract things). 
This paper continues by a state of the art in which we 
mention the work of the social web and the semantic web 
that have guided us in our approach. The third section will 
present our sociocultural ontology with the presentation of 
Vygotsky theory, concepts and relationships that make up 
our ontology and we propose an approach to the analysis of 
our network. We end with a conclusion and perspectives of 
this work. 
II. 
SOCIAL WEB, SEMANTIC WEB 
We place ourselves in the context of setting up a 
semantic web platform sociocultural ontology-based to 
enable communities to share their knowledge as in classical 
social network. 
Semantic representation of resources manipulated in our 
"social network", we allow having rich information 
contained in the network. On the other hand, the Semantic 
Web opens up a semantic approach to social network 
analysis. 
We are interested here in the development process of 
sociocultural ontology. There is not, to the best of our 
knowledge, this ontology. In this section, we present the 
work in the field of the social web and the semantic web that 
have guided our methodological choices. 
A. Social Web 
There are several definitions of the social web. However, 
in our study we consider the definition of [3], who defines 
the social web as an ecosystem of participation, where value 
is created by the aggregation of many individual user 
contributions. In our case, contributions that can introduce 
users will certainly be new structures that are newly set up in 
69
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

a locality (creating a new instance) and the relationships they 
have with those existing. Also, provide information on the 
events is unrolling or will unroll. 
Once a social network is constituted, it can be analyzed 
by the study of social entities well as their interactions and 
their relationships. This is called social network analysis 
(SNA). Such analysis is related to the theory of social 
networks, which designs social relations in terms of nodes 
and links. The nodes are usually the social actors in the 
network but they may also represent institutions, and links 
are relationships between these nodes. This representation, 
called sociogram, has been proposed in [4]. Among the 
indicators of a social network, we can cite density and 
centrality. 
Density allows defining the cohesion of a social network. 
It is defined as the number of existing links divided by the 
number of possible links. Its value is equal to one if all nodes 
are interconnected. 
Centrality highlights the most important stakeholders of 
the network. Freeman [5] offers three definitions of 
centrality: (i) degree centrality treats the nodes which have 
the highest degrees of the graph, i.e., those which have more 
links in the network; (ii) closeness centrality indicates the 
degree whereby a node is close to all other nodes in a social 
network (directly or not). It is obtained by calculating the 
average distance of a node to all other nodes in the network; 
(iii) Betweenness centrality focuses on the ability of a node 
to serve as an intermediary in a graph. It is the shortest paths 
between any two nodes that pass through the given node.  
However, [5] considers undirected relation. Yet in a 
social network, a relation-oriented alone contains much 
semantics. Relations-oriented leads to the concept of 
prestige that is more refined that centrality. We distinguish 
incoming (in-degree) and outgoing (out-degree) links. An 
actor is prestigious if it has the highest in-degree. The out-
degree of an actor is often a measure of how influential the 
actor may have. 
The emergence of the Semantic Web leads to apply the 
methods of analysis of networks on new traces generated by 
the use of the web. 
B. Semantic Web 
Berners-Lee [6] describes the web of tomorrow as a vast 
space for exchange of resources between humans and 
machines allowing exploitation large volumes of information 
and various services. The current Web is fundamentally 
syntactic, in the sense that document structure is well 
defined, but its content remains virtually inaccessible to 
machines treatment. Only humans can interpret their 
contents. Thus, the Semantic Web aims at overcoming this 
difficulty. Web resources are more easily accessible to both 
the man and machine, using the semantic representation of 
their contents. The Semantic Web is at first an infrastructure 
to allow the use of formalized knowledge in addition to the 
current informal web content, even if there is no consensus 
on the limits of this formalization. This infrastructure should 
allow first locating, identifying and transforming resources 
so robust and healthy while enhancing the openness of the 
Web with its diversity of users. It must be based on a certain 
level of consensus, for example, on representation languages 
or ontologies used. It should help ensure, as automatically as 
possible, interoperability and transformations between 
different formalisms and different ontologies. Thus, the 
Semantic Web provides the opportunity for machines to 
understand and exploit the resources of the web in an 
interoperable manner. For this, the W3C offers formalisms 
provided with XML syntax to model the concepts on the 
web, to instantiate it and query it [7]. 
C. The Semantic Web can be social 
This question should be asked because papers such as 
[8][9][10] have defended the importance of social dimension 
in the construction of a Semantic Web life cycle  and have 
proposed a new approach - the socio-semantic web - Authors 
radically oppose  the traditional approach of the semantic 
web. In their approach, they subdivide the semantic web into 
two entities: the computational semantic web and the 
cognitive semantic web. 
According to them computational semantic web "aims 
fundamentally at automating the search of information using 
software agents (...) and we will represent the ontologies and 
semantic networks using formal languages supporting 
inferences and powerful treatments, such as logical 
languages or object-oriented” [8] while cognitive semantic 
web "aims at supporting research activities of human users in 
complex and evolving corpus" [10]. Thus "while extending 
this perspective, socio-semantic web is positioned towards 
the Social Web (...) and it aims at supporting cooperation 
activities in which more structured interactions also rely on 
information or documents shared by a collective continuing, 
at least for a time, common goals" [9]. However, as shown in 
[11], there is a big difference between the Semantic Web and 
formal logic. According to [11], the semantic web is a family 
of languages of increasing expressiveness whose building 
blocks are not a logical but turn around the RDF model 
(model of triples to represent graphic descriptions of the 
resources) and semantic web does not object to the web 
dimensions semiotic, social or pragmatic. However, since 
[11], camp of socio-semantic web has changed its approach 
according to Manuel Zacklad "considering that there was 
indeed a form of complementary" between both even if he 
claims that "socio-semantic web initiative is a current 
particularly within semantic web”. In this context, we see 
two forms of sociality. 
The first form is the social network of communities. In 
this network, W3C formalisms allow us to model our social 
network, which is consistent with the position taken by 
Fabien Gandon who argues that "Semantic Web is not anti-
social" [11] since the Semantic Web is not a revolution but a 
web evolution. Moreover, as we intend to use some 
indicators of social web we will need a powerful query 
language yet "cognitive Semantic Web does not usually 
make logically valid inferences automatically” [8].  
The second form of sociality is located within the 
community. For its consideration, it will certainly be 
necessary to use socio-semantic web for the different views 
of members of a community that will bring "mutual 
understanding that encompasses all issues related to cultural 
70
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

and 
linguistic 
to 
establish 
an 
agreement 
between 
participants" according to Manuel Zacklad. 
D. Semantic representation and social network analysis  
FOAF (Friend Of A Friend) project is one of the largest 
projects on the Semantic Web. FOAF has become a widely 
accepted standard vocabulary for representing social 
networks [12][13][14]. However, it is an RDF vocabulary for 
describing people and the relationships they maintain 
between them while in our approach we want to model 
sociocultural knowledge of the different localities. The use 
FOAF ontology is therefore not appropriate in our context. It 
is why we propose the use of OWL ontology [15] in our 
modeling. 
OWL 
(Web 
Ontology 
Language), 
a 
W3C 
Recommendation, 
is 
a 
language 
for 
defining 
and 
instantiating Web ontologies. An OWL ontology may 
include descriptions of classes, properties and their instances. 
Classifications expressed in OWL are based on a strict 
separation class/instance, inheritance of properties, the 
expression of cardinality constraints and logical constraints 
on the relationships between properties, etc. OWL provides 
three increasingly expressive sublanguages designed for use 
by specific communities of implements and users [15], 
among which we can mention OWL-DL language that we 
use. It supports those users who want the maximum 
expressiveness without losing computational completeness 
(all entailments are guaranteed to be computed) and 
decidability (all computations will finish in finite time) of 
reasoning systems. 
Furthermore, social network analysis focuses on the 
nodes rather than types of node. Thus, we can use it in our 
case. However, as part of our work to apply the formalism of 
the Social Web in our ontology, it would be interesting to do 
so for a specific entity. Because in traditional social network 
where  there is only one object type (people), in this network, 
it would be interesting to see the nodes that meet the 
different metrics across the network. In our "social network" 
where there are several types of concepts, find degree 
betweenness of the node for example has no real meaning as 
in conventional networks. However, it would be very 
interesting for the different components in each locality to 
see which one is more active by calculating the degree 
centrality. In the same sense considering the degree 
centrality, we can know the localities where there are many 
more sociocultural activities. 
However, current approaches to analysis algorithms of 
social networks are based on definitions and characteristics 
of graphs representing social networks. The semantics of 
measured indicators are not taken into account. Social data 
described in RDF form a typed-graph that provides more 
powerful 
and 
richer 
representations 
compared 
to 
conventional models for graphical analysis of social 
networks. The majority of the research aims to calculate the 
metrics of social networks using the relations "knows" and 
"interest" of FOAF ontology [16] with the query language 
SPARQL (SPARQL Protocol And RDF Query Language), a 
W3C Recommendation, in particular, allows querying of 
RDF descriptions. However, SPARQL shows some limits on 
the semantic analysis of social networks. As shown in [17], 
RDF and SPARQL present all the characteristics for sharing, 
interoperability, query processing and social data on the web. 
However, they also show that the standard version of 
SPARQL is not expressive enough to query "global" on a 
social network, necessary to calculate the metric of the most 
SNA. Likewise, SPARQL lacks some key features for 
building powerful Semantic Web applications. Thus a new 
version, SPARQL 1.1 [18] in development since March 
2009, seeks to rectify these omissions. It adds, among other 
things, an update language and supports aggregation, 
subqueries, creating values by complex expressions, 
extensible value testing, and constraining queries by source 
RDF graph. This new version is promising for the SNA 
mainly with the aggregation functionality. 
We cannot conclude this section without mentioning 
works that have been done around Towntology project [19], 
even if they have not been developed within the Semantic 
Web. We mention them because their finality - design an 
urban ontology - seems to be a part of our work, since 
modeling sociocultural aspects of a community necessarily 
involves a consideration of the urban aspect. However, 
during the development of this ontology, designers have felt 
the need to develop their own language based on XML, so it 
is impossible to reuse it in our context. Nevertheless, in our 
modeling we will use some concepts (classes) of the project 
to build our ontology. 
III. 
SOCIOCULTURAL ONTOLOGY 
We propose a methodology to identify features that 
represent a community in its social aspects (in the broadest 
sense), modeling of these characteristics will represent our 
sociocultural ontology. The approach we use is based on a 
process called "Vygotskian Framework" proposed by 
Vygotsky. This process examines the relationship between 
knowledge and development of a society in three areas: a) 
human (subject), b) objects (buildings, park, etc.) c) artefacts 
(abstract things). 
We mean by methodology, work procedures and steps 
that describe why and how of conceptualization then of 
artefact built. By lack of common guideline, there is no 
“correct” way or methodology for developing ontologies 
[20]. Thus, we will rely on the Vygotsky process for our 
methodology. 
A. Vygotskian Framework 
Vygotsky theory, sometimes called Activity Theory, is a 
metaphorical space representing the location of cognitive 
development, a site occupied by subjects, experts, and any 
other device capable of contributing in development. 
Activity theory sees human action as being mediated by 
objects such as tools that carry with them the cultural history 
of mankind. It describes two processes that are inseparably 
intertwined: 
internalization 
and 
externalization. 
Internalization is the process by which culture determines 
human action and ensures continuity. Externalization is the 
process by which human actions construct new instruments 
and forms of activity at collective and individual levels and 
thereby initiate social change. 
71
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

Activity Theory is not a methodology; it is a 
philosophical framework for studying human practices as 
development processes. It offers, at least in principle, the 
possibility to conceptualize a scientific way of metacognitive 
processes, which allows to bind this cognitive development 
dimension in general and understand the origin of this 
capacity to control its own internal processes by the schema 
of Figure 1 and describes the transition from external and 
interpersonal control to individual intrapsychic control. 
Thus, we could say that the Vygotsky theory is a "socio-
historical-cultural development theory" [21]. With the three 
axes of Vygotsky theory, we can model the different 
concepts of our ontology: 
• 
Subject: as in our "social network" we will replace 
human by communities. That axis represents 
communities.  
• 
Object: can be different infrastructures of a 
community. 
• 
Artefact: can be physical (tools), symbolic (text, 
taxes) or mental (architectural styles). For our 
modeling, it will represent cultural activities, historic 
events and localities of our country. 
 
Figure 1.  
Vygotsky mediating triangle 
B. Concepts and Relationships 
The three axes of the Vygotsky process will be the 
fundamental classes in our ontology. As shown in Figure 2, 
an excerpt of the ontology includes main classes and their 
subclasses. Note Historic_Site class is the union of 
Built_Area and Unbuilt_Area classes. With these classes and 
their under classes we can capture all the sociocultural 
knowledge of a city. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  
Extract of our sociocultural ontology (Basic Concepts).
72
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

Classes alone will not provide enough information. 
They should be associating of attributes that play an 
essential role in ontology development. They describe 
properties of classes and instances. However, due to lack 
of space, we cannot detail the attributes of our various 
classes. Nevertheless, we will present two ontologies 
reused, which are W3C recommendations, OWL-Time 
ontology [22] proposed for modeling complex temporal 
phenomena for Semantic Web and GeoRSS-Simple 
ontology [23] a reference vocabulary for geospatial 
description of properties of Web resources. 
We exploit OWL-Time ontology by defining two 
relations 
between, 
respectively, 
Activity 
and 
Historic_Event concepts of sociocultural ontology and 
DateTimeDescription and Interval concepts of OWL-Time 
ontology, due to   owl:equivalentClass constructor of 
OWL-DL language. With first relationship, the Activity 
concept has properties (attributes) such as hasBeginning 
and hasEnd that mark respectively the beginning and the 
end of an activity. Since the DateTimeDescription concept 
is used to describe intervals implied, such as "May 8, 2007 
at 12am 03mn 08s", which represent an interval of 24 
hours, with the second relationship we enjoy this type of 
description for our Historic_Event concept. 
With respect to GeoRSS-Simple ontology, we define a 
relationship between the Infrastructure concept of 
sociocultural ontology and the gml:_Feature   concept of 
GeoRSS-Simple ontology. Due to   owl:equivalentClass 
constructor of OWL-DL language, we get all properties of 
the gml:_Feature concept. Thus, many attributes- box, 
point, line and polygon- can be used to attach 
Infrastructure instances concrete   geometries specified 
using strings following a certain format. Also we benefit 
of WHERE relationship that can bind   Infrastructure 
instances to different geometries of gml:_Geometry 
concept. 
Relations are, as classes, most important concepts in 
ontology development.  A design choice   that must be 
made during ontology development is to define when 
knowledge should be modeled in a property (attribute) or 
used as relation pointing to another concept. A criterion 
may be saying  that is a property when values are of a  
type called primitive   (integer,   string),   and   it   is   a   
relationship  when values  are of  a  type  said complex, 
i.e., another concept  of ontology. However, this border 
can be questioned. Thus, Figure 3 illustrates the different 
relationships that may exist between our classes. 
With these relations, we find Vygotsky mediating 
triangle at different levels. They allow representing 
different sociocultural knowledge: 
• 
Organize, Localize and Occur relationships allow 
knowing the different interests of the Community 
based on their Activity it organizes. Likewise, we 
have an idea of the events that occur in a Locality. 
• 
Concern and Refer relationships provide different 
historical   narratives   of   a   Locality   or 
Community. 
• 
Is-in relationship provides different communities 
of a Locality. 
 
Figure 3.  
Relationships between classes. 
C. "Social network" analysis 
Analysis   of   our   "social   network"   will   be   made   
by considering two levels in the definition of metrics. 
A first level is to consider a social network within the 
Community. In this case, the basic elements considered are 
the different components of a community. Associations 
that are in place are the components. Considering 
associations we   can   calculate the degree centrality   to   
see   those that are   more   active   in   considering   the 
relationship   Organize, i.e., those   which   organize   
more activities.   Similarly,   for   a   locality, we   know 
the   various infrastructures   and   organizations   that   are   
there   and   their numbers thanks to the degree centrality. 
Therefore, with the degree centrality it is possible to find 
various information about a locality. 
A second level is to consider an inter-community 
network. In   this   case,   the   basic   elements   considered   
are communities that make up our "social network".  As in 
our first   level we have important activities of   the various 
components of a community, the idea here is to create a 
new indicator that can show the "similarity of interests" 
between communities. The similarity measure is built on 
the various activities within the Community. This indicator 
allows us to divide our communities clustered according to 
their center of interest. For example by calculating the 
73
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

degree centrality of different activities that are organized 
in a community, if we realize that religious associations 
are more active we can say that community has a religious 
interest. This "similarity of interest" can also be calculated 
using a descriptive vector. Thus from the vector, we can 
describe the different characteristics for which the 
similarity of interest will be calculated between 
communities. For example, we can take a vector whose 
first field contains the communities in which their cultural 
activity is between 20% and 25% of their activity, the 
second field in which economic activity is between 30% 
and 40% of their activity, etc. We can define several fields 
and so see the communities that share the same 
characteristics as this vector. 
With different levels of our two metrics, we can have 
the interests   of   each   community   and   with our index 
of "similarity of interests",   it will   be   possible   to   
divide our network according to their centers of interests. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented a method for developing 
sociocultural ontology in order to popularize and 
perpetuate the culture of a country through the sharing of 
customs and history of different localities of the country. 
This method is based   on   the   process   "Vygotskian   
Framework" which allowed us to model the main concepts 
of our ontology. Under the Social Web, we defined a new 
point of view of the concept of community. Thus, in our 
approach we have substituted a person to a community of 
people. Thus, focus on the information within a 
community but also between communities. 
 As a result, we have divided our system into two 
levels. The first level gives us rich information at a 
community level and the second allows us to divide our 
communities according to their focus through our index of 
"similarity of interests."  
We have just completed a survey in the region of 
Louga in Senegal and we envision, at first, use the 
monograph obtained to populate and validate the 
sociocultural ontology. Likewise, we are going to try to 
see how to integrate socio-semantic aspects of our study. 
Afterwards, we must imagine a semantic web platform 
around this ontology, a framework for sharing knowledge 
of Senegalese communities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Uschold, “Knowledge level modeling: Concepts and 
terminology”. The Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol. 
13: 1, 1998, pp. 5-29. Printed in the United Kingdom. 
Copyright 1998, Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
[2] V. John-Steiner and H. Mahn, "Sociocultural Approaches 
to Learning and Development: A Vygotskian Framework".   
Educational Psychologist, 3I (3/4), pp. 191-206. Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Inc, 1996 
[3] T. Gruber, “Collective Knowledge Systems: Where the 
Social Web meets the Semantic Web”. Journal of Web 
Semantics, 6(1) pp. 4–13, 2008. 
[4] J. L. Moreno, “Emotions mapped by new geography”, New 
York Times, pp. 17, 1933. 
[5] L. C. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks: Conceptual 
Clarification”. Social Networks. 1, pp. 215-239, 1979. 
[6] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler and O. Lassila, “The Semantic 
Web”. Scientific American, Vol. 284, n 5, pp. 34-43, 2001. 
[7] W3C. 
Semantic 
Web 
Activity, 
http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/ 
and 
http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/Activity, 30.08.2011. 
[8] J. Caussanel, J. P. Cahier, M. Zacklad and J. Charlet, “Les 
Topic Maps sont-ils un bon candidat pour l'ingénierie du 
Web 
Sémantique?” 
Conférence 
Ingénierie 
des 
Connaissances IC’2002, pp.  3-14, 2002. 
[9] M. Zacklad and X. Barbaud, “Vers une application du Web 
Socio Sémantique pour la réalisation d’un système 
d’information destiné aux réseaux de santé”, Second 
séminaire francophone du Web Sémantique Médical, 
Rouen – 9 mars 2004. 
[10] M. Zacklad, “Introduction aux ontologies sémiotiques dans 
le Web socio sémantique“. Conférence Ingénierie des 
Connaissances, pp. 241-252, Nice : PUG, 2005. 
[11] F. Gandon, “Le Web sémantique n’est pas antisocial”, in 
actes des 17ème journées francophones de l’ingénierie des 
connaissances, IC 2006, pp.131-140, 2006. 
[12] T. Finin, L. Ding and L. Zou, “Social networking on the 
semantic web”. The Learning organization journal. Vol. 12, 
Number 5, pp. 418-435, 2005. 
[13] J. Goldbeck and M. Rothstein, “Linking social Networks 
on the web with FOAF: a semantic web case study”. 
Proceedings of the twenty-third conference on artificial 
intelligence, Vol. 2, pp. 1138-1143. 2008.  
[14] G. Erétéo, F. Gandon, M. Buffa, P. Grohan, M. Leitzelman 
and P. Sander “A state of the art on Social Network 
Analysis and its applications on a semantic web”. Proc. 
Social Data on the Web, Workshop held at the 7th 
International Semantic Web Conference, pp. 13-18, 2008. 
[15] M. K. Smith, C. Welty and D. L. McGuinness, “OWL Web 
Ontology Language”.  W3C Recommendation 10 February 
2004. http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-guide/, 30.08.2011. 
[16] G. Erétéo, F. Gandon, M. Buffa and P. Grohan,  “Analyse 
des réseaux sociaux et web sémantique : un état de l’art”. 
Technical report, Project ISICIL (ANR), 2009. 
[17] M. San-Martin and C. Gutierrez, “Representing, Querying 
and Transforming Social Networks with RDF / SPARQL” 
ESWC’09, pp. 293-307, 2009. 
[18] S. Harris and A. Searborne, “SPARQL 1.1 Query 
Language”. 
W3C 
Working 
Draft 
12 
May 
2011, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/, 30.08.2011. 
[19] A. K. Keita, C. Roussey and R. Laurini, “Un outil d’aide à 
la construction d’ontologies pré-consensuelle: le projet 
Towntology”. In actes du 24ème congrès d’Informatique 
des Organisations et Systèmes d’Information et de Décision 
(INFORSID), pp. 7-22, 2006. 
[20] N. F. Noy and D. L. McGuinness, “Ontology Development 
101: a guide to creating your first ontology”. Stanford 
Knowledge Systems Laboratory Technical Report KSL-01-
05, 2001. 
[21] I. 
Ivic, 
“Lev. 
S. 
Vygotsky. 
Perspectives”, 
revue 
trimestrielle d’éducation compare (Paris, UNESCO : 
Bureau international d’éducation), vol. XXIV, n° 3/4, 1994 
(91/92), pp. 793-820, 1994. 
[22] J. R. Hobbs and F. Pan, “Time Ontology in OWL”. W3C 
Working 
Draft, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/, 
30.08.2011. 
[23] GeoRSS-Simple Documentation,  
http://www.georss.org/simple. 30.08.2011. 
74
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

