Decision Markets for Continuously Reﬂected Collective Decisions
Stephan Leutenmayr
Sven Ziemer
Bauhaus Luftfahrt
Munich, Germany
e-mail: {stephan.leutenmayr, sven.ziemer}@bauhaus-luftfahrt.net
François Bry
Institute for Informatics
Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich
Germany
e-mail: bry@lmu.de
Abstract—The application of the market metaphor to forecasting
uncertain future events exhibits appealing characteristics such as
forecast accuracy and being considered attractive by most users.
Based on the demonstrated success of such so called prediction
markets as an accurate forecasting mechanism, the market
metaphor has been applied to related domains such as decision
making and decision support in order to beneﬁt from its attractive
characteristics. However, not all of those characteristics still hold
in these application areas. We currently develop Liquid Decision
Making (LDM), a market based approach for group decision
making. This article reports on three design principles that we
devised to address the aforementioned challenges, namely the
principles of a collaborative decision making situation, a personal
involvement of the participants with the decision at hand and dual
incentives provided to the users. A prototypical implementation
of this LDM mechanism has been tested for decision making
in a scenario building seminar. There, participants gathered,
categorized and ranked driving factors for their relevance for
scenarios to be developed for the topic of personalized mobility in
2050. In this setting, the design principles of the mechanism were
deemed to be viable for addressing the challenges of attracting
and retaining participants.
Keywords—decision making; market design; incentives
I.
INTRODUCTION
Decisions often need to be made, or beneﬁt from being
made, by a group of people as they contribute with dif-
ferent perspectives, knowledge and evaluation criteria. The
alternatives of the pending decision thereby often need to be
considered over a prolonged period of time in order to gather
as much relevant information as possible and to allow for
informed opinions to be formed. In such circumstances, not all
consequences of all available alternatives can be comprehen-
sively considered due to time and informational limitations.
Additionally, group members may be heterogeneous in their
assessment criteria for the decision alternatives. Engaging a
large and heterogeneous group of people to produce a joint
result is a main theme of social media [1]. One of these social
media methods is the application of the market metaphor.
In such decision making situations as delineated above, the
market metaphor poses a promising alternative to conventional
group decision making approaches. Economic markets have
been attributed the ability of efﬁciently aggregating informa-
tion from people and representing it in the resulting price [2].
The goal in the application of the market metaphor to decision
making is to jointly achieve a decision. The market metaphor
thereby offers continuous participation, revisability of one’s
assessments, immediate feedback on one’s actions, anonymity
and an intuitive representation of the users’ assessments in the
market prices. It furthermore encourages decisiveness and ﬁrst-
mover behavior as hesitant and indecisive participants may lose
inﬂuence due to increasing prices and unwisely spent money.
In a market based decision making approach, the decision
is represented by a market and the decision alternatives are
traded as stocks on that market. Participants buy shares of their
favored decision alternatives and sell shares of the unwanted
alternatives. At market end, the highest ranking stock of that
market is chosen as the jointly determined decision alternative.
Any mechanism based on continued contributions by par-
ticipants needs to attract and retain users. Markets are no
exceptions. In the application as a forecasting mechanism in
so called prediction markets, attracting and retaining users is
achieved by rewards such as real or play money or reputation
that can be granted to participants based on forecast accuracy.
There, every participant’s ambition to maximize his reward
by providing an accurate forecast of the outcome serves the
goal of the organizer of attaining such an accurate forecast.
Hence, prediction markets are incentive compatible in game
theoretic terms. In a decision making situation, however, such
performance based rewards are likely to bias the contributions
of the participants towards predicting market results instead of
contributing their true assessments. This phenomenon is known
as the Keynesian beauty contest in which participants try to
guess the actions of others and adapt their behavior accordingly
[3]. Results of such markets then reﬂect the average evaluation
of the average assessments of participants rather than the
aggregation of their true opinions on the respective topics.
Thus, other measures for attracting and retaining users
are desirable. We currently develop our LDM mechanism for
group decision making that utilizes the market metaphor [4].
To address the aforementioned challenges, we formulated the
following principles for the design of LDM. The collaborative
decision principle emphasizes the collaborative nature of the
LDM approach as people utilize it for jointly determining a
decision alternative. It aims at attracting people by the ability
to collaboratively identify the decision outcome rather than
by speculative prospects. The principle of user involvement
ensures that people care for the actual outcome of the market.
The more they are personally involved with the result of the
market, the more they should be willing to care about the
resulting decision alternative and to participate in the market
in the ﬁrst place. The principle of dual incentives caters to the
demand of attracting and retaining users by providing push and
pull style information to the participants. Market information
pushed to participants on a regular basis should encourage
users to participate repeatedly. The availability of up-to-date
market information on demand should also contribute to the
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

level of participation.
Despite these design principles, users may nevertheless
participate not according to the market goal of achieving a joint
decision. Thus, LDM furthermore incorporates an approach for
determining the sincerity of the single contributions by a price
perturbation mechanism [5].
The design principles of LDM are introduced in Section
II. Furthermore, our prototypical implementation of LDM is
delineated. Based on this prototype, a case study has been
designed and executed (see Section III-A). The results of the
case study are examined in Section III-B. Related work is
surveyed in Section IV. Section V concludes and highlights
future work for LDM design and potential applications.
II.
THE LIQUID DECISION MAKING MECHANISM
In this section, the design principles of LDM are introduced
and a prototypical implementation for testing their adequacy
is highlighted.
A. The Liquid Decision Making Design Principles
Attracting and retaining participants are special challenges
in the application of the market metaphor to decision making.
Among the beneﬁts of the market metaphor are the capability
of accommodating a large group of people and the poten-
tial for continued participation over a prolonged period of
time. However, these beneﬁts need to be made palatable for
prospective users for them to actually participate. LDM on
the one hand seeks to allow group members to contribute their
assessments of the single decision alternatives and on the other
hand to provide them with incentives for repeated participation.
The design follows the principles of a collaborative decision
goal achieved with the market metaphor, involvement of the
participants with the decision outcome at hand and dual
incentives for participation in order to meet those goals. The
design principles aim at encouraging certain behavior in par-
ticipants. These considerations result form observations from
the literature and own case studies. Participants in prediction
markets are typically assumed to be utility maximizing and to
derive this utility from the beneﬁts they expect in return for
their participation. We decided to keep up with this assumption
and to investigate how we need to design LDM for directing
the utility maximizing behavior in helpful lines with respect
to the decision making goal.
1) The Collaborative Decision Principle: Markets natu-
rally provide incentives for speculation and gambling by their
utilization of real or play money as a voting medium and
the associated potential for gains and losses. Participants may
primarily follow such speculative considerations in order to
gain money instead of bearing the actual decision in mind.
Such trading is comparable to technical trading which only
deals with trends and correlations without considering the
fundamental values of the respective stocks [6]. The col-
laborative decision principle emphasizes the collaboration of
people to ﬁnd a joint decision alternative using the market
metaphor and, to this end, acknowledge the market result as the
chosen alternative for the decision. Thus, LDM reduces sources
of utility maximizing behavior that do not contribute to the
achievement of a joint decision by omitting market information
that may fuel market gambling or speculative market trading
Fig. 1: The integration of the market metaphor with decision making
behavior. People should be drawn to participate rather by the
topic than by the market mechanism.
Fig. 1 depicts this principle as the integration of a decision
making effort with a ranking mechanism. There, the decision
alternatives are ranked using some mechanism and the result-
ing ranking is returned to the decision making effort for further
processing.
2) The User Involvement Principle: With prediction mar-
kets, participants can be rewarded for accurately forecasting a
future event. Thus, they are likely to care for providing an ac-
curate forecast. Decision markets cannot rely on such accuracy
metrics as there is no external event deﬁning an objective mea-
sure. Thus, other means for encouraging meaningful contribu-
tions are desirable. The principle of user involvement regards
the degree of personal relationship the participants exhibit with
respect to the decision outcome. Personal involvement here
denotes how much a user is affected by the resulting decision
outcome. The more involved, that is, affected, a user is with the
decision outcome, the more utility he is likely to derive from
the actual outcome. Maximizing this utility would then consist
of contributing meaningfully to the selection of a decision
alternative and to observe the process and to react to the actions
of others. Thus, the user involvement principle stipulates the
application of LDM in situations with a signiﬁcant degree of
participants’ involvement with the decision outcome. In this
way, users should perceive the mechanism as attractive and
continually come back. Prediction markets correspond to the
common notion of crowd sourcing, that is, the division of an
extensive task among many people and of aggregating their
partial results. These participants typically only care for their
allocated work share and for achieving the associated reward.
With LDM on the contrary, a potentially large group of people
participates speciﬁcally in order to achieve the overall goal of
making a collective decision.
3) The Dual Incentives Principle: Decision markets enable
participants to take an active part in determining a decision
alternative and to revise their assessments of the alternatives
during that process. However, people often need to be in-
centivized to participate in such a decision making effort.
LDM has been designed with dual incentives in mind for
both attracting and retaining users. For attracting people to
participate for the ﬁrst time, the goal of this principle is
to feature a decision that participating in is beneﬁcial for
prospective users. This beneﬁt then needs to be highlighted
comprehensibly to participants. For retaining users, that is,
encouraging their repeated participation, this principle en-
compasses the provision of up-to-date market information to
participants. Up-to-date information supports the striving for
utility maximization. This information should be both available
on request by the participants and pushed out to participants as
a periodic reminder of the decision making effort. In this way,
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

participants receive information on the status of the market and
their favored alternatives in particular and are encouraged to
visit LDM on a regular basis.
B. The Liquid Decision Making System
We currently develop a prototypical LDM system for in-
vestigating market-based decision making. This system formed
the basis for examining the adequacy of the introduced design
principles. The system is realized as a web-based software
in order to facilitate an ease of use without the need for
a local installation, a low entry barrier due to a familiar
web interface and a distributed participation. The software
allows for surveying the available cash reserve, the tradable
decision alternatives, their prices and rankings, for trading
in the single decision alternatives, for proposing additional
decision alternatives, for accepting or rejecting the proposals
as well as functionality for commenting on trading actions and
decision alternatives and for ranking a comment’s helpfulness.
The design principles are realized in the following new
functionalities of LDM. For emphasizing its collaborative na-
ture, only little information is offered which could fuel specu-
lative behavior or gambling. In this case, the LDM system does
not calculate the portfolio worth of each participant and does
not compile a user ranking from it. The lack of this striking cue
on the ranking of participants should contribute to lowering the
temptation of gambling behavior in the market. Furthermore,
the system provides a ranked list of the decision alternatives so
that every participant can identify the currently selected joint
decision alternative. Fig. 2 depicts such a ranking utilizing a
bold font for the collectively chosen decision alternatives.
The involvement of the users is ensured on the one hand
by providing a meaningful decision to participants. On the
other hand, additional functionality may also increase the
involvement of users. To foster the involvement of users,
the LDM system offers functionality for commenting on the
single decision alternatives and on trading actions by the
users. Comments can also be rated by participants for their
helpfulness. This is to stimulate further engagement with the
single decision alternatives. In this way, their involvement
should be intensiﬁed.
The
formulated
dual
incentive
principle
summarizes
present market functionality as a speciﬁc requirement for
addressing the decision market design challenges. It is reﬂected
in the LDM system in two ways. First, the goal and utilization
Fig. 2: Detail of the price chart and factor ranking indicating the collectively
chosen factors in bold face from the case study
Fig. 3: Architecture of the prototypical LDM implementation
of the result are clearly stated on the system website in
order to attract participants for their sincere opinions. Second,
up-to-date information is provided to participants, including
an overview on the general market status and the decision
alternatives and the respective holdings in particular. This
information is provided to participants as a push notiﬁcation
realized by a newsletter and a pull notiﬁcation in the form of
a LDM system dashboard. The newsletter acts as a periodic
reminder to return to the system and contains information on
the development of the market status since the last issue.
The emphasis on collaborative decision making is also
reﬂected in the system’s architecture. The domain-speciﬁc
collaboration part and the market-speciﬁc trading part are
separated into different modules (see Fig. 3). The prepro-
cessing module is responsible for the contribution mechanism
for new factors and their examination by the organizer. This
preprocessing module allows the contribution of factors to
a public queue. This queue is then processed by designated
participants for admission or rejection. Reasons can be given
for each. Then, the ranking and structuring takes place. Both of
these modules utilize the market functionality of the underlying
market module. The information sharing module is responsible
for commenting and comment rating.
Many decision alternatives may need to be considered in
LDM. Thus, participants may spread over the single alterna-
tives and hence may not ﬁnd matching counterparts for trading.
LDM therefore employs the market maker approach with a
central entity acting as a middle man for trading. With such
a market maker, trades can be executed by participants at any
time with an immediate response from the system [7].
III.
THE LIQUID DECISION MAKING CASE STUDY
Determining the adequacy of a given approach requires a
systematic investigation. A ﬁrst step in such a series of anal-
yses is a case study for collecting qualitative experience with
the proposed approach. In the following, the design, execution
and evaluation of a case study are presented, which has been
executed for testing the effectiveness of the design principles
and the applicability with a scenario building process.
A. The Case Study Design and Execution
LDM has been tested in conjunction with a two week
university seminar on scenario building at the Technische Uni-
versität München, termed Szenario-Börse (engl. scenario stock
exchange). The topic of this seminar was the development
of future scenarios for a personalized mobility in the year
2050. Nine bachelor students participated in the seminar by
choice in partial fulﬁllment of their curriculum. The goal
for the students was to learn the methodology of scenario
building and to apply it to the topic of personalized mobility.
The goal of the scenario building methodology is to produce
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

a couple of consistent scenarios for a topic concerning the
future based on a selected set of inﬂuencing factors. The
methodology basically includes the identiﬁcation, gathering
and assessment of potential inﬂuencing factors, the selection
of the most relevant factors, the generation of initial scenarios
based on the selected inﬂuencing factors and the formulation
of plausible pictures of the future [8].
The goal of this case study was to investigate the applica-
tion of LDM with the scenario building methodology and the
impact of our design principles. For the application of LDM
with the scenario building, we chose to utilize LDM for making
the decisions regarding the gathering, assessment and selection
of the inﬂuencing factors as an input for the further building
of the scenarios. We furthermore employed LDM to gather the
experience that the students had gained with the factors after
the scenarios had been generated.
The ranking functionality of LDM was utilized for ranking
the inﬂuencing factors according to their relevance in the
generation of the single scenarios as well as for categorizing
the factors with respect to the predeﬁned categories of society,
technology, environment, economy, politics, values and air
transport. In order to provide sufﬁcient time for identifying and
gathering factors, we started the decision making system three
weeks prior to the actual scenario building seminar. For that
pre-seminar period, we expanded the number of participants
by 11 additional people from the organizing institutions in
order to bring in more diverse knowledge on the subject.
During that period, the tasks of the participants comprised the
contribution of new factors, the ranking of existing factors and
the assessment of their categorizations as well as commenting
on factors and trading actions and rating the helpfulness of
those comments. Suggested factors were queued and processed
by the organizer of the seminar for admission. All participants
were given an introductory written tutorial on the system func-
tionality and their tasks prior to the opening of the Szenario-
Börse. Participants were required to register with the system
in order to track their market actions, cash reserve and share
holdings. Anonymity was guaranteed by freely selectable user
names. Upon registration, each participant received the same
initial endowment of play money that was not redeemable in
real currency. According to Servan-Schreiber et al., play money
should not signiﬁcantly impact market results [9].
At the beginning of the scenario building seminar, two
trading sessions were held with only the nine students par-
ticipating as they would have to work with the chosen factors.
They were granted additional money for ﬁnally selecting the
10 most relevant factors that were to be used as input to the
further development of the scenarios. After the second trading
session, the market was still open for trading in the factors,
however, the scenarios were built based on the 10 highest
ranking factors as determined after the second session. At the
end of the scenario building seminar, the LDM system was
utilized in a third trading session for enabling the participants
to reﬂect their insights on the relevancy of the factors that they
gained during the scenario building seminar. After the end of
the scenario building seminar, a user survey was conducted for
gathering feedback on various aspects of the LDM approach.
B. Evaluation and Discussion of the Case Study Results
The goal of this case study was to investigate the appli-
cation of LDM in a decision making situation and to gather
qualitative experience with our devised design principles in the
context of the scenario building seminar. The evaluation of the
success of the design principles is based on the post-seminar
survey among the students, their qualitative feedback during
the seminar and on experience from prior LDM installments
that did not fully respect these principles. Overall, LDM was
applied successfully with the scenario building methodology,
the design principles seemed to be promising for achieving
their aspired results in the design of LDM and the prototypical
system deemed useful. Participants made use of the continuous
nature of the LDM system as is reﬂected in the total number
of 1545 trades, with a maximum of 333 trades, a minimum of
3 trades and a mean of 71 trades per person. The ratings in the
following refer to the survey using a Likert scale ranging from
1 (does not apply) to 5 (completely applies). The prototypical
implementation of LDM was rated by participants as relatively
easy to use (mean of 3.1) and as providing relevant information
with a mean of 3.1.
The application of LDM to scenario building was success-
ful as participants of the scenario building seminar achieved a
joint selection of the most relevant factors. This was validated
by the organizer of the seminar who conﬁrmed the relevance
of the selected factors. Furthermore, participants appraised the
results immediately after the factor ﬁnalization as valuable.
In the post-seminar survey, they were also satisﬁed with the
factor selection approach with a mean of 3.0 and they rated
the adequacy of the selected factors with a mean of 3.3. 25
additional factors were contributed with 18 of them accepted
for trading. Finally, the three future scenarios created by the
students were rated very well by the organizer of the seminar.
The factors for the scenario building were collaboratively
ranked using the Szenario-Börse for their relevance. In the
provided information in the Szenario-Börse, the emphasis was
on the joint decision making goal rather than on market
gambling. Overall, participants rated the provided information
to be relevant for the joint goal with a mean of 3.1. They
furthermore did not object to the produced factor selection
in a discussion session right after the selection and accepted
the result as the jointly produced input to the further scenario
generation. Two participants criticized the lack of more in-
depth market information similar to tools for stock market
brokers. The demand for more market-related information is
an indicator for the effect of the collaborative decision prin-
ciple as applied in this case study. The relationship between
personal involvement, provided quality of market information
and gambling should be interesting to investigate in further,
more controlled, experiments in more detail.
The students had to work with the factors further in
the scenario building process that were determined by the
Szenario-Börse. In this way, they had a personal interest in
selecting meaningful factors for further processing. This user
involvement was perceived as a motivation for trading with a
mean of 3.2 by the students. The produced scenarios were also
highly acclaimed by the seminar organizer. This points to the
importance of providing a tangible personal involvement and
thus meaning for participants in such a mechanism. The third
trading session aimed at aggregating the knowledge that the
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

students gained during the generation of the single scenarios.
However, the result of this third session had no personal impact
for them and the achievement of the group goal. According
to comments in the post seminar survey, users were more
drawn to gambling efforts in this session than in the trading
period prior to the selection of the relevant factors. This
apparently underlines the importance of the user involvement
principle for the design of LDM. The LDM system also
provided functionality for commenting on decision alternatives
and trade actions. This was utilized for 30 comments during the
Szenario-Börse. Presumably, this relatively low utilization was
due to a low interest in the opinion of the other participants or
the expectation to discuss matters in person at the beginning
of the actual seminar. For future work, it may be helpful to
provide additional incentives for providing helpful comments
such as additional money.
In this case study, the Szenario-Börse provided a mean-
ingful decision as the students had to work with the resulting
factors further on in the scenario building process. According
to the survey, this served as an incentive to participate in the
Szenario-Börse with a mean of 3.3, which is also reﬂected
in the average logins of two to ﬁve times a week. They
furthermore liked the immediate price feedback with a mean of
3.3. Thus, attracting and retaining users seem to have worked.
IV.
RELATED WORK
The market metaphor has been applied in several domains
and has been investigated from several points of view. This
section puts the work at hand in the context of existing work.
A. Related Market Applications
The design of LDM rests on the involvement of the
participants, the provision of decision aligned incentives and
the setting of a joint decision making goal. Historically, the
market metaphor has ﬁrst been applied in prediction markets
for forecasting the outcome of uncertain future events [10].
There, the price mechanism aggregates individual forecasts
into a joint prediction of the most likely outcome of the
uncertain event [11]. Such prediction markets typically exhibit
the characteristics of principal-agent situations in which the
principal needs some work to be carried out and offers agents
a reward for executing this work properly [12]. In contrast
to LDM, agents are not personally involved with the task
set out by the principal, incentives are based on the agents’
performance in the market mechanism and optimizing this
performance is aligned with meeting the goals of the principal.
Hanson ﬁrst proposes the utilization of the market
metaphor for making conditional predictions in what he calls
decision markets [13]. There, participants forecast the likeli-
hood of future outcomes conditional on the implementation
of certain actions. Berg and Rietz as well as Chen investigate
conditional prediction markets as a basis for making decisions
in order to inﬂuence the actual outcome of the future event
[14][15]. Abramowicz and Henderson focus on conditional
prediction markets in a corporate setting and their forecast
accuracy as well as on enhancements in the information ﬂows
in a corporate environment [16]. In these settings, the goal
of the market application shifts from a pure prediction to the
support of selecting strategic actions, however, the principal-
agent characteristics still apply.
The information aggregation capabilities of the market
metaphor are also utilized for selecting all sorts of innovations
and ideas in so called preference markets. Such preference
markets are used to select ideas in a corporate setting [17][18],
to gather product feature preferences [19] and to select innova-
tions for corporate research portfolios [20]. In such preference
market settings, the market metaphor is typically employed
in a principal-agent fashion. In particular, participants are not
personally involved with the topics at hand and are rewarded
based on their in-market performance, e. g. , the highest-valued
portfolio. Thus, participants are found to engage in beauty
contests and trade according to two different motivations,
namely truthful reporting and market speculation. This, how-
ever, does not contribute to the revealing of the participants’
true assessments. Kamp et al. devise a model of inﬂuencing
factors for such situations [21]. In their model, the nature of the
incentives plays a central role for inﬂuencing the behavior of
participants. They conclude that incentives should be aligned
with the market purpose to avoid feeding speculative behavior.
Chen et al. investigate the provision of proper incentives
in conditional prediction markets for decision making. In their
principal-agent situation, the agents are rewarded based on
which action is ﬁnally chosen. The agents thus have incen-
tives to inﬂuence the principal on which action to take [23].
They design a market mechanism that discourages trying to
proﬁt from real world inﬂuence. In LDM, participants directly
inﬂuence the selected decision alternative via the market result
without a principal making the ﬁnal decision. Thus, there is no
need for exerting real world inﬂuence on some principal. Fur-
thermore, our LDM design assumes a personal involvement of
participants and hence meaningful contributions. Nevertheless,
participants may not contribute meaningfully for some reason.
We thus designed an approach for uncovering the origins of
price formations [4] and tested the pertinence of this approach
in a lab study [5].
B. Related Decision Making Approaches
The market approach of LDM allows each participant
to express his preference for a given stock (representing an
alternative in a decision to be made) through trading actions.
This makes a participant’s preference for trading a stock the
single decision criterion. Based on the resulting prices of all
participants’ trading behaviors, a ranking of the decision alter-
natives is then produced. A number of different prioritization
strategies as well as different decision criteria are applied by
decision making methods and are discussed in the literature.
The Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) is a framework for
multi-criteria decision-making developed by Thomas L. Saaty
[24]. AHP is applied in many different domains, including
software engineering [25] and strategic business planning [26].
Using AHP includes the deﬁnition of several criteria that are
evaluated for each decision alternative by each stakeholder
using a scale ranging from 0 to 1. The different assessments
are then aggregated into a single indicator using the approach
of AHP. AHP provides a rational approach to decompose
a decision problem into sub-problems that can be evaluated
by the decision makers. An important objective of the LDM
mechanism is to enable collaborative decision making. Using a
multi-criteria approach such as AHP to decompose a decision
problem, serves this objective to some extent. But as Hall
and Davis [27] are pointing out, the interpretation of such
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

criteria is framed by the different value-based perspectives
of the decision makers. When reaching out to a large group
of heterogeneous decision makers, the involved perspectives
may address different domains, including technical, social and
economic aspects. It is thus obvious that a single set of criteria
cannot reﬂect the perspectives of all decision makers in such
contexts. The use of a single decision criterion in LDM may
lack some of the accuracy as found in multi-criteria decision
methods such as AHP, but it enables all decision makers to
express their particular perspective into a buy/sell preference.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this article, the design principles of a collaborative
decision, personal user involvement and dual incentives have
been introduced that we formulated for achieving meaningful
results with LDM. The design principles and our prototypical
LDM system have been tested in a case study for building
scenarios for personalized transport in the year 2050. In this
case study, the devised principles seemed to be adequate for
the design of LDM and the approach deemed applicable with
the scenario building methodology. According to the study
ﬁndings, an application of LDM should be organized in such
a way that users perceive LDM as a means for collaboratively
making decisions rather than for gambling, that users are
involved with the resulting decision as a proper incentive for
meaningful participation and that dual incentives are provided
for attracting and retaining users with the mechanism.
We plan the following strands of future work. Based on the
experience gained from the case study regarding the scenario
building process, we plan to reﬁne the design principles of
LDM, for example in strengthening user involvement through
competitive and collaborative elements and in providing addi-
tional retaining incentives that encourage continued participa-
tion. Further investigations, particularly in controlled experi-
ments, should help establish the precise impact of the single
design principles. Second, we envision the application of LDM
for collaborative ontology engineering. There, contributions
and opinions of many stakeholders need to be gathered and rec-
onciled in order to form a joint ontology. In this reconciliation
process, conﬂicts, both on the logical and collaborative level,
are likely to occur. The application of the market metaphor
as a conﬂict resolution mechanism in collaborative ontology
engineering by ranking the available conﬂict resolutions using
decision markets seems to be a feasible approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Hornung of Bauhaus
Luftfahrt and Niclas Randt of the Institute of Aircraft Design
at the Technische Universität München for integrating the
reported LDM case study in their seminar on scenario building.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Doan, R. Ramakrishnan, and A. Y. Halevy, “Crowdsourcing Systems
on the World-Wide Web,” Commun. ACM, vol. 54, April 2011, pp. 86–
96.
[2]
F. A. Hayek, “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American Economic
Review, vol. 35, no. 4, 1945, pp. 519–530.
[3]
J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
Macmillan Cambridge University Press, 1936.
[4]
S. Leutenmayr, F. Bry, T. Schiebler, and F. Brodbeck, “Work in
Progress: Do They Really Mean It? Assessing Decision Market Out-
comes,” in Proceedings of 4. Workshop Digitale Soziale Netze, 41.
Jahrestagung der Gesellschaft für Informatik, Berlin, Germany, 2011.
[5]
S. Leutenmayr and F. Bry, “Liquid Decision Making: An Exploratory
Study,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Informa-
tion Integration and Web-based Applications and Services, ser. iiWAS
’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 391–394.
[6]
J. J. Murphy, Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets: a Compre-
hensive Guide to Trading Methods and Applications, ser. New York
Institute of Finance Series.
New York Institute of Finance, 1999.
[7]
R. Hanson, “Logarithmic Market Scoring Rules for Modular Combina-
torial Information Aggregation,” Journal of Prediction Markets, vol. 1,
no. 1, 2007, pp. 3–15.
[8]
H. D. Jouvenel, “A Brief Methodological Guide to Scenario Building,”
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 65, no. 1, 2000, pp.
37–48.
[9]
E. Servan-Schreiber, J. Wolfers, D. M. Pennock, and B. Galebach,
“Prediction Markets: Does Money Matter?” Electronic Markets, vol. 14,
no. 3, 2004, pp. 243–251.
[10]
R. Forsythe, F. Nelson, G. R. Neumann, and J. Wright, “Anatomy of an
Experimental Political Stock Market,” The American Economic Review,
vol. 82, no. 5, 1992, pp. 1142–1161.
[11]
J. Wolfers and E. Zitzewitz, “Prediction Markets,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 18, no. 2, 2004, pp. 107–126.
[12]
J.-J. Laffont and D. Martimort, The Theory of Incentives.
Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2002.
[13]
R. Hanson, “Decision Markets,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 14, no. 3,
1999, pp. 16–19.
[14]
J. Berg and T. Rietz, “Prediction Markets as Decision Support Systems,”
Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 5, no. 1, 2003, pp. 79–93.
[15]
Y. Chen, “Markets as an Information Aggregation Mechanism for
Decision Support,” Ph.D. dissertation, Pennsylvania State University,
School of Information Science and Technology, 2005.
[16]
M. Abramowicz and M. T. Henderson, “Prediction Markets for Corpo-
rate Governance,” Notre Dame Law Review, vol. 82, no. 4, 2007.
[17]
C. A. LaComb, J. A. Barnett, and Q. Pan, “The Imagination Market,”
Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 9, no. 2-3, 2007, pp. 245–256.
[18]
E. Bothos, D. Apostolou, and G. Mentzas, “Idea Selection and Infor-
mation Aggregation Markets,” in Engineering Management Conference,
2008, pp. 1–5.
[19]
E. Dahan, A. Soukhoroukova, and M. Spann, “New product devel-
opment 2.0: Preference Markets – How Scalable Securities Markets
Identify Winning Product Concepts and Attributes,” Journal of Product
Innovation Management, vol. 27, no. 7, 2010, pp. 937–954.
[20]
C. Gaspoz, J. Ondrus, and Y. Pigneur, “Comparison of Multi-criteria
and Prediction Market Approaches for Technology Foresight,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 13th AIM Conference, 2008.
[21]
G. Kamp and P. A. Koen, “Improving the Idea Screening Process within
Organizations using Prediction Markets: A Theoretical Perspective.”
Journal of Prediction Markets, vol. 3, no. 2, 2009, pp. 39–64.
[22]
D. R. Raban and D. Geifman, “Designing Online Information Ag-
gregation and Prediction Markets for MBA Courses,” Interdisciplinary
Journal of E-Learning and Learning Objects, vol. 5, 2009, pp. 247–262.
[23]
Y. Chen, I. Kash, M. Ruberry, and V. Shnayder, “Decision Markets
with Good Incentives,” in Internet and Network Economics, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, N. Chen, E. Elkind, and E. Koutsoupias,
Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, vol. 7090, 2011, pp. 72–83.
[24]
T. L. Saaty, The Analytic Hierarchy Process: Planning, Priority Setting,
Resource Allocation.
McGraw-Hill, 1980.
[25]
J. Karlsson and K. Ryan, “A Cost-Value Approach for Prioritizing
Requirements,” Software, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 5, 1997, pp. 67–74.
[26]
R. K. Singh, “Prioritizing the Factors for Coordinated Supply Chain
using Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP),” Measuring Business Excel-
lence, vol. 17, no. 1, 2013, pp. 80–97.
[27]
D. J. Hall and R. A. Davis, “Engaging Multiple Perspectives: A Value-
based Decision-Making Model,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 43,
no. 4, 2007, pp. 1588–1604.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

