Sharing Our Heritage to Shape Our Future 
How Effective Are Multi-User Sharing Platforms in Supporting Collaborative Visioning for the Future, 
and Why is Heritage Centre-Stage? 
Andrea Nanetti 
School of Art, Design and Media 
Nanyang Technological University 
Singapore 
e-mail: andrea.nanetti@ntu.edu.sg 
Anna Simpson 
Futures Centre 
Forum for the Future 
Singapore 
e-mail: a.simpson@forumforthefuture.org
 
Abstract—This is a position paper about heritage and futures 
that the authors present for discussion to set the stage for a 
subsequent analysis of the topic supported by statistics and 
formal proofs. In social eco-informatics, a significant, 
challenging, not yet solved problem comes from the fact that 
the global Internet community is entering the age of 
collaborative and generative design: not of a central object, but 
of complex systems. People are looking around them, spotting 
patterns of connection, extrapolating as trends converge, 
questioning the implications, and coming together in groups to 
reimagine the future. The recognition that we need to come 
together to shape our common futures does not just coincide 
with the rise of social media: it is thanks to social media that 
this consciousness has reached such scale. Now, social 
networking sites are being created with the intention to help 
people across the world talk about the future they want and co-
design it. In this process, heritage, seen as the treasure trove of 
human experience, is found to be centre-stage. We do not know 
what the next generation will value and like, but we can 
display and discuss what humans valued and liked and why, 
using the results to make better decisions. The practice of 
sharing heritage can become the context and the method for 
collaborative design. This paper inquires how effective these 
new platforms are in shaping visions for the future, and what 
difference an emphasis on sharing heritage makes to their 
success. And, in conclusion, the paper underlines how 
comprehensive and systematic use of heritage (seen as the 
treasure of human experiences) becomes the key science for 
sustainable 
and 
dynamic 
innovation 
in 
the 
coming 
anthropogenic era, during which human activity is becoming 
the dominant influence – not only in climate and the 
environment, but also in the human genetic and epigenetic 
heritages evolutionary processes. 
Keywords—multi-user 
sharing 
platforms; 
collaborative 
visioning for the future; heritage science 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
We have entered the age of collaborative design, not of a 
central object, but of complex systems. People are looking 
around them, spotting patterns of connection, extrapolating 
as trends converge, questioning the implications, and coming 
together in groups to reimagine the whole, 'a crude look at 
the whole', as Murray Gell-Mann would say [1]. 
There is an on-going shift in consciousness beyond an 
individualist mindset towards greater awareness of the 
collective, connected nature of our lives in our global 
Internet community. The understanding that “no man is an 
island” (John Donne, Meditation XVII) [2] is expressed in the 
ancient philosophy of the Tao – where human life is seen as 
“an integral feature of the world process, and not as 
something alien or opposed to it” [3]. But with the rise of 
liberalism, recognition of our interdependence became more 
an abstract theory than a lived experience: you might have 
known you were in tune with high-street trends, for instance, 
but believed it was a matter of personal choice, intoxicated 
with the idea of self-determination [4]. 
Today, things are different: we are confronted with the 
influence of wider forces shaping our lives on a minute-to-
minute basis, thanks to the omnipresence of accessible and 
useful data, targeted advertising, and social media. Targeted 
communications and advertising run on the irony that people 
can be made to feel intimately known, precisely because 
their behaviours and interests can be mapped to wider trends 
and thereby anticipated. Behavioural researchers are asking 
“how modern collective behaviour may be changing in the 
digital age, including whether behaviour is becoming more 
individualistic, as people seek out exactly what they want, or 
more social, as people become more inextricably linked, 
even “herd like,” in their decision making” [5]. 
Some find the shift in our collective consciousness 
unnerving, as Cameron Tonkinwise, Director of Design 
Studies at Carnegie Mellon University, explains [6]: 
I think everyone feels the disjuncture between what big data is 
telling us – “I discover that I am part of a data set through the 
ads in my buzz feed and the way they have been tailored to 
me" or literally an article saying "You are a Gen Xer and you 
have no healthcare" – and our phenomenological experience of 
the world. 
In response to this rising awareness of the forces at play, 
communities are coming together to shape their future. It 
might be interpreted as a reassertion of collective agency [7]. 
They are going beyond the traditional work of consumer-
focused design, which focuses on the relation of subject to 
object. Their focus is how communities relate to 
commonalities [8]. 
Similarly, designers—from brand strategists to web 
programmers—are putting user experience at the heart of 
their processes. They recognise that we cannot recreate 
systems—such as cities, food cycles, and community energy 
schemes—without the volition and participation of their 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
future users. The same goes for pensions, health plans, 
transport, and schools [9]. 
To reiterate, the recognition that we need to come 
together to shape our common futures does not just coincide 
with the rise of social media: it is thanks to social media that 
this consciousness has reached such scale. And so it is no 
coincidence that social sites are enabling people across the 
world to co-design their future spaces. The transition began 
with innovative companies recognising the opportunities in 
social media for co-creation [10]. But increasingly, 
communities of interest are collaborating on social platforms 
to take the design of their own futures in hand.  
Take Visionmaker [11]: a New York-based platform that 
allows communities to rethink precise urban areas, projecting 
into the future. Individuals can select an area of the 
metropolis and a timeframe (for instance, Manhattan in 
2050), and specify factors such as land use (from vegetable 
garden to street trees to retail complex), energy sources (e.g., 
waste-to-energy power plant), water source, storage and 
usage, and transport types. They can also select various 
‘precipitation events’—such as drought, or showers—and 
observe how their system fares. Crucially, designs can be 
shared and discussed with other visionaries or contributors. 
Only some urban planners are thinking about what might 
social design sites, such as this, actually change. For an 
analogy, take the design of an energy efficient building. An 
architect can optimise natural light and ventilation all they 
like, but if the inhabitants choose to live with the curtains 
drawn for privacy and the lights on, the features are wasted. 
Similarly, our future will depend only in part on our external 
conditions: we must also design our future lifestyles. 
This is something the creators of Visionmaker have 
worked into the fabric of their site: “Beyond changing the 
ecosystems of an area of interest, users are able to change the 
Lifestyle and Climate scenarios that inform their visions.” A 
lifestyle scenario—the site explains—will affect the 
consumption and waste generation patterns of the people 
living in the area, as well as factors such as take-up of 
various modes of transportation, and subsequent energy use. 
Communities are also establishing themselves around 
social platforms to design global systems, beyond the bounds 
of single geographies or industries. We might even 
paraphrase the Latin author Cicero in his famous quote—
dated June 46 BCE—"if you have a garden and a library too, 
you are not missing anything" (Si hortum in bibliotheca 
habes, deerit nihil), saying "if you have a garden and a 
'connection to the internet' too, you are not missing anything" 
[12]. 
One example of such a social platform, where humanity’s 
garden meets its vital knowledge-sharing infrastructure, is 
‘The Future of Protein’. This online sharing site is at the 
heart of The Protein Challenge 2040: a consortium convened 
by Forum for the Future and involving the World Wildlife 
Fund, the Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition, 
Firmenich, Hersheys, Quorn, Target, Volac and Waitrose.  
This is the first international innovation partnership to 
explore how we balance supply and demand of protein for a 
growing population, in a way that is affordable, healthy and 
good for the environment. The stakeholders are now sharing 
their perceptions of change and their long-term implications 
via Forum’s public trends-monitoring platform, the Futures 
Centre, in a topic hub called ‘The Future of Protein’ [13]. 
Users spot ‘signals of change’, from ‘Nutrient shakes replace 
meal breaks in Silicon Valley’ to ‘Industry stakeholders call 
for debate on insects as food and feed’. They’re also raising 
questions, such as ‘What will it take to meet China’s 
growing demand for pork?’ 
These questions converge around the theme of intangible 
cultural heritage. Can Westerners overcome their aversion to 
eating grubs? Will the attraction of meat continue to rise 
among Asia’s growing middle class? Why are social 
mealtimes losing their value among tech entrepreneurs? Our 
assumptions about the world we want to create—its founding 
myths—are shaped by our cultures. In designing the future, 
we are always choosing the elements of our current culture 
that we want to carry forward with us. In this conscious or 
subconscious selection process, we are also designing what 
might be inherited by the future generations in terms of both 
active cultural politics and digitally archived latent legacy 
factors. 
The paper is structured in nine sections (including this 
introductory one and the conclusion) followed by an 
acknowledgment of an epiphany and bibliographical 
references. Section 2 presents heritage as the treasure of 
human experience, which can pioneer a new science in the 
social media era. Then—after having introduced Singapore 
as a privileged view point in Section 3—some exemplary 
less privileged case studies are presented in the three 
following sections (Greece in Section 4, Syria in Section 5, 
and Rwanda in Section 6) to open the stage for Section 7 and 
Section 8 that propose a complex-network approach to 
heritage data analysis as the core methodology, with which 
heritage science can support multi-user sharing platforms in 
developing effective and sustainable collaborative visioning 
for the future. In the paper, it has been chosen to avoid a 
systematic review of online social media and platforms that 
could relate to the topic, because other conference papers are 
focusing on them in detail both in CENTRIC 2015 - The 
Eighth International Conference on Advances in Human-
oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and 
Services and SOTICS 2015 - The Fifth International 
Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, 
and Informatics (Barcelona, Spain, November 15-20, 2015) 
[14]. 
II. 
HERITAGE: TREASURE AND FOUNDATION OF HUMAN 
EXPERIENCE 
For the first time ever, our society has the technological 
capacity to organize and retrieve myriad records of human 
experience at any time and from any digitally connected 
place, and apply these elements of this treasure trove to any 
kind of future design process. We are able to select from the 
past and apply to the future in full consciousness that 
responsibility belongs only to those present, in their shaping 
of the past, and is heavily interdependent of the news flow. 
[15]. 
"Heritage poses the challenge of innovation in a new 
way: how does the new integrate with the old?" This was the 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
key question raised by Helga Nowotny (co-founder and 
former president of the European Research Council) in her 
keynote address at the 1st Singapore Heritage Science 
Conference on Heritage science as a complex system: The 
embarrassment of complexity: A phase of transition?. The 
conference was organized and chaired by Andrea Nanetti 
and Siew Ann Cheong at Nanyang Technological University 
Singapore for the Complexity Program and the School of 
Art, Design and Media (6-7 January 2014), to pioneer a new 
science of heritage, as a state-of-the-art multidisciplinary 
domain able to investigate and discover integrated action 
plans and solutions in response to, and in anticipation of, the 
challenges arising from cultural heritage issues in society. In 
this way, heritage is closely linked to the history and identity 
of communities [16]. 
This new science of heritage focuses on accessing, 
interpreting, conserving and managing cultural heritage. It 
takes into account knowledge and values acquired in all 
relevant disciplines, from arts and humanities (philosophy, 
ethics, (art-)history, economics, sociology and anthropology) 
to fundamental sciences (chemistry, physics, mathematics 
and biology), as well as computer sciences and engineering, 
and media studies. In fact, the 2nd Singapore Heritage 
Conference “Heritage and the Creative Industry”, held on 
15-16 January 2015, wrestled with the tensions between age-
old practices and our modern digital lifestyles. In particular, 
there was a sense that we might be losing our humanity, as 
our lives become more and more digital. In hearing 
experts—like Harold Thwaites in his keynote—talk about 
their past experiences, and draw from them creative 
inspirations for the future, one could realize that human 
qualities like ethics, empathy, identity, and spirituality are 
connective qualities that serve to bind people together. In 
short, to be human is to be connected to other humans, to our 
environments, and for some, to cosmic significance [17]. On 
that same note, significantly, Steve Dixon—in his talk given 
for the online international symposium Art of the Networked 
Practice chaired by Vibeke Sorensen and Randall Packer at 
the Nanyang Technological University Singapore for the 
School of Art, Design and Media on April 1, 2015—used the 
metaphor of existentialism to speak about commitment and 
engagement in contemporary networked practices [18]. 
The ethics of reporting current affairs has received much 
attention, but the emphasis has been on the present-day 
implications and the need to assume responsibility for past 
events: a stance shaped by notions of justice rather than an 
acknowledgement of any design agency in the practice of 
reporting itself. More attention is now due to the ethics of 
shaping the future, and the politics of heritage-selection as 
part of this. In this way, the social media experience is 
entering that same field of 'intangible cultural heritage' that 
UNESCO (and with it 153 countries) defines as [19]: 
… the practices, representations, expressions, knowledge, and 
skills––as well as the instruments, objects, artifacts and cultural 
spaces associated therewith––that communities, groups and, in 
some cases, individuals recognize as part of their cultural 
heritage. This intangible cultural heritage, transmitted from 
generation 
to 
generation, 
is 
constantly 
recreated 
by 
communities and groups in response to their environment, their 
interaction with nature and their history, and provides them 
with a sense of identity and continuity, thus promoting respect 
for cultural diversity and human creativity. 
Thus, according to the UNESCO charter, the preservation 
of 
intangible 
cultural 
heritage 
requires 
the 
active 
collaboration of the people or community within which the 
heritage resides. This in turn requires protection of the 
processes that allow traditions and shared knowledge to be 
passed on to future generations, along with arts, science, 
problem solving and invention. 
The 4th Singapore Heritage Science Conference (25-26 
January 2016) will approach the interpretation of the nature 
of changes in intangible cultural heritage through the lens of 
complexity science: despite the fact that the roles of 
innovation and creativity in shaping the intangible cultural 
heritage of complex societies are not yet described in the 
literature, we believe that, in essence, these changes are 
voluntary human expressions of ingenuity. To build up a 
complexity science toolkit for incorporating innovation and 
creativity into the core processes of a living heritage, the role 
of multi-user sharing platforms will be crucial: these will 
both enable and build awareness of collaborative visioning 
for the future [20]. 
III. 
SINGAPORE AS A PRIVILEGED VIEW POINT 
In Singapore this year (2015), the decision process for its 
future direction is very much a conscious one. Singapore was 
‘born’ as a nation state 50 years ago, and has advanced 
largely (although not exclusively) to the plans of its first 
Prime Minister, the late Lee Kuan Yew. Because of the 
cultural dimension of urban planning—as addressed by Liu 
Thai Ker, former director in Singapore of the Urban 
Redevelopment Authority and now Chairman of the Centre 
for Liveable Cities in his lecture given on September 18, 
2015, in the Chinese Heritage Centre at Nanyang 
Technological University Singapore—in a careful and 
attentive design, Singapore's urban development story offers 
not only a unique view point for an integrated engineered use 
of the built heritage but also an advantaged perspective for 
intangible cultural heritage appreciation [21]. In fact, many 
are now taking the opportunity to look another 50 years into 
the future. One sharing platform, Imagine2065, invites 
communities to redesign key social spaces. Among three 
spaces showcased, two are to be found on the map: Telok 
Ayer community centre and the youth centre *Scape. The 
third—the ‘mothership’—invites designs for online shared 
spaces, with various aims: to channel funding for social 
projects, to offer a safe space for pre-formed thoughts, to 
raise difficult questions, such as 'Should new college 
graduates immediately get corporate jobs?’ 
Visions for both community centres illustrate the active 
process of heritage-design. Members of the Telok Ayer 
community call for “a living museum that reflects the 
organic and dynamic stories of the community” and “a 
gallery where community groups can showcase themselves”, 
while the youth centre is imagined as “a blank canvas for 
youths to express themselves”. 
Imagine 2065 is the creation of The Thought Collective, 
a group of social enterprises with the shared aim to “build up 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
Singapore’s social and emotional capital” – beginning with 
young people. Founder Tong Yee explains [22]: 
We truly believe that in any form of solution, if you do not 
understand the context, you are not going very far. If you look 
at a young person, you have to ask, ‘How do I give you the 
context that will allow you to be a much more strategic thinker 
and partner in the future?’ 
The need for young people to be at the heart of future 
developments has been powerfully advocated by one of 
Singapore’s most respected strategists, the former Foreign 
Minister, George Yeo, an early blogger and Facebook user. 
At the launch of his newly published collection of essays and 
public talks, Yeo observed a “much healthier" level of civic 
participation in Singapore today, and put it down to two 
factors: the Government "letting go'' to some extent, and new 
technology like social media "allowing sunlight to break 
through". He was referring to a speech he made in 1991, in 
which, as the Straits Times reports [23]: 
He used the analogy of the state as a banyan tree, calling for it 
to be pruned to let the sun through so that the undergrowth - or 
civic society - will not be stultified. 
George Yeo, in his new book, writes [24]: 
As hierarchies give way to networks, it is younger members of 
society who adapt the most readily … If we fail to engage and 
involve the young, the transition from a hierarchical to a 
network society will be a troubled one. 
The ‘motive force’ for this transition, Yeo claims, is the 
digital revolution: 
The new technologies unleashed by [it] enable better and 
higher forms of human organisation to emerge but not before 
old ones are brought down. The search for new pathways to 
that future is the story of today. 
Heritage is at the heart of his understanding of that 
search. It was Yeo that persuaded the Chinese Chamber of 
Commerce to restore the Sun Yat Sen Villa, transforming it 
into a museum commemorating the founding father of the 
Republic of China, who visited Singapore nine times 
between 1900 and 1911 [25]. The restoration was not only a 
tribute to Singapore’s Chinese heritage, but a statement of 
Yeo’s intent to maintain strong economic ties with China in 
future. Yeo was also one of the founders of a project to 
revive Nalanda University, Bihar’s ancient seat of learning, 
and is now its new Chancellor, taking over from the Indian-
American economist Amartya Sen, a fellow advocate of the 
power of debate and author of ‘The Argumentative Indian’ 
[26]. 
IV. 
GREECE: A CASE OF HERITAGE IN ACTION 
Since 2008, after Wall Street imploded, Greece became 
the epicentre of Europe’s debt crisis. An article published by 
Suzanne Daley and Anemona Hartocollis in The New York 
Times in response to the Greek referendum of 5 July 2015 
made the interesting claim that the ‘No’ was influenced by a 
“history of defiance”, founded in Greek history as illustrated 
here below in Figure 1. 
The authors cite Nick Malkoutzis, the editor of 
Macropolis. Greece in Perspective, a political analysis 
website [27], in saying: “It is true that deep in the Greek 
psyche is the idea of glorious resistance against all odds. 
Moments of defiance, he added, are “written into the 
conscience of every Greek”. Instances used to justify this 
understanding of the Greek psyche are handpicked from both 
history and mythology, from legends of women throwing 
themselves off cliffs to escape slavery, to the iconic figure of 
the Spartan king Leonidas remembered for his death at the 
Thermopylae, to Greek fighters blowing themselves to avoid 
being captured by the Ottomans in the 1800s [28]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Greek "No" to the Troika and king Leonidas' legacy [29]. 
If Figure 1 shows a clear example of (ab)use of heritage 
to (emotionally) convey political statements, otherwise based 
on assumptions, Figure 2 shows the retired Greeks waiting to 
receive partial pension payments outside of a bank in Athens, 
who can hardly get relief by that “history of defiance” 
founded in Greek history, as described by Nick Malkoutzis. 
Our vision is that multi-user sharing platform can start to 
make the difference today in a strong collaboration between 
computer science, humanities, and news broadcasting tools 
(e.g., Apple News as firstly realised with iOS 9 in September 
2015 [30], and Facebook Instant Articles [31]). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Photograph by Eirini Vourloumis for The New York Times. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
The comparison between Figure 1 and Figure 2 provides 
a first example for what has been claimed here above in 
Section 3. Even if it is not a formal proof, yet, it shows the 
way towards it accomplishment: a comprehensive and 
systematic analysis and use of historical information would 
become here a key tool for sustainable and dynamic 
innovation in news broadcasting and appreciation. Let us 
think about a platform, which could automatically access the 
historical evidence and the many sub-sequential (politically 
and culturally informed/biased) interpretations related to the 
Spartan king Leonidas and visually match them with the key 
elements of Nick Malkoutzis' narrative and with the 
economic scenarios envisaged by the so called troika 
(European Commission, European Central Bank, and 
International Monetary Fund) using the methodology 
mentioned here below in Section 7. 
The process of defining what is, and what has been, 
influences both our present day, our collective sense of the 
past, and our aspirations to the future. Our aspirations are 
formative, and therefore in shaping them, we also have a part 
in shaping the world to come. 
The better we understand what’s changing today, the 
greater chance we have of shaping the future we want. 
Futures practitioners (including the team at Forum for the 
Future) monitor the ‘megatrends’ shaping our lives—such as 
population growth, climate change and hyper connectivity—
and collect signals of change: unprecedented instances of 
behaviours, technologies, designs and applications that could 
open new directions for current systems. These stories of 
ongoing and sudden change are used to create potential 
scenarios of different futures, so that organisations, sectors, 
industries or nations can make better decisions today. 
Decisions are based on how we judge – both rationally 
and emotionally – various scenarios, and these judgements 
are based on assumptions of what is desirable and valuable. 
The stories we tell shape these assumptions. Today, some of 
the most influential storytellers—Disney, for instance [32]—
condition young children to value riches over rags and 
conformity over difference: its happy endings are defined by 
wealth, marriage and conventional beauty. 
Thus, if nations are founded upon narrative myths, and 
intergenerational repetition perpetuates the assumptions and 
values they contain, as demonstrated in 2011 by Caspar 
Hirschi [33], heritage can be understood as the system 
through which we—as communities, organisations and 
states—can choose these myths and share them. 
Now we have the technology to implement a heritage-
based better understanding of the future implications (on 
social, economic and environmental fronts) of the selections 
and (re)shaping of our mythical foundations. In the case of 
Greece, one of the most important outcomes of this 
approach—paraphrasing 
90-year-old 
Jimmy 
Carter's 
interview with National Geographic—would be filling 
vacuums and things that governments do not do [34]. 
The vision is also to increase the participatory 
responsibility of citizens in the democratic processes of 
decision-making. The theoretical point has always been 
made both in philosophy and political science. 
One could recall Plato's Socrates’ Apology: 
The unexamined life is not worth living (Ὁ δε ἀνεξέταστος 
βίος οὐ βιωτὸς ἀνθρώπῳ, 38a). 
Life is not worth living without ἔλεγχος/elenchus, i. e., 
without examination, argument of disproof or refutation, 
dialogue; cross-examining, testing, scrutiny especially for 
purposes of refutation. Such is the Socratic elenchus, often 
referred to also as exetasis or scrutiny and as basanismus or 
assay [35]. 
One could recall August Wilson, who signed both the 
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, preached 
startlingly democratic theories - more democratic than the 
ideas of any other delegate to the Constitutional Convention. 
In his oration at Philadelphia on July 4, 1788, celebrating the 
adoption of the Constitution of the United States, he said 
[36]: 
You are responsible for the world that you live in. It is not the 
government’s responsibility. It is not your school’s or your 
social club’s or your church’s or your neighbour’s or your 
fellow citizen’s. It is yours, utterly and singularly yours. 
One could recall the Greek composer Yorgos Tsangàris 
(1948-2008) [37]: 
There is no time for yourself if you want to become a Man 
(Δεν υπάρχει χρόνος για τον εαυτό σου αν θέλεις να γίνης 
Άνθρωπος). 
But, it seems that only today we are having a new great 
opportunity: 
using 
heritage-based 
multi-user 
sharing 
platforms we could support collaborative visioning for the 
future and—as Marten Sheffer would say—"create safe 
operating space to avoid the loss of resilience that prepare 
the advent of crisis" [38]. 
V. 
SYRIA: FROM NEWS FEEDS TO MULTI-USER SHARING 
PLATFORMS 
A key question today is about the support that technology 
and crowd-sourcing can offer to help us undertake the 
process of selecting and sharing our heritage collectively, as 
part of futures design. 
One approach comes from News Deeply, an online 
media platform that aims to offer readers the cultural, 
political and historical context to current affairs, revalorising 
a systemic understanding of events – as opposed to the 
exclamatory hype of the tabloid press. It began with a news 
site focused exclusively on Syria [39], which features a 
timeline, conflict map and detailed sections covering ‘the 
basics’ since the March 2011 uprising, the regime, an 
understanding of the Islamic State of Iraq and the 
Levant/ash-Sham/Syria (better known as ISIS), a summary 
of key global players, and a reading room of leading 
thinkers. 
Two elements, arguably, are missing: one is a section 
elaborating the heritage of Syria. This would enable the 
reader to conceptualise the scale of loss – both in terms of 
deepened empathy for the people and in imagining the 
damage to societal cohesion, as well as the loss of sites of 
cultural significance. The other missing element is the 
opportunity for users to contribute their own observations. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
They can currently comment on shared stories, but not share 
their own. 
Were these two desirable functions to be combined—
creating a section in which users could contribute their 
understanding of Syria’s pasts (Greek-Roman-Byzantine, 
Arab, Crusader, Ottoman, French, Independent) as well as 
the current civil war started in 2011—it would create a rich 
opportunity for discussion as to ways forward. Could the 
careful use of taxonomy in tagging the stories shared even 
allow users to study patterns of values, as represented in the 
heritage, and relate these to desired social outcomes? Our 
solution is proposed here in Section 7 and Section 8. 
VI. 
RWANDA: A SHARED APPROACH TO NARRATIVE 
INTERPRETATION 
Heritage as a means for collaborative design demands a 
shift away and a reorganization of traditional disciplines 
(history, anthropology, archaeology, etc.) towards a new 
awareness of collective sharing and interpretation. 
An example of what this new awareness might draw 
upon in its development is offered by Dave Snowden, 
Founder and chief scientific officer of Cognitive Edge, with 
SenseMaker® [40], which allows people to act as their own 
ethnographers 
for 
complex 
analysis 
of 
their 
lived 
experiences. 
Of course, anthropologists have always collected stories 
from the studied group; the difference in Snowden’s 
approach is that the people not only share their experiences 
but also index them. His system means that each individual 
does not only have a voice but also the means of 
interpretation. 
It is essentially a software tool that allows users to 
contribute a narrative and then asks them a set of questions 
to analyse what they have shared. This data is used to map 
their interpretation of their story against other users’ 
interpretations of their own stories. The framework for this 
map might be a simple triangulation, or a grid. The 
SenseMaker® site explains: 
The output of SenseMaker is statistical data backed up by 
explanatory narrative. This means that advocacy is an integral 
part of the system. Numbers on their own appear objective but 
are not persuasive; anecdotes on their own may be persuasive 
but are not objective. […] “Instead of asking, “How do we 
create a culture of X?” we ask “How do we create more stories 
like this and fewer stories like that?” 
Crucially, in sensitive contexts and for difficult subject 
matter, the interpretation can be made public and mapped, 
without individual’s story being revealed. The system also 
allows people to share their experience in their own language 
and yet offer data that can be used widely, without costly 
translation. This enables the system to operate at significant 
scale – potentially even national or global. 
To give an example, GirlHub—a Nike Foundation 
project—ran a pilot project with SenseMaker® to study the 
impact of its 12+ Young Empowerment Programme in 
Rwanda [41]. In Figure 4, the SenseMaker® matrix maps the 
descriptions caregivers gave of the intentions and actions of 
girls in the stories they shared. Caregivers were asked to 
share a true story about an experience in a girl’s life. They 
were then asked whether, in their story, the girl wanted to do 
something, did not want to do something [mapped across the 
horizontal axis] did something, or did not do something 
[mapped on the vertical axis]. The researchers then focused 
their interest upon those stories where ‘wanted to do 
something’ met ‘did something’, to discern patterns that 
could lead to recommendations for future empowerment. For 
instance, they noted that, “The areas where girls and parents 
were viewed as having the most decision-making ability 
were education and health”. 
 
Figure 3.  Pilot study conducted in 2015 in Rwanda by GirlHub. 
A shared approach to narrative interpretation calls for the 
application of such a system for personal histories to develop 
a new collective heritage mapping as a foundation for 
possible sustainable futures as presented in the two following 
Sections 7 and 8. 
VII. A COMPLEX-NETWORK APPROACH TO HERITAGE 
DATA ANALYSIS 
In the words of John H. Holland [42] and William Brian 
Arthur [43], complex systems are characterized by their 
dependence on contingencies; for example, event B happens 
because event A happened in the past, but not event C. These 
contingencies, also called path dependences, make the study 
of global histories highly bewildering, because of the 
concatenation of conditional probabilities [44]. 
Seeing history not as a linear progression of events, but 
as a complex, nonlinear network of contingencies gives us 
the correct frame of mind to respond to the issues raised by 
William A. Green in his article on world history 
periodization [45]: 
Periodization is rooted in historical theory. It reflects our 
priorities, our values, and our understanding of the forces of 
continuity and change. Yet periodization is also subject to 
practical constraints. For pedagogical reasons, world historians 
must seek reasonable symmetry between major historical eras 
despite huge discrepancies in the availability of historical data 
for separate time periods and for different areas of the world. 
It also addresses to the issues raised by microhistory [46], 
which studies well-defined single historical units/events to 
ask—as defined by Charles Joyner—"large questions in 
small places" in contrast with large-scale structural views 
[47]. The most famous example being Carlo Ginzburg's Il 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
formaggio e i vermi first published in Italian in 1976 [48]. In 
the book, which is considered to have initiated this research 
field in historical studies, the author wrote: 
The historians have long since learned that history is the 
history of men, not of the "great," and the closer you get up to 
everyday reality the better you decipher the past, and then 
grasp the sense of immediacy with the problems, the 
connections with today's present, i.e., history. 
The solution proposed by Andrea Nanetti and Siew Ann 
Cheong to delimit time periods is to move away from 
focusing on main individual events, but to look instead at 
intensity in the flow of events in societies' natural nonlinear 
perception of time. 
Figure 3 (left) shows the six W's of a narrative, and how 
they relates to the key actors, key events, key periods, key 
locations, key factors, and key actions in historical analysis. 
In Figure 3 (right) different link types (blue, green, and red, 
and possibly others as well) of socio-political relations 
(trade, diplomacy, conflicts, etc.) connect historical actors (a, 
b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j) in a complex network, from which, 
among other higher-level information, we can extract the 
power blocs shown here below as the clusters A and B. 
Concerted effort and funding are now needed to enable 
such projects to proliferate. 
    
 
 
Figure 4.  The 6 W's of a narrative as a complex network 
Marten Scheffer's research team recently used eco-
systems as a showcase to point out that complex systems 
theory associates regime shifts as critical transitions with 
higher intensities of events [49]. Building on his insights, 
Siew Ann Cheong and Andrea Nanetti decided to mine the 
complex network of intercontinental trade, diplomacy, 
conflicts and other interactions among cities, nations and 
continents during Late Middle Age and Early Renaissance 
(1205-1533 CE) to identify time and geography of such 
transitions. This time-resolved complex-network approach to 
historical analysis allows to automatically identifying the key 
actors driving a specific key event. At present, expert 
historians painstakingly piece together the key events, and 
thereafter examine the main actors in such events. With that 
method, this identification can be automated and different 
definitions of key actors adopted [50]. 
This methodological approach can easily move from the 
historical landscape to the social media historical memory, as 
intangible cultural heritage of humanity (see the UNESCO 
definition in Section 2). 
VIII. ENGINEERING SOCIAL MEDIA HISTORICAL MEMORY 
AS INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE OF HUMANITY 
Engineering Historical Memory [51] is an experimental 
methodology and an on going research project for the 
organization of historical data in the digital age, that Andrea 
Nanetti theorized when he was Visiting Scholar at Princeton 
University in 2007, and further developed it when he was 
Visiting Full Professor at the University of Venice Ca' 
Foscari in 2012. Since 2013 he is carrying on the research at 
Nanyang Technological University Singapore at the 
intersections of humanities and data science/visualisation. 
The project was awarded best conference paper at 2013 
Culture and Computing (Kyoto, Japan), and has been funded 
by Microsoft Research and Microsoft Azure (2014-2016). 
Engineering Historical Memory is helping to develop 
heritage studies as a science in response to, and in 
anticipation of, the exponential growth of knowledge—
encoded/embodied in complex interactions of written, 
pictorial, 
sculptural, 
and 
architectural 
records, 
oral 
memories, practices, and performed rituals—in our glocal 
society (i.e., reflecting or characterized by both local and 
global considerations). What sets it apart from other 
approaches is a focus on developing and applying 
computationally 
intensive 
techniques 
(e.g., 
pattern 
recognition, data mining, machine learning algorithms 
derived from other disciplines, and visualization solutions) to 
achieve this goal. It entails the creation and advancement of 
databases (relational, graph, and hybrid), algorithms, 
computational, statistical, and complexity techniques and 
theories to solve formal and practical problems arising from 
the study, interpretation, conservation, and management of 
cultural heritage data in the context already presented in 
Section 2. 
The basic problem has been clearly framed by Larry Page 
in his TED's talk Where's Google going next? given on 21 
March 2014 [52]: 
Google mission is to organise world's information and make it 
universally accessible and useful. People keep on asking: "Is it 
what you guys are still doing?" I think at it on myself and I am 
not quite sure about what to answer. Actually, when I think 
about search, it is such a deep thing for all of us: to really 
understand what you want, to understand the world's 
information... And we are still very much in the early stages of 
that. And it is totally crazy! We have been out for 15 years 
already, but it is not at all done. 
In September 2015, Apple welcomed to its News App 
using the following advertisement [53]. 
The best stories from sources you love, selected just for you. 
The more you read, the more personalised your News becomes. 
To start the application the user is required to select a list 
of preferred sources. But there is no tool to cross the 
information and validate the single news. 
On 23 September 2015, Wired published an article by 
Julia Greenberg referring to Facebook 360 videos in News 
Feed [54]. 
WHO?
WHAT?
WHEN?
WHERE?
WHY?
HOW?
Key Actors
Key Events
Key Periods
Key Locations
Key Factors
Key Actions
Elements of a Narrative
a
h
b
i
d
j
e
g
c
f
A
B
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
"Over time the types of stories that people want to tell each 
other and the types of content they want to share with each 
other will get richer and more immersive" Facebook's VP of 
product Will Cathcart says. "So just as we have seen an 
evolution from text to photos, we are seeing a pretty big jump 
to video in the last couple of years. We think that's only going 
to continue. 
From a media perspective, the challenge is to have a 
system that works on a visual base to be tested in two 
parallel experiences: one with the scholars (historians and art 
historians interested in data mapping and visualization) to 
investigate as deeper as possible at a global cultural scale the 
concepts of 'provenance' and 'validation' of the sources and 
their interpretations; and another in the social media to 
approach the actual shift from texts, to photographs, videos, 
and 360 immersive spaces in the community sharing 
processes. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
It is true, for the first time in history all peoples on earth have a 
common present: no event of any importance in the history of one 
country can remain a marginal accident in the history of any other. 
Every country has become the almost immediate neighbour of every 
other country, and every man feels the shock of events, which take 
place at the other side of the globe. But this common factual present 
is not based on a common past and does not in the least guarantee a 
common future. Technology, having provided the unity of the world, 
can just as easily destroy it and the means of global communication 
were designed side by side with means of possible global 
destruction 
(Johanna Arendt 1906-1975, Man in Dark Times, 1955/1968, p. 83) 
As observed in Sections 3 to 6, the potential to share, 
select and index our heritage, and to use this as a tool in 
designing our future, has reached unprecedented scale. 
Heritage is considered as the thesaurus of human 
experiences (i.e., the comprehensive storage system of 
human knowledge and values) embedded in human artefacts 
and in nature as interactively experienced by different 
cultural communities, and biologically perceived by the 
human brain. In this way, heritage issues become the key-
factor for innovation in the Anthropocene, the incoming era, 
during which human activity is becoming the dominant 
influence not only in climate and the environment but also in 
the human genetic and epigenetic heritages evolution. 
In Section 7—following the solution proposed by Andrea 
Nanetti and Siew Ann Cheong in 2013—, has been proposed 
to use a complex-network approach to heritage data analysis 
as the core methodology, with which heritage science can 
support multi-user sharing platforms in developing effective 
and sustainable collaborative visioning for the future. We do 
not know what the next generation will need, value, and like, 
but we can display and discuss what humans needed, valued, 
and liked—and the reasons why they did it—using the 
results to make better decisions. The following Section 8 
demonstrated how social media could become the repository 
of possible solutions, whether organized, treated, and 
investigated through the lens of a new upgrade of the 
methodologies developed by the century-old scholarly 
tradition of historical sciences. 
In that way, this contribution can be used for theory 
and/or practice to develop ICT tools able to aggregate 
heritage data into news and social media platforms in order 
to increase the awareness of existing connections and 
possible future scenarios in a more scientific way. 
All in all, heritage is not about the past but about a shared 
future: we believe that sharing and discussing our heritage 
via multi-user sharing platforms can support collaborative 
visioning for the future and towards a new art and science of 
living together on Earth. 
AKNOWLEDGMENT 
The conception of this paper would not have been 
achieved without the continuous scholarly dialogue that 
since March 2013 Andrea Nanetti has been having with Siew 
Ann Cheong at Nanyang Technological University in the 
Complexity Program directed by Jan Vasbinder and later on 
in 2014 in the newly established Complexity Institute 
directed by Peter Sloot and Stephen Lansing. A key event 
was also the conference "Nurturing Leonardos" held at the 
ArtScience Musuem Singapore in May 2015, where the 
authors met and started to discuss about the topic of this 
paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Available from http://www.bu.edu/pardee/9-27-05/ [accessed 
on 12 October 2015]. See: J. H. Miller, A Crude Look at the 
Whole: The Science of Complex Systems in Business, Life, 
and Society. New York: Basic Books, 2016. 
[2] J. Donne, "Meditation XVII". [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.online-literature.com/donne/409/ [accessed on 12 
July 2015]. 
[3] See the Introduction in A. Watts, Tao: The Watercourse Way. 
New York: Random House, 1975. 
[4] J. Christman, "Liberalism and individual positive freedom," 
Ethics, vol. 101, no. 2, January 1991, pp. 343–359. 
[5] R. A. Bentley, J. M. O'Brien, and A. W. Brock, "Mapping 
collective behavior in the big-data era," Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, vol. 37, issue 1, February 2014, pp 63–76. 
[6] Anna Simpson, Interview with C. Tonkinwise [conducted on 
15 April 2015," unpublished. 
[7] H. Haugh, "Community-led social venture creation," 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, vol. 31, issue 2, March 
2007, pp. 161–182, doi:10.1111/j.1540-6520.2007.00168. 
[8] K. Alexiou, G. Alevizou, T. Zamenopoulos, S. de Sousa, and 
L. Dredge, "Learning from the use of media in community-led 
design projects," Cultural Science, vol. 8/1, Jan. 2015, pp. 30–
40. 
[9] G. Voss and N. Carolan, "User-led design in the urban 
domestic environment," Journal of Urban Technology, vol. 
19, 
no. 
2, 
2012, 
pp. 
69–87. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.unialliance.ac.uk/blog/2015/02/12/changing-
healthcare-for-the-better-through-user-led-design-research 
[accessed on 12 July 2015]. 
[10] From Social Media to Social Product Development: The 
Impact of Social Media on Co-Creation of Innovation. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=1975523 
[accessed on 12 July 2015]. 
[11] Available from: https://visionmaker.us/nyc [accessed on 12 
July 2015]. 
[12] M. Tulli Ciceronis, Epistularum ad Familiares, Liber IX, Ep. 
IV. 
[13] Available 
from: 
http://www.thefuturescentre.org/topic-
hubs/protein [accessed on 12 July 2015]. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
[14] Available 
from: 
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2015/ProgramCENTRIC15.h
tml 
and 
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2015/SOTICS15.html 
[accessed on 26 July 2015]. 
[15] A. Nanetti, S. A. Cheong, and M. Filippov, "Interactive 
Global Histories. For a new information environment to 
increase the understanding of historical processes," in 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Culture and 
Computing 2013 (Kyoto, Ritsumeikan University, Sept. 16-
18, 2013). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society, 2013, 
pp. 104–110, doi:10.1109/CultureComputing.2013.26. 
[16] The complete videorecorded conference is avilable from: 
http://www.paralimes.ntu.edu.sg/Pages/Home.aspx. 
[17] The complete videorecorded conference is avilable from: 
http://www.paralimes.ntu.edu.sg/NewsnEvents/Heritageandth
eCreativeIndustry/Pages/Video%20Gallery.aspx. 
[18] The complete videorecorded symposium is avilable from: 
http://oss.adm.ntu.edu.sg/symposium2015. 
[19] UNESCO Charter for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural 
Heritage, 2003, Art. 2. 
[20] A. Nanetti and S. A. Cheong, "Complexity Science and Man-
Heritage-Landscape Systems. A Heritage Impact Factor 
Theory", in Proceedings of the 3nd International Conference 
on documentation, conservation and restoration of the 
architectural heritage and landscape protection, ReUSO 2015, 
organized by the School of Engineering Building at the 
Polytechnic University of Valencia, in association with the 
School of Architecture at the Polytechnic University of 
Madrid, the Architectural Department in the University of 
Florence, the Department of Civil Engineering and 
Architecture of University of Pavia, Forum Unesco-
Universidad y Patrimonio, and the Instituto Universitario de 
Restauración del Patrimonio (Valencia, October 22-24, 2015), 
unpublished. 
[21] T. C. Khoo, Chief Editor, Built by Singapore: from Slums to a 
Sustainable Built Environment. Singapore:m Centre for 
Liveable Cities, 2015 (Singapore Urban Systems Studies 
Series). 
[22] Available from: http://www.thefuturescentre.org/signals-of-
change/2951/crowd-sourcing-singapore-s-future-spaces 
[accessed on 12 July 2015]. 
[23] Available 
from: 
http://www.straitstimes.com/politics/singaporeans-more-
vocal-today-bringing-new-tensions-and-possibilities-george-
yeo [accessed on 12 July 2015]. Yeo calls himself a Taoist, 
referring to “the larger currents at play … to which we are 
subject” (citation in George Yeo on Bonsai, Banyan and the 
Tao, A. I. Latif and H. L. Lee, Eds.. Singapore: World 
Scientific, p. 3, 2015). 
[24] A. I. Latif and H. L. Lee, Eds., George Yeo on Bonsai, 
Banyan and the Tao. Singapore: World Scientific, 2015, p. 5. 
[25] Available 
from: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sun_Yat_Sen_Nanyang_Memor
ial_Hall [accessed on 12 July 2015]. 
[26] Available 
from: 
http://lkyspp.nus.edu.sg/wp-
content/uploads/2013/04/pa_tk_ST_George-Yeo-A-Man-for-
All-Seasons_090511.pdf [accessed on 12 July 2015]. 
[27] S. Daley and A. Hartocollis, “Greek ‘No’ May Have Its Roots 
in Heroic Myths and Real Resistance,” New York Times, 6 
July 2015, p. 45. 
[28] Available from: http://www.macropolis.gr. 
[29] Available 
from: 
https://www.flickr.com/photos/helmet_13/19441895492 
[accesed on 20 September 2015]. 
[30] Available 
from: 
http://www.apple.com/ios/?cid=wwa-us-
kwg-features. 
[31] Available from: https://instantarticles.fb.com. 
[32] A. Simpson, The Brand Strategist’s Guide to Desire. London: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2015, pp. 55–56. 
[33] C. Hirschi, The Origins of Nationalism: An Alternative 
History from Ancient Rome to Early Modern Germany. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
[34] "My Work Since the White House and My Legacy [Interview 
with Jimmy Carter]," National Geographic, vol. 228, no. 4, 
October 2015, p. 11. 
[35] G. Vlastos, "The Socratic Elenchus," Oxford Studies in 
Ancient Philosophy, vol. 1, 1983, pp. 27–58. 
[36] Available 
from 
http://www.nccs.net/the-responsibility-of-
citizens.php [accessed on 25 September 2015]. 
[37] Available 
from: 
http://www.antiwarsongs.org/do_search.php?idartista=12288
&lang=it&stesso=1 [accessed on 25 September 2015]. 
[38] M. Sheffer et al., "Early-warning signals for critical 
transitions," Nature, vol. 461, 3 September 2009, pp. 53–59, 
doi:10.1038/nature08227. 
[39] Available from: http://www.syriadeeply.org. 
[40] Available 
from: 
http://cognitive-edge.com/sensemaker 
[accessed on 12 July 2015]. 
[41] Available 
from: 
http://old.cognitive-edge.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/GH-SenseMaker-brief.pdf [accessed 
on 12 July 2015]. 
[42] J. H. Holland, Emergence: From Chaos to Order. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2000. 
[43] W. Brian Arthur, Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in 
the Economy. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
1994. 
[44] P. Bak and M. Paczuski, "Complexity, contingency, 
criticality," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America, vol. 92, 1995, pp. 6689–
6696. 
[45] W. A. Green, "Periodizing World History," History and 
Theory, vol. 34, issue 2, May 1995, pp. 99–111 (p. 99, for the 
quotation). See also the larger work by the same W. A. Green, 
"Periodization in European and World History," Journal of 
World History, vol. 3, 1992, pp. 13–53, and the paper by J. H. 
Bentley, "Cross-Cultural Interaction and Periodization in 
World History," The American Historical Review, vol. 101, 
no. 3, June 1996, pp. 749–770. 
[46] C. Ginzburg, "Microhistory, two or three things that I know 
about it," in Idem, Threads and Traces. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 2012, pp. 193–214. 
[47] C. W. Joyner, Shared Traditions: Southern History and Folk 
Culture. Urbana: University of Illinois, 1999, p. 1. 
[48] C. Ginzburg, Il formaggio e i vermi. Il cosmo di un mugnaio 
del '500. Einaudi: Torino, 1976. In English: The Cheese and 
the worms: the cosmos of a 16th-century miller. Transl. by J. 
Tedeschi and A. Tedeschi. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1980. 
[49] M. Scheffer et al., "Early-warning signals for critical 
transitions," Nature, vol. 461, no. 7260, 2009, pp. 53–59. 
[50] A. Nanetti, A. Cattaneo, S. A. Cheong, and C.-Y. Lin, "Maps 
as Knowledge Aggregators: from Renaissance Italy Fra 
Mauro to Web Search Engines," The Cartographic Journal, 
vol. 52, issue 3, August 2015, pp. 1-10. 
[51] Available from: http://ehmazure.cloudapp.net. 
[52] Available 
from: 
https://www.ted.com/talks/larry_page_where_s_google_going
_next?language=en. 
[53] Available from: http://www.apple.com/news. 
[54] Available from: http://www.wired.com/2015/09/facebook-
launches-360-video-immersive-star-wars-clip
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

