 Agricultural Knowledge Transfer Via Talking Planter 
 
Yosei Isoe 
Graduate School of Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
cc001071@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, JAPAN 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—The succession of agricultural knowledge has 
recently grown in importance because of a decrease in the 
number of agricultural workers in Japan. To aid in solving 
that problem, this study suggests a framework for use in the 
succession of agricultural knowledge via a system. More 
concretely, it involves a method that planter communicates 
with users and other planters. The content of the 
communication includes failure information, which has been 
confirmed to be effective in a previous study. 
Keywords- Knowledge transfer; agriculture; tacit knowledge; 
explicit knowledge; SECI model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge Transfer is currently a very important theme 
and it has been gaining a great deal of attention. The transfer 
of knowledge issue is being tackled in a variety of scenes, for 
example, system engineering, artificial intelligence, and so 
on.  However, these approaches involve a number of 
problems. 
This particular research tackles the problem of 
transferring agricultural knowledge. Agriculture does not 
involve any corporatization and hence has typically been 
communicated from parents to their children or person to 
person over long periods of time. In recent years, however, 
the number of people who have been changing jobs from 
corporate employees to farmers has been increasing. As a 
result, the need for agricultural knowledge to be transferred 
to them has increased as well. In addition, with the increase 
of home gardens allowing crops to grow, gardening boom 
have taken place among young people, and the need for 
agricultural knowledge to be transferred to them is also 
increasing[3]. However, as lacking of experience, the 
transfer of newly increased agricultural knowledge has been 
taken place via the trial and error process until now. Recently, 
the possibility of knowledge being shared on a global scale 
through the new ubiquitous network society has also risen. 
This study suggests a framework by which novice 
agricultural workers can access to the knowledge of 
experienced agricultural workers via the network mentioned 
above. This study uses, in particular, knowledge gained from 
past failures and provided by the planters and novice 
agricultural workers can then share that knowledge. Through 
the conversation with planters, the novice agricultural 
workers can gain the knowledge while they are doing the 
agricultural work. There have been a number of studies and 
support systems on enabling objects to provide information 
to the user but this study suggests a new support system 
specifically 
concerning 
the 
transfer 
of 
agricultural 
knowledge. 
Section 2 explains about associated concept of this study. 
Then, we introduce the previous study in Section 3. Finally, 
we explain the proposed system in Section 4, and present 
conclusion and future works in Section 5. 
II. 
ASSOCIATED CONCEPT 
A. Tacit knowledge 
Nonaka defined tacit knowledge to be “knowledge 
gained from individual experiences or specific situations, 
which can include intangible elements such as beliefs, views, 
value systems, and so on” [4]. This concept was a refinement 
of Michael Polanyi's concept of tacit knowledge [5]. 
Agricultural knowledge regarding the necessary chores, 
know-how, and experience gained from failures could be 
classified as tacit knowledge. 
B. SECI model 
The SECI model was defined by Nonaka and Takeuchi 
as a knowledge acquisition process used to share tacit 
knowledge inside a company. This model repeats 4 processes, 
which are given below. 
i . 
Tacit to Tacit (Socialization) 
ii . Tacit to Explicit (Externalization) 
iii . Explicit to Explicit (Combination) 
iv . Explicit to Tacit (Internalization) 
Figure 1 shows the flow of the SECI model. 
14
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

 
Fig.1 Flow of SECI model 
These four processes lead to the creation of new 
knowledge. The succession of agricultural knowledge can 
also be classified into the four steps of the SECI model, with 
examples of each step being as follows. 
i . 
Socialization 
Novice agricultural workers work together with 
experienced agricultural workers. Novice agricultural 
workers can thus observe them, and then imitate them, learn 
the techniques of experienced agricultural workers. 
ii . Externalization 
Novice agricultural workers and experienced agricultural 
workers note down what they have noticed during 
agricultural work. 
iii . Combination 
Novice agricultural workers summarize what they have 
noted down. In addition, novice agricultural workers also 
transcribe what was noted down by experienced agricultural 
workers. 
iv . Internalization 
Novice agricultural workers work alone without the help 
of the experienced agricultural workers. 
Several studies have been made on transferring 
knowledge using the SECI model, but have been inadequate. 
Examples include a “Knowledge Management Support 
System That Uses Fond Memories in Peer Support 
Communities 
of 
Universities” 
[6] 
and 
“Supporting 
Knowledge Transfers and Task Scheduling via Use of 
Ontology” [7]. Some research has also taken place on 
supporting agriculture. However, there has been almost 
none on support from the aspect of “Objects that can 
provide information to people”. 
III. 
PREVIOUS STUDY 
A. Agricultural Knowledge Transfer 
This research is based on the previous research called 
“Agricultural Knowledge Transfer Based on Experience 
from Failures” [8]. The previous study supports the transfer 
of the knowledge that should be transferred as the failure 
experience through the SECI model. The four processes of 
the SECI model were used in the system as follows. 
STEP1: Socialization 
Novice agricultural workers learn the experience gained 
in failure using the system. 
STEP2: Externalization 
Experienced agricultural workers or novice agricultural 
workers with experience gained from failures input the 
experience they gained from failures into the system. 
STEP3: Combination 
The rules are made according the failure experience and 
the time and stored in the system. The system then informs 
novice agricultural workers using those rules. 
STEP4: Internalization 
Novice agricultural workers carry out the actual work 
using the above rules or their own thinking. 
The transfer of knowledge has been attempted by 
repeating the above 4 steps according to the SECI model. 
B. System Construction of Previous Study 
The flow of the system involves 5 main functions, with 
an explanation on each and the corresponding SECI model 
process being given below. 
i． Retrieval 
Failure 
Experience 
function 
(Socialization) 
ii． Recommendation of Relevant Failure Experience 
function (Socialization) 
iii． Registration 
of 
Failure 
Experience 
function 
(Externalization) 
iv． Make rules function (Combination) 
v． Information function (Combination) 
The system does not actually implement Internalization 
of the SECI model and instead, novice agricultural workers 
have to select the right choice before doing the actual work, 
which therefore plays the role of Internalization in the SECI 
model. 
Figure 2 shows an image of the system and Figure 3 is 
the main screen of the previous system. 
15
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

 
Fig. 2 Image of the previous system 
 
Fig.3 Main screen of the previous system 
C. Evaluation of Previous Study 
The previous study was evaluated using the system. The 
purpose is confirming whether the subjects did actually learn 
from experienced agriculture workers and their own 
experiences. In addition, the system also confirms whether or 
not the subjects were able to gain individual knowledge. The 
evaluation involved the method of cultivation being 
classified into 3 patterns, the results of which were then 
compared. The 3 patterns were as below. 
i． Pattern where nothing was utilized 
ii． Pattern where a manual was utilized 
iii． Pattern where this system was utilized 
The subjects cultivated Mizuna for a month, then they 
were interviewed, and the results of the 3 patterns were then 
compared. 
D. Experimental subjects 
Before the evaluation the subjects were provided with a 
questionnaire on their knowledge of agriculture, with 29 
university students from the Social Communication 
Laboratory completing the questionnaire forms. 6 of the 
subjects that gave the same answers in the questionnaire 
were then selected as it was assumed that their knowledge 
of agriculture would be approximately the same. Table 1 
shows the assignment of the method of cultivation. 
TABLE I.  
ASSIGNMENT OF METHOD OF CULTIVATION 
 
Group A 
Group B 
Use nothing at all 
Subject K 
Subject T 
Use a manual 
Subject I 
Subject H 
Use the system 
Subject O 
Subject Y 
E. Results of interviews 
The results of interviews were classified into three 
different types of knowledge and experience as below. 
i . 
Knowledge the subjects learned from the system or a 
manual 
ii . Knowledge the subjects learned via experience 
iii . Chores the subjects experienced 
Some of the results of the interviews are given below, 
and are based on the above classification. Table 2 shows the 
results of “Pattern where nothing was utilized”, Table 3 
“Pattern where a manual was utilized”, and Table 4 “Pattern 
where this system was utilized”. 
TABLE II.  
RESULT OF “PATTERN WHERE NOTHING WAS UTILIZED” 
< Knowledge the subjects learned from the system or a 
manual> 
Nothing in particular 
< Knowledge the subjects learned via experience > 
Don't plant too many seeds at one time 
< Choices the subjects experienced > 
Plant a little less seeds 
Water the crop everyday 
Water the crop using a glass container and tap 
TABLE III.  
 RESULT OF “PATTERN WHERE A MANUAL WAS UTILIZED” 
< Knowledge the subjects learned from the system or a 
manual> 
Water the crops carefully 
Don't overwater 
< Knowledge the subjects learned via experience > 
Nothing in particular 
16
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

< Choices the subjects experienced > 
Plant seeds in a line 
Water the crop carefully 
Water the crop using the right amount 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF “PATTERN WHERE THIS SYSTEM WAS 
UTILIZED” 
< Knowledge the subjects learned from the system or a 
manual> 
Narrowly-spaced planting results in slow growth 
The crop can be blighted because of being watered too 
many times or not watered enough 
< Knowledge the subjects learned via experience > 
Mizuna seeds are very small 
Take care not to plant seeds too close to each other 
Mizuna leaves are not very big 
< Choices the subjects experienced > 
Plant seeds with appropriate spacing 
Don’t plant one seed per space but instead two 
 
 
The results led to the following discoveries: 
<Pattern where nothing was utilized> 
Subjects 
experienced 
gaining 
knowledge 
from 
experience. 
<Pattern where a manual was utilized> 
Subjects experienced gaining knowledge from the 
system or a manual. 
<Pattern where the system was utilized> 
Subjects gained knowledge not only from the system or 
a manual but also actual experience. 
The traditional transfer of agricultural knowledge has 
involved the method that experienced agriculture workers 
provide novice agriculture workers with knowledge and 
experience, and the novice agriculture workers then gain 
individual knowledge via actual experience. These steps are 
typically used to transfer agricultural knowledge. The 
pattern that uses the system is thus fairly similar to these 
steps when compared to the other 2 patterns. 
 The system can therefore be used to efficiently transfer 
agricultural knowledge. 
F. Problems 
In 
the 
previous 
study, 
transferring 
agricultural 
knowledge has been proved to be effective through the use 
of failure experience and the SECI model. However, 
agricultural work is assumed to be done after referring the 
failure experience information in front of a computer. In the 
succession of agricultural knowledge, it is typical that the 
knowledge is shared and exchanged between people. Using 
the system via a computer therefore appears slightly 
unnatural and using the computer and doing the agricultural 
work will be recognized as two no-related things. Moreover, 
it will be difficult for users to relate knowledge acquired 
during agricultural work to knowledge acquired from the 
system because they would appear to be separated processes. 
This study therefore suggests a framework that users can use 
to help succeed agricultural knowledge face-to-face during 
actual agricultural work. 
IV. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
A. Media Equation 
The Media Equation involves a "Person corresponding 
unconsciously and socially to the treatment of an object" [9]. 
This suggests that user can treat object in the same way as 
treating a person. 
Example of study by using Media Equation include 
a ”Clothes Which Propose Fashion Coordinate Based on the 
Previous Experience”[10]. This study uses that theory in 
aspiring to aid in knowledge transfers. 
B. Approach of the system 
This study attempts to rectify problems in the previous 
study through a “Media Equation”. In addition, this study 
suggests a framework to help user gain knowledge with the 
same feeling as when the user work with a real person. The 
method “a planter provides information while talking to the 
user during agricultural work”, in particular, is used. This 
results the user feeling that they are working together with 
another person, because, the planter provides a form of 
communication. In addition, the user can do according to the 
information provided by the planter. Thus, the user can learn 
know-how from the planter and do the agricultural work at 
the same time.   
C. Summary of the system 
In this study, the planter used grows crops while 
managing all the crops through communicating with the 
user. The user can thereby decide what to do in the next step 
by communicating with the manager planter. 
This study mainly involves three conditions wherein the 
planter communicates. 
i． The same work as the failure experience of another 
person. 
ii． The same work as the failure experience of user. 
iii． The different planter with the planter the user works 
with. 
In pattern i, the planter tell user about the failure 
possibility according to the failure experience of the other 
worker. The same as pattern i, in pattern ii, the planter also 
talk to users about the possible failure. In pattern iii, the 
different planters communicate with each other, because, the 
agricultural work with each planter differs. In any other 
situation, the planter communicates if the content of the 
agricultural work is somewhat irregular, for example, the 
work of the day before and the work that the day greatly 
differs. 
17
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

The system using various sensors to recognizes the type 
of agricultural work. For example, a sensor can be installed 
to measure the volume of water and another sensor to 
monitor the temperature. 
Users can thereby obtain and share knowledge during 
agricultural work via communicating with the planters. 
Figure 4 shows an image of the system and Figure 5 shows 
the composition of the system. 
 
Fig. 4 Image of this system 
 
Fig. 5 Composition of this system 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper suggested a framework to help the transfer of 
agricultural knowledge via communication with the planters. 
And a prototype is under development according the method 
mentioned in the study. Especially the “watering” is an 
essential part in agricultural work and this part will also be 
develop in this study. In the next step, add the possibility of 
choose a crop and state of cultivation and collect failure 
experiences. Moreover, the system will be evaluated and the 
efficiency of the method be confirmed. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Miyajima, S, Zukai 2007nenmondaino subetega wakaru(Can 
understand the issues 2007). Gijutsu-Hyohron Co., Ltd. Tokyo, 
Japan. 2006. 
[2] 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan, The 84TH 
Statistical Yearbook of Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries 2008-2009.  
http://www.maff.go.jp/e/tokei/kikaku/nenji_e/other/n045.xls 
(retrieved: 2011/10/11) 
[3] 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan, The 85TH 
Statistical Yearbook of Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries 2009-2010.  
http://www.maff.go.jp/e/tokei/kikaku/other/n045.xls 
(retrieved: 2011/10/11) 
[4] 
Nonaka, I and H. Takeuchi, The Knowledge Creating Company. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, England.  1995. 
[5] 
Polanyi, M., The Tacit Dimension.  University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, USA.  1967. 
[6] 
Ishibashi, M and Y.  Nakatani, Knowledge Management Support 
System That Uses Fond Memories in Peer Support Communities of 
Universities.  72th Information Processing Society of Japan.  Tokyo, 
Japan.  2010, vol. 4, pp. 265-266. 
[7] 
Yoshioka, A., et al., Supporting Knowledge Transfers and Task 
Scheduling via Use of Ontology.  The 21st Annual Conference of the 
Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence.  Miyazaki, Japan.  2007.  
http://www.ai-gakkai.or.jp/jsai/conf/2007/data/pdf/100120.pdf 
(retrieved: 2011/10/11) 
[8] 
Isoe, Y and Y.  Nakatani, The Knowledge Transfer in Agriculture 
based on Failure Experiences.  73th Information Processing Society 
of Japan.  Tokyo, Japan.  2011, 6R-7, vol. 4, pp. 881-882. 
[9] 
Reeves, B and Nass, C. The Media Equation, How People Treat 
Computers, Television, and New Media Like Real People and Places, 
University of Chicago Press.  1996. 
[10] Fukuda, M and Y.  Nakatani, Clothes Which Propose Fashion 
Coordinate Based on the Previous Experience.  73th Information 
Processing Society of  Japan.  Tokyo, Japan.  2011, 2ZA-8, vol. 4, 
pp. 881-882. 
 
18
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

