 
Social TV and “Influencers”: Different Users, Different Effects  
Angela Fortunato, Roberta Barone, Umberto Panniello, Michele Gorgoglione 
Dipartimento di Meccanica, Matematica e Management 
Politecnico di Bari 
Bari, Italy 
e-mail: angela.fortunato@poliba.it 
 
Abstract— TV broadcasters are increasingly adopting social 
TV strategies to affect the viewers’ online behavior. The 
research done so far suggests that different drivers play 
different roles and their effects are different according to the 
specific type of online behavior. In order to extend this 
research, through hierarchical linear regression models, we 
compare the effects of the different drivers on the online 
behavior of “influencers”, i.e., users having a large number of 
followers, and “ordinary” users. Despite some limitations, we 
show relevant differences between the online behaviors of these 
two kinds of users, particularly the social TV strategies do not 
affect the online behavior of the “influencers”, while some of 
them affect the online behavior of “ordinary” users.  
Keywords-social 
TV; 
engagement; 
online 
behavior; 
influencer. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the context of the “Social TV” phenomenon [2], 
social networks, as Twitter, have gained a relevant role, by 
allowing viewers to share online their real-time viewing 
experiences [1]. On the other hand, broadcasters often use 
Social TV strategies [2][3][4] to prompt viewers to interact 
online during the TV programs [3] and then increase the 
viewers’ involvement [5] and the online engagement around 
the TV programs, that is the amount of viewers’ interactions 
occurring online [3]. Viewers can interact online through 
different types of behaviors: in particular, on Twitter they 
can post original tweets, share tweets (retweets), reply to 
tweets (replies). Previous research found a relationship 
between some viewers’ online behaviors and specific TV 
programs and contents [13], while few studies have 
explored the effects of the Social TV strategies on viewers’ 
online engagement. Reference [3] showed that displaying a 
TV show-related tweet on TV screen increases the number 
of retweets, while showing a hashtag increases the viewers’ 
online engagement during commercial breaks. Furthermore, 
reference [9] demonstrated that the effects of Social TV 
strategies and TV contents on online engagement can be 
better explained by distinguishing the different kinds of 
online behaviors (i.e., generating original tweets, sharing 
tweets and replying to tweets). They found that some 
strategies positively affect the generation of original tweets 
and negatively affect retweets and replies, while the absence 
of a strategy has a negative effect on all kind of behaviors. 
Moreover, different TV contents have different effects on 
different kinds of online behaviors. In particular, during 
commercial breaks the generation of original tweets 
decreases, while retweets and replies increase.  
However, in order to better examine the viewers’ online 
engagement, relevant aspects of online social networks 
should be considered. In social networks’ context, indeed, 
one of the most relevant aspect characterizing the online 
behavior is represented by the individual characteristics 
[10], specifically the influence a user exerts in his/her 
network to spread information further [10]. This kind of 
user is called “influencer” [8][10] (also “influential” or 
“opinion leader” [6]) and generally the behavior is different 
from the one of the other members of the network, called 
“ordinary” users [7]. For instance, by analyzing the online 
behaviors on a Google Groups’ sample, reference [11] 
demonstrated that “influencers” are more likely to post 
messages and reply to other messages than other members 
of the network. Therefore, “influencers” are generally 
characterized by a different behavior in comparison with the 
remainder of the network. “Influencers” are identified by 
considering several metrics, such as the number of followers 
[7][8][10]. The distinction between “influencers” and 
“ordinary” users is valid also in the Social TV context but 
no studies have explored their behavior. In particular, no 
studies explored whether “influencers” and “ordinary” users 
show different reactions to the TV contents and the Social 
TV strategies. Therefore, our aim is to examine in depth the 
effects of Social TV strategies and TV contents on the 
online behaviors [9], by studying the difference between 
“influencers” and “ordinary” users. 
The paper is structured as follows. The section II depicts 
the methodology of our research, in terms of dataset, 
variables’ description and method applied to study the 
relationship between variables. The section III illustrates the 
preliminary results and conclusions. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
According to prior research, we want to study the effects 
of Social TV strategies and TV contents on the online 
behaviors of “influencers” and “ordinary” users. In order to 
do so, first we collected approximately 500,000 viewers’ 
tweets during the entire 2015 edition of the Italian TV show 
“L’Isola dei Famosi”, one of the most popular reality show 
using social TV strategies, where celebrities had to survive 
on a desert island. During the show (one episode a week for 
seven weeks), the broadcaster delivered several strategies on 
the second screen app dedicated to the program. The 
collected data were further distinguished between original 
tweets, retweets, replies and tweets generated through the 
second screen app. Then, we defined two different types of 
users: “influencers” and “ordinary” users. In order to do so, 
we measured the number of followers [7][8][10] of each 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
user and we built a frequency distribution of the number of 
followers per user. Finally, we identified the group of 
“influencers” by considering the top 1% of users [12], 
which are the users with the highest number of followers. 
The rest of the network has been labeled as “ordinary” 
users. 
In addition, for each minute of the show (including 
commercial breaks), we measured: the type of TV content 
shown on screen, the type of Social TV strategy used, the 
number of viewers, the number of total tweets further 
distinguished into original tweets, retweets, replies and 
tweets generated through the second screen app. According 
to previous research [9], we applied hierarchical multiple 
linear regressions using the following dependent variables: 
online engagement (OE), i.e., total number of tweets, and 
the different kinds of online behaviors, such as original 
tweets (OT), retweets (RT), replies (RP) and tweets 
generated through the second screen app (AT). The 
dependent variables were shifted by a time delay of one 
minute with respect to the measurement of independent 
variables [9]. The independent variables are: the TV 
content, i.e., (1) general contents, (2) challenge, (3) 
nomination, (4) week summary, (5) contestant’s elimination, 
(6) appearance of eliminated contestant in studio, (7) visit in 
“Playa Desnuda”, (8) start of voting, (9) commercial break; 
the Social TV strategy, i.e., (1) call to comment, (2) 
survey/quiz, (3) call to predict, (4) photo gallery, (5) call for 
appreciation, (6) call to vote, (7) displaying related 
information, (8) absence of strategy. Finally, we considered 
viewership and time (the minute within the episode and the 
number of the episode within the season) as control 
variables.  
III. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we report the main results obtained from 
our models. For the sake of brevity, we just discuss the 
statistical significant results (p-value is lower than 0.1) as in 
[9], without showing any table. We found that viewership 
positively affects the OE generated by both “influencers”  
and “ordinary” users. We also found that during the season 
only the “ordinary” users increase all kinds of online 
behaviors, while during each episode only the “influencers” 
increase their online behaviors.  
Concerning the Social TV strategies, the results show 
relevant differences between the two types of users. First of 
all, the absence of Social TV strategies (strategy 8) has a 
negative effect on the online behavior of the “ordinary” 
users, while it does not affect the online behavior of the 
“influencers”. The Social TV strategies do not affect the 
online behaviors of the “influencers”, while some of them, 
such as strategy (5), negatively affect the online behaviors 
of the “ordinary” users, and some other Social TV 
strategies, such as strategy (1), positively affect their posting 
behavior and negatively affect their sharing behavior.  
Looking at the TV contents’ effects, we found that some 
contents (such as content 2 or content 9) generate increases 
and decreases in different types of online engagement for 
the two groups of users. In particular, during commercial 
breaks, i.e., content (9), RT generated by both kinds of users 
increases. However, “ordinary” users decrease OT and 
increase both RT and RP, while “influencers” increase only 
RT. In other words, “influencers” and “ordinary” users react 
differently to different kinds of TV contents and, in 
particular, during the commercial breaks, only the 
“ordinary” users decrease the posting behavior.  
In this paper, we have shown the preliminary results of 
our research, which aims at demonstrating that the 
distinction between “influencers” and “ordinary” users is 
useful to explore the effects of Social TV strategies and TV 
contents in the Social TV context. The results suggest that 
the two kinds of users are characterized by different 
behaviors: “influencers” increase the online behaviors 
during the episode, while “ordinary” users increase the 
online behaviors during the season. Moreover, “ordinary” 
users are more affected by Social TV strategies than 
“influencers”, while different TV contents lead to different 
effects on the online engagement of the two groups of users. 
As next steps, we will observe in depth the difference 
between these two kinds of users, by further analyzing the 
two subsets. In particular, we will include further metrics 
suggested by the previous literature to identify “influencers” 
and “ordinary” users, including the “Pareto principle”). 
Furthermore, we will take into account other similar TV 
shows in order to confirm these results.      
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We wish to thank Telecom Italia for funding this 
research, Auditel for allowing the authors to access 
viewership data, Media Consultants for providing the 
viewership datasets.  
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Cesar and D. Geerts, “Past, Present and Future of Social 
TV: 
A 
Categorization,” 
The 
IEEE 
Consumer 
Communications and Networking Conference, pp. 347-351, 
Jan. 2011, ISBN: 978-1-4244-8789-9 
[2] G. Harboe, “In Search of Social Television,” in Social 
Interactive Television: Immersive Shared Experiences and 
Perspectives, P. Cesar, D. Geerts and K. Chorianopoulos, IGI 
Global, USA, pp. 1-13, 2009. 
[3] S. Hill and A. Benton, “Social TV: Linking TV Content to 
Buzz 
and 
Sales,” 
The 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information Systems (ICIS), Dec. 2012, pp. . 
[4] M. Lochrie and P. Coulton, “Sharing the Viewer Experience 
through Second Screens,” The 10th European Interactive TV 
Conference (EuroITV), pp. 199-202, July 2012, ISBN: 978-1-
4503-1107-6 
[5] M. Proulx and S. Shepatin, Social Tv: How Marketers Can 
Reach and Engage Audiences by Connecting Television to the 
Web, Social Media, and Mobile. Wiley, 2012.  
[6] E. Dubois and D. Gaffney, “The Multiple Facets of Influence. 
Identifying Political Influentials and Opinion Leaders on 
Twitter,” American Behavioral Scientist, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 
1260-1277, Sept. 2014, doi: 10.1177/0002764214527088 
[7] S. Wu, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason, and D. J. Watts, “Who 
Says What to Whom on Twitter,” The 20th international 
conference on World Wide Web, pp. 705-714, Apr. 2011, 
ISBN: 978-1-4503-0632-4 
[8] E. Bakshy, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason, and D. J. Watts, 
“Everyone’s an influencer: quantifying influence on twitter,” 
The Fourth ACM International Conference on Web Search 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
and Data Mining (WSDM), pp. 65-74, Feb. 2011, ISBN: 978-
1-4503-0493-1 
[9] A. Fortunato, M. Gorgoglione, and U. Panniello, “The 
Influence of Social TV Strategies and Contents on TV Online 
Engagement,” The Fifth International Conference on Social 
Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics, pp. 
65-70, Nov. 2015, ISBN: 978-1-61208-443-5  
[10] O. Aarts, P. P. van Maanen, T. Ouboter, and J. M. Schraagen, 
“Online Social Behavior in Twitter: A Literature Review,” 
IEEE 12th International Conference on Data Mining 
Workshops (ICMW), pp. 739-746, Dec. 2012, ISBN: 978-1-
4673-5164-5 
[11] D. Huffaker, “Dimensions of Leadership and Social Influence 
in Online Communities,” Human Communication Research, 
vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 593-617, Sept. 2010, doi: 10.1111/j.1468-
2958.2010.01390.x 
[12] M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto, and K. P. Gummad, 
“Measuring user influence on twitter: The million follower 
fallacy,” The 4th Int’l AAAI Conference on Weblogs and 
Social Media, pp. 10-17, May 2010. 
[13] F. Giglietto and D. Selva, “Second Screen and Participation: 
A Content Analysis on a Full Season Dataset of Tweets,” 
Journal of Communication, Vol. 64, No. 2, pp. 260-277, Apr. 
2014, doi: 10.1111/jcom.120 
 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

