 Does Social Media Behaviors Reflect Users’ Anxiety  
A Case Study of Twitter Activities 
 
Tian Wang 
Illinois Informatics 
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
Champaign, USA 
Email: tianw7@illinois.edu 
Masooda Bashir 
School of Information Sciences 
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
Champaign, USA 
Email: mnb@illinois.edu
 
 
Abstract—Anxiety has been a common mental health disorder 
that affects many people, especially young adults, but it is often 
undetected 
or 
untreated. 
Meanwhile, 
mental 
health 
professionals and services available are insufficient for the 
assessment and treatment of mental illnesses, including 
anxiety, due to cost, availability, and other factors. Therefore, 
there is an urgent need to develop new approaches for mental 
healthcare services. Considering that the number of young 
adults using social media has increased significantly in the last 
decade, data from social media activities could possibly be a 
new approach for individual’s mental health assessment. In 
this study, we recruited 95 participants and examined their 
Twitter activities to learn if young adults’ social media 
activities are relevant to their anxiety level. Twitter activities 
were assessed between two groups of users, namely, those 
participants who reported symptoms, and participants 
reporting few or no anxiety symptoms. Our preliminary results 
show that certain social media behaviors differ for individuals 
that report anxiety symptoms and those with less or no 
symptoms of anxiety. Results from this study could be 
beneficial for both researchers and mental health professionals 
as a supplemental source of information and could potentially 
provide a new approach for mental health assessment and 
treatment in the future.  
Keywords – Social media behaviors; Mental health; Data 
analytics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
While mental health is a growing concern around the 
globe in recent years, anxiety disorders have been one of the 
most commonly diagnosed mental illnesses. According to 
National Institute of Mental Health, about 18% of U.S. 
adults aged 18 or older are affected by anxiety in any given 
year [1], and over 20% of those adults with anxiety disorders 
have severe symptoms. Moreover, 31.1% of U.S. adults are 
estimated to experience anxiety disorders at some time in 
their lives [2]. In particular, anxiety disorders are very 
common among children, adolescents, and young adults. 
Statistics show that about 30% of young adults aged 18-29 in 
U.S. have some type of anxiety disorders [3]. However, 
assessments and treatments for mental illness have been 
considered to be insufficient in the recent past. A previous 
study in 2017 [4] pointed out that although effective 
treatment may be theoretically available, healthcare services 
are still lacking for many mental illnesses including anxiety 
disorders. According to a survey study by National 
Comorbidity Survey (NCS), about 75% of nearly 10,000 
people with generalized anxiety disorder or social anxiety 
disorder did not receive any treatment [2]. Therefore, it is 
necessary for researchers and mental health professionals to 
explore new approaches to provide more effective and 
efficient mental healthcare services besides the current 
applied methods. 
Nowadays, interactive communication technologies such 
as social media have become ever more popular all over the 
world. Research studies have found that 72% of the US 
population uses some type of social media [5]. Especially, 
social media continues to be popular among young adults. 
Reports found that usage of social media for young adults 
has increased from 9% in 2005 to 89% in 2013 [6]. Social 
media is mostly used by individuals to share information, 
express feelings and emotions, catch up with latest news, and 
connect with other people. Hence, the information from an 
individuals’ social media activities which provides a great 
reflection of their daily life could be helpful in determining 
their mental wellbeing. 
This research study aims to examine the relationship 
between young adults’ social media behaviors and their 
mental health status, especially general anxiety level. We 
selected Twitter as the social media platform to observe and 
analyze in this study based on its large number of users and 
content. As of 2019, Twitter has 139 million active users per 
day [7] with a total of 500 million Tweets being posted [8]. 
To understand the relationship between individuals’ Twitter 
activities and anxiety level, two research questions will be 
addressed when conducting the study: 
• 
Is there a relationship between Twitter activities and 
one’s anxiety level? 
• 
Are there any differences in Twitter activities among 
people with symptoms of anxiety and people without 
such symptoms? 
The subsequent parts of this paper are organized in the 
following way. In Section II, previous literature will be 
reviewed and summarized to provide an overview of the 
current practices related to social media analytics and mental 
health predictions. Section III will explain the methodology 
used in this research study, including the process of data 
collection, and elements measured in the study. Results will 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

be displayed in Section IV, and Section V will discuss the 
characteristics of the preliminary results. We conclude the 
work in Section VI. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Although typical diagnosis on mental health status is 
based on self-reported information and mental status 
examinations [9], social media provides reflections of an 
individual’s personal life given its massive amount of 
information on people’s personal experiences, feelings, and 
emotions that is being shared. Individuals use social media 
for various reasons: social interaction, information seeking, 
entertainment, relaxation, or expression of opinions [10], and 
each of these activities involve significant personal data 
collection, sharing, and processing. Previous research 
suggested that social media activities could be used for 
personal 
identification, 
including 
age, 
gender, 
and 
personality [11]. For example, one research study reported 
that users’ personality traits could be predicted by their 
information shared publicly on Facebook, and the results of 
the predictive models were more accurate than the 
predictions made by close friends and family [12]. The 
statistical models also provided accuracy rates on predicting 
other personal information, for example, sexual orientations 
(if someone was homosexual or heterosexual), or political 
opinions (if the user was Democrat or Republican) [13]. In 
addition, expressed emotions on social media websites have 
been used by commercial companies to improve their 
business decision making and tailor their marketing 
strategies [23].  
Previous studies on social media found that individuals’ 
social media activities could be used to assess, identify, and 
predict their health status. For instance, a study on Twitter 
behaviors by Choudhury et al. [9] found that people with 
major depression may behave differently on social media 
compared with people without any symptoms. Another study 
also suggested that people with depression symptoms may 
have different perspective on sharing personal information 
on social media compared with people without such 
symptoms [21]. Besides predicting depression, similar work 
by Choudhury et al. [14] also applied predictive models to 
forecast if new mothers could possibly experience significant 
postpartum changes by analyzing their social media 
activities. Social media behaviors are not only used for 
personal health assessment, but also could be used for overall 
community healthcare. Social media analytics have been 
widely used in the field of medical sciences, examples 
including biomedical outcome prediction [15], infectious 
disease risk prediction [16], predicting and tracking the 
trends of disease outbreaks [17]. Using social media for 
health predication have also been shown to have accuracy 
rates in previous studies. One such study found that 
Facebook postings on two health issues were very similar to 
the actual results on official reports about the same topics 
[18].  
III. 
METHODS 
An online survey was designed and used to conduct this 
research study. Participants were recruited randomly via 
Amazon Mechanic Turk (MTurk), which is a crowdsourcing 
platform. The online survey used General Anxiety Disorder-
7 (GAD-7), which is a seven-item, self-report questionnaire, 
to assess participant’s health status based on the scores. The 
GAD-7 has been used in both research and clinical settings 
to detect individual’s anxiety level [19]. The survey also 
includes questions on Twitter usage, as well as general 
demographic information. Participants were asked to provide 
their Twitter links and give permission to researchers for 
observing their Twitter activities. No personal identifiable 
information was collected in this study. The recruitment 
process and the online survey were reviewed and approved 
by the Institutional Review Board. In addition, relevant 
resources were provided to participants at each page of the 
survey in case they felt upset or needed any help during the 
study.  
By using filters on MTurk, only adults aged 18-25 in 
U.S. holding a Twitter account were recruited in this study 
since the aim of this study is to analyze the relationship 
between young adults’ social media activities and their 
mental health status. A total of 200 participants were 
randomly recruited from MTurk, and 95 responses were 
recorded after excluding noisy data (i.e., incomplete survey 
or filling out the survey within extremely short time period), 
with 52 out of 95 (54.74%) participants being female. The 
average age of participants was 25.35, and 65 participants 
(68.42%) held a bachelor’s degree or higher. Over half of the 
participants (56 out of 95) indicated that they use Twitter 
every day. Participants’ responses on their health status were 
converted to numerical scores based on GAD-7 guideline. 
Total score for each participant was calculated, and 
participants were divided into two groups, participants with 
symptoms of anxiety and participants with less or no 
symptoms of anxiety, by using the cut-off point (10 or 
greater) recommended by GAD-7. There were 34 
participants who received a total score of 10 or greater, while 
61 participants received less than 10 in the GAD-7 
questionnaire.  
By using Twitter links provided by each participant, data 
on all the publicly available information was collected, 
including information on user’s profile, followings and 
followers, Twitter postings (Tweet), liked Tweet, and photos. 
Twitter’s developer API was used to retrieve content of 
Tweets from user’s timeline. One notable exclusion during 
the retrieving process was that only historical Tweets posted 
before the participant took the survey were collected, since 
the measurements on GAD-7 are based on previous 
experience. In addition, this step was taken to minimize 
social desirability on Twitter based on the study 
participation. A total number of 353514 Tweets were 
retrieved from the 95 participants’ public Twitter links.  
To analyze participants’ Twitter activities, three elements 
were measured: overall engagement, negative emotions, and 
level of personal information revealed publicly. In a previous 
study, Choudhury et al. have defined and explained the 
measurements of engagement [9], and similar methods were 
applied in this study. Besides that, since posting personal 
content on social media is on the rise [10], we were also 
interested in assessing negative emotions and the level of 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

personal information revealed on participant’s Twitter links 
to see if those two elements are also related to their mental 
health status.  
• 
Engagement: Number of Tweets, Retweets, replies, 
liked Tweets, followers, and followings. We 
considered those elements to be a reflection of how 
active an individual is on Twitter. For example, if an 
individual posts a huge number of Tweets in a short 
time period, it may imply that he or she spends a lot 
of time on social media every day. We also 
considered Retweets and replies to be related to the 
interaction with other people, and the number of 
followings and followers to show how close the 
individual connects to the social media community 
[20].  
• 
Negative emotions: Sentiment analysis has been 
widely applied in Twitter data analytics. For 
example, models of sentiment analysis such as  
polynomial regression, classification modeling, and 
lexicon-based sentiment analysis models, all have 
been helpful in categorizing data and hence enabling 
fast decision making [22]. To analyze the negative 
emotions 
expressed 
in 
participants’ 
Twitter 
activities, we considered and examined two specific 
elements: frequency of words with negative 
sentiment used in original Tweets, and if any 
negative attitude was exhibited in Twitter activities 
other than original Tweets, such as liking or re-
posting negative Tweets, or including negative 
words in profile description. Content and sentiment 
analysis were applied to assess the negative 
emotions.  
• 
Level of personal information shared publicly: In 
a previous study on depression and social media 
activities, results showed a relationship between the 
level of personal information shared publicly and the 
person’s depression [20]. More specifically, we 
observed activities such as using selfie as a profile 
photo, posting photos or videos related to personal 
life, or adding personal identifiable information on 
profile description. Therefore, examining publicly 
shared personal information might potentially 
indicate if individuals are open and willing to 
disclose and share their personal life publicly with 
the online community, including both acquaintances 
and strangers. 
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
As described in Section III, three elements are analyzed 
based on data retrieved from participants’ Twitter activities: 
engagement, negative emotions, and level of personal 
information shared publicly. For each of the two groups, 
participants with anxiety symptoms and participants with 
few or no symptom of anxiety, the results were recorded 
accordingly and then compared. The results and comparisons 
for all of the three elements are shown in the following sub-
sections: 
A. Engagement 
To analyze the engagement element, the average number 
of Tweets, followings, and followers are recorded. The 
statistics on the engagement for both groups are shown in 
Table 1.  
TABLE I.  
STATISTICS ON ENGAGEMENT 
Participants 
With anxiety 
symptoms 
Without anxiety 
symptoms 
N=34 
N=61 
Average # of Tweets 
4970.30 
4138.04 
Average # of followings 
449.96 
373.13 
Average # of followers 
190.18 
229.42 
Ratio of Followings/Follower 
2.37 
1.63 
 
From the table above, statistics show that participants 
with anxiety symptoms have a slightly larger number of 
Tweets posted. One reason could be that the sample size is 
small and outliers exist when analyzing the data (for 
example, there is one particular participant who posted over 
30,000 Tweets, and another participant only posted 1 Tweet 
although the Twitter was registered in 2011). Note that the 
number of Tweets recorded in Table 1 includes both original 
posts, re-posts (Retweets), and replies, and most of the 
participants with larger number of Tweets have a lot of 
Retweet, which increased the total number. Although outliers 
may influence the results, those outliers were not excluded 
from our analysis because the number of Tweets could be a 
determining factor when evaluating how active a participant 
is on a given social media. Only Tweets posted before the 
participant took this study’s survey were collected. One 
challenge that we faced was related to collecting all of the 
user’s historical data and relating that to their mental health 
condition because, for this study, we did not asses or know 
the onset of anxiety. Therefore, our study results may be 
limited in explaining the relationship between participants’ 
Twitter activities and their anxiety level. Further research 
studies with more comprehensive survey questions that 
assess the onset of the mental health condition would be 
recommended to have more precise results.  
Based on observations of the data collected, participants 
with anxiety symptoms had significantly higher percentage 
of Retweets in their total number of Tweets, for example, 
sharing an external link from other websites, or re-posting a 
celebrity’s Tweet. However, people with less or no 
symptoms of anxiety were more likely to post original 
content or interact with others by replies.  
Also, participants with anxiety symptoms have more 
followings but less followers than participants with less or no 
symptoms. Ratios of number of followings to number of 
followers for these two groups are 2.37 and 1.63, 
respectively. Further observations found that participants 
with anxiety symptoms are more likely to follow verified 
Twitter accounts (celebrities, organizations’ official accounts, 
website accounts), while participants with less or no 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

symptoms tend to follow personal accounts like their family 
and friends that are close to them in real life.   
B. Negative Emotions 
To understand the emotions expressed on participants’ 
Tweets, only original posts (Tweets) and replies were 
retrieved and analyzed as measurement, since content on re-
posts (Retweets) were not created directly by participants 
themselves. Although those Retweets may also imply 
participants’ attitude, in this study, we only focused on posts 
from the participants directly. The first step was to analyze 
word occurrence and frequency for Tweets and replies. After 
excluding common used words like pronouns and 
prepositions (i.e., “my”, “you”, “the”), or words without 
clear sentiment (i.e., “time”, “video”, “do”), Table 2 shows 
the top 10 most frequently used words (with sentiment) for 
participants with symptoms of anxiety and participants with 
few or no anxiety symptoms.  
TABLE II.  
WORD FREQUENCY FOR ORIGINAL POSTS 
Rank 
With anxiety symptoms 
Without anxiety symptoms 
1 
love (0.27%) 
love (0.74%) 
2 
good (0.20%) 
good (0.52%) 
3 
new (0.12%) 
new (0.52%) 
4 
better (0.10%) 
liked (0.41%) 
5 
great (0.09%) 
best (0.40%) 
6 
best (0.09%) 
chance (0.38%) 
7 
happy (0.08%) 
right (0.37%) 
8 
over (0.07%) 
never (0.37%) 
9 
stop (0.06%) 
happy (0.33%) 
10 
bad (0.05%) 
amazing (0.27%) 
 
From Table 2, we could see that there are similarities for 
the most frequently used words with sentiments between the 
two groups. However, although participants with anxiety 
symptoms mentioned positive words in their original posts, 
the percentage of word occurrence (how many times the 
word occurred / total number of all the words) for those 
words is lower than the one for participants with less or no 
anxiety. For example, the percentage of word occurrence for 
the word “love” is 0.74% for participants with less or no 
anxiety, but only 0.27% for participants with reported 
anxiety symptoms. It is similar for the words with positive 
sentiment like ‘good”, “new”, and “best”. Another 
observation from Table 2 is that the group with anxiety 
symptoms frequently used some words with negative 
sentiment, for example, the word “bad” was ranked 10th for 
participants with anxiety symptoms, but was not in the top 
10 for the other group.  
Since there were too many words in the list, we took a 
closer look at the words with negative sentiment. For 
participants with anxiety symptoms, the frequency of words 
with negative sentiment in their Tweets and replies was 
higher than the one for participants with less or no symptoms. 
For example, the frequency for the word “sad” was about 
0.07% for participants that reported anxiety, but was less 
than 0.01% for the other group.  
Participants with anxiety symptoms were not only 
expressing negative emotions on Tweets, but also on their 
Twitter profile descriptions. One example was a participant 
who described herself as “an awkward girl trying to find 
herself” in her Twitter profile, and there was another 
participant from this group using the phrase “pseudo human” 
in his profile description.   
C. Level of Personal Information Shared Publicly 
In this study, the level of personal information shared 
publicly on Twitter is examined by three sub-categories: 
• 
Profile photo: Is the user’s selfie being used as 
profile photo? If so, is the photo clear enough to 
identify the person? 
• 
Profile 
description: 
Is 
there 
any 
personal 
identifiable information disclosed in the profile 
description? For example, gender, age, education 
level/school, geolocation, occupation. 
• 
Media posts: Is there any media post (photo or 
video) related to the user’s personal life? For 
example, selfie, photos of personal experiences 
(hobbies, travels, daily life), or photos with family 
and friends. 
The results showed that participants with less or no 
anxiety symptom (21 out of 61, 34.4%) are more likely to 
use their selfies as profile photos than participants with 
anxiety symptoms (7 out of 34, 20.6%). For participants who 
reported anxiety symptoms, 6 of them were using photos that 
were not clear enough to identify their faces in different 
ways: some of those pictures included blur effects, some 
pictures were taken from far away, and some selfies were 
taken from the right/left side of the face. Most of the 
participants with anxiety symptoms were using irrelevant 
pictures as profile photos, like animation picture, landscape, 
celebrities, and so on.  
For profile description, 13 of the 61 participants with few 
or no anxiety symptoms had detailed information about 
themselves in the profile description. Most of them were 
indicating their job occupations, school and graduate year, 
place (state or city) of residency. However, only 2 of 34 
participants who reported anxiety symptoms included some 
basic level of personal information in their profile 
description.  
Participants with few or no anxiety symptoms were also 
more willing to post photos and videos about themselves, 
their family and friends, and photos related to personal 
experiences. On the other hand, participants who reported 
anxiety were more reserved to post any media that could 
potential disclose their personal information. They were 
more cautious with media posts shared publicly, and they 
were more likely to only post default gif pictures by Twitter, 
or irrelevant pictures from the Internet.  
Overall, from the comparison between the two groups in 
the three sub-categories described above, participants with 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

few or no anxiety symptoms are more open to reveal their 
personal information or daily life in their profile and posts. 
The level of personal information shared publicly is much 
lower for participants with anxiety symptoms.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Based on the preliminary results described in the above 
section, there are some initial findings on the relationship 
between social media behaviors and individuals’ mental 
health status. In our study, we found that participants with 
reported anxiety symptoms behave differently on social 
media like Twitter compared with participants with few or 
no anxiety symptoms. For the social media engagement, 
study participants with high anxiety level are more likely to 
re-post content from others instead of creating original 
content. Considering they have much more followings than 
followers, this may be an indication that they are less active 
in connecting with others or with a community since they 
tend to follow verified accounts like official organizations or 
celebrities instead of interacting with others. Our sentiment 
analysis from Twitter content showed that participants with 
anxiety symptoms tend to be more passive and negative by 
using more words with negative sentiment and fewer 
positive words being mentioned. In contrast to participants 
with less or no symptoms of anxiety, who are more likely to 
express their negative attitude (for example, loneliness, 
sadness, anxiety, or frustration), not only on Twitter posts, 
but also on their Twitter profile descriptions. The results also 
reveal that participants with anxiety symptoms are more 
cautious with sharing their personal information publicly via 
Twitter, while participants with few or no anxiety symptoms 
being more open to share their photos, information, and 
personal life with the Twitter online social media 
community.   
Considering the preliminary results found in this study, 
as well as previous research studies on social media and 
mental health, social media behaviors may be a useful source 
of information for individuals’ general mental health status. 
Thus, in our quest of wanting to provide more timely, cost 
effective, and broader coverage of mental health services, 
perhaps social media data analysis may provide a way 
forward. Also, such information could be potentially used as 
a novel and effective approach to identify, detect, and predict 
one’s mental health status other than traditional methods like 
self-reported information and screening tests, with two 
additional benefits. First, this approach is easy to implement 
and it includes rich content coverage of an individual’s 
online activities. Second, compared to traditional methods, 
this approach could provide more efficient, objective, and 
unbiased information sources since it is entirely based on 
individuals’ behaviors in their daily life without their 
awareness of being assessed or tested when applying 
traditional methods. 
However, it is important to address privacy violations 
that may occur given the fact that people with reported 
anxiety symptoms could be identified according to their 
social media activities. There are already some commercial 
companies or third-party services using social media users’ 
data to categorize them into certain groups and send targeted 
advertisements [21]. While data sharing and personal 
identification 
might 
be 
unavoidable 
given 
current 
circumstances for the online environment, it is vital to 
recognize the importance of user privacy protections since 
social media users with mental health disorders may be more 
vulnerable and sensitive. Thus, such social media analytics 
should only be considered if and when privacy protections 
are of the highest priority. 
Still, more research studies are needed to pave the way 
forward as our study is the first one and it includes some 
limitations. First, although our preliminary results suggest 
relationships between individuals’ social media activities and 
their mental health status, especially anxiety level, more 
research studies with larger sample of participants and more 
accurate mental health assessment are necessary to confirm 
the results since the sample size is small and the mental 
health assessment is based on self-reported information. The 
crowdsourcing platform (MTurk) used for recruitment in this 
study also has its own limitations such as not being a 
representative of all populations and only including online 
participants. Second, only U.S. participants were selected to 
be involved in this study, but young adults from other 
counties may have different social media behaviors because 
of cultural differences. Studies on other social media 
platforms, such as Facebook and Instagram are also 
suggested to analyze individual’s behaviors on various social 
media platforms, since this study only focused on one 
specific platform (Twitter). In addition, while social media 
activities could provide supplemental information for 
clinicians and researchers when assessing individual’s 
mental health status, it is also important to address privacy 
protections when such level of personal information is 
involved.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This research study shows initial findings that 
individuals’ social media behaviors may be relevant to their 
mental health status, and people with symptoms of anxiety 
may behave differently than people without such symptoms. 
Information from social media activities could potentially be 
considered as a new method for mental health assessment 
and treatment along with traditional methods given how 
much it reveals an individual’s personality and daily life. 
Results from this study may provide the initial steps towards 
a new direction in mental healthcare services that can be 
timely and reach broad and diverse populations.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
National Institute of Mental Health, Any Anxiety Disorder, 
Retrieved: 
August, 
2020 
from 
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/any-anxiety-
disorder.shtml. 
[2] 
Harvard Medical School, National Comorbidity Survey (NCS), 
Retrieved: 
August 
2020 
from 
https://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/index.php, 2007. 
[3] 
Behavioral Health in the United States, Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration, n.d., 7 February 2016. 
[4] 
J. Weissman et al, "Disparities in health care utilization and 
functional limitations among adults with serious psychological 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

distress, 2006–2014," Psychiatric Services, vol. 68, no.7, pp. 653-659, 
2017. 
[5] 
Social Media Fact Sheet, Pew Research Center, Retrieved: August, 
2020 from https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact-sheet/social-
media/, 2019. 
[6] 
D. C. Brooks, and J. Pomerantz, "ECAR Study of Undergraduate 
Students and Information Technology, 2017," EDUCAUSE, 2017. 
[7] 
I. Lunden, Twitter Q2 beats on sales of $841M and EPS of #0.20, 
new metric of mDAUs up to 139M, Retrieved: August, 2020 from 
https://techcrunch.com/2019/07/26/twitter-q2-earnings/, 2019. 
[8] 
Twitter, The power of Twitter, Retrieved: August, 2020 from 
https://business.twitter.com, 2019. 
[9] 
M. D. Choudhury et al, "Predicting depression via social media," 
Icwsm 13, pp. 1-10, 2013. 
[10] A. Whiting, and D. Williams, "Why people use social media: a uses 
and gratifications approach," Qualitative Market Research, vol. 16, 
no. 4, pp. 362-369, 2013. 
[11] H. A. Schwartz et al, "Personality, gender, and age in the language of 
social media: The open-vocabulary approach," PloS one, vol. 8, no. 9, 
e73791, 2013. 
[12] J. Golbeck, C. Robles, and K. Turner, "Predicting personality with 
social media," CHI'11 extended abstracts on human factors in 
computing systems, pp. 253-262, 2011. 
[13] M. Kosinski, D. Stillwell, and T. Graepel, "Private traits and 
attributes are predictable from digital records of human behavior," 
Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, vol. 110, no. 15, pp. 
5802-5805, 2013. 
[14] M. D. Choudhury, S. Counts, and E. Horvitz, "Predicting postpartum 
changes in emotion and behavior via social media," Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pp. 
3267-3276, 2013. 
[15] S. D. Young, "Behavioral insights on big data: using social media for 
predicting biomedical outcomes," Trends in microbiology, vol. 22, 
no. 11, pp. 601-602, 2014. 
[16] J. Rushmore et al. "Social network analysis of wild chimpanzees 
provides insights for predicting infectious disease risk," Journal of 
Animal Ecology, vol. 82, no. 5, pp. 976-986, 2013. 
[17] C. W. Schmidt, "Trending now: using social media to predict and 
track disease outbreaks," Environmental Health Perspectives, vol. 
120, no. 1, pp. a30-a33, 2012. 
[18] N. Vincent, "Social Media and Environmental Health Crises: An 
Examination of Public Response to Imported Drywall and Perchlorate 
Health Risks," American Public Health Association Annual Meeting 
and Exposition, Washington, DC, vol. 31, 2011. 
[19] N. Williams, "The GAD-7 questionnaire," Occupational Medicine, 
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 224-224, 2014. 
[20] T. Wang, and M. Bashir, "A Study of Social Media Behaviors and 
Mental Health Wellbeing from a Privacy Perspective," International 
Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, vol. 1213, 
pp. 137-144, 2020. 
[21] K. Leetaru, What Does It Mean For Social Media Platforms To "Sell" 
Our 
Data? 
Forbes, 
Retrieved: 
August, 
2020 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/kalevleetaru/2018/12/15/what-does-it-
mean-for-social-media-platforms-to-sell-our-data/#1d8005892d6c, 
2018. 
[22] X. Guo, and J. Li, "A Novel Twitter Sentiment Analysis Model with 
Baseline Correlation for Financial Market Prediction with Improved 
Efficiency, " 2019 Sixth International Conference on Social Networks 
Analysis, Management and Security (SNAMS). IEEE, pp. 472-477, 
2019. 
[23] P. Madhala, J. Jussila, H. Aramo-Immonen, and A. Suominen, 
"Systematic literature review on customer emotions in social 
media," ECSM 2018 5th European Conference on Social Media, 
Academic Conferences and publishing limited, pp. 154, 2018. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

