Towards an Index of Mental Wellbeing in Language 
The relationship between time orientation, self-focus and mood during prolonged bed-rest. 
Schmer-Galunder, Sonja 
Smart Information Flow Technologies  
Minneapolis, U.S.A.  
sgalunder@sift.net 
Wu, Peggy 
Smart Information Flow Technologies  
Minneapolis, U.S.A.  
pwu@sift.net
Ott, Tammy 
Smart Information Flow Technologies  
Minneapolis, U.S.A.  
tott@sift.net 
Miller, Chris 
Smart Information Flow Technologies  
Minneapolis, U.S.A.  
cmiller@sift.net
 
 
Abstract— Monitoring the mental wellbeing and psychosocial 
states of human operators in safety-critical domains is key to 
improving crew performance, safety and security. However, 
acquiring objective data and insights to mental wellbeing and 
psychosocial states among human operators is difficult and has 
relied on the subjective reports of operators, which are prone to 
biases and distortions. Team communications in a broad range of 
contexts 
from 
business 
organizations 
to 
high 
criticality 
workplaces such as emergency response, airplane pilots and 
spaceflight could be significantly improved with quick access to 
reliable and objective data about the psychosocial health of a 
team.  Data on the psycho-social dimensions of collaborative 
teams, such as social distance, power dynamics, affect, and a 
team’s comfort working together are typically highly subjective, 
not readily computationally tractable, and are collected using 
self-reports such as think-aloud protocols or surveys that can 
confound the behaviors being studied. By developing a method to 
collect data using non- or minimally intrusive methods requiring 
low participant effort coupled with automated data processing, 
we unshackle researchers from the burdens of hand-coding raw 
data and enable them to make empirically based discoveries 
more rapidly.  This paper presents a validated, cost-effective and 
fast alternative to the shortcomings of current assessment 
methods. We present the results from an automatic text analysis 
tool applied to large amounts of written text (i.e., journals kept 
by participants in a bed rest study) in order to identify topics of 
interest, the emotional valence (positivity or negativity) of topics, 
as well as changes in these metrics over time. These topics and 
aspects of the text were identified computationally and 
automatically. This research was performed on different groups 
of subjects participating in NASA analog studies, where the 
primary goal of our investigation was the identification of 
changes to psychosocial states. Our results show that it is possible 
to predict mood based on journal entries alone using Latent 
Semantic Analysis and that we are able to identify non-conscious 
variables impacting well-being over time. 
Keywords—Latent 
Semantic 
Analysis; 
Sociolinguistics; 
Wellness; Psychosocial State Detection; Sentiment Analysis; Data 
Mining; 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Relying on self-reports to make assessments about mental 
wellbeing and psychological health on a continous basis has 
many potential pitfalls. This is particularly true in the context 
of long duration experiments such as longitudinal studies that 
span weeks or months. Respondent fatigue, where participants’ 
attention and motivation to respond drops, is a well 
documented problem that affects data quality. Survey data is 
also subject to a participant’s memory, biases, vigilance, and 
personality (e.g., some participants are simply not inherently 
very self-aware or reflective). Further, self-reports can affect 
task performance if they impose additional workload, or if the 
act of reporting is disruptive to the behavior or environment 
being studied. For example, in an emergency response 
scenario.  In such scenarios, data is often gathered using human 
observation, which is also prone to errors and omissions.  
In the domain of space exploration, NASA has identified 
the need to monitor individual behavioral and mental health, 
which is crucial in ensuring high performance and mission 
success, especially in its vision for deep space, long duration 
exploration missions. Of particular importance are the 
detection of changes in mood and mental wellbeing. These 
changes can be particularly difficult for crew members to 
detect themselves as fatigue can impair self-reflection. Lack of 
sleep has been associated with negative mood such as 
depression and anxiety, however recent findings show that the 
relationship between sleep and mood is bi-directional, such that 
daytime mood impacts sleep quality [1]. Sleep deprivation may 
increase ruminating, defined as compulsively focusing 
attention on a source of distress. This tends to be associated 
with remembering negative events from the past rather than 
contemplating the future [2], and ruminating is considered a 
vulnerability factor for depression [3]. In contrast, regularly 
timed exercise impacts mood stability positively and shortened 
sleep decreases mood stability [4]. Interestingly, time 
orientation, whether one focuses on the past or the future, 
might be a mediating factor. For example, Stolarski et al. [5] 
has found that vivid recall of past negative events worsens 
reported wellbeing while recall of past positive events has an 
energizing effect.  
Using Linguistic Inquiry Word Count (LIWC) analysis, 
researchers have consistently found that writing has beneficial 
effects on wellbeing. For example, changes in insight and 
causal words over the course of writing are indicative of better 
mental 
health, 
because 
these 
word 
groups 
represent 
understanding and organization of thoughts into a more 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

coherent and cohesive personal narrative (Pennebaker and 
Francis). Other studies found that persons who use a moderate 
number of negative emotion words, had fewer doctor than 
those who uses very few or a lot of negative words.  
 
However, while reflective writing can have therapeutic 
effects on mental wellbeing, reflection can also turn into 
rumination. Rumination involves focusing repeatedly and 
passively on what one is feeling and why one is feeling a 
certain way. It has been shown to increase feelings of anger 
and aggression [6] and leads to higher levels of depressive 
symptoms over time [7]. Typically, depressed people tend to 
think more negatively about the past and tend to recall negative 
memories of the past more often.  
At the same time, self-focus is associated with negative 
affect, where rumination is a strong mediator [8]. Interestingly, 
Mor and Winquiest also found that private self-focus is more 
strongly associated with depression and generalized anxiety, 
whereas public self-focus is more strongly associate with social 
anxiety.  
But self-focus can take on different perspectives with 
different outcomes on personal mood and wellbeing. Kross et 
al found that memories of the past can be described using a 
self-distanced or a self-immersed perspective. Typically, when 
people recall negative emotional events, they take on a more 
self-immersed perspective; re-experience the past event in the 
first person, through one’s own eyes [9]. However, if people 
take on a more self-distanced perspective, people reconstruct 
the event in ways that promote insight and closure, leading to 
less negative affect [10]. This kind of perspective taking can be 
detected in writing through the use of personal pronouns, 
past/present/future tense and affect words. However, because 
these processes happen often in a non-conscious domain, 
automatic and objective analysis of language can be useful in 
identifying an index of mental wellbeing.  
 
With the vast improvements in speed and processing power 
of modern computers, it is now possible to automatically 
analyze 
very 
large 
text 
corpora 
with 
sophisticated 
computational models that reveal hidden, or latent, structures in 
written language that are associated with psychological and 
emotional states. These models can then be used to accurately 
and reliably predict psychological and emotional states from 
writing. These states may not be detectable through human 
observation. Developing tools like this will be crucial for 
monitoring space crews’ mental health on long haul missions. 
The goal of this work is to demonstrate the feasibility of 
automatically, unobtrusively and objectively detecting changes 
in mood that may result from participating in prolonged 
bedrest. Related factors impacting mood can be disturbed 
sleep, lack of exercise and cognitive factors. Our hypothesis is 
that mood is expressed unconsciously in the journal writing of 
participants, represented through the valence, frequency and 
co-occurrence of certain words. This work furthers the search 
for reliable and unobtrusive ways to monitor the psychological 
health of crews in extreme environments.  
 
In preparation for future Mars missions, methods to 
augment current practices for evaluating psychological health 
and factors impacting behavior and performance (i.e., mood, 
sleep, etc.) need to be explored. It is difficult to overstate the 
value of an accurate, objective, repeatable, efficient, accepted 
and non-intrusive means of assessing relevant psychosocial 
states. An automatic, non-intrusive acquisition and processing 
capability allows researchers to learn and validate virtually 
everything else necessary for the psychosocial health and 
performance of future space missions.  
II. METHOD 
A. Bedrest Study 
 
This study was carried out at NASA’s Flight Analog 
Research Unit (FARU) Bedrest Facility at the University of 
Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), see Figure 1. The FARU 
bedrest facility’s primary focus was to study the effects of 
microgravity on human physiology, for example, the effects of 
exercises and testosterone treatments on muscle and bone mass 
loss in space. Participants underwent 14 days of intake protocol 
and were then confined to bed-rest for 70 days, followed by 14 
days of recuperation and post-treatment protocols (for more 
information see [9]). Some subjects work with trainers and 
exercise up to 9 times per week while maintaining a head-down 
position.  Participants are selected for age, physiological and 
psychological characteristics analogous to the astronaut 
population.  Subjects maintained a 6-degree head down angle 
for all activities during the 70-day bed rest period. They were 
monitored by a human 24/7 to ensure compliance. There were 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Bedrest Facilities UTMB FARU: (a) Bedrest Subjects on 
Vertical Treadmill. (b) After an inital 2 weeks of baseline data collection, 
subjects maintain a 6 degree headdown position for 70 days. 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

4 different conditions: exercise (E), control (C), exercise & 
testosterone (EX&T) and freefly (F). Subjects in the exercise 
condition trained in 9 sessions per week with a human trainer; 
in the testosterone condition exercisers were additionally 
injected with a very small amount of testosterone. The control 
group did not exercise but received a placebo injection. The 
freeflly condition did mild exercise and no injection/placebo. 
Physical health, as well as diet, were closely monitored and 
managed throughout the study. A clinical psychologist 
evaluated the psychological health of all subjects on a weekly 
basis. 
We collected journal data from 16 bedrest subjects with an 
average of 83.75 entries per subject. The total word count 
(WC) of the data corpus is 210,943, with the mean number of 
words per entry being 174.77.  59,371 (28%) words were 
provided during 2 weeks of pre-bedrest, with a mean of 242.33 
per entry. 132,925 (64%) words were provided during bedrest, 
with a mean of 165.74 per entry. 18,647 (8%) words were 
provided during the 2 weeks of post bedrest, with a mean of 
116.54 per entry. For this analysis, we included a total of 1174 
journal entries.  
B. Measures and surveys 
Subjects were asked to complete the State Trait Anxiety 
Inventory (STAI) [11] once as part of intake, and complete the 
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) once daily. 
At the end of each day, they complete a 20-minute journal 
writing session, followed by a short survey asking general 
questions about their wellbeing, time orientation, self-vs. other 
focus, depth of thoughts and physical state. After they 
complete the 70-day bed rest, they are debriefed on their 
journaling results and general experience. Facility staff 
completed daily surveys about their general observations of a 
subject. The instructions for the written journal are as follows: 
“Reflect on your feelings throughout the day. Write in a quiet 
space without distractions for roughly 20 minutes. Make sure 
to write at least a half page of text (at least 250 words), though 
feel free to write more if you wish. Do not worry about 
spelling, grammar, or repetition.” 
C. Latent Semantic Analysis and Valence calculations 
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) is a computational 
algorithm that captures the occurrence and relative position of 
words and their semantic equivalents, and in our case also the 
valence of texts of interest. The term “valence” refers to 
general pleasantness vs. unpleasantness and it refers to a 
numeric value that we are able to deduce from the general tone 
of any text of interest, ranging from 0 (low valence) to 9 (high 
valence). To calculate valence, we used 1) LSA to generate a 
high-dimensional semantic space from the entire text corpus, 
resulting in a matrix where the columns correspond to text 
contexts (paragraphs, clauses or any other unit comprising a 
number of words), while every individual word is represented 
by a row. The matrix describes a high-dimensional space, 
which we reduced to 100 dimensions for computational 
efficiency. This is also the optimal number of dimensions that 
captures the semantic relationships in the text.  The model 
depicts word incidences in different contexts. 2) We then used 
the Affective Norms of English Words (ANEW) [12] as a 
dependent measure for a multiple linear regression across the 
100 dimensions in the semantic space. The result is the best-
fitted valence of the words in the ANEW word list. This yields 
a predicted valence value for each expression of interest 
(words, sentences, documents), taking its surrounding context 
into consideration. Figure 2 shows two writing samples and 
calculated high/low valence points, based on the content.  
 
Using this method we calculated valence values for all 
journal entries and identified high and low points, captured 
changes over time in mood and we could characterize the 
contextual circumstances in which a topic is discussed. This 
essentially provides a method for quantitative analysis of 
highly qualitative data, enabling, for example, cross-validation 
of calculated valence with subject survey ratings for affect. 
D. Linquisitc Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) 
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) is a text 
analysis program based on work by Pennebaker, Booth and 
Francis [12]. LIWC counts the frequency of an occurrence of a 
word (or word root) in a given body of text and computes the 
percentage of total words in defined linguistic categories. The 
categories include negative emotion words (sad, angry), 
positive emotion words (happy, laugh), standard function word 
categories (ﬁrst, second, and third person pronouns, articles, 
prepositions), and various content categories (e.g., religion, 
death, occupation). Words were assigned to specific categories 
by having groups of judges evaluate the degree to which about 
2000 words or word stems were related to each of several 
dozen categories. LIWC uses the developed "dictionaries" to 
provide the percent of a given text that can be found in each 
category. 
The computed LIWC score has been shown to correlate 
with specific attitudes and attributes in the writing of many 
populations (see [13], [14] for summaries). For example, a 
category of words associated with cognition and cognitive 
mechanisms 
is 
said 
to 
be 
associated 
with 
female 
speakers/writers, with negative emotions, and with complex 
reappraisals of situations such as following trauma [13], as well 
as increased mental health [14].  
Figure 2. Samples of positive and negative valence of journal entries.  
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

III. RESULTS 
A. Valence predictions of mood over time 
Correlational analysis showed that general LSA valence for 
daily journal entries correlates with daily PANAS survey 
responses over all bed-rest subjects. Positive Affect (PA) and 
Negative Affect (NA) scores show significant correlations in 
the expected direction, where PA correlates positively with 
valence (rs[1174]= 0.159, p<0.001) and NA correlates 
negatively with valence  (rs[1174]= -0.105, p<0.001).   Thus, 
using automated tools it is possible to identify general mood 
without having to ask subjects to fill our surveys.  
Moreover, using LSA, it is also possible to pick a random 
journal entry and predict with 63.6 % accuracy the 
experimental condition (E, C, T or F) of single subjects.  The 
same analysis can be done with survey responses as the 
predictor variable. This analysis yields an accuracy rate of 59% 
accuracy for PANAS scores of single journal entries.   While 
the accuracy may seem low, it is important to note that 
emotional variety of journal entries is relatively high, while 
PANAS scores represent a single score for affect. Moreover, 
text-based predictions 
of PANAS scores can 
be complimented by 
the 
capability 
to 
recognize 
changes 
such as upward or 
downward emotional 
trends, as well as the 
ability to examine the 
co-occurring 
predictions of other 
factors such as social 
connectedness, 
physical wellbeing or 
sleep.  However, using this method, we can reliably predict 
features like experimental condition or at which day during the 
90-day BR a particular journal entry has been written (Figure 
3).  
B. Positive and Negative topic identification and time 
orientation in corpora 
 
Apart from simply tracking general mood over time, we 
investigated larger text corpora (all journal entries of all 
subjects in the bed-rest study) in order to identify words 
(topics) 
with 
significantly 
higher 
(lower) 
valence 
in 
comparison to the rest of the corpus. 
 
Figure 4(a) and 3(b) shows the result of this analysis - 
visualizations of arising topics in word clouds, where the size 
of the word indicates higher frequency/importance. During this 
study most positive topics contexts were “home”, “friends”, 
“games”, “family”, while words like “muscle”, “pain”, 
“sleeping”. It is also interesting to note that time orientation in 
negative contexts is oriented towards the past as represented by 
the significantly more negative valence of words like “was”, 
“were”, “told”, “didn’t”, “then” or “done” in comparison to 
words representative of the present, i.e.  “today”, “be”, “play”, 
“do”, “make” or “here”, which can be found in journal entries 
having more positive valence. We can also find that focus is 
more placed on “others” in positive valence contexts (i.e., 
“you”, “friends”, “family”), are more on the self in negative 
contexts (in particular own body parts i.e., “stomach”, “leg”, 
“thigh” or “shoulder”).  These topics are derived from the sum 
of all journal entries and represent most frequent, or salient 
topics.  
C. Self-focus, Time Orientation and Mood 
 
Because our analysis focused preliminary on the 
relationship between automated analysis of linguistic content 
and subjective survey responses, we focused on identifying 
correlations between subjectively reported experience and 
journal content. What we found in our data is that persons who 
responded on the self-focus survey being more “other-focused” 
also reported more Positive Affect (PA) on the PANAS scales, 
and less Negative Affect (NA), while persons who are more 
self-focused also feel more negative, and less positive affect. 
Correlations are significant at p=0.000 for PA with r=0.483 and 
NA r= -0.395. More self-focus is related to higher LIWC past 
tense word frequencies, while focus on others is related to less 
focus on the past. However, we found a negative correlation 
between past tense words and the word “I” (r=-0.151, 
p<0.000), and more “I” when writing about the present 
(r=0.286, p<0.000) and the future (r=0.182, p<0.000), meaning 
that subjects use less “I” when writing about the past.  
One would expect that self-focus as expressed in the use of “I” 
would yield higher frequencies of “I” in journal entries with a 
past-focus. However, a more detailed valence analysis revealed 
that the valence of the word “I” is low in journal entries, which 
have a focus on the past, while valence of “I” is high when 
journal entries are more present and future oriented. Further 
correlational analysis showed that the use of personal pronouns 
is high when NA is high (r= 0.138, p<0.000) and low when PA 
is high (r=-0.159, p<0.000). Interestingly, both PA and NA 
affect responses are low when frequencies of past tense use is 
high (PA: r= -.263, p<0.000 and NA: r= -.148, p<0.000) while 
 
 
Figure 3. Predicted PANAS score of 
positive affect (PA) using LSA valence 
 
Figure 5.  (a) Frequency of past tense by condition (Control, Exercise, 
Exercise&Testosterone), FlyWheel. (b) Frequency of present tense by 
condition (c) Frequency of future tense by condition.  
 
                           4(a).  
 
 
 4b).  
Figure 4. Positive and negative valenced word clouds in LSA space. (a) 
Substraction of low valenced words (word usage in positive contexts). (b) 
Substraction of high valenced (negative contexts). 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

journal entries with a present-focus correlate positively with 
both PA (r= 0.125, p<0.000) and NA (r=0.221, p<0.000). We 
found further support for theories that link self-focus with 
anxiety and negative mood in correlations between time 
orientation and the STAI. State as well as trait anxiety 
correlated positively with frequency of past tense use (r= 
0.224, p<0.000, r= 0.145, p<0.000), and negatively with future 
tense use (r = -0.202, p<0.000 for state anxiety, no sig. 
correlation for state anxiety). As expected, PANAS PA scores 
correlate negatively with STAI responses (state anxiety: r=-
0.226, p<0.000, trait anxiety: r=-0.433, p<0.000) and positively 
with PANAS NA responses (state anxiety: r= .304, p<0.000, 
trait anxiety: r=0.196, p<0.000).  
In sum, these results confirm current theories that a focus 
on self correlates negative mood and the recalling of an event 
in the past, while a focus on others is related to a more positive 
mood.  
D. Difference between Bedrest Conditions 
Next we looked at differences between conditions. Using a 
4 Condition (Control, Exercise, Exercise&Testosterone, 
Freefly) x 3 Headdown (Head up, Head down, Post-Bedrest) 
ANOVA analysis, we found a main effect for condition for 
general valence F(3,1171)=6.697, p=0.000. Controls have 
lowest overall valence (M=4.95), Exercisers have higher 
overall valence (M=5.02), followed by the EX&T group 
(M=5.11) and the freefly group (M=5.09).  We also found a 
main effect for PA F(3,1162)=5.293, p=0.001 and NA 
F(3,1162)=5.233, p=0.000. Thus, differences between the 
conditions are significant for both automatically retrieved as 
well as reported mood. However, there are some interesting 
differences. While generally speaking, Controls have lowest 
affect (low valence, high NA and low PA), subjects who 
exercised have higher reported PA and NA as well as higher 
valence in their journal entries. Subject who exercised, but also 
received testosterone report both lower PA and NA relative to 
the exercisers, while their overall valence is highest among all 
conditions. The freefly condition reports moderate PA, high 
NA and moderate/high valence. Clearly, there are differences 
in mood and wellbeing among the different experimental 
conditions, but in order to understand driving variables, we 
wanted to understand if self-focus and time orientation play a 
role. we looked for differences in past, present and future tense 
usage. We also found an interaction for past tense use, 
F(6,1172)=2.476, p<.05, present tense use, F(6,1172)=2.275, 
p<.05, and future tense use, F(6,1172)=3.683, p<.01, see 
Figure 5. Only the control group differed in past and present 
tense usage during the different phases of the study. While all 
groups differed in future tense use. The control group used the 
most future tense during head-up, the EX group used the most 
during post bedrest, while the Flywheel used the most during 
head-down. There was no difference for the EX+T group.  
 
What we found is that Controls report less negative affect 
and less positive affect when talking about the past, but 
negative affect when talking about the future. This pattern is 
reversed for the EX&T condition, which report high PA when 
talking about the future and very low PA when talking about 
the past. Maybe the most interesting finding is that the EX&T 
condition, which has highest overall valence, uses more 3rd 
person pronouns when talking about the past, but no 3rd person 
pronouns when talking about the present, but instead more “I”. 
Together with a high correlation of positive affect and present 
term word usage, this group may have highest overall valence 
because they are taking on a more self-distanced perspective, 
as reflected in 3rd person pronoun usage, more positive affect 
related to the “now” and an absence of negative affect. What is 
also interesting is that for the Controls, insight and cause words 
are less used in journal entries focusing on the past in 
comparison to the other condition, while insight worlds are 
used by all conditions, but the freefly condition in present-
focused journal entries. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
Our results show that automated linguistic analyses on 
journaling data can provide insights into the mental wellbeing 
of single persons as well as a number of people of interest.  
Using LSA derived valence values, we found that is it possible 
to predict characteristics about journal entries, i.e. time when it 
was written or experimental condition, by simply looking at the 
semantic word contexts.  Computational methods that are able 
to predict self-reported survey responses are an attractive 
alternative to time-consuming survey responses. These 
methods may also provide the means to send automatic 
messages back to earth that a team might be in difficulty early 
enough to take countermeasures. We were also able to identify 
variables impacting general mood, i.e. time orientation and 
self/other focus.  What we found is that generally, people who 
are more self-focused also show more negative affect. 
However, taking on a distanced (vs. immersed) self-
perspective, as reflected in the use of 3rd person pronouns as 
well as insight words, an indicator of better mental wellbeing 
can be found. For our purposes, PA reflects the activation of 
positive emotions, feeling enthusiastic, active and alert. High 
PA is a state of high energy and pleasurable engagement, 
whereas low PA is characterized by sadness and lethargy. In 
contrast, NA describes a general dimension of subjective 
distress and engagement in negative moods such as anger, fear, 
disgust or nervousness. Low NA is therefore a reflection of not 
being engaged in negative moods, and may include feeling 
calm and relaxed. Thus, what we found is that automated 
textual analysis of valence is able to identify activation of PA 
and NA. We believe that there are large individual differences 
in outward expression of emotion either in written or verbal 
communications, thus correlations may be stronger when 
averaged over either longer periods of time, or using higher 
numbers of observations. Longer periods with greater numbers 
of observations provide individuals with the opportunity to 
express their emotions through behaviors. This is consistent 
with our preliminary analysis of verbal communications data, 
 
 
Figure 6. Scores by Group and and Headdown Conditions. (a) Positive 
Affect (PANAS PA), (b) Negative Affect (PANAS NA). 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

which contains much more textual volume per sample, as well 
as stronger correlations between individual LSA valance 
components and PANAS.Within the context of long duration 
missions due to the lack of real-time communication, it is 
crucial to be able to detect and predict relevant behavioral and 
mental health metrics of the crew over extended periods of 
time. In other domains such as healthcare and interpersonal 
skills training where there is an abundance of narrative data, a 
process for automatic analysis is sorely needed to reduce the 
labor costs of manually coding observations.  
While the use of journal writing may impose workload on 
the participant, the writing itself may in fact have positive 
psychological benefits [15]. In addition to positive and negative 
affect, the journal text can provide a rich dataset for analyzing 
multiple factors and sentiment on environmental factors and 
other contexts. Furthermore, once rich models are developed 
the system could guide crewmembers in their writing by 
suggesting the use of, for example, more 3rd person pronouns. 
This simple change in writing style might improve mood.  
Unlike surveys, free-form text and communications transcripts 
may also be mined for constructs that were not conceived a-
priori to data collection. Minimally intrusive method of 
detecting attitudes towards environmental or situational factors 
and emotional state can help individuals make the connection 
between precipitating events to changes in moods and attitudes. 
For example, studies have shown that for ‘healthy’ persons, 
narratives of highly stressful events change over the course of 
time, including expect of their environment and new 
experience. But there is little change over time to the linguistic 
content of the narrative of less resilient persons [16]. Moreover, 
this method can be used for self-monitoring and can help 
increase individual self-awareness. It can also inform the 
author about how a message might be perceived by others 
before the message is sent. Thus, our results are able to provide 
an objective solution to identifying psycho-social dimensions 
wellbeing completely unobtrusively. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work was sponsored by NASA’s Human Research 
Program under contract #NNX12AAB40G. We would like to 
thank our NASA sponsors Lauren Leveton, Laura Bollweg, 
Brandon Vessey, Holly Patterson, the BHP element, and the 
subjects and staff at the various spaceflight analog facilities for 
their oversight, direction, and support.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Vandekerckhove and R. Cluydts, “The emotional brain and sleep: an 
intimate relationship,” Sleep Med Rev, vol. 14, pp. 219-226, 2010.  
[2] 
J. Smallwood and R. O’Connor, R. C., “Imprisoned by the past: 
Unhappy moods lead to a retrospective bias to mind wandering,” 
Cognition and Emotion, vol. 25(8), pp. 1481–1490, 2011. 
[3] 
S. Nolen-Hoeksema, B. E. Wisco, and S. Lyubomirsky, “Rethinking 
rumination,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, vol. 3(5), pp. 400–
424, 2008.  
[4] 
J. R. Bowen, L. Balbuena, M. Baetz, and L. Schwartz, “Maintaining 
sleep and physical activity alleviate mood instability,” Preventive 
Medicine, vol. 57(5), pp 461–465, 2013.  
[5] 
M. Stolarski, G. Matthews, S. Postek, P. Zimbardo, and J. Bitner, “How 
We Feel is a Matter of Time: Relationships Between Time Perspectives 
and Mood, Journal of Happiness Studies, “ vol. 15 , pp. 809-827, 2013.  
[6] 
B.J. Bushman, “Does venting anger feed or extinguish the flame? 
Catharsis, rumination, distraction, anger, and aggressive responding,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, vol. 28, pp. 724-731, 2002. 
[7] 
S. Nolen-Hoeksema and J. Morrow, “The effects of rumination and 
distraction on naturally occurring depressed mood,” Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, vol. 102, pp. 20-28, 1993. 
[8] 
N. Mor and J. Winquist, J., “Self-focused attention and negative affect: 
A meta-analysis,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 128, pp. 638-662, 2002.  
[9] 
For more information on the NASA’s bedrest study, please see 
https://bedreststudy.jsc.nasa.gov/ 
[10] E. Kross and O. Ayduk, “Facilitating adaptive emotional analysis: 
Distinguishing distanced-analysis of depressive experiences from 
immersed-analysis and distraction,” Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bulletin, vol 34, 
pp. 924–938, 2008. 
[11] E. Kross, Ayduk, O., and W. Mischel, “When asking ‘why’ does not 
hurt: Distinguishing rumination from reflective processing of negative 
emotions,” Psychological Science, vol. 16, pp. 09–715, 2005.  
[12] C. D. Spielberger, R. L. Gorssuch, P. R. Lushene, P.R. Vagg, and G. A. 
Jacobs. “Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Consulting 
Psychologists Press, Inc., 1983.  
[13] J. Pennebaker, R. Booth, and M. Francis, M, “Operator’s Manual: 
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count: LIWC2007”  [Online]. Available 
from:http://homepage.psy.utexas.edu/homepage/faculty/pennebaker/repr
ints/LIWC2007_OperatorManual.pdf. 2013.08.28 
[14] J. Pennebaker, “The Secret Life of Pronouns,”   New York: Bloomsbury, 
2011.  
[15] M. Purcell, M, “The Health Benefits of Journaling,” [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://psychcentral.com/lib/the-health-benefits-of-
journaling/000721,  2012.11.04.  
[16] Y. Tausczik and J. Pennebaker, “The Psychological Meaning of Words: 
LIWC and Computerized Text Analysis Methods,”  Journal of Language 
and Social Psychology, vol. 29(1), pp 24–54, 2010.  
[17] B. A. van der Kolk and W. Kadish, “Amnesia, dissociation, and the 
return of the repressed,”  In B.A. van der Kolk (Ed.), Psychological 
Trauma. American Psychiatric Press, Inc., Washington, D.C., 1987.   
 
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

