Knowledge Sharing through Social Networks  
Liaquat Hossain 
Complex Systems and Project Management Program 
The University of Sydney, NSW Australia 
Department of Informatics, Lund University, Sweden 
Liaquat.hossain@sydney.edu.au or @ics.lu.se 
 
Rolf T Wigand 
Departments of Information Science and Management 
University of Arkansas, Little Rock 
rtwigand@ualr.edu 
 
            Simon Reay Atkinson 
Complex Systems and Project Management Program 
The University of Sydney, NSW Australia 
Simon.reayatkinson@sydney.edu.au 
 
Sven Carlsson 
Department of Informatics 
Lund University, Sweden 
Sven.carlsson@ics.lu.se 
 
 
Abstract—We suggest that a lack of understanding of 
the social and human factors in the design process 
may lead to the failure of knowledge sharing or KS in 
most organizations. The basis for KS in organizations 
is embedded in participants’ action and experience. 
We propose that successful KS initiatives require (1) 
attention to communication patterns of individuals or 
groups 
working 
in 
different 
divisions 
of 
an 
organization and (2) the development of IT systems 
that support both strong and weak ties between 
participants. 
Specifically, 
a 
distinction 
between 
different network structures as they relate to the 
concept of structural holes is drawn for highlighting 
how types of network structures effect sharing of 
explicit and tacit knowledge. Additionally, strong and 
weak tie theories are applied to develop a framework 
for potential IT-based initiatives aimed at addressing 
structural 
holes 
of 
communication. 
A 
set 
of 
propositions is proposed with their implication for 
designing KS systems in organizations. This paper 
concludes that sociological perspective in achieving a 
balance between the different types of ties (i.e., strong 
and weak ties) could assist in the maintenance and 
ongoing creation of new knowledge without having the 
networks to be redundant. 
 
Keywords- knowledge sharing; transfer systems; social 
networks;  tie diversity;  structural hole. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Social networks or SN is an interdisciplinary 
behavioral approach for the study of human actors, their 
relationships and interdependencies. SN draws theoretical 
and methodological foundations from areas such as 
communication, sociology, social psychology, psychiatry, 
organizational science and graph theory. It involves 
theorizing, model building, and empirical studies, which 
focuses on uncovering patterns of communication among 
actors, organizations, states etc. Therefore, uncovering the 
communication practices among members from different 
organization, which would result in detecting cliques, 
isolates and brokers and their role in the network forms 
the basis for application of SN to study the knowledge 
sharing in organizations.  
 
Social ties, a critical aspect for understanding the 
formation of cliques, isolates and brokers and their role in 
the network can be seen from two perspectives: (i) strong 
ties, and (ii) weak ties. Social network literature suggests 
strong ties or close and frequent interactions among 
people from different organizations are likely to lead to 
redundant information because they tend to occur among 
a small group of actors in which everyone knows what the 
others know. Contrary to strong ties, weak ties or distance 
and infrequent relationships provides access to novel 
information by bridging the disconnected groups and 
individuals in organizations [7, 46]. The usefulness of 
strong or weak relationships among people in different 
organization for effective coordination needs further 
investigation and especially in the context of knowledge 
sharing [3, 4, 5]. Furthermore, the relationships among 
strong and weak ties and computer mediation for 
successful knowledge sharing context have yet to be 
explored [7, 8, 9]. Also, the use of SNA and its outcome 
in improving communication flow and its process as a 
measure for developing effective knowledge sharing 
systems is yet to be explored. 
The transfer of knowledge between individuals, 
groups, communities or systems is regarded as Knowledge 
Sharing (KS) in organizations [1, 2, 3]. Research suggests 
that understanding social interaction between different 
interest groups within an organization is a critical 
component of effective KS [4, 5, 6]. The relevance of a 
social interaction approach has been debated in areas such 
as systems design, organizational process redesign, 
process improvement and artificial intelligence per se [7, 
8, 9]. The social approach for designing KS is based on the 
argument that communication between individuals, teams, 
groups, and communities is critical to the development and 
sustainability of a knowledge-creating organization [10, 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

11, 12, 13]. It is also suggested in studies that an 
appropriate structure of KS is essential for facilitating 
effective sharing in organizations [1]. Specifically, we 
suggest that KS is dependent on the structure of the social 
communication network at play in an organization.  
Organizational science literature also highlights that 
communication network structure provides insight about 
the communication patterns of individuals working in an 
organization [7]. Therefore, an understanding of the 
communication network at play needs to be viewed as an 
essential part of the design of KS systems in organizations. 
There is also a tension in the organizational structure, 
strategy and process literature when applied to KS in 
organizations. Studies suggest that organizations should 
not start with structure but with a task-and-person based 
foundation 
that 
incorporates 
both 
authority 
and 
responsibility [14]. Therefore, the design of the KS 
structure should be based on the study of the existing 
communication structure. Communication networks may 
suggest how individuals, groups, communities or systems 
interact in an organization and can be used as a basis for 
KS process of an organization [1, 2, 3].  
In this paper, we first provide a background to 
organization as a network o people. A person or a group of 
people united for some purpose is considered to be a form 
of organization [15, 16]. Cyert and March [15] suggest that 
organization needs to be viewed as a form of coalition. 
That is, an organization is considered to be a coalition of 
individuals, some of them organized into sub-coalitions. 
Arrow [16] highlights that formal organizations, firms, 
labor unions, universities, or government, are not the only 
types of entities that represent the term ‘organization’. For 
example, the market system has elaborated methods for 
communication and collective decision-making and, 
therefore, can be interpreted as an organization [16].  
It is further suggested by Mintzberg [17] that 
organization structures have both a formal and informal 
structure. Formal organizational structure is usually 
represented by the organization chart and widely 
accessible by the internal and external members. It is also 
suggested in the organizational science literature that 
every organization is a network of people [15, 18, 19, 20]. 
An analysis of the communication network can help us in 
understanding 
the 
information 
exchange, 
patterns, 
coalition and power of the individual members in an 
organization [7, 21]. The distinction between formal and 
informal organization structure can be drawn by looking 
at the types of interactions, or links, between individuals 
or agents in an organization. For example, the legitimate 
network refers to formal structure and the shadow 
network refers to the informal structure of an organization 
[20]. In the legitimate network, interactions or links are 
either (i) formally and intentionally established by the 
powerful members of the organization or (ii) established 
well-understood, implicit guiding principles, which is 
accepted by the members of the organization [20]. On the 
other hand, the shadow network consists of links that are 
spontaneously 
and 
informally 
established 
by 
the 
individuals among themselves during the interaction 
process in the legitimate system [20].  
It is also evident that the shadow system does not 
coincide with the rigid boundaries of the legitimate 
system. Shadow system is classified to have porous 
boundaries and therefore considered to the principal route 
for 
interaction 
between 
individual 
agents 
in 
an 
organization or in an inter-organizational network [20]. 
We argue that the KS system needs to be designed by 
conducting a thorough requirement analysis of both the 
legitimate and shadow network. This is important as the 
legitimate network may provide a normative view of how 
individuals 
should 
share 
knowledge 
while 
the 
communication network analysis of shadow network will 
assist KS system designers in understanding the 
descriptive view of individual agents’ communication 
patterns. This information could later be used to directly 
address issues of structural holes that may or may not 
exist in an organization or in a department [20]. 
In this paper, we first highlight that successful KS 
initiatives require (1) attention to communication patterns 
of individuals or groups working in different divisions of 
an organization and (2) the development of IT systems 
that support both strong and weak ties between 
participants. In particular, we provide a distinction 
between different network structures as they relate to the 
concept of structural holes. We also highlight how types 
of network structures effect sharing of explicit and tacit 
knowledge. Additionally, strong and weak tie theories are 
applied to develop a framework for potential IT-based 
initiatives aimed at addressing structural holes of 
communication. A set of propositions is proposed with 
their 
implication 
for 
designing 
KS 
systems 
in 
organizations. 
 
II. 
DESIGNING KNOWLEDGE SHARING 
SYSTEMS 
 
KS systems design evolved from the traditional 
structured systems design literature. Scientists, engineers, 
technicians, and programmers initially performed the 
design of technology-based systems in the 1950s and 
1960s [22, 23]. Kling highlights that design flaws were the 
major impeding factor for ensuring the optimal use of 
computer-based information systems in organizations [23, 
24, 25, 26]. The design of computer systems for 
supporting collaborative work requires careful attention in 
five key areas--planning, analysis, design, implementation 
and support [27, 28]. The importance of careful 
examination of these phases for ensuring the success of 
systems 
implementation 
has 
been 
addressed 
in 
organizational design literature as well [17, 29, 30].  
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Previous studies suggest that systems design is 
essentially a social process [23, 24, 25, 26]. Therefore, the 
social role of systems analyst is one of the critical success 
factors for the successful design and implementation of the 
system [1, 31, 32, 33]. This social role is essential for the 
collection 
of 
relevant 
information 
from 
different 
disciplines and people during the requirements analysis 
phase of the systems development [23]. Therefore, the 
design of technology-based products has to be in line with 
social and organizational dynamics [23]. In fact, there is a 
danger of systems failure or not receiving high rate of user 
acceptance if systems design issues are considered 
separately from the organizational issues. This is a 
common problem for the implementation of multi-module 
software systems such as enterprise resource planning 
[23].  
Studies suggest that the social systems design approach 
by Mauro Mauro Design Inc. improved the performance of 
the New York Stock Exchange trading systems. The 
systems analyst from Mauro Mauro Design Inc observed 
the traders at the Stock Exchange for six months prior to 
start coding new software together with 30 iterations in 
testing their new systems [34]. Kling and Star [34] 
highlights that analyses that cover the complexity of social 
organization and the technical state of the art is critical to 
the design or use of human-centered computing. This 
analysis can provide the systems designers with insights 
both the technological characteristics of a computerized 
system and the social arrangements under which the 
system will be used [35].  
For example, it is highlighted in studies that 
understanding the distinction between the legitimate and 
shadow network structure is an important first step 
towards the design of the KS in organizations. 
Understanding the shadow network structure requires a 
communication network analysis so that the patterns of 
exchange between agents in a network can be understood. 
It is highlighted in previous studies that a successful 
knowledge creation process requires an established 
communication 
network. 
Communications 
network 
structure deals with individual communication pattern in 
an organization or in a unit of work. KS design can be 
viewed as a social process because it requires interaction 
between all parties moving through developmental phases 
together in order to produce a system that is efficient and 
effective. It creates ownership in a system, which 
alleviates many of the problems traditionally associated 
with implementing a new system, resistance to change, 
resistance to imposed authority, training, etc. This serves 
as a basis for the development of a conceptual model of 
KS in organizations [36].  
Nonaka [37] and Brown and Duguid [38] also support 
that knowledge creation is essentially a social process. It is 
suggested in case studies such as Nucor Steel and 
Buckman Labrotaries [39] that understanding the 
interaction of individuals, groups, teams and communities 
in knowledge networks leads to a successful KS in 
organizations. Therefore, it can be seen that there is a 
growing interest among social scientists to view KS as 
socially constructed and embedded in social networks and 
communities of practice [11]. These findings clearly 
highlight that the dichotomy of KS systems design can be 
seen from three perspectives—technological determinism, 
systems rationalism, and socio design. In the following 
section, we provide a brief overview of the systems design 
literature as it relates to the design of KS in organization. 
 
III. 
SOCIAL DESIGN OF KNOWLEDGE SHARING SYSTEMS 
 
Social design refers to joint design of both the 
technological characteristics of a system and the social 
arrangements under which it will be used [35, 40, 41]. 
Bijker [40] argued that the development of technological 
systems should be viewed as a social process, not an 
autonomous occurrence where relevant social groups will 
be the carriers of that process. Kling et al [23] further 
highlights that these social choices are considered to be an 
integral part of computerization, even though they are not 
formally decided or completely within the control of any 
one person. For example, company A is adopting portable 
computers so that they can improve the flexibility of 
people’s work situations and relationships. However, 
company A still insists that their employees report to work 
daily during the regular working hours. Therefore, 
employees of company A have very little flexibility to 
work from a remote location even though they have access 
to the technology infrastructure provided by the company. 
In contrast, the underlying operational philosophy of 
company B is to allow its employees to work from remote 
location so that it provides maximum flexibility and 
optimal use of portable computing. This example illustrate 
that it is not only the technology that guide successful 
operation, but the guiding principles or social design of 
work practices that organizations decides to pursue. 
Managers, therefore, must address the cultural side of 
change when implementing software systems such as 
ERP as it increases fear among managers that the 
availability of company wide information may challenge 
their authority [42]. The biggest impediment to 
knowledge transfer is corporate culture and the biggest 
difficulty in managing KS is changing people’s 
behaviour. Therefore, organizations need IT infrastructure 
to make progress or to provide the facilitation of 
knowledge networks, but the use of ICT for managing KS 
activities should be supported by introducing proper 
organizational processes, people and content. There is 
also a growing interest in considering a social network 
approach to understand the KS design in organizations. 
Social network analysis refers to the method of analysing 
social structures and relational aspects of structures that 
exist in a communication network. It is highlighted in the 
previous section that communication network structure 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

can be viewed as a legitimate or shadow network. That is, 
an organization’s structure may suggest how the 
legitimate communications network should work and the 
shadow network structure may suggest how the 
communication flow occurs at an organization. Therefore, 
social network analysis is continuing to play a significant 
role in developing a deeper understanding of the actual 
process of communication flow between individuals [18].  
Additionally, one can conclude from all of the above that 
social network analysis has the potential to play a 
significant role in the design and implementation of 
knowledge management systems. 
 
IV. 
BUILDING INFO-CULTURE FOR KS 
 
Socialization, 
externalization, 
internalization, 
and 
combination can be seen as a mechanism for the creation 
of knowledge in organizations [37]. Here, the socialization 
in organization refers to the conversion of tacit knowledge 
to new tacit knowledge through social interaction and 
shared experiences [3]. The combination mode deals with 
the creation of new explicit knowledge by merging, 
categorizing, reclassifying and synthesizing existing 
explicit 
knowledge. 
Both 
the 
externalization 
and 
internalization 
mode 
refers 
to 
interactions 
and 
conversation between tacit and explicit knowledge where 
externalization deals with the conversion of tacit 
knowledge to new explicit knowledge and internalization 
deals with the creation of new tacit knowledge from 
explicit knowledge. Table 1 provides an overview of four 
modes of knowledge creation. 
 
TABLE 1.  FOUR MODES OF KNOWLEDGE  CREATION 
Modes 
of 
Knowledge  
Creation 
Characteristic
s 
Examples 
Socialization 
Conversion of 
tacit to new tacit 
knowledge 
Apprenticeship, 
user training 
Combination 
Creation 
of 
new 
explicit 
knowledge 
Survey reports 
Externalizatio
n 
Conversion of 
tacit to new explicit 
knowledge 
Lessons learned 
Internalization 
Creation 
of 
new 
tacit 
from 
explicit knowledge 
Learning 
and 
understanding from 
reading 
and 
discussion 
 
It can be seen from Table 1 that knowledge sharing 
and creation is dependent on the modes of knowledge 
creation. Here, socialization is seen as an important aspect 
for the conversion of tacit knowledge into new tacit 
knowledge. For example, the development of an 
“infoculture” is the first essential step for creating 
knowledge-based organizations [39]. The study of Nucor 
Steel highlights that three essential elements—superior 
human capital, high-powered incentives and a high degree 
of empowerment guide the knowledge creation process 
[39]. Nucor Steel used a group-based incentive 
mechanism to encourage people to start sharing 
knowledge that in fact lead to the development of an 
infoculture 
in 
their 
organization. 
This 
incentive 
mechanism was introduced at all levels of the 
organization so that Nucor could only reward group-based 
performance.  
Social network analysis is increasingly used to 
develop a better understanding of the shadow system 
network that is considered to be a true representation of 
the communication patterns that exist in an organization. 
Social networks can be defined as an individual’s 
relations and contacts with others [21, 42]. Social network 
analysis can be seen as a method that allows us to analyse 
social structures and relational aspects of the structures 
that exists in a communication network between 
individuals, teams, groups and communities. The 
argument advanced in this paper is that once the IT-based 
KS systems put into practice or implemented in 
organization, it becomes a social network. Therefore, the 
social design of this IT-based KS should be established 
through a thorough analysis of both the formal and 
informal social networks that may exist in an 
organization. It is argued here that the design of IT-based 
KS should be able to accommodate the facilitation of the 
communication patterns or flow process that exists in a 
department or in an organization. Therefore, the social 
dimensions of KS can be described from two 
perspectives—the first is the role of socialization and 
community building as a backbone social infrastructure 
for KS, and the second is the IT-based KS systems. IT-
based KS systems are also considered as social systems as 
this KS systems link people as well as machines.  
Wellman [43] suggests that computer supported social 
networks help sustain strong, intermediate and weak ties 
which provide information and social support in both a 
specialized and broad-based relationships. It is also 
important to note that there are direct and indirect ties 
exist between agents or the participating agents engaged 
in KS. It is clear that these ties are embedded in both the 
legitimate and shadow network of an organization.  This, 
when combined with what is known about computer 
supported social networks mentioned above, may provide 
valuable insights for the effective design of IT-based 
knowledge management systems. This is discussed 
further in the following two sections. 
 
A. KS through Strenghts of Ties 
It is indicated earlier that organizations can be viewed 
as a network of people. In particular, we discussed two 
types of networks—legitimate and shadow and its 
implications for the design and sustainability of KS 
provided. These networks consist of individuals working 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

in an organization and can be seen as redundant or non-
redundant. A structural hole is referred to as a relationship 
of non-redundancy between two or more contacts [21]. 
Non-redundant contact between individuals can be seen 
as disconnected either directly or indirectly. Here, the 
disconnected direct non-redundant contacts suggest that 
there is no direct contact with one another and the indirect 
contacts suggest that one has contacts that exclude the 
others. Burt [21] further suggests that the two contacts 
provide network benefits as a result of the structural 
holes.  Here, we discuss the concept of structural holes 
together with the strong and weak ties metaphor as it 
relates to KS systems design in organizations.  
Burt [21] suggests that two criteria—cohesion and 
structural equivalence can be used as an indicator for 
detecting structural holes. Cohesion criterion refers to 
direct connection between the contacts. For example, two 
contacts A and B are redundant to the extent that a strong 
tie connects both A and B. Here, this strong tie between 
contacts A and B indicates the absence of structural holes 
(e.g. the relationship between father and son, or people 
who frequently connects with each other for social 
occasions). However, structural equivalence concerns 
indirect connection by mutual contact. For example, both 
A and B are structurally equivalent to the extent if they 
both have same contacts. 
This nature of the contacts between the executives and 
persons in their network is referred to as strength of ties 
[44]. Intense, emotion-laden, and reciprocal relationships 
that require time and energy to create and maintain can be 
a reflection of strong ties. Weak ties on the other hand, 
reflect loose networks and are best explained by the 
concept of a bridge [44]. The strength of the tie has 
traditionally been viewed as bearing on the overall 
amount and content of information associated with the 
contact. It is however suggested in previous studies that 
novel and non-redundant information is available through 
weak ties more than through strong ties [44, 45]. Strong 
ties can be seen as advantageous because they allow for 
quick 
flow 
of 
information 
and 
social 
support. 
Furthermore, strong ties are reliable, easily available, and 
important when dealing with conflicts, crises, and 
uncertainty [46].  
Granovetter's [44] theory of strong and weak ties 
highlights the importance of weak ties in providing 
information. A weak tie is defined as a “casual 
acquaintance” and a strong tie is a formal relationship 
defined by a high-shared knowledge base and multiple 
interactions [45, 46, 47]. Burt [21] further suggests that 
weak ties provide a useful mechanism for understanding 
the strength of structural holes in a communications 
network. We believe that both these types of ties offer 
unique opportunities for developing a theoretical base for 
the design of KS systems in organizations from both a 
theoretical and an applied perspective. Studies suggest that 
weak relationships such as casual acquaintances, do not 
take as much time and effort to cultivate as friendships or 
community of practice. It is therefore easy to have more 
acquaintances 
than 
friends. 
A 
larger 
number of 
acquaintances can provide access to information about 
more out-groups. Most importantly, acquaintances offer 
the potential for (1) a relationship that takes limited time 
and effort and (2) offers the most potential for non-
redundant and, thus, valuable information and knowledge. 
Specifically, Burt [21] proposed a direct relationship 
between the number of structural holes and the rate of 
return on player’s investment in terms of time and energy 
and social capital (Figure 1). Here, the shape of the curve 
is to indicate the general relationship between structural 
holes and human capital as opposed to any validated and 
specific function. 
 
B. Supporting KS through Social Capital 
We propose above that the value of social interaction 
and social exchanges needs to be taken into consideration 
by a designer of an IT-based KS system. We further 
propose here that the design of an effective IT-based KS 
system should allow for an economic use of time and 
energy in the growth of social capital.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Relationship between Rate of Return and 
Structural Holes [21] 
 
To discuss the specific effects of an IT-based KS 
system on social capital we will illustrate how one can 
increase capital by acting on the following five t 
propositions:    
1. Maximizing weak ties in one’s network increases 
the potential for innovation and/or market 
penetration [44].   
2. IT-based KS systems are an effective means for 
establishing and maintaining weak ties [43].    
Rate  
of  
Return  
from  
Players  
Investment 
       Structural Holes in Player’s Network 
Few --- Entrepreneurial Opportunities --- Many  
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

3. Maximizing the number of structural holes in 
one’s network increases the potential for 
innovation and/or penetration [21].  
4. A finite number of strong ties can be maintained 
[21].   
5. Minimizing the number of strong ties allows for 
more allocation of resources to the application 
and creation of new knowledge.   
Assume “Entrepreneur A” (E.A.) has lived and 
worked in city “Home” for a number of years.  During 
this time, E.A. has established a number of strong ties due 
numerous in-person exchanges (Figure 2). E.A. soon 
realizes that both new ideas and/or potential markets for 
his product have become too redundant and that a larger 
network is required for further growth.  E.A. decides to 
explore some potential new contacts via various forms of 
IT (Figure 2).   
After establishing a number of loose contacts, E.A. 
decides to strategically strengthen ties with those who 
offer the greatest number of resources. The inherent 
communication barriers associated with numerous forms 
of IT motivate E.A. to invest time and energy into more 
face-to-face interactions with one of the selected new 
contacts.  E.A. spends weeks (or, perhaps, longer) on-site 
with new contact E.B. who resides in Home2 and begins 
to strengthen their tie.  E.A. also spends times with some 
of E.B.’s contacts and establishes a number of new 
relationships.  During this time, E.A. maintains his ties 
back home by using IT channels. The maintenance of 
these ties requires (1) relatively little effort given the 
established shared knowledge base and (2) a strategic 
approach as to which contacts from Home make the most 
“economic” sense to maintain.  E.A. maintains other new 
contacts by using the same methods used while at home. 
E.A. takes special care to maintain a weak tie, or no tie, 
between E.B. and other new contacts (Figure 3).   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Social Network with proximal, strong ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Social Network with proximal, strong ties, and 
new “distal”, weak ties 
 
Once the required shared knowledge base is established, 
E.A decides to move to Home3 to establish a stronger tie 
with E.C. E.A. maintains strong ties with Home and E.B. 
through efficient use of IT. Most importantly, E.A. 
maintains the structural holes between Home, E.B., E.C., 
and E.D. (Figure 4). 
This process continues until E.A. reaches a 
maximum number of strong ties that can be maintained 
without having to “fill” in, or bridge, important structural 
holes due to a limited number of strong ties that can be 
maintained. E.A. eventually shows a significant amount 
of growth in social capital (see Figure 3) and invests more 
time in managing the flow of knowledge and information 
rather than actively searching for more capital (Figures 5 
and 6). 
One can better understand the demands of a system 
designer by combining an understanding of cognitive 
demands and limitations with the social behaviors and 
needs of end users like E.A. That is, for example, E.A. 
potentially realizes his cognitive capacity with the 
development and maintenance of 6 strong ties and the 
knowledge and information flow resulting from the 
increase in social capital. With every developed strong tie 
the demand imposed by the maintenance and utilization of 
a growing—and, thus, more complex—social network 
increases.  Therefore, the ultimate requirement of an IT-
based KS system is to minimize cognitive demand in the 
maximization and utilization of social capital. From this 
perspective, the IT-based KS system complements the 
individual and increases the potential for innovation and 
knowledge creation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Example of Social Network with proximal, 
strong ties, distal weak ties, and a new distal strong tie 
E.A. 
E.A. 
E.B. 
E.C. 
E.D. 
E.A. 
E.B. 
E.C. 
E.D. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of Social Network with proximal 
strong ties, new distal weak ties and strong ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Example of Social Network with the same 
number of strong ties as shown in Figure 4, but with a 
significant increase in the amount of social capital  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
 
It is concluded that complex systems design such as 
knowledge sharing systems requires careful attention to 
the social context for which is systems is developed. 
Therefore, we suggest here that the designer of KS 
systems is required to develop the systems based on 
observations of the social interaction and social exchange 
needs of the individuals working in an organization. We 
further highlight that the design of KS should be based on 
an understanding of both the legitimate and shadow 
network structure of an organization. We recommend that 
social network analysis is a useful methodological 
paradigm for the purpose of eliciting the communication 
patterns for understanding the shadow network structure. 
It is suggested here that structural holes provide network 
benefits for developing social capital among participating 
members in knowledge sharing and conclude that strong 
and weak tie is a useful metaphor for fitting the structural 
holes. In conclusion, the following propositions can be 
used to develop a better understanding about how to 
effectively 
and 
efficiently 
leverage 
information 
technology for the development of social capital which 
help support knowledge sharing in organisations  
 
1. Maximizing weak ties in one’s network increases the 
potential for innovation and/or market penetration 
[44].   
2. IT-based KS systems are an effective means for 
establishing and maintaining weak ties [43].    
3. Maximizing the number of structural holes in one’s 
network increases the potential for innovation and/or 
penetration [21].  
4. A finite number of strong ties can be maintained [21].   
5. Minimizing the number of strong ties allows for more 
allocation of resources to the application and creation 
of new knowledge.   
 
 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Davenport, T. H., and Prusak, L. (1998). Working Knowledge: 
How 
organizations 
manage 
what 
they 
know, 
Boston, 
Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Press. 
[2] Hansen, M. T., and Von, O. B. (2001). ‘Introducing T-shaped 
managers: Knowledge management’s net generation,’ Harvard 
Business Review, March, pp. 38-49. 
 [3] Alavi, M., and Leidner, D. (2001). ‘Review: Knowledge 
Management and Knowledge Management Systems: Conceptual 
Foundations and Research Issues,’ MIS Quarterly, 25, 1, 107-
36. 
[4] Pickering, J. M., and King, J. L. (1995). ‘Hardwiring Weak Ties: 
Inter 
organizational 
Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 
Occupational Communities, and Organizational Change,’ 
Organization Science, 6, 4, 479-486. 
E.A
 
E.B
 
E.C
 
E.D
 
E.A. 
E.B. 
E.C. 
E.D. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

[5] Ivari, J., and Linger, H. (1999). ‘Knowledge work as collaborative 
work: A situated activity theory view,’ in Proceedings of the 
Thirty-Second Hawaii International Conference on Systems 
Sciences, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA. 
[6] Tuomi, I. (1999). ‘Data is more than knowledge: Implications of 
the reversed hierarchy for knowledge management and 
organizational memory,’ in Proceedings of the Thirty-Second 
Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, IEEE 
Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA. 
 [7] Wigand, R. T. (1988). ‘Communication Network Analysis: 
History and Overview,’ In: Handbook of Organizational 
Communication, G. Goldhaber and G. Barnett, Ablex Publishing 
Corporation, Norwood, New Jersey, 319-359. 
[8] Nonoka, I., and Takeuchi, H. (1995). The Knowledge-Creating 
Company: How Japanese companies create the dynamics of 
Innovation, New York: Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
[9] Earl, M. (2001). ‘Knowledge management strategies: Toward a 
taxonomy,’ Journal of Management Information Systems, 18, 1, 
215-233. 
[10] Argyris, C., and Schon, D. (1978). Organizational Learning: A 
Theory of Action Approach, Reading, MA: Addison Wesley. 
[11] Kogut, B., and Zander, U. (1992). ‘Knowledge of the firm, 
combinative capabilities, and the replication of technology, 
Organization Science, 3, 3, 383-397. 
[12] Watson, R. T. (1999). Data Management: databases and 
Organizations (2nd ed.), John Wiley, New York. 
[13] Levine, L. (2001). ‘Integrating knowledge and processes in a 
learning organization,’ Information Systems Journal, Vol. 18, 
No. 1, pp.21-33.  
[14] Drucker, P. (1974). Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, 
Practices, Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd. Oxford. 
[15] Cyert, R. M., and March, J. G. (1963). A Behavioral Theory of 
the Firm, Prentice-Hall Inc., NJ, USA.  
[16] Arrow, K. (1974). The Limits of Organization, Norton and 
Company, New York. 
[17] Mintzberg, H. (1979). The structuring of organizations: a 
synthesis of the research, Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 
 [18] Charan, R. (1991). ‘How networks reshape organization-for 
results,’ Harvard Business Review, Sept.-Oct., 12, 479-494. 
[19] Nohria, N., and Eccles, R. G. (1992). Networks and 
organizations, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
[20] Stacey, R. D. (1996). Complexity and Creativity in 
Organizations, Berrett-Koehler Publishers, San Francisco. 
[21] Burt, R.S. (1992). Structural Holes: The Social Structure of 
Competition, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University 
Press. 
 [22] Yourdon, E. (1989). Modern Structured Analysis, Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J: Yourdon Press. 
[23] Kling, R., Crawford, H., Rosenbaum, H., Sawyer, S., and 
Weisband, S. (1998). Learning from social informatics: 
Information and communication technologies in human context, 
Center for Social Informatics, Indiana University, IN. 
[24] Kling, R. (1991). ‘Computerization and social transformations,’ 
Science, Technology and Human Values, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 
342-367.  
[25] Kling, R. (1993). ‘Organizational analysis in computer science,’ 
The Information Society, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 71-87. 
[26] Kling, R., and Jewett, T. (1994). ‘The social design of worklife 
with computers and networks: an open natural systems  
perspective,’ Advances in Computers, Vol. 39, Marshall Yovits, 
Ed., Orlando, FI: Academic Press, pp. 239-293. 
[27] Avison, D., and Shah, H. (1997). The Information Systems 
Development Life Cycle, The McGraw-Hill Co. Ltd. 
[28] Whitten, J. L., and Bentley, L. D. (1998). Systems Analysis and 
Design and Methods, Irwin McGraw-Hill. Fourth Edition. 
[29] Schon, D. A.  (1967). Technology and change: the new 
Heraclitus, Delacorte Press, New York. 
[30] Mintzberg, H. (1989). Mintzberg on Management: Inside our 
strange world of organizations, Free Press: New York. 
[31] Forsythe, D. (1992). ‘Blaming the user in medical informatics,’ 
Knowledge and Society: The anthropology of science and 
technology, Vol. 9, pp. 95-111.  
[32] Forsythe, D. (1994). ‘Engineering knowledge: the construction 
of knowledge in artificial intelligence,’ Social studies of science, 
Vol. 24, pp. 105-113. 
[33] Suchman, L. (1996). ‘Supporting articulation work,’ in 
Computerization and Controversy: Value conflicts and social 
choices, 2nd Ed., Kling, R., (Ed.), San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press. 
[34] Kling, R., and Star, S. L. (1998). ‘Human-centered systems in 
the perspective of organizational and social informatics,’ 
Computers and Society, March, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 22-29.  
[35] Kling, R. (1987). ‘Computerization as an ongoing social and 
political 
process,’ 
in 
Computers 
and 
Democracy: 
A 
Scandinavian Challenge, Bjerknes, G., Ehn, P., and Kyng, M. 
(Ed.), Vermont: Gower Pub. Co. 
[36] Armbrecth, F. M., and Chapas, R. B.  (2001). ‘Knowledge 
management in research and development,’ Research Technology 
Management, V. 44, No. 4, pp. 28-48. 
[37] Nonaka, I. (1994). ‘A dynamic theory of organizational 
knowledge creation,’ Organization Science, 5, 10, 14-37. [38] 
Brown, J. S., and Duguid, P. (1998). ‘Organizing knowledge,’ 
California Management Review, 40, 3, pp. 90-111. 
[38] Brown, J. S., and Duguid, P. (1998). ‘Organizing knowledge,’ 
California Management Review, 40, 3, pp. 90-111. 
[39] Gupta, A., and Govindrajan, V. (2000). ‘Knowledge flows 
within multinational corporations,’ Strategic Management 
Journal, 21, pp. 473-496. 
 [40] Bijker, W. E. (1997). Of Bicycles, Bakelities, and Bulbs: 
Toward a theory of sociotechnical change, MIT Press. 
[41] Bijker, W. E., and Law, J. (1992). Shaping technology building 
society: studies in sociotechnical change (Eds.), MIT Press. 
[42] BarNir, A., and Smith, K. A. (2202). ‘Interfirm alliances in the 
small business: The role of social networks,’ Journal of Small 
Business Management, Milwaukee, Vol. 40, Issue 3, pp. 219-
232. 
 [43] Wellman, B. (1996). ‘For a social network analysis of 
computer networks: A sociological perspective on collaborative 
work and virtual community’, Proceedings of the 1996 
conference on ACM SIGPR/SIGMIS conference, Denver, Co. 
pp. 1-11. 
[44] Granovetter, M. (1973). ‘The strength of weak ties,’ American 
Journal of Sociology, Vol. 78, pp.1360-1380. 
[45] Granovetter, M. S. (1974). Getting a job: A Study of Contacts 
and Careers, The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London. 
[46] Granovetter, M. S. (1982). ‘The strength of weak ties: A 
network theory revisited,’ In: Structure and network analysis, 
edited by Peter V. Marsden and Nan Lin, Sage Publications, pp. 
1054. 
[47] Hansen, M. T. (1999). ‘The Search-Transfer Problem: The 
Role of Weak Ties in Sharing Knowledge Across Organization 
Subunits,’ Administrative Science Quarterly, 44, 1, 82-111. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

