#MyIBDHistory on Twitter 
Predicting IBD Type from Personal Tweets 
 
Maya Stemmer, Gilad Ravid, Yisrael Parmet 
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 
P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva, Israel 
e-mails: mayast@post.bgu.ac.il, rgilad@bgu.ac.il, iparmet@bgu.ac.il 
 
 
Abstract—Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is a chronic 
inflammation condition of the digestive system that is usually 
classified into one of two diseases: Crohn's Disease (CD) or 
Ulcerative Colitis (UC). If neither one is diagnosed with 
certainty, the patient is diagnosed with IBD Unclassified (IBD-
U). IBD patients form communities on Twitter and exchange 
thoughts regarding their diseases. In 2018, IBD patients shared 
their disease history on Twitter and signed their tweets with the 
hashtag #MyIBDHistory. In their tweets, they mentioned their 
age at diagnosis, the medications they have tried over the years, 
whether they underwent any surgeries, and more. In this 
research, we analyzed patients' tweets containing the hashtag 
#MyIBDHistory and built a classifier that predicts the IBD type 
(CD or UC) of a patient. We transformed the disease history 
described in the tweets into tabular classification features and 
assessed their importance. We identified key features that 
helped distinguish CD from UC and used the classifier to predict 
the disease type of IBD-U patients. Our results were correlated 
with IBD related research, as the two most prominent features 
that tilted the classification towards CD were having a fistula 
and suffering from nutrient deficiency.  
Keywords-Twitter; IBD; data analysis; logistic regression. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is a chronic 
inflammation condition of the digestive system characterized 
by flares and remission states. The two primary diseases 
identified with IBD, Crohn's Disease (CD) and Ulcerative 
Colitis (UC), are usually diagnosed in young patients (in the 
age range of 15-30 years) [1,2]. Distinguishing between CD 
and UC is not trivial as their symptoms and effects may 
overlap. When the disease features are inconclusive and do 
not enable a certain diagnosis of CD or UC, patients are 
diagnosed with IBD Unclassified (IBD-U) [3,4]. The 
incidences of IBD are rapidly increasing, and it has evolved 
into a global disease [5]. 
There are no medications or surgical procedures that can 
cure IBD. Treatment options can only help with symptoms, 
affecting each patient differently. They involve prescription 
drugs and lifestyle-related solutions, such as diets and 
therapies. Symptoms include abdominal pain, diarrhea, and 
fatigue; severe cases may result in hospitalization or surgical 
interventions [6,7]. As chronic bowel diseases, both CD and 
UC require day-to-day care for drug consumption and special 
nutrition. 
Patients describe IBD as an embarrassing disease that 
causes immediate disruption of daily activities. They 
experience difficulties adjusting to the changes it entails and 
consider themselves different from their peers. Since IBD is 
identified with frequent bowel movements, people do not 
hasten to share their disease with others [8,9]. IBD patients 
attribute part of the embarrassment to a lack of public 
awareness. Outsiders cannot see that a person's stomach hurts 
or that their bowels are scarred. The disease is invisible, and 
others might doubt that it exists [10,11]. 
The embarrassment caused by IBD and the need to 
confide in people who undergo similar experiences help 
explain the creation of IBD-related communities on Twitter. 
IBD patients are the most common type of users who talk 
about IBD on Twitter [12]. They use Twitter for sharing their 
own experiences and for seeking social support. They 
exchange thoughts about symptoms and medications and 
recommend treatments to one another [13]. By sharing their 
life experiences with the disease on Twitter, patients fight 
disease invisibility and raise public awareness about IBD 
[14]. 
The hashtag #MyIBDHistory was first initiated in 2018 by 
a Twitter account promoting IBD-related discussion called 
@bottomlineibd. The account's manager is the IBD patient 
and advocate Rachel Sawyer, founder of The Bottom Line 
IBD community. Sawyer challenged her fellow IBD patients 
to write their own IBD medical history in a single tweet and 
sign it with the hashtag #MyIBDHistory. 
This research aimed to analyze patients' tweets containing 
the hashtag #MyIBDHistory and to determine the disease type 
of an IBD patient based on their symptoms and treatments. 
We constructed a list of classification features and used 
LASSO logistic regression to predict whether a patient 
suffered from CD or UC. We identified key features and our 
results correlated with IBD-related research. To adhere to 
ethical norms and maintain user privacy, we only publish 
aggregated results that do not reveal the specific users. Sawyer 
herself gave her informed consent to be mentioned in this 
study. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II 
we explore related research regarding health and IBD on 
Twitter, in Section III we describe in detail the methods used 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-002-5
SOTICS 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

in this research, in Section IV we review the results of our 
research, in Section 0 we discuss the implications of the 
results, and in Section VI we conclude and suggest future 
research. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Many studies have used machine learning models [15,16] 
and neural networks [17] for predicting whether an individual 
suffers from a specific illness. Nonetheless, standard logistic 
regression continues to hold a prominent role in performing 
such tasks [18]. It yields as good a performance as more 
complicated models while being easy to interpret [19,20]. 
Using a small dataset, logistic regression even shows more 
stable results compared to machine learning models and 
neural networks [21,22]. Lately, there has been a growing 
interest in the use of penalized regression for IBD diagnosis 
[23]. 
During the past years, text mining and social network 
analysis have been used to detect personal health mentions on 
Twitter [24,25], identify depression [26], or track the spread 
of the covid-19 pandemic [27]. Regarding IBD, two previous 
studies [28,29] have automatically identified patients with 
IBD among the IBD community on Twitter, but did not 
differentiate between CD and UC. The authors in [30] 
implemented a deep-learning method for extracting medical 
entities from social media and showed state-of-the-art results 
on other diseases. Nonetheless, their method failed to 
distinguish CD from other IBD complications because of 
their overlapping symptoms.  
In this study, we addressed a set of users who openly 
declared their IBD on Twitter and tried to distinguish 
between CD patients and UC patients. We used a penalized 
logistic regression model to predict whether a patient with 
IBD suffered from CD or UC based on the information they 
shared in their tweets. 
III. 
METHODS 
In this section, we describe the data we gathered for this 
study and the method we used to analyze the data and predict 
the patients' disease type. 
A. Data Collection and Preparation 
On September 29th, 2021, we used Twitter academic API 
to collect all tweets containing the hashtag #MyIBDHistory. 
We performed a full-archive search that was not limited to a 
specific timeframe. We excluded retweets and limited our 
search to tweets written in English. Two hundred six tweets, 
written by 140 different users, were collected. The earliest 
tweet containing the hashtag was published on July 26, 2018. 
The hashtag was intensively used until mid-August 2018, and 
sporadically used later. The latest tweet containing the hashtag 
was published on July 23, 2019, as a reminder of last year's 
discourse. Our study was based solely on those publicly 
available tweets and did not perform any clinical intervention.  
The collected tweets were manually processed by the 
authors of this paper who are experts in statistics and social 
network analysis. One hundred twenty-five users were IBD 
patients telling their IBD story, while others were engaged 
spectators who did not contribute a story of their own. Patients 
mentioned their age at diagnosis, the medications they have 
tried over the years, whether they underwent any surgeries, 
and more. Some patients described their history in minute 
detail, insisting on fitting everything into several tweets; 
others wrote in general and focused on milestones. We were 
interested in transforming the heterogeneous data written by 
patients into fixed categorical features, so we could analyze 
the data using statistical algorithms. 
We carefully read all patients' tweets and processed them 
into a tabular framework containing categorical features. We 
did not decide on the features in advance; we derived them 
from the information the patients shared in their tweets. With 
every new tweet we read, we added features to our framework 
or updated the existing ones based on the information in 
contained. The only feature we added, though not mentioned 
in the tweets, was gender.  
We deduced each patient's gender by manually looking 
into their Twitter profile and investigating their full name and 
profile picture. Notice that this process can be done 
automatically, as Pérez-Pérez et al. showed [28]. We also 
investigated their user description (bio) since many users 
explicitly mentioned how they should be addressed (e.g., 
she/her) or used informative phrases (like father/husband) in 
their bio. The combination of full name, profile picture, and 
bio was enough to determine the gender of 118 patients: eighty 
females and thirty-eight males. 
We were unable to determine the gender of seven 
responders. Two of them twitted from social enterprise 
accounts that did not reveal personal details regarding their 
authors. The other five accounts were no longer available on 
Twitter, and we did not want to specify their gender only 
based on their screen name. We marked the gender of these 
seven users as Unknown. 
The first feature we derived from the tweets was the type 
of the disease – whether the patient was diagnosed with CD, 
UC, or IBD-U. Thirty-three patients did not mention their 
disease type in their tweets, and we searched their Twitter 
profiles for the information. We were able to determine the 
disease type of all thirty-three patients based on their previous 
tweets and their Twitter bio. Seventy-six patients had CD, 
forty-three had UC, and six had IBD-U. 
The second feature we derived from the tweets was the 
patient's age at diagnosis. Only sixty-seven patients 
mentioned their age at diagnosis, and we left the feature blank 
for all other patients. Since the logistic regression 
classification model ignores all records with missing values, 
we had to forfeit the entire feature or drop half the records in 
our dataset. Since IBD patterns in childhood differ from adult-
onset disease, and distinguishing CD from UC in children 
differs from the equivalent task in adults [31,32], we were 
unwilling to give up the age feature. 
Based on previous literature [1,2], we considered three age 
groups that are meaningful to the outburst of IBD: under 15 
years old (y/o), between 15 y/o and 35 y/o, and over 35 y/o. 
We transformed the continuous age feature into one 
categorical feature, indicating whether the patient belonged to 
one of the three age groups. Thirteen patients were under 15 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-002-5
SOTICS 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

y/o when diagnosed with IBD, forty-five patients were 
between 15 y/o and 35 y/o, and nine were over 35 y/o. The 
fifty-eight patients from whom we were not able to derive 
their age did not belong to any of the age groups. 
Based on the diverse types of drugs known to treat IBD 
[1,33], we created six binary features to describe the patients' 
medical treatments: anti-inflammatory medications (meds), 
steroids, antibiotics, biologic meds, immune system 
suppressors, and other meds. We considered each med feature 
positive if the patients explicitly mentioned they had tried at 
least one medication from that specific drug class. A negative 
value meant that the patients either have tried the drug class 
but failed to mention it or explicitly mentioned they have not. 
Fifty-eight tried anti-inflammatory meds, seventy-seven tried 
steroids, fourteen tried antibiotics, seventy-six tried biologic 
meds, seventy-six tried immune system suppressors, and 
thirteen tried other types of medication.  
We constructed another two binary features: whether the 
patient was initially diagnosed with a different disease or a 
different type of IBD and whether the patient had a fistula. 
Twenty-two patients wrote they were misdiagnosed, and 
seventeen wrote they suffered from a fistula. We considered 
the features positive for the relevant patients and negative for 
the rest. 
We considered three categorical features: whether the 
patient underwent any weight changes, whether they changed 
their diet as a mandatory or preventive action, and whether it 
took a long time to confirm their diagnosis. Thirteen patients 
emphasized losing weight or being extremely underweight, 
while only one mentioned gaining weight with medications. 
Eleven patients experienced forced diet changes, resorting to 
a liquid diet or even tube feeding, and four patients mentioned 
their diet as a way of controlling their disease. Thirty-five 
patients said they had suffered for a long time before 
eventually being diagnosed, and three patients mentioned that 
their diagnosis was part of emergency surgery. We considered 
each of the three categorical features unavailable whenever a 
patient did not explicitly mention one of its values.  
We extracted one ordinal variable from the text: whether 
the patient was ever hospitalized or even had surgery. Eighty-
five patients underwent at least one surgery, fifteen patients 
were hospitalized but have not had surgery, and six explicitly 
wrote they have never been hospitalized. We considered those 
who did not regard hospitalization in their tweets as those who 
said they were never hospitalized. 
We transformed each categorical/ordinal feature into a set 
of binary features based on the number of categories it 
contained. TABLE I. summarizes the features we gathered 
from the tweets by showing each feature and the presence of 
its values in our dataset. The right column of the table explains 
how we eventually used the features in our classification 
model. 
B. Predicting Disease Type 
We wished to predict the type of IBD based on the 
symptoms the patients had and the treatments they received. 
We tried several learning algorithms that showed consistent 
results and decided to focus this paper on logistic regression 
because of its simplicity and interpretability.  
TABLE I.  
CLASSIFICAION FEATURES - DESCRIPTION AND VALUES 
Description and Values Type and Model Use 
Feature Name 
Binary, dependent: CD or UC 
IBD-U as new data 
CD: 76, UC: 43,  
IBD-U: 6 
Disease type 
String, unique identifier 
For internal use only 
Unique Twitter screen 
name 
User 
Two binary features 
Females: 80, males: 38, 
unknowns: 7 
Gender 
Under 15: 13, 15-35: 45, Three binary features 
over 35: 9, unknowns: 58 
Age group 
Binary 
Yes: 58, no: 67 
Meds: anti-
inflammatory  
Binary 
Yes: 77, no: 48 
Meds: steroids 
Binary 
Yes: 14, no: 111 
Meds: 
antibiotics 
Binary 
Yes: 76, no: 49 
Meds: biologics 
Binary 
Yes: 76, no: 49 
Meds: immune 
suppressors 
Binary 
Yes: 13, no: 112 
Meds: others 
Binary  
Yes: 21, no: 104 
Wrong diagnosis 
Binary  
Yes: 17, no: 108 
Fistula  
Two binary features 
Lost: 13, gained: 1, 
neither: 111 
Weight 
Mandatory: 11, lifestyle: Two binary features 
4, neither: 110 
Diet  
Two binary features 
Prolonged suffering: 35, 
Emergency surgery: 3, 
neither: 87 
Pre-diagnosis  
(Prior to 
diagnosis) 
Surgery: 85, hospitalized: Two binary features  
15, neither: 25 
Hospital 
We considered the disease type as the dependent variable 
and the rest of the features as independent variables and used 
logistic regression to predict whether the patient suffered from 
CD (1) or UC (0). We excluded the six patients suffering from 
IBD-U from our dataset and considered them as unlabeled 
new observations. We used the seventy-six patients suffering 
from CD and the forty-three patients suffering from UC to 
train and validate our model. 
We used the scilkit-learn (sklearn) package in python [34] 
to split our dataset into training (80%) and test (20%) sets and 
to build a LASSO logistic regression model. We decided to 
use L1 regularization since we had twenty-one explanatory 
variables and a relatively small dataset. The LASSO logistic 
regression would help eliminate unnecessary independent 
variables [35].  
We used five-fold cross-validation on our training data to 
evaluate different regularization parameter values ( 𝑐 ∈
{0.1,0.5, 1, 10}) and select the best one (𝑐 = 1). Then we 
trained a LASSO logistic regression model with the best 
regularization parameter on the entire training set. We applied 
the obtained classifier to the test set to evaluate its 
performance 
and 
estimated 
feature 
importance 
by 
investigating the regression coefficients. 
Finally, we trained our model on all 119 records of CD and 
UC patients and used the obtained classifier to classify the 
IBD-U patients. This means, we trained our model on the 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-002-5
SOTICS 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

entire dataset of labeled data to predict the classification of 
new observations. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
TABLE II. shows five classification metrics evaluating the 
performance of our regression model. The table shows the 
evaluation of the model on the test set (when trained on the 
training set) and the evaluation of the model when trained on 
the entire dataset (for predicting the class of IBD-U patients). 
TABLE III. shows the confusion matrices of both cases. We 
can see that while our model successfully identified the CD 
patients, it had difficulty identifying the UC patients. 
TABLE II.  
REGRESSION MODEL EVALUATION RESULTS 
Evaluation Measure 
Evaluation Data 
Test Set 
Entire Dataset 
Accuracy 
0.75 
0.7563 
Precision 
0.7273 
0.7527 
Recall 
1.0 
0.9211 
F1 
0.8421 
0.8284 
Area Under the Receiver Operating 
Characteristic Curve (AUC ROC) 
0.625 
0.6931 
TABLE III.  
CONFUSION MATRICES FOR THE REGRESSION MODEL 
Evaluation Data 
Predictions  
Predicted UC 
Predicted CD 
Test Set 
True UC 
2 
6 
True CD 
0 
16 
Entire Dataset 
Ture UC 
20 
23 
True CD 
6 
70 
 
Figure 1 demonstrates the importance of the features in 
our model by showing the regression coefficient of each 
feature. We can see that the strongest feature was fistula, 
tilting the classification in favor of the CD class. Indeed, in 
our dataset, none of the patients who mentioned suffering 
from a fistula had UC: sixteen of them had CD, and one had 
IBD-U. The second strongest feature was a mandatory diet 
change, again favoring the CD class. Out of the eleven 
patients who mentioned changing their diets due to 
nutritional deficiencies, ten had CD, and one had IBD-U. 
Then, there was a group of three features favoring a CD 
prediction 
with 
notable 
coefficients: 
Pre-diagnosis: 
prolonged suffering, Meds: biologics, and Hospital: surgery. 
Nine features turned out to be unimportant and were 
omitted from the regression model: Gender: female, Age 
group: under 15, Age group: 15-35, Meds: antibiotics, Meds: 
immune suppressors, Meds: others, Weight: gain, Diet: 
lifestyle, and Pre-diagnosis: emergency surgery. In Figure 1, 
we can see that their coefficients were shrunk to zero by the 
LASSO algorithm. Another insignificant feature was 
Hospital: hospitalization, whose coefficient was close to zero 
(0.04). Gender: male had the second smallest absolute 
coefficient of 0.125. 
TABLE IV. presents the features and predictions for the 
six IBD-U patients. Though five of them were classified as 
CD patients, we can see that for only three of them, the 
classification probability was greater than 0.6, and for only 
one of them, the classification was done with great confidence 
(probability greater than 0.99). The probabilities of the other 
three predictions were close to 0.5 (between 0.4 and 0.6), 
meaning that the classification between CD and UC was 
inconclusive. The results in TABLE IV. are highlighted with 
a gray scale based on the strength of the classification. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Barplot of feature importance based on regression coefficients. 
TABLE IV.  
FEATURES AND PREDICTIONS FOR IBD-U PATIENTS 
Feature/ Prediction 
Patient 
IBD1 
IBD2 
IBD3 
IBD4 
IBD5 
IBD6 
Gender: female 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
Gender: male  
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Age group: under 15 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
Age group: 15-35 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Age group: over 35 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
Meds: anti-
inflammatory  
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
Meds: steroids 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
Meds: antibiotics 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
Meds: biologics 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Meds: immune 
suppressors 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
Meds: others 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Wrong diagnosis 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Fistula  
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
Weight: loss 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
Weight: gain 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Diet: mandatory 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
Diet: lifestyle 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Pre-diagnosis: 
emergency surgery 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Pre-diagnosis: 
prolonged suffering 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Hospital: surgery 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Hospital: 
hospitalization 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Probability 
0.622 
0.567 
0.994 
0.603 
0.428 
0.589 
Class  
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
 
The results from the feature importance analysis and the 
prediction for IBD-U patients correlate and demonstrate the 
challenge in predicting the IBD type. As can be seen in Figure 
1, substantially more features favored a CD classification and 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-002-5
SOTICS 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

the few favoring a UC classification had relatively small 
coefficients. The results in TABLE IV. show the influence of 
the features on the prediction: When the model observed one 
of the strong features, it confidently returned a CD prediction. 
When none of the strong features were present, the model 
returned an equivocal prediction based on weaker features.  
Patient IBD3 who had a fistula and a mandatory diet 
change, the two strongest classification features, was 
unambiguously classified as a CD patient. Patients IBD1 and 
IBD4 both used biologic medications and showed prolonged 
suffering and surgery, respectively. Hence, they were both 
classified as CD patients, but not with the same confidence. 
Each of the other three patients showed only one of the 
medium level features, if any. Their predictions were, 
therefore, indecisive with probabilities close to 0.5. Patient 
IBD5 who used both anti-inflammatory medications and 
steroids, the two strongest features favoring UC, was the only 
one classified as a UC patient.          
V. 
DISCUSSION 
In this section, we discuss the study's principal findings, 
describe its strengths and limitations, and suggest future work.  
A. Principal Findings 
In this study, we collected and analyzed tweets containing 
the hashtag #MyIBDHistory, where IBD patients described 
their disease history in just one tweet. We transformed the 
natural language text of the tweets into a tabular database 
with binary features that indicated the symptoms and the 
treatments the patients experienced. Then, we trained a 
LASSO logistic regression model that predicts the type of the 
disease, CD or UC, based on these binary features. We 
analyzed the importance of our classification features and 
used the classifier to predict the disease type of patients with 
IBD-U. 
We did not compare the performance of our classifier 
with classification results from previous studies [28-30] since 
our prediction task differed from theirs. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first study to use social media data for 
differentiating between CD and UC. 
The feature importance analysis and the prediction of 
disease type for IBD-U patients showed the complexity of 
distinguishing between these two diseases. In some cases, the 
CD's distinctive characteristics helped identify it. In other 
cases, the prediction probabilities were approximately 0.5, 
indicating the ambiguity of the classification. 
The use of LASSO logistic regression helped to eliminate 
unnecessary independent variables that did not contribute to 
the classification. A regular logistic regression would give a 
small coefficient, but not zero. If we had used regular logistic 
regression, we had to perform a procedure of model selection 
such as forward selection or backward elimination to get 
exactly zero coefficients.  
The two key features that helped distinguish CD from UC 
were having a fistula and resorting to mandatory diet changes 
due to nutrient deficiency. These findings align with IBD-
related literature since suffering from fistulas or malnutrition 
is common with CD, but seldom occurs with UC [36,37]. The 
IBD-U patient who was classified as a CD patient with great 
confidence also suffered from fistula and malnutrition.  
The female indicator was ignored entirely by the classifier 
and the male indicator had the second smallest absolute 
coefficient. Overall, our data contained more females than 
males, even though there are more male Twitter users than 
female Twitter users [38]. Moreover, the prevalence of CD is 
similar within the two genders and the prevalence of UC is 
geographically dependent [39]. Both facts can explain why 
the gender features did not contribute to the classification.  
B. Impact on Health-Related Research 
Twitter is becoming an online space for health-related 
conversations where patients share personal experiences on a 
global scale [25]. The platform is available for patients at any 
time, allowing them to get support from others sharing their 
disease. It constitutes a huge database of personal health 
information that can enrich traditional medical data.  
Twitter research enables to collect data from substantial 
amounts of patients simultaneously and to perform both 
personal and aggregative analyses. Hence, such research may 
derive not only personalized insights but also global 
comprehensions regarding the disease.  
This study demonstrates how findings from Twitter 
research on IBD patients correlate with existing medical 
knowledge regarding the disease. Predicting the type of IBD 
will help physicians when determining the right treatments 
for patients. Insights from such study can serve as a decision 
support system for physicians facing a challenging diagnosis. 
Therefore, further mining Twitter for health-related data may 
complement and enhance healthcare research. 
C. Limitations 
We focused our research on Twitter and manually 
processed tweets containing the hashtag #MyIBDHistory. 
Therefore, our patients' dataset was relatively small and 
contained only 125 patients. Enriching the dataset, by 
identifying more patients on Twitter or expanding the search 
to other social media, could significantly improve the 
classifier's performance and make the classification more 
precise.  
Our limited data were also imbalanced: we had 76 CD 
patients and only 43 UC patients. Nonetheless, we used a 0.5 
classification threshold such that any probability greater than 
0.5 indicated a CD prediction. This could explain the bias of 
our model towards the CD class.  
The limited dataset and its imbalance were inherent in the 
information available on Twitter. We did not filter the data 
other than excluding retweets and focusing on tweets written 
in English. All tweets containing the hashtag #MyIBDHistory 
that met this description were used in this study.  
Finally, though both having a fistula and undergoing 
surgery had meaningful coefficients, the two features are 
correlated since surgery is usually necessary for treating 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-002-5
SOTICS 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

fistulas [37]. Our surgery feature does not differentiate 
between bowel surgeries and fistulotomies.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In the era of personalized medicine and patient-centered 
care, it is important to derive insights that reflect the patients' 
perspective, as manifested in social media. Collecting and 
analyzing patients' data on Twitter shows that CD and UC are 
not easily distinguishable and highlights two key features that 
help identify CD from UC. It also points out insignificant 
features for separating the two. The findings provide an 
additional foundation for existing medical knowledge 
regarding IBD. 
In a previous study [29], aiming to identify patients with 
IBD on Twitter, we trained and evaluated a classifier that 
distinguishes patients with IBD from other users who tweet 
about the disease. In future research, we intend to enrich our 
patients' dataset by applying the classifier and identifying 
more patients with IBD. Then, we can mine their Twitter 
timelines for the key features found in this study and enable 
the analysis of big data.  
Future research should compare the results of such 
scalable analysis with those presented in this study and 
evaluate the contribution of collecting patients' data 
automatically. On the one hand, one can achieve a much larger 
dataset of patients. On the other hand, the dataset may contain 
erroneous identification of patients due to the imperfection of 
the classifier. It would be interesting to investigate how this 
trade-off affects the quality of the results. 
This research suggests that there is room for collaboration 
between physicians and engineers regarding understanding 
chronic diseases. The personal information shared by 
chronically ill patients on Twitter can be used to understand 
better the disease and how it affects patients' lives. The 
presented methods, which were applied to IBD, can also help 
to explore other medical conditions. Although such analysis 
should not strive to replace physicians or draw conclusions of 
clinical 
nature, 
it 
may 
provide 
complementary 
recommendations for healthy lifestyles based on the wisdom 
of the crowd. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported by a grant of the ERA-Net 
Cofund HDHL-INTIMIC (INtesTInal MICrobiomics) under 
the umbrella of Joint Programming Initiative "A healthy diet 
for a healthy life". 
REFERENCES 
[1] Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation of America, "The facts about 
inflammatory bowel diseases," Inflammatory bowel diseases, 
vol. 2, p. 1, 2014. [PDF]. 
[2] I. Trivedi and L. Keefer, "The emerging adult with 
inflammatory bowel disease: challenges and recommendations 
for the adult gastroenterologist," Gastroenterology Research 
and Practice, 2015. 
[3] B. S. Kirschner, "Inflammatory Bowel Disease Unclassified 
(IBD-U)/Indeterminate Colitis," 
Textbook 
of 
Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, pp. 393-399, 
Springer, Cham, 2022. 
[4] D. A. Winter et al., "Pediatric IBD-unclassified is less common 
than previously reported; results of an 8-year audit of the 
EUROKIDS registry," Inflammatory bowel diseases, vol. 21, 
no. 9, pp. 2145-2153, 2015. 
[5] G. G. Kaplan, "The global burden of IBD: from 2015 to 2025," 
Nature reviews Gastroenterology & hepatology, vol. 12, no. 
12, pp. 720-727, 2015. 
[6] B. Norton, R. Thomas, K. G. Lomax, and S. Dudley-Brown, 
"Patient perspectives on the impact of Crohn’s disease: results 
from group interviews," Patient preference and adherence, vol. 
6, pp. 509-520, 2012. 
[7] D. T. Rubin et al., "The impact of ulcerative colitis on patients’ 
lives compared to other chronic diseases: a patient survey," 
Digestive diseases and sciences, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1044-1052, 
2010. 
[8] J. Devlen et al., "The burden of inflammatory bowel disease: a 
patient-reported qualitative analysis and development of a 
conceptual model," Inflammatory bowel diseases, vol. 20, no. 
3, pp. 545-552, 2014. 
[9] N. J. Hall, G. P. Rubin, A. Dougall, A. Hungin, and J. Neely., 
"The fight for ‘health-related normality’: a qualitative study of 
the experiences of individuals living with established 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)," Journal of health 
psychology, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 443-455, 2005. 
[10] D. O. Frohlich, "The Social Construction of Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease Using Social Media Technologies," Health 
Communication, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1412-1420, 2016. 
[11] G. G. Macdonald et al., "Patient perspectives on the challenges 
and responsibilities of living with chronic inflammatory 
diseases: qualitative study," Journal of Participatory Medicine, 
vol. 10, no. 4, e10815, 2018. 
[12] A. Rowe, S. Rowe, A. Silverman, and M. L. Borum, " P024 
Crohn’s disease messaging on twitter: who’s talking?," 
Gastroenterology, vol. 154, no. 1, pp. S13-S14, 2018. 
[13] P. O'Neill, B. Shandro, and A. Poullis, "Patient perspectives on 
social-media-delivered telemedicine for inflammatory bowel 
disease," Future Healthcare Journal, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 241, 2020. 
[14] D. O. Frohlich and A. N. Zmyslinski-Seelig, "How Uncover 
Ostomy challenges ostomy stigma, and encourages others to do 
the same," New media & society, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 220-238, 
2016. 
[15] S. F. Weng, J. Reps, J. Kai, J. M. Garibaldi, and N. Qureshi, 
"Can machine-learning improve cardiovascular risk prediction 
using routine clinical data?," PloS one, vol. 12, no. 4,  
e0174944, 2017. 
[16] I. K. A. Enriko, M. Suryanegara, and D. Gunawan, "Heart 
disease prediction system using k-Nearest neighbor algorithm 
with simplified patient's health parameters," Journal of 
Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering 
(JTEC), vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 59-65, 2016. 
[17] N. H. Ismail, N. Liu, M. Du, Z. He, and X. Hu. "A deep 
learning approach for identifying cancer survivors living with 
post-traumatic stress disorder on Twitter," BMC Medical 
Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1-11, 
2020. 
[18] M. E. Shipe, S. A. Deppen, F. Farjah, and E. L. Grogan, 
"Developing prediction models for clinical use using logistic 
regression: an overview," Journal of thoracic disease, vol. 11, 
no. Suppl 4, pp. S574-S584, 2019. 
[19] S. Nusinovici et al., "Logistic regression was as good as 
machine learning for predicting major chronic diseases," 
Journal of clinical epidemiology, vol. 122, pp. 56-69, 2020. 
[20] E. Christodoulou et al., "A systematic review shows no 
performance benefit of machine learning over logistic 
regression for clinical prediction models," Journal of clinical 
epidemiology, vol. 110, pp. 12-22, 2019. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-002-5
SOTICS 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[21] T. van der Ploeg, P. C. Austin, and E. W. Steyerberg, "Modern 
modelling techniques are data hungry: a simulation study for 
predicting dichotomous endpoints," BMC medical research 
methodology, vol. 14, no. 1, pp 1-13, 2014. 
[22] S. Nalluri S, R. Vijaya Saraswathi, S. Ramasubbareddy, K. 
Govinda, and E. Swetha, "Chronic heart disease prediction 
using data mining techniques," Data engineering and 
communication technology, pp. 903-912, Springer, 2020. 
[23] B. Stankovic et al., "Machine Learning Modeling from Omics 
Data as Prospective Tool for Improvement of Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease Diagnosis and Clinical Classifications," Genes, 
vol 12, no. 9, p. 1438, 2021. 
[24] L. Luo, Y. Wang, and D. Y. Mo, "Identifying COVID-19 
Personal Health Mentions from Tweets Using Masked 
Attention Model," IEEE Access, 2022. 
[25] Z. Yin, D. Fabbri, S. T. Rosenbloom, and B. Malin, "A scalable 
framework to detect personal health mentions on Twitter," 
Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 17, no. 6, e4305, 
2015. 
[26] Y. Zhang et al., "Monitoring depression trends on twitter 
during the COVID-19 pandemic: observational study," JMIR 
infodemiology, vol. 1, no. 1, e26769, 2021. 
[27] M. Lopreite, P. Panzarasa, M. Puliga, and M. Riccaboni, "Early 
warnings of COVID-19 outbreaks across Europe from social 
media," Scientific reports, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-7, 2021. 
[28] M. Pérez-Pérez, G. Pérez-Rodríguez, F. Fdez-Riverola,  and A. 
Lourenço, "Using twitter to understand the human bowel 
disease community: exploratory analysis of key topics," 
Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 21, no. 8, e12610, 
2019. 
[29] M. Stemmer, Y. Parmet, and G. Ravid, "Identifying Patients 
With Inflammatory Bowel Disease on Twitter and Learning 
From Their Personal Experience: Retrospective Cohort Study," 
Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 24, no. 8, e29186, 
2022. 
[30] S. Scepanovic, E. Martin-Lopez, D. Quercia, and K. Baykaner. 
"Extracting medical entities from social media," In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Health, Inference, and 
Learning, pp. 170-181, 2020. 
[31] A. Bousvaros et al., "Differentiating ulcerative colitis from 
Crohn disease in children and young adults: report of a working 
group of the North American Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition and the Crohn's 
and Colitis Foundation of America," Journal of pediatric 
gastroenterology and nutrition, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 653-674, 
2007. 
[32] A. S. Day, O. Ledder, S. T. Leach, and D. A. Lemberg, 
"Crohn’s and colitis in children and adolescents," World 
journal of gastroenterology: WJG, vol. 18, no. 41, p. 5862, 
2012. 
[33] A. B. Pithadia and S. Jain, "Treatment of inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD)," Pharmacological Reports, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 
629-642, 2011. 
[34] F. Pedregosa et al., "Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python," 
the Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 12, pp. 2825-
2830, 2011. 
[35] R. Tibshirani, "Regression shrinkage and selection via the 
lasso," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B 
(Methodological), vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 267-288, 1996. 
[36] J. J. Ashton, J. Gavin, and R. M. Beattie, "Exclusive enteral 
nutrition in Crohn's disease: Evidence and practicalities," 
Clinical nutrition, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 80-89, 2019. 
[37] J. Cosnes, C. Gower–Rousseau, P. Seksik, A. Cortot, 
"Epidemiology and natural history of inflammatory bowel 
diseases," Gastroenterology, vol. 140, no. 6, pp. 1785-1794, 
2011. 
[38] D. Noyes, "Distribution of Twitter users worldwide as of 
January 2021, by gender," 2021. 
[39] T. Greuter, C. Manser, V. Pittet, S. R. Vavricka, and L. 
Biedermann, "Gender Differences in Inflammatory Bowel 
Disease," Digestion, vol. 101, no. 1, pp. 98-104, 2020. 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-002-5
SOTICS 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

