Modeling Democratic Elections
via Congestion Networks
Guillermo De Ita Luna, Yolanda Moyao and Meliza Contreras
Computer Sciences Faculty, Autonomus University of Puebla, M´exico
Email: {deita, ymoyao, mcontreras}@cs.buap.mx
Abstract—We address the problem for selecting a representa-
tive via a democratic election simulated by a multi-agent system.
Due to lack of analytic tools for simulating electoral tendencies,
we propose here, a model based on a set of non-cooperative agents
which are competing for obtaining a maximum number of votes
from a population. A key element in this model is to recognize the
‘proﬁles’ that characterize in a speciﬁc election how the voters
make their political decisions. In order to inﬂuence the voters,
the agents apply different strategies. In our model, an agent’s
strategy is represented via a vector of weights which indicate
the amount on each proﬁle the agent utilize to persuade the
voters. We have programmed a simulation system of the voting
tendencies by sectors, in agreement with the changes of strategies
that the candidates perform throughout their political campaign.
As the proﬁles used for characterizing the voters, and forming the
strategies of the agents have a limited nature, then a congestion
network is built. The use of a congestion network allows us to
search the singular points of the competition system, enabling us
to predict the possible winner of that competition according to
the strategies used by the agents.
Keywords-Multi-Agent System; Congestion Games; Electoral
Simulation; Voting Tendencies
I. INTRODUCTION
The Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has motivated the explo-
ration of new reasoning issues and methods, as well as
combined disparate reasoning modalities, into an uniﬁed
framework which allows to deal with incomplete, imprecise,
contradictory, and changing information.
In the AI, the application of intelligent agents has brought a
great commercial interest, and it has been useful for decision
making. One of the possible applications of the intelligent
agents is to simulate speciﬁc human tasks. For example, an
important human task has been the selection of a representative
from a population.
The selection of a representative is both an important and
common problem. For instance; selecting the candidate of
a political party, the head of a department, a supervisor,
etc. This means, when it is necessary to select the best
representative within a group of people. Different methods
have been intended to carry out this task.
We consider each one of the candidates as an independent
player with his own strategies. Each agent competes against
each other in order to win a political election. In [2], [3], [7],
[8], [15], several models of voting are established assuming
democratic systems. Particularly, the absolute majority system,
where the player who obtains a relative majority becomes the
winner, is studied.
In such systems, a candidate must obtain over 50% of the
popular ballots to become the winner of the election. If none
of the players overcome this threshold in the ﬁrst round, then
there is a runoff between the two top candidates to decide who
is the winner.
Different mathematical formalisms have been developed to
describe electoral systems and outcomes by modeling both
voting rules and human behavior
[3], [7], [15], [16]. We
remit the reader to [3], [7], for a survey on the fundamental
characteristics in voting and election theories. And in
[6],
[11], [15], [16], we can ﬁnd practical examples of particular
vote schemes occurring around the world.
In [9], [16], an analysis on the winning coalition structure
of an election system is done as a simple legislative game,
considering the importance of relative ideological positions in
a legislative decision game, that is, as a non-cooperative game.
While in
[3], [6], [13], the dynamics of their model is
based on applying the search for equilibrium points, which
must resolve the expectations of voters and the optimum policy
choices of representatives assuming stationary environments.
Nowadays, demoscopic studies (opinion polls) are accom-
plished in order to determine some electoral preferences.
Those surveys, as describers of a moment, allow us to make
predictions for a very short term. An opinion poll, in its
traditional elaboration form, usually reﬂects outlying questions
about the candidates, and about the political competition
such as; popularity indexes, perceptions on the nature of the
candidates or their images, the impact of their campaigns,
mottos, etc. Many times the factors that are measured through
those surveys answer more to the interest of the political
parties than to the perception of the voters.
Due to this panorama that lacks the necessary analytic tools
for studying electoral tendencies, we propose a simulation
system of the political behavior for certain voters segments
in accordance to the changes of strategies that the candidates
perform in the course of their campaign.
A key element for determining the winner of the contest,
is to recognize the proﬁles characterizing the voters, given
that all agents form their set of strategies based on promises
and actions which try to inﬂuence the voters. Those promise
and actions are reﬂected via a set of weights assigned to the
proﬁles characterizing the voters.
Our logical model is an application of a congestion game
[5], [10], [12]. Building a congestion game, allows us to realize
a search for the singular points in the competition system,
85
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

enabling us to predict the possible winner of an speciﬁc
electoral contest. Once the singular points have been achieved,
we can determine the winning strategy and the agent that will
obtain the largest number of votes, that is, we can determine
who will be the winner as well as its winning strategy.
In Section 1, we describe the problem to consider. In
Section 2, we present the deﬁnition of the concepts and the
mathematical objects to be used in our model. In Section 3, we
describe how to model the political preferences of the voters.
As well as the method used for determining a relative hierarchy
among those preferences. In Section 4, we show the method
used for computing the number of votes according to the
hierarchy previously established. In Section 5, we describe a
case study made during the principal’ election in the Faculty of
Computer Sciences- BUAP, M´exico. In that election, we apply
our model in order to predict the expected voting results by
the student’s sectors. In Section 6, we present the conclusion
and future works.
II. BUILDING THE MULTI-AGENT SCENARIO
Let A = {A1, A2, . . . , An} be a set of n intelligent agents.
Ai ∈ A represents one of the competitors contending for a
position or, in political terms, a candidate competing in a
political election.
In the selection of a representative among a group of
intelligent agents, it is common that beyond the beliefs, such
selection also depends on the actions and the set of resources
that each agent holds in order to persuade the population to
vote for him.
We represent the resources used by the agents via a discrete
set P∫ = {P1, . . . , Pm}. The elements of P∫ are called
”proﬁles”. Such proﬁles are the key objects to characterize
as the voters as the strategies of the candidates.
Each agent has to make sure to possess (or to offer to
the voters) a certain quantity of each proﬁle. The quantity
of a proﬁle that an agent believes to have is represented by
a weight. An agent (and sometimes, his campaign’s team)
organizes the proﬁles and their corresponding weights in
different ways, creating so different political programs to be
used in accordance with the answer of the population.
We call to each one of the agent’s programs a strat-
egy. An agent apply one of its strategies to compete
with other agents in order to obtain a maximum number
of votes. A strategy si of Ai is a set of pairs: si
=
{(P1, wi1), (P2, wi2), . . . , (Pm, wim)}, where each weight
wij, j = 1, . . . , m is the amount of the proﬁle Pj that the
agent Ai applies in one of his political programs (si).
In fact, each agent (or his advisers) has to determine which
proﬁles (and their corresponding weights) an agent should
promote, and he also has to plan how to arrange those proﬁles
in his political program. According to the different scenarios
or to the results obtained through the opinion polls, as well as
to the agent’s knowledge about the preferences of the voters,
the agent selects one of his strategies. However, the agents are
autonomous and consequently, their strategies are private.
Let S(Ai) = {si1, si2, . . . , sini} be the set of different
strategies that the agent Ai ∈ A can apply for attracting voters.
TABLE I
EXAMPLE OF A STRATEGIES-MATRIX FOR A SET OF n AGENTS
P1
P2
P3
...
Pm
s11
20
25
0
...
10
s12
0
20
10
...
15
...
...
s1n1
5
0
10
...
10
s21
5
15
0
...
10
s22
0
10
10
...
15
...
...
s2n2
20
0
10
...
10
...
...
sn1
5
5
30
...
0
sn2
10
10
15
...
5
...
...
snnn
10
10
0
...
17
We can order the set of strategies of the agents via a matrix
called the strategies-matrix (see Table
I). Once all agents
have chosen one of their strategies si ∈ S(Ai), i = 1, . . . , n,
a state (an action in the multi-agent system) is formed e =
(s1, . . . , sn) ∈ S(A1)X . . . XS(An). Let S = {e1, . . . , eo}
be the set of different states formed by the multi-agent system.
Then, a state ej, j
= 1, . . . , o is one of the possible
conﬁgurations of the multi-agent system, and according to the
strategies applied by the agents, they obtain a certain number
of votes in each state. As the agents change their strategies in
order to obtain more votes, they interactively form new states
into this multi-agent system.
While more and more agents utilize the same limited proﬁle,
such proﬁle tends to saturate, and its inﬂuence on the voters
will also become smaller and smaller. Thus, a congestion
network is an ideal gadget for modeling this kind of share
resources.
A congestion network game is a triple (A, P∫, k), where
A is a set of n players, P∫ is a set of m limited resources,
and k is an increasing cost function, which depends on the
number of agents using the same resource
[6], [13]. Every
player has to choose a strategy which allows him to decrease
his cost function value. A state e = (s1, . . . , sn) occurs when
each player selects a strategy si. For each resource Pi ∈ P∫,
let Pi’s congestion ni be the number of players whose chosen
strategy contains the proﬁle Pi. The gain for player At ∈ A
is 
Pj∈si kPj(nt) and the goal of each player is to maximize
his earnings.
The cost of a resource (one edge on this network) is
given by the function of the congestion, i.e., the number of
agents allocating the same resource. This class of congestion
networks has been extensively used in game theory [2], [5],
[10]. In many applications, players incur some costs when
they change their strategy. Hence, it is reasonable to assume
that a player is only interested in changing his strategy if it
signiﬁcantly increase his earnings.
Seeking for the optimal interactive strategy of an agent
is a hard problem, because its effectiveness depends mostly
on the strategies of the agents involved
[4]. Thus, we are
modeling the selection of a representative as a non-cooperative
86
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

game, where there is a limited quantity of each proﬁle which
represents a limited resource in a congestion network.
Another relevant element of our model consists in the way
to characterize the voters’ population. We use the same proﬁles
applied in the codiﬁcation of the strategies of the agents for
characterizing the sector’s of voters.
III. CHARACTERIZING THE SECTORS OF VOTERS
Let Pot = {Z1, Z2, . . . , Zk} be a population of voters
distributed in k sectors. Let WZi = |Zi| be the number
of voters of the sector Zi. We assume that the cardinalities
WZi, i = 1, . . . , k are known values. The members of each
sector are characterized and identiﬁed by a set of ‘proﬁles’
which represents the main political characteristics of the
members in that sector.
An important problem is to determine the main proﬁles
used for characterizing each sector, as well as to determine
its relative political importance among them. Usually, political
experts can approximate those values after analyzing previous
elections and carry out a profound study on the political
behavior of the voters’ population.
In our model, a signiﬁcant sample of each sector of voters is
selected to apply opinion polls. The responses obtained allow
us to conﬁgure the set of proﬁles P∫ as well as to determine
the relative order of importance of each proﬁle in each sector.
For designing the opinion polls, we considered the historical
political behavior of the voters, the identiﬁcation of their
political and economical necessities, and the current electoral
interests. In fact, the questions included in the opinion pulls
are directed to recognize the real neccesities of the voters and
not just to quantify the popularity of the candidates.
Given a sector Zi ∈ Pot, a weight wzij for each proﬁle
Pj ∈ P∫ is computed based on the responses obtained in the
opinion polls. If a proﬁle Pj is not relevant, then wzij = 0,
and if a proﬁle Pj is too important for characterizing Zi, then
wzij has to be a greater value than the other proﬁles’ weights.
In some cases, the values wzij are obtained as the average
of the values assigned to that proﬁle by the selected sample
of each sector. Therefore, if the weight of each proﬁle is
computed through opinion polls, it is adequate to calculate
the average of responses, and to apply minimum squares to
ﬁt each poll with the average values of the sector in order to
eliminate ’false positives’.
The false positives cases are represented as responses of
voters who do not want to cooperate with the opinion polls,
either when they try to be tricky or when a voter had sluggish
responses. A formula which could be applied to eliminate false
positives consists in, for example, eliminate the response of the
voters whose total sum over the difference with the averages
of the sector is greater than the 50% of the sum of the averages
in that sector.
We consider as a relevant proﬁle Pc ∈ P∫ the impact that
the political campaign has on the voters, in such a way that we
are able to evaluate some changes of preferences of the voters
before and during the political campaign. Furthermore, we
have found that as a reﬂection of the heterogeneous character
TABLE II
RELATIVE WEIGHTS FOR PROFILES CHARACTERIZING EACH SECTOR
Sectors
P1
P2
...
Pm
Z1
AvP1Z1
AvP2Z1
...
AvPmZ1
Z2
AvP1Z2
AvP2Z2
...
AvPmZ2
...
Zk
AvP1Zk
AvP2Zk
...
AvPmZk
of the sectors, the proﬁles can have a positive or a negative
inﬂuence on the voters when they make their political decision.
An order of relevance is given over the proﬁles of each
sector Zi ∈ Pot. Let AvPjZi be the relative value given to
the proﬁle Pj with related to the other proﬁle’s values of the
sector Zi. For example, AvPjZi could be the percentage of
members from Zi in which the proﬁle Pj is their main proﬁle.
The values AvPjZi, j = 1, . . . , m could be percentages that
determine a relative order over the set of proﬁles characterizing
Zi and then, usually m
j=1 AvPjZi = 100%. Then, the values
AvPjZi build a hierarchy among the proﬁles of a same sector.
A simple way to determine the percentages values AvPjZi
of a sector Zi, is to assign the same importance to all proﬁles
and then, each percentage AvPjZi is equal to 100% divided
by the number of relevant proﬁles in Zi.
Other way to compute AvPjZi, j = 1, . . . , m is by adding
up the average weights wzij obtained for all proﬁles and
then, divide the corresponding weight of each proﬁle by
such sum, that is, for each ﬁxed sector Zi, i = 1, . . . , k
AvPjZi = wij/ 
P j∈P∫ wij.
Many times the sum of averages for the positive proﬁles
is greater than the sum of averages of the negative ones,
because the positive proﬁles have a greater inﬂuence than the
negative ones to decide the vote in a proportion according to
the political scenario which is being modeled.
We order the relative percentages AvPjZi in a vector V Zi,
that is, V Zi[j] = AvPjZi, j = 1, . . . , m, i = 1, ..., k. Each
vector V Zi, i = 1, . . . , k operates like a ’sieve’ that selects
the adequate proportion of the proﬁles to characterize a sector
Zi. The vectors V Zi are stored as rows of a matrix MPot
(see Table II).
In the following section, we present a way to distribute
the total number of votes among the agents. Such distribution
depends on their strategies and the relevance of the proﬁles
characterizing each sector.
IV. COMPUTING THE NUMBER OF VOTES
Given a state e = (s1, . . . , sn), let wij be the weight for
the proﬁle Pj ∈ P∫ that the agent Ai ∈ A applies in his
strategy si. For each relevant proﬁle Pj of a given sector Zi,
a sum of the weights of that proﬁle is done among the agents
determining the value T opj = 
Al∈A wlj. T opj represents
the total quantity of Pj to be shared among all agents.
Then, the value PAlPj = (wij ∗ AvPjZi)/T opj represents
the proportional part that each Al ∈ A has contributed to
T opj. Notice that AvPjZi = 
Al∈A PAlPj.
Given a state e ∈ S and a sector Zi, for each agent
Al ∈ A, let S(e, Al, Zi) = m
j=1 PAlPj be the proportion
of voters from the sector Zi which are potential voters for the
87
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

agent Al, l = 1, . . . , m. The cardinality of the sector WZi is
divided among all agents in a proportional way due to the sum
S(e, Al, Zi).
We denote the number of voters of a sector Zi for an agent
Al ∈ A as #Vote(Al, Zi) and that values is computed as:
#V ote(Al, Zi) = WZi ∗ (S(e, Al, Zi
100
)
(1)
The value #Vote(Al, Zi) represents the proportional part
of the members in the sector Zi which are potential voters
for Al, l = 1, . . . , n. Then, #Vote(Al, Zi) is computed for all
sector Zi ∈ Pot in order to count the total voters from the
population corresponding to an agent. Let #V otes(A l, e) be
the total voters for Al and considering all the population, then
#V otes(Al, e) =
k

i=1
#V ote(Al, Zi)
(2)
Given a state e = (s1, . . . , sn) ∈ S, an improvement step
for an agent Ai is a change of his strategy from si to s′
i
changing to a new state e′ and where his number of votes
#V otes(Ai, e′) increases with respect to the previous value
#V otes(Ai, e).
Thus, we can see the neighborhood of a state e consisting
of those states that derive from e only in one agent’s strategy.
The improvement over the number of votes of an agent A i
is precisely #V otes(Ai, e′) − #V otes(Ai, e). Consequently,
the potential function for our system is T otal #V otes(e) =

Al∈A #V otes(Al, e).
Given a state e, a move of improvement through local
optimal values is made by the search of a neighbor e ′ where

Ai∈A #V otes(Ai, e′) > 
Ai∈A #V otes(Ai, e).
Notice that given a state e, there is an agent who obtains
the maximum number of votes, we call such an agent the
candidate in the state e, and it is denoted as Candidate(A, e),
which is computed as:
Candidate(Al, e) = max{#V otes(Al, e), l = 1, . . . , n}
(3)
Although to change an agent’s strategy (even if the
Candidate does not change his strategy) represents a change
in the state from e to e′, and the agent who obtains the
candidacy could change too.
In our system, we can analyze the ﬂuctuations of the votes’
tendencies in order to organize the strategies of a speciﬁc
agent, either as ’bad’ or ’good’ strategies, according to the
number of votes that the agent obtains. Furthermore, we can
ﬁnd which are the better strategies for a particular agent,
according to a speciﬁc electoral scenario.
Assuming that all the people really vote, we have a ﬁxed
total number of votes and, if we look for an optimal point the
search could be cyclic. Meaning that if an agent reduces his
number of votes, then any other agent will increase his own
number of votes. So, some agents could always improve their
number of votes from one neighbor to another.
An adequate variable to avoid cyclic searches, is to consider
the percentage of abstention in each sector. Although the
abstention is a real fact in democratic systems, to determine
the percentage of that abstention require a profound analysis of
the traits and behavior of the population in previous elections.
In our system, the political campaign is developed on a
certain time in such a way that when a candidate recognizes a
new way to improve his strategy, that new strategy is applied
and then, the number of votes have to be re-computed for all
the involved candidates. This continues until no further impact
can be produced on the number of votes or when the political
campaign is ﬁnished.
Of course, there are factors and events in an election
that could not be directly modeled via a congestion game,
since there are some hiding and misleading events that can
occur throughout democratic elections. For example, in the
presidential elections in M´exico in 1988, during the counting
of votes, the computational system ’fell down’ for a certain
number of hours, and when the system was ﬁnally restored,
the voting tendencies had changed. Such tendencies did not
change again during the remaining time of the computing
process, giving so the victory to the candidate belonging to
the government’s political party [1], [14].
Thus, modeling electoral competitions, even though they
call themselves democratic, holds a high grade of extra-legal
manipulations that cause that the results of any computational
system differ from what really happens. Specially, in corrupted
processes, when the rules are manipulated, or when the rules
are not clear established during the competition.
V. A CASE STUDY
We have modeled the elections of the principal in the
Faculty of Computer Sciences (FCC) in Puebla, M´exico,
where the vote casts are organized in 11 sectors; 5 belonging
to professors, 5 to students and 1 to administrative workers.
In the FCC, there are two bachelor programs: Computer
Sciences and Engineering in Computing. For each bachelor
program, there are two sectors; Basic and Formal sectors.
Then, there are four sectors at bachelor level; Basic Eng,
Advance Eng, Basic Cs, Advance Cs and one sector at post-
graduate level: Postgrade.
There are about 1900 students at the bachelor level and
46 students at post grade level. There are 117 Professors and
15 administrative workers. In this election, 1448 of bachelor
students and 40 posgrate students voted. While 100% of
administrative workers voted and 111 professors voted.
The political preference for professors and administratives
can be captured via classical opinion polls due to the size of
those sectors. In fact the biggest size of any of those sectors
was 32 professors. Then, we can collect, for all professors and
administratives, their political preference. On the other hand,
the size of population of students and their vague answers
for determining just one preferable candidate, generate the
adequate scenario to prove our model. Thus, we simulate the
tendencies of the vote just for the ﬁve students’ sectors.
Then, we applied an opinion poll in order to recognize the
proﬁles that distinguish the main features that students deem
important to decide their vote. We found that the following
88
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

TABLE III
MAIN PROFILES FOR CHARACTERIZING THE STUDENTS
Proﬁle
Description
P1
Opinion of the classmates
P2
Opinion of the academic advisers
P3
Opinion of the professors
P4
Opinion of the political student groups
P5
Opinion of the ofﬁcial administration
P6
Commitment shown by the candidate
P7
Academic background of the candidate
P8
Political group that supports to the candidate
P9
Political work during the campaign
P10
Possible contact with the candidate
P11
Image and conﬁdence shown by the candidate
P12
Whether they support reelection or desire a new administration
12-proﬁles were the most important for deciding their vote,
(see Table III).
Afterward, another opinion poll was applied to the students
in order to assign a relative order of the proﬁles according to
what they consider from more to less important for making
their political decision. We processed such opinion polls and
computed the average of the responses. Adjustment by mini-
mum squares was applied to the sample in order to eliminate
the ’false positives’.
The formula applied to eliminate false positives consists of
eliminating the students’ cases where the sum of the difference
with the averages of the sector is greater than the 50% of the
sum of the same averages of that sector.
We found that some proﬁles have positive inﬂuences (called
positive proﬁles) and others have negative inﬂuence (called
negative proﬁles) on the students when they are deciding their
vote. We also assign a relative percentage to each proﬁle,
according to the relative importance assigned by the students
to those proﬁles. It is important to note that the FCC is
an institution belonging to the area of engineerings and by
tradition, the students give a great importance to the academic
and professional aspects of the professors, sometimes they give
much more relevance to those aspects than the image and the
way that the professors interact with them.
The sum of the percentages over the positive proﬁles was
100%, while the sum of the percentages over the negative
proﬁles generally gave values from 40% to 50%. According
to the atmosphere that exists in the FCC, we detected that
positive proﬁles had more impact than negative ones.
TABLE IV
RELATIVE WEIGHTS FOR PROFILES CHARACTERIZING SECTORS
Proﬁle
Basic Eng
Adv Eng
Basic Cs
Adv Cs
Posgrade
P1
-1.1062
-2.789
-2.957
-0.9381
-3.06
P2
-0.9878
-0.194
9.58
-0.187
9.51
P3
10.896
10.361
10.46
9.41
8
P4
-1.3414
-1476
-1.7
-2.44
-1.66
P5
-1.15
-2.0354
-1.73
-4.41
-1.22
P6
19.565
19.458
16.64
17.47
17.956
P7
16.197
17.651
15.96
15.46
17.07
P8
11.677
12.168
10.91
12.5
11.11
P9
39.13
38.916
33.278
34.95
53.867
P10
14.92
14.94
13.563
15.6
12.889
P11
13.958
13.615
11.364
13.844
12.62
P12
-38.646
-39.124
-35.463
-39.5
-35.31
In Table IV, we present the results obtained after processing
the opinion instruments showing the relative percentage of
importance for each proﬁle in each one of the 5 students’ sec-
tor. Negative values are indicative of proﬁles with a negative
impact on the students.
Of course, the agents do not know precisely neither what
the most important proﬁles nor their importance is. Although,
they intuitively recognize the importance of some proﬁles and
they try to impact the voters through their political programs
(strategies).
The strategies of each agent can be considered as a vector of
12-values, each value represents the intention of the candidate
to inﬂuence the voters trough that corresponding proﬁle. The
weights constituting the strategies of the candidates were
computed based on; the curriculum vitae, the proposals, the
political group supporting the candidates, and in this particular
case, in the knowledge and perception that the authors have
about the candidates.
For any other electoral contest, opinion polls could be
designed to calculate the corresponding weights in order to
form the agents’ strategies. Each agent applies one of his
strategies creating a state e of the multi-agent system. The
agents change their strategies at the moment and in accordance
to the opinion polls that they know.
In Table V and VI we present some of the strategies used
by the agents. At the beginning, we considered three agents
competing for the position (see Table V). Later on, only
two agents were considered, and we also recognize that the
strategies applied to the bachelor sectors were different to
those used for the postgraduate sector.
We analyze the percentages of the votes assigned to each
candidate in accordance to the main changes in their strategies.
The formulas (1) and (2) allow us to compute the number of
votes for each agent, and in fact, is a way to simulate the
outcomes obtained by the agents.
In Figure 1, we show three moments of the change of strate-
gies just for one of the competing agents; at the beginning, in
the middle and the ﬁnal period of the political campaign. We
also show the real percentages obtained for the selected agent
in order to compare it with the estimations previously made.
TABLE V
INITIAL STRATEGIES’ AGENTS
Proﬁle
Director
Opponent 1
Opponent 2
P1
8
6
4
P2
6
5
4
P3
8
6
3
P4
5
5
2
P5
7
5
2
P6
10
5
5
P7
8
4
8
P8
8
8
3
P9
0
0
0
P10
8
5
5
P11
8
5
5
P12
10
-3
-5
The curve labeled as ’Initial Vote Estimate’ represents the
estimation of the percentage of votes obtained for A 1 con-
89
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

sidering three competing agents. While the other two curves
represent the estimation of the percentages of votes obtained
for A1 considering just two competing agents, which was the
real number of competing candidates in this election.
TABLE VI
FINAL STRATEGIES’ AGENTS
Proﬁle
Dir Bachelor
Dir Post
Opp Bachelor
Opp Post
P1
9.5
5
5
8
P2
8
9.5
5
4
P3
7
9
8
5
P4
8.5
8.5
5
5
P5
6
6
3
3
P6
7
7
4
4
P7
8
8
5
5
P8
8
8
6.8
6.8
P9
6
9
8.5
5.5
P10
7
7
7
7
P11
8
8
6
6
P12
10
10
1
1
Comparing the estimated results at the end of the campaign
versus the real percentages of votes, the absolute errors on the
percentages of the votes obtained for the candidate labeled as
Opposite, were: 2.5, 11.5, 2.5, 3.6, 7.2, which correspond to
the sectors: Basic Eng, Advance Eng, Basic Cs, Advance Cs
and Postgrade sectors, respectively.
If we want to model elections at the scale of, for ex-
ample, governor of a city, the key point in our proposal is
the partition of the voters into sectors with common and
recognized necessities (proﬁles). That implies that we do not
only have to know the sizes of the sectors, but we also have
to analyze the political and economical historical behavior
of those sectors. The demoscopic studies can be helpful for
recognizing the proﬁles and their relative importance among
them. Of course, this imply a bigger effort than just to apply
the common opinion polls for analyzing political preferences.
However, predictions more precise request deeper studies. And
our model is a guide for how can be done those studies.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have designed a multi-agent system that simulates the
process of selecting a representative in a democratic system
organized by sectors. In our proposal, we assume that each
prospectus determines a ﬁnite set of strategies (political pro-
grams). Each one of these strategies is constituted by a set of
weights on the proﬁles characterizing the voters.
Our system can be used to study the tendencies of the vote
and for this, it’s necessary to determine the relevant proﬁles
that characterize the political behavior of the voters. Those
proﬁles model how the voters, in a speciﬁc election organized
by sectors, make their political decision.
The proﬁles used for characterizing the voters, and for
forming the strategies of the agents, have a limited nature.
Consequently, a congestion network is built. Working with
congestion networks allows us to apply a search for the
singular points in the competition system, enabling us to
predict which agent is expected to win the electoral contest
and also, what was his winning strategy.
Fig. 1.
Percentages of votes estimated and obtained for one of the candidates
We have applied our model to simulate the elections of the
principal in the FCC - BUAP University, obtaining estimations
very close to the real outcomes. Future works could come
from the application of our model in other electoral contests,
and specially, to scale our method at the level of cities’ and
countries’ elections.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Fernandez, Edad, Sexo y Pol´ıtica. Preferencias Electorales en M´exico,
La Ventana, vol. 5, 1997, pp. 133-152.
[2] B. V¨ocking, Congestion Games: Optimization in Competition, Proc. of
the 2nd algorithms and complexity, Kings College Publications, London
2006, pp. 9-20.
[3] J. Banks and J. Duggan ,A dynamic model of democratic elections in
multidimensional policy spaces, Quarterly Journal of Political Science,vol
3. pp. 269-299.
[4] D. Carmel and S. Markovitch, Learning Models of Intelligent Agents,
Eighth Innovative Applications of A.I. Conf., AAAI Press, California
1996, pp. 62-67.
[5] A. Fabrikant, C. Papdimitriou, and K. Talwar, The complexity of Pure
Nash Equilibria, In Proc. 34th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
STOC’04, ACM, New York 2004, pp. 604-612. .
[6] A. Feldmann, H. R¨glin, and B. V¨cking, Computing Approximate Nash
Equilibria in Network Congestion Games, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 5058, 2008, pp. 209-220.
[7] J. Gill and J. Gainous, Why does voting get so complicated?, Statical
Science vol. 17, No.4, 2002, pp. 1-22.
[8] M. Golder, Democratic Electoral Systems around the World 1946-2000,
In Electoral Studies, Elsevier, vol. 24, 2003, pp. 103-121.
[9] M. Jackson and B. Moselle, Coalition and Party Formation in a Legisla-
tive Voting Game, Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 103, Issue 1, March
2002, pp. 49-87.
[10] R. Lipton, E. Markakis, and A. Mehta, Playing large games using simple
strategies, In Proc. of ACM E-Commerce, 2003, pp. 36-41.
[11] M. Nagel, A Mathematical Model of Democratic Elections, Current
Research Journal of Social Sciences, vol. 2(4), 2010, pp.255-261.
[12] M. Penn, M. Polukarov, and M. Tennenholtz, Congestion games with
failures, In Proc. of the 6th ACM Conf. on Electronic commerce, 2005,
pp. 259-268.
[13] M. Quant, P. Borm, and H. Reijnierse, Congestion network problems
and related games, European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 172,
2006, pp. 919-930.
[14] P. Quiroz, La psicolog´ıa en los procesos electorales, la educaci´on y la
vida cotidiana, Direcci´on de Fomento editorial - BUAP, 2008.
[15] K. M. Quinn and A. D. Martin, An Integrated Computational Model
of Multiparty Electoral Competition, Statistical Science Vol. 17, No. 4,
2002, pp. 405 - 419.
[16] K. Strom, A Behavioral Theory of Competitive Parties, in American
Journal of Political Science (Houston: University of Texas Press) vol. 34,
No. 2, 1990, pp. 565-598.
90
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

