The Impact of Technological Development on the use of Technical Product 
Documentation. 
A Multimethod-Multisource Approach to Identify Customers’ Communication Behavior and the 
Implications on new Requirements for Virtual Support Systems.
Thomas Puchleitner 
Institute of Information Science and Information Systems 
University of Graz / evolaris next level GmbH 
Graz, Austria 
e-mail: thomas.puchleitner@uni-graz.at 
 
Abstract—Late 
technological 
developments 
show 
strong 
impacts on customers’ communication behavior. While only 
years ago customers perused printed manuals in case of 
technical problems, they now request new ways for support. It 
is of crucial importance for businesses to identify these changes 
in communication behavior and to adopt their support offers 
to match customers’ expectations. This paper utilizes a 
multimethod-multisource approach to give insights into the 
new importance of technical documentation as link between 
customer support and product marketing. After indicating the 
ongoing change in media consumption, creators of technical 
documentations as well as product users are analyzed 
regarding 
the 
usage 
scenarios 
of 
technical 
product 
documentation. Finally, major implications for businesses are 
built on customers’ changed requirements of virtual support 
systems. 
Keywords-technical 
documentation; 
product 
support; 
communication 
behavior; 
customer 
support 
systems; 
technological development 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Consequences of late developments in the areas of 
information and telecommunication systems are still taking 
place in various application fields. Technical communication 
[1] in form of different kinds of documentations and manuals 
plays a major role for the adoption of new products and is 
thereby strongly influenced by these technical developments 
[2]. While only years ago every newly acquired product 
obtaining some level of technical complexity (like the 
consumer electronics industry) required bulky manuals, 
hence product enclosures only aim to support customers by 
guiding them through first installation processes. Especially 
in the software industry these changes can conspicuously be 
observed. Product packaging for software like image 
processing applications or operating systems contained often 
one or two CDs as carrier medium but required thousands of 
sites of printed manuals resulting to boxes with several 
ponds of weight [3]. Thanks to digitalized content and 
developments in product usability, modern software products 
require far less printed documents or no need for printed 
manuals is given any more at all. In other branches like the 
automobile industry these potentials are not fully released 
yet. Still many car manufacturers deliver their vehicles with 
a set of diverse and impersonalized booklets and manuals, 
consisting of sections referencing extras and features that are 
not even integrated in the specific car. So how do 
developments in information technology affect technical 
documentation and how will businesses have to react on 
those changes? 
A. Marketing aspects of technical documentation 
Technical communication includes both company-
internal as well as external information regarding the 
product. Technical documentation is defined as the pool of 
information that is specifically handed to the user [4]. From a 
customer’s point of view any kind of documentation fulfills 
one single need: to gather the relevant information required 
with as little afford as possible [5]. Thereby two main 
triggers for the demand of support can be spotted. First, in an 
early phase within the product lifecycle support to learn how 
to handle the product is required. Later on this changes to 
more problem-orientated support scenarios when product 
failures are to overcome. While customers therefore only 
notice the functional aspects of product support, businesses 
have to consider every touch point with its’ customers from a 
marketing point of view as well [6]. The importance of 
customer support is already acknowledged in marketing 
literature, determining forms of product accompanying 
documents as instruments of marketing [4]. By the ongoing 
transition from classic printed documents to alternative 
digitalized variants companies are forced to adopt their 
format of customer and product support. It is of crucial 
importance to not only offer up-to-date products but also 
adequate support for existing as well as potential future 
customers. The structure of the paper is described in the 
following section. 
II. 
RESEARCH GAP AND METHODLOGY 
The increasing importance of technical documentation 
for marketing purposes forces businesses to react according 
to their customers’ changes in communication behavior. 
Businesses have to identify the new roles of communication 
technologies for customers and how they utilize these 
technologies. Thereby businesses gain the opportunity to 
adopt their marketing communication activities in an 
appropriate way to offer relevant information wherever and 
however the customer expects the information. This paper 
contributes to an ongoing research project regarding new 
marketing potentials in modern customer support by the 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

utilization of state-of-the-art application of information 
systems. The paper plays a crucial role within this research 
process as one key question relates to the change in users’ 
communication behavior. Only by the identification and 
adaption of customers’ communication behavior in support 
cases are businesses enabled to build adequate information 
systems. We therefore analyze the impact of new 
communication technologies to allow implications on how 
customers expect businesses to place their support 
mechanism.  
 
To assure relevant as well as rigorous implications a 
mixed methods research approach was chosen. By utilizing a 
variety of research methods (multisource and multimethod) a 
higher quality on an evidence of results is given [7].  
 
 
Figure 1. Research methodology 
Figure 1 shows the applied research methodology. The 
basis for all changes in communication behavior lies in the 
adoption of new technologies. Section 3 focuses on these 
developments by a detailed analysis of relevant indicators for 
the last years. In section 4, insights on how the usage of 
technical documentation is developing from the perspective 
of content creators is given by applying a meta-analysis of a 
survey that was conducted in 2010. As the main focus of a 
study on customer behavior is the customer himself the fifth 
section focuses on statements and observations regarding the 
user. Results of an online survey are presented to show 
customer opinions as well as a research observation was 
performed to allow a comparison between customers’ 
statements and their actual behavior.   
III. 
TECHNOLOGY AS ENABLER 
Developments in technology build the foundation for 
changes in customers’ usage behavior. Therefore it is of 
relevance to monitor and build awareness for such 
developments as only by analyzing these data and indicators 
trends can be identified. In cases of technology monitoring it 
is of high importance not only to highlight current statistics 
directly related to a specific topic but also to include close-by 
areas. This allows a more holistic view and the implication 
of tendencies, which may impact a specific field of interest. 
Some of the analyzed data shows therefore no direct relation 
to technical documentation, but by the holistic view on these 
studies implications for further developments in the concrete 
field can be given. 
A. Customers are online and mobile 
The most influential transition in the last decades was 
the rise of the Internet. As more and more people gather 
their information online or use the Internet in its many other 
ways, businesses are expected to be reachable in the web. 
While in the year 2000 less than 400 Million people were 
online this number increased to around 2.5 Billion in 2012 
[8]. As an example in Germany more than 76% of all age 
groups are online in 2013 [9]. Besides the rise in online 
rates also the medium to get online is of importance for 
content providers. The worldwide traffic caused by mobile 
devices increased from 6,25% in the end of 2010 to more 
than 23% in the last quarter of 2012 [10]. Smartphones and 
tablet computers are becoming more and more popular for 
daily online routines, with leads to about 70% Germans 
using their smartphone to access the Internet on a daily basis 
[11]. 
B. Changes in media consumption 
These developments caused be the pervasion of the 
Internet had tremendous impacts on various business 
models. 
Especially 
business 
models 
dealing 
with 
reproducible digital data had to be adopted. The music as 
well as the movie industry was directly affected but also the 
television and radio market is still changing. All forms of 
printed newspapers, magazines, books and of course 
manuals exist in some kind of duality between an online and 
an offline version. Depending on the target group these 
changes seem more or less dramatically. Results of the 
ARD/ZDF Longtime Study on Mass-communication [12] 
allow two different propositions. First, more different ways 
to consume media emerge, and secondly the usage behavior 
is highly dependent on the age.   
 
 
Figure 2. Change in media consumption [Q9] 
Figure 2 shows results of this study. A transition of 
media consumption from the three classic forms of TV, 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

radio and newspapers to online content can be determined. 
More interesting is the separation in overall and young 
survey participants as these numbers show that younger 
customers are mainly reachable by online channels. 
C. Social communities are still growing 
Again the Longtime Study on Mass-communication [12] 
gives detailed insights on how people use the Internet. 
Besides typical leisure activities like watching videos or 
sharing photos also functional aspects are still relevant. In 
fact gathering information and gaining knowledge is the 
most utilized private usage scenario with Wikipedia and 
various forms of online communities at highest ranks. 
Especially social networks like Facebook play a major role 
for most Internet users. Regardless if a company decides to 
utilize such networks for marketing purposes, customers do 
communicate product-related issues in the public. The 
traditional thinking in sender and recipients becomes 
obsolete due to social interactivity between users. 
Communication Space models [13] better describe these 
settings where companies lose some kind of control 
regarding their communicated messages. Improper support 
may therefore directly influence potential customers on their 
decision as existing customers state their experienced 
treatments. Hence, every company-performed action may 
initiate a new reaction, which could get communicated to 
the public. 
D. Merging physical and virtual world 
The 
last 
significant 
change 
affecting 
technical 
documentation and product support from a technological 
point of view is the merging between the physical and the 
virtual world. Technologies start from simple Quick-
Response (QR) Codes, where an image is scanned and 
interpreted to perform an action, to radio-frequency 
technologies like Near-Field-Communication (NFC). While 
research often focuses on the technical differences between 
QR-codes and the NFC technology the latter allows much 
wider fields of potential applications. Active two-way 
communication could enable display-less products to 
transport messages or status codes to smartphones where an 
output could then be displayed. Products showing error-
codes where the user has to look up the meaning of the code 
would be simplified in many ways. In 2015, more than 250 
Million smartphones integrating the NFC technology will be 
sold leading to more than 25% of all sell-through 
smartphones [14]. 
Augmented Reality as one of the most advanced fields 
of application allows a direct merging of both worlds on the 
device’s display by adding an additional layer on top of the 
cameras output. Thereby the display not only shows a live 
picture on what the camera is filming but also identifies 
specified objects or schemas and shows some extra 
information regarding these elements. Hence, for technical 
documentation this merging is of high interest, as many 
physical products without displays require manuals in form 
of virtual contents such as text or video instructions. By 
utilizing a bridging technology users would be able to 
receive context-sensitive information depending on the 
product version or support situation. 
IV. 
WRITERS AS CREATORS OF TECHNICAL 
DOCUMENTATION 
Developments and numbers in the last section are 
gathered by various research institutions and organizations 
and represent facts in technical and societal incidents. To 
allow feasible implications for technical documentation also 
opinions of experts in the area seem beneficial. A study on 
technical documentation by Broda [15] in 2010 analyzed 
survey answers of experts and technical writers. Technical 
writers create all forms of technical documents, for 
company-internal usage as well as for customer usage. 
 
 
Figure 3. The role of technical writers 
Figure 3 shows the important role of technical writers as 
they take the product as an input to produce various forms 
of technical documents as an output. Technical writing is 
therefore associated to the scientific field of translation 
science as writers translate product features into customer-
orientated manuals. As already mentioned in the first section 
technical documentation is gaining importance in the field 
of marketing because such manuals directly transport 
company information to the customer. Technical writers 
therefore are more and more required to closely interact 
with marketing personnel or are even organized within the 
marketing department itself.  
A. Results 
Broda received 59 entirely filled out questionnaires. 10 
out of the 59 were entitled as experts in the field of technical 
documentation, 49 were service providers for technical 
documentation. Another 13 service providers did not finish 
the survey and are therefore marked as incomplete. The 
survey took place in Germany from August to September 
2010. The study focused on aspects of technical 
documentation in mobile environments as on smartphones 
or tablet computers. Overall practitioner gave more skeptic 
answers then experts, which leads to the assumption that 
current limitations also occur at the level of the creation of 
documentation. Typical limitations of surveys have to be 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

considered such as bias effects. While experts may answer 
in a more general context, answers from service providers 
directly relate to their work. Two main results can be 
highlighted: there are obstacles to overcome for new 
technologies entering the technical documentation market 
and the content representation is expected to depend on the 
usage intention.  
B. Obstacles to overcome for new technologies 
Participants were asked to list the three main reasons 
why printed standard documentation will not vanish in the 
next years. 40 participants voted with “legal issues” as top 
answer (see Figure 4). Highly restricted countries like 
Germany or Austria still require some kind of printed and 
product-accompanying form of documentation. The second 
most significant reason is the availability of documents. 
While printed manuals are in physical possession of the 
customer and can be attached in cases of reselling, 
participants worry about these aspects for digital versions. 
 
Figure 4. Obstacles to overcome for new technologies 
C. Adequate application of content representation 
Secondly, the study gives also insights on how content 
could be represented for different usage scenarios of product 
support. This information is especially beneficial as the 
participants are the most significant target group for such a 
complex question. Experts as well as practitioners both have 
knowledge on the advantages and disadvantages of these 
representation forms and are therefore empowered to match 
both entities. 
Unsurprisingly 
of 
low 
relevance 
are 
audio 
representations, with the classic text and pictures at the very 
top as Figure 5 shows (ratings between 0 and 5). 
Augmented Reality is expected to be beneficial in total but 
especially for maintenance activities. Screen casts are an 
example for a very diverse form of information 
representation. While suitable for teaching materials there is 
no, match for more product-related content.  
 
Figure 5. Forms of documentation and suggested content representation 
V. 
USING TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION 
Even more important than content creators are opinions 
of actual users. Therefore, an online survey was conducted 
to identify current usage behaviors related to technical 
documentation as well as to get impressions on customers’ 
attitude on professional product support. Like in other social 
science research methods also participants of surveys intend 
to naturally bias their answers. To allow the forming of 
implications from a customer behavior analysis a 
multimethod approach was undertaken. Parallel to the 
survey a method to detect the actual behavior in form of an 
observation was required. Google Trends [16] as a feature 
of the worlds most popular search engine Google allows the 
comparison of different search terms. By utilizing this tool 
an observation on how users perform their search in 
problem situation was conducted. The combination of both 
research methods pictures a change in communication 
behavior. 
A. Survey results 
The survey took place in Austria with a total response of 
254 questionnaires. Average age was 25.7 years (standard 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

deviation 7.64) with 71% female and 29% male 
participation. Results for this research paper are grouped 
into three categories: (1) dependence of used support 
method on product type, (2) online search behavior and (3) 
obstacles for online support systems. 
 
1) Dependence of used support method on product type  
Results in Figure 6 highlight that the type of product 
(software 
or 
non-software) 
strongly 
influences 
the 
utilization of support methods. While in the software 
industry help systems can easily be integrated within the 
product, non-software product may not facilitate such 
mechanism. The media format discontinuity for using online 
support systems on physical products plays a major role 
here.  
 
 
Figure 6. Use of support method is depending on product type.  
2) Online search behavior 
The second important result of the survey relates to the 
customers’ behavior when requesting support online. While 
from a traditional perspective a strong relation between 
product and manufacturer is given in support cases, 
customers rely on generic search engine providers to find 
adequate solutions for their problems. Figure 7 shows that 
with more than 50% of all participants more users rather use 
such a search engine than to directly visit a support site 
provided by the manufacturer. This means a tremendous 
change for support service providers as search engines are 
operated by an algorithm and can therefore hardly be 
manipulated by content providers. 
 
3) Obstacles for online support systems 
While customers are aware of online support systems and 
how to search for requested information, they seem also 
familiar with some limitations of online platforms. For the 
majority the permanent availability of support is of high 
importance. On the one hand customers have to be 
connected to the Internet to use online services, on the other 
hand customers rely on the availability of the support 
service itself.  
 
 
Figure 7. Search engines are used before manufactorers’ support site. 
Printed manuals or documents in digital form are in 
possession of the customer and guarantee this requirement. 
As Figure 8 illustrates, participants could not clarify if 
support platforms may entirely replace traditional manuals. 
 
 
Figure 8. Availability as trigger for traditional manuals. 
B. Observations 
In a second attempt Google Trends was used to ensure 
rigor and relevance of the empirical survey data. While 
obstacles of online support can barely be acknowledged by 
such a method, differentiations in usage scenarios 
depending on product type (see point 1 in empirical results) 
as well as implications for general search behavior (point 2 
in empirical results) are more feasible. In a first test a 
software-related problem was simulated to see how 
customers search in case of software problems. Second, a 
technical non-software product was chosen. Apple’s Iphone 
4 was the subject of interest in these queries, as the product 
is known for a problem with its integrated antenna affecting 
the phone’s reception. When the problem first occurred 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

customer did not know that it was caused by a 
manufacturing error. This incident builds a perfect occasion 
for an observation as customers were in a typical product 
support situation. Both products do not include an extended 
amount of manuals since the software comes with an 
integrated system and Apple represents products of high 
usability. As Google Trends allows the comparison between 
terms in form of percentage relations only, no absolute 
numbers of search queries can be given. 
 
Figure 9. Context-sensitive search outnumbers the demand for manuals 
(geographic location: United States). 
The software-test was processed by querying for a 
typical Microsoft Excel problem. While traditional manuals 
do not provide context-sensitive help, search engines are 
used to query for an answer directly related to a problem. 
Therefore, while searching for the traditional manual would 
indicate the need for technical documentation in the typical 
structure, customers intend to directly enter the question 
resulting into endless search query variations. As Figure 9 
shows even a comparison between the search terms manual 
and problem demonstrates more queries for the latter. 
Including the variations of real appended problem situations 
would outnumber requests for traditional manuals. 
 
Figure 10. Search engines directly link to support content (geographic 
location: United States). 
Figure 10 highlights an online search behavior. Again 
customers directly enter their problem into the generic 
search engine without any demand for manuals. 
VI. 
IMPLICATIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
Businesses have to adopt their external communication 
to meet customers’ demand for product support. Results 
show the traditional user manual devolves into online 
support systems where context-sensitive and location-
independent information is made available. Users directly 
transform their support questions into queries, which 
implies that businesses have to build their support offerings 
search-engine-optimized. Additionally the media format 
discontinuity is an obstacle to overcome by utilizing linking 
technologies between the physical and virtual world. At last 
the availability of support plays a major role for customers, 
which businesses have to ensure. 
 
This publication is a crucial contribution to marketing as 
well as information systems research. Both disciplines put 
the customer into the center of attention. Further research 
will be done to identify how virtual online support systems 
have to be implemented to match requirements of customers 
as well as businesses. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Redish, “Technical Communication and Usability: Intertwined 
Strands and Mutual Influences Commentary”, IEEE Transactions on 
Professional Communication, vol. 53, no. 3, 2010, pp. 191-201. 
[2] 
J. Hennig and M. Tjarks-Sobhani, Usability and technical 
documentation, Lübeck, Schmidt-Römhild, 2007. 
[3] 
Amazon, 
http://www.amazon.com/IBM-Warp-Connect-3-0-
Bonus/dp/B0023R30V4/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1373794258&sr
=8-3&keywords=ibm+os%2F2+warp (last visited July 14, 2013). 
[4] 
D. Gebert, Instruction manuals as a marketing tool, Wiesbaden, 
Forkel, 1988. 
[5] 
B.S. Wiese, J. Sauer, and B. Rüttinger, "Consumers' use of written 
product information" in Ergonomics, vol. 47, no. 11, 2004, pp. 1180-
1194. 
[6] 
M. Bruhn and G. M. Ahlers, "Customer Touch Points – Tasks and 
method of multi-channel communication" in Handbook Multi-
Channel-Marketing, Wiesbaden, Gabler, 2007, pp. 393-425. 
[7] 
J. W. Creswell, Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and 
Mixed Methods Approaches, Los Angeles, SAGE Publications, 2009. 
[8] 
ITU World Telecommunication, ICT Indicators, worldwide, 2000 to 
2012 via Statista. 
[9] 
TNS Infratest, D21-Digital-Index, Germany, 2001 to 2013, via 
Statista. 
[10] Walker Sands, Q4 2012 Mobile Traffic Report, worldwide, Q4 2010 
to Q4 2012, via Statista. 
[11] Tomorrow Focus AG, Mobile Effects 2013-1,  Germany, January 
2013, via Statista. 
[12] ARD/ZDF, Longtime Study Mass-communication,  Germany, 1970-
2012. 
[13] T. Puchleitner and M. Harnisch, "Communication Technology as 
Enabler for the Communication Space", in P. Kommers and P. Isaías, 
Proceedings of the IADIS International Conference e-Society 2012, 
Berlin, 2012, pp. 265-272. 
[14] Pyramid 
Research 
Global 
Telecom 
Insider, 
NFC-Enabled 
Smartphones to Account for 28% of Global Market by 2015. 
[15] S. Broda, Mobile technical documentation, Lübeck, Schmidt-
Römhild, 2011. 
[16] Google, http://www.google.com/trends/explore (last visited August 
22, 2013). 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

