Mobile Applications for Ethical Consumption - 
Metrics and Frameworks 
Stephanie Watts 
Dept. of Information Systems 
Boston University School of Management 
Boston, MA 
swatts@bu.edu 
 
Abstract—Mobile smartphone applications are becoming 
available in the service of ethical consumption. Ethical 
consumption occurs when consumers are empowered with 
sufficient information about firm behavior to make their 
purchases in consonance with their own ethics.  Such tools vary 
in the transparency of the data they rely on to deliver ethical 
information to users, from those based on rich, complex but 
proprietary data sets, to those based on parsimonious but 
transparent, public-domain data sets. This paper presents a 
theoretical framework for understanding the potential impacts 
of these differences, and provides an example of what the 
metrics in a transparent, public-domain data set might look 
like.  Such applications have the potential to substantially 
increase the role of the public in supporting ecology and social 
justice.  
 
Keywords- mobile computing, smartphones, transparency, 
ethical consumption, corporate social responsbility.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Consumer citizenship [1] is becoming increasingly 
important as individuals seek to consider the impact of their 
purchasing choices on wider society and the environment 
[2]. The 2008 ethical purchasing index published by the 
U.K.’s co-operative bank reports both growing support for 
ethical products and services, and also large losses to brands 
due to consumer boycotts. The ethical consumption 
movement is growing, perhaps not coincidentally at a time 
of high levels of distrust in business. In the U.S., a 2008 
Gallup survey found that 47% of consumers say they have 
"very little or no" trust in business [3]. A 2009 survey by 
AccountAbility in the U.K. found that over half the public 
(56%) say businesses themselves must be accountable for 
their own behavior, but only 6% of people trust them to do 
so. This is problem for business, since good stakeholder 
relations enable firms with superior financial performance to 
sustain this for longer and help poorly performing firms 
recover more quickly [4]. Large consumer product 
organizations have spent billions on branding over the past 
decade, the primary purpose of which is to build consumer 
trust. For a public distrusting business, the possibility of 
collective engagement through ethical consumption offers 
an alternative path:  A market-based approach to achieving 
the benefits of socially responsible commerce, such as better 
environmental stewardship and a strong middle class. 
Fundamentally, the more that companies practice corporate 
social responsibility (CSR), the more they will reap the 
documented benefits of CSR, such as fostering consumer 
and employee engagement [5], enhancing corporate 
reputation [6], and increasing profits [7][8].  
The increased accessibility of information about global 
concerns 
has 
amplified 
consumer 
activism 
[9]. 
Controversies 
surrounding 
business 
practices 
are 
increasingly disseminated via the internet, resulting in better 
informed consumers [10]. The Internet enables consumers 
to overcome many of the information asymmetries that 
characterize traditional consumer markets, and to obtain 
high levels of market transparency. Communication 
technologies enable consumers to more easily act 
collectively to impose sanctions on firms via exit and voice, 
and to play an active role in influencing business practices 
[11]. As a result, increasing numbers of consumers are 
seeking to engage and influence corporate behavior through 
their actions in the marketplace, responding to reports of 
questionable practices such as environmental pollution, 
child labor, and/or animal welfare abuse. This reflects 
consumers’ understanding that their collective buying power 
is significant and can exert economic pressure. In one 
modeling study, economic pressure from consumers on 
companies and brand owners was found more likely to lead 
to improved workplace conditions than socio-political 
pressure [12], and there is no reason to believe this does not 
extend to other ethical business practices. One of the 
reasons that there is little research in this area is that until 
very recently, even the Internet had not made it easy and 
convenient for consumers to shop with their consciences. 
Information on corporate behavior available on the Internet 
is vast, complex, and can be of questionable validity. Such 
information is rarely easy or convenient to use at the point 
of purchase, and many areas of consumer concern are 
characterized by a lack of effective labeling and the 
“greenwashing” of negative activities by firms themselves. 
The inconvenience to consumers of applying CSR 
information to their everyday purchasing behavior has been 
cited as the cause of the ‘values-action’ gap, wherein 30% 
of consumers report that they are very concerned about 
ethical issues, yet the market for ethically-produced foods 
remains at 5% [13]. The advent of mobile smartphones is 
changing this situation, providing convenient, easily 
accessible 
information 
about 
business 
practices 
to 
consumers at the point of purchase. Smartphones such as 
Apple’s iPhone and Google’s Android are poised to 
significantly alter information asymmetries in consumer 
markets more effectively than the Internet has been able to 
thus far. Smartphone users downloaded 2.4 billion 
applications in 2009, and are predicted to download 7 
1
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

billion in 2013 [14]. There are currently over 50 iPhone 
applications in distribution that address the needs of green 
consumers. For example, Greenopia by Geodelic Systems 
and GreenMap by Green Map Systems utilize GPS 
technology such that users can locate green businesses when 
traveling. Applications such as CarbonCalc by Carbon 
Harmony, and ClimateCounts provide tools to help users 
reduce their carbon footprint. What’s on My Food by the 
Pesticide Action Network, Shop No GMO by Mark 
Rainbow, and Cruelty Free by Symbiotic Software enable 
consumers to identify which products are free of pesticides, 
genetically modified ingredients, and animal testing during 
development, 
respectively. 
Such 
applications 
are 
distinguished by the industries, products and practices they 
provide information about, and by the consumer markets 
they aim to serve. Almost all are available for free or a 
nominal fee on the iPhone and will soon be available on 
other platforms. We refer to these applications as Mobile 
Technology-enabled Ethical Consumption (MTEC) tools.  
Armed with a smartphone and free software downloads, 
consumers can now swipe the barcode of a product in a store 
and quickly and easily find out information about the product 
and the company that produced it. In this way consumers can 
choose to buy products produced by companies whose 
practices are consonant with their values. Used en masse, 
these tools give consumers the power to reward good 
companies and punish bad ones, using their collective 
purchasing power to create market mechanisms that motivate 
ethical corporate practices. In a 2009 BBC News poll of 
14,500 people in 15 countries, more than half said they were 
"active ethical consumers". In the hands of large numbers of 
consumers, smartphone applications are making previously 
private information public and altering companies’ ability to 
exploit information asymmetries.  Business leaders are 
noticing this trend:  The April, 2010 issue of the Harvard 
Business Review explains how the new transparency is 
changing the landscape of business [15]. The impacts of this 
new technology-enabled consumer phenomenon on society 
and business are potentially very positive, yet largely 
unknown. Such positive impacts – public empowerment, 
increased profits, environmental stewardship, less worker 
exploitation, sustainable development, etc. – depend on the 
widespread adoption of the information delivered by these 
technologies, and the validity of that information. It takes 
large numbers of ethical consumers to alter market share 
through ethical consumption. However, the movement is 
small right now and it is not clear how or whether it will 
succeed in motivating companies to practice more ethically. 
This research presents a theoretical framework for 
understanding differences among MTEC tools, on the basis 
of the type of data they use to present information to 
consumers.  It then presents an example of a data index that 
illustrates the potential role that data transparency might play 
in the adoption of ethical consumption. 
This paper is structured as follows: We begin by 
reviewing prior research in the domain of ethical 
consumption, and make the case that dual-process theories of 
human cognition can increase our understanding of this 
phenomenon. Next we present our theoretical model, 
followed by a description of the index that we are working to 
embed in our MTEC application. We conclude with a 
discussion of the importance of such applications for 
furthering ecology and social justice. 
II. 
REVIEW OF PRIOR RESEARCH 
The bulk of the empirical research on the impacts of the 
ethical consumption phenomenon comes from the marketing 
departments of business schools. These researchers 
investigate the effect of corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) information on consumers’ intent to purchase and 
willingness to buy products produced ethically. Using 
survey methods, marketing researchers have established that 
what consumers know about a company can influence their 
beliefs 
about 
and 
attitude 
toward 
new 
products 
manufactured by that company [16]. Consumers’ positive 
perceptions of a company’s social responsibility have a 
positive impact on their purchase intent for products 
produced by that company [17]. Consumers’ intention to 
buy a product increases when the product complies with 
ethical and social requirements (Fair trade products in this 
case) and the company has an acknowledged commitment to 
protect consumer rights and interests [18]. The question of 
how CSR information affects consumer purchase intent is 
an important one, and these results are encouraging. 
However, these studies do not take into account the role of 
MTEC tools on this process. By making ethical 
consumption information available at the point of purchase 
in the grocery store, well-designed MTEC tools can provide 
accurate, transparent information to consumers in a 
convenient form – with a swipe of the bar code. This 
capability is what is new about ethical consumption, and 
why new approaches to understanding this phenomenon are 
called for. Further, CSR affects both consumers’ intent to 
purchase and their intent not to purchase. The marketing 
research in this domain does not investigate the impact of 
CSR on non-purchasing, and collective non-purchasing 
behavior is an important driver for motivating ethical 
business practices.  
For these reasons, and because of the potential for 
important widespread impacts of MTEC tools on the 
ecological and social justice practices of corporations, non-
marketing-based theoretical approaches to this phenomenon 
are called for. Our theoretical model applies the widely 
accepted body of dual-process cognitive theory to the 
problem of understanding consumer adoption of CSR 
information via MTEC tools. Dual-process cognitive 
theories describe the conditions and processes that take 
place when people accept new information as valid or 
discount it as invalid. These theories distinguish between 
two basic ways that individuals’ process information: 
systematically and heuristically. Systematic processing 
involves scrutinizing the argumentation of new information 
and analyzing it in the context of what is already known, in 
order to judge its validity. Performing this detailed analysis 
2
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

demands and consumes cognitive capacity [19], [20]. 
Heuristic processing is defined as the application of learned 
procedural 
knowledge 
structures 
–heuristics– 
to 
informational 
cues 
during 
assessment 
of 
received 
information [20], [21]. In general, both processing modes 
occur concurrently and exert interdependent effects on 
judgment [21], [22]. The dual-process paradigm evolved out 
of the early attitude change research of social psychologists 
such as McGuire [23]. The Heuristic Systematic Model 
(HSM) [20], [21] and the Elaboration Likelihood Model 
(ELM) [19] are the most renowned variants of this 
perspective. ELM has been widely adopted by marketing 
researchers in order to understand what makes information 
most persuasive. However, because the paradigm also 
applies to validity-seeking processes in general, the dual-
process theories have been used to investigate a wide variety 
of phenomena. Examples include studies of risk perception 
[24], auditor performance [25], and price search behavior 
[26]. For understanding adoption of computer-mediated 
information, Watts-Sussman has investigated information 
adoption when it is mediated by email [27], [28], online 
communities [29], voicemail [28], decision support systems 
[30], and videoconferencing [31]. This research extends this 
work to the phenomenon MTEC tools.       
III. 
THEORETICAL MODEL 
HSM was developed to apply to validity seeking 
settings in which people are primarily motivated to attain 
accurate views consonant with relevant facts [21]. In this 
study we are interested in knowledge adoption in the context 
of ethical consumption, and because this is a validity-
seeking context, we utilize the theory and terminology of 
HSM throughout this paper. Such models are particularly 
appropriate for investigating how people process mediated 
information, as follows: Systematic processing is relatively 
unaffected by information delivery medium, since people 
are able to access argument content regardless of how it is 
delivered (i.e., email and face-to-face do not differ 
significantly in their ability to deliver explicit content). 
However, available heuristics can vary widely across 
mediated 
communication 
modes. 
Heuristics 
are 
informational indicators other than the content itself that 
people use to assess content. A potentially infinite number 
of these heuristics exist in interpersonal communication 
contexts [32]. For instance, in groups people are influenced 
by consensus cues and attributes of the group leader such as 
charisma. 
Individually, 
people 
often 
use 
heuristics 
pertaining to an information source, and can be influenced 
by an information source’s attractiveness, likeability, and 
credibility [19]. While face-to-face interaction provides the 
many peripheral cues that enable us to establish a shared 
context [33], we know that peripheral cues do operate in 
computer-mediated contexts [34]. For example, people use 
cues to delete e-mails they receive without scrutinizing the 
arguments they contain or even reading them at all.  
Because it is a widely accepted body of cognitive theory 
that has been successfully applied to computer-mediated 
communication contexts in the past, this research uses the 
HSM to investigate information adoption processes in the 
context of ethical consumption. The model in Figure 1 
below from Sussman and Seigal [27] was used to show that 
the process of email-mediated information adoption follows 
the dual process paradigm, such that source credibility 
functions as a peripheral cue and affects the perceived 
relationship between argument quality and information 
usefulness, ultimately affecting information adoption.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        Figure 1. Information adoption of email-mediated advice  
 
This 
theoretical 
framework 
is 
appropriate 
for 
understanding the process of how people adopt the 
information delivered to them via MTEC tools: 
• 
Information adoption is positively associated with 
information usefulness. 
• 
Perceived information usefulness is a function of both 
the systematic processing of argument quality and the 
heuristic processing of source credibility cues. 
• 
The relative influence of argument quality and source 
credibility is moderated by both the information 
recipient’s domain expertise and his involvement in the 
information topic, consistent with the dual-process 
theories.  
 
However, this model does not help us distinguish 
between tool designs.  It is important to do so, since the 
design of these tools embeds in them availability of certain 
heuristics, which in turn affects how the information they 
provide is processed by the user.  In order to adapt this body 
of theory to technology-mediated ethical consumption, we 
propose that the construct of data transparency is 
particularly important in this context, providing a means for 
distinguishing among different designs of these tools, and 
therefore should be included in the validated model of 
information adoption above.  Data transparency – the 
degree that the user is able to self-validate the information 
provided by the tool – increases source credibility.  Data 
transparency is a technical design factor that designers can 
optimize in the tool, or not. To the extent that the user is 
able to independently confirm the validity of the 
information provided by the tool, the source of the 
information is more credible than if the user is not able to 
independently confirm its validity.  Thus: 
Recipient 
E
ti
Recipient 
Argument 
Quality 
Source 
Credibility 
    Expertise 
Information 
Usefulness 
 
Information
Adoption 
Involvement 
3
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

P1. Higher data transparency is associated with higher 
source credibility, which is in turn associated with higher 
information usefulness and adoption.   
P2. Information provided by MTEC tools with higher 
data transparency is more likely to be adopted by users than 
information provided by tools with lower data transparency. 
P3. This effect is likely to be more pronounced among 
users that are less trusting of online information validity.   
 
The dominant MTEC tool in the United States is 
GoodGuide.  For its data source, GoodGuide uses the output 
of research and analysis firms produced for the purpose of 
socially responsible investing.  The data sets created by 
these companies are extremely thorough; many are based on 
over 600 indicators.  Such extensive research and analysis is 
expensive, and the companies that create them sell these 
data to institutional investors who can afford to pay high 
subscription fees.  Because they are expensive to create and 
maintain, these data sets are proprietary, which reduces the 
data transparency of the MTEC tools delivering information 
based on these data.  In order to produce MTEC tools with 
high data transparency, we propose the creation of metrics 
based on non-proprietary data, analogous to the concept 
underlying the United Nation’s Human Development Index 
(H.D.I).  The H.D.I. ranks countries according to only three 
simple indices: a nation’s G.D.P., its citizens’ education, 
based on adult literacy and school-enrollment data, and its 
citizens’ health, based on life-expectancy statistics.  The 
advantage of the H.D.I. is its transparency, parsimony and 
corresponding simplicity, but this simplicity comes at a 
sacrifice of data richness and nuance, a limitation that H.D.I. 
researchers are working to address.  We suggest that a 
parsimonious, transparent index of CSR behavior can be 
developed that will increase user adoption of the 
information provided by MTEC tools. Below we propose 
one such index based entirely on data in the public-domain.  
Note that it applies to publicly held corporations only, since 
privately held companies are not required to disclose some 
of the metrics that the index is based on. 
IV. 
TRANSPARENT CSR INDEX 
On the basis of data availability, we suggest three sub-
metrics 
for 
this 
index: 
unproductive 
spending, 
environmental sustainability, and local job creation. First, 
corporate spending patterns indicate the capacity of a 
corporation to internalize costs that it has externalized to 
society and the environment. Companies that spend their 
earnings wisely have more funds available for improving 
environmental and social performance than do spendthrift 
companies.  For this reason we identify four categories of 
large business expenses that are widely accepted in the 
corporate world, but that common-sense and history suggest 
are unproductive use of funds: excessive advertising, 
excessive long-term debt, high executive salaries and 
bonuses, and government lobbying. In most developed 
countries, these data are publicly available in financial 
reports that public corporations are required by law to file. 
Most large corporations are headquartered in these 
countries, since they tend to have stable economies. For 
example, according to this sub-metric described in detail 
below, the Kraft Corporation spent $1.5B in 2009 on 
unproductive spending in these four categories, but only 
made $3B profit on $40.4B in sales revenue. Thus for this 
company, unproductive spending amounted to about one 
half of its 2009 profits, and suggests that if companies were 
to cut back on these unproductive expenses they could 
afford to do the right thing by their workers, communities, 
and the environment.    
A. Metrics of Unproductive Spending 
While all companies need to advertize, a number of 
corporations spend more than half their profits on 
advertising.  Socially responsible companies of the future 
will choose to spend less on advertising and PR, choosing 
instead to spend these dollars on things like good wages and 
benefits for their workers, environmental management 
systems, philanthropy, etc.  This has the direct effect of 
doing good works, and also the indirect effect of generating 
positive perceptions of the company, which in turn drives 
sales.  Nor does advertising get high grades for its impact on 
society in general and on children in particular.  Advertising 
affects our cultural understanding of what is valuable and 
can fuel materialism, consumption, superficiality, and 
insecurity [35].  Advertising to children can create frequent 
conflicts for families when children pressure their parents 
into buying things that they can’t afford, exacerbating the 
debt burdens of working families.  For these reasons we 
contend that spending excessively on advertising and PR is 
an unproductive use of corporate earnings, relative to the 
environmental and social good that could come out of 
spending those funds more wisely.  Thus one metric of this 
proposed spending index is the amount that a corporation 
spent on advertising the previous year as listed on their 10K, 
above an amount equal to 20% of the profit they reported 
that year. This is an arbitrary designation reflecting the 
value judgment that spending more than 20% of profits on 
advertising is unproductive relative to other potential uses of 
those funds.      
Another area that U.S. companies spend trillions on 
annually is debt financing. Corporations take out loans to 
finance things like new buildings and production facilities, 
company acquisitions, and stock buy-backs, and then pay 
interest on these loans. Clearly, such borrowing is necessary 
and desirable, to a point.  However, companies that borrow 
too much spend unproductively on interest payments.  High 
levels of debt financing constrain managerial choice because 
interest on this debt must be repaid on a contractual 
schedule.  Companies with high levels of debt do not have 
the financial flexibility to react effectively to unforeseen 
costs, for example the costs of an environmental accident or 
new labor demands. Socially responsible companies keep 
their debts to a reasonable level so that they can pay them 
4
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

off without having to cut spending in other important areas.  
Consumers and governments work to practice restraint in 
accumulating debt, and well-governed corporations do 
likewise. The value of limiting to a reasonable level the 
amount of debt a corporation takes on seems self-evident to 
those outside of the financial industry: if consumers and 
governments are expected to practice such fiscal restraint, it 
seems reasonable to expect corporations to practice it as 
well. Thus the second metric of our index uses the ratio of 
long-term-debt to capitalization. Capitalization refers to how 
much the company is worth on the stock market and so is an 
indicator of net worth.  For the purposes of this index, and 
based on conversations with financial experts at ethical 
investing firms, we suggest this ratio shouldn’t be higher 
than 20%. Clearly startup companies naturally need higher 
debt margins, but this metric is for large established 
corporations that have already grown to a massive size.  
Thus we count 5% of the long-term debt that exceeds this 
ratio, as an approximation of the costs to finance this 
excessive debt.  Note that this figure does not include funds 
spent on research and development, so this metric should 
not impede the corporate capacity to innovate.    
It is widely acknowledged that many companies spend large 
sums paying their top executives disparately large salaries 
and bonuses.  This occurs regardless of whether the firm is 
currently laying-off workers, cutting benefits, or paying 
subsistence wages.  Clearly top executives should be paid 
well, but there are negative consequences to the 
organization when they are paid hundreds of times more 
than their employees.  High levels of executive 
compensation are associated with high employee cynicism, 
which in turn reduces employees’ organizational citizenship 
behaviors and increases the chances that they will agree to 
engage in unethical behavior such as workplace sabotage 
(Andersson & Bateman, 1997).  Indeed, wide disparities in 
corporate pay scales can directly and adversely affect the 
value of the firm (Thomas, 2003), due to a variety of effects 
such as lower employee productivity, higher turnover, and 
higher absenteeism.  Thus companies that pay their 
executives disproportionally not only incur the direct costs 
of paying these high sums, but also a variety of indirect 
costs that can have a negative effect on the bottom line.  For 
these reasons, we suggest that companies that pay 
unreasonably high levels of executive compensation are 
spending this money unproductively, since this money could 
be more productively and responsibly spent in other ways.  
Thus the third metric of our spending index is total the 
amount paid out to top executives in compensation and 
bonuses the prior year, above $3M for each executive, as 
listed on the Summary Compensation Table of the DEF 14A 
Proxy statement that corporations are required by law to 
disclose.   This is an arbitrary designation:  Many executives 
may view $3M as a paltry salary, but their employees 
earning $15 per hour would probably find it acceptable. 
More research needs to be conducted on what an optimal 
amount would be, one that is high enough to attract and 
retain leadership talent, but not so large as to incur the 
negative effects on employees and firm value discussed 
above.    
The final area of unproductive corporate spending that 
we propose for this index is government lobbying.  
Corporate revenues exceed the GDP of most governments.  
In the U.S., companies spent $3.49 billion on Federal 
lobbying in 2009 [36], an average of over $6.5 million per 
congressperson. Clearly this gives corporations a lot more 
power to influence what legislation gets implemented than 
most individuals have. The governments of the European 
Union, Scandinavia, Brazil and Japan all do a better job of 
protecting their citizens from the effects of cost 
externalization than the U.S. government does [37], partly 
because they have stricter controls on lobbying. Companies 
that spend excessively on lobbying are using their financial 
power to influence legislation, a practice that Adam Smith 
and many other organizational theorists since are against.  
Lobbying is not a productive use of earnings relative to 
other socially responsible spending opportunities.  Thus the 
final element of our proposed spending index is the total 
amount a firm spent on Federal lobbying the prior year, 
which companies are required by law to disclose.  This has 
the disadvantage of not accounting for the size of the 
company.  However, when politicians vote in congruence 
with lobbying efforts, it is the total dollars spent that are 
influential, regardless of company size.       
According to this proposed metric of corporate 
spending, the 2009 Kraft corporation example above breaks 
down to $1.04 billion spent on excessive advertising, $431 
million spent to finance excessive long-term debt, $37.1 
million on excessive executive compensation, and $3.39 
million on Federal lobbying, for a total of $1.52 billion 
dollars.  This is a lot of money, relative to the $3,021 
million in profit they made the same year, and certainly 
could have been spent in more socially and environmentally 
productive ways.   
B. Non-financial Indices in the Public Domain 
Public-domain 
indicators 
of 
a 
corporation’s 
environmental record and sustainability initiatives are 
obvious candidates for such an index, although they vary 
according to local regulatory requirements.  The U.S. 
government-mandated Toxic Release Inventory – toxic 
releases plus toxic wastes – reflects a transparent indicator 
of corporate environmental behavior that is in the public 
domain in the United States.  Another indicator we might 
include in this index addresses the issue of job off shoring 
and the deleterious effects it is having on the economies of 
more advanced countries. As the economies of many 
wealthier countries become increasingly bifurcated due to 
reductions in the size of their middle classes, fewer and 
fewer citizens have the financial resources to use anything 
other than price to inform their purchasing decisions.  This 
situation supports and maintains those companies that 
produce cheap products by taking advantage of lax 
5
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

regulatory oversight in lessor developed countries (LDCs). 
It also has deleterious consequences within the economies 
of developed countries as increasing rates of poverty give 
rise to higher levels of crime, domestic violence, 
underground economies, and corruption.  We use the United 
States to describe a proposed metric comprised of two 
ratios, but it is applicable to any country:  For every million 
dollars spent by Americans and recorded as U.S. sales by a 
corporation (i.e., U.S. sales), that corporation supports X 
jobs in the U.S.  For every million dollars spent by non-
Americans as reflected in non-U.S. sales reported, this 
corporation supports Y jobs.  The ratio of X to Y shows the 
extent that the company supports more jobs overseas than 
they are in the U.S., for the same sales dollars spent by 
consumers, where the lower this number is the better.  The 
higher this number, the fewer U.S. jobs the company 
supports per dollar of U.S. sales.  For example, companies 
whose sales are primarily generated in the U.S. and who 
locate their jobs primarily in the U.S. will have a very low 
score for this. Companies whose sales are generated in the 
U.S. but who rely heavily on foreign labor will have a very 
high score on this. This data is publicly available since 
corporations are required to release it for tax reporting 
purposes. 
A final metric that we would like to see in this index 
would be a measure of supply chain transparency. This is an 
extremely important issue for development policy, since 
most of the environmental and human rights violations by 
businesses in LDCs are perpetrated not by large 
corporations themselves but by their smaller local suppliers.  
Often we have accurate information about what local 
companies are doing, but since transnational corporations 
are not required to disclose their supply chain partners, they 
cannot be held accountable for these violations. And while 
many of the large multinational corporations have policies 
that ostensibly prohibit them from trading with unethical 
suppliers, it is very difficult and expensive to monitor 
supply chains effectively.  For this reason, until we have 
mandated disclosure of supply-chain partners, we lack a 
public-domain metric in this important area. 
V. 
 CONCLUSIONS 
The emergent phenomenon of MTEC tools have the 
potential to fuel widespread ethical consumption, where 
consumer choices in aggregate provide a market-based 
mechanism for motivating corporate social responsibility. 
But, the achievement of this potential depends on 
widespread adoption and use of the information provided by 
these tools. This research contributes a theoretically-driven 
model for understanding the important role that data 
transparency can play in designing MTEC tools for optimal 
adoption. In service of this model, we propose a 
parsimonious, non-proprietary index of corporate social 
responsibility that consists of three sub-metrics – 
unproductive spending, environmental sustainability, and 
local job creation.  We hope to encourage debate and 
discussion about both the idea of such an index, and what an 
optimal form of it would look like. We hope that, over time, 
firms will see the value in improving their performance in 
areas measured by this index. In this way, MTEC tool-
supported ethical consumption can become a significant 
driver supporting the needs of civil society.   
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Lang, T. and Gabriel, Y. (2005). A brief history of consumer 
activism. In Harrison, R., Newholm, T., Shaw, D. (Eds),The Ethical 
Consumer, Sage, London, pp. 39-53. 
[2] 
Doane, D. (2001), Taking Flight: The Rapid Growth of Ethical 
Consumerism, New Economics Foundation, London. 
[3] 
Knight, K. (2008). Consumers trust business less. BizReport.com. 
http://www.bizreport.com/2008/08/report_consumers_trust_businesse
s_less.html.  Last acccessed July 18th, 2011. 
[4] 
Choi, J. and Wang, H.L. (2009). Stakeholder relations and the 
persistence of corporate social performance. Strategic Management 
Journal, 30:8, 895-907. 
[5] 
Hoeffler, S., Bloom, P.N. and Keller, K.L. (2010). Understanding 
stakeholder responses to corporate citizenship initiatives: Managerial 
guidelines and research directions. Journal of Pubic Policy and 
Marketing, 29:1, Sp. Iss. 78-88. 
[6] 
Liu, T.C., Wang, C.Y., and Wu, L.W. (2010). Moderators of the 
negativity 
effect: 
Commitment, 
identification 
and 
consumer 
sensitivity to corporate social performance. Psychology and 
Marketing, 27:1, 54-70.  
[7] 
Husted, B. W. and Salazar, J. (2006). Taking Friedman Seriously: 
Maximizing Profits and Social Performance. Journal of Management 
Studies, 43(1), 75-91. 
[8] 
Siegel, D.S. and Vitaliano, D. F. (2007). An Empirical Analysis of the 
Strategic Use of Corporate Social Responsibility. Journal of 
Economics and Management Strategy, 16(3), 773-792. 
[9] 
Nicholls, A.J. (2002). Strategic options in fair trade retailing. 
International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 30(1), 6-
17. 
[10] Harrison, R. (2005). Pressure groups, campaigns and consumers. 
Pp.55-67 in The Ethical Consumer, edited by R. Harrison, T. 
Newholm, and D. Shaw. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.  
[11] Rezabakhsh, B., Bornemann, D., Hansen, U. and Schrader, U. (2006). 
Consumer Power: A Comparison of the Old Economy and the 
Internet Economy. Journal of Consumer Policy, 29(1)  
[12] Pines, G.L.S. and Meyer, D.G. (2005). Stopping the exploitation of 
workers: An analysis of the effective application of consumer or 
socio-political pressure. Journal of Business Ethics, 59:1, 155-162.  
[13] Young, W., Hwang, K., McDonald, S. and Oates, C.J. (2010). 
Sustainable consumption: Green consumer behavior when purchasing 
products. Sustainable Development, 19:1, 20-31. 
[14] Arghire, I., (2010). Mobile App Downloads to Peak in 2013, 
Softwire.com, 
May 
7, 
Quoting 
ABI 
Research,   
http://news.softpedia.com/news/Mobile-App-Store-Downloads-to-
Peak-in-2013-141572.shtml.  Last accessed July 18th, 2011. 
[15] Meyer, C.  and Kirby, J. (2010). Leadership in the Age of 
Transparency. Harvard Business Review, 88(4), 38-46.  
[16] Brown, T.J. and Dacin, P.A. (1997). The company and the product: 
Corporate associations and consumer product responses. Journal of 
Marketing, 61:1, 68-84.  
[17] Auger, P., Devinney, T.M., Louviere, J.J. and Burke, P.F. (2008). Do 
social product features have value to consumers?  International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 25(3), 183-191. 
[18] Castelado, S., Perrini, F., Misani, N. and Tencati, A. (2009). The 
missing link between corporate social responsibility and consumer 
trust. Journal of Business Ethics, 84(1), 1-15. 
6
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

[19] Petty, R.E. and Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). Communication and 
Persuasion: Central and peripheral routes to attitude change. New 
York: Springer-Verlag. 
[20] Eagly, A.H. and Chaiken, S. (1993). The Psychology of Attitudes. 
Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
[21] Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information 
processing and the use of source versus message cues in persuasion. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(5), 752-766. 
[22] Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., and Eagly, A. H. (1989). Heuristic and 
systematic information processing within and beyond the persuasion 
context. In J. S. Uleman & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought. 
(pp. 212-252). New York, NY, USA: Guilford Press. 
[23] McGuire, W. J. (1969). The nature of attitudes and attitude change. In 
G. Lindzey and E. Aronson (Eds.), The Handbook of Social 
Psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 3). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
[24] Trumbo, C. W. (2002). Information Processing and Risk Perception: 
An Adaptation of the Heuristic-Systematic Model. Journal of 
Communication, 52(2), 367. 
[25] Brazel, J. F., Agoglia, C. P., and Hatfield, R. C. (2004). Electronic 
versus Face-to-Face Review: The Effects of Alternative Forms of 
Review on Auditors' Performance. Accounting Review, 79(4), 949. 
[26] Darke, P. R., Chaiken, S., and Freedman, J. L. (1995). Percentage 
discounts, initial price, and bargain hunting: A heuristic-systematic 
approach to price search behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
80(5), 580. 
[27] Sussman, S. W., and Seigal, W. S. (2003). Informational Influence in 
Organizations: An Integrated Approach to Knowledge Adoption. 
Information Systems Research, 14(1), 47-65. 
[28] Watts, S. (2007). Evaluative Feedback: Perspectives on Media 
Effects. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(2), 
article 3. http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol12/issue2/watts.html . 
[29] Zhang, W. and Watts, S. (2008). Capitalizing on content: Information 
adoption in two online communities.  Journal of the AIS, 9(2), 74-95. 
[30] Watts, S., Shankar, G. and Even, A. (2009). Data Quality Assessment 
in Context: A Cognitive Perspective. Decision Support Systems, 
48(1), 202-211. 
[31] Ferran, C. and Watts, S. (2008). Videoconferencing in the Field: A 
Heuristic Processing Model. Management Science, 54(9), 1565-1578.  
[32] Gergen, K. (1982). Toward Transformation of Social Knowledge. 
New York: Spriger-Verlag. 
[33] Zack, M. H. (1993). Interactivity and communication mode choice in 
ongoing management groups. Information Systems Research, 4:3, 
207-239. 
[34] Walther, J.P. (1992). Interpersonal effects in computer-mediated 
interaction. Communication Research, 19:1, 52-90. 
[35] Ewen, S. (2001). Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the 
Social Roots of Consumer Culture, Basic Books, Anniversary 
Edition. 
[36] Center for Responsive Politics, (2010). Http://OpenSecrets.org. Last 
accessed July 18th, 2011. 
[37] Schapiro, M. (2007). Exposed: The Toxic Chemistry of Everyday 
Things and What’s at Stake for American Industry, Chelsea Green 
Press.                                                                                                                                  
 
7
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

