Restrictions Towards the Adoption of Social Media Platforms by Civil Servants 
Joshua Ebere Chukwuere 
Department of information systems 
North-West University 
Mahikeng, South Africa  
joshchukwuere@gmail.com 
Sikedi Ramawela 
Department of Information Systems 
North-West University 
Mahikeng, South Africa  
ramawelasikedi@gmail.com
Abstract—Technology is changing continually and the 
introduction of Web 2.0 has brought about innovations such as 
social media (SM) and other inventions. Social Media brings 
about continual communication and engagement for the 
public, including civil servants. It allows civil servants (users) 
to create profiles, connect to existing profiles and communicate 
with others. It also allows civil servants (users) to view, 
comment, like, navigate, as well as share views and ideas with 
others. However, there are many challenges that hinder civil 
servants from adopting social media platforms (SMPs) for 
work and non-work related purposes, especially in developing 
countries. Academic scholars are widely exploring various 
challenges confronting individuals and organisations from 
adopting social media platforms, but little is known of the facts 
that hinder civil servants from adopting social media 
platforms. Therefore, this study seeks to identify possible 
challenges that hinder civil servants from adopting social 
media platforms, both for work-related and personal activities. 
The study deployed close-ended questionnaires involving 252 
civil servants within selected cities in the North West Province, 
South Africa. The study found that personal customs and 
traditions, organizational policy, high cost of data and others 
cause hindrances for civil servants to adopt social media 
platforms in their daily lives. 
Keywords-civil servant; social media (SM); social media 
platforms (SMPs); social media network (SMNs); web 2.0; 
organizations; developing countries. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
The use of technology and its ever-evolving innovation 
has affected people’s daily lives through access to the 
Internet. Social media is seen as the 21st century innovation 
with a great deal of impact in public services. The use of the 
Internet, therefore, gave rise to social media platforms, such 
as Facebook, Instagram, Skype, Twitter, WhatsApp and 
many others. Social media platforms create seamless 
mediums for cost-effective and efficient communication of 
important information locally and globally [1]. Social media 
platforms are used in government and non-governmental 
organizations to improve communication, productivity and 
provide services [2]. According to Ferreira and Du Plessis 
[3], social media platforms improve effective communication 
among individuals with common goals and interests. This 
increase creates connectivity between organisations and 
employees, organisations and customers, and among 
employees. However, organisations perceive negative effects 
of social media platforms on employees’ productivity and 
commitment to work [3]. This means that organisations see 
no benefit in the adoption and usage of social media 
platforms at work. 
Notwithstanding the benefits attached to social media 
platforms, some organisations and civil servants in 
developing countries are yet to adopt it due to some 
challenges. However, there are few or no empirical studies in 
developing countries dealing with challenges, barriers and 
restrictions towards employees or civil servants adopting 
social media for either work or non-work related purposes. 
Therefore, this study is aimed at investigating some of the 
restrictions that hinder civil servants in developing countries 
from adopting social media platforms and many more. 
Ferreira and Du Plessis [3] suggest that civil servants are 
challenged 
by 
Internet 
usage 
and 
technological 
infrastructures in their effort to use social media platforms. 
Furthermore, many civil servants are digital immigrants 
(born or brought up before technology), which is a tall order 
for them to adopt 21st century technology trends and 
innovations, while others are digital natives (born or brought 
up during technology age (digital age)). The study is 
structured into problem statement and research objectives, 
literature review, research methodology, data analysis and 
discussions, findings and recommendations, conclusion and 
future research and references. 
II.
PROBLEM STATEMENT AND RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
The advent of social media platforms (SMPs) has defined 
and is still redefining historical and cultural patterns of 
human communication and interaction across different 
spheres. Pamphlets, newspapers, magazines, leaflets and 
brochures were the most-used communication channels 
within organisations before the arrival of social media [4]. 
Furthermore, for civil servants to exchange information and 
contents within and outside the organization, emails and 
telephones could be used. Social media platforms created an 
innovative 21st century method of communication and 
establishing connections and friendships for individuals and 
organisations [5]. Social media platforms allow for the 
construction of virtual profiles and engaging with other 
users. The connected individuals have differences such as 
social status (class), culture, ethics, values, beliefs and many 
others [6].  
The platforms allow users to share commonalities across 
developed and developing countries on various issues. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-757-3
SOTICS 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Previously, social media was used by private sectors [7], but 
has become a norm for the public sectors. The platform is 
used in social, health and educational environments and even 
by government and non-government officials [2]. Ferreira 
and Du Plessis [3] state that Social media platforms assist 
humans to achieve continuous connections with known and 
unknown friends as well as new ones with the intention of 
sharing common interests and information, also acquiring 
new skills and knowledge. To some people, including civil 
servants, the continuous connectivity is among the main 
reasons why they use social media. Furthermore, some issues 
on social media platforms can trigger ‘social activity’, which 
causes low productivity, privacy and security risks, phishing, 
identity theft, social engineering, spam, malware and many 
more [3].  
Social media platforms present organisations with more 
opportunities to engage with their customers timely, 
effectively and directly in many ways and get them involved 
in branding and feedback [8]. The platform offers low-cost 
engagement with its employees and other stakeholders such 
as customers. Civil servants use social media in many ways 
[9]. The researchers further suggest that social media users 
should be presented with the opportunity to communicate, 
exchange ideas and participate in social activities, 
engagements and discussions. It enables users to begin a new 
relationship, maintain existing ones and engage in business 
transactions. Scholars have proven great opportunities that 
lie behind the effective usage of Social media platforms. 
However, current studies have failed to capture the 
challenges or hindrances that stop civil servants from 
adopting social media platforms in their daily lives. 
According to Woods [7], there is a limited study on the 
usage of social media in government. Then, the primary 
objective of this study seeks to investigate some common 
restricting factors that limit civil servants in developing 
countries from adopting social media platforms.  
Based on the research gaps identified, the research 
objective further seeks to determine whether civil servants 
perceive that social media platforms were designed for 
specific groups; is the platform time consuming, destroying 
cultural 
values, 
and 
increase 
security 
challenges. 
Furthermore, this study aimed to determine the challenges 
confronting civil servants in adopting Social media 
platforms. 
III.
LITERATURE REVIEW
This section provides an overview on existing studies 
covering different kinds of social media platforms, positive 
aspect of civil servants using social media platforms in the 
work setting, and the negative aspect of social media 
platform on civil servants. The section guides readers to 
understand the underpinning literature in regard to this 
study. 
A.
Kinds of Social media platforms 
Web 2.0 powers the present social media platforms. Web 
2.0 is a second generation of the World Wide Web (www), 
which provides individuals the ability to generate contents 
and share them online using the social media platforms. Web 
2.0 is also called social web, participatory or participative 
web. The Web 2.0 platforms assist the web to be engaging. 
According to [2]-[10], Web 2.0 services are wikis, blogs, 
RSS, podcasting, social booking, microblog and many 
others. Each of these facilitates the functionality of social 
media platforms. Al-Badi [2] and Kietzmann et al. [30] 
believe that Social media platforms enable ‘sharing’, 
‘relationships’, 
‘conversation’, 
‘presence’, 
‘reputation’, 
‘identity’ and ‘group’. The categorization of Social Media is 
a topic of discussion by different scholars [2][10]-[15]. 
Overall, on estimate, there are more than 120 different types 
of social networking sites or applications categorized into 16 
classifications, as shown in Figure 1. Social Media sites, 
applications or platforms are interchangeable in this study. 
Figure 1. Social media classifications, adapted from Al-Badi [2] 
Different professionals including government and non-
government workers are using social networking sites or 
applications (Figure 1) in constructing ideas and knowledge 
and interacting with others on work-related and personal 
activities. According to Richthammer et al. [16], social 
media have become part of humans in exchanging 
information and communication with one another. The 
platforms have revolutionised the ways human interactions 
are taking place. The penetration of social Media in the 
public and private sectors provides positive and negative 
impacts to the users. 
B.
Positive aspect of civil servants using social media 
platforms in the work setting 
Scholars are aware of the benefits of social media 
networks (SMNs) or social media platforms on civil 
servants’ daily interactions [17]. Social media networks are 
an interlinked platform that is conceptualised to shape social 
groups with different forms of interactions and activities. It 
transfers information between enrolled participants [18]. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-757-3
SOTICS 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Work-related benefits of social media networks allow users 
to connect with the external experts, making and reinforcing 
ties with associates, gathering quality data, and advancing 
information sharing with colleagues and executives [19]. A 
study by Zhang et al. [28] determines how social media 
affects employees in China in their jobs. The findings show 
that social media promotes positive commitment and 
engagement in an organisation; it increases job satisfaction 
and decreases turnover intention of employees [28]. In 
addition, Song et al. [29] carried a qualitative study proves 
that work-related and non-work-related social media 
promotes team engagement and improve performance. 
Empirically, social media provides positive impacts for 
organisational employees whether for work-related or non-
work-related purposes [28][29][30]. Social media enables 
individuals to air their views and make contacts online. It is 
not the same as the old standard media, because it presents 
robust and flexible connective platforms for all. According to 
Hysa et al. [17], Social media platforms lie in the power of 
Web 2.0 by allowing individuals and organisations to build 
contents and exchange them. It contains content that might 
be in the form of a video, audios, images and texts with the 
ability to unite societies, and help individuals build 
connections [20]. As a Web 2.0 platform, Social Media 
allows individuals to build personal or organisational virtual 
profiles and connect with others [2]. Cilliers et al. [21] add 
that it grants workers (civil servants) a direct opportunity to 
reach out to other colleagues and customers. It further 
enables civic servants to stream meetings online and 
discussions without leaving their workplace. The positive 
benefits associated to Social media platforms are huge for 
organisations and civil servants (employees). 
Organisations currently use the influence of Social media 
platforms to identify new business opportunities, building 
new interest groups and associations, new industries, distinct 
knowledge, skills and proficiency. On the other hand, the 
platform enables organisations to store and transfer 
information of various marketing needs and techniques. In 
addition, social media helps organisations to connect with 
potential workers [22] and share valuable contents and 
information with employees. Few organisations value the 
usage of internal social media networks to determine and 
map their workers’ intelligence and improve cooperate 
communication to empower fast access. These internal social 
networks will have tremendous impacts on organisational 
turnover [18], because employees will be able to connect 
with each other on work-related issues. The discussed 
literature proves that social media platforms enrich civil 
servants, corporate and personal connections. 
C.
Negative aspect of social media platforms on civil 
servants 
Regardless of the advantages and commitment of Social 
media platforms on organisations and civil servants as 
specified above in the work environment, it also presents 
numerous threats, as it transforms the way individuals 
connect in their organisations [22]. Social media’s effortless 
connection has the potential of creating problems for the 
operational, tactical and strategic employees. Hysa et al. [17] 
believe that social media networks can distract and lead to 
slow civil servants’ work productivities because of large 
amounts of time spent on the platform. The authors also 
suggest that the misuse of the platform by an employee can 
create negative perceptions about a company and its brand. 
To another author, social media networks can be used 
obsessively in the work environment, which may result in 
preventing employees from working to their full capacity 
and potential [21].  
Moreover, civil servants may download online content 
that consumes large amounts of bandwidth, which has 
proven to be costly for the user, especially in developing 
countries. There are also additional dangers that civil 
servants may encounter when using social media. These 
include viruses that could damage the systems in the 
workplace, employees accessing pornographic sites, as well 
as posting defamatory comments or classified data on social 
media sites [21]. To Leftheriotis and Giannakos [19], social 
media sites are regarded as a time-waster and a security 
ambush for civil servants. However, according to Akram and 
Kumar [23], negatively, the use of social media can be time 
consuming; mistakes can go viral and many more. According 
to this study, social media platforms can expose civil 
servants 
to 
cyberbullying, 
exposing 
organisational 
confidential 
information 
to 
the 
public, 
increasing 
distractions, reducing employee-to-employee contact time 
with each other, increasing fraud, and destroying reputations. 
IV.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY, DATA ANALYSIS AND 
DISCUSSION
This study deployed quantitative research methodology, 
which collected numerical data [24]. According to Walliman 
[25], quantitative research analyses data using statistical and 
mathematical processes to reach results. As a quantitative 
research, the researchers used questionnaires in data 
gathering involving private and public organizations in 
Mmabatho and Mahikeng. Questionnaires was circulated to 
the participants on hardcopies and 252 copies were collected 
through random sampling techniques among civil servants, 
with the aim to determine basic factors that restrict them in 
the adoption of social media networks for both personal and 
work-related activities and achieving other objectives. 
Analysis was done on the collected data with the application 
of Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and Statistical Package for 
the Social Science (SPSS). 
This section is structured into demographic data 
(questions) and the research objectives which are: the factors 
that restrict civil servants from adopting social media 
platforms (cultural factors hindering the adoption of Social 
media platforms and civil servant challenges in adopting 
Social media platforms), civil servant perception on the 
social media platforms (design; time consuming, destroys 
cultural values and security challenges), and Pearson’s 
correlation. Through this structure, the collected data are 
analyzed to establish the data meanings and interpretation.  
Inversely, the followings are the research questions: What 
are the factors that restrict civil servants from adopting social 
media platforms? What are civil servants’ perceptions on the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-757-3
SOTICS 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

social media platforms?  However, the subheading below 
was drawn from the research objectives. 
A.
Demographic data 
The primary purpose of the demographic questions was 
to determine the respondents’ home language and 
educational qualifications. Both demographic questions are 
important to study, example, language is a good form of 
culture while educational qualifications were used on the 
Pearson’s’ correlation. However, majority of the participants 
were female civil servants. 
TABLE I. 
HOME LANGUAGE
Furthermore, the researchers asked a question to 
determine the participants’ language. There are eleven (11) 
official languages in South Africa. According to Table 1 
above, 45.6% (115) speak Setswana and other languages 
follow. The study shows that majority of the participants are 
Setswana speaking people. 
This study also seeks to understand the educational 
qualification of the respondents. It was recorded that 
majority of them hold higher and university educational 
qualifications 73.8% (186). Secondary certificate holders 
were 23.14% (60) while 2.4% (6) are primary school 
certificate holders. 
B.
The factors that restrict civil servants from adopting 
social media platforms 
Number of factors affect or hinder civil servants from 
adopting social media platforms. According to Ferreira and 
Du Plessis [3], the followings threats can cause users’ 
withdrawal from Social media platforms: low productivity, 
privacy and security risks, distraction, phishing, identity 
theft, social engineering, spam, malware, lack of trust and 
the list continues. This objective section aimed at 
discovering factors that may hinder the civil servants from 
adopting Social media platforms. The objective involves 
three questions to determine these factors. 
Cultural factors hindering the adoption of social media 
platforms - This question was intended to understand the 
different cultural factors that might hinder civil servants from 
adopting social media platforms. According to Cilliers et al. 
[6], online users have personal and social differences such as 
social status (class), culture, ethics, values, beliefs and many 
others, which impact their decision to adopt Social media 
platforms. 
Figure 2. Cultural factors hindering the adoption of social media 
Figure 2 above indicates that 36.99% (93) of the 
respondents believed that none of the cultural factors hinders 
their adoption of social media, while 20.33% (51) attribute 
customs and traditions as hindrance factors. The overall 
findings illustrate that most civil servants are not hindered by 
their cultural factors from adopting social media platforms; 
however, customs and traditions have some level of 
hindrance to the users. 
Workplace policy influences civil servants’ usage of 
social media platforms in working environments - This 
question seeks to find out whether workplace policy prevents 
civil servants from using Social media platforms at work. 
The findings revealed that 37% (94) state affirmatively that 
their workplace policy hinders workers from adopting or 
using social media at work. Importantly, this response 
contradicts the findings made by [22], which state that 
organizations use social media to engage with workers and 
join cooperative communication. Cilliers et al. [21] further 
added that Social Media enables employees to reach out to 
other colleagues and potential customers. Moreover, 36.9% 
(93) of the respondents indicated that workplace policy does 
not deny them the use of social media, while 14.2% (36) 
were uncertain, and 11% (28) responded that none of the 
options was applicable to them. The findings proved that 
workplace policy restricts civil servants from adopting social 
media platforms in their work environment. 
Civil servant challenges in adopting social media 
platforms - There are a number of challenges that users face 
when adopting social media platforms. Table 3 seeks to 
determine those challenges. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-757-3
SOTICS 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

TABLE II. 
CHALLENGES IN ADOPTING SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS
Table 2 above demonstrates that 40.9% (103) are affected by 
the high cost of data and other challenges. The results clearly 
show that the high cost of data is the most common 
hindrance confronting most participants. 
C.
Civil servants perception on the social media platforms 
design; time consuming, destroys cultural values and 
security challenges 
Civil servants’ perception on the design and the time 
spent on social media platforms determines whether it will 
be used on a work-related basis or for personal activities. 
The impact of social media platforms on civil servants’ 
culture will certainly determine whether they will accept the 
usage. Furthermore, security situations will have an impact. 
The questions below are aimed at determining all these from 
the civil servants. 
TABLE III. 
SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS DESIGNED FOR SPECIFIC 
GROUPS; TIME CONSUMING, DESTROYS CULTURAL VALUES AND SECURITY 
CHALLENGES
Table 3 comprises of four questions with the aim to 
understand whether civil servants perceived that Social 
media platforms was designed for specific group of 
individuals, and time consuming, destroying cultural values 
and exposing users to security threats and challenges. 
Question 1 proves that social media platforms are not 
designed for specific group of individuals, with 61.1% (154) 
in support. The findings clearly show that civil servants 
believe that social media is not designed for ordinary people 
and not for everyone to use.  
The second question shows that 64.28% (162) strongly 
suggest that social media usage is time consuming. In 
support of the findings, Leftheriotis and Giannakos [19] 
noted that employees view Social Media as a time-waster. In 
addition, Cilliers et al. [21] also indicated that employees 
could become overly obsessed with the use of social media, 
which may prevent them from performing their professional 
duties effectively. According to the third question, 36.1% 
(91) of the respondents stated that the use of social media 
destroys their cultural values. The study proves that civil 
servants’ usage of social media platforms gradually destroys 
their cultural values and norms, while 56.7% (143) of the 
respondents suggested that the use of social media exposes 
users to different forms of online security challenges. 
Leftheriotis and Giannakos [19] indicated that others 
view Social Media as a security threat, and therefore support 
the findings of this study. Moreover, Cilliers et al. [21] 
explained the dangers that employees may come across from 
the usage of social media, such as downloading online 
viruses that could harm systems or devices, as well as 
posting confidential data and information on social media. 
D.
Pearson’s correlation  
Table 4 above presents the questions involved in the 
correlation and the assigned abbreviations to each of them. 
TABLE IV. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
The correlations are aimed at determining whether there 
is a relationship between the variables [26][27]. It was used 
in this study to determine the strength between two variables 
that lie between +1 and -1. The p-value is the center point for 
this study, which means that when the p-value is less than or 
equal (≤) to 0.5, then the relationship is significant to the 
study to make predictions [26]. This interpretation means 
that any variables above p-value (0.5) will be rejected and 
excluded from the study. Pearson’s coefficient scale as 
applied in the study: Weak uphill or downhill ± 0.30, 
Moderate uphill or downhill ± 0.50, Strong uphill or 
downhill ± 0.70, Strong downhill -1, Perfect = 1 and No 
linear relationship = 0 [26] [27]. Table 5’s contents were 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-757-3
SOTICS 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

based on **. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-
tailed) and *. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-
tailed). 
TABLE V. 
PEARSON’S CORRELATIONS FOR THE STUDY
According to Table 5, the findings show that there is a 
weak uphill (positive) relationship between participants’ 
level of education and their perception of whether cultural 
factors were considered while designing social media 
platforms (B1). It means that the more educated participants 
are, the more they think cultural factors are considered, and 
vice versa. The study also presents a weak uphill (positive) 
relationship between the level of education of civil servants 
and B4. It indicates that the more participants’ education 
levels increase, the more they believed that the use of Social 
Media would destroy their cultural values and beliefs, and 
vice versa. 
There is a weak uphill (positive) relationship between B2 
and B1; this finding indicates that the more participants 
believe that social media destroys their culture; the more 
they believe that their cultural factors are not considered 
while designing social media platforms. Furthermore, 
participants believe that an increase in the perception of B1 
means an increase in participants’ perception of B4 and this 
is a weak uphill (positive) relationship. In addition, there is a 
weak downhill (negative) relationship between B1 and B7. 
The findings show that a decrease in participants’ perception 
of B1 can lead to a decrease in B7, and vice versa. 
There is a weak uphill (positive) relationship between B2 
and B4. The findings indicate that an increase in B2 will 
automatically lead to an increase in B4, and vice versa. B2 
and B6 are positively (weak uphill) related to each other, 
which implies that upward movement on any of the variables 
will draw the other on the same movement. This means that 
the participants’ perception of B2 will positively influence 
B6. Furthermore, the study found that B3 has a weak uphill 
(positive) association with B4; the positive association 
suggests that an increase in any of the variables will move 
another to increase. The study found that participants 
believed that the usage of social media would expose them to 
online security challenges, which will positively impact on 
how the usage of social media destroys their cultural values. 
Questions B3 and B5 are moderately uphill (positively) 
linked; this finding proves that B3 will influence B5 to 
increase, and vice versa. This means that an increase in the 
perception of civil servants of B3 will also increase their 
perception of B5. B3 and B9 have a weak uphill (positive) 
relationship with each other, meaning that an increase in one 
will also cause the other variable to move in the same 
direction. According to the relationship between B4 and B5, 
there is a weak uphill (positive) association between both 
variables. This kind of relationship shows that both variables 
will always move in an upright position. The study also 
proves that B4 and B6 are in a weak uphill direction, which 
means that both variables increase together and influence 
each other. 
The statistical association between question B4 and B9 
indicates a weak uphill relationship, which indicates that 
when participants’ perceptions of B4 increases, then B9 will 
increase too. The finding proves that the way participants 
think of social media to destroy their cultural values, and 
increase how they feel about different cultural factors that 
hinder them from adopting social media. While B5 and B6 
are positively related, having weak uphill relationships, it 
simply means that both variables are moving in an upward 
direction at the same time. As they believe that social media 
is time consuming, it increases, so their perception is that 
social media is not designed for ordinary people to use. 
According to the study, B6 and B7 are weak uphill related, 
which shows that both variables have a good and positive 
impact on each other. Both variables move in an upward 
direction and influence each other. 
The study found that B6 and B9 have weak uphill 
impacts on each other, which indicates that the increasing 
views of participants on B6 will lead to their perception of 
B9 to also increase. This shows that participants think that 
social media was not designed for ordinary people to use, 
which increases as their views of B9 increase. Again, the 
association between B7 and B8 is viewed as weak downhill 
(negative); the nature of the correlation implies that when the 
participants’ view of B7 decreases, the outcome will 
automatically affect B8 to move in the same direction. In 
addition, B7 and B9 have a weak uphill impact on each 
other. The outcome shows that a positive perception of 
participants on B7 will also affect B9 positively (weak uphill 
movement). 
V.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
To this study, the adoption of social media platforms 
presents opportunities as well as threats to user’s civil 
servants. Little is known in South Africa on the opportunities 
and threats of social media platforms on civil servants both 
on personal and work related purposes. This study has closed 
the existing research gap with a new insight and discovering 
of knowledge and ideas. Hysa et al. [17] suggest that 
scholars are aware of the benefits of social media platform 
on civil servants’ daily interactions with colleagues as well 
as families and friends. Here are some of the key findings 
from the study, which will help employees, and 
academicians in developing countries to understand what 
restricts employees adopting social media: 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-757-3
SOTICS 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics


The overall findings illustrate that most civil servants 
are not hindered by their cultural factors from 
adopting social media platforms; however, customs 
and traditions have some level of hindrance for the 
users. 

The findings prove that workplace policy restricts 
civil servants from adopting social media platforms 
in their work environments. 

The results clearly show that the high cost of data is 
the most common hindrance confronting most 
participants. However, there are other challenges, as 
shown in Table 3. 

The findings clearly show that civil servants believe 
that social media is designed for ordinary people and 
for everyone to use. 

The study further proves that civil servants’ usage of 
social media platforms gradually destroys their 
cultural values and norms. 

The respondents suggest that the use of Social media 
platforms exposes users to different forms of online 
security challenges and threats, which act as a 
hindrance in their adoption. 

In the end, it was found that the educational level of 
civil servants would determine whether they would 
believe that their cultural factors were considered in 
the design of social media. 
End-users expectations on social media platforms keep 
changing especially in the developing countries where 
cultural, social, economic and political (CSEP) challenges 
abound. The study recommends that for these restrictions to 
be conquered, social media platform designs should be based 
on civil servants’ (users’) cultural attributes. Furthermore, 
social media platforms should give users the ability to 
customize the platform to suit their culture. There should be 
enough training for the civil servants to understand the 
effective usage of social media platforms. Organizations 
should implement social media policies to promote effective 
and productive usage. Civil servants should undergo training 
on such policies. The cost of data for internet access should 
be reduced significantly to promote productive usage among 
different ages, populations and classes. Furthermore, civil 
servants should avoid borrowing social trends on social 
media that disvalue their own cultures and values. Managing 
different forms of bridges and exposing of personal 
information means adequate security, such as anti-virus, 
firewall, encryptions and many more across all social media 
platforms. 
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
There are different forms of restrictions that challenge 
civil servants in adopting social media platforms in 
developing countries. This study was able to highlight those 
challenges and restrictions confronting the civil servants’ 
intentions with the ability to inform organisations and 
designers alike. The future for social media platforms is 
bright in developing countries; researchers should carry out 
research to determine what civil servants are really doing on 
social media when the opportunity arises. Research should 
be conducted to understand the factors that push civil 
servants to adopt social media. This kind of study has to be 
conducted on the influence social media on different 
population groups. 
REFERENCES
[1]
M. K. Abubakar, M. N. Patricia, O. O. Samuel, O. O and A. 
Totolo, “Factors affecting adoption of Social Media by 
women’s 
non-governmental 
organisations 
(WNGOs)”, 
International Journal of Library and Information Science, vol. 
9, no. 9, pp. 96-106, 2017 
[2]
A. H. Al-Badi, “The adoption of Social Media in government 
agencies: Gulf Cooperation Council case study”, Journal of 
Technology Research, vol. 5, no. 1, 2014. 
[3]
A. Ferreira and T. Du Plessis. “Effect of online social 
networking on employee productivity”, South African Journal 
of Information Management, vol. 11, no. 1, pp, 1-11, 2009. 
[4]
K. Pillay and M. S. Maharaj, “Social Media and mobile 
communications adoption patterns of South African civil 
society organisations”, South African Journal of Information 
Management, vol. 16, no. 1, pp, 1-8, 2014. 
[5]
C. Kaitlin, “Social Media Changing Social Interactions”, 
Student journal of media literacy education, vol. 1, no. 1, 1-
17, 2010. 
[6]
L. M. Lekhanya, “Cultural influence on the diffusion and 
adoption of Social Media technologies by entrepreneurs in 
rural South Africa”, International Business & Economics 
Research Journal, vol. 12.12, vol. 12, 2013. 
[7]
W. E. Woods, “Government 2.5: The Impact of Social Media 
on Public Sector Accessibility”, 2016. 
[8]
B. Sago, “Factors Influencing Social Media Adoption and 
Frequency of Use: An Examination of Facebook, Twitter, 
Pinterest and Google+”, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 2013. 
[9]
M. M. Zwiers, “Exploration and explanation of the multiple 
ways of how employees make use of Social Media in their 
daily practices” (Master's thesis, University of Twente), 2014. 
[10] M. Shrivastava, T. Paperwala and K. Dave, “Trends in web 
technologies: Web 1.0 to Web 3.0 & beyond”, In The 
International Information Systems Conference (iiSC) 2011 
Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman, pp, 
73, 2011. 
[11] D. Nicholas and I, Rowlands, “Social Media use in the 
research workflow”, Information Services & Use, vol. 31, no. 
1-2, pp, 61-83, 2011. 
[12] P. Andersen, “What is Web 2.0?: ideas, technologies and 
implications for education”, Bristol: JISC, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-
64, 2007. 
[13] M. J. Culnan, P. J. McHugh and J. I. Zubillaga, J. I, “How 
large US companies can use Twitter and other Social Media 
to gain business value”, MIS Quarterly Executive, vol. 9, no. 
4, 2010. 
[14] A. Kassel, “Social networking: A research tool”, FUMSI 
article, 2018. 
[15] L, Safko, “The Social Media bible: tactics, tools, and 
strategies for business success”, John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[16] C. Richthammer, M. Netter, M. Riesner, J. Sänger and G. 
Pernul, “Taxonomy of social network data types”, EURASIP 
Journal on Information Security, vol. 1, no. 11, 2014. 
[17] B. Hysa, A. Mularczyk and I. Zdonek, “Social media–the 
challenges and the future direction of the recruitment process 
in HRM area”, Studia Ekonomiczne, vol. 234, pp. 54-67, 
2015. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-757-3
SOTICS 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[18] E. Tokarcíková, ”Influence of social networking for 
enterprise´ s activities”, Periodica polytechnica social and 
Management Sciences, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 37-41, 2011. 
[19] I. Leftheriotis and M. N. Giannakos, “Using Social Media for 
work: Losing your time or improving your work?”, 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 31, pp. 134-142, 2014. 
[20] M. Drahošová and P. Balco, “The analysis of advantages and 
disadvantages of use of Social Media in European Union. 
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 109, pp. 1005-1009, 2017. 
[21] L. Cilliers, W. T. Chinyamurindi and K. Viljoen, “Factors 
influencing the intention to use Social Media for work-related 
purposes at a South African higher education institution”, SA 
Journal of Human Resource Management, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 
1-8, 2017. 
[22] B. Aguenza, A. H. Al-Kassem and A. M. Som, “Social Media 
and 
productivity 
in 
the 
workplace: 
Challenges 
and 
constraints”, Interdisciplinary Journal of Research in 
Business, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 22-26, 2012. 
[23] W. Akram, and R. Kumar, “A Study on Positive and Negative 
Effects of Social Media on Society”, International Journal of 
Computer Sciences and Engineering, 5, 347-354, 2017. 
[24] D. Muijs, “Doing quantitative research in education with 
SPSS”, Sage, 2010. 
[25] N. Walliman, “Research methods: The basics”, Routledge, 
2017. 
[26] J. E. Chukwuere, “Towards a culture-oriented e-learning 
system 
development 
framework 
in 
higher 
education 
institutions in South Africa”, (Doctoral dissertation, North 
West University, South Africa), 2017. 
[27] D. J. Higgins, “The Radical Statistician: A Beginners Guide 
to Unleashing the Power of Applied Statistics in the Real 
World”, (5th Ed). California: Jim Higgins Publishing, 2015. 
[28] X. Zhang, L. Ma, B. Xu, B and F. Xu, “How Social Media 
usage affects employees’ job satisfaction and turnover 
intention: An empirical study in China”. Information & 
Management, 56(6), 103136, 2019. 
[29] Q. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Benitez and J. Hu, “Impact of 
the usage of Social Media in the workplace on team and 
employee performance”. Information & Management, 2019. 
[30] J. H. Kietzmann, K. Hermkens, I. P. McCarthy and B. S. 
Silvestre, “Social media? Get serious! Understanding the 
functional building blocks of social media”. Business 
horizons, 54(3), 241-251, 2011. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-757-3
SOTICS 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

