Virtual Activity Ontology Modeling: the Case of Sociocultural Knowledge Sharing 
 
 
 
Kaladzavi Guidedi 
University of Maroua 
Maroua, Cameroon 
kaladzavi@ymail.com 
 
 
 
 
Papa Fary Diallo 
University of Gaston Berger 
Saint-Louis, Senegal 
diallo.papa-fary@ugb.edu.sn 
 
 
 
 
Kolyang 
University of Maroua 
Maroua, Cameroon 
dtaiwe@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
Moussa LO 
University of Gaston Berger 
Saint-Louis, Senegal  
moussa.lo@ugb.edu.sn 
 
 
 
Abstract-In the light of the rhythm of the current cultural 
mixing, we believe that in the long term, culture of African 
people in particular may disappear. Some new computational 
techniques (semantic web technologies) are needed to manage 
the large repositories of sociocultural data and to discover 
useful patterns and knowledge from them. This paper presents 
a virtual activity ontology modeling approach, in the case of 
sociocultural knowledge sharing and co-construction named 
Ontoshare. Our modeling approach is based on Engeström’s 
Human Activity Theory (HAT). With Ontoshare we designed 
how Internet users could build the content of a sociocultural 
Knowledge Management System (KMS); this vocabulary also 
organises data, facilitates information retrieval by introducing 
a semantic layer in social web platform, we plan to implement. 
The platform could be considered as a « collective memory » 
which will allow communities to share, co-construct and 
discover sociocultural knowledge in the Cameroonian context. 
Keywords-sociocultural knowledge; sharing; Human Activity 
Theory. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Since 2005, UNESCO has projected that local knowledge 
will increasingly become the main point of social mutations; 
it leads economic, political, and sociocultural projects. 
Emerging societies must avoid being mere components of 
the “Global Information Society”. Effective participation of 
African Countries in “Societies of knowledge” is required 
[1]. While, local knowledge is considered in the conception 
of different project development, B. Z. Deli deplores the 
fact that, in Africa, cultures are deteriorating and emptying 
of their meanings, their mellow content and values [2]. To 
promote indigenous knowledge, some media have been 
proposed: a permanent (re)education, radio broadcasting, 
and of course Internet. On the Web, any topics may be 
discussed. As a result, the Web constitutes the source of 
global information. However, when we consider how 
Internet works by focusing on data flow, social values such 
as equality, freedom, democracy which are supposed to 
characterise the “Global Information Society" appear to be 
an illusion. The unbalance between these social values is 
described by “digital divide” issue between Northern and 
Southern countries. The “digital divide” has many views. 
Out of these views, there are “divide by access”, “divide by 
use”, “divide by decision”, and “divide by content”. The 
“divide by content” is defined as the gap between Western 
culture over-represented and African culture under-
represented. This gap is considerable [3]. To reduce this gap 
and promote the African culture, to refresh the memory of 
our citizens and show the transparent view of opportunities 
(unknown infrastructures, spaces, etc.) and challenges 
(investments 
unequally 
distributed, 
marginalised 
communities, etc.) through endogenous information (from 
involved actors), rather than external analysis, we propose, 
the implementation of ontologies-based web platform for 
sociocultural knowledge sharing and co-construction in the 
Cameroonian context.  
By Web 2.0, Internet users are no longer just consumers 
but also authors of information. Semantic Web is a Web 
evolution, through ontologies; it improves data organisation, 
and information retrieval. Ontology is an explicit 
specification of a shared conceptualisation [4]. As such, 
ontologies are considered to be knowledge representation 
tools, transforming data into information and information 
into knowledge. They are recommended tools for 
knowledge reuse, organisation, interoperability, integration, 
and valorisation on the Web [5].  
The objective of this paper is to present a virtual activity 
ontology modeling approach in the case of sociocultural 
knowledge sharing and co-construction named Ontoshare. 
Ontoshare modeling approach is based on Engeström's 
Human Activity Theory (HAT). HAT is a conceptual 
framework which, the foundational concept is “activity”, 
understood as purposeful, transformative, and developing 
interaction between actors (“subjects”) and the world 
(“objects”) [6].  
This paper is organised as follows: In Section 2, we 
present research work related to our domain. In Section 3, we 
shall explain our modeling approach, which is based on 
Engeström‟s Human Activity Theory and how we reused the 
related ontologies to solve interoperability issue. Moreover, 
we will describe in Section 4, how Ontoshare has been 
populated and improved through inference services provided 
by reasoning engine in Protégé. In the same section, we will 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

point out some SPARQL queries on a Knowledge Base 
related to the use cases to illustrate how the “collective 
memory” could be built. This will end with, a conclusion and 
future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK   
To the best of our knowledge, only the Sociocultural 
Ontology [7][8] covers the sociocultural domain which has 
been developed in the Senegalese context. The modeling 
approach is based on Vygotsky framework [9]. This 
framework is considered as the first Generation of HAT. It 
is organised around the "mediation" concept and based on 
the idea that, human actions are mediated by cultural, 
symbolic or physical artifacts that enable man to act on his 
environment. 
The main limitation of Vygotsky's framework is the fact 
that, it focuses solely on individual actions and not on 
individual actions within the community. The modeling 
approach proposed in [7][8] tried to solve this limitation by 
substituting subject by community. In this model, there are 
three main axes, which are:  
1. Community: which is a group of people sharing a 
common interest in a sociocultural domain; 
2. Object: considered as a locality or infrastructure 
where community evolves; 
3. Artifact: it mediates the actions of community with 
object. 
Translating subject by community has just solved the 
problem concerning community action but has failed to 
model the dynamics within the community. The authors of 
this model consider the community as an atomic entity. The 
modeled ontology in [7] hides some knowledge on the 
internal dynamics (collaborations, interactions, actors, roles, 
etc.) of the community and the contextual nature 
(regulations) while organising activities considering the fact 
that knowledge on internal dynamic within community will 
enrich our Knowledge Base and allow deep analysis of 
communities and activities. 
Due to the limitations of sociocultural ontology [7], we 
proposed in our previous paper an improved sociocultural 
ontology named OntoSOC [10]. Its modeling approach 
considers the dynamics within communities and the 
contextual nature for organising activities. This vocabulary 
enabled us to semantically circumscribe the content of 
sociocultural knowledge.  
However, on the Web, the flows have been reversed: 
Internet user is no longer passive (reader) but active (author). 
The transition from Web 1.0 to Web 2.0 done in 2004 was a 
decisive transition to social media paradigm. Social media 
includes all tools and applications that allow interaction 
between Internet users. Within that “galaxy” of social media, 
there are several "planets". Out of them, there are texts 
publishing tools (wikis, blogs, etc.), exchanging and sharing 
tools (YouTube for videos, Slideshare for sharing 
presentations, etc.), tools for discussion (Skype, Messenger, 
etc.), and networking tools (Twitter, Facebook, MySpace, 
etc.), etc., are in continuous supply.  
Unfortunately, most of them are not sharing and 
discovering local knowledge oriented, except Wikipedia 
[11], the online encyclopedia which is inter-domain and 
inter-society. The second limitation and not of lesser 
importance, is the fact that they are not ontologies-based. In 
the case of Wikipedia, DBpedia [12] project has been 
launched to address this issue. DBpedia is an academic and 
community project for automatic data exploration from 
Wikipedia to propose a structured version in semantic web 
format (RDF) of data. Due to the previous limitations and 
the unknown of a sociocultural sharing ontology, designing 
ontology of how Internet users could interact to share 
knowledge is needed. 
III. 
ONTOSHARE MODELING 
In this section, we present, why and how we used Human 
Activity Theory to model Ontoshare. 
A. Methodology 
Practically, ontological engineering does not propose a 
standardised methodology for designing ontologies [13]. 
Our concern is to implement a “collective memory” system 
helping people to have a holistic view on local changes, 
while considering culture and historicity in our localities. 
Otherwise, we agree with P. Berger and T. Luckmann in [14] 
with the fact that reality is a social construction and that, the 
universe is evolving. These changes are driven by groups of 
individuals through their various activities. For analysing 
and understanding these changes and how they transform 
reality, some activity models have been proposed. There are 
three generations of this model: the first and the second are 
characterised by focusing on subject and its actions; the 
third generation is known as collective view framework 
making distinction between individual actions and collective 
activities. For these purposes, Engeström‟s model is more 
adapted and has been chosen as framework of our modeling 
process. 
Engeström‟s model clearly points out distinction 
between individual action and collective activity. It is 
produced according to the historical and cultural view of 
activity. The model has six poles (Subject, Object, Tools, 
Rules, Community and Division of Labour) as shown in 
Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Engeström‟s Human Activity triangle 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

- 
Subject: represents the chosen individual to analyse; 
- 
Object: environment transformation by activity 
(task to be performed, objective to be achieved); 
- 
Tools: materials or symbolic tools that mediate 
activity ; 
- 
Community: set of individuals that share the same 
interests 
 
and 
thereby 
differ 
from 
other 
communities; 
- 
Division of Labour: it considers, the horizontal 
distribution of actions among subjects, community 
members 
and 
the 
vertical 
hierarchy 
or 
responsibilities and status; 
- 
Rules: they refer to implicit and explicit standards, 
conventions, habits, etc. that maintain and regulate 
actions and interactions within the community. 
Many Human-Computer-Interaction (HCI) researchers 
were eager to move beyond the confines of traditional 
cognitive science to HAT direction [16]. Activity Theory is 
a powerful and clarifying descriptive tool rather than a 
strongly predictive theory. It incorporates strong notions of 
intentionality, 
history, 
mediation, 
collaboration 
and 
development 
in 
constructing 
conscientiousness. 
HCI 
research needs to understand and describe “context”, 
“situation” and “practice”. Considering these previous 
features of HCI, its objectives are related to HAT objectives. 
Although, the HAT is developed for offline communities, 
the concept of online community is still the set of people 
(Internet users) who share the same values and interests. 
Thus, to analyse how internet users will interact with 
computer to co-construct knowledge in our context, Human 
Activity Theory constitutes the powerful tool [17]. 
B. Concepts and Relationships identification process 
In this section, we focus on how Engeström‟ HAT has 
been used to construct our ontology (Ontoshare). In other 
words, we want to show how we deduced concepts and 
relationships from HAT. To do that, due to “collaborative 
persona" approach, we simulated HAT in three use cases of 
online knowledge sharing. “Persona method” is a modeling 
strategy used by software architects. This idea was 
introduced by A. Cooper, software designer [18]. In 
Software Engineering, this approach is called “Goal-
directed design“. It represents patterns of users‟ behavior, 
goals and motivations, compiled in a fictional description of 
a single individual. It also contains made-up personal 
details, in order to make the person more “tangible and 
alive” for the development team. In our case, we use 
“collaborative 
persona" 
suitable 
for 
collaborative, 
participative and interactive context as community [19]. 
To simulate the online shared information, the following 
activities were chosen: a cultural event organised by 
NakoSenda community in Mokolo (locality), rural library 
building activity conducted by CDE-SAARE [20] in Kolara 
(locality) and a soccer tournament holidays organised by 
Club 2-0-UMa. 
There are two types of Internet users: passive and active 
users. Active user is the one who edits (shares) information. 
For the purpose of this paper, active user is named 
contributor. Any contributor can be a member of a 
community which organises activity, or a witness who 
attends the activity or just anyone who has information 
(partial or complete) to share on an activity. For example, in 
the first case, a contributor named D, created in our platform 
a page named “cultural event in Mokolo”, in which he 
edited information about the location (weather forecast, 
vegetation, etc.) of Mokolo. The second contributor named 
MP who is Nakosenda‟s member, shared information on the 
same page relative to NakoSenda (the founder, headquarter, 
regulations, type). The third contributor called M shared his 
impression on the event. All these contributors shared and 
co-constructed sociocultural knowledge on cultural event 
organised by NakoSenda in the respect of platform 
regulations. Thus, for each use case and for each contributor, 
we simulated separately, twelve triads within the overall 
triangle as shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Subject-regulations-Activity triad  
As seen in Figure 2, the above triad gave rise to the 
following triples: 
- 
isRespectedBy (contributor, Paltform regulations) ; 
- 
isParticipedby (contributor, sharing) ; 
- 
isRegulatedBy (sharing, Paltform regulations). 
Thirty triples in all were deduced from twelve triads. 
The connexity of some triads gave in some cases identical 
triples. For example: Subject-Community-Division of 
labour 
and 
Community-Division 
of 
labour-Activity 
producing identical triple, isCreatedBy (Community, 
Division of labour). After identifying and eliminating 
redundant triples, the following results were obtained: 
- 
isUsedBy(sociocultural Knowledge, Contributor);   
isMemberOf 
(Contibutor, 
community 
of 
Contributors); 
- 
isRegulatedBy (Sharing, Paltform regulations); 
- 
isAllowedBy (Contributions, Administrators); 
- 
isEditedBy (Contibution,Contributor);  
- 
isConcernedBy (Sharing, Contribution);  
- 
isMonitored (Sharing, Administrators); 
Activity (Sharing)  
Rules (Platform 
regulations) 
Subject (MP) 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

- 
isRespectedBy (Contributor, Paltform regulations); 
- 
isParticipedby (Contributor, sharing). 
 
Subjects and objects of these triples model fundamental 
concepts and predicates representing relationships between 
them. Table 1 shows mapping carried out between poles of 
Engeström‟s model and upper-level concepts of our 
ontology. 
TABLE I.   MAPPING BETWEEN ENGESTRÖM‟S MODEL POLES AND 
ONTOSHARE UPPER- LEVEL CONCEPTS 
Engeström model poles 
Ontoshare Upper-level concepts  
Object 
Sharing 
Subject 
Contributor 
Rules 
Platform regulations  
Community 
Community of Contributors 
Division of Labour 
Contributions 
Tools  
Sociocultural Knowledge  
- 
Community of Contributors:  set of contributors; 
- 
Sharing: information co-construction activity ; 
- 
Contributor: active Internet user; 
- 
Platform Regulations: rules defined for guiding 
sharing activity and contributors; 
- 
Contributions: shared information for describing 
any Sociocultural Knowledge on the platform. In 
others words, this concept models each piece of 
information edited (shared) by any contributor into 
the knowledge construction in platform; 
- 
Sociocultural Knowledge: This concept models 
information about society and culture. According 
to [21], sociocultural knowledge concept, concerns 
all forms of human knowledge: objects that 
compound the real world, facts and events. This 
concept is complex. As a result, sociocultural 
ontology named OntoSOC proposed in our 
previous work [9] was reused. This vocabulary 
helped us to semantically circumscribe the content 
of 
sociocultural 
knowledge. 
To 
reuse 
it, 
Sociocultural Knowledge concept was used as a 
“bridge” concept.  
C. Concepts and Relationships 
Different concepts obtained in Table 1 represent 
fundamental classes of Ontoshare. There are seven upper-
level concepts in all. Figure 3 illustrates these concepts and 
relationships between them. In fact, classes alone are not 
enough to define ontology; we need to define also relations 
between them and attributes to characterise classes. These 
two notions add semantics to ontologies. In our study, use 
cases 
were 
required 
in 
identifying 
the 
following 
relationships: 
- 
isUsedBy(Sociocultural Knowledge, Contributor) ; 
- 
MemberOf 
(Contibutor, 
Community 
of 
Contributors) ; 
- 
isRegulatedBy 
(Community 
of 
Contributors, 
Plateform-Regulations) ; 
- 
isAllowedBy (Contribution, Administrators) ; 
- 
isEditedBy (Contibution, Contributor) ;  
- 
isConcernedBy (Sharing, Contribution) ; 
- 
isMonitored (Sharing, Administrators). 
 
 
Figure 3.   Ontoshare concepts and relationships 
D. Hierarchy of classes  
Out of seven concepts, three have variant depth, going 
from one to level six. There are many approaches to define 
hierarchy of classes:  top-down, bottom-up and hybrid 
approach. The use of HAT not only enabled us to generate 
fundamental concepts but also marked the beginning of top-
down method. Thereafter, to better define hierarchy, we 
intended to “think up” before making specifications. This is 
a top-down development process that begins with definition 
of the most general concepts in the domain and continues 
with sub-concepts specialisation. Figure 4 shows an 
overview of possible articulation between various generality 
levels of Ontoshare.  
 
 
Figure 4.    Ontoshare hierarchy extract 
For example, community of contributors consisting of 
Administrators, Community members and not-Community 
members gives the overview of those who can share 
information on the platform. Administrators are particular 
members. In addition to their contributions, they have to 
work on monitoring edited contents by implementing and 
setting platform regulations. It clearly appears from this 
that, hierarchy of sociocultural knowledge provides 
information on different views (task, tools, community, 
actors, regulations, etc.) of data that each contributor can 
share through sharing concept. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

E. Ontoshare alignment 
For semantic web, alignment is a solution to the 
interoperability issue. It helps not to recreate those that exist 
but only to improve them. Ontoshare is an inter-domain 
vocabulary. It reuses some concepts of related ontologies 
(FOAF, Schema.org, DBpedia, and wai). Figure 5 presents 
alignment (manually) done between related vocabularies 
and some corresponding Ontoshare concepts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.   Ontoshare alignment 
In recent years, the concept of Linked Open Data 
(LOD), and the so-called Web of Linked Data, has attracted 
tremendous attention from both the academic and real 
application world. The idea is, if we start to publish 
machine-readable data, such as RDF documents on the Web, 
and somehow make all these documents connected to each 
other, then we will be creating a Linked Data Web that can 
be processed by machines. Alignment technic participates to 
build the LOD project at two levels: 
- 
Using OWL:equivalentClass property to connect 
Ontoshare concepts to standard vocabularies 
concepts and share semantics between these 
concepts. It is the case of ontoshare:task which is 
semantically 
equivalent 
to 
wai:role 
and 
ontoshare:contributor 
which 
is 
semantically 
equivalent to foaf:person; 
- 
Using is-a property to add news concepts to LOD 
through standard vocabularies (FOAF, Schema.org, 
DBpedia, and wai). In our case, we added to LOD, 
a local concept as « tontine » which is the sub-
concept of ontoshare:community class representing 
the local social network. 
IV. 
ONTOSHARE POPULATING AND VALIDATION 
For editing, we used "Protégé 5.0", an ontology 
development tool [22]. Ontoshare populating was done with 
data related to some activities (cultural events, sport events, 
and religious events). Three of them have been used 
previously for simulating HAT.  
Protégé offers a number of reasoning engines and 
SPARQL endpoint in its standard distribution. A reasoner 
checks for consistency of description of class, subsumption 
between classes, taxonomy of class names (classification) 
and finds classes that match known instances. The 
performance of the proposed ontology has been evaluated at 
the following levels: classification, consistency checking 
using a reasoner, and competence question checking by 
SPARQL queries.  According to classification checking, we 
tried to identify by classify function; if instances are 
automatically classified in a defined class. we did it for all 
concepts. For consistency checking, we aimed to verify, if 
there is any class which could never have an instance due to 
its definition. The competence question checking allowed 
by SPARQL endpoint enables to verify, if ontoshare can 
answer a competency question that guided its design. Thus,  
we focused on various activities organised in a specific 
locality to evaluate consistency of the Knowledge Base, and 
check for infinite query (eventually). The following query 
enabled to extract the relevant information on organised 
activities, resource used and tasks realised by subjects for 
any given community from our Knowledge Base. 
PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> 
PREFIX OntoShare: <http://maroua-univ/ns/ OntoShare #> 
SELECT  ?Communuties ?Activité ?task ?person ?tools   
WHERE { ?task OntoShare:isUsedBy ?tools 
OPTIONAL { ?Activité OntoShare:isRealizeBy ?task } 
OPTIONAL { ?task OntoShare:isPlayedBy ?person } 
OPTIONAL { ?task OntoShare:isCreatedBy ?Communuties } 
} ORDER BY  ?Communuties 
 
 
Figure 6.  SPARQL query overview 
The result of the SPARQL query is presented in Figure 6. 
It illustrates how the content of our KMS has been enriched 
by Internet users by editing some pieces of information 
related to sociocultural activities.  
We would like to point out that, access features to ICT 
such as “divide by access”, “divide by use”, “divide by 
decision” in Cameroon must be improved, even if, sharing 
knowledge and discovering on that platform will not only be 
done by Cameroonians, but all Internet users worldwide. In 
fact, according to [23] “digital divide”, statistics are very 
low. As a result, Cameroon would be the seventieth country 
over fifty four in Africa with about one million of Internet 
users. This number represents only 5% of its population. 
The same survey, recorded that the Internet penetration rate 
would be around 0.01 %.  
Schema: Organization 
Ontoshare: 
Community_of_contributors 
Ontoshare: Community 
Ontoshare: Activity 
DBpedia: Event 
Sociocultural 
knowledge 
Ontoshare: 
Contributor 
OntoSHARE: task 
wai:Role 
 
Ontoshare: Individual 
Foaf: Person 
OWL: equivalentClass 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented Ontoshare modeling approach. 
Ontoshare is online activity ontology in the case of 
sociocultural knowledge sharing. To get there, we used 
Engeström‟s Human Activity Theory (HAT). To fix the 
interoperability problem, we have established mapping 
between Ontoshare concepts and those related. We 
populated our ontology with use cases and applied some 
SPARQL tests. Certainly, our use cases are far to be 
representative, but, their data helped us to eliminate or 
explain some inconsistencies and demonstrate how our 
“collective memory” could be co-constructed. It should be 
noted that redundant triples elimination process was done 
empirically. We have no guarantee of reaching minimal 
coverage. Nevertheless, reduction rate is considerable, about 
60%. In addition, due to the fact that sociocultural 
knowledge is complex, we reused OntoSOC to circumscribe 
data type to be shared and co-constructed into our platform 
through sociocultural knowledge concept.  
In perspective, we will focus on domain ontology and 
design the platform„s architecture. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the University of Maroua 
which partially 
funded this work. 
Special thanks to LANI (Laboratoire d‟Analyse Numérique 
et d‟Informatique) of the University of Gaston Berger, 
Saint-Louis, 
in 
Senegal 
to 
our 
research position in the Laboratory. 
REFERENCES 
[1] UNESCO, “Toward the knowledge societies”, world report of 
UNESCO, editions UNESCO, 2005. 
[2] B. Z. Deli, ”Western culture imperialism and the future of African 
culture: Challenges and Perspectives” GSSA, Maroua, Cameroon, 
2008, pp15-20. 
[3] http://www.enssib.fr/bibliotheque-numerique/notices/1948-de-la-
fracture-numerique-a-la-fracture-cognitive-pour-une-nouvelle-
approche-de-la-societe-de-l-information, [retrieved: 10, 2015]. 
[4] T. R. Gruber, “Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies used 
for 
Knowledge 
Sharing”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Human Computer Studies, Special issue: the Role of Formal 
Ontology in the Information Technology, Vol. 43, No. 5, 
, 1995, pp.907-928. 
[5] G. Kaladzavi, P. F. Diallo, Kolyang, and M. LO, “The role of 
ontologies in valuing African sociocultural knowledge on the Web “,  
2nd Computer Science Reasearch Conference, Yaoundé, Cameroon, 
2015, In press.  
[6] https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/book/the-encyclopedia-
of-human-computer-interaction-2nd-ed/activity-theory, [retrieved: 10, 
2015]. 
[7] P. F. Diallo, S. M. Ndiaye, and M. LO, “Study of sociocultural 
ontology”, In the First International Conference on Social Economics 
and Informatics, Spain, October 2011, pp. 43-53. 
[8] P. F. Diallo, O. Corby, M. LO, I. Mirbel, and S. M. Ndiaye, 
“Sociocultural Ontology: Upper-level and Domain Ontologies” in 
Actes JFO, Hammamet, Tunisia, november 2014, pp. 15-27.  
[9] L. S. Vygotsky, “Mind in society: the development of higher 
psychological processes, “Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
[10] G. Kaladzavi, P. F. Diallo, Kolyang, and M. LO, “OntoSOC: 
Sociocultural knowledge ontology“, International Journal of Web & 
Semantic 
Technology, 
vol 
6, 
No 
2, 
April 
2015, 
DOI: 
10.5121/ijwest.2015.6201. 
[11] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page, [retrieved: 09, 2015]. 
[12] http://mappings.dbpedia.org/server/ontology/classes/, [retrieved: 10, 
2015]. 
[13] A. Gangemi, A. Prisco, M. T. Sagry, G. Steve, and D. 
Tiscornia,”Some Ontological Tools to Support Legal Regulatory 
Compliance, with a Case Study”, In OTM Confederated International 
Workshops, 2003, pp. 1-2. 
[14] http://mip-
ms.cnam.fr/servlet/com.univ.collaboratif.utils.LectureFichiergw?ID_
FICHIER=1295877017861, [retrieved: 09, 2015]. 
[15] L. S. Vygotsky, “Mind in society: the development of higher 
psychological processes.“ Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
[16] Y. Engeström, “Activity theory as a framework for analyzing and 
redesigning work”, Ergonomics, 2000,  pp. 960-974 
[17] K. Kuutti, “Activity Theory as a potential framework for human- 
computer interaction research”, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995,          
pp. 17-44, [retrieved: 10, 2015]. 
[18] S. Blomkvis, “The User as a personality. Using Personas as a tool for 
design“, Theoretical perspectives in Human-Computer Interaction, 
IPLab, KTH, September 3, 2002. 
[19] A. Giboin, “From Individual to Collective Personas Modeling 
Realistic Groups and Com munities of Users (and not Only Realistic 
Individual Users) “, The Fourth International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interaction, 2011. pp. 32-35.  
[20] J. P. Haton and M. C. Haton, “Knowledge Representation and 
Reasonings”, in Artificial Intelligence, 15e ed. Paris, France: PUF, pp 
39-67, 1989. 
[21] cde-saare.de, [retrieved: 09, 2015]. 
[22] protege.stanford.edu/, [retrieved: 10, 2015]. 
[23] http://www.journaldunet.com/web-tech/chiffres-
internet/cameroun/pays-cmr, [retrieved: 17, 2015]. 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

