Ethics and Social Eco-Informatics
Richard Lucas
Information Systems
University of Canberra
Canberra, Australia
and
Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics Charles Sturt University
Email: Richard.Lucas@canberra.edu.au
Abstract—Ethics problems in emerging ﬁelds, typically, do not
get advance consideration. It is not until after an ethical lapse
occurs in a ﬁeld of study does ethics get a serious examination.
Social Eco-informatics is no exception. I will show the extent of
the existing consideration in the academic literature concerning
eco-informatics of ethics problems and their ethical basis. Lessons
from the history of emerging ﬁelds in information technologies
will be examined as a way of pointing out the detail of ethical
problems that this ﬁeld might encounter. This paper looks at
the ethics-ﬁrst – ethics-last debate and offers some guidance for
researchers in this emerging ﬁeld. The challenge for emerging
ﬁelds such as eco-informatics lies in keeping ahead of potential
ethics problems not reacting to them after they occur. Finally, I
use a paper on social eco-informatics to point to possible places
where the eco-informatic researcher might look to include ethical
considerations.
Index Terms—ethics ﬁrst; ethics last; eco-informatics; personal
ethics;
It needs no proof that neither economic activities nor any
other class of human activities can rightly be made indepen-
dent of moral laws. (Keynes, 1890, 24) [8]
I. INTRODUCTION
I would have liked to have written a paper about ethical
problems in social eco-informatics, showing signiﬁcant and
deep insight into common concerns such as privacy protection.
However when I began to examine the usual ethical suspects,
harm, rights violations, unprofessionalism, and so on I became
aware of the lack of extant research into ethical problems
in the ﬁeld. I had encountered this problem before when
examining the moral issues in enterprise computing [11]: No
literature. I could have retreated to the established and ﬁeld of
environmental ethics and expounded on, for example, privacy
protection and what might be done about it, but my interest
was piqued: I wondered why there might be nothing so far?
Was it just a coincidence that two emerging IT ﬁelds have no
current, or past, interest in their ethical dimensions? Out of
this wonder emerged this paper.
A. A word about terms
The usual practice in science research is to precisely deﬁne
terms. For this paper, fortunately, such a requirement is un-
necessary when discussing ethics and social eco-informatics.
Why is this?
Even if there were precise deﬁnitions of the individual terms
ETHICS and SOCIAL ECO-INFORMATICS that all could agree
on they, as discussed in the next part, would have no effect on
the thrust of this paper. What I was looking for in this paper
was the occurrence of the term pair ETHICS and SOCIAL ECO-
INFORMATICS, regardless of what the individual terms might
mean to any particular individual.
Nonetheless, ETHICS is a sufﬁciently common term that,
while there may be some disagreement about what counts as
ethical (or more usually, unethical), there is no substantive
disagreement that everyone has a conception of what counts
as being ethical. A common example might be:
Ethics is a set of values for determining right and wrong.
I could ﬁnd no such common example for SOCIAL ECO-
INFORMATICS. For this paper I take the characterization of
eco-informatics used by Kineman and Kumar [9].
represent natural biodiversity and ecosystem phe-
nomena, and to communicate such information to
society, for science, valuation, management, and
policy
II. WHAT IS THERE TO BE ETHICAL ABOUT WITH
ECO-INFORMATICS?
Apparently nothing. Ethics, it seems, is not on the radar of
researchers into eco-informatics.
In a search of Google Scholar conducted at the last possible
moment for this paper (18 June 2012) using the keyword
phrases “eco-informatics” + “ethics”I searched for the occur-
rrence of research papers on the topic of ethical problems in
eco-informatics. I had originally planned to take the results of
this search and reﬁne it by adding “social”. However, as the
results below show this became unnecessary. Also note that
a mere seven search results were in the “ethical”list that did
not also appear in the “ethics”list: this made discussing them
separately unnecessary.
A. The Google Scholar Search
Google Scholar was searched for academic papers and
books that examined the phrase “eco-informatics”. The term
eco-informatics alone without additional search terms resulted
in a mere 303 results. The search uncovered the ﬁrst occur-
rence of the term “eco-informatics”combined with “ethics”and
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

“ethical”as part of the more weildy “geo-eco-informatics”(or
geographical and ecological information systems) in Koshkar-
iov, Tikunov, and Troﬁmov (1989) [10]. This makes the use
of the term eco-informatics a relatively new phenomenon. The
results were then categorized into nine groups:
TABLE I
KEYWORD SEARCH RESULTS CATEGORIES “ECO-INFORMATICS” +
“ETHICS”OR “ETHICAL”
Category
ethics
ethical
1
Jnl or Org Code of Ethics
1
0
2
Another ﬁeld’s ethics
5
4
3
Reference to an ethics paper
3
2
4
Ethics is important
5
2
5
Personal Ethics
1
1
6
Soft Science
1
1
7
Actual Examples
0
0
8
Moral evaluation
0
0
9
Unable to locate term
39
9
Categories Totals
55
19
Now, I do not want to make too much of these results.
I am fully aware that the ethics of eco-informatics could be
regarded as a melding of the ﬁelds of environmental ethics
and information ethics and merely examining each of these
ﬁelds ought to be sufﬁcient to identify any ethical problems
and be aware of any moral evaluations. This may be true but
any connections to these already established ﬁelds does not
make the point that I want to make here. The point here is
that if a ﬁeld chooses to create a new term, such as eco-
informatics, then the ﬁeld, presumably, has substantial reasons
to distinguish itself from other closely related ﬁelds. This
difference then ought to result in unique ethical problems and
present unique opportunities to show its moral worth.
A cursory analysis of this shows some interesting features.
1) Jnl or Org Code of Ethics: This category refers to those
search results that mention a journal or organizational code of
ethics. One search result made reference to the need to follow
a code of ethics but did not say why or what the relevance of
such a code might be.
2) Another ﬁeld’s ethics: This category refers to those
search results that mention another ﬁeld’s ethics, environmen-
tal ethics, for example. Several search results (5 and 4) made
reference to another academic ﬁeld’s ethics. Environmental
and information ethics both got a mention. However no details
were drawn out nor any ethical problems relating speciﬁcally
to eco-informatics were mentioned.
3) Reference to an ethics paper: This category refers to
those search results that speciﬁcally mention a paper that has
ethics in its title or is in an established applied ethics journal.
Three search results included a reference to a paper in an ethics
journal such as Journal of Information Ethics and Journal
of Environmental Ethics. However no use was made by the
articles found to discuss the ethics of eco-informatics.
4) Ethics is important: This category refers to those search
results that, in some form or other, emphasise the importance
of ethics or ethical concepts (such as harm, beneﬁt,trust,
autonomy, honesty, virtue). Five search results mentioned the
importance of ethics but did not say how or why.
5) Personal Ethics: This category refers to those search
results that refer to personal or a person’s ethics. One search
result said that personal ethics were important when dealing
with eco-informatics. Again there was no caching out of this
claim nor evidence of how this might be.
6) Soft Science: This category refers to those search results
that refer to ethics obliquely by bundling it in with other
social or ‘soft’ sciences. For one search result the authors,
referring to those constructing eco-informatics systems, wrote
that it was important to take into account soft sciences such as
ethics, management, and society into account. However, “Soft
or social sciences, in so far as they embrace environmental
issues, history, ethics and philosophy have til now run a very
poor second.” [14]
7) Actual Examples: This category refers to those search
results that refer to speciﬁc ethical problems that have oc-
curred, and are named in connection with eco-informatics. No
search result gave actual examples of ethical problems. I would
have also taken (and did search for), the usually erroneously
named, ethical dilemma but there were none. This will be one
of the two main discussion points in the next subsection.
8) Moral Evaluation: This category refers to those search
results that mention any sort of evaluation of eco-informatics,
eco-informatics systems in terms of its moral or social worth.
No search result gave actual examples of ethical problems.
I would have included any indication of the ethical merit
of speciﬁc examples of eco-informatics (data, information, or
systems) , the usually erroneously named, ethical dilemma but
there were none. This will be one of the two main discussion
points in the next subsection.
B. Some (non-scientiﬁc) analysis
My conclusion is that ethical eco-informatics, as a serious
ﬁeld of study, has been much neglected.
I do not intend to provide a sophisticated statistical analysis
of the above search nor an in-depth defence of my conclusion.
That is not my goal here. My goal here is to point out that
for a term that is 23 years (see [10]) old there are no serious
academic papers tackling the idea that there might be ethical
problems lurking in the background or that the moral worth
of eco-informatics be examined. This might be explained by
the fact that no ethical problems have occurred in the ﬁeld;
that the moral worth of eco-informatics is so obvious so as to
not need stating.
Perhaps, the ﬁndings above are just artefacts of history,
that will go the way of all technological implementations
of informations systems: we will work out the problems
eventually. Is it merely a matter of time before researches into
eco-informatics and ethics come good; that academics have a
go at examining the ethical problems (potential and actual) to
measure the ethical merit?
Put another way, is eco-informatics any different to any
other ﬁeld? After all, it seems that ethics gets mentioned,
eventually, in every ﬁeld. However, if you look closely at
nearly any ﬁeld it turns out that ethics gets a mention only
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

after some unethical, usually catastrophic, event has occurred.
That is, ethics gets considered last.
III. ETHICS FIRST OR ETHICS LAST?
It seems clear to me that in the emerging ﬁeld encom-
passing the environment, technology, and information (eco-
informatics) there has been no forethought about its ethical
implications. That is, ethics has not come ﬁrst. Also pointed
out previously is that this is nothing new, it happens all
the time. But why should this be so? Why does ethics not
get considered ﬁrst, as the ﬁeld emerges? Why is ethics not
discussed ahead of time?
A. Lessons from history
To frame a discussion on whether ethics ought to be done
ﬁrst or last I will use, one traditional area of information
and communication technology (ICT) ethics, systems develop-
ment, and two emerging areas, radio frequency identiﬁcation
device (RFID) tags and data matching. In a forthcoming
book, Professionalism in the Information and Communication
Technology Industry [20] Bernd Stahl and Simon Rogerson,
say that: “A central problem of the ethics of technology is
that it [ethics] tends to arrive too late”. Michael Kirby the
recently retired (2009) Justice of the High Court of Australia,
showed that there were many difﬁculties in regulating new
technologies, ICT specially. In a similar vein, Philippe Goujon
and Catherine Flick state that “the strong push for technology
development too often obscures the need for any deep ethical
consideration before a technical project is funded, developed
and deployed”.
Researchers can, either react to the technology, that is the
ethics is done last, after the technology has been developed, or,
it can be proactive, that is be done ﬁrst, before the technology
is developed. This ethics ﬁrst – ethics last, approach seems
to raise what is commonly known as the Collingridge [2]
dilemma. If the ethics is done before the development has
impacts it is difﬁcult to predict what those impacts will be
and if done after development it is difﬁcult to control these
impacts. Croy [3] formulates the dilemma this way:
Either a technology is in a relatively early stage
of development when it is unknown what changes
should be made, or a technology is in a relatively
late stage of development when change is expensive,
difﬁcult and time-consuming.
If the former, then control is not possible.
If the latter, then control is not feasible.
Therefore, either controlling technology is not pos-
sible, or controlling technology is not feasible.
In short, controlling technology is not possible because
prediction is so unreliable and is not feasible because, once the
technology is developed; change is difﬁcult. While this appears
to pose real difﬁculties, it is not quite the dilemma that it
initially appears to be. Some prediction can be informative and
some control after the development is possible. Furthermore,
it is possible, to some extent, to slip between the horns.
B. What is the difference between reactive and proactive
active ethics?
1) Reactive ethics: I will show the difference between
reactive and proactive ethics through a brief look at the
history of the closely related (to the informatics part of eco-
informatics) ﬁeld of the ethics of information technology.
Problems in IT ethics are not different or new in the sense
that they are different in kind from other ethical problems.
Moral philosophy has been studied , at least, for the past 2500
years, and the ethical issues in computing are an extension
of this. What is new and different is that the development
and use of computers has raised old questions in interestingly
new and different ways [7], often creating what Moor [12]
calls policy vacuums: problems without worked out ways of
dealing with them. The work of the computer ethicists then
is to develop policies to ﬁll those vacuums. One example
in computing is hacking. Breaking into someone’s computer
account is in some ways like breaking into someone’s house,
but there are interesting differences. It is a logical rather
than a physical entering. Another is unauthorised copying of
software, which is a bit like unauthorised copying of a book,
and a bit like taking a television set, but there are signiﬁcant
differences. There are also questions relating to work and
the loss or creation of skills, which arise in a unique way.
This way of doing computer ethics is essentially reactive [7]
and, unfortunately, the most common role of applied ethics in
general.
2) Proactive ethics: When a proactive, or ethics-ﬁrst, ap-
proach is taken, the emphasis is different. One is much more
likely, and in fact it is necessary, to think carefully about
what is wanted from the technology, and that involves thinking
about what sort of life one thinks is a good one. This approach
means taking action that will guide the development of the
technology in a particular manner. This proactive stance also
highlights a more positive view of applied ethics. Ethicists
are frequently seen as playing only a negative role, always
criticising and attempting to hinder development. While this
view is to some extent correct, it is not the only thing that
ethicists should be doing. Technology clearly has a positive
role. In many ways our lives are much better because of
various technologies.
In software engineering (a common area of ICT), calls for
ethics to be considered early in the development process are
not new; Don Gotterbarn [6] has been promoting a piece of
software called SODIS (for the ethical evaluation of software
development projects) for years. This, however, is rare. In
ICT development, as in most technical development, ethical
questions have generally been left until problems appear.
3) Both: So, should ITC ethics be reactive, proactive, or
both? That is, should ICT ethics just respond to existing
problems, try to anticipate problems, or both respond and
anticipate?
The argument here is that the ethics ﬁrst model and the
ethics last model are popular but poor solutions to a false
dichotomy (see Weckert [19] for a detailed examination). ICT
ethics is not something one can complete satisfactorily either
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

ﬁrst or last but something that needs be done continually
as the technology develops and as its potential consequences
become better understood. Ethics is dynamic in that the factual
component on which it relies has to be continually updated.
Norbert Wiener outlined this approach in 1960. In talking
about automated machines, he writes:
To be effective in warding off disastrous conse-
quences, our understanding of our man-made ma-
chines should in general develop pari passu [in step
with] with the performance of the machine.
(Wiener, 1960, 1355) [22]
What he is suggesting is that if we wait until the technology
has been developed, it may be too late to avoid disastrous
consequences. Predicting is hazardous and he does not suggest
that these machines should not be developed on the grounds
that they may produce undesirable consequences. Rather, the
understanding must develop in step with the development of
the technology’s systems. Similarly, the contention here is that
the understanding of ethical questions must develop as the
technology develops. This will be dynamic; partly reactive,
partly pari passu, and partly proactive; continually returning
to the technology to understanding how it is developing and
what its actual or likely consequences are.
Technologists must work with ethicists to predict future
problem areas. This is of course fraught with danger given the
uncertain nature of prediction, but if care is taken, it is a useful
and important activity. In many cases it is at least plausible that
ethical problems will arise and that we can know something
about what they will be like. Take the case of RFID chips
(These are the chips that are embedded in clothing or otherwise
attached to desirable and disposable goods. They emit a radio
frequency which is detected by a scanning device within its
range.). It is known that they have been developed signiﬁcantly
compared to the passive chips currently used in libraries and
other places and research is continuing. For example a new
passive RFID chip is under development that will be able to
be printed onto clothing, and paper, with a range eventually
of around 300 metres (Williams [21]).
As another example, think of data matching (the process of
aggregating information across a number of disparate sources.
Usually, these, many sources were never intended to be put
together or matched) within a large organisation. Consider the
enterprise as a multinational, multi-industry conglomeration.
This enterprise has a number of customer loyalty cards. People
who took out the individual, separate, loyalty cards never
imagined that the information they contain would be combined
to provide a comprehensive proﬁle of the card holder. Neither
did the designers of the loyalty systems. Were it only restricted
to the giving bonuses for loyalty but it never ends there. It
gets extended to more and more activities that are less and
less relevant to the card holder.
It is, now, fairly clear that developments in ICT in this
context, will lead to further consolidation and aggregation
of citizens’ information. Given these developments and uses
of the citizen data already in other contexts (Thornley, et
al. [17]), it is certainly plausible that government agencies
and private enterprise (for example the marketing departments
for both groups) will extend their uses in ways that are
increasingly threatening to privacy and make them much more
than mere isolated databases. This is not inevitable of course:
I am not a proponent of technological determinism, the view
that technology will move on regardless of what we do.
However, given the extent to which the values of efﬁciency and
productivity seem to override other values in the assessment of
technologies and their uses, the pressures to extent their uses
will be intense if it is seen to aid efﬁciency. Resistance might
also be weak. In other areas privacy is eroded a little at a time
in a way that is almost unnoticeable. Imagine if, say about
twenty years ago before paying for groceries with credit cards
was popular, the supermarkets had employed people to sit and
watch all customers as they paid, and made a record of their
purchases, names, and addresses. Most of us probably would
have been a little concerned about this. Now it all happens
automatically for those who pay by credit card; most people
do not give it a second thought. This suggests that what the
eye doesnt see doesnt really bother most people: what happens
gradually goes largely unnoticed.
C. So What?
It is here that proactive ethics comes in to play.
1) RFIDs: The argument is not that RFID chips should not
be used in libraries because of future dangers. The question to
be asked is, is it morally responsible to use the chips in certain
extended ways? And how can the technology be designed to
mitigate the dangers? What kind of regulations need to be put
in place to control the use of the chips? These are all legitimate
questions for the proactive ethicist and their answers should
feed into policy decisions about the future use of RFID chips.
2) Data Matching: In the other example of data matching
the questions to be asked are; is it morally responsible to use
loyalty card information in certain extended ways? How can
the technology be designed to mitigate the dangers? What kind
of regulations need (or ought) to be put in place to control the
use of the information?
D. Summing Up
Ethics has a role to play early in the process of technological
development. Stahl and Rogerson (in [20]), the current and
immediate past directors of the Centre for Computing and
Social responsibility at DeMontfort University, acknowledge
the difﬁculty of forecasting future developments, but through
an examination of European Union projects isolate a number
of ICT trends. These are; increasing computational power and
decreasing size, new types of interfaces, network connection
anywhere and anytime, and increased development of virtual
places. These trends suggest ethical issues that require ad-
dressing, or at least, serious consideration. Goujon and Flick
(also in [20]) are critical of the sharp divide that appears to
exist between ethics and technology, and argue for ethical
reﬂexivity, that is, the constant reassessment of ethical norms
in response to the technology to economics, to politics and to
gaps in regulation. The context of development is particularly
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

important and the non-neutrality of ICT requires emphasis.
Inadequacies in both current risk assessment and technology
assessment are highlighted.
IV. THE CASE FOR ECO-INFORMATICS
So, what lessons can eco-informatics take from this dis-
cussion? Think of eco-informatics as part of the larger envi-
ronmental ethics movement. Think of eco-informatics as part
of the larger information ethics movement. But, as discussed
earlier, if eco-informatics is to stand as a meaningful term then
we must search the eco-informatics literature for an example
that can be used to highlight where ethical deliberations might
be put.
I will use the paper, What is meant by “decision-making” in
the context of eco-informatics? by J´anos F¨ul¨op, David Roth,
and Charles Schweik [5] to show how an eco-informatics
researcher might include ethics in their deliberations.
A. Decision Styles
The paper starts with the standard descriptions of decision
making styles: Rational, Contingency Perspectives, Incremen-
tal, and Garbage Can Decision-Making. It is in the Rational
style that ethics makes its only appearance in the whole paper.
In the context of choosing the cheapest copier and vendor in
which all the copiers are identical, they quote Rainey [15]
saying that “to choose another vendor ‘would invite others to
question the [manager’s] competence, ethics, or sanity”’. They
suggest that it would be unethical to not take the cheapest offer.
However, it is not nearly so straightforward. There are
some decision makers who consider themselves to be perfectly
rational but would make their choice in the following way.
1) Determine the integrity of the Vendor. If it is acceptable,
2) determine the character of the Vendor’s Representative.
If the Representatives are acceptable,
3) determine the way in which the copiers are identical.
Are they merely functionally identical? They cannot be
absolutely identical without violating someone’s copy or
patent rights. Are the differences ethically relevant? If
so which is the most relevant?
4) Having done the previous steps which copier makes the
greatest contribution to society.
This decision making process is rational but, simply choos-
ing the cheapest alternative is not necessarily the right choice.
In fact, using this process it would be reasonable to ‘question
the [manager’s] competence, ethics, or sanity’ if they did not
take ethics into account.
Similar comments could be made for each of the other
styles; Contingency Perspectives, Incremental, and Garbage
Can.
With Contingency Perspectives the emphasis is on ‘judg-
ment and intuition‘; the decisions makers engage in‘bargaining
and political manoeuvering in their decision-making process’.
Here, the authors could easily include ethical judgment and
moral intuition [1] in these descriptions.
Incremental decision-makers ‘choose to make less con-
troversial, intermediary decisions to ensure some degree of
success of achieving vague goals’. Vagueness, can be seen to
be either a virtue or a vice. Some success can be seen as
providing some beneﬁt while minimising (usually) potential
harm. Virtue and harm are both standard ethical concepts.
This decision making style is already (if implicitly) framed
in ethical terms.
Finally, the Garbage Can style is epitomised by ‘waiting for
an opportunity to advocate actions already planned’. Oppor-
tunism is usually seen in an unfavourable light. It is frequently
considered unethical to be opportunistic as this has hints of
using people, treating them as means to an end. Of course this
is not necessarily true but the mere mention of this style is an
opening to bring in the ethical notions of respect for persons,
responsible decision making, and so on.
The authors end this section of their paper with:
it is probably safe to say that most developers of eco-
informatics tools or information hope that their work
will be utilized in some form of rational decision-
making processes or that at the very least, their tools
and information are used to help inform incremental
decision-making processes
Again, this a point at which the ethically sensitive eco-
informatics researcher might add that ‘their tools and infor-
mation [could] be used to help inform’ projects with ethical
merit.
B. Optimization approaches
Here the authors attribute to Nemhauser the idea that optimi-
sation ‘can be applied in decision settings where there is a sin-
gle criterion to base a decision on (such as cost)’(Nemhauser,
et al. [13]). It would be relatively easy to include other criterion
such as ethical worth, contribution to society, and so on.
Also, in this section, they refer to the development of ‘GIS-
based models’– a natural for eco-informatic systems. Given
the recent problems that Google earth has had with privacy,
identity theft, and the like it would be prudent to include
such considerations in the constructions of such systems. See
the Professional Ethics in engineering Forum [4] and Stephen
and Cizek [16] for contemporary discussions of such ethical
matters.
In the last example for this section of their paper, the authors
are right to say:
Another important point related to the various
decision-making tools and approaches cited above
as well as others falling in the domain of eco-
informatics is that often variables used in computer-
based models (such as multi-attribute decision mod-
els) are set to subjective values. These models
may contain uncertainties, either because subjective
scoring or are based upon some data or model
output that contain some level of uncertainty. It
is therefore an important question how the ﬁnal
ranking of alternatives are sensitive to the changes
of input parameters contained within the decision
model and how uncertainties are communicated to
the user through analytic tools.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

This is a perfect opportunity to introduce ethics into the
discussion. It is not enough to simply say that communication
with users is an important question. Here, they might say that
it is not only an important question but rather it is a moral
imperative to communicate the user so they can make the
most fully informed choice, so they can give real, meaningful,
informed consent.
C. Politics
The authors then touch lightly on the important topic of the
use of eco-informatics for political ends.
some scholars lament the fact that various eco-
informatics-based tools, computer-based models and
information are utilized as ‘weapons in political and
policy warfare,’while others accept this supporting
role
There is insufﬁcient space in this paper for a full examina-
tion of the ethical implications of this statement. Sufﬁce it to
say that introducing the ethics of such use is very important.
Eco-informatics researchers ought to have strong well thought
out moral stances to these kinds of uses of their work and these
stances ought to be communicated through their writing.
D. Complexity
Also in this part of their paper the authors say that:
Others
worry
about
the
complexity
of
eco-
informatics-based computer models and decision
makers’ abilities to understand them.
This ﬁts in nicely with the previous discussion that eco-
researchers ought to strive to enable users of their work to
be able to take informed decisions, to give informed consent.
They could easily stress the ethics of such enabling writing.
E. Context
In the graph of the main part of their paper, the authors
make the important point that:
it is probably the case that developers of eco-
informatics tools develop these methods without too
much concern for the context in which such tools
will be applied to decision making. Developers may
focus more on getting the tool right (scientiﬁcally)
and concentrate less on how the tool might be used
or abused in particular decision-making settings
They present this in a neutral way: it ought not to go
uncommented. They could to make the much stronger point
that the developers have signiﬁcant and important duties to
the users, and society at large, for the responsible use of their
efforts. The authors have an excellent opportunity to show the
ethical urgency of changing this sort of attitude. Developers
ought to be concerned about the context in which their tools
are used.
V. CONCLUSION
I have shown that ethics does not get a serious examina-
tion by eco-informatics researchers and hence by social eco-
informatics researchers. I have argued that ethical deliberation
ought to be in the forefront of all researchers thoughts. Also,
I have shown that with some reﬂection it is straightforward to
put ethical deliberation into an eco-informatics research paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Audi, The Good in the Right - A Theory of Intuition and Intrinsic
Value,
Princeton University Press, 2004.
[2] D. Collingridge, The Social Control of Technology,
St. Martins Press,
New York, 1980
[3] M. Croy, “Collingridge and the control of educational computer tech-
nology”, Society for philosophy and technology, 1(3-4), 1996, available
at http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ejournals/SPT/, [retrieved: June 2012]
[4] Eng-Tips
forum,
Google
,Maps/
Earth
ethics
ques-
tion,
thread765-215311,
Available
from:
http://www.eng-
tips.com/viewthread.cfm?qid=215311, [retrieved: June 2012]
[5] J.
F¨ul¨op,
D.
Roth,
and
C.
Schweik,What
is
meant
by
“decision-making”in
the
context
of
eco-informatics?,
Available
from:
http://academic.evergreen.edu/projects/bdei/documents/
decisionmakingsummary.pdf, [retrieved: June 2012]
[6] D. Gotterbarn, “A practical mechanism for ethical risk assessment
a
SoDIS inspection”in Herman T. Tavani and Kenneth Einar Himma (eds),
The Handbook of Information and Computer Ethics,
Wiley, Hoboken,
NJ, pp. 429-471, 2008
[7] D. Johnson, Computer Ethics,
Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Prentice-Hall,
2001
[8] J.M. Keynes, The Scope and Method of Political Economy,
London,
Macmillan and co., 1890
[9] J.J.
Kineman
and
K.A.
Kumar,
“Information
as
com-
munication”,
Proceedings
of
the
50th
Annual
Meeting
of
the
International
Society
for
the
System
Sciences,
http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings50th/article/view/367/136,
2006, [retrieved: June 2012]
[10] A.V. Koshkariov, V.A. Tikunov, and A.M. Troﬁmov, ’“The current state
and the main trends in the development of geographical information sys-
tems in the U.S.S.R.”, International journal of geographical information
systems, Volume 3, Issue 3, 1989
[11] R. Lucas, What is there to be ethical about with Enterprising Comput-
ing?,
EC@UC 15th - 16th, May 2012, Canberra, 2012
[12] J. Moor, “What is computer ethics?”, Metaphilosophy, 16, pp. 266-275,
1985
[13] G.L. Nemhauser, A.H.G. Rinnoy Kan, and M.J. Todd, Handbooks in
Operations Research and Management Science: Volume 1 Optimization,
Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1989
[14] P. Nicholls, Cross-Disciplinary Research and Education Post Copen-
hagen 2009, The Royal Golden Jubile International Seminar Series LXX,
p. 268, Graduate School of Business, Assumption University, 2009
[15] H. Rainey, Understanding and Managing Public Organizations, San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2003
[16] S.R.J. Sheppard and P. Cizek, “The ethics of Google Earth: Cross-
ing thresholds from spatial data to landscape visualisation”, Jour-
nal
of
Environmental
Management,
Volume
90,
Issue
6,
May
2009, pp. 2102-2117, ISSN 0301-4797, 10.1016/j.jenvman.2007.09.012.
(http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301479708001151)
[17] C. Thornley, Stuart Ferguson, John Weckert, and F. Gibb, “Do RFIDs
(radio frequency identiﬁer devices) provide new ethical dilemmas for
librarians and information professionals?”, International Journal of
Information Management, 31, pp. 546-555, 2011
[18] F. Villa, “New computer architectures as tools for ecological thought”,
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, Volume 7, Issue 6, pp. 179-183, 1992
[19] J. Weckert, “An Approach to Nanoethics”, in Graeme Hodge, Diana
Bowman and Karinne Ludlow (eds), New Global Regulatory Frontiers:
The Age of Nanotechnology, Edward Elgar, 2007
[20] J. Weckert and R. Lucas Professionalism in the Information and Com-
munication Technology Industry, Canberra, ANU ePress, forthcoming
2012
[21] M. Williams, Nano-based RFID tag, you’re it, Available from:
http://www.media.rice.edu/media/NewsBot.asp?MODE=VIEW&ID=13899,
[retrieved: June 2012]
[22] N. Wiener, “Some moral and technical consequences of automation”,
Science, 131, pp. 1355-1358, 1960
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

