Social Networks for Knowledge Management 
 
 
Ryan Zammit, Mark Woodman 
School of Science and Technology 
Middlesex University 
London, United Kingdom 
e-mail: r.zammit@mdx.ac.uk, m.woodman@mdx.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—Online social networks have changed the way many 
people communicate and interact as private individuals and 
employees. Sharing and communication through this medium 
has become, for many, a daily habit. Many of these networks 
provide a simple way to seek and find knowledge and expertise 
from both friends and strangers. Information technology has 
been used in many ways to support knowledge management 
initiatives. However the use of social networking technology 
has been little explored. It is thus argued that combining 
knowledge management systems with social networking 
technology would bridge this gap. Social software is becoming 
part of a standard arsenal of tools deployed within companies, 
tools that may help knowledge management. Evidence is 
presented from a review of relevant literature and through a 
survey, 
conducted 
via 
online 
social 
networks, 
asking 
respondents’ usage of social networking for knowledge 
management purposes in both their private lives and also 
work-related practices. It shows that personal networks are 
often used as a medium to seek knowledge for personal and for 
organisational motives. The results confirm that online social 
networks, and their enterprise counterparts, are aiding 
knowledge management initiatives. Knowledge appears to be 
flowing through online social networks. Findings also include 
the confirmation of Dunbar’s number, and reaffirming the 
strength of “weak ties” as originally proposed by Granovetter. 
The paper proposes the new concept of temporary ties that are 
aided through social networks. It also describes the work in 
progress and findings so far on the use of social networking 
technology and habits for aiding knowledge management 
initiatives.  
Keywords-	  knowledge management, knowledge management 
systems, social networking, strong ties, weak ties, temporary ties 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge management (KM) is generally taken as the 
systematic and organisationally specified process for 
acquiring, organising and effectively communicating 
knowledge of employees to other employees so that they 
can be more effective and productive in their work [1]. KM 
is applied where the interaction between people, technology, 
and techniques allow an organization to manage its 
knowledge by facilitating knowledge creation, knowledge 
validation, knowledge presentation, knowledge distribution, 
and knowledge application activities. All these aim to 
maximise business value by delivering what is needed at 
critical points when it is needed (Bhatt, 2011). 
To aid KM initiatives, knowledge management systems 
(KMS) are often introduced. The aim of KMS is to enable 
the formation, communication and utilisation of knowledge 
[2]. Meso and Smith [3] propose two predominant 
perspectives of what constitutes KMS; the technical 
perspective and the socio-technical perspective. On one 
hand, the technical perspective takes the point of view that 
the technology is the KMS [3]. On the other hand, the socio-
technical perspective recognises that technology alone does 
not make up a KMS and that most importantly people form 
part of the KMS. This paper takes the stance of the socio-
technological view, and further argues that, the users are not 
simply part of the system but are critically central to it [4]. 
 
According to Aristotle, humans are by nature social 
animals: through socialisation, knowledge has been 
transferred from generation to generation since the very first 
days of communication. Technology now provides for the 
human need to be socially connected. Online social 
networks have proliferated and become a conventional 
communication medium for teenagers and adults alike 
(Evans, 2011). These systems have seen an unusually high 
user take-up for varying reasons. Most of the current online 
social networks (SN) allow friends to connect to each other 
and form virtual networks (e.g., Facebook, LinkedIn). 
Others enable the connection between total strangers, 
usually formed on mutual interest or experience, with 
connections being unidirectional or bidirectional, depending 
on the users’ choice (e.g., Twitter). 
 
An immediate advantage of using a social network is the 
possibility of the compilation of a user-updated digital 
address book of friends or acquaintances. However, social 
networks also provide a user with the ability to publicly 
display a profile, exposing to varying extents, personal 
interests, experience and expertise. Moreover user’s walls or 
streams, which are a list of user’s actions, updates, etc., 
provide a real-time feed of personal information to their 
friends and followers. These facilities engender and are 
supported by habits of SN users to keep their information up 
to date. This paper argues that KM initiatives stand to 
benefit from these new habits by introducing more social 
aspects in their KMS. 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Arguably, informational systems categorised as KMS 
have hindered the practice through their lack of social 
elements. Separate research [5] shows that social interaction 
and network ties are indeed associated with greater 
knowledge acquisition for companies. This paper argues that 
online SNs are aiding companies to acquire new knowledge 
through employees’ personal networks. The primary 
evidence comes from an online survey, published and shared 
mainly through SNs. Findings from the survey show that 
there are new tendencies of individuals and employees using 
their personal social networks to aid their knowledge. 
Connections are happy to help or refer connections to other 
users, which thanks to SNs are only a couple of clicks away. 
Personal expertise is exposed through profiles and this 
appears to be aiding network connections to learn more 
about one’s interest and knowledge. Weak ties still prove to 
be an important source of new knowledge. SNs also appear 
to be facilitating the shifting, between ties, from strong to 
weak, or vice-versa, depending on personal situations. This 
concept is defined by this research as temporary ties. 
 
Section II discusses related work. Section III discusses 
socialisation in knowledge management and Section IV 
argues the use of social networks for knowledge 
management. Section V highlights the design and execution 
of the survey conducted. Section VI discusses the survey 
findings. Section VII presents a conclusion of the paper 
whilst proposing further research. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Social networking literature pre-dates today’s modern 
tools and online SN. Maguire [6] points out how networks 
are formed on the basis of rewards, costs of participation, 
and social context; these factors continuously change whilst 
relationships are maintained as long as the costs of 
maintaining the network relationships do not exceed the 
rewards. Marin and Wellman [7] define a SN as “a set of 
socially relevant nodes connected by one or more 
relationships”. For example, in the case of Facebook, 
socially relevant relationships form based on real life 
relationships, whilst in the case of Twitter, social relevancy 
would emerge based on interest and friendship. These often 
overlap and intertwine. The reasons why people decide to 
connect with others is out of scope of this research, however 
it is acknowledged that a relationship forms on a base of real 
world relationships or personal rewards and benefits. On 
such basis ties are formed. 
 
Seminal work by Granovetter [8] posits that strong ties, 
i.e., the connections that are more similar to us, contribute a 
limited amount of new knowledge whereas weak ties may 
serve as a bridge to new knowledge. Thus weak ties hold a 
greater potential for new knowledge than strong ties would. 
Maguire [6] points out how “when new knowledge or 
unusual information is required, a network is often used 
with at least some weak ties that bridge other networks. One 
or more weak ties to different type of networks increase the 
likelihood 
of 
encompassing 
different 
opinions 
and 
information”. Knowledge management thus stands to 
benefit in many and multiple ways through the interaction 
and exploitation of users’ online activity, sharing, and their 
established networks. 
 
Sharing has always been a crucial task for knowledge 
management. Yet knowledge sharing is a complex activity 
as knowledge held by a person cannot be completely 
codified and shared (Johnson et al, 2002 – cited in Bick et 
al., 2012). In Nonaka and Takeuchi’s work [9], famously 
known as the SECI model, depicted in Figure 1, 
socialisation is the first step in the effort of knowledge 
sharing. The SECI model has wide implications on KMSs 
that merely try to use informational systems to capture 
knowledge for knowledge sharing without much effort on 
the socialisation aspect. KMS implementing social elements 
in their design seem to be preferred by users. Zammit and 
Woodman [4] argue that KMS take-up is drastically 
improved when social elements are introduced. The tools 
and techniques they implemented were mainly aimed to 
improve knowledge sharing and expertise localisation, often 
leading to face-to-face socialisation, which ultimately aided 
the KMS adoption. Arguably this ties in with the huge usage 
of public online SNs where users find it rewarding to 
maintain information as complete and up-to-date, even in 
real time. 
 
Figure 1 – SECI model (Nonaka & Tackeuchi, 1995) 
 
The field of computer science and information systems 
is only now beginning to investigate the properties of SNs 
and the role of computer mediation for successful 
knowledge sharing (Mislove et al, 2007; Hossain et al, 
2012). By contrast, other disciplines, including the social 
and behavioural sciences, economics, marketing and 
industrial engineering, have long been studying online SNs 
[10]. Although knowledge sharing in social networks can be 
observed on a daily basis, the effect of general social 
networking, and hence SNs, on KM has been little explored 
[11]. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

III. 
SOCIALISATION IN KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
Socialisation is a key stage in the knowledge transfer 
and hence in KM. From the SECI model [9], it emerges that 
the transfer of knowledge originates through socialisation. 
The SECI model proposes knowledge transfer as a spiral 
model starting in a 2 x 2 matrix in which existing 
knowledge can be of either form, i.e., tacit or explicit, and 
the objective of knowledge transfer is to convey knowledge. 
 
On a daily basis, one may observe socialisation 
happening in the workplace through the so-called “water-
cooler” conversations, or other official team-building 
activities [12]. Successful KM concepts and elicitation 
methods, 
such 
as 
Communities 
of 
Practice 
[13], 
Collaborative Innovation Networks [14], Storytelling, 
Knowledge Cafés, Cynefin [15], and KMS development 
methodologies such as the Five-Phase Methodology [16] all 
have a major feature in common; socialisation is central to 
their method and socialisation is given importance over the 
technology used. 
 
Delmonte and Aronson [17] analyse the correlation 
between socialisation and KMS success factors finding that 
there is a significant relationship between social interaction 
within an organisation and KMS success. Other empirical 
research also suggests the importance of the social 
environment in the enhancement of collaboration activities 
[12]. This is also corroborated in other findings, which 
denote that a sole technology approach to knowledge 
management has serious limitations [18]. 
 
However, the view that KMS are a subclass of 
information systems still persists [19] and KMS development 
is often oriented towards information systems development 
[20]. Information systems are weak in interpreting 
information and high level communication [21] and tend to 
view the class of users as an external entity to the system. 
Contrastingly in KMS this should not be the case. Yahya and 
Goh [12] argue that the interpretation of information is the 
corner stone for KM. If so, then it is the human that makes it 
a knowledge system, and thus, systems need not only enable 
and aid knowledge management, but also aid socialisation in 
order to achieve better knowledge management. 
 
In the situation of knowledge socialisation, knowledge 
can be considered to be flowing among the parties, and 
techniques for socialisation are creating knowledge flows. 
Socialisation is thus important in the context of KM 
initiatives and attendant KMS. Surprisingly, very little 
emphasis is found on this aspect in the KMS literature. 
 
Social software development is prospering and a number 
of public sites have seen record number of users signing-up. 
Software is also available for enterprises to setup there own 
social networks, often referred to as enterprise social 
networks, and other software packages, such as customer 
management systems, are also including social elements in 
their systems. Britaniu and Orzea [22] posit that public social 
networks sites can be regarded as settings for knowledge 
transfer, sharing and knowledge dissemination [22]. 
 
Arguably traditional KMS development focuses on the 
capturing and dissemination of knowledge, to the detriment 
of the social aspect in knowledge transfer. A system aimed at 
the capture and dissemination of knowledge, analysed under 
the SECI model, falls within the Externalisation quadrant 
and aides the Internalisation quadrant. Socialisation and 
Combination are arguably left out or not aided by 
information systems branded as KMS. By contrast, a social 
system, such as an SN, will also include the Socialisation and 
Combination aspect thus satisfying the spiral of knowledge 
transfer according to the SECI model. 
 
While socialisation within KMS seems to be improving 
system take-up, the effect of social networking on KM has 
been little explored (McLure Wasko & Faraj, 2005; 
Bebensee et al, 2011; Rashid et al, 2011). This paper looks 
into how social networking, especially through an electronic 
medium such as social networks, is an emerging trend and 
how this trend is helping knowledge management initiatives. 
This paper places importance on socialisation and 
collaboration, and the impact that social networks are having 
on knowledge management efforts in acquiring, capturing, 
and transferring knowledge. 
IV. 
SOCIAL NETWORKS FOR KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
SNs are shaping our daily lives including our social and 
working habits. The level of adoption of SNs and the 
amount of sharing over them is unprecedented. Facebook, 
for example, is a remarkable case study: it has over one 
billion monthly active users as of October 2012 [23]. SNs 
provide a constant stream of status updates, photos, and 
news from online social circles, often in real-time fashion. 
These shared updates are of interest to a number of 
connections to which the posts may constitute a source of 
knowledge. 
 
The statistics on information management that can 
represent knowledge sharing are of considerable note. For 
example, on an average Facebook day [24]:  
15% of Facebook users update their own status. 
22% comment on another’s post or status. 
20% comment on another user’s photos. 
26% “Like” another user’s content. 
10% send another user a private message. 
Based on the above statistics the definition of SN 
knowledge sharing activity, for purposes of this research, is 
taken to be an update to a profile, commenting on other 
posts or status, or private messaging. Based on this 
definition it emerges that 47% of daily usage on Facebook 
happens for knowledge sharing. Facebook is huge with over 
1 billion users. That gives 470,000,000 knowledge posts. 
For the sake of argument, if about 10% of this sharing 
contains valuable knowledge to a user, then 47,000,000 
posts contain relevant knowledge. From this rough estimate, 
the huge potential for knowledge sharing is clear. Of course 
not all of this knowledge is directly accessible to an 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

individual’s direct network; however, if an individual user 
has an average network size of 150 connections, a good 
number of accessible posts will contain knowledge. 
Furthermore, considering that these 150 connections might 
be aware of a person seeking certain knowledge, then the 
potential growth in knowledge accessibility is exponential. 
Moreover, the streams of information being posted and 
shared by a user’s network are already pre-filtered by the 
SN, which, in theory, should reduce information overload – 
i.e., by social-filtering. As strong ties have same interests, 
posts from strong ties should strengthen user’s knowledge, 
whilst on the other hand posts from weak ties should 
increase user’s exposure to new knowledge. 
 
Thus, SNs constitute a source of knowledge and are 
suitable for aiding KM initiatives. SNs provide an electronic 
platform to maintain a large network of contacts, supporting 
both the existing social connections, and the formation of 
new ones [25]. Moreover, these contacts are willing to share 
knowledge that may provide benefit to their network. Above 
this, SNs provide an easy direct way to contact connections, 
and to keep abreast with their updates.  
 
Using the SECI model quadrants to analyse SNs for 
KM, they appear to provide a means of Socialisation 
through connecting people, a means of Externalisation of 
user’s knowledge through the sharing of posts, the 
Combination through receiving users posts which also aids 
Internalisation. Ellison [25] and Hampton [26] also find that 
there is a clear trend for those who use Internet and social 
technologies to receive more support than other people who 
do not. This is also corroborated in other research (Yli-
Renko et al, 2001; Gloor et al, 2008; Hossain et al, 2012; 
Phelps et al, 2012). For KM this implies that aiding users to 
maintain more connections would aid the KM initiative.  
 
However, although having more connections seems to 
be more beneficial, it is contrary to Dunbar’s findings [27]. 
A (non-tech) social study by Dunbar shows that humans are 
limited in their ability to maintain a network to between 
124–153 active connections (Dunbar, 1992; Hill and 
Dunbar, 2003). SNs nowadays might appear to be 
disproving this with people having more than 1,000 so-
called ‘online friends’. Dunbar himself has denounced 
Facebook ‘friends’ as something that can’t be described as 
relationships [28]. Having a connection does not imply 
having active interactions with a person. Since neither 
Dunbar nor Granovetter [8] had the computing power or the 
SNs we have today, a number of experiments, to prove or 
disprove this number using modern SNs have already been 
run. These, however, have achieved mixed results [28]. 
 
To date, no studies have been found on whether, and 
how users use SNs for knowledge management purposes. 
To address this gap in published work, this research 
conducted a survey to assess users’ social networking habits 
in relation to seeking help and finding knowledge. Section 
V describes the survey followed by the discussion of the 
findings in section VI. 
V. 
SURVEY DESIGN AND EXECUTION 
In order to quantify the usage of SNs for knowledge 
purposes, this research has run a survey [29] asking the 
participants about the way they use SNs with respect to their 
help-seeking tendencies.  
 
The respondents were asked general questions from their 
age, to which SNs they use, to how often they visit these 
sites. Furthermore they were asked the amount of 
connections, or “friends”, they have within their network 
and how well they consider they know these connections. 
The survey asked respondents about how they seek for help 
through personal profiles, private messages, or walls. For 
the purpose of this research this establishes the usage trends 
of knowledge seeking. Respondents were then asked if they 
mainly seek help for their personal problems or for work 
related issues. This helps the research establish whether SNs 
are being used for seeking work-related knowledge.  
 
Next, respondents were asked whether they have learnt 
about their contact’s area of expertise through SNs or if they 
knew it beforehand, which helps the research shed light into 
how users chose to contact whom and what role SNs play. 
Lastly, the users were asked about their tendencies to 
provide help to their contacts, showing whether or not users 
are willing to act as bridges to new knowledge.  
 
The survey was mainly shared online via the 
researcher’s SNs, namely Facebook and Twitter. Sharing the 
survey solely through two social networks had the risk of 
collecting the sole view of those networks’ users. This was 
addressed by using a personal connection that is known to 
shy-away from SNs. Through link-tracking mechanisms it is 
possible to ascertain that 18.66% of responses came through 
this source. 
 
To avoid inadvertent bias, the survey did not explicitly 
define what ‘active connections’ or ‘acquaintances’ are. The 
respondents were left to use commonplace meanings. 
VI. 
SURVEY FINDINGS 
The survey itself is an example of how knowledge can 
be acquired through SNs. The survey questions may be 
regarded as a knowledge-seeking effort; the replies regarded 
as information gathering, the accumulation of which results 
in new knowledge. In less than 12 hours from the survey 
being released more than 100 respondents had, not only 
answered the survey, and shared their knowledge, but also 
“shared” to their networks. This sharing may be seen as 
effective new knowledge that would have been otherwise 
inaccessible, without a considerable amount of effort. 
 
134 respondents answered the survey, with 47.76% of 
the respondents aged 18-24, 44.03% aged 25-34, 2.24% 
aged 34-44, 2.99% aged 45-54, and another 2.99% falling 
within the 55-64 age range. 49.51% of the respondents visit 
SN sites “Extremely Often”. The survey results clearly 
indicate a shift in culture towards using SNs for knowledge 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

management purposes. All respondents have admitted to 
actively seek help through their contacts with 21.35% of 
respondents admitted to learning about their contact’s area 
of expertise through SNs. This indicates that users learn 
more about their weak ties thanks to SNs, opening up 
possibilities for knowledge from these ties. Qualitative 
research suggests that perceptions formed on another person 
through direct interaction, observation or recommendation 
affects the likelihood of seeking information from them in 
the future, and thus learning someone’s expertise or 
knowing how to reach him or her quickly, affects the 
probability of seeking that person for information in the 
future [29]. 
 
Respondents disclosed that SNs prove to be helpful for 
both personal and professional problems. 80.9% indicate 
that SNs are helpful with regards to “Common Personal 
Problems”, 71.9% indicate SNs are helpful with “Specific 
Personal Problems”, 76.39% indicate SNs are helpful for 
“Common Professional Problems” and 69.66% indicate that 
SNs are helpful with “Specific Professional Problems”. 
Therefore it emerges that users are using their SNs in order 
to overcome work problems more or less to the same degree 
to which they use SNs for private problems. Personal SNs 
are thus being used to the benefit of the employing 
organisation. 
 
Interestingly, 30.78% of the respondents refer their 
contact (Contact A) to another contact (Contact Z) in their 
network for help when they themselves are unable to help. 
Thus SNs appear to be providing a medium for contacts to 
act as bridges between unconnected ties. Ref to Figure 2. 
Haythornthwaite [30] defines the concept of “latent ties” as 
those social network ties that are ‘‘technically possible but 
not activated socially’’ [30]. Hence SNs are facilitating 
latent ties to be introduced to the user’s network. Similarly 
SNs appear to enable ties to temporarily shift from being 
weak ties to becoming strong ties, without much effort. In 
order to achieve a goal a weak tie may temporarily shift to 
become a strong tie. Thus temporary ties are defined by this 
research as being those ties that are shifted in one’s network 
to benefit a specific need. Whether these replace a 
previously strong tie or not, in-line with Dunbar’s limit, is 
unimportant as the behaviour of shifting one’s network ties 
is naturally observable with relationships shifting naturally 
over time. The concept of shifting ties is novel and further 
research into this concept may be required. 
As a side-product of the survey, results also indicate that 
Dunbar’s number still holds within SNs. Respondents 
declared an average total of 663 connections with an 
average of 206 as “active” connections and 287 as 
“acquaintances”. 
 
The 
survey 
has 
thus 
exposed 
that 
knowledge 
management is occurring through public online SNs. Albeit 
in an ad-hoc manner, SNs are providing a medium for 
communication and knowledge exchange. Knowledge is 
being sought and directly exchanged, through direct 
personal messages, or indirectly found through “updates”,  
“streams”, “timelines” or “walls”. Arguably, previous to 
SNs, knowledge-seekers needed to actively search for help. 
For example one would need to remember that contact C 
knows about topic X and devise a way to communicate with 
C for help, be it in person, or email etc. This is also true for 
contact C wanting to share his knowledge. They would need 
to actively think about who might need what he knows and 
actively send, or document in a repository, his knowledge. 
 
The findings could be strengthened by running the same 
survey through separate networks like, for example, starting 
from Person A where person A is not connected, or is far 
away from the centre, of the researchers network. However, 
these findings are believed to be a good representation of 
the trends in the use of social networking for knowledge-
seeking efforts. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper builds an argument for the use of social 
networks for knowledge management purposes. Through the 
reviewing of related work, evidence is exposed that social 
networking technology may benefit knowledge management 
initiatives. A gap is exposed on the lack of use of social 
networking technology within knowledge management 
initiatives. 
 
To address this gap, a survey is conducted in order to 
assess the habits of public online social network users in 
their quest to acquire knowledge. The survey results show 
that personal social networks are being used for knowledge 
management purposes, both for personal and professional 
reasons. This appears to be benefiting the employing 
organisation by expanding their boundaries.  
 
Social networks are clearly being used for knowledge 
management purposes. Further research needs to be done 
within the field of knowledge management to explore the 
possible 
benefits 
of 
integrating 
social 
networking 
technologies within knowledge management initiatives. 
 
The survey results also reaffirm the strength of weak 
ties, and that Dunbar’s limit seems to still hold. Through 
this paper the concept of shifting temporal ties are proposed. 
Through social networking technology it appears that 
knowledge seekers shift their weak ties closer in an effort to 
satisfy their knowledge needs. Further research possibilities 
exist here to explore this concept further. 
Figure 2 - SN bridging unconnected ties. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

REFERENCES 
[1] J. Hahn and M. R. Subramani, "A Framework of Knowledge 
Management Systems: Issues and Challenges for Theory and 
Practice," , Brisbane, 2000. 
[2] J. Gonzalez-Reinhart, "Wiki and the Wiki Way: Beyond a 
Knowledge Management Solution," 2005. 
[3] P. Meso and R. Smith, "A resource-based view of 
organizational knowledge management systems," Journal of 
Knowledge Management, vol. 4, no. 3, 2000, pp. 224-234. 
[4] R. Zammit and M. Woodman, "A Case for Repositories in 
Knowledge Management Systems," in 13th European 
Conference on Knowledge Management, Caratgena, 2012, pp. 
1289-1297. 
[5] H. Yli-Renko, E. Autio, and H. J Sapienza, "Social Capital, 
Knowledge Acquisition, and Knowledge Exploitation in 
Young Technology-Based Firms," Strategic Management 
Journal, vol. 22, 2001, pp. 587-613. 
[6] L. 
Maguire, 
Understanding 
Social 
Networks.: 
Sage 
Publications, Inc., 1983. 
[7] A. Marin and B. Wellman, "Social Network Analysis: An 
Introduction," in The Sage Handbook Of Social Network 
Analysis, John Scott and Peter J Carrington, Eds.: Sage, 2012, 
pp. 12-25. 
[8] M. S. Granovetter, "The Strength of Weak Ties," American 
Journal of Sociology, vol. 78, no. 6, May 1973. 
[9] H. Nonaka and I. Takeuchi, The Knowledge Creating 
Company: How Japanese Companies. New York: Oxford 
Press, 1995. 
[10] S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Network Analysis 
Methods and Applications, 15th ed., M. Granovetter, Ed. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1994, vol. 15. 
[11] T. Bebensee, R. Helms, and M. Spruit , "Exploring Web 2.0 
Applications as a Mean of Bolstering up Knowledge 
Management," 
The Electronic Journal of Knowledge 
Management , vol. 9, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1-9. 
[12] S. Yahya and W. Goh, "Managing Human Resources 
Towards Achieving Knowledge Management," Journal of 
Knowledge Management, vol. 6, no. 5, 2002, pp. 457 – 468. 
[13] E. Wegner, R. McDermott, and W. M. Snyder, Cultivating 
Communities of Practice: A Guide to managing knowledge.: 
Harvard Business School Publishing, 2002. 
[14] P. Gloor, R. Laubacher, S. B. C. Dynes, and Y. Zhao, 
"Visualization of Communication Patterns in Collaborative 
Innovation Networks: Analysis of some W3C working 
groups," in Proc. ACM CIKM 2003, 2003, pp. 5-6. 
[15] F. C. Kurtz and D J Snowden, "The new dynamics of strategy: 
Sense-making in a complex and complicated world," IBM 
Systems Journal, vol. 42, no. 3, 2003, pp. 462-283. 
[16] M. Woodman and A. Zade, "Towards a Practical Guide for 
Developing Knowledge Management Systems in Small 
Organizations," 
Electronic 
Journal 
of 
Knowledge 
Management, vol. 10, no. 2, 2012, pp. 184-195. 
[17] A. J. Delmonte and J. E. Aronson, "The Relatonship Between 
Social interaction and Knowledge Management System 
Success," Journal of Knowledge Management Practice, 
August 2004. 
[18] L. Damodaran and W. Olphert, "Barriers and facilitators to 
the use of knowledge management systems," Behaviour & 
Information Technology, vol. 19, no. 6, 2000, pp. 405-413. 
[19] M. Alavi and D. Leidner, "Knowledge Management and 
Knowledge Management Systems: Conceptual Foundations 
and Research Issues," MIS Quaterly, vol. 25, no. 1, 2001, pp. 
107-136. 
[20] A. Moteleb, M. Woodman, and P. Critten, "Towards a 
Practicle Guide for Developing a Knowledge Management 
System," 
in 
European 
Conference 
on 
Knowledge 
Management, 2009, pp. 559-569. 
[21] G. Bhatt, "Knowledge management in organizations: 
examining the interaction between technologies, techniques, 
and people," Journal of Knowledge Management, vol. 5, no. 
1, 2001, pp. 68-75. 
[22] C. Bratianu and I. Orzea, "Knowledge Strategies in Using 
Social Networks," in European Conference on Knowledge 
Management, Cartagena, 2012, pp. 127-134. 
[23] Facebook. Facebook. [Online]. HYPERLINK "Newsroom"   
http://newsroom.fb.com/Key-Facts, 
[retrieved: 
December, 
2012]. 
[24] PEW Research Center, "Social networking sites and our 
lives," PEW Internet, PEW Research Center, 2011. 
[25] N. B. Ellison, C. Steinfield, and C. Lampe, "The Benefits of 
Facebook ‘‘Friends:’’ Social Capital and College Students’ 
Use of Online Social Network Sites," Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, vol. 12, 2007, pp. 1143-1168. 
[26] K. Hampton. New York Times. [Online].   HYPERLINK 
"Social 
Media 
As 
Community"   
http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2012/02/12/the-
advantages-and-disadvantages-of-living-alone/social-media-
as-community, [retrieved: June, 2012]. 
[27] R Dunbar, "Neocortex Size as a constraint on group sizes in 
primates," Journal of Human Evolution, vol. 20, 1992, pp. 
269-293. 
[28] P. Bogolyubov, "The Strength of Ties on Social Networks: 
An examination of Demographic Determinants," in European 
Conference on Knowledge Management, 2012, pp 93-99. 
[29] R. 
Zammit. 
Social 
Networks 
For 
KM. 
[Online].   
HYPERLINK "http://bit.ly/sn4km"   http://bit.ly/sn4km 
[retrieved: March, 2013]. 
[30] S. P Borgatti and R. Cross, "A Relational View of 
Information Seeking and Learning in Social Networks," 
Management Science, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 432-445, April 2003. 
[31] C. 
Haythornthwaite, 
"Social 
networks 
and 
Internet 
connectivity effects," Information, Communication & Society, 
vol. 8, no. 2, 2005, pp. 125-147. 
[32] L. Hossain, S. Reay Atkinson, R. T. Wigand, and S. Carlsson, 
"Knowledge Sharing through Social Networks," in The 
Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics, 
2012, pp. 27-34. 
[33] R. A. Hill and R. I. M. Dunbar, "Social Network Size In 
Humans," Human Nature, vol. 14, no. 1, 2003, pp. 53-72. 
[34] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K. P. Gummadi, P. Druschel, and B. 
Bhattacharjee, "Measurement and Analysis of Online Social 
Networks," in Internet Measurement Conference, San Diego, 
2007. 
[35] M. M. Wasko and S. Faraj, "Why Shoud I Share? Examining 
Social Capital and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic 
Network Practice," MIS Quaterly, vol. 29, no. 1, March 2005, 
pp. 35-37. 
[36] A. Rashid, W. Wang, and K. Hashim, "Social Networks and 
its Impact on Knowledge Management," in International 
Conference on Control System, Computing and Engineering, 
2011, pp. 227-230. 
[37] C. Phelps, R. Heidl, and A. Wadhwa, "Kowledge, Networks, 
and Knowledge Networks: A Review and Research Agenda," 
Journal of Management, vol. 38, no. 4, July 2012, pp. 1115-
1166. 
[38] S. Evans. AdAge. [Online].   HYPERLINK " Kickstart Slide 
Deck"   http://adage.com/article/adagestat/stats-day-50-social-
media-stats-kickstart-slide-deck/231093/ 
[retrieved: 
November, 2011]. 
[39] M. Bick et al., "Manifesto for a Standard on Meaningful 
Representations 
of 
Knowledge 
in 
Social 
Knowledge 
Management 
Environments," 
in 
Multikonferenz 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 
2012.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

