 
 
Helping Hands of Autism Blogger Community in Social Media Platforms 
 
Amit Saha 
Center for Distance Health 
University of Arkansas for Medical Science  
Little Rock, Arkansas, U.S.A. 
email: asaha@uams.edu  
Nitin Agarwal  
Maulden-Entergy Chair Professor of Information Science 
University of Arkansas at Little Rock   
Little Rock, Arkansas, U.S.A. 
email: nxagarwal@ualr.edu 
 
 
Abstract— With a high prevalence of autism among 
children, there is a shortage of autism support facilities 
around the world. Families dealing with autism use 
online social media to share experiences with other 
members of the community. Systematic analysis of the 
vast interaction between autism community members in 
blogs and Twitter can be used to build a learning tool for 
others who are dealing with autism. The study found 
that the autism blogger community provides substantial 
social support to other community members. Differences 
across various groups (autistic bloggers, mother 
bloggers with autistic kids, father bloggers with autistic 
children, and autism support group blogs) and different 
social media platforms (blogs and Twitter) were 
reviewed in context of social support. We found that the 
families dealing with autism have a better quality of life 
when facilitated with social support by community 
members. 
Keywords-Autism; ASD; Social Support; Twitter; Blogger; 
Community. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
According to estimates by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) approximately 1 in 68 in the 
USA are diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). 
ASD occurs in all the ethnicities and boys are four to five 
times more likely to have autism as compared to girls [1]. 
Intervention and efficient treatment such as specialty 
services and early detection can help people with Autism to 
lead a better quality of life [2]. 
Social media has provided Internet users an open 
platform for discussions, communication, and information 
exchange for various health related topics. Families with a 
member diagnosed with autism share their life experiences in 
social media (almost on a daily basis). This exchange of 
information, which is by default archived, has become an 
immense source of knowledge for others dealing with the 
same situation. Organizations working on spreading autism 
awareness encourage creation of an open social media 
platform on autism where members can share their 
experiences and get advice from others. Shared experience 
by an individual dealing with autism in the social media 
platform, especially blogs, Twitter and Facebook shed light 
on various issues of autism. To raise awareness among 
autism community members, premier non-profit organization 
like Autism Speaks [3] recognizes top autism bloggers based 
on feedback from families with autism. Shared know-how 
about autism helps to find a better way of life for the families 
dealing with autism. Social support in online platform can be 
defined as "information leading the subject to believe that he 
is cared for and loved, esteemed, and is a member of a 
network of mutual obligations" [4].  
The purpose of this study is to offer a research-based 
understanding of the conversations in social media platforms 
especially blogs and Twitter among families dealing with 
autism. The study aims to shed light on characteristics of 
social support provided by autism blogger community 
towards other members of the community. 
This paper is organized as follows: the prior related 
works are described in Section II, Section III depicts the 
methodology and data collection, Section IV shows the 
result, Section V discusses about the inferences drawn from 
the study; finally, in Section VII, we draw conclusions and 
possible future works.  
II. 
RELATED WORK  
Many clinical studies are ongoing to get an in-depth 
knowledge of causes and effective interventional strategies 
for ASD. These studies provide understanding of the 
outcome of various available therapy options for autism.  
With the high cost involved in clinical trials, the use of social 
media content in research analysis to assess the effectiveness 
of different intervention strategies for autism could be an 
economically viable option. Caregiver's preference for using 
social media platform as compared to any other 
communication platform was also established by Hamm, et 
al., [5]. Our study does not intend to provide a substitute for 
clinical tests of the intervention strategies. On the contrary, 
our methodology would provide the perceived effectiveness 
of the intervention strategies or the therapies from a 
practitioner’s perspective. This would include clinically 
evaluated as well as unevaluated strategies. This in turn 
would help prioritizing resources on the testing procedures of 
intervention strategies. In this study, however, we address a 
tiny part of this bigger research agenda, which is does autism 
blogger community provide social support to other 
community members? Are there differences in the offered 
social support across various groups of bloggers (i.e., autistic 
bloggers, mother bloggers with autistic kids, father bloggers 
with autistic kids, and autism support group blogs) and 
different social media platforms (e.g., blogs and Twitter)?. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
Answers to these questions will help conduct a more 
systematic evaluation of interactions occurring on various 
online platforms, especially the social media, for evaluating 
the efficacy of intervention strategies from the perspective of 
the practitioners.  
Sociologists published many research works on the social 
support concept. The link between social support and health 
is addressed by two different hypothesis: the buffering 
hypothesis and the direct effects hypothesis. In the buffering 
effect hypothesis, social support enhance good heath by 
reducing the effect of stressful life events [6] while in direct 
effect hypothesis, better health is provided by high social 
support [7].  
Hamm et al., [5] found in their study that caregivers and 
patients started using social media to gather health 
information and exchange information related to health 
informatics. The mostly publicly available social media data 
facilitated by various healthcare communities can be 
analyzed effectively to build a knowledge-based source. 
  
III. 
METHODOLOGY AND DATA COLLECTION 
Social support concept, although widely studied in the 
social science literature, there lacks a formal mathematical 
definition. Hence, we leverage various empirical definitions 
available in computational science literature that overlap 
with or application domain, i.e., healthcare. 
This study evaluates the social support using sentiments 
expressed by the interactions of the autism bloggers 
community. The social network analysis features are used to 
evaluate the structural aspect of the generation of the social 
support within the autism community. Our methodology 
consists of the following steps: 
 
1) Collect data from Autism bloggers in different social 
media platform (blogs and Twitter). 
2) Pre-process and filter noise.   
3) Perform topic and word analysis to ensure the subject of 
discussion is autism. 
4) Construct networks for autism community for each social 
media platform. 
5) Analyze the sentiment of the content of the interaction of 
the members of autism blogger community. 
6) Calculate the degree of social support provided by the 
interaction of the autism community members. 
 
Web search on autism keyword shows, presently there 
are more than a thousand active autism bloggers. For the 
initial phase of the study, we selected the top 40 autism 
bloggers based on the recommended list of popular bloggers 
by the Autism Speaks organization. The content and 
metadata of blogs by the 40 autism was extracted and 
analyzed. Further, we cross-referenced their blogger profile 
and Twitter profile (wherever the blogger had provided a 
link to his/her Twitter profile) and collected their tweets, and 
other network information, including friends and followers. 
We retrieved the most recent permissible tweets (up to 
3,200 each) for the 40 autism bloggers, resulting in 118,531 
tweets. All the tweets are in the English language. Some of 
the tweets by autism bloggers are as follows, “Autism is part 
of what we are. Neither good nor bad.  Being unable to talk 
is a problem to be solved. Absolutely ”, “I am a strong 
believer in developing therapies and tools to help people 
severely disabled by autism. Always believed that..”. 
Profile analysis of the bloggers led to the classification of 
bloggers based on different characteristics. Classification of 
autism bloggers into different categories is done to deduce 
different capacities of social support based on defined 
blogger categories. Of the 40 autism bloggers, 13 were 
female bloggers with autistic kids who are termed as 
mothers. Male bloggers with autistic children termed as 
fathers are 10 in our database. Number of bloggers who 
blogged as groups to create autism awareness termed as 
autism support group are 13 and rest 4 termed as self-autistic 
bloggers who are diagnosed with autism and blogs for 
themselves.  
To infer social support from the text content, the 
psycholinguistic analysis was used. De Choudhury [8] 
studied the online exchange of social support for health 
communities on depression using the psycholinguistic 
analysis technique. Blog content and tweets are categorized 
into psychological groups utilizing Linguistic Inquiry and 
Word Count (LIWC) program [9]. In LIWC, a word can 
belong to more than one groups. LIWC has been used by 
many researchers for text analysis, and promising results 
have been reported. Tov and Ng [10] found a consistent 
correlation between emotion rating values of LIWC with 
self-reported values.  
LIWC categories used to infer social support were 
selected based on resemblance with social support concepts 
like the social process, which signifies feeling of solidarity. 
The definition proposed by Cobb [4] for online social 
support is used as the reference. The definition is quoted in 
Section 1. Social support in the text content is deduced 
primarily using the scale in the spoken category of assent 
along with positive emotion and social processes.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
To get an insight into social support characteristics of 
autism blogger community, various social network analysis 
techniques were used during the study. To infer network 
dimension of the autism blogger community, the activities 
like tweets, friends, followers, mentions, the hashtag of 
autism bloggers in Twitter and blogs were analyzed.  
The autism blogger community interaction shows tightly 
linked community. The friend and follower Twitter network 
of autism blogger community is shown in Figure 1. The 
autism bloggers are annotated based on the classification 
defined in Table 1. Their real identity is anonymized. 
Different colors indicate various communities based on 
network modularity. For complex network structure,  
modularity is one of the effective function in community 
detection [11]. Figure 1 shows distinct characteristics of the 
autism blogger network on Twitter where any member of the 
community can reach a colleague on average 3.4 hops 
(average geodesic distance), as compared to the widely 
known 4.74 degrees of separation in Facebook network of 
active users [12].  
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
 
Figure 1. Friend and follower network of autism blogger community. 
Colors indicate different communities based on the network modularity. 
The modularity of the Twitter network of autism 
bloggers is 0.623, which indicates that the community is well 
connected. The network is partitioned into 22 communities 
using Chinese whisper clustering algorithm [13]. The top 
hashtags of the autism blogger network are ‘autism', 
‘autismawareness', ‘autismhoops' and ‘specialneeds' that 
indicate the network is highly focused on autism-based 
discussions. Wordpress, a very well-known platform for 
blogging, along with blogspot.com are found to be the top 
domains shared among tweets. Overall analyzed metrics of 
the Twitter friends and followers network is shown in Table 
1.The tweets content of the autism bloggers found to be 
involved in many topics related to autism and the aim of the 
autism community bloggers’ Twitter network seems to be 
spreading autism awareness.  
 
TABLE 1. OVERALL TWITTER DATA CHARACTERISTICS OF 
THE AUTISM BLOGGER COMMUNITY NETWORK. 
Metric 
Friends and 
Followers 
Network 
 
Metric 
Friends and 
Followers 
Network 
Number of 
users 
48030 
Out-Degree 
2011 (Max), 
1.137 (Average) 
Total Edges 
98099 
Connected 
Components 
1 with 35787 
Maximum 
Vertices 
In-Degree 
2018 (Max), 
1.88 
(Average) 
Geodesic 
Distance 
(Diameter) 
5 (Max), 3.408 
(Average) 
Tweets collected and analyzed for the study shows signs 
of sentiments associated. "I also really liked this positive 
post from about when and how to tell kids about their autism 
diagnoses", "The study means we are one step closer to 
understanding how one of the key components of autism 
happens in the brain" are some of the examples of tweets 
with positive sentiments.  
Based on the author characteristics of the autism bloggers 
and choice of social media platform, the positive sentiment 
in the text varies. LIWC provides the baseline values for the 
control writing, science articles and conversion medium. 
Chuang and Yang [14] in their study on online alcohol 
community found the presence of social support. Based on 
Chung and Yang [14] work we used the social support 
provided by the alcohol support forum as the baseline value 
to infer the presence of social support.  
Major findings: Our study found average positive feeling 
of autism blogs is much higher as compared to another 
support forum like alcohol support community or by the 
general conversation medium. Moreover, mother of an 
autistic kid shows much more positive emotion on Twitter as 
compared to the father of an autistic child or autistic 
bloggers. For the autism support forum, the negative 
sentiment was evaluated to be a lot lower as compared to 
control writing and science articles. The negative attitude 
was quite higher for the father of an autistic kid, as compared 
to other categories of bloggers (i.e., mother and autistic 
bloggers).  
Social support provided by the textual interaction was 
estimated using the scores of assent, positive sentiment, and 
social process in the text content. Our study found that in 
Twitter, mothers of autistic kids provide the maximum 
amount of social support as compared to other autism 
blogger categories.  The autism bloggers’ community in 
Twitter and blogs as a whole provided high social support as 
compared to other forms of text writing such as emotional 
writing, scientific articles, etc. Further, social support 
provided by talking or verbal communication is quite higher 
as compared to all other modes of communication, including 
online forums and social media. This finding demonstrates 
that there is no substitute for the verbal communication 
medium. 
However, 
social 
media 
and 
other online 
communication media could possibly fill the gaps, wherever 
verbal 
communication 
with 
an 
expert 
is 
instantly 
unavailable. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The study sheds light on characteristics of social support 
provided by online support community of autism on the 
different social media platform. The social support provided 
by interactions within autism blogger community by 
identifying the bloggers and the community members was 
unfolded in the study. 
The tightly knit interaction within the autism blogging 
community was revealed in our study. Members of the 
autism community provide extensive social support to its 
members, by sharing information and extending emotional 
support. Members of the autism bloggers community in 
Twitter and blogs provide high social support as compared to 
other health groups like alcohol support forum. 
For the tweets of the mothers, the amount of social 
support provided is higher than fathers or autistic bloggers 
with a given amount of positive emotion, but the ratio is 
highest in verbal communication as compared to any written 
text interaction. Figure 2 shows the variation of social 
support with positive emotion. Verbal communication 
provides the maximum amount of social support for a given 
value of positive emotion in contrast to other communication 
modes.  
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
Statistical analysis of our model for social support 
determination based on various psychological groups of 
LIWC scores shows impressive results. For the mother and 
father with autistic kids, the value of social support provided 
given the score of positive emotion came out to be 
statistically significant (p <=0.001). Positive emotion is 
highly correlated with social support. Figure 2 also depicts 
the high correlation between positive emotion and social 
support. The correlation, however, is not monotonically 
increasing, which means beyond a certain degree of positive 
emotion, social support provided is unchanged.   
Figure 2. Social support variation with positive emotion. Vertical Axis 
shows the amount of Social Support and Horizontal axis represents positive 
emotion. Each circle represents a data point. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
In this research, we study the online social support 
provide by interaction among members of the autism blogger 
community in different social media platforms. The study 
extracts blogging activity of popular autism blogger and their 
Twitter activity including their friends, followers, tweets, 
retweets, mentions, and hashtags information. The tightly 
knit interaction within the autism blogging community was 
identified in our study. Our study found that Autism blogger 
community provides extensive social support to its 
community members in different social media platforms, 
especially on Twitter. The autism community members share 
a feeling of solidarity by providing support to other 
community members empathetically on social media. While 
negative sentiments are reflected in some tweets, the social 
support contributed by the autism blogger community 
overwhelmingly outweighs the negativity.  
Social support provided by autism bloggers varies based 
on blogging characteristics and social media platform. 
Whether bloggers influence played a role in evoking social 
support within the readers/audience is an interesting 
question, which could be studied. Agarwal et al. [15] in their 
research suggested that influential bloggers are more likely 
to encourage discussions among the community members 
through comments in blogs or retweets in Twitter.  
We envision our study will provide a mechanism to 
access social support in online health communities. 
However, the fact that autism bloggers also use other social 
media platforms, such as Facebook presents a limitation in 
our study. The findings of this study lay the groundwork to 
study our bigger research agenda, i.e., evaluating the efficacy 
several of therapies for ASD as perceived by the caregivers 
through the experiences they have shared in online forums 
and social media. This will help build a knowledge base for 
interventions and experiences, which in turn could assist the 
clinical research in better understanding of behavioral 
interventions for various health disorders. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was funded in part by the Jerry L. 
Maulden/Entergy Fund at the University of Arkansas at 
Little Rock. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
funding 
organization. 
The 
researchers 
gratefully 
acknowledge the support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).. “Community 
Report 
on 
Autism”, 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/states/ 
comm_report_autism_2014.pdf/. [Online; accessed 10-June-2015]. 
[2] V. B. Gupta, et al., “Identifying children with autism early?” 
Pediatrics 119(1):152–153, 2007. 
[3] Autism Speaks, http://www.autismspeaks.org (Online; accessed July 
14, 2015). 
[4] S. Cobb, "Presidential Address-1976. Social support as a moderator 
of life stress," Psychosomatic Medicine, vol. 38, 1976, pp.300-314. 
[5] M. P. Hamm, et al., “Social media use among patients and caregivers: 
a scoping review”, BMJ open 3(5),2013. 
[6] J. E. Wallace, "Job stress, depression and work-to-family conflict: A 
test 
of 
the 
strain 
and 
buffer 
hypotheses." 
Relations 
Industrielles/Industrial Relations (2005): 510-539. 
[7] L. F. Berkman and L. Breslow, ”Health and Ways of Living: The 
Alameda County Study”, Oxford University Press, New York, 1983. 
[8] M. De. Choudhury, S. Counts, E. J. Horvitz, and A. Hoff, 
“Characterizing and Predicting Postpartum Depression from 
Facebook Data”, ICWSM 2014, Baltimore, MD, 2014. 
[9] Linguistic 
Inquiry 
and 
Word 
Count 
(LIWC) 
program 
http://www.LIWC.net (last visited May 14, 2015). 
[10] W. Tov, K. L. Ng, H. Lin, and L. Qiu, “Detecting Well-Being via 
Computerized Content Analysis of Brief Diary Entries”, Journal of 
Personality 
Assessment, 
vol 
25(4), 
1069-1078, 
2013. 
doi: 
10.1037/a0033007. 
[11] M. E. Newman, "Modularity and community structure in networks." 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103.23 (2006): 
8577-8582.  
[12] L. Backstrom, P. Boldi, M. Rosa, J. Ugander, and S. Vigna, “Four 
degrees of separation”, In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM Web 
Science Conference (WebSci '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
2012, pp.33-42. 
[13] C. Biemann, “Chinese Whispers - An Efficient Graph Clustering 
Algorithm and its Application to NLP Problems”. In Proceedings of 
TextGraphs, New York, USA ,2006, pp.73–80. 
[14] K. Chuang and C. Yang, “Informational Support Exchanges on 
Different Computer-Mediated Communication Formats in a Social 
Media Community of Alcoholism,” Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Tech., vol.65, no.1, 2014, pp.37-52. 
[15] N. Agarwal, H. Liu, L. Tang, and S. Y. Philip, “Modeling blogger 
influence in a community”,  Social Network Analysis and 
Mining, 2(2), 2012, pp.139-162. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

