Use of ICT in Finnish Social Welfare 
Situation in 2011 
Jarmo Kärki, Maarit Laaksonen, Hannele Hyppönen  
National Institute for Health and Welfare  
Information Department 
Helsinki, Finland 
jarmo.karki@thl.fi, maarit.laaksonen.2@thl.fi, hannele.hypponen@thl.fi 
 
 
 
Abstract— National level monitoring of adoption and use of 
information systems is becoming common practice, providing 
one set of indicators for success of e-health policies. This is not 
the case in social welfare, in spite of advancing national e-
welfare policies. This article presents results of a national web-
based survey of availability and use of electronic social services 
and social welfare client information systems in Finland. The 
survey conducted in 2011 was targeted at managers or IT-
leaders of public and private service provider organizations. 
The results show that the majority of social welfare service 
providers in municipalities have a client information system 
(CIS). A half of the public social welfare organizations use 
mobile systems for some purposes. Private service providers 
use CIS's somewhat less than local authorities. Small private 
enterprises generally do not have CIS's. Not all social welfare 
employees have a personal workstation. Information exchange 
between organizations is limited to read-only. There is little 
exchange of information between information systems. 
Internet access is more commonly available. Providers of social 
welfare services generally have a website with information on 
their operations. Public service providers are more likely to 
have their own IT personnel than private service providers. 
The percentage of CIS investment costs out of total ICT costs 
varies greatly from one organization to another. Local 
authorities invest more in ICT than private service providers. 
The development of e-welfare services has been rather slow 
over the past decade. Results will be used in development of 
national information services for social care in Finland. 
Keywords-social care; social services; private social welfare 
service providers; ICT; electronic information management; 
client information systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
E-government 
agendas, 
regulatory 
bodies 
and 
Information and Communication Technology companies are 
participating in shaping what has been called an ‘electronic 
turn’ in social work and social care [1]. There is an 
increasing interest in the European Union, the World Health 
Organization and The Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development as well as national authorities in 
monitoring the success of this turn [2][3], but the focus has 
been largely in e-health, not in e-welfare [4][5]. A recent 
literature review [6] searched five databases, such as JStor, 
Annual Reviews, Ebsco, PubMed and Nelli, and three 
journals, as Communications in Information Literacy, 
Journal of Social Work and British Journal of Social Work 
refereed electronic journals. The search was conducted 
combining the following search terms: social* AND 
informatics, social* AND information technology, social* 
AND information systems and social* AND knowledge 
management. The review revealed lack of studies of e-
welfare adoption. According to the review, the studies focus 
mainly usability or use of applications in social services. 
Client’s perspective or the social work processes have been 
ignored. Situation is the same in Finland: e-welfare 
execution and the use of ICT in social welfare has been 
monitored previously in 2001 [7]. Internationally, similar 
studies are rare [8]. 
However, e-government and e-welfare policies have 
advanced remarkably during the 10-year period in Finland: 
an act on Information Management Governance in Public 
Administration entered into force in 2011 [9]. An ambitious 
purpose of the law is to lay down provisions on information 
management governance in public administration and to 
ensure the interoperability of information systems. The 
Finnish Ministry of Finance is devising an overall enterprise 
architecture for public administration. The authorities in 
central and local government, as well as in social welfare, 
each plans and specifies their enterprise architecture in 
accordance the overall architecture. As a part of public 
services, the horizontal interoperability of client information 
systems in social welfare as well as the vertical 
interoperability of governmental information systems, needs 
to be improved. The client information must be available for 
the social welfare authorities wherever and whenever it is 
needed. The citizens have a right to seamless and user-
friendly e-services and e-practices in social welfare. The aim 
of citizens’ e-services is to increase service availability 
where and when needed and empower clients in their own 
care.    
Many academic and practical models have been proposed 
to understand the maturity of digital government or e-
government [10]. Often the stages of e-services, e-
democracy or other e-practices development are described in 
these models. Initial stages concentrate on the availability of 
public information and on the possibility of handling 
administrative 
processes 
online. 
Later 
stages 
are 
characterized by for example vertical and horizontal system 
integrations, a homogenous network of public services and 
data mobility and sharing across public and private services. 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

The models and the assessment indicators have been 
criticized to be predominantly technical overshadowing 
crucial social aspects, such as power, interest groups, conflict 
and values [11]. 
Although interesting research of electronic recording in 
social welfare and social work practices are published 
[12][13][14][15][16][17], the need for the advanced research 
methods of social care informatics has been widely 
recognized [18][19][20][21]. Also a Declaration for action 
has been presented by twenty-three actors with a 
multidisciplinary background of research from 15 different 
European countries [5]. The Declaration of action is a 
significant effort to define social care informatics more 
rigorously as a field of research and as a domain of research 
investigations. 
The purpose of this article is to present results of a 
national survey of electronic social services and social 
welfare client information systems currently available for 
key social services in Finland [22]. The questions that are 
studied in this paper are:  
(1) What kind of e-services has been offered for citizens?  
(2) What kind of client information systems and other 
professional e-tools the social welfare employees use?  
(3) To what extent is information exchange between 
organizations possible in the social welfare services?  
(4) How does the data management and resources used to 
ICT look like in social welfare sector?  
The survey was conducted as part of the Government 
Programme for public e-services for citizens (SADe 
programme) [2] funded by the Ministry of Finance, where 
electronic service systems are developed for different public 
services, including the social welfare and health care sector. 
The survey was commissioned by the National Institute for 
Health and Welfare and conducted by Market-Visio Oy. The 
data concerning the availability and use of ICT in health care 
were collected simultaneously and the results were published 
in a separate report.  
First the methods and data of the survey are presented. 
Then the main results of the survey are reported and two 
figures presented. Finally the conclusions, future works and 
implications of the study are presented in Section 4.   
II. 
METHODS AND DATA 
Data collection was carried out as semi-structured 
Webropol-questionnaire at the beginning of 2011. The 
questionnaire was modified from an instrument that has been 
used for mapping health care IT diffusion and use biannually 
since 2003, in order to maintain comparability of the data 
between sectors. The target group of the survey were all the 
chief information officers of the Finnish local government 
organizations organising social services, and private social 
service providers in Finland.  
There were 336 municipalities and 35 municipal 
federations in Finland at the time of the survey. In 2010, 
there were 2 922 private organizations, associations or 
companies providing social services, which delivers almost a 
third of all social services in Finland. All organizations of the 
target group could not be reached. 
In the social services part of the survey, 457 
organizations providing social welfare services responded: 
69 local authorities, 13 municipal federations (or similar 
bodies) and 373 private enterprises, associations or non-
governmental organizations. Response rate (23 %) remained 
low despite the best efforts to acquire additional responses. 
However, organizations of all sizes responded to the survey. 
Geographically the respondents represent whole Finland. As 
far as public social services go, the responses cover some 
63% of the population of Finland. The data includes all the 
statutory social welfare service tasks, such as child 
protection, social work, disability services, substance abuse 
services and services for older people. The responses from 
private service providers were mainly from organizations 
providing services for the elderly such as home services, 
housing services and institutional care.  
The limited data do not allow for meaningful statistical 
inference. Therefore, this article focuses on the descriptive 
statistical analysis. The results are interpreted as a sample of 
the target group. The results are presented graphically by 
describing the values of the distributions and cross-
tabulating. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The survey asked what kind of public electronic services 
the respondents organize for citizens. Providers of social 
welfare services generally have a website with information 
on their operations. Half of the local authorities and one 
fourth of the private service providers had a facility for 
online feedback. One in four of the local authorities 
responding reported that they offered online services for 
citizens such as applications for daycare places or income 
support. In cases where citizens were offered a facility for e-
transactions, about half of the clients choose to manage their 
affairs with the service provider in some other way. Anyhow 
eSocial care is about to come: online services are being 
developed in several projects around the country. Overall 
architecture for e-services was also asked by the local actors. 
The survey demonstrates that the majority of providers of 
social welfare services in local government have a client 
information system. Two applications dominate the market, 
as shown in Figure 1. One-fifth of the public social welfare 
organizations use more than one CIS's, having different CIS 
for different services.  
 
 
Figure 1.  
The percentages of different client information systems used 
by public social service providers (% of respondents) n=89. 
53 % 
34 % 
9 % 4 % 
System A 
System B 
Other system 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

 
Figure 2.  
The percentages of the different public social services using client information systems. The data of the public social service providers (% of 
respondents). The number of respondents is presented in the parenthesis after the name of the social service.  
However, the possibilities for an employee in municipal 
social services to use these client information systems 
depends on the particular service and access rights of 
employees; not all of the branches of the social services have 
a client information system. For example a quarter of those 
working in adoption counseling or immigration services are 
missing the opportunity to record on client information 
systems. The percentages of the different public social 
services using or not using CIS's are presented in Figure 2. 
Private service providers use client information systems 
somewhat less than local authorities, although there is great 
variation. Small private enterprises generally do not have 
information systems. 
The contents, like classifications or data structures, of 
CIS's vary depending on software and organization. 
Requirements of an annual collection of national statistics 
are so far the only unifying element between the different 
systems. 
The surveys reveals that local authorities commonly use 
national classifications for compiling the annual statistics for 
the National Institute for Health and Welfare, such as the 
statistical classifications in social services institutional and 
housing services notifications, child welfare services 
statistics classifications, and child support and maintenance 
statistics classifications. Private service providers use only 
the statistical classifications of care notifications.  
The survey shows that information exchange between 
organizations is so far limited to read-only, and there is little 
exchange of information between information systems. Only 
one of five public service providers reported that digital 
exchange of information is possible. The results show that 
municipal social services have quite good access to the query 
system SOKY of the Social Insurance Institution (Kela) and 
the population register system of the Population Register 
Centre (VRK-database). The personal information of these 
systems is used by social workers in particular when granting 
social assistance or assessing the clients' needs in the social 
work. Without electronic access to this data, the same 
information is acquired by telephone or in a printed form 
delivered by the client. Nearly two of five public service 
providers have organized an access to an electronic patient 
record of primary health care. Access to other information 
systems is considerably more rare. 
Also, access to client information outside organizations is 
strictly limited to designated employees specially those 
working in social assistance, social work and child 
protection. In private organizations, employees rarely have 
access to outside information systems, and information 
exchange between systems is extremely rare. 
Not all social welfare employees in the public or private 
sector have a personal workstation. Internet access is more 
commonly available. Almost half of the public social welfare 
organizations use mobile client information systems for 
some purposes, and the other half does not have the similar 
possibility. Private service providers, by contrast, have 
virtually no mobile client information systems. Social 
services professionals commonly use their own user 
identifier and password to identify themselves. Only a few of 
the public-sector organizations responding are using an 
official e-transaction card, a health care certificate card or 
other identifier device. 
Public service providers are more likely to have their 
own IT personnel than private service providers (68 % vs. 38 
%). Similarly, public service providers are more likely to 
have an information management strategy, an electronic 
archive 
plan, 
client 
documentation 
instructions 
for 
employees or data protection or information security 
instructions than private service providers. Altogether, there 
are significant deficiencies in social care information 
management in Finland.  
The survey indicates that the online professional tools 
most frequently used by social services employees are the 
75 % 
62 % 
74 % 
76 % 
84 % 
84 % 
84 % 
84 % 
90 % 
91 % 
91 % 
95 % 
97 % 
98 % 
100 % 
100 % 
100 % 
25 % 
38 % 
26 % 
24 % 
16 % 
16 % 
16 % 
16 % 
10 % 
9 % 
9 % 
5 % 
3 % 
2 % 
0 % 
0 % 
0 % 
0 % 
20 % 
40 % 
60 % 
80 % 
100 % 
Other social services (18) 
Adoption counselling (21) 
Services for long-term unemployed (54) 
Immigration services (34) 
Emergency social services (21) 
Services of guardianship, maintenance and paternity (51) 
Services for substance abusers (57) 
Disability services (61) 
Child guidance and family counselling (40) 
Support for informal care (56) 
Child welfare (59) 
Social work (59) 
Child care (30) 
Social assistance services (56) 
Social lending services (10) 
Institutional care and housing services for old people (48) 
Home care (55) 
CIS 
No CIS 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Sosiaaliportti 
online 
portal 
[23], 
which 
publishes 
professional information for Finnish social workers, and the 
Intranets of their respective organizations. One in five public 
organizations and one in ten private ones make use of online 
learning environments. 
The percentage of client information system investment 
costs out of total ICT costs varies greatly from one 
organization to another. Local authorities would seem to 
invest more in ICT than private service providers. Many 
respondents reported a percentage of less than 10 %, but 
some more than 50 %. ICT costs of the public service 
providers were total of about 40-50 million euro in 2010 
based on an estimation derived from the results. It's about 
five percent of all ICT costs of municipalities in Finland. The 
majority of the respondents estimated that their total ICT 
costs would increase between 2011 and 2013. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Limitations of the study include poor response rate, even 
if the sample was nationally representative. The data doesn’t 
allow meaningful statistical inference and in order to 
illustrate the evolution of the ICT use. However, results can 
be compared to the situation in 2001 [7] and careful 
suggestions be made in light of key e-government and e-
welfare policy goals to indicate most acute development 
needs. 
There are websites and some facilities for online 
feedback, but well-designed online services offered for the 
citizens are still rare. Interestingly as many as 45 percent of 
the public social service providers announced to offer 
guidance via e-mail in 2001 and improving the e-services 
were mentioned as a key development area at that time. In 
the light of the findings, very rapid development hasn't taken 
place for the last ten years. Information about services is 
fragmented and access to them limited to certain times and 
places, with poor access to information required for 
applications. Regarding e-services for citizens as a 
significant e-welfare policy goal, the maturity level of the 
social welfare system seem yet to be low: the technology 
used is rather undeveloped and the distribution of the e-
services has been limited to only a few social services. Social 
services are not yet available where and when needed, 
neither do they empower clients in their own care. More 
structured development of e-welfare services for citizens in 
SADe-program could start from a simple integrated service 
directory and electronic application of services with 
integration to national SOKY and VRK -databases.  
Most of the client data can be recorded on the stationary 
CIS's engineered by two software houses. The logical level, 
such as classifications and data structures, of the CIS's is 
heterogeneous, which makes the information exchange 
between organizations difficult. Over the last decade the 
number of the municipalities, in which more than one CIS's 
are used, have increased. Despite of this software 
differentiation, 
there 
are 
yet 
some 
social 
service 
organizations, often with a limited number of clients, without 
any CIS's. One of the main e-welfare policy goals, the 
horizontal interoperability of client information systems in 
social welfare, is not yet possible. In order to achieve the 
goal, it seems necessary to plan, specify and implement the 
overall information architecture also in social welfare.   
Social welfare professionals have access to the Internet 
and they log in the applications with the user ID's of their 
own, but only a limited group of the municipal social welfare 
employees have an access to the two governmental data 
systems. However, compared to the situation in 2001, the 
possibility to use information systems outside the home 
organization has improved considerably. Particularly, an 
option to use the digital information recorded in the primary 
health care services in elderly and home care seems to easier 
nowadays than 10 years ago. At least in some services, the 
progress has been made in vertical interoperability, when 
considering the availability of data for professional use in 
social welfare. However, there are still plenty of challenges 
regarding usability and advanced technological solutions. 
Altogether, several millions of euro are laid every year 
out to the ICT of the social welfare in Finland, but the 
foundations, such as an enterprise architecture and the 
information management, need to be better organized. Even 
if there are CIS's and access to some information systems, 
the technology is only as good as the management and 
organizational systems, within which it is placed [24].  
In Finland, which is said to belong to the Scandinavian 
and universalistic model of welfare regimes [25], citizens' 
rights to social protection are rooted in the Constitution. The 
municipalities have a responsibility to organize social 
welfare services for the citizens. The services are mainly 
produced by public institutions, too. As a result of this, 
public service providers have larger number of clients and 
more financial and human resources to invest in ICT than 
private service providers, which explains most of the 
differences of the results between public and private sector.  
The Finnish e-welfare services are probably placed 
mainly on the initial stages of the maturity assessment 
models of e-government. Despite the Finnish high level 
Government information society strategies, legislation and 
Action Programmes [26], the results of this study shows that 
the basic infrastructure and the management of e-social 
welfare in Finland is tenuous and deficient. From the point of 
view of the social welfare professionals and of their clients 
speaking about "network society" [27] or information society 
ring hollow.  
The results can be leveraged in further specifying the 
needs, potential and capacity for implementing nationwide 
online client service functions in social welfare and health 
care and for implementing nationwide social welfare 
information system services. The results may also be used 
when designing local and regional solutions.  
This study paints a partially fragmented and patchy 
picture of e-welfare implementation in Finland, with more 
ICT support for certain social work areas than others. With 
e-government strategies being increasingly implemented, 
importance of monitoring the progress and impacts of them 
is growing for evidence based management of e-welfare 
services. The emerging software architecture and the greater 
use of centrally devised e-assessment templates attempt to 
map the structure of social work and construct new 
"workflows". It is important to ensure that this IT-mediated 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

(re)construction will happen in a transparent way, where 
feedback is used to steer further development. Feedback 
needs to be collected not only to monitor speed of the policy 
implementation, but also the acceptance and added value to 
the clients, workers and service providers [1][8][11][13][21]. 
The future development needs for this survey lie in closer 
integration with the e-health survey to monitor integrated 
care, and in extending the data collection to usability, user 
satisfaction and cost and benefits of the ICT-mediated 
services. So far, there are no systematic mechanisms to 
measure the customer satisfaction or the accuracy of the 
social welfare service system neither in municipalities nor in 
private social service organizations in Finland.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P.N. Garrett, "Social work’s electronic turn: notes on the 
deployment of information and communication technologies 
in social work with children and families," Critical Social 
Policy 25, 2005, pp. 529 - 553.   
[2] i2010 High Level Group. Benchmarking Digital Europe 2011-
2015 a conceptual framework. Issue No: 27, October 2009. 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/eeurope/i2010/docs/b
enchmarking/ benchmarking_digital_europe_2011-2015.pdf. 
(10.1.2012)  
[3] Global eHealth – Measuring Outcomes: Why, What and How. 
Bellagio, Italy, July 13-August 8 2008. http://www.ehealth-
connection.org/files/conf-materials/Global%20eHealth%20-
%20Measuring%20Outcomes_0.pdf. (10.1.2012) 
[4] M. Rigby, P. Hill, and A. Allman, "Ensuring Trust and 
Governance in E-social Care," in Collaboration and the 
Knowledge Economy: Issues, Applications, Case Studies, Vol 
5, Part 1, P. Cunningham, M. Cunningham, Eds. IOS Press, 
2008, pp. 22-28, 
[5] M. Rigby, P. Hill, S. Koch, and D. Keeling, "Social care 
informatics as an essential part of holistic health care: A call 
for action," International Journal of Medical Informatics 80, 
2011, 544-554. 
[6] M. Laaksonen, Social Work Informatics: Integrated literature 
review [Sosiaalityön tiedonhallinnan tutkimus: Integroitu 
kirjallisuuskatsaus], Master’s thesis, Kuopio: University of 
Eastern Finland, 2010.  
[7] K. Hartikainen, S. Kuusisto-Niemi, and E. Lehtonen, Survey 
of information systems in Finnish health and social care in  
2001 [Sosiaali- ja terveydenhuollon tietojärjestelmäkartoitus 
2001], Osaavien keskusten julkaisuja 1/2002, Helsinki, 2002. 
[8] Department of Health. National Electronic Social Care 
Record 
Survey 
Report, 
2006/07, 
England.  
http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalass
ets/@dh/@en/documents/digitalasset/dh_075530.pdf. 
(26.7.2012) 
[9] Act on Information Management Governance in Public 
Administration (634/2011), The Ministry of Finance in 
Finland, 
2011. 
http://www.vm.fi/vm/en/04_publications_and_documents/03_
documents/20110902ActonI/Tietohallintolaki_englanniksi.pd
f (6.8.2012) 
[10] S. Assad, I. Boughzala, and I. Boydens, "Back to Practice, A 
Decade of Research in E-Government," in Practical Studies in 
E-Government: Best Practices from Around the World, S. 
Assad et al., eds. New York: Springer, pp. 1-12, 2011. 
[11] M. Simões, "Sociological Reflections on E-government," 
IARIA, ICDS 2012: The Sixth International Conference on 
Digital 
Society, 
2012, 
pp. 
29-34. 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
icds_2012_2_20_10116 (3.8.2012) 
[12] F. Reamer, "Documentation in Social Work: Evolving Ethical 
and Risk-Management Standards," Social work, vol. 50, pp. 
325-334, 2005. 
[13] J. Kagle, "Record Keeping: Directions for the 1990's," Social 
Work, vol 38, pp. 190-196, March 1993. 
[14] I. Shaw, M. Bell, I. Sinclair, P. Sloper, W. Mitchell, P. Dyson, 
J. Clayden, and J. Rafferty, "An exemplary scheme? An 
evaluation of the integrated children’s system," British 
Journal of Social Work, vol. 39, pp. 613–626, 2006. 
[15] N. Ames, "Social work recording: A new look at an old 
issue," Journal of Social Work Education, vol. 35, pp. 227-
237, 1999. 
[16] J.-M. Räsänen, "Producing Norm Talk of Fact-based Case 
Recording in Interviews With Emergency Social Workers," 
Qualitative Social Work, vol. 11, pp. 6–22, January 2012. 
[17] B. Pahwa, "Technology and School Social Work Services: 
Introducing Technology in an Alternative School," Journal of 
Technology in Human Services, vol. 21, No. 1/2, pp. 139-160, 
2003. 
[18] H. Mouratidis, G. Manson, and I. Philp, "Analysis and design 
of the eSAP: An integrated health and social care information 
system," Health Informatics Journal, vol. 9, No: 2, pp. 89–92, 
June 2003. 
[19] M. Rigby, P. Hill, S. Koch, and J. Kärki, "Social care 
informatics – the missing partner in eHealth," in Medical 
Informatics in a United and Healthy Europe, Proceedings of 
MIE 2009, K.-P. Adlassnig et al., Eds. Amsterdam: IOS 
Press, 2009, pp. 277–281. 
[20] D. Parker-Oliver and G. Demiris, "Social Work Informatics: 
A New Specialty," Social Work, vol. 51, No: 2, pp. 127-134, 
2006. 
[21] P. Hill, A. Allman, M. Rigby, and R. Wilson, "Social Care 
Informatics: Beginning to Face up to the Reality of the Mixed 
Services Economy?" in Collaboration and the Knowledge 
Economy: Issues, Applications, Case Studies, Vol 5, Part 1, P. 
Cunningham, M. Cunningham, Eds. IOS Press, 2008, pp. 14-
21. 
[22] J. Kärki, M. Laaksonen, and H. Hyppönen, Use of technology 
in 
Finnish 
social 
welfare 
in 
2011 
[Tieto- 
ja 
viestintäteknologian käyttö sosiaalihuollossa vuonna 2011], 
Raportti 2/2012, Helsinki: Terveyden ja hyvinvoinnin laitos 
(THL), 2012. 
[23] http://www.sosiaaliportti.fi/en-GB/(10.1.2012) 
[24] T. Carrilio, "Management Information Systems: Why Are 
They Underutilized in the Social Services?" Administration in 
Social Work, vol. 29, No: 2, pp. 43-61, 2005. 
[25] G. Esping-Andersen, "The Sustainability of Welfare States 
into the Twenty-First Century," International Journal of 
Health Services, vol. 30, No: 1, pp. 1-12, 2000. 
[26] The National Knowledge Society Strategy 2007-2015. 
Finland, 
 
26.9.2006, 
http://www.tietoyhteiskuntaohjelma.fi/esittely/en_GB/introdu
ction/_files/76222690188788831/default/Strategia_englanti_1
81006final.pdf (6.8.2012) 
[27] M. Castells and P. Himanen, The Information Society and the 
Welfare State: The Finnish Model, New York: Oxford 
University Press Inc, 2002. 
 
 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

