Complex Systems Engineering for Rapid Computational Socio-Cultural Network 
Analysis and Decision Support Systems 
 
Tareq Z. Ahram 
Institute for Advanced Systems Engineering (IASE)  
University of Central Florida 
 Orlando, FL 32816, USA 
tahram@ucf.edu  
 
Waldemar Karwowski  
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management 
Systems (IEMS)  
University of Central Florida 
 Orlando, FL 32816, USA 
wkar@ucf.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The advent and adoption of internet-based social 
networking has significantly altered our daily lives. The 
educational community has taken notice of the positive aspects 
of social networking such as creation of blogs and to support 
groups of system designers going through the same challenges 
and difficulties. This paper introduces a social networking 
framework for collaborative education, design and modeling of 
the next generation of smarter products and services. Human 
behavior modeling in social networking application aims to 
ensure that human considerations for learners and designers 
have a prominent place in the integrated design and 
development of sustainable, smarter products throughout the 
total system lifecycle. Social networks blend self-directed 
learning and prescribed, existing information. The self-
directed element creates interest within a learner and the 
ability to access existing information facilitates its transfer, and 
eventual retention of knowledge acquired.  In conclusion, this 
research paper introduces the application of social-networking 
to design and modeling of products and services and provides a 
novel technology for facilitating the understanding of complex 
human behavior and to better identify crucial user needs. 
 
     Keywords - social modeling; decision support systems; 
behavioral modeling. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The concept of smartness of consumer products and 
services has been investigated by several authors. This 
section presents a synthesis and summary of the most 
innovative work that influenced research in this field.  
Allmendinger and Lombreglia [1] highlighted smartness in a 
product from a business perspective. They regard 
“smartness" as the product's capability to predict business 
errors and faults, thus “removing unpleasant surprises from 
[the users'] lives.” Ambient Intelligence (AMI) group [2] 
describes a vision where distributed services, mobile 
computing, or embedded devices in almost any type of 
environment (e.g., homes, offices, cars), all integrate 
seamlessly with one another using information and 
intelligence to enhance user experiences [3, 4, 5, 23]. The 
advent and adoption of internet-based social networking sites 
such as MySpace TM and Facebook TM has significantly 
altered social interactions of their users. Users of social 
networking sites vary their activities; some may be very 
active sharing their daily life experiences with comments and 
pictures, while others simply use the sites as a personal 
directory service. The educational community has taken 
notice of the following positive aspects of social networking: 
 
Peer feedback, increasingly fast response times for 
scientific discovery, collaborative design and research 
 
Creation of blogs and support groups of individuals 
going through the same or similar difficulties 
 
Providing a social context in line with the university, 
company, design group, or field of study 
A venue with links not directly related to a given 
educational alignment or resource. 
 
Social networking applications support the development of 
a methodology to better assess and predict imprecision and 
variability in user behavior by applying advanced 
mathematical and soft computing techniques to aid in 
studying human social, cultural and behavioral aspects. 
Application of soft computing techniques helps identify 
erroneous, problematic activities and issues that might 
otherwise go undetected for their obscurity, complexity, or 
elaborate inter-relationships. In addition to these above, 
social networks themselves are highly adaptable, flexible, 
and mobile. For example, the “blogging” paradigm became 
the “micro-blogging” concept known as Twitter, which now 
is integrated with Facebook’s “status updates.”  Arguably, 
social networking provides an effective method of satisfying 
the primal human desire of communication. 
 
     Rapid 
technological 
advancements 
and 
agile 
manufacturing 
created 
what 
is 
called 
today 
smart 
environments. Definitions of smart environments may be 
taken into account as a first reference point, since smart 
products have to be considered in the context of their 
environment. For example, Das and Cook [6] define a smart 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

environment as the one that is able to acquire and apply 
knowledge about an environment and adapt to its inhabitants 
in order to improve their experience in that environment.  It 
is noticed that the knowledge aspect has been recognized as a 
key issue in this definition. Mühlhäuser [2] refers to smart 
product characteristics that are attributed to future smart 
environments, i.e., “integrated interwoven sensors and 
computational systems seamlessly embedded in everyday 
systems and tools of our lives, connected through a 
continuous network.” In this respect, smarter products can be 
viewed as those products that facilitate daily tasks and 
augment everyday objects.  In 2007, AMI identified two 
motivating goals for building smart products [7]:  
 
1) Increased need for simplicity in using everyday 
products, as their functionalities become ever more 
complex. Simplicity is desirable during the entire 
life-cycle of the product to support manufacturing, 
repair, or use. 
2) Increased number, sophistication, and diversity of 
product components (for example, in the aerospace 
industry), as well as the tendency of the suppliers 
and 
manufacturers 
to 
become 
increasingly 
independent of each other which requires a 
considerable level of openness on the product side. 
Mühlhäuser [2] observed that these product characteristics 
can now be developed due to recent advances in information 
technology as well as ubiquitous computing that provides a 
“real world awareness" in these systems through the use of 
sensors, smart labels, and wearable, embedded computers. 
According to Mühlhäuser [2], product simplicity can be 
achieved with improved product to user interaction (p2u). 
Furthermore, openness of a product requires an optimal 
product to product interaction (p2p).  Knowledge intensive 
techniques enable better p2p interaction through self-
organization within a product or a group of products. Indeed, 
recent research on semantic web service description, 
discovery, and composition may enable self-organization 
within a group of products and, therefore, reduce the need for 
top-down constructed smart environments [8]. Smart 
products also require some level of internal organization by 
making use of planning and diagnosis algorithms as stated by 
[2]: 
“A Smart Product is an entity (tangible object, 
software, or service) designed and made for self-
organized 
embedding 
into 
different 
(smart) 
environments in the course of its lifecycle, providing 
improved simplicity and openness through improved 
p2u and p2p interaction by means of context-
awareness, semantic self- description, proactive 
behavior, multimodal natural interfaces, AI planning, 
and machine learning." 
 
Major characteristics of smart products are illustrated by 
comparing their essential features. For example, [9] define 
six major characteristics for smart products illustrated in 
Table 1 below. Table 2 provides a comparative presentation 
of the main characteristics of smart products. These 
characteristics include the following: 
 
Context-awareness - the ability to sense context 
 
Proactivity - the ability to make use of this context 
and other information in order to proactively 
approach users and peers 
 
Self-organization - the ability to form and join 
networks with other products. 
 
In addition to the above characteristics, Mühlhäuser [2] and 
SPC emphasize the fact that smart products should support 
their entire life-cycle. In addition, special care should be 
devoted to offering multimodal interaction with the potential 
users, in order to increase the simplicity characteristics of the 
products. 
 
TABLE 1. SMART PRODUCTS CHARACTERISTICS [9] 
 
Characteristic 
Description  
Personalization 
Customization of products according 
to buyer's and consumer's needs. 
Business-
awareness 
Consideration of business and legal 
constraints. 
Situatedness 
Recognition of situational and 
community contexts. 
Adaptiveness 
Change product behavior according to 
buyer's and consumer's responses to 
tasks. 
Network ability 
Ability to communicate and bundle 
with other products. 
Pro-activity 
Anticipation of user's plans and 
intentions. 
 
TABLE 2. A COMPARISON OF SMART PRODUCT'S CHARACTERISTICS [7] 
 
Maass and 
Varshney [9] 
Mühlhäuser [2] 
Smart Products 
consortium [4] 
Situatedness 
Context-aware 
Situation- and 
context-aware 
Pro-activity 
Proactive 
Behavior 
Proactively 
approach the user 
Network ability 
Self-organized 
embedding 
Self-organized 
embedding 
in smart product 
environments 
 
Support the 
entire 
life-cycle 
Support the user 
throughout whole 
life-cycle 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Maass and 
Varshney [9] 
Mühlhäuser [2] 
Smart Products 
consortium [4] 
Multimodal 
Natural 
Interfaces 
Multimodal 
interaction 
Personalization 
 
 
Business-
awareness 
Adaptiveness 
 
Autonomy 
Support 
procedural 
knowledge 
Emerging 
knowledge 
Distributed 
storage of 
knowledge 
 
II. 
SOCIAL NETWORKING FOR SMARTER PRODUCTS AND 
SERVICES DESIGN  
Communication of ideas, as a core for effective education 
and collaborative design, is the basis of distance and virtual 
learning. Social networks blend self-directed learning and 
prescribed, existing information. The self-directed element 
creates interest within a learner and the ability to access 
existing information facilitates its transfer, and eventual 
retention of knowledge acquired. There may also be a 
competitive element for educators to explore, since design 
activities are transparent in social networking. Ziegler [10] 
observed that social networking sites may radically change 
the educational system, since they offer the “capacity to 
motivate students as engaged learners”, rather than what he 
considers the usual “passive observers of the educational 
process.”  However, there are also conflicting views in the 
literature regarding the usefulness of social networks in 
education and design. In today’s interconnected world, social 
networking provides a great source of information and 
knowledge sharing that has not yet been fully explored to 
support collaborative products design and education. 
 
Selwyn [11] performed an observational study of a group 
of students’ online interactions with FacebookTM in the UK. 
Though the author cited many limitations of the study, some 
interesting findings included an observation that the social 
network site did not serve a meaningful role in making new 
partnerships. Rather, it maintained strong links already 
established in an emotionally close-knit group of people. 
Social networks share many functional elements with blog, a 
term coined recently as a shortened form of “web log,” 
describing a page that is frequently updated with comments, 
links, images, and other media pertaining to a given subject. 
The blog makes a statement and offers a space below for 
readers to comment and respond. Social networks have taken 
the blog concept and applied it to a directory concept.  
People who are “linked” together can receive updates from 
others micro-blog inputs. The concept of social networking 
can be extended to  collaborative design and modeling as 
means of facilitating team work and sharing product design 
experience in order to enhance team learning process, 
including collaborative online discussions, idea generation, 
peer review activities, and even debate [12,13].  
 
III. 
SOCIAL NETWORKING IN EDUCATION 
The proliferation of broadband-enabled interactive 
devices, such as smart cellular phones and media players, 
with social networking gadgets and application allows social 
communication and collaborative education activities to 
occur outside of lecture times. Another offshoot of social 
networking and blogging sites is that of wiki articles and 
their massive compilation, Wikipedia. A traditional 
understanding of an academic resource that “anyone can 
edit” seems unreasonable. The seemingly micro-managed 
and endlessly peer reviewed “live” nature of the document 
made Wikipedia a compelling new way to create, store, and 
integrate vast stores of knowledge [14]. The pull of social 
networking technologies cannot be ignored, as they have 
attracted millions of users in a short amount of time since 
their introduction. Ahram et. al. [23, 24, 25, 26] cited that the 
shortcomings such as the necessity of pre-existing offline 
relationships and, as of yet, unexploited educational and 
design opportunities may be addressed by serious initiatives 
and the integration of such technologies into modern 
educational and design methods and practices. The 
accessibility of these networks is more pervasive now than 
ever, thanks to gaming consoles and mobile devices. Prensky 
[15] claims that today’s students “think and process 
information differently” from their pre-digital world 
counterparts. People born after the mid 1980s are part of a 
group of “digital natives” who take information technology 
and its use for granted. Today, data can be created anywhere 
and on a great variety of computing platforms. The ability to 
create and view data anywhere can translate to new learning 
opportunities. Several universities have already turned 
towards the web and outlets previously used only to sell 
music and video as a way to disseminate lecture materials. 
Apple Computer’s iTunes TM software dominates the digital 
media player market. It has recently launched “iTunes 
University,” a subset of its online media store devoted to 
distributing lectures and presentations from various academic 
institutions. All of these novel technologies and media 
distribution 
platforms 
offer 
unimagined 
learning 
opportunities. As of yet, the educational elements are largely 
unused compared to their strictly entertainment-related 
digital media. Many opportunities exist for providing 
students with this media but dissemination is not enough 
alone. Serious educational games, educator’s involvement, 
and classroom activities sent to these services offering 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

interaction rather than “passive observation” would be 
valuable aids to the learning process. There is no doubt that 
today’s traditional students consume more media and games 
than previous generations. They need only be given some 
structure and appropriate interactive learning media to 
augment their already media-enriched lives. 
 
IV. 
SOCIAL NETWORKING SYSTEMS ENGINEERING 
APPROACH TO STUDY COMPLEX HUMAN BEHAVIOR  
 
The contemporary systems engineering process is an 
iterative, hierarchical, top down decomposition of system 
requirements [16]. The hierarchical decomposition includes 
Functional Analysis, Allocation, and Synthesis. The iterative 
process begins with a system-level decomposition and then 
proceeds through the functional subsystem level, all the way 
to the assembly and program level. The activities of 
functional analysis, requirements allocation, and synthesis 
will be completed before proceeding to the next lower level. 
SysML is a general-purpose visual modeling language for 
specifying, analyzing, designing, and verifying complex 
systems which may include hardware, software, information, 
personnel, procedures, and facilities (OMG SysML: 
http://www.omgsysml.org). SysML provides visual semantic 
representations for modeling system requirements, behavior, 
structure, and parametrics, which is used to integrate with 
other engineering analysis models [17, 23, 26]. 
 
Ahram et al. [23, 26] indicated that traditional machine 
learning techniques have some limitations for modeling 
human behavior, mainly the lack of any reference to the 
inherent uncertainty that human decision-making has. This 
problem can be partially solved with the introduction of Soft 
Computing (SC) to model human behavior via social 
networking applications. SC is an innovative approach to 
building computationally intelligent systems that differs from 
conventional (hard) computing in that it is tolerant of 
imprecision, uncertainty and partial truth. The guiding 
principle of soft computing is to exploit the tolerance for 
imprecision, uncertainty and partial truth to achieve 
tractability, robustness and low solution cost. SC consists of 
several computing approaches, including neural networks, 
fuzzy set theory, approximate reasoning, and search 
methods, such as genetic and evolutionary algorithms. SC 
technologies provide an approximate solutions to an ill-
defined problems encountered in social networking 
application and can help creating human behavioral models 
in an environment, such as during conflicts , in which users 
are not willing to give feedback on their actions and/or not 
able to fully define all possible interactions due to social and 
cultural barriers. Different techniques provide different 
capabilities to support the development of smarter products 
and services. For example, Fuzzy Logic provides a 
mechanism to mimic human decision-making that can be 
used to infer goals and plans; Neural Networks a flexible 
mechanism for the representation of common characteristics 
of a user and the definition of complex stereotypes; Fuzzy 
Clustering a mechanism in which a user can be part of more 
than one stereotype at the same time; and Neuro-Fuzzy 
systems a mechanism to capture and tune expert knowledge 
which can be used to obtain assumptions about the user. 
 
Systems engineering teams along with product and service 
designers are responsible for verifying that the developed 
products and services meet all requirements defined in the 
system specification documents. The following procedures 
outline the relevant systems engineering process steps [18, 
21, 26]: 
 
 
Requirements analysis: review and analyze the 
impact of operational characteristics, environmental 
factors, functional requirements and develops 
measures suitable for ranking alternative designs in 
a consistent, objective manner. Each requirement 
should be re-examined for consistency, desirability, 
applicability, and potential for improved return on 
investment [19]. This analysis verifies that the 
requirements are appropriate or develops new 
requirements for the smart product operation. 
 
 
Functional analysis - systems engineers and product 
designers 
use 
the 
input 
of 
performance 
requirements to identify and analyze system 
functions in order to create alternatives to meet 
system requirements. Systems engineering then 
establishes performance requirements for each 
function and sub-function identified. 
 
 
Performance 
and 
functionality 
- 
systems 
engineering allocates design requirements and 
performance to each system function. These 
requirements are stated in appropriate detail to 
permit allocation to software, systems components, 
or 
personnel. 
Performance 
and 
functionality 
allocation process identifies any special personnel 
skills or design requirements.  
 
 
Design Synthesis - designers and other appropriate 
engineering 
specialties 
develop 
a 
system 
architecture design to specify the performance and 
design requirements which are allocated in the 
detailed design. The design of the system 
architecture is performed simultaneously with the 
allocation of requirements and analysis of system 
functions. The design is supported with block and 
flow diagrams. Such diagrams support: 
 
- 
Identifying the internal and external interfaces 
- 
Permitting traceability to source requirements  
- 
Portraying the allocation of items that make 
up the design 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

- 
Identifying system elements along with 
techniques for its test and operation 
- 
Providing a means for comprehensive change 
control management  
 
 
Documentation - the primary source for developing, 
updating, and completing the system and subsystem 
specifications. Smart product requirements and 
drawings should be established and maintained.  
 
 
Specifications - to transfer information from the 
smart product systems requirements analysis, 
system architecture design, and system design tasks. 
The 
specifications 
should 
assure 
that 
the 
requirements are testable and are stated at the 
appropriate specification level. 
 
 
Specialty engineering functions - participate in the 
systems engineering process in all phases. They are 
responsible for system maintainability, testability, 
producibility, human factors, safety, design-to-cost, 
and performance analysis to assure the design 
requirements are met. 
 
 
Requirements verification - systems engineering 
and test engineering verify the completed system 
design to assure that all the requirements contained 
in the requirements specifications have been met.  
 
Model-based interactive human system approaches for 
design and modeling of smart systems and products 
differentiate between human performance and effectiveness 
criteria. These criteria determine a total system mission 
performance level and acceptability that is directly 
attributable to specific actions allocated to human 
performance metrics. These are indicators measure which 
performance effectiveness criteria are met [20, 21].  
 
Currently there are few applications to facilitate human 
behavior modeling in social networking applications. One of 
the applications that support a full Human Systems 
Integration (HSI) within a systems engineering process is 
DOORSTM by Rational. DOORS or Dynamic Object 
Oriented 
Requirements 
System 
specifically 
tracks 
requirements for product or software design. Since the 
requirements process has many shared elements to 
knowledge management, DOORS facilitates requirements 
entry, organization into hierarchies, and display. Users make 
changes and link any requirement to sub requirements and 
related requirements.  DOORS require individual users to 
have accounts.  Each account can be restricted to elements of 
the database and given read-only or administrative-level 
rights. Changes made are tracked by user, allowing managers 
to trace changes down to the individual user level. IBM 
Rational DOORS [27] provides a structured framework for 
adding, viewing, and changing requirements.  
V. 
HYBRID COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL NETWORK 
ANALYSIS  
     The interest in Computational Social Network Analysis 
(CSNA) has been growing massively in recent years. 
Psychologists, anthropologists, sociologists, economists, and 
statisticians have given significant contributions, making it 
actually an interdisciplinary research area.  This research 
summarizes 
the 
development 
of 
CSNA 
framework 
composed of methods used to (1) rapidly collect and (2) 
visualize socio-cultural network data in order to analyze 
economic and social data relationships between people, 
groups, organizations- and other knowledge-processing 
entities by integrating knowledge from available databases 
[23,26]. In particular, the first category (methods used for 
network data collection) aims to provide a dataset that helps 
study the effects that social networks have on different 
aspects of social and cognitive activities. To achieve this 
aim, the following methods were considered: (a) Socio-
centric modeling: to examine sets of relationships between 
actors that are regarded for analytical purposes as bounded 
social collectives. (b) Ego-centric: to select focal actors 
(egos), and identify the nodes they are connected to.  
The second category (methods used for network data 
visualization) aims to render data in easily understood 
graphical formats, thus making complex information usable 
and understandable by a broad community within the civilian 
economics and decision leaders to enable better decision-
making at various levels (policy, and private sector sales 
operations) and to support cultural situational awareness for 
tactical decision-making and training. To achieve this aim, 
the following representations are used:  
(a) Graphs: to visualize relationships among members of 
a narrow socio-cultural Network;  
 
(b) Matrices: to visualize dense socio-cultural networks  
 
(c) Maps: to manage a wide amount of data and 
information; and  
 
(d) A mixed hybrid approach: to integrate different 
visualization perspectives according to the rapid 
socio-cultural assessment goals. 
 
   Different techniques provide different capabilities to 
support extensive cultural situational awareness analysis for 
tactical decision-making and rapid socio-cultural assessment. 
For example, techniques such as Self Organizing Maps 
(SOM) and Cellular Automata (CA) can be used to construct 
a user model by themselves or in combination with 
traditional machine learning techniques. Generated models 
based on available datasets can be classified in this work 
based on how human behaviors are represented as models, 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

and their purpose (Figure 1). To this end, two main 
dimensions are considered:  
 
1) Granularity of the model: A model can be created 
for each individual (content-based modeling) or for 
clusters of users or a group (collaborative 
modeling)  
2) Type of task for which the model is going to be 
used: Ahram et al. [26] define four basic types of 
tasks:  (i) Filtering, (ii) Classification, (iii) 
Prediction, and (iv) Recommendation  
    The developed model supports prediction, which is the 
capability of anticipating future actions using past behavior 
[23,26]. A basic assumption is made with this approach: a 
user’s immediate future is very similar to his/her immediate 
or midterm past, an approach used to describe and model the 
social network system emergent behavior as shown in Figure 
1 [23, 26]; this is traditionally presented in the literature as 
content-based filtering [28]. Recommendation is the 
capability of suggesting interesting socio-cultural dataset 
elements relationships; Clustering is the process of locating 
“interesting” data and groups of interests from among the 
data. It is a technique that groups data with similar 
characteristics. The purpose of visualization using a 
Geographic Information System (GIS) is to map data 
presented in the models with SOM and CA onto a graphical 
representation to provide a qualitative idea of its properties. 
[26].  
 
 
 
Figure. 1. Characterisitcs of a socio-economic cultural system to reflect 
emergent behavior 
 
   Self-Organizing Map’s (SOM) is a neural network model 
for clustering and visualizing high-dimensional data. The 
SOM can be used to map high-dimensional complex socio-
cultural data onto a low-dimensional space that is usually 
two dimensional. In general, data visualization is used as a 
way to aggregate large quantities of data (see Figure 2), and 
present them in a way that allows to: (1) quickly 
communicate rich messages (communication). (2) discover 
new, 
previously 
unknown 
facts 
and 
relationships 
(discovery). (3) getting better insight into things we already 
know (insight).  
 
   The visualization can be performed by using (i) graphs 
made up of nodes and connection lines and the numbers in 
each cell stand for specific relationships among these values, 
(ii) matrices where row and columns stand for actors and 
properties, (iii) maps, and/or (iv) a hybrid approach. 
 
 
Figure.2. Example Visual Socio-Cultural Network Analysis 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  AND FUTURE WORK 
As an introductory contribution to the application of social 
networking and systems engineering process for the design 
and development of smarter products and services, this paper 
provides a motivation and quest for integrated social 
networking approach to systems engineering and to study 
complex human behavior. While a large number of 
disciplines and research fields must be integrated towards 
development and widespread use of smarter products, 
considerable advancements achieved in these fields in recent 
years indicate that the adaptation of these results can lead to 
highly sophisticated yet widely useable collaborative social 
networking applications for smart products.  
Future research will emphasize the applications of 
systems engineering and social-networking to design and 
modeling of specific services and will demonstrate the 
benefits in supporting and facilitating the understanding of 
complex human behavior and to better identify crucial user 
needs. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was sponsored by the Office of Naval 
Research (ONR) and the Office of Secretary of Defense 
(OSD) under contract No. N00014-11-1-0934. The authors 
acknowledge the helpful guidance by ONR Program 
Management, and the contributions of the technical team. 
REFERENCES 
[1 ]  
G. Allmendinger and R. Lombreglia, “Four Strategies for 
the Age of Smart Services”, Harvard Business Review, 
2005, 83(10):131-145. 
[2]  
M. Mühlhäuser, “Smart Products: An Introduction. In 
Constructing 
Ambient 
Intelligence”, 
AMI 
2007 
Workshop, pages 154 – 164, 2008. 
[3]  
M. Weiser, “The computer of the 21st century”, 
Scientific American, 1991, 265(3):66-75. 
[4]  
 J. Ahola, “Ambient Intelligence”. ERICM News, 2001, 
(47).  
[5] 
E. Arts and B. de Ruyter, “New research perspectives on 
ambient intelligence”. Journal of Ambient Intelligence 
and Smart Environments, 2009, 1:5-14. 
[6] 
S. Das and D. Cook, “Designing Smart Environments: A 
Paradigm Based on Learning and Prediction”, In: 
Shorey, R., Ananda, A., Chan, M.C., Ooi, W.T. (eds.) 
Mobile, Wireless, and Sensor Networks: Technology, 
Applications, and Future Directions, 2006, pp. 337–358. 
Wiley, Chichester. 
[7]  
M. Sabou, J. Kantorovitch, A. Nikolov, A.Tokmakoff, X. 
Zhou and E. Motta. “Position Paper on Realizing Smart 
Products: Challenges for Semantic Web Technologies”, 
Report 
by 
Knowledge 
Media 
Institute, 
2009, 
http://people.kmi.open.ac.uk/marta/papers/ssn2009.pdf 
form [retrieved: August, 2012].  
[8]  
S. Chandrasekharan, “The Semantic Web: Knowledge 
representation and affordance”, In: B. Gorayska, and J.L. 
Mey (eds). Cognition and Technology: Co-existence, 
Convergence, 
and 
Co-evolution,  
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins, 2004, pp.153-174  
[9] 
W. Maass and U.  Varshney, “Preface to the Focus 
Theme Section: 'Smart Products'. Electronic Markets”, 
2008, 18(3):211-215. 
[10]  
S. Ziegler, “The (mis)education of Generation M’ 
Learning, Media and Technology”, 2008, 32, 1, pp.69-81  
[11]  
N. Selwyn, “Screw blackboard… do it on Facebook!: An 
investigation of students’ educational use of Facebook”, 
Paper presented to the Pole 1.0 – Facebook social 
research symposium, November 15, 2007  at University 
of London: 
            http://www.scribd.com/doc/513958/Facebook-seminar-
paper-Selwyn  [retrieved: October, 2009].  
[12] 
J. Davies, and G. Merchant, “Looking from the inside 
out: academic blogging as new literacy” in C. Lankshear, 
and M.  Knobel, (eds.) ‘A New Literacies Sampler’ New 
York, Peter Lang, 2007. 
[13]  
F. Dubet, “Dimensions and representations on student 
experience in mass universit”, Revue Francaise de 
Sociologie, 2004, 35, 4, pp.511-532  
[14] 
C. Madge, J. Meek, J. Wellens and T. Hooley, 
“Facebook, social integration and informal learning at 
university: ‘It is more for socialising and talking to 
friends about work than for actually doing work”, 
Learning, Media and Technology, 2004, Routledge.  
[15]  
M. Prensky, “Digital Game-Based Learning”, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 2001, ISBN 0-07-136344-0  
[16]  
D. K. Hitchins, “Systems Engineering: A 21st Century 
Systems Methodology. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2007. 
[17]  
S. Friedenthal, A. Moore and R. Steiner, “A Practical 
Guide to SysML: The Systems Modeling Language”, 
Morgan Kaufmann; Elsevier Science, 2008.  
[18] 
 Defense Acquisition University (DAU) Guidebook 
2004, Chapter 4: Systems Engineering. 
[19]  
T. Z. Ahram and W. Karwowski, “Measuring Human 
Systems Integration Return on Investment”. The 
International Council on Systems Engineering – 
INCOSE Spring 2009 Conference: Virginia Modeling, 
Analysis and Simulation Center (VMASC), 2009, 
Suffolk, VA. USA.  
[20] 
 T. Z.  Ahram, W. Karwowski, B. Amaba and P. Obeid, 
“Human Systems Integration: Development Based on 
SysML and the Rational Systems Platform”, Proceedings 
of the Industrial Engineering Research Conference, 
2009, Miami, FL. USA.  
[21]  
Systems 
Engineering 
Fundamentals, 
Defense 
Acquisition University Press, 2001. 
[22]  
W. 
Karwowski and 
T. Z. 
Ahram, 
“Interactive 
Management of Human Factors Knowledge For Human 
Systems 
Integration 
Using 
Systems 
Modeling 
Language”. Special Issue for Information Systems 
Management, 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Systems 
ManagemenT, 2009, Taylor and Francis.  
[23]  T. Z.  Ahram, W. Karwowski, and B. Amaba,  
“Collaborative 
systems 
engineering 
and 
social 
networking approach to design and modeling of smarter 
products”. Behav. Inf. Technol. 30, January, 2011, 13-
26. 
[24]  
T. Z.  Ahram and W. Karwowski, “Social Networking 
Applications: Smarter Product Design for Complex 
Human 
Behavior 
Modeling”, 
Human 
Computer 
Interaction Proceedings. 14th International Conference 
on Human-Computer Interaction (HCII 2011), Orlando, 
FL, July 9-14, 2011. 
[25]   T. Z.  Ahram, W. Karwowski, “ Visual Social Network 
Analysis: Effective Approach to Model Complex Human 
Social, Behavior & Culture”. The 18th World Congress 
on Ergonomics (IEA) held February 12-16, 2012, in 
Recife, Brazil.  
[26]   T. Z.  Ahram and W. Karwowski, “Developing Human 
Social, 
Cultural, 
Behavior 
(HSCB) 
Ontologies: 
Visualizing & Modeling Complex Human Interactions”, 
Presented at the Office of Secretary of Defense Human 
Social, Culture Behavior Modeling (HSCB Focus 2011), 
Chantilly, VA,  February 8-10, 2011 
[27]     IBM Rational DOORS software website:  
            http://www.ibm.com/software/awdtools/doors/ 
[retrieved: September, 2012]. 
[28]     M. Balabanovic and Y. Shoham, “Learning Information   
            Retrieval Agents: Experiments with Automated Web   
            Browsing”. In Working Notes of the AAAI Spring  
            Symposium Series, 1995, pp. 13-18. Stanford University. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

