Deregulation in the Field of Games on Chance/on-line Gambling – in Favour of
Citizens
Hana Horak
Kosjenka Dumančić
Department of Law/Faculty of economics and business
University of Zagreb, UNIZG
Zagreb, Croatia
hhorak@efzg.hr
kdumancic@efzg.hr
Abstract— When we discuss the games on chance regulatory
framework, we cannot miss one of its major parts: the on-line
gambling issues. The regulation of this area is of outmost
importance because of its social impact, such as protection of
minors, protection of consumers, large possibility of addiction
problems and money laundering. At the moment, there is no
compliance with these rules at the European Union (EU) level.
The only source of secondary law in this area, at the moment,
is the European Court of Justice case law. Problems with on-
line gambling have been rising permanently since the Internet
became more and more popular. This area has been one of the
fastest growing industries in the past ten years. Along with
that, the questions of cross-border gambling issues are arising
as well. Gambling is recognized as one of the fastest growing
social
problems.
This
article
explores
the
possibility
of
protecting citizens/consumers from bad influences that are
caused by on-line gambling. We are certain that one of the
possibilities is to comply and regulate the rules dealing with
this issue. The EU Law gambling sector is regulated by the
rules of free movement of services and, according to those
provisions, the operators are authorized to provide services
from one European member state to another. The Member
states can restrict that freedom only by overriding reasons in
the public interest. According to the recent trends, the
restrictions imposed to on-line gambling by each member state
vary from being lawful to being illegal. This article gives an
overview of the current situation in the EU legislation and
stresses out the suggestions on what type of regulation is the
best for EU citizens.
Keywords-games on chance; on-line gambling; EU regulation;
freedom to provide services; EU law.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper is focused on on-line gambling, bearing in
mind that, in most European Union member states, a
restrictive regime governs the gambling, consisting of
prohibitions, state operations, monopolies or restrictive
licensing regimes, depending on the type of gambling [1].
Games on chance are of special interest for the states
and, of course, for the citizens. Regarding the state, there is
a benefit from the high income that comes from the taxes,
but, on the other hand, it should be regulated and
supervised. Closely connected to the games on chance are
potential criminal issues like money laundering, addiction
and illegal activities. In Europe, after a decade of market
liberalization, which has been specially underlined through
the technological development, organizing the games on
chance is still exempt from the scope of Services directive
on the Internal Market. This means that the EU member
states are entitled to organize and, therefore, to restrict that
freedom only by overriding reasons in the public interest
(like consumer protection), public health and prevention of
fraud under the subsidiary principle. Also, the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) [6] principles
of equal treatment, non-discrimination and proportionality
should be taken into consideration when justifying the
restrictions of free movement.
There are currently two different regimes of the national
regulatory framework within the member states applied in
the area of gambling: one based on licensed operators
providing services within a strictly regulated framework and
another on a strictly controlled monopoly (state owned, or
otherwise) [7]. Different regulatory regimes applied to
various traditional forms of off-line gambling can cause
situations of legal uncertainty, which, among possible
regimes, can be applied to on-line gambling [1]. According
to the recent trends, restrictions imposed to the online
gambling in each member state vary from being lawful to
being illegal. In six member states, on-line gambling is
illegal (Cyprus, Germany, Estonia, Greece, the Netherlands
and Poland) and seven member states impose prohibitions
on specific types of on-line gambling, such as on-line
casinos and on-line games (Belgium, France, Finland,
Hungary, Lithuania, Portugal and Slovakia) [8]. Some
jurisdictions
also
distinguish
home
state
providers
established on their territory and foreign providers, and the
regulation may apply only to home state providers or only to
foreign providers, or to both [1]. The regulators are also
entitled to make a distinction between gambling services
provided
domestically
only
and
services
provided
to
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

residents in foreign jurisdictions (outgoing services). Some
regulators prohibit gambling services from being provided
domestically, but allow gambling operators established on
its territory to provide such services to foreign jurisdiction
only (outgoing services) [3]. These differences are described
in the Table I, where the regulatory matrix for different
situations within the games on chance regulatory framework
is given. The situations detected differ whether the service is
provided by home state or foreign providers and also for
whom the service is provided, whether for home state or for
foreign consumers.
TABLE I. REGULATORY MATRIX
Regulatory matrix
Home state providers
Foreign providers
Home
state
consumers
Home state services
prohibition/monopoly
/license
Incoming services
prohibition/license
Foreign
consumers
Outgoing services
Prohibition/license/
Xxx
Traditionally, land based casinos have been restricted to
particular territory and the regulatory controls have been
applied to that territory, which is not possible to achieve
with on-line gambling [16].
The prohibition aims at preventing the risk of social
harms, such as gambling addiction, gambling by minors,
association with crime and money laundering, consumer
fraud. From the economic point of view, the restrictions
usually form barriers of entry and possibility to operate on
the market for on-line gambling. The result is reduced
supply. According to the authors, the restrictions are only
effective in minimizing the supply if they are effectively
enforced
and
enforcement
may be hampered
by the
gambling operator avoiding the operation from abroad, lack
of resources and/or technological circumvention [19].
Gambling as a state monopoly is always under (or must
be under) control of activities and taken steps are usually in
favour of accomplishing the regulatory objectives [1]. The
“monopolist” is usually under the regulation forced to give a
part of his profits for founding charitable, cultural and
sporting activities. The problem arising in practice is that
state lotteries, for example, are state owned companies and
it is questionable and must be very well regulated how to
organize these founding, bearing in mind strict rules on
competition and state aids.
When regulating on-line gambling, a few policy choices
have been developed in order to limit the gambling on state
monopoly, to charitable entities, outright prohibition, to
license the private gambling operators on liberalized market
[1]. Usual practice in member states is to prohibit gambling,
except to extend expressly allowed by the law [5].
This article is structured in four sections. The structure is
following a development of regulation in the area of games
on chance, with special emphasis at on-line gambling. The
article describes practice of the ECJ and gives an overview
of the EU current regulatory activities in the area.
II.
ECJ CASE LAW
One of the most important regulators in the area of
games on chance at EU level is the European Court of
Justice. The period after the judgement in the Gambelli case
(Case C-243/01 Criminal Proceedings against Pier Giorgio
Gambelli and others [2003] ECR I-13031) [9] , that was a
turning point for the period that came after, we can realize
the ECJ practice development in accordance with growing
liberalization of the services in the area of games on chance.
The reasons for justification of restrictions that were
accepted by the ECJ in the period before the Gambelli case
are not accepted any more. The margin of discretion for the
member states in relation to restrictions for the free
provision of services in this area is tightened up [18].
After a number of judgements in the previous period,
ECJ in Gambelli case underlined that restrictions deriving
from the national legislation, which prohibits the activities
even through collection of bets in the area of sport, are
considered as restriction that can be justified only by taking
into account its goal and proportionality. For the first time,
the ECJ underlined the thesis that restrictions, which were
imposed by the member states, could not be justified if the
same member state at the same time is pursuing a policy of
substantial expansion of betting and gaming at national
level. If participation in lotteries, games of chance and
betting are encouraged by a member state aiming at deriving
the benefit for itself, that state cannot rely on a need to
uphold the public order in order to justify the restrictive
measures.
If the member state gains profit from those activities,
then that profit has to be acquired as only an incidental and
not as a primary benefit. The ECJ states that the restrictions
may be justified if they are required for consumer protection
and for the preservation of social order, taking into account
moral, religious and cultural factors and moral and financial
consequences for individuals and society.
Furthermore, the main objective of such restrictions
must reflect an overriding reason of general interest, such as
a reducing of gaming opportunities. The procurement of
finances for public funds, on the other hand, cannot
constitute justification. The restrictions may not go beyond
what is necessary to attain that objective and must be
applied in a non-discriminatory manner.
In the Gambelli case, the ECJ states that it is for the
national court to consider whether the principle of non-
discrimination has been complied with, and whether, in
practice, the conditions for running betting operations can
be more easily satisfied by home state operators than by
foreign operators. If so, those conditions are discriminatory.
This justification of the national measures that cannot be
justified only by reasons from the Art 46 TEC (now Art 52
TFEU) or by the reasons from the ECJ case law, is
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

developed by a detailed analysis of such restriction from the
aspects of proportionality and not going beyond necessary
to attain the objective. This analysis that began with the
Gambelli case was developed in a number of judgements
that followed.
In Placanica case (Case C-338/04 Criminal Proceedings
against Placanica and Others [2007] ECR I-01891) [10], one
of the most important judgements in the area of on-line
games in that period, the ECJ judgement concerned legality
of criminal sanctions for persons in Italy that dealt with
collection of bets without possessing a licence and police
authorizations for the company that had registered seat
outside the member state (Italy). The ECJ points out that
legislation, which prohibits – on pain of criminal penalties –
the pursuit of activities in the betting and gaming sector
without a licence or a police authorisation issued by the
State, places restrictions on the freedom of establishment and
the freedom to provide services. However, those restrictions
can be justified by moral, religious or cultural reasons, as
well as the morally and financially harmful consequences for
the individual and for society associated with betting and
gaming. Anyhow, the restrictions must nevertheless satisfy
the conditions concerning their proportionality.
III.
HARMONIZATION ACTIVITIES AT EU LEVEL
Beside the fact that the judgements of the ECJ are the
source of secondary law and give solutions to the problems
in this field, an inconsistent application at the national level
gives legal uncertainty [1]. The EU Commission makes an
effort to harmonize national laws in the area of on-line
gambling that has been abandoned and the Commission has
made steps in bringing the infringement proceedings against
the EU member states when there are inconsistencies in the
national regulation systems (The European Commission has
taken steps against the Netherlands with respect to sports
betting, Sweden with respect to
poker tournaments and
sports betting, Germany with respect to Internet gambling
and advertising prohibitions, France and Greece with
respect to sports betting, Denmark, Finland and Hungary
with respect to sports betting and Austria and Italy
concerning casino advertising and sports betting).
The Resolution of European Parliament on the Integrity
of on-line gambling [11], besides the fact that ECJ case law
considers gambling as a service of an economic activity,
states that those are activities of a very special nature, due to
the social and public order and health care aspects linked to
them. The Resolution emphasizes that pure internal market
approach is not appropriate because of highly sensitive
matter and requires of the Commission to pay special
attention to the views of ECJ. That leads to the third period
of ECJ practice case law. In that period, the ECJ is coming
back again to the principles that are similar to the principles
from the period before the Gambelli case. In the area of
freedom to provide services in the gaming sector, the
member
states
again
recall
the
public
interest
as
a
justification for their restrictions in the area of free provision
of services that are provided by the citizens from other
states and, at the same time, they are encouraging those
activities organized by the state aiming at securing the
profits for the state [4].
If the national measure, which restricts free movement,
is not discriminatory on the basis of nationality or the place
of establishment, i.e. it is equally applicable on home state
and foreign services providers, then its restrictions can be
justified by the list of public policy reasons. The restrictions
defined by the member states can be imposed as licences or
authorizations or in a way of giving exclusive right for
organizing the games on chance like state monopoly. Or, it
can even be completely prohibited to organize the games on
chance in a certain state. Just a need for efficient regulation
in the area of games on chance deems for the supervision by
the state on their territory. National authorities in the
gaming sector have to provide licensing at the transparent,
objective and non-discriminatory criteria in line with ECJ
case law and control, if service providers comply with
specific demands for licensing, and to provide regulatory
framework through efficient measures at the national level
[12].
From the ECJ case law it is obvious that the restrictions
can be justified by overriding public interest requirements
such as consumer protection, preventing overspending,
preventing gambling addiction, preventing fraud and other
crime, preserving public order and barring gambling from
being a source of private profit. However, the Court has also
held that financial objectives such as providing for the
financing of charitable and cultural purposes or increasing
tax revenues were not legitimate grounds for justifying
restrictive measures [2].
IV.
CONCLUSION
We cannot expect that the regulation of games on chance
at European level will enable total liberalization of the
games on chance market. However, member states should
stop
to
recall
overriding
public
interest
reasons
as
justifications in the sector of games on chance and, at the
same time, covering the real goal of their regulation, which
is a protection from the foreign concurrence.
In fact, the number of procedures that the Commission
has taken in the last period against the member states
because of their non compliance with European law and
restrictions in the area of games on chance, leads to this
conclusion(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/services/gam
bling_en.htm). The Swiss Institute Study [5] was prepared
as a model for harmonization of laws in that sector at the
European Level, giving a detailed analysis of the national
jurisdictions that regulate games on chance within the EU
member states.
This analysis shows that the regulation framework in the
area of games on chance is mainly governed by the
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

legislation which aims to protect public interest. To achieve
the goal of protecting the public interest, member states
often impose regulatory and other obstacles for provision of
services in the area of games on chance that are contrary to
the European Law.
According to the authors, when considering the cross-
border on-line gambling, as there are different cultures on
gambling issues in the EU, besides the regulations, there
must be common political solutions as well. Measures to
prevent
negative
consequences
of
gambling
must
be
provided (The Swiss Study indicates that the risk of
developing compulsive gambling is 5-7 times higher if you
play poker on the computer than if you go in the ordinary
casino). So, there is a reason why the on-line gaming
operators must comply with the regulatory framework of the
state where the consumer lives and, as stated before, there
should be a political, rather than legal, clarification how to
solve the problems on the European on-line gaming market
[15].
Regarding the role of authority on the Internal Market,
the Internal Market Information System (IMI) has already
indicated good results as a flexible tool for administrative
cooperation between member states. Thus, it should be
considered
whether
IMI
is
right
for
administrative
cooperation on gambling, which can provide cross-border
exchange of information between public authorities. It is
already used for two areas of professional qualifications and
services. The benefits of IMI can be seen as benefits for
member states and benefits for competent authorities. The
benefits for member states are: no IT costs, adaptable to any
administrative structure, secure transfer of data, compliant
with data protection rules, single system to manage. For
competent authorities: easy-to-use, no language problems,
direct link within the EEA, clear procedure and fast
response, help desk support, training material. In the area of
gambling, IMI can work for administrative cooperation on
gambling.
There
are
several
examples
of
possible
cooperation, such as exchange of information on licence
holders mutual assistance in case of suspected fraud,
notification of national conditions imposed on licence
holders and alerts in cases of unlicensed operators (illegal
practice).
The
basic
requirements
for
administrative
cooperation
through
IMI
include:
there
must
be
an
agreement in the area of cooperation, there should be a legal
basis for exchange of personal data, identification of
authorities involved and technical adaptations to the IMI
system (IMI, DG for internal market and services, market,
www.imi net).
The conclusion should be, by taking into consideration
all the aforementioned, that the answer can be given after a
detailed economic analysis of regulatory framework and the
cost-benefit analysis which should lead for a more balanced
approach or, in other words, to see whether a measure goes
beyond what is necessary to achieve the specified policy
aims.
As the authors stated before in this article, in the area of
off-line gambling/ the tendencies are in the line with market
liberalization and
for
the
on-line
gambling
we need
regulations. It is far more difficult to supervise and control
on-line games on chance and effects of on-line gambling on
consumer regarding the time of use, age of consumer and
incomes of service provider. In that context, as we have
already concluded, a special state policy is required
concerning the consequences on the consumer. This service
may have a common policy at EU level, as well as the
realisation at member states level.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Hornle and B. Zammit, “Cross-border Online Gambling
Law and Policy,” Edward Elgar, Publilshing Limited, UK,
2010.
[2]
J. Hőrnle, “Online gambling in the European Union: a Tug of
War without a winner?, Queen Mary University of London,
Legal studies research paper, No 48/2010
[3]
E. Schriever, Conflict and Co-ordination between Diverse
Regulatory
Envoronment,
2004
in
Swiss
Institute
of
Comparative Law, Cross-Border Gambling on the Internet
[4]
J.
Hojnik,
„Cross
border
gambling:Reconciliation
of
controlled expansion and genuine diminution of gambling“,
Conference proceedings from Jean Monnet Conference,
University of Maribor, Faculty of Law, ed. Rajko Knez,
Maribor, 2009
[5]
Swiss Institute of Comparative Law, Study of gambling
services in the Internal Market of the European Union, Final
Report,
14
June
2006
available
at
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/gambling/docs/study1_en.
pdf [retrieved: September, 2013]
[6]
Treaty
on
the
functioning
of
the
European
Union,
consolidated version from 30.3.2010, OJ C 83/47
[7]
Green paper on-line gambling in the Internal Market, SEC
(2011) 321 final, European Commission, Bruxelles 24.3.2011
COM (2011) 128 final
[8]
The Council Presidency Progress Report of 27 November
2008
available
at
http://register.consilium.
Europa.eu/pdf/en/08/st16/st16022.en08.pdf
[9]
Case C-243/01 Criminal Proceedings against Piergiorgio
Gambelli and others [2003] ECR I-13031
[10] Case C-338/04 Criminal Proceedings against Placanica and
Others [2007] ECR I-01891
[11] Resolution on the Integrity of Online Gambling of 10 March
2009, P6_TA(2009)0097 and Report oft he Commission on
the Internal Market and Consumer Protection (A6-0064/2009)
[12] Council
of
the
European
Union
Conclusions
on
the
framework for gambling and betting in the EU member states
3057th COMPETITIVENESS (Internal Market, Industry,
Research and Space) Council meeting Brussels, 10 December
2010
Available
at
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressd
ata/en/intm/118398.pdf
[13] http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/services/gambling_en.htm
retrieved [September, 2013]
[14] Study of gambling services in the internal marketeđ of the
European
union,
Final
Report
14
June
2006
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/services/docs/gambling/st
udy1_en.pdf [September, 2013]
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

[15] C. Schaldemose, “Regulating gambling: the role of the
authority” 12.10.2010
[16] ECA European Casino association: (Online) Gambling in
Europe-What
is
at
stake,
available
at
www.europeancasinoassociation.org [September, 2013]
[17] Online Gaming A Gamble or a sure bet?, KPMG International
available at www.kpmg.com [September 2013]
[18] A. Kaburakis, Europeana Union Law, Gambling and Sport
Betting – European Court of Justice, Member State Case law
and Policy, in Sports, Betting Law and Policy, eds. P.
Anderson, I. Blackshaw,
R.
Siekmann and J. Soek, J.,
Heidelberg, Germany, Springer Verlag. December, 2011, pp.
27-97.
Available
at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1977342
[September, 2013].
[19] S. Planzer, and H. Wardle, The Comparative Effectiveness of
Regulatory Approaches and the Impact of Advertising on
Propensity
for
Problem
Gambling,
October
1,
2011).
Responsible Gambling Fund, 2011, pp. 1-87. Available at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2045052 [September, 2013].
[20] A. Kaburakis, ECJ Jurisprudence and Recent Developments
in EU Sport Betting, EU sport, Law and Policy, eds. S.
Gardiner,
R.
Parrish,
and
R.
Siekmann,
Hague,
Netherlands: T.M.C. ASSER International Sports Law
Centre
Press,
(April
30,
2009),
available
at
SSRN
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1496639 [September, 2013].
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

