Investigations to Deploy e-Services for Cocoa Fair-trade Farmers in Africa 
Henry Imaze Ehi 
University of Geneva 
Switzerland 
imazeeh0@etu.unige.ch 
 
Jean-Marc Seigneur 
University of Geneva 
Switzerland 
Jean-Marc.Seigneur@reputaction.com
 
 
Abstract— This paper focuses on the possibility of deploying e-
service for fair trade cocoa producers in Africa in order to 
reach 
international 
market 
audiences 
of 
buyers 
and 
consumers. We have used a qualitative research methodology 
to gather information from 110 fair-trade farmers from 
Nigeria and Ghana. We found that although Africa has an 
important growing rate of new mobile phone subscribers, e-
service could still be difficult to be deployed for fair-trade 
farmers in Nigeria and Ghana without proxies who would help 
them to be connected.  
Keywords-Information Technology; Poverty Alleviation; 
Connection; Mobile Phones; E-service 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 1998, only very few people in Sub-Saharan Africa had 
access to computers and telephones [1]. However, mobile 
phone users in Africa have experienced a fundamental 
growth. This growth is concentrated in the urban cities. 
There has also been a phenomenal growth in the number of 
computer users. From 2007-2011, it is assumed that a quarter 
of people in the developing countries were online [2]. There 
is still some increase in mobile phones usage in Africa [3]. In 
Africa, mobile phone users use a lot their phone for financial 
reasons in addition to simply making phone calls [7]. What is 
still lacking in Africa is broadband access capable of 
handling much higher volumes of traffic than what is 
generated by voice services. This type of network 
infrastructure is traditionally underdeveloped in Africa. The 
lack of suitable infrastructure has become a significant 
problem. In Africa, it is not uncommon to see a huge amount 
of people live mostly in the rural areas and these people 
living outside the urban towns and cites have not made 
telephone calls and do not have access to telephony [6]. 
Recent development concerns undersea fiber optics cable 
connecting Africa to the world communication networks [4]. 
Still, one may wonder if cocoa producers mostly dominated 
by small-scale farmers benefit from this increased access. 
More precisely, we have studied if fair-trade farmers from 
Nigeria and Ghana can easily have access to e-services.  Do 
they also experience the digital divide, which underlines 
disparities in the aggregate ownership of personal computers, 
access to broadband, telephone usage across demographic 
settlements intra and inter countries [5]. 
The following Figure 1 depicts the level of connection 
and access penetration in Africa compared to the rest of the 
world, according to [9]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Acces Penetration and Users in Africa [9] 
From our perspective, connection in Sub-Saharan Africa 
is a paradigm shift in urban areas in that, it is not only a 
medium for dissemination and transmission of information, 
it is also a social arena for people to exchange ideas (Social 
Media), a market place, and above all a catalyst in 
integrating Sub-Sahara Africa to the global exchange system. 
This paper investigates the possibility of deploying e-
services to the rural fair trade farmers in Nigeria and Ghana. 
In Section 2, we present our research methodology, which 
explains how data was collected and analyzed as well as 
methods used. Section 3 discusses the challenges to e-service 
in rural cocoa farming Communities in Africa. In Section 4, 
we conclude and mention our future work. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
We first present the study area in Nigerian and then the 
study area in Ghana.  
A. Nigeria Study Area 
The study was carried out in Oshogbo, South Western 
part of Nigeria. This geographic zone was selected due to the 
high density of cocoa producers in this region. The proximity 
of this region to Lagos, which is the commercial hub of 
Nigeria, was another reason for the choice. 
 The Nigeria cocoa board was dissolved in 1986 and 
replaced with cocoa association of Nigeria and that was the 
beginning of complete deregulation in Nigeria. Respondents 
from seven villages around the Oshogbo were picked. A total 
of 37 cocoa producers were sampled randomly from seven 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

villages. 
They 
were 
interviewed 
using 
structured 
questionnaires and they were mainly rural farmers, mainly 
small scale or family oriented small farmers.  
Our concerned was to know if these farmers had access 
to the Web. We asked if they had mobile phones connected 
to the Web, if they were connected to any social media or if 
they had a Web site or Web page for their farm. 
We wanted to know if these farmers could easily have 
access to e-services designed for them. 
In urban areas in Nigeria, access to the Web, though it is 
still very slow, has permeated the society compared to the 
rural areas where 80% of cocoa farmers live. Nigeria cocoa 
export has experienced a tremendous growth over the years, 
ranging from a mere £215.2m in 2006 to a whopping 
$900.2m in 2012 [8].  
Figure 2 below shows that most cocoa producers in 
Nigeria are still very much backward in having access to 
mobile phones and none of them had Internet access or a 
Web site or page. 
  
 
Figure 2. Farmers with and without a mobile phone subscription 
Source: from our own fieldwork 
B. Ghana Study Area 
 Unlike in Nigeria, Ghana main export is cocoa and 
Ghana’s cocoa business is still very much partially 
deregulated. Ghana cocoa board, in short (COCOBOD), is 
still very much on the limelight in cocoa business in Ghana.  
This study was conducted in the southern part of Ghana, 
to be precise in Kumasi rural areas of Obogu1 and Obogu2, 
Perminase - Bomfa and Odubi. A total of 75 respondents 
were selected based on densities of people in this locality, as 
cocoa farmers, and as certified cocoa farmers to two labels. 
One important reason for the choice of this study is the 
fact that Kumasi is the highest region where cocoa is 
produced in Ghana with about 56% of cocoa produced. 
A total of 75 respondents were interviewed using 
structured questionnaires and the application of focus group. 
The respondents were mainly from the rural areas randomly 
selected from five villages mainly fair-trade farmers and 
UTZ [13] certified farmers. Fair-trade is by definition a 
labeling organization established to help farmers from the 
South adequate access to fair market, by meeting production 
standards to strengthen their economic positions, product 
sustainability, and to alleviate them from poverty. UTZ 
Kapeh means ”Good Coffee” in Mayan language in Mexico. 
UTZ certified famers are farmers certified by UTZ 
organization as standard for cocoa, coffee and tea production 
with responsible and sustainable production practices that 
would ultimately lead to poverty alleviation, quality and 
responsible production process. 
 
 
Figure 3. Farmers with and without a mobile phone subscription 
Source: from our own fieldwork 
Figure 3 above shows that a higher number of farmers in 
Ghana have mobile phone subscriptions compared to Nigeria   
but none of them have Internet access or a Web site for their 
farm. 99.9% of them had no clue about what is a Web site by 
the way. 
III. 
CHALLENGES TO DEPLOY E-SERVICE IN RURAL 
COCOA FARMING COMMUNITIES IN AFRICA 
  Africa has only 7.0% presence online and 15.6% 
penetration on average [9]. Thus, it is not shocking to find in 
the previous sections that online access has not taken deep 
root in Africa, with the exception of South Africa. However, 
there are more challenges faced by most African countries 
that still put them away from realizing robust information 
technology sector. 
According to International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU), “the estimates that the world broadband prices is $77 
while the African average is $206 per 100 kilobit per month 
and also the limited fixed lines in sub-Sahara Africa are 
problematic as well, increased coverage and lower cost 
depend largely on the spread of wireless technologies” [10]. 
The cost of connection in Nigeria is much higher 
compared to cost of connection in Europe. In Nigeria for 
instance, mobile phones cost around $35 per month for 250 
MB download, which is by all manner of definition 
expensive for the African middle class left alone the poor 
rural cocoa farmers. 
In Ghana, there are six licensed mobile and Internet 
service providers. Amongst is MTN, as the dominant in 
telecommunication and in Nigeria as well. Apart from the 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

expensive price paid per minute coupled with mere 250MB 
upload, the farmers are too poor to shoulder the high cost of 
connection in Ghana. The poor infrastructure is also another 
bane. There are areas where people have very weak signal. 
That has reduced the impact of mobile telephony for those 
with mobiles in the rural areas, let alone connection where 
fixed lines are in very drastic short supply. 
The lack of fibers optics connection in Africa is another 
challenge. Most of the connections are on KU-Band and 
transmission is weak and often interrupted when it rains. 
Though under sea water fibers optics is currently under 
construction in Africa that would connect Africa, Europe and 
Asia, not until the project is completed Africa would still 
remain the most under connected in the world, with a mere 
7% online users. 
The poverty level in Sub-Saharan Africa is another 
problem exacerbating the challenges of connection and the 
attendant back clash it has on the farmer’s participation on 
social media. A continent, where 70% of its people still live 
on less than a dollar a day, is still very much not ready to pay 
the high price for connection [12]. This would continue to 
put the poor cocoa farmers on the defensive and make them 
susceptible to exploitation. The implementation of fair-trade 
traceability through e-services would help both the producer 
and the consumer facilitate quality, safe and traceable 
products [11]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the course of this research, we found out that not 
enough farmers have Internet connections and, even phones. 
Thus, although Africa has an important growing rate of new 
mobile phones subscribers, e-services could still be difficult 
to be deployed for fair-trade farmers in Nigeria and Ghana 
without proxies who would help them to be connected. This 
initial study has showed that in order to deploy e-services in 
those countries, human proxies, meaning people who would 
be paid an Internet connection to be shared with the farmers, 
who need access for the e-service, would be mandatory.  
Our future work would look at the possibility of a proxy 
pilot project in Nigeria and Ghana, towards connecting fair-
trade farmers to the Internet.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the Centre Universitaire d’Informatique (CUI) de 
l’Université de Genève. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
W. Marks. K. Kaoru and O. D. Wambogo, “ICT in Sub-
Saharan Africa: Success Stories”, World Bank, pp. 339 – 
342, 2010. 
[2] 
ITU, “World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators 
Database”, 2011. 
[3] 
ITU, “World Telecommunication Indicators Database”, 
2008. 
[4] 
A. Manka and C.-P. Punam, “Success Stories from a 
Dynamic Continent”, USA, 2010. 
[5] 
S. Sonaike, “The Internet and the Dilemma of Africa 
Development,” Gazette, vol. 1, pp. 41 – 61, 2004. 
[6] 
UNDP, “Human Development Report 2001: Making New 
Technologies Work for Human Development”, 2001. 
[7] 
Africa Partnership Forum, “ICT in Africa: Boosting 
Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction”, Proceeding of 
the 10th meeting of the Africa Partnership Forum Tokyo 
Japan. Tokyo, Japan, 2008. 
[8] 
Daily Independent, “Nigeria realized $900m from export 
of cocoa, cocoa products in 2012”, 
http://www.dailyindependentnig.com/2013/03/nigeria-
realised-900m-from-export-of-cocoa-cocoa-products-in-
2012-aganga/ [Accessed: 01-09-2013]. 
[9] 
I. W. Stats, “Internet Usage Statistics for Africa,” 2013. 
[Online]. Available: 
www.http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats1.htm. 
[Accessed: 01-09-2013]. 
[10] 
ITU, “ITU, Telecommunications/ICT markets and trends 
in Africa 2007,” 2007. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-
D/ict/statistics/material/af_report07.pdf Accessed 
[Accessed: 01-09-2013]. 
[11] 
U. O. Linus, “Traceability in Agriculture and food supply 
chain: A review of basic concepts, technological 
implications, and future prospects”, Journal: Food, 
Agriculture and Environment, Vol. 1, Issue 1, pp. 101 –
106, 2003. 
[12] 
 G. Rossi and M. San, “IT Emerging Markets”, IT 
Professional, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 2 – 3, 2012.  
[13] 
 UTZ, https://www.utzcertified.org/ [Accessed: 01-09-
2013]. 
 
 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

