A Real-Time Disaster-Related Information Sharing System
Based on the Utilization of Twitter
Osamu Uchida∗, Masafumi Kosugi†, Gaku Endo‡, Takamitsu Funayama§, Keisuke Utsu¶,
Sachi Tajima∥, Makoto Tomita∗∗, Yoshitaka Kajita††, and Yoshiro Yamamoto‡‡
∗Dept. of Human and Information Science, Tokai University, Japan
Email: o-uchida@tokai.ac.jp
†Dept. of Human and Information Science, Tokai University, Japan (Currently, Yahoo Japan Corporation)
‡Graduate School of Engineering, Tokai University, Japan
§Graduate School of Science and Technology, Tokai University, Japan
¶Dept. of Communication and Network Engineering, Tokai University, Japan
∥Student Project Center, Tokai University, Japan
∗∗Dept. of Arts, Tokai University, Japan
††Dept. of Civil Engineering, Tokai University, Japan
‡‡Dept. of Mathematics, Tokai University, Japan
Abstract—In order to minimize the damage in case of a disaster, it
is important to collect and spread accurate information quickly.
Therefore, utilizing Twitter at the time of accidents has been
gaining attention. In this paper, we propose a real-time disaster-
related information sharing system based on the utilization of
Twitter. The proposed system consists of two functions, the one
is a disaster-related information tweeting function that automat-
ically attaches user’s accurate current geo-location information
(address) and the hashtag of the form “#(municipality name)
disaster,” and the other is a disaster-related information mapping
function that plots neighboring disaster-related tweets on a map
in real time. We implemented the system on a linux server and
conducted a veriﬁcation experiment. The results of the experiment
verify the usefulness of the proposed system.
Keywords–Twitter, tweet mapping; disaster-related information;
disaster mitigation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In order to minimize the damage in case of a disaster,
it is important to collect and spread accurate information
quickly. Therefore, utilizing Twitter at the time of accidents
has been gaining attention. The primary reasons for this are
that Twitter is a social media having the characteristics of high
immediacy, sharing information is very easy using Twitter,
and the number of Twitter users is very large. In recent large
scale natural disasters, such as the Grate East Japan Earthquake
occurred in 2011, Hurricane Sandy, a Category 3 Superstorm
which hit the U. S. East Coast in 2012, and Typhoon Haiyan
which is called Typhoon Yolanda in the Philippines and caused
severe damage to the islands of Leyte in 2013, Twitter was
utilized as a communication tool by many people [1][2]. Due
to the reasons mentioned above, lots of Japanese national
and local governmental agencies have taken a great deal of
utilizing Twitter in order to collect and distribute disaster-
related information in recent years. For example, in Wako City,
Saitama Prefecture, Japan, the government decided that the
hashtag “#和光市災害” (“和光市” means Wako City and “災
害” means disaster) is used as an ofﬁcial hashtag for reporting
disaster situations in Wako City and conducted a disaster drill
in order that citizens may get familiar with using this hashtag.
Using the hashtag of the form “# (municipality name) disaster”
has been spreading to other municipalities in Japan.
By the way, in order to optimize the utilization of disaster-
related tweets in case of disasters, it is desirable that these
tweets are geo-referenced accurately, that is, have geotags (lon-
gitude and latitude coordinates information). This is because
geo-referenced tweets can be plotted on a map automatically,
and both governmental agencies and disaster victims can ob-
tain desired information by taking advantage of this map easily
and promptly. However, it is well known that the percentage
of Twitter users who permit the use of location services on
Twitter is small, and then the ratio of geotagged tweets is
quite small. For example, Cheng et al. found that only 0.42%
of the tweets in their dataset were geotagged [3]. If tweets
contain some geo-related information, such as building name
or street address, it may be possible that obtaining longitude
and latitude coordinates information by applying geoparsing
technique [4][5] and geocoding. However, it is impossible to
identify the location from tweet text by geoparsing completely
because, for example, there are a dozen of “central park” all
over the world.
Moreover, considering the active utilization of tweets
posted during disasters, these tweets should contain appropriate
hashtags. During past disasters, the number of tweets increased
dramatically, then hashtags played an important role in infor-
mation retrieving from the stupendous tweets [6]. For example,
if we access https://twitter.com/search?q=%23earthquake, we
can obtain tweets that contain the hashtag “#earthquake.”
In this study, based on these backgrounds, we have imple-
mented a real-time disaster-related information sharing system
utilizing Twitter that supports self-, mutual-, and public-help
at the occurrence of a disaster (Figure 1 shows the top page
of the proposed system). The system consists of the following
two functions:
(1)
a disaster-related information tweeting function that
automatically attaches both the user’s current geo-
location information (address) and the hashtag of the
form “#(市区町村名) 災害” (that means #(municipality
name) disaster), and
(2)
a disaster information mapping function that plots
tweets posted using the function (1) on a map.
In this paper, we describe the outline of the proposed
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Figure 1. Top page of the proposed system
system, and report the results of the veriﬁcation experiment
that was conducted in June 2015.
II.
UTILIZATION OF TWITTER IN CASE OF DISASTER
In recent catastrophic natural disasters, Twitter was widely
used for communication tool [1]. For example, it is widely
known that during the Great East Japan Earthquake occurred
on March 11, 2011, thousands of people took advantage of
Twitter to retrieve information on the tsunami, shelter, the
state of public transportation services, and so on [2][7][8][9]
[10]. More than 20 million tweets about Hurricane Sandy were
posted between Oct. 27 and Nov. 1, 2012 [11]. Over a quarter-
million tweets were posted during the ﬁrst 72 houors after
Typhoon Haiyan destroyed large areas of the Philippines and
crisis map was made with the aid of crowd sourcing [1][12].
When a ﬂood disaster caused by a heavy rainfall was occurred
on September 10, 2015, in Joso City, Japan, a victim who
posted a tweet with address for a rescue request was saved by
a rescue squad.
III.
REAL-TIME DISASTER-RELATED INFORMATION
SHARING SYSTEM
A. Disaster-Related Information Tweeting Function
A disaster-related information tweeting function was im-
plemented as a web-based application on a linux server using
PHP and JavaScript (Figure 2). This function has the following
features:
(1)
Tweets are posted as tweets from the user’s own
Twitter account (Twitter authentication is conducted
at the start of the use of the function).
(2)
Information of the user’s current geo-location infor-
mation (the longitude and latitude coordinates) is
acquired by utilizing location speciﬁcation functions,
such as the Global Positioning System (GPS), and
based on the acquired location information, both ad-
dress of the user’s current location and a hashtag
for disaster reports of the form “#(市区町村名) 災
害” (#(municipality name) disaster) is automatically
attached to the tweet. In the case where the user
requires rescue, the hashtag to be attached becomes
Figure 2. Disaster-related information tweeting function
Figure 3. Selection of the type of the hashtag to be attached and whether the
user attaches a photo or not
of the form “#(市区町村名) 災害 要救援” (“要救援”
means rescue requirement (Figure 3).
(3)
If the user enable location services on Twitter, the
tweet is geotagged.
(4)
An image can be attached (Figure 3).
Both address, which is determined by reverse geocoding
(Yahoo! Japan Developer Network, Yahoo! Reverse Geocoder
API [13] is used in this study) the location (the longitude
and latitude) acquired by W3C Geolocation API [14], and
hashtag for disaster reports are automatically attached to
tweets. For example, the acquired location information is that
the latitude and longitude are 35.361743 north and 139.273691
east, respectively, the address of the user’s current location
is determined as “神奈川県平塚市北金目 4 丁目 1” (4-1
Kitakaname, Hiratsuka City, Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan) and
the hashtag is determined as “#平塚市災害” (#Hiratsuka City
disaster) (if relief is need, it becomes “#平塚市災害 要救援”
(#Hiratsuka City disaster rescue requirement)). This function
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Figure 4. An example tweet posted by the proposed system
allows the user to attach images stored in their device. Users
also can take a photos to be attached when they post tweets if
their devices are smartphones or tablet PCs. The application
uses Twitter API [15] to post texts and images. The maximum
ﬁle size of the image that can be posted by Twitter API is
about 3MB. Therefore, the application shrinks the ﬁle size
of the image to be posted by decreasing the resolution of it
before posting. Figure 4 shows an example Tweet posted by
the proposed disaster information tweeting function. As you
can see from the ﬁgure, the address of the current location “
神奈川県平塚市北金目 4 丁目 1” is written at the beginning
of the tweet and the hashtag “#平塚市災害” corresponding to
the current location is attached.
B. Disaster-Related Information Mapping Function
The function to plot tweets posted using the disaster-
related information tweeting function stated in the previous
subsection, that is, tweets that are containing hashtags “#(市
区町村名) 災害” (#(municipality name) disaster) or “#(市
区町村名) 災害 要救援” (#(municipality name) disaster
rescue requirement) on a map is implemented as a web-based
application on the linux server using PHP and JavaScript
(Figure 5). This application has the following features:
(1)
It is available for a person without any twitter account
to use.
(2)
It identiﬁes the municipality name from the user’s
current location information (longitude and latitude)
and displays tweets containing the municipality name
in the hashtag on a map. For example, if the user’s
current location is 平塚市 (Hiratsuka City), tweets
with “#平塚市災害” (#Hiratsuka CIty Disaster) or
“#平塚市災害 要救援” (#Hiratsuka CIty Disaster
rescue requirement) are pinned on the map.
(3)
Tweets with geotags are mapped by using the latitude
and longitude. Tweets without geotags are mapped by
geocoding the address written at the head of the tweet
(Yahoo! Japan Developer Network, Yahoo! Geocoder
API [16] is used in this study).
(4)
The shape and/or color of the icon that is used to
indicate the position of the tweet change depending
on the type of the attached hashtag (whether it is the
rescue requirement hashtag or not) and whether an
image is attached or not (Table 1).
(5)
The places of shelters within 2km from the current
location of the user are displayed on the map. If user
click (tap) an icon indicating a shelter, the shortest
route from the current location of the user to the
Figure 5. Disaster-related information mapping function
shelter is displayed by using Yahoo! Japan route map
API [17] (Figure 6).
(6)
If the municipal government of the current location of
the user has an ofﬁcial Twitter account, the latest 10
Tweets of the account will be also shown.
Using this function, we can get neighboring disaster-related
information in nearly real time easily. We believe that the
function is useful both governmental agencies and disaster
victims, that is, supports self-, mutual-, and public-help at the
occurrence of a disaster.
IV.
VERIFICATION EXPERIMENT
From 10:00 am to 4:00 pm, June 3, 2015, we conducted
a veriﬁcation experiment jointly with “The Study Group on
Collection and Sharing of Disaster Volunteer Information
Utilizing ICT, Kanagawa Prefectural Activity Support Center.”
There were 41 participants. The participants tweeted 217
Tweets in all. Generally, the system operated well and many
of participants expressed their impression that by using the
proposed system they were able to post tweets with address of
their location and the corresponding hashtag of the form “#(市
区町村名) 災害” (#(municipality name) disaster) very easily.
However, the following issues were noticed:
(1)
When the ﬁle size of the attached image was large, the
uploading time was long depending on the connection.
It sometime caused time-out error of the system.
(2)
When it was used indoors, geotagging feature was in-
accurate and the address attached to the tweet deviated
from the user’s actual address.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

TABLE I. ICONS FOR TWEET PLOTTING
icon
image
rescue requirement
geotag
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Figure 6. An example of displaying the shortest route from the current
location of the user to the shelter the user selected
To solve the problem (1), we planned incorporating a
feature that will reduce the ﬁle size of the image to be attached
on the client-side device. For the problem (2), it is difﬁcult
to ﬁnd a fundamental solution. However, we would like to
consider that if the deviation estimated by the value of the
accuracy obtained by W3C Geolocation API is large, only
municipality name will be attached in the tweet.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We implemented a real-time disaster-related information
sharing system with two functions: a disaster-related infor-
mation tweeting function and a disaster-related information
mapping function, and moreover conducted veriﬁcation exper-
iment. By using the proposed system, users can post disaster
related tweets with geo-location information (address) and
the corresponding hashtag of the form “#(市区町村名) 災害”
(#(municipality name) disaster) easily even if they do not now
where they are. In the future, we will try to improve the
system by realizing features such as, for example, automatic
useful tweets extraction [18] and tweet classiﬁcation according
to the contents of tweets, aggregating similar tweets, and
the personalization of the tweet map according to the users’
attributes, as well as improving and ﬁxing the issues revealed
by the veriﬁcation experiment. The proposed system can be
basically used only in Japan. Therefore, we will try to extend
the system to so as to be used throughout the world.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the members of The Study
Group on Collection and Sharing of Disaster Volunteer Infor-
mation Utilizing ICT, Kanagawa Prefectural Activity Support
Center for their cooperation in the veriﬁcation experiment.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Meier, Digital Humanitarians: How Big Data Is Changing the Face
of Humanitarian Response, CRC Press, 2015.
[2]
B. D. M. Peary, R. Shaw, and Y. Takeuchi, “Utilization of Social
Media in the East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami and its Effectiveness,”
Journal of Natural Disaster Science, Vol. 34, No. 1, 2012, pp. 3–18.
[3]
Z. Cheng, J. Caverlee, and K. Lee, “You Are Where You Tweet: A
Content-Based Approach to Geo-Locating Twitter Users,” Proc. 19th
ACM Int’l Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
2010, pp. 759–768.
[4]
X. Liu, F. Wei, S. Zhang, and M. Zhou, “Named Entity Recognition
for Tweets,” ACM Trans. Intelligent Systems and Technology, Vol. 4,
No. 1, Article No. 3, 2013.
[5]
J. Gelernter and S. Balaji, “An Algorithm fo Local Geoparshing of
Microtext,” GeoInformatica, Vol. 17, No. 4, 2013, pp. 635–667.
[6]
L. Potts, J. Seitzinger, D. Jones, and A. Harrison, “Tweeting Disaster:
Hashtag Constructions and Collisions,” Proc. 29th ACM Int’l Confer-
ence on Design of communication, 2011, pp. 235–240.
[7]
F. Toriumi, T. Sasaki, K. Shinoda, K. Kazama, S. Kurihara, and I.
Nodao, “Information Sharing on Twitter during the 2011 Catastrophic
Earthquake,” Proc. 22nd Int’l Conference on World Wide Web Com-
panion, 2013, pp. 1025–1028.
[8]
S. Doan, B.-K. H. Vo, and N. Collier, “An Analysis of Twitter Messages
in the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake,” Lecture Notes of the Institute for
Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engi-
neering, Vol. 91, 2012, pp. 58–66.
[9]
A. Acar and Y. Muraki, “Twitter for Crisis Communication: Lessons
Learned from Japan’s Tsunami Disaster,” International Journal of Web
Based Communities, Vol. 7, No.3, 2011, pp. 392–402.
[10]
H. Wilensky, “Twitter as a Navigator for Stranded Commuters during
the Great East Japan Earthquake,” Proc. 11th Int’l ISCRAM Conference,
2014, pp. 695–704.
[11]
A tweet from @twitter on Nov. 3, 2012, https://twitter.com/twitter/
status/264408082958934016 [accessed: 2015-10-03].
[12]
iRevolutions,
“Live
Crisis
Map
of
Disaster
Damage
Reported
on
Social
Media,”
http://irevolution.net/2013/11/11/
live-crisis-map-of-disaster-damage-reported-on-social-media/
[accessed: 2015-10-03].
[13]
Yahoo!
Japan
Developer
Network,
Yahoo!
Reverse
Geocoder
API,
http://developer.yahoo.co.jp/webapi/map/openlocalplatform/v1/
reversegeocoder.html [accessed: 2015-10-03] (in Japanese).
[14]
W3C
Geolocation
API
Speciﬁcation,
http://dev.w3.org/geo/api/
spec-source.html [accessed: 2015-10-03].
[15]
Twitter Developers, https://dev.twitter.com/ [accessed: 2015-10-03].
[16]
Yahoo! Japan Developer Network, Yahoo! Geocoder API, http://
developer.yahoo.co.jp/webapi/map/openlocalplatform/v1/geocoder.html
[accessed: 2015-10-03] (in Japanese).
[17]
Yahoo! Japan Developer Network, Yahoo! Route Map API, http://
developer.yahoo.co.jp/webapi/map/openlocalplatform/v1/routemap.html
[accessed: 2015-10-03] (in Japanese).
[18]
R. Kitajima, R. Kamimura, O. Uchida, and F. Toriumi, “Neural Potential
Learning for Tweets Classiﬁcation and Interpretation,” 7th International
Conference on Soft Computing and Pattern Recognition, 2015 (Ac-
cepted).
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

