Clothes that Coordinate Your Fashion Based on Previous Choices 
 
Mio Fukuda 
Graduate School of Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga,Japan 
cc010072@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
 
Abstract ― This paper concerns research on "Talking 
Closet" system that support coordination of your everyday 
fashion. It involves fashion coordination via the "Clothes 
communicating, and making fashion proposals" when 
clothes are in your hand in front of the closet, making the 
act of choosing clothes when the system is used more 
enjoyable. Experiments took place with subjects and the 
feel of the operation and significance of the system verified. 
The significant nature of this system was proved as a result 
of the experiment. 
 
Keywords - fashion coordination; recommendation system; 
feeling;  IC tag; multi-agent system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays fashion not only involves clothing but is also 
used in a broader sense. For example, fashion is involved in 
a lot of things of our lives, including hairstyles, footwear, 
makeup, recreation, housing, ways of thinking, food, art, 
and so on. Fashion can reflect the age, society, and lifestyle 
modifications with reality. In addition, fashion is now used 
to emphasize self-expression a lot more than ever before. 
Fashion is now also focusing on tools that can use one’s 
own sensibility and intellect. Moreover, when you put on 
your favorite clothes you can improve the way you feel, or 
by putting on clothes that differ what from you always wear, 
too. Choosing clothes to put on can help you in recognizing 
your own possibilities and can be a form of control, both 
also quite significant matters. 
The variety of fashion is extremely diverse throughout the 
world, with the combinations being basically infinite. 
People’s choice of fashion is in reality, however, influenced 
by the cost, trends, culture, society, and religion, etc. 
Making that choice can involve internal communication and 
enrich your self-awareness, being based on fresh discoveries 
and failures. However, it can also involve psychological 
stress for some people now. People nowadays can find it 
difficult to find the time to coordinate their fashion within a 
limited time in the morning and when they need to take into 
consideration 
the 
various 
abovementioned 
elements. 
Moreover, a vicious circle can occur in that case the onus of 
your fashion coordination can ever increase, along with the 
conditions that should be considered if the target situation is 
important, thus making it impossible to determine very 
easily. Young people also generally don’t have many 
clothes, thus making it even more difficult to coordinate 
new styles of clothing.  
This study therefore proposes an unprecedented system 
wherein the coordination of clothing is assisted through 
quasi-interactions of the clothing and guidelines from past 
experiences in solving the abovementioned problems, being 
intended for use in assisting with coordination of clothing. 
This paper describes the related research in Section 2, and 
states the outline of this system in Section 3. Details of the 
trial production built system are given in Section 4. Section 
5 reports an experimental result and interpretation. 
II. 
ASSOCIATED STUDY 
An extremely large number of fashion coordination 
support systems have taken place to date [1][2][3]. 
This research was first directed to a system and method 
of providing a virtual fashion closet [1]. The system 
coordinates clothing by combining two or more fashion 
items via a Virtual Closet on a computer. In some 
embodiments the Virtual Closet system can recommend 
outfits based on the weather, season, or the user's calendar. 
In addition, a Virtual Closet social network site can be made 
available. The Virtual Closet social network can be used to 
allow friends to view each other's Virtual Closets, 
recommend outfits to one another, recommend fashion items 
to buy, recommend fashion items to get rid of, recommend 
outfits to wear at a particular event, share and borrow each 
other's fashion items, or otherwise provide an appropriate 
social networking environment via the Virtual Closet. 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Illustration of fashion items displayed 
 
19
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

This research then involves garments being presented to  
the user via a computer and a database of garments, wherein 
the database of garments includes parameters for at least 
some of the garments represented by records in that database, 
with the parameters including at least the type of garment, 
data on any plurality of garment types, on each type of 
plurality of garments, a set of tolerance ranges for that 
garment type, the user’s measurements, as obtained from the 
consumer or a source derived from the consumer, the 
measurements of garments in the database, comparing the 
user’s measurements to the garment measurements, giving 
the garments a score from the database of garments based on 
their measurements, the user’s measurements and a set of 
tolerance ranges for each garment based on its type, and the  
presentation to the user with a computer generated filtered 
list of garments from the database in order, or at least 
approximately, according to those scores [2]. 
However, the act of choosing clothes while considering 
the computer system gives the user the interval separated 
from daily life, and it doesn't become the one to look forward 
to coordination though these existing fashion coordination 
support systems are convenient to support the acquisition of 
the dissemination and the skill for the user to choose clothes. 
There is also a psychological sense of resistance to accepting 
fashion coordination that a system has one-sidedly decided 
upon. The user making their own choice is necessary, and, if 
possible, the act of doing so enjoyable. It is necessary to 
achieve a process wherein the system enables a situation in 
which clothes are chosen very naturally in daily life in 
ensuring that the user is not psychologically affected by the 
system, with no resulting burden and the person making the 
final decision. This approach therefore involves each of the 
individual clothing plugging itself to the person. 
III. 
OUTLINE OF SYSTEM 
This system supports the user making judgments in real 
time and interactively by each of the clothes wishing to be 
selected and based on variety of knowledge concerning 
fashion coordination and its own particular features, past 
history of being worn, and the day’s schedule, etc. 
A. Operational procedure 
Figure 2 shows the system configuration. The user first 
registers their feelings and purposes of the day into the 
system. The registration of feelings is achieved by choosing 
a color from a palette. The user then needs to stand in front 
of the closet. At this time the clothes that best matches the 
chosen color image and purpose insist that they be chosen 
because of their uniqueness. It also starts to insist that it be 
chosen, if the different clothing is touch. The user therefore 
needs to feel, after having picked some specific clothing, 
gratitude for choosing the clothing. At this point, and if 
the user has selected the top clothes the clothing at the 
bottom start to insist from the viewpoint of compatibility 
with the top. Finally, the user makes a decision that is based 
on the insistence of the various clothing. The coordination 
then finally decided upon is then stored in the data base with 
information input that includes the date and the purpose, etc. 
(Figure 2). 
B. Mounting tool 
Figure 3 shows IC tag and IC tag Reader which the user has 
it strapped to his hand. Specified clothing is then recognized 
by the IC tag on the pertinent hanger. The IC tag reader of 
"Yubitan" of AP-REFI NE INC.  Co. and key ring type 
IC tags of WATADA PRINTING CO., LTD were used. The 
clothing was thereby identified with that equipment and the 
clothes "Touched" in daily life recognized, and cooperation 
within the system thus achieved. The intention to equip with 
the reader in hand mentioned is that this device is available 
to use in a wide area, not just the closet. In addition, the 
shape of clothes not ruined by adding the IC tag that is not 
added directly to clothes it set in suspenders and individual 
information can be prevented from leaking.  The aim with 
the system was to create an enjoyable feeling after having 
chosen some 
clothing, thus making communication 
important. The data was managed by a terminal PC. A 
prototype system for trial purposes was constructed using 
Java on a Windows PC.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Image of system utilization 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 
IC tag and IC tag Reader 
 
 
20
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

 
Figure 4. 
System configuration chart 
 
C. System configuration 
Figure 4 shows the system configuration. The temperature 
on the day acquired from the data base from the associating 
feeling and color, the user's schedule, and the Internet for 
the clothing data base and coordination knowledge database 
and weather information etc. were all used. A template must 
be referred to from the conversational data base for the 
content of what the clothes insists. 
 
D. Recommendation flow 
First any candidate clothing from the color and purpose of 
the feeling input by the user are selected from the data base. 
The candidates from the color based on the same and the 
contrast of hue and the tone include three color choices that 
match the color of the input feeling clothing or input feeling. 
Moreover, the color image is considered by defining using 
14 image words. The one that the color image is 
corresponding to the image of clothes made a candidate. 
(Figure 5). The attributes of clothing (It is pants and T-shirt 
in case of sports. If it is an announcement, the blouse and 
skirt, etc.) that are considered appropriate for the schedule 
of the day are also candidates because of the purpose. The 
features of clothing that is touched when first being decided 
upon (color, image, and attribute) are then analyzed, and 
candidates selected by it that have been frequently touched 
given priority, and are then recommended by the system 
from 
candidates 
selected 
by 
the 
user 
in 
past 
recommendation situations. When the first clothes are 
decided, the clothes appropriate for the purpose are 
recommended as a candidate.  
The self-recommendation from clothes output by the voice, 
and the content is elected from the conversation template 
according to the condition of arriving at the candidate. 
IV. 
PROTOTYPE SYSTEM 
Because the system was made for trial purposes this time 
registers author's wardrobe was used, ten kinds of colors 
that are appropriate for the college woman were able to be 
set into the color palette, and to select a target item from six.  
The screen was divided into three fields, (with) from the left 
being the input field, the candidate display field, and a 
detailed information display field. Six or less pieces of 
candidate clothing are displayed on the screen in the center 
once the user has specified a color and purpose (Figure 6). 
The process can be restarted again by pushing the lower 
right UP button if there are no suitable clothes. Clothes that 
are touched start self-insistence when they are displayed in 
the center, and detailed information on the clothes displayed 
in the detailed information field on the screen. The user 
listens to the insistence of clothes to which a voice has been 
output, and thus can visually decide upon the clothing. 
Clicking the FIX button at the bottom of the detailed 
information field stops it. Once the top half of your clothes 
have been decided upon, the bottom suitable for the top is 
elected a candidate field. However, it becomes a 
coordination decision at that time when it is chosen. In the 
same way the coordination is completed by deciding upon 
the second set of clothes, the combination, date and input 
information are registered in the data base, and it is reflected 
in the future (Figure 7). 
V. 
EVALUATION AND CONSIDERATION 
The utility of the system was evaluated via experiments and 
a questionnaire. Author's 38 clothes were used for ten 
college women and the system was used.  The operation 
and significance of the system were then considered using 
the results. 
A. Evaluation result  
With operability the answer "It was easy to use" was 
received from all the experimental subjects and the opinion 
that using it was enjoyable was also received.  
The answer "Would use it once it is put to practical use" 
was received from all the experimental subjects with regard 
to its significance. However, there were many that answered, 
although not by all members, that they "Used it every day", 
but found it "Embarrassing" or "Had no time", etc. In 
addition, the act of coordinating clothing can be understood 
and demand high with anyone who finds coordinating their 
clothes every day annoying but understands the system, and 
thus happy with it. In addition, the opinion of "The lack of 
hesitation can be recommended with anyone not confident 
about their fashion sense" was also obtained. 
B. Consideration 
The direction of the system will not be changed because 
of the above-mentioned results in the future, and the aim of 
21
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

a system that can be naturally operated in choosing clothing 
and an interface pursued. Moreover, it turned out that "The 
interested parties would be both men and women who are 
insecure about their fashion sense", which is a significant 
result. 
VI. 
POSTSCRIPT 
This papers proposed a system that supports fashion 
coordination in everyday life, used it for trial purposes, and 
then evaluated it. The system involved research and 
development with the aim at creating it and thus supporting 
fashion coordination in an original, enjoyable way. 
Experiments involving a prototype system and subjects 
revealed its significance. The following views will be 
achieved to assume it to the system that specializes in the 
user or more in the future.    
1) Creation of user's preference learning function 
2) Introduction of trends 
3) Changed into the multi agent. 
Moreover, to correspond to a more complex condition, the 
enhancement of the following functions is aimed at. 
4) Diversification of retrieval function (expansion of 
weather information and vital information, addition of 
priority, figures, and consideration of balance) 
5) Recommendation routine made perpetual (increase in 
volume of data and variation in the conversations).  
6) Increase in number of combinations (heavier clothing, 
accessories, and shoes) 
Now, to clear these problems, the research is advanced, and 
the inducement of the action is enabled by analyzing the 
user's behavior and doing modeling and it will develop with 
the system where the fashion coordination is felt happier in 
the future.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Kim Cho, Monica T., and Stanley Carl Ng: On Systems 
and methods for providing a virtual fashion closet, USPTO 
Patent Application 20100191770, 2010. 
[2] W. Louise and Lambert. J P: Computer system for rule-based 
clothing matching and filtering considering fit rules and 
fashion rules, United States Patent Application 20100023421, 
2010. 
[3] S Nishi, Toshiaki S, Yasushi H, Shoji K and Kenji M,” 
Design and Development of the Textile Fashion Coordination 
System--- a communication aid for the customer and the 
salesclerk in real shop ---”,  CollabTech, 2008, p.151-156 
[4] 
WATADA PRINTING CO., LTD. 
http://www.watada.co.jp/ (accessed September 22, 2011) 
[5] AP- REFINE INC.  Co. 
http://www.ap-refine.co.jp/ (accessed September 22, 2011) 
[6] Mary Lou Andre:Ready To Wear: An Expert's Guide to 
Choosing and Using Your Wardrobe, 2004,p180-p198 
[7] Color Image Scale with RGB Values. 
http://blogs.veracitysolutions.com/tag/rgb/ 
(accessed 
September 22,  2011)
 
 
Figure 5. 
Color image scale [5] 
22
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

 
Figure 6. 
Screen displaying candidate clothes 
 
 
 
Figure 7. 
Screen displaying coordination decisions 
23
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

