The Need for Synthetic Standards in Managing Cyber Relationships 
 
Simon Reay Atkinson 
Complex Civil Systems Research Group 
The University of Sydney 
Sydney, Australia 
simon.reayatkinson@sydney.edu.au  
Seyedamir Tavakoli Taba 
Complex Civil Systems Research Group 
The University of Sydney 
Sydney, Australia 
seyedamir.tavakolitabaezavareh@sydney.edu.au  
Amanda Goodger  
Engineering Design Centre 
The University of Cambridge 
Cambridge, England 
acg66@cam.ac.uk  
Nicholas H.M. Caldwell 
School of Business, Leadership and Enterprise,  
University Campus Suffolk 
Ipswich, England 
n.caldwell@UCS.AC.UK 
 
 
 
 
Liaquat Hossain 
Complex Civil Systems Research Group 
The University of Sydney 
Sydney, Australia 
liaquat.hossain@sydney.edu.au
 
 
Abstract—This paper considers four strands of thinking 
emerging from Cambridge University, Engineering Design 
Centre; Sydney University, Complex Civil Systems Group and 
the Advanced Research and Assessment Group. It considers 
the synthesis of the machine and the organization in 
mechorganics; it examines the Lodestone concept as a means 
for instrumenting social awareness; it considers the role 
variety plays in collaboratively influencing complex systems, 
over time, and coordinating and controlling them, in time. 
Finally, it examines the needs for assaying information and 
data as a means of providing the social transparencies needed 
for real time verification and validation. From this, it posits the 
needs for simple empirical standards and setting/vetting 
organizations that encourage good behavior and discourage 
bad. 
These 
standards’ 
organizations 
provide 
for 
the 
governance and assurances necessary for packet-markets to 
form where prices can be assured, products verified, exchanges 
made and fees / taxes abstracted. 
Keywords-mechorganics; lodestone; instrumenting; packet-
markets; governance; metadetics; synthesis; assaying. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Cyber may consist of two sub-systems identified and 
classified as being “Coordination Rule and Control (CRC)” 
and “Collaboration and Social Influence (CSI)” [1, 2]. 
These system attributes provide the necessary and “requisite 
variety” [3] to enable both control, “in time”, and influence 
[4-8], “over time”. In this regard, Cyber may consist of two 
poles:    
 „A technologically bounded, largely immeasurable, 
strongly scientific, stochastic coordination, rule and 
control space; comprising virtual-media and the display of 
data dealing with the real communication of facts; and the 
conceptualization of alternative possibilities, themselves 
capable of generating hard physical and soft more social 
effects and collaboratively influencing them‟[9]. 
“Mechorganics” is postulated to have 1) a thematic 
systems identity (defined by its networked disciplines) and 2) 
a critical and functional education base [10, 11]. It is not 
seen either as „a reversion of digital data back to an analogue 
form‟ [12] or some form of „Golem‟ warned of by Wiener 
[13]. Mechorganics is based on “designing humanity back 
into the loop” [14, 15] and: „the synergistic combination of 
civil mechanical systems engineering, social network 
dynamics, ICT and the management of interconnected 
knowledge, information (and data) infrastructures in the 
designing and composing of adaptive (resilient and 
sustainable) organizations‟ [14].  
The “Lodestone” concept arose from a concern that the 
“Cyber-pole” applying Coordination, Rule and Control 
(CRC) was being emphasized at the expense of the whole 
and specifically the pole dealing with collaboration and 
social influence. The result, it was conjectured, was twofold: 
first, that government was becoming irrelevant to many 
social-media users and, secondly, that this was creating a 
vacuum in which less benign influences might flourish. For 
example, studies of social networking and identity have 
shown that there is a strong tendency to connect like-to-like 
[16]. This narrowing focus potentially reduces societal 
variety and makes people less tolerant to alternative ideas 
and ontologies than their „non-digital forebears‟. They may, 
in actual fact, become non-democratic, xenonetworks (from 
xenophobia, xenonetworks are „social networks with a strong 
dislike or fear of other networks or ideas that appears foreign 
or strange to them‟) [2], extremely hostile to alternative ideas 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

(and that they might be wrong). Discussion at the time was 
focused (as it remains largely today) on finding information 
„keystones‟, „architectures‟, „protocols‟ or „gateways‟ not so 
much to assist people identify good information from bad but 
to control. A problem with each of these concepts is that they 
obtrusively and exclusively focus on the stable, static (hence 
keystone) and ergodic, as opposed to the dynamic and non-
ergodic. The “Information Lodestone” concept recalled the 
semi-mythical lodestones of antiquity that enabled ancient 
mariners both to determine / „fix‟ their position and 
simultaneously steer a safe course. The objective is to design 
a non-obtrusive, dynamic instrument. In this respect, we are 
commencing work with Health and manufacturers of 
sensitive materials, to model and identify data / information 
flows and the potential for leaks along complicated, sensitive 
lines-of-communication in which knowledge assurances, 
e.g., for operating on patients, are essential. Other work is 
being undertaken to teach life systems management skills to 
young people, with an emphasis on either metamatics (the 
mathematics of cyber-social and cyber-physical systems) or 
metadetics, as defined in this paper. We consider this to be 
exciting work, on the cutting edge of our science, essential to 
enabling the emerging Knowledge Enterprise Economies of 
the 21st Century. 
This paper is divided into three sections. In section one, 
the cyber-system is considered as it relates to the individual 
and at the social level. In the next section, means for 
instrumenting the Cyber are posited. Finally, inclusive 
designs and standards to enable people to sensemake within 
new and emerging cyber and synthetic ecologies are posited. 
II. 
CYBER AS A SOCIAL BEING 
The informal motto of the Lodestone Project was 
suggested as „conscius in res‟ or “sense-in-being”, relating to 
Badiou‟s [17] understanding of “being”, when he states: 
„what happens in art, in science, in true (rare) politics, and in 
love (if it exists), is the coming to light of an indiscernible of 
the times, which, as such, is neither a known or recognized 
multiple, nor an ineffable singularity, but that which detains 
in its multiple-being all the common traits of the collective in 
question: in this sense, it is the truth of the collective’s 
being‟. The idea of multiple-beings holds within it the traits 
of the social being at the heart of most systems and 
organizations. It is their truths and trusts that “detain the 
common traits of the collective in question”. When these 
trusts dissipate or are allowed to wither, the organization 
may remain as a physical entity (when a building becomes 
statue) but its essence and being – its “ineffable singularity” 
– is no longer [18]. It is conjectured that, by dealing with 
cyber exclusively as an info-techno construct, many 
organizations lost sight of their “social being”. 
Considering the Cyber as two poles, it is suggested that 
one has more info/techno-socio traits; the other more socio-
info/techno, in which, building on work by Harmaakorpi et 
al. [19][17], it is posited that: „Info-Techno-Socio systems 
seek to program (as opposed to programme) the relationship 
between technical processes and humans by digitizing 
performance fidelity and coding for repeatable risk free 
procedures in computer-control-spaces so that data and 
communication do not [temporally] contradict each other ‟ 
[20]. By contrast: „Socio-Info-Techno systems stress the 
reciprocal interrelationship between humans and computers 
to foster improved shared awareness for agilely shaping the 
social programmes of work, in such a way that humanity and 
ICT [control] programs do not contradict each other ‟ [20]. 
The two systems are also considered in terms of their 
signatures, where I-T-S systems are considered as strong-
signal systems [21-24], in which: „System Information and 
Communication are the key variables‟, after, Castells [25] 
and Sokol [26]. And weak-signal S-I-T systems [21-24], in 
which: „Influence (through shared awareness) and Control 
(through switching) of Information and Communication are 
the key variables‟, after Castells [25]. 
Most of us intuitively know the type of organization we 
would wish to be working for. Warren and Warren (1977) 
considered this in terms of “organizational health” and 
concluded that „healthy organizations‟ have „a critical 
capacity for solving problems‟, [27]. They identified three 
dimensions of connectedness (see also Thibaut and Kelley 
[28]): identification with the organization (they referred to as 
neighborhood); 
interstitial 
interaction 
within 
the 
organization 
and 
existential 
linkages 
outside 
the 
organization.  
Considerations of health apply equally to organizations 
working with/in the Cyber and their capacity for “problem 
solving” and so controlling, in time, and influencing, over 
time. It is contended that successful companies are 
constantly “balancing” between the exploitative (delivered in 
time by coordination, rule and control) and the explorative 
(delivered over time through collaborative social influence). 
The capacity for balancing between coordination & control 
(the exploitative) and collaboration and influence (the 
explorative) to keep an organization “in kilter” is known as 
“ambidexterity” [29]. It is suggested that this ability to 
dynamically balance between the exploitative and the 
explorative is indicative of a systems ability to “problem 
solve” and, therefore, of its health. 
As humans learn, it is contended that they develop a 
critical capacity for problem solving based upon their 
individual social system model. This capacity for systems 
and critical thinking can be taught and is seen as a necessary 
pre-requisite for understanding and dealing with complexity. 
In this regard, from Lever et al. [30], it is considered that:  
Systems Thinking may be the ability to determine 
appropriate options for leading, managing, designing, 
engineering and modeling complex systems, taking 
adequate empirical account of different system types, 
configurations, dynamics and constraints, and; 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Critical Thinking may be the ability to ask the right 
questions and make useful sense of information that is 
technically 
complex, 
incomplete, 
contradictory, 
uncertain, 
changing, 
non-ergodic 
and 
subject 
to 
competing claims and interests. 
After Dreyfus & Dreyfus [31], it is suggested we all have 
an individual „meta-datum‟ that reference what is posited as 
our “metadetic spheroid” [31-33]. This gives rise to concepts 
of “metadetic-datum”, with similarities to a geodetic datum 
used to “reference” the spheroidal model of the earth being 
applied, e.g., World Geodetic System (WGS) 84. Individual 
metadetic spheroids may be broadly similar. How they are 
referenced – in other words their datum – is seen to affect 
how humans‟ process information and what they perceive. A 
metadetic-spheroid is an individual‟s model (no matter how 
incomplete) 
of 
the 
sociodetic-spheroidal 
“beings” 
/ 
organizations they inhabit; see Fig. 1. The meta-datum 
achieves the best “fit” of an individual‟s metadetic-spheroid 
to what may be described as its “sociodetic-spheroid” 
describing the overall model of the related social system. 
 
Figure 1.  Sociodetic / Metadetic Spheroids and Datums 
Bunge [34] maintains that „perception is personal; whereas 
knowledge is social‟. An individual‟s perception of their 
“sociodetic spheroidal system” is incomplete. Only by 
“collaboratively 
connecting” 
with 
“others” 
metadetic 
spheroids may an individual begin to “map” the sociodetic 
spheroidal whole. It is this process of “collaborative 
sensemaking” that moves what is effectively static, 
positional information and data to the social and dynamical 
knowledge of “being”.  
Markov chains applied within Bayesian Belief Networks 
[35] were considered by Logan and Moreno [36] in terms of 
„Meta-State-Vectors‟ referenced to „Meta-Data‟ [31-33]. 
Meta-State-Vectors (MSVs) relate to the idea of some 
information containing “indicators” that will be identified 
immediately against an individual‟s metadetic-datum without 
the need for preamble / additional processing. MSVs are 
therefore distinguishable from serial information; from 
which „expert‟ human processors „can form diagnostic 
hypotheses and draw rational conclusions from system 
patterns [and] critical reflection of their own meta-datum‟ 
[31]. In terms of collaboration and shared awareness, this 
should enable individuals to „make better use of one 
another‟s expertise‟ [37], particularly if „authenticated‟ [38], 
validated and verified. 
In a social system, there also exists the risk of knowledge 
blindness or “blind knowledge” [39, 40]. Models of 
“info/techno-socio 
exchange” 
and 
“socio-info/techno 
knowledge capture” therefore need to differentiate „between 
the active physical and technological capture of data and 
information‟ [41, 42] and the socio-info/techno exchange of 
knowledge [43-48]. To understand how the best “fit” is to be 
achieved between the info/techno-socio “machine” and the 
socio-info/techno organizational “being”, it is necessary to 
identify the system‟s ecology and its purpose / role within it. 
If an organization‟s purpose is to problem solve, then how it 
maps its sociodetic spheroid and positions its datum will 
determine its health and future fitness judged by its ability to 
„test for both success and failure‟ [49].     
III. 
INSTRUMENTING THE CYBER 
At the turn of the millennium, the old UK Defence 
Research Agency (DERA) was undertaking trials of 
networked soldiers at the British Army Training Unit in 
Suffield (BATUS), Canada. Soldiers had all been issued with 
GPS. As reported to the first author, the result was “digital” 
in terms of the troops‟ movement, which was recorded as 
being “stop and go”. Troops would stop, find out where they 
were, report their position and then move. The researcher 
removed GPS from the soldiers and caused them to return to 
map and compass. The result was dramatic. Soldiers began 
to interpret their datum against the map and to use their 
senses to determine progress. They used the compass to 
provide analogue direction and their bearing to dynamically 
align their datum. 
After the Heisenberg principle, Price [50] suggests that „it 
is impossible to determine simultaneously both the position 
and momentum of a particle with any great degree of 
accuracy or certainty‟. This led the first author to surmise a 
potential metaphor for the modern age: „that we know 
precisely where we are but we no longer know where we are 
going‟. Although causality is hard to attribute [51], it may be 
possible to apply the Heisenberg principle as a useful rule-
of-thumb when designing dynamic (non-ergodic) systems by 
suggesting that: 
„the more precisely one measures a position, the less 
able one may identify change, over time, and vice 
versa‟[18]. 
This has specific implications for system designs noting 
the predilection in recent years to emphasize metrication and 
the setting of targets / goals etc. for managing organizations. 
Reported separately [18, 52], instead of improving shared 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

awareness, the excess of information and targets required as 
a form of control can detract from work [53] and so 
collaboration and shared awareness. This suggested that 
reducing collaborative and shared awareness impacts 
negatively an organization‟s ability to problem solve. Ipso 
facto, 
these 
exploitative 
type 
organizations 
become 
unhealthy and potentially, even, risky places to be. 
In addressing the failures of government and collective 
(collegial) intelligence prior to 9/11 and the Iraq War, the US 
9/11 Commission [54] and the (Lord) Butler Enquiry [55] in 
the UK identified the failure of governance specifically in 
terms of the digital ecologies, then in existence. What they 
saw was that essential information existed, but that it was 
being 
missed, 
mislaid 
and, 
critically, 
not 
shared. 
Furthermore, they saw confusion between data, information 
and communication networks (essentially ICT) and what was 
being identified and abstracted in terms of knowledge and 
actionable intelligence that could be appropriately shared 
and used across government, in real time. Busy Secretary‟s 
of State, Ministers, government officials / business / industry 
/ financial leaders and project / programme directors, 
managers, administrators, users, agents and other consumers 
of actionable intelligence were being overwhelmed in a 
deluge of data and information technology, process and 
methodology that was quite literally blinding them to what 
was vital; what was strategic; what was operational; what 
was routine; what was base level knowledge (against which 
change and perturbations might „show up‟ (be envisioned)) 
and what was simply background noise. Organizational 
structures had not simply atrophied but had become „tuned 
out‟ – no longer able to select between the vital weak-signals 
of innovation, adaptation and change (as threat or 
opportunity) and the strong-signals of method and process 
[21-23, 56, 57]. Recommendations arising from 9/11 [54, 55] 
and the Global Financial Crisis were three fold: firstly has 
been to require greater transparency e.g., between the banks, 
investors, borrowers and governments; secondly, has been to 
demand greater regulation and thirdly, to move away from 
the need to know control model towards what has been 
described as the three needs model – need to know; need-to-
share; need-to-use (3NM) [42].  
 
Figure 2.  Three Needs Model (3NM) 
Knowledge blindness [40] was also seen in the run-up to the 
Global Financial Crisis (GFC), when public and private 
organizations / individuals capable of identifying alternative 
futures were no longer able to communicate / be listened to: 
„It is remarkable that the advanced research and assessment 
group…put the danger of a global financial collapse into the 
[UK] draft national security strategy [in 2005/6], but were 
told to take it out, presumably for political reasons, before it 
occurred‟ [58].  
 In this respect, Szilard‟s warning that „information is 
expensive to acquire and use‟ [59] and Bunge‟s recognition 
that „knowledge was social‟ [34] had been potentially lost in 
the noise of new IT, methods and processes. The Lodestone 
project was conceived from this confusion and a recognition 
that „today‟s economy and society is totally reliant on 
technology as an enabling force for all economic and societal 
activities‟ [60]. It identified the potential of societal cascades 
in which „a failure of a very small fraction of nodes in one 
network may lead to the complete fragmentation of a system 
of several interdependent networks‟ [61]. The series of 
cascades considered at the time (2009/10) included UK 
strategic failure in Iraq and Afghanistan [62] and the global 
financial crisis. Significantly, an undermining in binding 
societal trusts and assurances were seen simultaneously to be 
occurring / had the potential to occur, such as the UK MPs 
honors and expenses scandals; connecting to the phone 
hacking scandal that implicated media, police and 
politicians; to the failure of the BBC to protect young and 
vulnerable people; to the 2010 UK student riots and the 2011 
“London” riots.  Each of these cascades began / was 
exacerbated in the Cyber as, potentially, they will also be 
resolved.  
 
Figure 3.  Multiple Meshed Sociodetic / Organisational System Model 
Consequently, it was seen as being necessary „to 
protect…information infrastructure technologies…a strategic 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

core [of] which must be maintained i.e., the Critical National 
Infrastructure (CNI) / Critical Information Infrastructure 
(CII)‟. It was recognized that „small incremental changes and 
/ or large-scale modifications can drastically shape and 
reshape both the economy and its society with known and 
often unknown consequences, due to ever-increasing 
interconnectivities and growing complexities … especially, 
the information technologies that have come to pervade 
virtually all aspects of life‟ [63] – hence “societal cascades”. 
This led to the development of an „Assurance Case Approach 
methodology for individual CII assets to input into the larger 
Business Information Environment‟, „the development of a 
Mesh case that can be visualized as the 3-D atomic structure 
of a molecule‟ and which „provides a lateral approach for 
interdependencies between individual assurance cases‟ [60]. 
The “multiple” mesh envisioned represents the sociodetic 
spheroidal “being” described by Fig. 3 and relates to both 
interdependencies and assurances to provide overarching 
confidence in the system whole. Protecting the system whole 
and providing for resilience and responsiveness required a 
flexible, adaptive and ambidextrous CSI „approach over time 
and real-time‟, CRC mechanisms for interacting directly 
with „dynamic information ecosystems‟ [60], in time. 
IV. 
SETTING CYBER STANDARDS 
Regulations and controls can be antithetical to creating a 
shared aware and collaborative ecology and enabling the 
necessary transparencies for encouraging good behavior and 
discouraging bad [52]. The three needs model aims to create 
an information assurance / business security layer between 
the user (pull) and the knowledge (push) custodian [42], see 
Fig. 2. There are significant challenges to the managing of 
information and data allowing for successful, inclusive 
means for identifying / testing when information and data 
has been tampered with, changed, added to or where leakage 
points may occur. Examples include the loss (probably 
through accounting errors and multiple packet switching) of 
sensitive materials, e.g., in the explosives industry for 
products that have to be accounted for to the milligram. 
Similarly, limited information and data tracking (including 
asset tracking) e.g., in the health service, means that safety 
critical equipment can become mislaid or misapplied; so 
placing patients at risk. During the recent Europe-wide meat 
scandal an inability to track information and data and test / 
verify it for validity at key stages of the supply chain, 
enabled graft and fraud to take place across the whole. 
Throughout history, successful economies have been 
based upon the accurate and reliable “assaying” of materials, 
such as metals (gold) and food. These social transfer points 
also became the opportunity for reliable trade and pricing 
moments and so taxation. Scales and weights were regularly 
tested and subject to daily public scrutiny – they created 
transparencies 
for 
encouraging 
good 
behavior 
and 
identifying bad. Similar open-social “assaying standards” 
that can be used to assess information and data in terms of its 
goodness, purity and proof are harder to find. And there is 
not a simple and readily available instrument such as a “scale 
and weights” or “map and compass” that can be applied 
unobtrusively at different stages of often complex supply 
chains to verify and validate information & data flows and 
leakages. This does four things: it limits transparencies; so 
encouraging graft / crime; consequently reducing the 
opportunities for legitimate business / taxation and 
discouraging good behavior.  
In his theory of the firm, Coase [64] argues that the reason 
for firms forming is to enable „employer and employee 
relations with regard to cost‟, which „were necessary to 
understanding the working of firms and organizations‟. He 
suggested that „governance is chosen in a cost effective 
degree to infuse order, thereby to mitigate conflict and 
realize mutual gain‟ [64]. It follows that regulations and 
controls that fail to „mitigate conflict and realize mutual 
[collaborative] gain‟ create unhealthy ecologies by limiting 
organizational problem solving capacities [52]. In his Law of 
Requisite Variety, Ashby [3] maintains that „only variety can 
control variety‟ and that „for every control one needs a 
controller‟. Reported separately [18, 52, 65], „organizations 
under control, may never be more shared aware than the sum 
of their links‟. By contrast, organizations that enable 
collaborative social influence can „generate, on average, 
12.5% more [linkages] than formally specified‟ [18]. 
Furthermore, these organizations can adapt, over time, to 
different levels of control. In other words, these „new‟ 
linkages also provide the „variety necessary to control 
variety‟ – so meeting Ashby‟s Law of Requisite Variety.  
V. 
A NEW METADETIC 
In setting Cyber Standards, the issue appears two fold. 
First, to create inclusive standards through „the synergistic 
combination 
of 
civil 
mechanical 
systems 
and 
the 
management of interconnected knowledge, information (and 
data) infrastructures in the designing and composing of 
adaptive (resilient and sustainable) organizations‟ [14], that 
readily encourage openness and transparencies and can be 
easily assayed. Secondly, is for these standards to encourage 
collaborative shared awareness, from which new controls 
and pricing opportunities and markets may emerge. Thus, 
inclusive standards for information / data “packet-switching” 
may create opportunities for “packet-marketing” and so for 
pricing and taxation. This returns to standards acting as 
social instruments that, through their very “being”, can 
synthesize the info-techno and socio to create opportunities 
both for collaborative exploration and exploitative control – 
or ambidexterity. It is suggested that creating socially 
inclusive and acceptable standards for assaying the goodness 
of information and data enables this synthesis. This leads 
potentially into a third area to do with the synthesizing of 
Cyber Standards, introduced in Section III and by Figs. 1 and 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

3. It is suggested that how social reference-standards are 
designed to be inclusive of the machine and the organization 
and are best “fitted” to their organizational (sociodetic) 
systems, may potentially be considered as the subject of 
“metadetics”.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
UK Admiralty and Defence Research Establishments 1842-
1991. Advanced Research Assessment Group (ARAG) 
2003-2009. CESG. Royal Australian Navy (1913-2013). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Walker, S. Reay Atkinson, and L. Hossain, “Collaboration 
Without Rules - A New Perspective on Stability Operations”, 
Presented at IEEE Cyber Conference, 14-16 Dec, 2012, IEEE: 
Washington. 
[2] S. Reay Atkinson, S. Feczak, A. Goodger, N.H.M. Caldwell, 
and L. Hossain, “Cyber-internet: a potential eco-system for 
innovation and adaptation”, in European Alliance for 
Innovation: Internet as Innovation Eco-System Summit and 
Exhibition 2012, 4-6 Oct, .2012, EAI: Riva del Garda: Italy. 
[3] R. Ashby, An Introduction to Cybernetics, 1957, London: 
Chapman and Hall. 
[4] D. Cartwright, “Influence, leadership, control”, in Handbook 
of Organizations, J.G. March, Editor, 1965, Rand McNally: 
Chicago. pp 1-47. 
[5] P.A. David, “Path Dependence - A Foundational Concept for 
historical Social Science”. Cliometrica -The Journal of 
Historical Economics and Econometric History, 2007. 1(2), 
Summer 07. 
[6] R.A. Dahl, “The Concept of Power”. Behavioral Science, 
1957. 2:3, July: p. 201. 
[7] L. Hossain, M. D‟Eredita, and R.T. Wigand, “Towards a 
Product Process Dichotomy for Understanding Knowledge 
Management, 
Sharing 
and 
Transfer 
Systems” 
in 
Organizations. Submitted to Information Technology and 
People, 2002. 
[8] D.H. Wrong, “Some Problems in Defining Social Power”. 
The American Journal of Sociology, 1968. Vol. 73, No. 6 
(May), pp. 673-681. 
[9] S. Reay Atkinson, “Cyber-: Envisaging New Frontiers of 
Possibility”. UKDA Advanced Research and Assessmnent 
Group, 2009. Unpublished, Occasional Series, 03/09. 
[10] L.O. Dahlgren, “Undervisningen och det meningsfulla 
lärandet (The Teaching of Meaningful Learning)”, 1995, 
Linköping University. 
[11] M. Grimheden, and M. Hanson., “Mechatronics - the 
evolution of 
an 
academic 
discipline 
in 
engineering 
education”. Mechatronics, 2005. 15, pp. 179-192. 
[12] K.D. Bollacker, “Avoiding a Digital Dark Age”. American 
Scientist, 2010. Volume 98, pp. 106-110. 
[13] N. Wiener, God and Golem, Inc. 1964, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
[14] L. Hossain, S. Reay Atkinson, M. D‟Eredita, and R.T. 
Wigand. 
“Towards 
a 
Mech-Organic 
Perspective 
for 
Knowledge Sharing Networks in Organizations”. in UK 
Academy for Information Systems. 2013. Worcester College 
University of Oxford, 8-20th March. 
[15] S. Reay Atkinson, “An Age of Evolutionary Step Change”, in 
Think-Piece, 2012, University of Sydney: Complex Civil 
Systems Research Group. 
[16] M.C. Larsen, “Understanding Social Networking: On Young 
People's Construction and Co-Construction of Identity 
Online”, in Proceedings of Internet Research 8.0: Lets Play, 
2007, Association of Internet Reserearchers: Vancouver. 
[17] A. Badiou, Being and Event, ed. T.O. Feltham, 2005, London: 
Continuum. 
[18] S. Reay Atkinson, “Engineering Design Adaptation Fitness in 
Complex Adaptive Systems”, 2011, Cambridge University 
Engineering Department, EDC: Cambridge, UK. 
[19] V. Harmaakorpi, I. Kauranen, and A. Haikonen, “The Shift in 
the 
Techno-socio-economic 
Paradigm 
and 
Regional 
Competitiveness”, in The 43rd  Conference of European 
Regional Sciences Association (ERSA), 27-31 Aug, 2003, 
Helsinki University of Technology: Lahti Center, Jyväskylä, 
Finland. 
[20] S. Reay Atkinson, A. Goodger, N.H.M. Caldwell, and L. 
Hossain., “How lean the machine: how agile the mind”. The 
Learning Organization, 2012. Vol. 19 Iss: 3, pp. 183 - 206. 
[21] H.I. Ansoff, “Managing Strategic Surprise Response to Weak 
Signals”. California Management Review, 1975. Vol. XVIII, 
No. 2, pp. 21-33. 
[22] B. Coffman, “Weak Signal Research, Part I: Introduction”. 
1997 
 
[cited 
2010 
13 
Oct]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.mgtaylor.com/mgtaylor/jotm/winter97/wsrintro.ht
m., last accessed May 2011. 
[23] E. Hiltunen, “Weak Signals in Organizational Futures 
Learning”, 2010, Helsinki School of Economics A-365. 
[24] E. Hiltunen, “Good sources of weak signals: a global study of 
where futurists look for weak signals”. Journal of Futures 
Studies, 2008. Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 21-44. 
[25] M. Castells, “The Information Age. Economy, Society and 
Culture”, in Volume I, The Rise of the Network Society, 
1996, Blackwell Publishers: Oxford. 
[26] M. Sokol, “The Knowledge Economy: a critical view”, in 
paper presented at the Regional Studies Association 
International Conference,12-15 April, 2003: Pisa. 
[27] R.B. 
Warren, 
and 
D.I. 
Warren, 
The 
Neighborhood 
Organizer‟s Handbook, 1977, South Bend, Ind: University of 
Notre Dame Press. 
[28] J.W. Thibaut, and H.H. Kelley, The Social Phsychology of 
Groups, 1959, New York, London: John Wiley, Chapman 
Hall. 
[29] Z-L. He, and P-K. Wong, “Exploration vs. Exploitation: An 
Empirical 
Test 
of 
the 
Ambidexterity 
Hypothesis”. 
Organization Science, 2004. Vol. 15, No. 4, July-August, pp. 
481-494. 
[30] T. Lever, H. Ainsworth, G. McGarry, S. Ludewig, and S. 
Reay Atkinson, “Project Management Professional and 
Academic, 
Complex 
Critical 
and 
Systems 
Thinking 
Competency 
Matrix 
(CCSTCM™)”, 
in 
Unpublished, 
CCSTCM™, S. Reay Atkinson, Editor, 2012, Complex Civil 
Systems 
Research 
Group 
and 
Project 
Management 
Programme: University of Sydney, Faculty of Engineering 
and IT, School of Civil Engineering. 
[31] H.L. Dreyfus, and S.E. Dreyfus, Mind Over Machine, 1987, 
New York: The Free Press. 
[32] G. Chaitin, Meta Math, 2005, New York: Pantheon Books. 
[33] P.A. Corning, “Book Review Essay: From Complexity to 
Life: On the Emergence of Life and Meaning”, in 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change (2003), N. 
Gregersen, Editor, 2004, OUP: Oxford. 
[34] M.A. Bunge, “Ten Modes of Individualism - None of Which 
Works - And Their Alternatives”. Philosophy of the Social 
Sciences, 2000. 30(3), pp. 384-406. 
[35] S. Russell, and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence A Modern 
Approach, 1995, Upper Saddle River, New Jersyey: Prentice 
Hall. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

[36] B. Logan, and P.J. Moreno, “Factorial Hidden Models for 
Speech recognition: Preliminary Experiments, in Technical 
Report Series”, CDR 97/7, September, Cambridge-Research-
Laboratory, Editor, 1997, Cambridge University: Cambridge. 
[37] H. Mintzberg, D. Dougherty, J. Jorgensen, and F. Westley, 
“Some surprising things about collaboration - knowing how 
people connect makes it work better”. Organizational 
Dynamics, 1996. Spring, pp. 60-71. 
[38] R.L. Ackoff, “From data to wisdom”. Journal of Applied 
Systems Analysis, 1989. Vol. 15, pp. 3-9. 
[39] R. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, 1986, London: Penguin 
Books. 
[40] L. Perros-Meilhac, P. Duhamel, P. Chevalier, and E. 
Moulines, “Blind Knowledge Based Algorithms based on 
second order statistics”, in ICASSP, 1999, IEEE Proceedings, 
Vol 5, Mar, pp. 2901-2904: Phoenix, Arizona. 
[41] D. Rus, and D Subramanian, “Customizing Information 
Capture and Access”. ACM Transactions on Information 
Systems, 1997. Vol. 15, No. 1, Jan, pp. 67-101. 
[42] S. Reay Atkinson, S. Lesher, and D. Shoupe, “Information 
Capture and Knowledge Exchange: The Gathering Testing 
and assessment of Information and Knowledge through 
Exploration and Exploitation”, in 14th ICCRTS: C2 and 
Agility, 2009, CCRP: Washington. 
[43] W. Bijker, T. Hughes, and T. Pinch.“The social construction 
of Technological Systems”, 1987, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
[44] K. Henderson, On Line and On Paper, 1999, Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
[45] A. Martinelli, M. Meyer, and N. von Tunzelmann, “Becoming 
an entrepreneurial university? A case study of knowledge 
exchange relationships and faculty attitudes in a medium-
sized, research-oriented university”. Journal of Technology 
Transfer, 2007. (2008), Vol. 33, DOI 10.1007/s10961-007-
9031-5, pp. 259-283. 
[46] Y. Cengeloglu, S. Khajenoori, and D. Linton, “A Framework 
for Dynamic Knowledge Exchange Among Intelligent 
Agents”, in AAAI Technical Report FS-94-02, 1994, AAAI: 
Palo Alto, CA. 
[47] S. Hagen, “From tech transfer to knowledge exchange”, Ch 
10, in European universities in the marketplace, the Authors 
Volume Compilation, 2008, Portland Press Ltd. 
[48] B. Latour, “Visualization and Cognition: Thinking with Eyes 
and Hands. Knowledge and Society”, 1986. Studies in the 
Sociology of Culture of Society Past and Present, Vol. 6, pp. 
1-40. 
[49] J.K. DeRosa, A-M. Grisogono, A.J. Ryan, and D.O. Norman, 
“A Research Agenda for the Engineering of Complex 
Systems”, in IEEE International Systems Conference, 
SysCon, 2008, IEEE, pp. 15-22. 
[50] H. Price, Time‟s Arrow: New Directions for the Arrows of 
Time, 1996, Oxford, UK: OUP. 
[51] H. Price, Causation, Physics, and the Constitution of Reality: 
Russell's Republic Revisited, 2007, Ed. R. Corry, Oxford, 
UK: OUP. 
[52] S. Reay Atkinson, S. Tavakolitabaezavareh, D. Walker, L. 
Liu, and L., Hossain, “Securing the bolts before the horse has 
bolted: A new perspective on Managing Collaborative 
Assurance”, in The IEEE, 2013 Conference on Security 
Management, Aug2013: Las Vegas. 
[53] L. Dabbish, and R. Kraut, “Controlling interruptions: 
Awareness displays and social motivation for coordination”, 
in ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work, 2004: Chicago, USA. 
[54] National Commission of Terrorist Attacks (NCTA), “9/11 
Commission Report”. 2004  [cited 2007 June]; Available 
from: http://www.9-11commission.gov/report/911Report.pdf., 
last accessed Mar 2010. 
[55] Lord Butler, “Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass 
Destruction”, in Report of a Committee of Privy Counsellors, 
Chairman: The Rt Hon The Lord Butler of Brockwell KG 
GCB CVO, 2004, Ordered by the House of Commons, 14th 
July: London. 
[56] M. Granovetter, “The strength of weak ties”. American 
Journal of Sociology, 1973. 78(6), pp. 1360-1380. 
[57] M. Hansen, “The search-transfer problem: The role of weak 
ties in sharing knowledge across organization subunits”. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 1999, pp. 82-111. 
[58] B. Jenkin MP,  “Speaking in the House of Commons”. 
Hansard, 
2010. 
Column 
699,1 
Mar, 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmhansr
d/cm100301/debtext/100301-0010.htm, last accessed June 
2013. 
[59] L. Szilard, “On the Increase of Entropy in a Thermodynamic 
System by the intervention of Intelligent Beings - the 
Critique” (Rapoport A. and M. Knoller trans.). Behavioral 
Science, 1964 (1929). 9, pp. 302-310. 
[60] A.C. Goodger, N.M.M. Caldwell, and J.T. Knowles. “What 
Does the Assurance Case Approach deliver for Critical 
Information Infrastructure Protection in Cybersecurity?” in 
System Safety 2012 - The 7th International IET System 
Safety Conference, incorporating the Cyber 
Security 
Conference 2012. Edinburgh, 15 Oct: IET. 
[61] S.V. Buldyrev 2, R. Parshani, G. Paul, H.E. Stanley, and S. 
Havlin, “Catastrophic cascade of failures in interdependent 
networks”. Nature, 2010. 464, 15 April 2010 (Received 22 
December 2009; Accepted 17 February 2010), pp. 1025-1028. 
[62] Public Administration Select Committee (PASC), “Who Does 
UK National Strategy?”, in PASC, 12 Oct, 2010, House of 
Commons London. 
[63] P. Dickens, Global Shift - Reshaping The Global Economic 
Map in the 21st Century, 2003, London: Sage Publications. 
[64] R.H. Coase, “The Nature of the Firm”. Economica, 1937. 
New Series, Vol. 4, No.16, Nov, pp. 386-405. 
[65] S. Reay Atkinson, A.M. Maier, N.H.M. Caldwell, and P.J. 
Clarkson, “Collaborative trust networks in engineering design 
adaptation”, in International Conference of Engineering 
Design, ICED11, 2011: Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby. 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

