Towards Social Media Platform Integration with an Applied Gaming Ecosystem 
Munir Salman 
FernUniversität in Hagen 
Faculty for Multimedia 
and Computer Science 
Hagen, Germany 
Email: 
munir.salman@studium.f
ernuni-hagen.de 
 
Kam Star 
PlayGen 
42 - 46 Princelet Street 
London, E1 5LP 
Email: 
kam@playgen.com 
 
 
Alexander 
Nussbaumer 
Graz University of 
Technology 
Graz, Austria 
Email: 
alexander.nussbaumer@t
ugraz.at 
Michael Fuchs, Holger 
Brocks, Duc Binh Vu 
Research Institute for 
Telecommunication and 
Cooperation 
Dortmund, Germany 
Email: mfuchs@ftk.de 
Email: hbrocks@ftk.de 
Dominic Heutelbeck 
Telecommunication and 
Cooperation 
Dortmund, Germany 
Email: 
dheutelbeck@ftk.de 
 
 
Matthias Hemmje 
FernUniversität in Hagen 
Faculty for Multimedia 
and Computer Science 
Hagen, Germany 
Email: 
matthias.hemmje@ 
fernuni-hagen.de 
 
Abstract—The European (EU)-based industry for non-leisure 
games (so called Applied Games, AGs) is an emerging business. As 
such it is still fragmented and needs to achieve critical mass to 
compete globally. Nevertheless, its growth potential is widely 
recognized and even suggested to exceed the growth potential of 
the leisure games market. The European project Realizing an 
Applied Gaming Ecosystem (RAGE) is aiming at supporting this 
challenge. RAGE will help to seize these opportunities by making 
available an interoperable set of advanced Applied Game (AG) 
technology assets, as well as proven practices of using such AG 
assets in various real-world contexts. RAGE will finally provide a 
centralized access to a wide range of applied gaming software 
modules, relevant information, knowledge and community 
services, and related document, media, and educational resources 
within an online community portal called the RAGE Ecosystem. 
Besides this, an integration between the RAGE Ecosystem and 
relevant social network interaction spaces that arranges and 
facilitates collaboration that underlie research and development 
(R&D), as well as market-oriented innovation and exploitation 
will be created in order to support community building, as well as 
collaborative asset exploitation of  User Generated Contents 
(UGCs) of the RAGE Ecosystem. In this paper, we will outline a 
conceptual approach exploring methods to first of all integrate 
Content Management- and Community Collaboration support 
including advanced portal features based on Digital Library (DL), 
Media Archive (MA), and Learning Management System (LMS) 
infrastructures with Social Network (SN) integration support 
technologies and on capturing support for Semantic Social Media 
(SSM) content. This will allow for a seamless integration of social 
network advantages within community portal operation. On the 
other hand it will support information, UGC, and knowledge 
sharing, as well as persistency of social interaction threads within 
Social Networking Sites (SNSs) that are connected to the RAGE 
Ecosystem. The paper reviews possible alternative architectural 
integration concepts, as well as related authentication, access, and 
information integration challenges. In this way, on the one hand a 
qualitative evaluation regarding an optimal technical integration 
approach is facilitated while on the other hand design approaches 
towards support features of resulting user interfaces are initiated. 
Keywords—Social Media; Applied Gaming; Digital Ecosystem; 
Access and Information Integration; Know-how transfer; Social 
Networking Site;  
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION  
The EU-based industry for AGs is an emerging 
business. As such it is still fragmented and needs to 
achieve critical mass to compete globally. Nevertheless, 
its growth potential is widely recognized and even 
suggested to exceed the growth potential of the leisure 
games market. The RAGE project [6] is aiming at 
supporting this challenge. RAGE will help to seize these 
opportunities by making available an interoperable set of 
advanced technology assets, tuned to applied gaming, as well 
as proven practices of using asset-based applied games in 
various real-world contexts. This will be achieved by 
enabling a centralized access to a wide range of applied 
gaming software modules, information, knowledge and 
community services, as well as related document, media, and 
educational 
resources 
within 
the 
RAGE 
Ecosystem. 
Furthermore, the RAGE project aims to boost the 
collaboration of diverse actors in the AG environment. 
Therefore, the main objectives of the RAGE Ecosystem are 
to allow its participants to get hold of advanced, usable 
gaming assets (technology push), to get access to the 
associated business cases (commercial opportunity), to 
create bonds with peers, suppliers, and customers (alliance 
formation), to advocate their expertise 
and demands 
(publicity), to develop and publish their own assets (trade), 
and to contribute to creating a joint agenda and road-map 
(harmonization and focus). 
This means that seen as a whole, the RAGE project is a 
technology and know-how driven research and innovation 
project. Its main driver is to be able to equip industry players 
(e.g., game developers) with a set of AG technology resources 
(so-called Assets) and strategies (i.e., know-how being 
provided by means of information services and knowledge 
resources) to strengthen their capacities to penetrate a market 
(non-leisure), which is new for most of them, and to 
consolidate a competitive position in it. Figure 1 represents 
the positioning of the project in the spectrum from 'theory to 
application'. 
In consequence, the RAGE Ecosystem and its integration with 
social networks of game-research-, game-developing- , 
gaming-, and AG communities will on the one hand become an 
enabler to harvest community knowledge and on the other hand 
it will support the access of such communities to the RAGE 
Ecosystem as an information and knowledge resource.  
Building on the results of this SNS integration with the 
RAGE Ecosystem including corresponding SNS-enabled 
content and knowledge management, the RAGE Ecosystem 
will in the future also support Social Network Analysis 
 
Figure 1. Technology and Know-How transfer [6] 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

(SNA) by means of applying technologies for Natural 
Language Analysis (NLA) for discourse analysis, as well as 
Named 
Entity 
Recognition 
(NER) 
and 
Semantic 
Representation and Annotation (SRA) of its results. This will, 
e.g., enable users to utilize the envisioned Ecosystem with 
features of a social mediation engine  going beyond content 
syndication, i.e., it will serve as a social space that mediates 
collaboration partners, while content remains the main 
attractor. Finally, an interactive map of supply- and demand-
side stakeholders and resources will be provided for domain 
and community orientation, as well as visual access support. 
Firstly, section II provides a brief introduction of a set of 
exemplar target communities that are present in SNS. 
Furthermore the section III describes related researches. The 
section IV is about state of the art in science and 
technology. Section V, more specifically, reviews the 
integration possibilities of social network technologies and 
their interfaces that could possibly support integration with 
the RAGE Ecosystem. Furthermore, it will investigate how 
to support access to resources and assets from such SNSs.  
Additionally, in section VI, 
it 
will 
outline 
design 
approaches towards 
supporting 
users 
in the 
target 
communities 
by 
services 
provided 
by 
the 
RAGE 
Ecosystem by means of outlining several use case 
scenarios for using Social Networking Features (SNFs) 
within the RAGE Ecosystem user interfaces. Finally, it will 
present conclusions and future work. 
II. 
TARGET SNS USER COMMUNITIES AND 
CORRESPONDING EXEMPLAR USER STEREOTYPES   
As outlined above, the EU-based industry for AG is an 
emerging business, which is still fragmented and needs to 
achieve critical mass for global competition. The AG 
industry and developer groups want to keep their 
developments 
innovative, 
i.e., 
attractive 
and 
technologically in good condition. These groups already have 
a very good understanding of their competitive advantage and 
corresponding assets (e.g., software, documents, and social 
media objects, etc.). However, they also need innovative ideas 
to develop innovative AGs in order to stay competitive. 
Therefore, they look for possibilities to cooperate with AG 
Research and Development (R&D) groups. Besides this, the 
AGs that researchers create within research projects produce a 
lot of AG research assets and prototypes, which need to be 
fully developed and deployed by AG software developers to 
become marketable. Apart from AG developers and 
researchers, there are also AG customers and players who on 
the one hand want to learn about or contract the development 
of AGs and on the other hand can also contribute to the 
development of AG usage scenarios. Many of these 
communities (AG developers, researchers, customers and 
players) are already present in a fragmented way within 
several groups in several SNSs. In [21], there are some 
examples of AG research, as well as industry and developer 
communities in, e.g., LinkedIn and Twitter. The Applied 
Games and Gamification (AGG) LinkedIn group, see [24] 
has over 4,500 members and has been running since 2011. 
The group claims to be one of the largest collective of 
creators, developers, researchers and users of applied games 
and gamification globally. The typical users can be divided 
approximately into those from the industry and those from 
the academia. From professors and recent graduates in 
gaming and related technologies, to CEOs, founders and 
directors of a wide variety of organisation that work or 
research the domain. The majority of discussion posts are 
promotions of products, methodologies for design, reposts of 
other interesting blogs on the topic and individuals' thoughts 
on implications of games and gamification for learning, 
training and behaviour change. The most prolific posters tend 
to be consultants and individuals representing organisation 
that are looking to showcase their abilities to a more business 
oriented community toward winning more business. Many 
posts do not garner comments or discussion as they are often 
pointing to other resources; however posts which pose 
interesting questions do receive attention and lead to 
interesting discussions from the more active members. 
Similarly the Serious Games Group on LinkedIn, see [25], 
has over 5100 members and has been running since 2008. 
The group memberships somewhat overlap with the applied 
games and gamification, however the audience tends to be 
more focused on the learning solutions and learning 
providers, with fewer CEOs and marketing directors, and 
more game designers as compared to the AGG, although the 
mode of use are very similar. 
 
RAGE will help to overcome this fragmentation and aims 
to support the capturing, as well as the representation, 
management, sharing, and exchange of social media 
produced content and knowledge resources through its 
Ecosystem. Therefore, the integration of SNSs hosting such 
target communities with the RAGE-Ecosystem and at the 
same time enabling the connectivity between SNSs and the 
RAGE-Ecosystem will connect research-, gaming industry-, 
intermediary-, education provider-, policy maker- and end-
user communities. Furthermore, it will facilitate the 
centralized access to the valuable assets beyond the SNSs. 
As a whole, take up of RAGE results will generate 
impacts that will be visible through multiple enhancements 
in the performance of European Applied Game industries, 
especially in terms of reducing the current fragmentation, 
improving their innovation capacity and fostering their 
progress towards global technological leadership. By 
offering reusable Applied Games assets, the RAGE 
Ecosystem infrastructure and marketplace will play a key 
role in support of applied research and technology 
development, including demand driven research and 
productification activities, easing technology transfer and 
field validation of novel products and services, on a broad 
collaborative basis. The combined effects will allow end-to-
end Applied Games value chain players to dramatically 
improve their competitive position. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
The work presented in this paper is related to a number of 
topics in research. The RAGE Ecosystem will be built upon 
the Educational Portal (EP) technology and application 
solution, which was developed by the software company 
GLOBIT [1] that already was used in APARSEN [2]. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

APARSEN (Alliance Permanent Access to the Records of 
Science in Europe Network) was an EU-funded project within 
the digital preservation area with the goal to create a virtual 
research center in digital preservation in Europe. The so-called 
EP tool-suite offers a wide variety of tools. This includes a 
web based, user-friendly User and Community Management 
(UCM) including an advanced Contact and Role Management 
(CRM) based on MythCRM [20], as well as knowledge 
management support in the form of Taxonomy Management 
(TM) support and semi-automatic taxonomy-based Content 
Classification (CC) support [3][16], as well as a Learning 
Management System (LMS) based on Moodle [4] and an 
advanced Course Authoring Tool (CAT) [23]. In this way, the 
Content & Knowledge Management (C&KM) tools of the EP 
tool suite support the management of documents in a 
taxonomy-supported Digital Library, the management of 
multimedia objects in a taxonomy-supported Media Archive 
and the management of Learning Objects in a competence-
based Learning Management System [19]. Furthermore, one 
of its additional purposes is to support Continuous 
Professional Education (CPE) and training of practitioners, 
experts, and scientists, which are members of professional 
communities of practice or scientific communities. Figure 2 
displays the components and services in the EP tool suite as 
described in [16]. EP was built based on Typo3 [1] and, 
therefore, can be extended with the help of Typo3 extensions. 
Evgeny, Bogdanov et al [11] extend a social media platform in 
higher education with lightweight tools (widgets) aimed for 
collaborative learning and competence development. Our 
work will establish the new EP module Community & Social 
Network Support with a so-called Agile Application Interface 
(AAPI), which facilitates the connectivity to a wide range of 
SNSs. 
IV. 
RELEVANT STARTING POINTS WITHIN THE 
STATE OF THE ART IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
SNSs have changed the way of information sharing and 
learning processes by adding innovative features to social 
communication. SNS were defined as “Internet or mobile-
device 
based 
social 
spaces 
designed 
to 
facilitate 
communication, collaboration, and content sharing across 
networks of contacts. SNS allows its users to become content 
creators and content consumers at the same time, thus 
allowing instant participation, sharing of thoughts or 
information and personalised communication” [7]. Therefore, 
SNSs are becoming increasingly important. This holds 
especially true for various SNFs like, e.g., rating, 
commenting, tagging, chatting, liking, posting new Social 
Media (SM) and UGC, following actors or celebrities, 
playing games etc. These SNFs are not only entertaining 
and exciting but also useful for 
learning and for 
information enrichment. Research has shown that distance 
education courses are often more successful when they 
develop communities of practice [10]. Besides, SM content 
becomes increasingly important in business and research. 
Kaplan [14] gave a clarification what the term SM means and 
how the concept of SM differs from the concept of related 
concepts such as Web 2.0 and UGC. Furthermore, he presents 
10 pieces of advice to utilize SM. On the other hand, 
Agichtein et al [9] focus on the Semantic Social Media (SSM) 
and investigate methods exploiting community feedback, e.g., 
to automatically identify high quality content. Breslin et al. 
define in [12] “The Social Semantic Web as a vision of a 
Web where all of the different collaborative systems and 
social network services, are connected together through the 
addition of semantics, allowing people to traverse across 
these different types of systems, reusing and porting their data 
between systems as required.” RAGE will use Semantic Web 
technologies in order to describe in an interoperable way 
users’ profiles, social connections, and social media creation 
and sharing across different SNSs, as well as within the 
RAGE Ecosystem. Therefore, RAGE will be able to deliver 
well-grounded recommendation and mediation features AG 
R&D communities.  
Today, 
most 
SNSs 
provide 
so-called 
Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs) for developers to integrate the 
SNSs into their systems. Although, the SNSs are different in 
their functionality, 
i.e., their social networking feature 
support, their software architecture for the communication 
with distributed other systems is similar. Most of the SNSs 
offer REST APIs like [12][13][15], which can be used for 
integration with other systems. In the following, the description 
of the LinkedIn REST API software architecture as described 
in [7], as well as the Twitter Semantic REST API as described 
in [18] will be cited as an exemplary, illustrative, and at 
the same time representative example. 
The following 
features can be accomplished with the LinkedIn self-service 
APIs: Sign in with LinkedIn, Apply with LinkedIn, Share on 
LinkedIn and Manage Company Pages. One of the most 
important LinkedIn APIs is the share content. There are two 
methods for sharing content via the REST API [7]. 
 
Post a comment that includes a URL to the content, 
which should be shared— LinkedIn analyzes the 
 
Figure 2. EP Tool Suite - Components and Services 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

included URL and automatically identifies the title, 
description, image, etc. 
 
Share with specific values — developer should 
provide the title, description, image, etc., directly 
via the parameters of the API call. 
Figure 3 displays a coding example for sharing content with 
specific values on LinkedIn [7]. 
The documentation of the Twitter API explicitly specifies 
four main response objects (Tweets, Users, Entities and Places) 
[22] but Togias et al. [18] identified with a more thorough 
study 44 of such resource types. Some of them can be directly 
accessed through actions provided by the API, while other can 
be accessed through the fields of other resource types. All of 
them defined the identified resource types as instances of 
ResourceType Class. Table I describes some of these instances 
in more detail. 
In summary, it is a big advantage to aim at supporting the 
integration of SNSs including relevant SNFs, as well as SSM 
content 
capturing, 
management, 
sharing, 
and 
dissemination support through their REST API into the 
RAGE Ecosystem. This will on the one hand facilitate to 
extend the envisioned RAGE Ecosystem with features of a 
social mediation engine going beyond content syndication, 
i.e., it can serve a social space that mediates collaboration 
partners, while content remains the main attractor. On the 
other 
hand it 
focuses 
on 
identifying 
collaboration 
opportunities between individuals and among groups, to 
support 
matchmaking 
and 
collaboration 
between 
stakeholders, and to identify and provide support 
for 
innovation opportunities and creativity efforts. That allows 
communities 
(such 
as 
technology 
providers, 
game 
developers and educators, game industries, researchers) to 
create their own assets and post them to the Ecosystem’s 
repository without major effort. Besides this, t h e  above 
approach enables follow-up work in the area of social network 
analysis and discourse analysis, which can then be conducted 
and used to provide feedback, recommendations, mediations, 
and relevant information to the communities. This feedback 
can e.g., help gaming companies to develop new markets in 
applied gaming. 
V. 
INTEGRATION APPROACH AND 
METHODOLOGY 
The following section presents the main technical 
integration possibilities in the backend, as well as in 
frontend. In this way, our integration approach and 
methodology is enabling us to differentiate between how to 
get access to resources and assets in the RAGE 
Ecosystem from external SNS communities and how to push 
contents from the RAGE Ecosystem to the external SNSs 
in order to improve user acceptance of services provided 
by the RAGE Ecosystem. Figure 4 displays the concept 
of a bi-directional integration approach of the RAGE 
Ecosystem with SNSs using a REST API. 
Corresponding to this bi-directional integration approach, 
table II details scenarios following possible Tight and 
Loose 
Coupling 
methodologies 
that 
have 
to 
be 
considered for achieving an integration of SNS to RAGE 
and vice versa. In the following, the description of the As 
Another example, the so-called SlideShare API and its 
software architecture as described in [8] will be cited in 
TABLE I. TWITTERS REST API INSTANCES OF THE 
RESOURCETYPE CLASS [18] 
ResourceType 
Instance 
Description 
 
Connections 
Connections of the 
authenticating user to other users 
DirectMessage 
A private message sent from a 
user to another user 
Entity 
Metadata and additional 
contextual information about 
content posted on Twitter 
EntityMedia 
Media elements uploaded with a 
Tweet 
FollowersIds 
Numeric IDs of users that follow 
the authenticating user 
FriendsIds 
Numeric IDs of users that the 
authenticating user is following 
TwitterList 
A collection of tweets, posted by 
users belonging to a curated list 
Trend 
A popular topic in Twitter 
UserCategory 
Categeory of users 
UsersLookup 
Extended information about 
users 
 
 
Figure 4. Integration Approach of RAGE Ecosystem with SNSs 
{ 
"comment": "Check out  
     developer.linkedin.com!", "content": { 
 
"title": "LinkedIn Developers Res.", 
"description": "Leverage LinkedIn's  
APIs to maximize engagement",  
 
"submitted-url":  
 
"https://developer.linkedin.com", 
"submitted-image-url":  
"https://example.com/logo.png" 
  }, 
  "visibility": { "code": "anyone"} 
} 
Figure 3. Sharing content with specific values on LinkedIn 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

{ The oEmbed version number }   
{ Media type }   
{ Embed media height }  
{ Embed media width }   
{ Embed content provider, SlideShare }  
{ URL of the provider }  
{ Thumbnail URL }   
{ Thumbnail height}  
{ Thumbnail width}  
{ Author of embed content }   
{ oEmbed version number }   
{ Author SlideShare homepage }     
{ ID of the slideshow } 
{ Total number of slides in slideshow} 
{ base URL of the slideshow images } 
{ base URL suffix } 
{ version number of the slideshow } 
http://www.slideshare.net/api/oembed/2?
url=http://www.slideshare.net/ 
haraldf/business-quotes-for-
2011&format=json 
the following as an exemplary, illustrative, and at the 
same time representative example for the loose and tight 
coupling between the RAGE Ecosystem and SNSs.  
The SlideShare API is based upon the REST model 
and supports the following functions: 
• 
Upload, edit and delete slideshows 
• 
Retrieving slideshow information by user, tag or 
group 
• 
Retrieving groups, tags, and contacts by user 
• 
Search slideshows 
Those facilitate the loose coupling integration into the RAGE 
Ecosystem e.g., to get Slideshows by tag using the SlideShare 
REST API the Request should include followings parameter: 
• 
Request Type: HTTPS GET 
• 
Authorization: None 
• 
URL: 
https://www.slideshare.net/api/2/get_slideshows_b
y_tag 
• 
Tag: tag name 
• 
[limit: specify number of items to return] 
• 
[offset: specify offset] 
• 
[detailed: Whether or not to include optional 
information. 1 to include, 0 (default) for basic 
information.] 
The Slideshows REST API Response is in XML format 
and it looks like the following coding: 
Furthermore, SlideShare provides an oEmbed API, which 
follows the oEmbed [5] standard. This standard facilitates the 
tight coupling integration of the Slideshows within the RAGE 
Ecosystem. The following codes show an example for 
making the embeddable media available through its oEmbed 
API endpoint and an API response example. 
1. Example: XML Request 
2. Example: XML Response 
VI. SNF USAGE SCENARIOS AND DESIGN CONCEPT 
In addition to outlining our SNS integration 
approach and methodology, Figure 5 displays how the 
SNS usage scenarios can be integrated into the RAGE 
Ecosystem itself. RAGE Ecosystem users can visit 
content and knowledge management support within the 
RAGE Ecosystem’s a Digital Library, Media Archive, 
Software 
Repository, 
which 
is 
currently 
under 
development based on [17], and Learning Management 
System. Here, users have the opportunity to: 
TABLE II. LOOSE AND TIGHT COUPLING INTEGRATION 
METHODS BETWEEN SNS AND THE RAGE ECOSYSTEM 
 
Method 
FROM SNS TO 
RAGE 
ECOSYSTEM 
FROM RAGE 
ECOSYSTEM TO 
SNS 
Tight 
Coupling 
Integration of 
RAGE-Interface 
within the SNS, 
user does not need 
to leave the SNS 
Environment (e.g., 
user posts a content 
to the RAGE 
Ecosystem without 
leaving the SN- 
Environment; user 
remains on the 
SNS) 
Integration of SN-
Interface within the 
RAGE Ecosystem, 
user doesn’t leave 
the RAGE 
Environment (e.g., 
user posts, likes 
etc. a content 
without switching 
to the SNS; user 
remains on the 
RAGE Ecosystem) 
Loose 
Coupling 
SNFs are related 
to SNS (links 
from RAGE to 
the SNS) 
User lefts the 
RAGE 
Environment and 
switches to the 
SNS; user has to 
complete the 
action on the 
SNS, not on the 
RAGE 
Ecosystem 
SNFs are only 
related to SNS (link 
from RAGE to the 
SNS) User leaves 
the RAGE 
Environment and 
switches to the 
SNS; user has to 
complete the action 
on the SNS, not on 
the RAGE 
Ecosystem 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Tag> 
  <Name>{ Tag Name }</Name> 
  <Count>{Number of Slideshows}</Count> 
  <Slideshow> 
  { as in get_slideshow } 
  </Slideshow> 
... 
</Tag> 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

a. 
Rate (1), like (2), and Comment (3): these 
Social Networking Features (SNFs) are e.g., 
important for the recommendation system (also 
currently under development, see [16] to get 
more useful suggestions. 
b. Tell a friend (4): users can send links to 
selected content (or the content itself) through 
email. Email addresses can be selected either 
from the RAGE address book or from users’ 
address books, which are located in SNSs. 
c. 
Share and post (5): Users can share the selected 
content to one of their favourite SNSs or on 
the fly to more than one by selecting them from 
the share button. 
Users also have the possibility to publish 
content to a repository (e.g., GitHub’s 
repository) or to cloud storage (e.g., into 
Dropbox). 
d. Favourite (6): Users can add content to their 
favourite lists, which facilitates to later, e.g., 
share/post their entire favourite list to a 
community. 
e. 
Share and post to RAGE Communities (7) 
within the RAGE Ecosystem and also from 
any other platforms outside the RAGE 
Ecosystem. A RAGE Share-Button can be 
released and, e.g., be integrated by developers 
into other portals, homepages, ecosystems etc. 
to provide the possibility to Internet Users to 
share and post their content to the RAGE-
Ecosystem. 
f. 
RAGE Follow-me (8): RAGE users can follow 
other users, groups or content in order to keep 
themselves up-to-date. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper, we have introduced the RAGE Ecosystem 
supporting 
community-based 
content and knowledge 
management. In detail it will support the collection, sharing, 
access, and re-use of AG R&D assets, including SSM 
content and UGC resources, as well as 
academic, 
industry, and end user best practice knowhow represented in 
corresponding knowledge resources. In this way, the RAGE 
Ecosystem will provide AG communities, and therefore 
SNS communities, too, an opportunity to interact, share 
and re-use SSM content and UCG including corresponding 
knowledge resources, 
as 
well 
as 
communicate 
and 
collaborate using the RAGE Ecosystem as a back-end 
community content and knowledge management portal in 
addition to their favorite SNSs. Besides this introduction, we 
have presented how a  technical integration between the 
RAGE Ecosystem and SNSs can be achieved to reduce the 
fragmentation and to increase the knowledge exchange 
among 
AG 
communities 
(such as AG developers, 
researchers, customers, and players). The RAGE Ecosystem 
and its SNS and SNF integration are currently under 
development. 
In 
the 
future, 
RAGE 
is 
aiming 
at 
increasing outreach and take-up of the RAGE Ecosystem 
through further SNS integration and SNF implementation. 
For example, the SNA and discourse analysis will be 
used for collecting, analyzing, and presenting data about 
various patterns of relationships among people, objects 
and knowledge flows within the RAGE Ecosystem and will 
provide additional functionality and sophisticated services 
for end-users, enhancing the emergence of communities. 
In particular, future developments will focus on identifying 
collaboration opportunities among individuals and groups, 
to support matchmaking and collaboration among main 
stakeholders, and to identify and provide support for 
innovation opportunities and creativity efforts. In this way, 
the RAGE project currently anticipates the following tools 
and services: 
a) The RAGE Diagnostic tool based on various metrics for 
analyzing the usage of resources, the formation of 
different users groups, the level of social interactions, 
etc., 
b) the RAGE awareness tool can increase participation of 
different target groups in the Ecosystem, 
c) the RAGE Knowledge Mapping tool builds and analyses 
knowledge maps for all kind of resources available in the 
Ecosystem. 
d) the RAGE Professional support tool will support the 
users by letting them know whom or where to ask for 
support in different situations, 
e) the 
RAGE 
Community 
detection 
tool 
will 
use 
available 
clustering 
algorithms 
(also 
called 
‘‘community detection algorithms’’) that automatically 
identify  and locate existing communities, in order to 
enhance 
the 
communication 
between 
gaming 
practitioners, 
f) the RAGE Ecosystem analysis tool will apply network 
 
 
Figure 5. SNF Usage Scenario in the RAGE Ecosystem 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

analysis including many algorithms for identifying the 
most important, or central in some sense, nodes within a 
network, 
g) the RAGE Recommendation may generate value 
interventions towards stimulating the participation of 
users. Such interventions include suggesting connections 
among users, setting up groups, closing the gaps in 
people’s knowledge of other members’ expertise and 
experience, and strengthening the cohesiveness within 
existing teams. 
Social media data such as tags, 
comments, purchasing patterns, and ratings can be used 
to link related gaming assets and users together into 
networks, the RAGE Social learning tool applies SNA 
to online learning environments, as well, focusing on 
the structural relationships between all learning objects 
and users, that support learning communities. 
 
 
With 
the 
design 
and 
development 
of 
a 
comprehensive approach as pursued with the RAGE 
Ecosystem, ethical issues need to be taken into account. 
The integration of users’ SN profiles from different SNS, 
as well as the use of features carrying out analyses on top 
of Ecosystem user data have ethical implications in terms 
of privacy and data protection and require appropriate 
information and consent in the terms and conditions of 
use, as well as compliance to national and international 
data protection regulations. The same is for any use of log 
data for the purpose of system evaluation, or for UGC and 
user actions shared among different SNS and the RAGE 
Ecosystem. In addition, with UGC questions related to 
verification and validation of contributions, as well as to 
copyright ownership and infringement become relevant. 
The consideration of such ethical and legal requirements 
shall be incorporated in the system design and 
development process in terms of an ethics-by-design 
approach [26]. This means that data protection and 
privacy is already taken into account when the system is 
being designed. Design principles, such as purpose 
binding, would ensure that personal information is only 
accessible, if there is a need for it when performing a 
certain action. The system can also control data access by 
respecting personal settings which data should be 
available to others or the public. Other ethics-enabled 
features include the modification or deletion of personal 
data. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS AND DISCLAIMER 
This publication has been produced 
in the context of the RAGE project. 
The project has received funding from 
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under 
grant agreement No 644187. However, this paper reflects 
only the author's view and the European Commission is 
not responsible for any use that may be made of the 
information it contains. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  „Globit.com. Educational portal,“ [retrieved: Sep. 2015].  
[2]  S. Schrimpf, „Aparsen - alliance permanent access to the records 
of science in europe network.,“ Dialog mit Bibliotheken, Feb. 
2014, pp. 52-53.  
[3]  T. Swoboda, Towards effectivity augmentation of automated 
scientific document classification by continuous feedback, Sep. 
2014, Hagen.  
[4]  „moodle,“ [retrieved: Sep. 2015]. Available: http://moodle.de/. 
[5]  „oembed,“ 
[retrieved: 
Sep. 
2015]. 
Available: 
http://oembed.com/. 
[6]  „RAGE,“ 
[retrieved: 
Sep. 
2015]. 
Available: 
http://www.rageproject.eu. 
[7]  „LinkedIn,“ 
[retrieved: 
Sep. 
2015]. 
Available: 
https://developer.linkedin.com/docs/share-on-linkedin. 
[8]  „SlideShare,“ 
[retrieved: 
Sep. 
2015]. 
Available: 
http://de.slideshare.net/developers. 
[9]  E. Agichtein, C. Castillo, D. Donato, A. Gionis and G. Mishne, 
„Finding High-quality Content in Social Media,“ 2009, pp. 183-
194.  
[10]  S. Barab and A. Duffy, „From practice fields to communities of 
practice. In D. Jonassen & S. M. Land Eds.,“ Theoretical 
foundations of learning environments, 2000, pp. 25-56.  
[11]  E. Bogdanov, F. Limpens, N. Li, S. El Helou, C. Salzmann and 
D. Gillet, „A Social Media Platform in Higher Education,“ IEEE 
Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), Apr. 
2012, pp. 1-8.  
[12]  J. Breslin and S. Decker, „The Future of Social Networks on the 
Internet: The Need for Semantics,“ IEEE Internet Computing, 
May 2008, pp. 86-90.  
[13]  G. Decker, A. Lüders, H. Overdick, K. Schlichting and M. 
Weske, „RESTful Petri Net Execution},,“Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Jul. 2009, pp. 73-87.  
[14]  A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, „Users of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of Social Media,“ Business 
Horizons, Jan 2010, pp. 59-68.  
[15]  J. Mangler, P. Beran and E. Schikuta, „On the Origin of Services 
Using RIDDL for Description, Evolution and Composition of 
RESTful Services,“ May 2010, pp. 505-508.  
[16]  M. Schmedding, C. Nawroth and M. Hemmje, „Get along in the 
RAGE Ecosystem - Hybrid Domain Specific Knowledge 
Capturing 
in 
an 
Heterogeneous 
Software 
Development 
Environment,“ 2015. Manuscript submitted for publication.  
[17]  Е. Stefanova, N. Nikolova, E. Peltekova, K. Stefanov, T. 
Zafirova-Malcheva and K. Kovatcheva, „Share.TEC: An 
innovative Solution for Teacher Educators,“ In proceedings of 
4th International Conference of Education, Research and 
Innovation, Nov. 2011, pp. 1679-1688, ISBN: 978-84-615-
3324-4, ISSN: 2340-1095.  
[18]  K. Togias and A. Kameas, „An ontology-based representation of 
the Twitter REST API,“ in Tools with Artificial Intelligence 
(ICTAI), IEEE 24th International Conference, Nov. 2012, pp. 
998-1003. 
[19]  „TENCompetence,“ Building The European Network for 
Lifelong Competence Development, [retrieved: Sep. 2015]. 
Available: http://www.tencompetence.org. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[20]  V. Duc Binh, „Customer Relationship Management based on 
Identity Management for Scientific Associations,“ Jul. 2015, pp. 
43-48.  
[21]  M. Salman, M. Hemmje, D. Heutelbeck, M. Fuchs and H. 
Brocks, „Towards Social Network Support for an Applied 
Gaming Ecosystem,“ 2015. Manuscript submitted for 
publication.  
[22]  „TwitterDev,“ 
[retrieved: 
Sep. 
2015]. 
Available: 
https://dev.twitter.com/. 
[23]  M. Then, B. Wallenborn, B. R. Ianniello and M. Hemmje, 
„Learning Design and Integration of Legacy Tools into Modern 
Learning Platforms,“ 6th Annual international Conference on 
Computer Science Education: Innovation and Technology, 2015. 
Manuscript submitted for publication.   
[24] "The Applied Games and Gamification Group on linkedin", 
[retrieved: 
Sep. 
2015]. 
Available:  
https://www.linkedin.com/grp/home?gid=3889283. 
[25] "The Serious Games Group on linkedin", [retrieved: Sep. 
2015]. 
Available:   
https://www.linkedin.com/grp/home?gid=137156.  
[26] D. Gotterbarn, K. Miller, S. Rogerson, „Software 
Engineering Code of Ethics," Nov. 1997. 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

