Assessing General Data Protection Regulation for Personal Data Privacy: is the End 
of “Take it or Leave it” Approach for Downloading Apps? 
Spyros E. Polykalas 
Department of Digital Media & Communication  
TEI of Ionian Islands  
Argostoli Kefalonia, Greece 
email: s.polykalas@teiion.gr 
 
 
Abstract—On a daily basis, an enormous amount of data are 
generated from several personal and non-personal devices, 
such as mobile phones, tablets, computers, sensors for the 
Internet of Things applications, etc. In most cases, the data are 
stored and analyzed aiming to improve the quality of the 
provided services. In cases, where these data are correlated, 
directly or indirectly, with a person are characterized as 
personal data. The collection, storage and processing of 
personal data raise several issues on personal data privacy, in 
particular when users are not well informed regarding the 
processing of their personal data. The aim of this paper is to 
examine to what extent the procedures currently followed in 
one of the most popular personal applications stores (Google 
Play), which contains more than 3 million mobile applications 
including social media applications, are in compliance with the 
provisions of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). 
Our analysis shows that the current procedures, followed by 
Google Play store, are not fully in compliance with the 
upcoming framework, in particular with issues related to, 
users awareness regarding the scope of personal data process, 
non availability of user option to install an app without giving 
full access to his/her personal data and protection of minor 
users. It is argued that several modifications should be done, 
both from apps developers and stores, in order to harmonize 
the relevant procedures with the provisions laid out in the 
upcoming EU Regulation. 
Keywords- data privacy; personal data; GDPR; Google Play 
store; Android; EU framework. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
World is moving in fully digitalized societies, where 
citizens are using electronic communication services, mainly 
internet based, for entertainment, communication and work. 
Most of us, are always connected to internet with personal 
devices, such as smartphones in which several applications 
(apps) are installed. The increased demand for personal apps 
leads to the development of millions of apps, which are 
available for downloading in internet app stores, such as 
Google Play store. The vast majority of these apps require 
access to data, stored in users devices, which directly or 
indirectly could lead to personal identification, therefore are 
characterized as personal data. Indeed, as shown in [10] the 
majority of the examined mobile applications (84%), require 
access to almost every single file stored in mobile devices, 
while users are evaluating mobile applications, without 
taking into account the level of data access, requested by 
each mobile application. That leads to a preliminary 
conclusion that users, either are not aware about the level of 
required data access by mobile applications, or they choose 
to install mobile applications, regardless of the length of the 
required data access.  
The framework of personal data and personal privacy 
remained the same in European Union (EU), for almost two 
decades. After four years of public consultations and 
discussions, within EU [8], in 2016 the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) was approved by the 
European Parliament, aiming to protect users from 
collecting, storing and processing of their personal data. The 
upcoming EU Regulation, introduces new principles to 
several issues related to personal data privacy in electronic 
communication sector, such as, the fully awareness of user 
about the purpose of personal data collection, the obligation 
of the existence of user consent, prior the personal data 
storage and process, the protection of minor users personal 
data introducing as mandatory the existence of parental 
consent, and several other issues.  
Currently, the majority of internet stores and personal 
apps follow a “take it or leave it” approach, which means 
that users are not allowed to restrict or minimize the extent 
of the required personal data access, prior the installation of 
the selected app in their personal devices. If a user wants to 
download and install an app, has to accept the full set of 
personal data access types, determined by app developer, 
even though some of the required personal data types are not 
necessary for the provided app running, at least with the 
basic functionality. The scope of this paper is twofold: first, 
to designate the main principles, laid down in the GDPR, in 
relation to protection of user personal data privacy, when a 
user downloads an app to his/her personal device and 
second, to examine whether the procedures and principles 
currently followed by internet app stores and by app 
developers are in accordance with the relevant principles 
contained in the GDPR. To do so, one of the most popular 
internet app store was chosen (Google Play store) and an 
indicative, free of charge, popular personal app was selected 
(“Temple Run 2”). It should be noted that the scope of this 
paper is not to criticize the procedures, followed by the 
selected app, but to examine in general the harmonization of 
the principles followed in Google Play store, by millions of 
apps, with the provisions of the forthcoming Regulation. In 
this context, it models the relevant procedures contained in 
the GDPR and compared them, with the current procedures 
followed by Google Play store, in order to determine the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

GDPR provisions that are violated by the procedures 
currently followed in Google Play store.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 
II, a literature review is discussed, while in Section III, first 
are modeled the procedures laid down in the GDPR and then 
are compared with the relevant procedures, in relation to 
personal data collection/storage/processing, followed by 
Google Play store. Finally, in the last section, the findings of 
this paper are discussed. 
. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
The issues of personal data protection and in general data 
privacy, have drawn the attention of several researchers. The 
majority of existing research deals with the awareness of 
users in relation to the extent of personal data access, 
development of applications for personal data management, 
type of personal data that apps shared with third parties, 
sufficiency of information provided by app developers in 
relation to purposes of personal data collection and several 
other issues. In particular in [5], researchers concluded that 
the majority of apps does not provide sufficient information 
to users, in relation to the purposes and necessity of personal 
data collection. In addition they found that for 31% of the 
examined apps, the requested types of personal data access is 
excessive in relation to the apps functionality. In another 
study [6], researchers developed an app permission manager 
that showed users nudges about the data handling performed 
by the installed personal apps. They concluded, that a large 
percentage of users, given the right information, will modify 
the permissions initially granted to the apps in their 
smartphones. In [7], users were paid, in order to assert their 
level of comfort, with respect to giving apps access to 
privacy-related information in their smartphone. Researchers 
concluded that users, have different expectations compared 
to the developers of the applications, moreover they find it 
difficult to assess, why an app may require certain privacy-
related data. In addition, it was found that when users are 
properly informed, then they feel more comfortable in 
providing access to the required information.  
As regards, the compliance of the framework in relation 
to protection of personal data privacy, researchers are 
focused on minors protection, user consent, portability of 
personal data and several other issues. More specific, in [1] 
researchers critically assess the provisions of the new EU 
Regulation, related to the consent of minors, and makes a 
comparative analysis with the requirements stipulated in the 
relevant framework in the USA, in order to identify pitfalls 
and lessons to be learnt before the new rules in the EU 
become applicable. In [2], they discuss the provisions of new 
EU Regulation, in relation with the associated data 
protection and user privacy concerns, making reference to 
such Internet of Things (IoT) service offerings, as smart 
retail, the smart home, smart wearables, smart health devices, 
smart television and smart toys. In [3], researchers deal with 
a new obligation introduced by the GDPR, in relation to 
personal data portability. As personal data portability is 
defined the user right firstly, to receive his/her personal data, 
which he/she has provided to service provider, such as web 
service provider, and secondly, to transmit those data to 
another provider without hindrance from the controller to 
which the personal data have been initially provided. The 
researchers suggest that, in order to ensure comprehensive 
data portability that reaches out to all relevant stakeholders, 
including businesses, the provisions in the GDPR need to be 
analyzed by taking into account EU competition rules. 
Another interesting approach is related to the provisions 
included in the GDPR, in relation to the requirements and the 
implications put in place for the design of learning analytics 
systems [4].  
 
III. 
GDPR AND GOOGLE PLAY STORE 
A. Modelling the main GDPR provisions  
The new EU Regulation published in 2016, introduced a 
new framework at EU level in relation to users personal data 
privacy. The provisions included in the new Regulation, are 
aiming to protect users’ personal data, taking into account 
the digitalized environment of our societies. The scope of 
this study is to examine the provisions of the new 
Regulation, in relation to the principles that should be 
followed by app stores and developers, in relation to user 
awareness regarding the personal data protection. In addition 
a comparative analysis is made between the provisions 
included in GDPR and the relevant, followed by app 
developers and Google Play store.  
In the following paragraphs are analyzed the main 
relevant provisions of the Regulation in relation to personal 
data privacy.  
First of all, the scope of the GDPR (article 1) is related, 
among others, to the protection of natural persons (hereafter 
users), regarding the processing of personal data, regardless 
of whether the storage and processing of personal data take 
place in the EU, or not. As personal data (article 4), are 
considered all information relating to an identified or 
identifiable user, such as name, location data, an online 
identifier, etc. The principles, in relation to personal data 
collection/storage/processing, should be characterized by 
lawfulness, fairness, transparency, purpose limitation and 
data minimization (article 5). Purpose limitation means, that 
data shall be collected and processed for specified, explicit 
and legitimate purposes and not further processed is 
permitted, in a manner that is incompatible with those 
purposes. Data minimization means that collected and 
processed data, shall be adequate relevant and limited to 
what is necessary, in relation to the purposes for which they 
are processed. In addition the process of personal data is 
lawful, only if and to extent, the users have given consent for 
the processing (article 6). It should be noted that there are 
few more cases, in relation to the lawfulness of personal data 
processing, where user consent is not required such as, 
protection of user vital interest, performance of user contract, 
etc., but these issues are out of the scope of this paper. In 
article 7 of the Regulation, are contained the conditions for 
user consent. First of all, the controller of personal data (in 
our case, Google Stores and app developers), shall be able to 
demonstrate that the user has consented to personal data 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

processing, when personal data processing is based on user’s 
consent. In addition in cases, where users have given 
consent, in the context of a written declaration which also 
includes and other matters, the request of consent shall be 
presented in a manner, which is clearly distinguishable from 
the other matters, in a intelligible and easily accessible form, 
using clear and plain language. In order to assess, whether 
the consent has been given in a freely manner, utmost 
account shall be given, whether the provision of a service is 
conditional on content to the personal data, that are not 
necessary for the provision of the service. Last but not least, 
it should also be pointed out, that the Regulation introduces 
new provisions in relation to the collection and process of 
minors’ personal data. In particular in article 8, it is 
mentioned that in case that user is under 16 years old, then 
the collection/storage/processing of his/her personal data, in 
relation to the provision of a service, is lawful, only if and to 
the extent that the consent has been given, or authorized, by 
the person who has the parental responsibility over the child.  
In the following figure (Figure 1), are modeled the 
procedures that shall be followed when a user is 
downloading an app, to his/her personal device, according to 
GDPR provisions. 
The first step, is related to whether the provision of an 
electronic communication service, concerns the collection 
and process of personal data. In the case, that the provision 
of a service is related with personal data collection, then the 
next step deals with the user consent. In particular, in the 
case that user has not give his/her consent, for the 
collection/process of his/her data, then the whole procedure 
is incompatible with the provisions of GDPR. In case, that 
user is under 16 years old, then the consent of the person, 
who has the parental responsibility over the minor user, is 
required otherwise the whole process is unlawful. In case, 
that user has give his/her consent, then it is crucial to 
examine, whether user has been informed about the purpose 
of personal data collection and process. If user is not aware 
about the purpose, then again the whole process is not 
compliant with GDPR provisions. The next step is dealing 
with the principles of data collection/processing, which shall 
follow the rational of purpose limitation and data 
minimization. For example, if data are collected / processed 
only for reasons relevant to service provision, then the 
collection of personal data, for advertising reasons is not 
lawful. In addition, if personal data are collected, which are 
not necessary and relevant to the informed purposes, then the 
whole process is not compliant with the provisions of GDPR. 
In the case, that user consent related to collection/processing 
of personal data, has been given within the context of other 
matters, such as, the terms and conditions of an offered 
service, then the request for personal data, shall be clearly 
distinguished from the other matters. Last but not least, it 
should be examined whether the user has the option to 
receive the requested service, but at the same time to deny 
the collection and process of his/her personal data, that are 
not necessary for the provision of the service.  
 
  
Figure 1.  Main GDPR personal data privacy provisions during an app 
downloading. 
B. Downloading an app from Google Play store  
In the next paragraphs, the current procedure followed in 
Google Play store for downloading an application, is 
described. Google Play store is organized in four main 
categories: Apps, Movies, Music and Books. The Google 
Play store, contained (June 2016) more than three million 
mobile applications grouped in the following three main 
categories: the first one which contains 28 sub-categories, 
the second titled Games, contained about 17 sub-categories 
and the third one named Family contained about 9 sub-
categories. Each sub-category contained hundreds or 
thousands mobile applications available for downloading 
either, free of charge or, paid. A precondition to download an 
app, from Google Play store, is the existence of a 
subscription to Google services and a personal device 
running Android operating system. It should be noted that 
subscription to Google services is allowed to a user, which is 
older than 13 years old (at EU level). In order to analyze the 
steps required for the installation of a Google Play 
application, one free of charge popular mobile app was 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

selected and installed, named “Temple Run 2”, which up to 
June 2017 had more than 100M installations. It should be 
noted that we logged in, with an account of a 15 years old 
user. The user of Google Store has the option to click the 
button “install”, or before that, has the option to scroll down 
the page, in order to get information for several issues 
including the “Permissions”, required by the app, as well as, 
the “Privacy Policy” of the app developer. By clicking “view 
details”, under the header of “Permission”, user is informed 
about the access, required prior the installation of the app. 
For the selected app user is informed, that the app will have 
access to “in app purchase”, “photos/media/files”, “storage”, 
“view WiFi connection information”, “view network 
connections” and “full network access”. According to the 
explanation, given by app developer, “app purchase” means 
that the app may ask the user to make purchases inside the 
app, while access to “photos/media/files” means, that the app 
will be able to read, modify or delete the content of usb 
storage. The same explanation is given, by the app 
developer, in relation to access to “storage”. The potential 
categories of permissions, required by any app in Google 
Store, are categorized and explained by Google Store site, in 
the terms and conditions of Google Store. The following 
table compares, for each permission category required in the 
selected app, the relevant description provided by the 
selected app, and Google Play store.  
 
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTION OF THE REQUIRED PERMISSIONS 
Type of 
access 
Description / Explanation 
  
Google Play store  
Selected App 
In-app 
purchases 
An app can ask you to make 
purchases inside the app. 
not explained  
Photo / 
Media / Files 
An app can use files or data 
stored on your device. 
Photos/Media/Files access may 
include the ability to:Read the 
contents of your USB storage 
(example: SD card), Modify or 
delete the contents of your USB 
storage, Format external storage, 
Mount or unmount external 
storage. 
read the contents 
of your USB 
storage 
modify or delete 
the content of 
your USB storage  
WiFi 
connection 
information 
An app can access your device's 
Wi-Fi connection information, 
like if Wi-Fi is turned on and the 
name(s) of connected devices. 
Wi-Fi connection information 
access may include the ability to 
view Wi-Fi connections. 
view WiFi 
connections 
Other 
Other types of acces such as 
receive data from internet. 
view network 
connections  
full network 
access 
Storage 
NA 
read the contents 
of your USB 
storage 
modify or delete 
the content of 
your USB storage  
It is obvious that the explanation given, by the selected 
app, is more generic and less specific than those included in 
the Google Store privacy policy, while it was expected the 
opposite. In addition, it was expected that the explanation 
provided by a specific app, will be easily understandable 
using plain and clear language. 
C. Comparative analysis  
Coming back to the awareness and understanding of a 
user, who is willing to download the selected app, an 
intermediate user is not aware what does mean “access to 
USB storage”. The first question that may come in his/her 
mind is “does my phone has a USB connection / 
capability?”. The vast majority of intermediate users 
correlates the “USB connection” with the memory USB 
sticks, used in laptops and desktops as external disks. So this 
kind of explanation, may confuse users, rather than assist 
them to understand the purpose, scope and type of the 
required permission. From an expert user point of view, all 
these required types of permissions arise several additional 
reasonable questions such as “for what reasons an app game 
requires, as a precondition for the installation, full access to 
all files stored in my personal device?”. Furthermore, several 
other reasonable questions may arise for expert and non-
expert users such as: “Do all these required permissions are 
necessary for the running of the app?” or “Can the app run, 
even with limited capabilities, if users deny the access to the 
full range of the required permissions?”. Regarding the last 
question we did the following test. After downloading the 
app, an option, provided by Android operating system, was 
used to view and modify the permissions given in each app, 
installed in a personal device. So, the initial permissions of 
the selected app were modified, by reducing the permission 
related to “Photo/Media/Files”. The app was still running, in 
the personal device, without noticing any limitation to the 
app functionalities / capabilities. So, a new important 
question arises: “why all these permissions are set as 
precondition for app installation, since are not necessary for 
the app basic functions?”.  
Coming back to the options, that a Google Play user has 
prior the installation of an app, we noticed that a user hasn’t 
the option to install an app, without giving full access to all 
required permissions by an app. To our understanding a 
phrase that can perfectly describe the practice currently 
followed by app stores and millions of personal app 
developers, is “take it or leave it” approach.  
The above analysis reveals discrepancies between the 
current approach, followed by millions of apps in Google 
Store, with the relevant principles, laid down in the 
forthcoming GDPR Regulation, as regards the personal data 
privacy. In particular, it was shown that the current followed 
practices, are in contrast with the provisions of the EU 
Regulation, in relation to the protection of minors’ personal 
data. As described above a minor user (15 years old) is able 
to download and install an app, which requires access to 
his/her personal data (access to stored files in the device), 
without the consent of the person who has the minor’s 
responsibility. This is fully incompatible with the provisions 
of EU Regulation. In addition, the selected app requires, as 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

precondition for downloading and installation, access to 
personal data that, as proved, are not necessary for the 
running of the selected app, at least with the basic features of 
the provided app. Furthermore, we noticed that the 
description provided by Google Play store and the developer 
of the selected app, in relation to the required access to user’s 
personal data, is generic without providing to user a clear, 
specific and understandable explanation, in relation to the 
purpose, as well as, the extent of personal data access.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper assesses to what degree the current 
procedures, followed by Google Play store, are in 
compliance with the provisions of the General Data 
Protection Regulation, in relation to personal data. It was 
critically examined issues such as, the existence of user 
consent for personal data access, protection of minor users, 
existence of specific and understandable explanation, in 
relation to the types of personal data access and the 
clarification of the purposes for which access to personal 
data is required. Furthermore, focus was given to the 
procedures that should being followed by a user, who is 
willing to download and install a mobile app to his/her 
personal device. To do so, an app was selected from Google 
Play store app and downloaded / installed in a personal 
device.  
The findings of this paper reveal incompatibilities 
between the new EU Regulation (GDPR) and the procedures 
currently followed in one of the most popular personal app 
store (Google Play store). In particular, the currently 
followed approach, we call it “take it or leave it” approach, 
does not allow users, to download and install a personal app 
without, prior the installation, giving full access to all, 
required by app developer, set of personal data. This 
approach is not compliant with the provisions of the GDPR. 
Furthermore, users are currently not well informed, neither 
for the purposes of the required personal data access, either 
for the extent of required access. Another important 
incompatibility deals with the protection of minors and the 
requirement set by new EU Regulation, regarding the 
mandatory existence of parental consent, in case, an app 
requires access to children’s personal data.  
It is argued, that the current Google Play store procedures, 
failed to be in accordance with the new EU framework, 
which requires that users of electronic communication 
services, need to be fully aware about the purposes of 
personal data selection and the extent of personal data 
access. In addition users shall have simple tools in order to 
understand how their privacy can be compromised and have 
the means to deny the use of their personal data, or to 
minimize the extent of personal data access.  
Further research could be done in relation to the procedures 
followed by other popular stores, like IOS store, as well as, 
to examine several other indicative apps in order to verify or 
not, the findings of this paper.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Macenaite, and E. Kosta, “Consent for processing 
children’s personal data in 
the 
EU: 
following 
in 
US 
footsteps?”, Information and Communications Technology 
Law, 
pp.146-197, 
May 
2017. 
DOI=10.1080/13600834.2017.1321096. 
[2] A. Chaudhuri, “Internet of things data protection and privacy 
in the era of the General Data Protection Regulation”, Journal 
of Data Protection & Privacy, vol. 1, pp. 64-75, December 
2016. 
[3] A. D. Vanberg and M. B. Ünver, “The right to data portability 
in the GDPR and EU competition law: odd couple or dynamic 
duo?”, in European Journal of Law and Technology, vol. 8, 
2017. [Online]. Available from http://ejlt.org/article/view/546/727 
(2017.08.04).  
[4] T. Hoel, D. Griffiths and W. Chen, “Implications of the 
European Data Protection Regulations for Learning Analytics 
Design”, Learning Analytics and Knowladge (LAK 2017), 
ACM, Mar. 2017, pp. 243-252, ISBN: 978-1-4503-4870-6. 
[5] Office of the Privacy Commisioner of Canada, “Results of the 
2014 
global 
privacy 
enforcement 
network 
sweep”,  
(September 
2014). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from  
https://www.priv.gc.ca/media/nrc/2014/bg 
140910 
e.asp 
(2017.08.04). 
[6] H. Almuhimedi, et al., “Your Location has been Shared 5,398 
Times!: A Field Study on Mobile App Privacy Nudging”, In 
Proceedings of the 2015, ACM, Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2015), ACM, pp. 787-
796. 
ACM, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
787-796. 
DOI=https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702210.  
[7] J. Lin, et al., “Expectation and purpose: understanding users' 
mental 
models 
of 
mobile 
app 
privacy 
through 
crowdsourcing”, 
In 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
2012 
ACM 
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp '12), ACM, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
pp. 
501-510, 
2012. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2370216.2370290.  
[8] P. D. Hert and V. Papakonstantinou, “The proposed data 
protection Regulation replacing Directive 95/46/EC: A sound 
system for the protection of individuals”, Computer Law & 
Security Review, vol. 28, pp. 130-142, April 2012.  
[9] Statista: The statistical portal [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/266210/number-of-
available-applications-in-the-google-play-store/ 2017.08.03. 
[10] S. Polykalas, G. Prezerakos, F. Chrysidou and E. Pylarinou, 
“Mobile apps and data privacy: when the service is free, the 
product is your data”, In Proceedings of the 2017  
International Conference on Information Intelligence Systems 
Applications (IISA 2017), IEEE, Larnaca, Cyprus, 2017, in 
press.  
 
 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

