Interfaces of Political Participation: Challenging the Analysis of Communicative 
Spaces 
Yulia Belinskaya 
University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: yulia.belinskaya@univie.ac.at 
Joan Ramon Rodriguez-Amat 
Sheffield Hallam University 
Sheffield, UK 
e-mail: mon.rodriguez@shu.ac.uk 
Abstract—Opening politics to direct citizen participation 
seems a double-edged operation that aligns communicative 
infrastructures with the governmental executive political 
sphere of participatory citizenship. While citizens’ initiative 
platforms wave civic participation as a democratic 
opportunity, their relative distance from the executive core 
conditions their political effectiveness. This paper considers the 
participatory platforms as communicative spaces and analyses 
them following the four-mode model that considers 
communicative spaces under four facets: representations, 
structures, connections, and textures. This paper reports on the 
initial results of a study of the effectiveness of three 
participatory portals available to Russian citizens to test the 
analytical tool, and to adapt, expand, and challenge it. This 
brief paper is first at exploring the possibilities of the four-
mode model of analysis of communicative spaces, applied to 
participatory portals. 
Keywords-direct participation; citizen initiatives; interfaces; 
communicative spaces. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 Opening politics to direct citizen participation seems a 
double-edged operation. The effort to facilitate grassroots 
movements showing “a renewed interest in community, 
place, and ‘local identity’” [1] also challenges traditional 
governmental approaches that consider citizens as passive 
receivers and taxpayers [2]. Citizen participation is 
considered as a response to the civic engagement crisis 
within traditional democratic welfare states, moving them 
towards an XXI century-like active role of citizenship in 
policy-making processes, including volunteering, 
engagement with non-governmental organisations (NGOs), 
solidarity projects, or certainly, legislative initiatives. In this 
light, technology being both empowering and restrictive [3], 
helped the instalment of the transnational European Citizens 
Initiative (ECI), in 2007, and opened strands for research 
and critical discussion about the European Public Sphere [4]
[5]; this trend has seen platforms sprout up either connected 
with national Parliaments (Spain, UK, Germany) or as non-
governmental platforms (Belgium, Netherlands).  
Online participatory platforms are considered to be 
communicative spaces [6] that can be analysed as such [7]. 
This paper explores how such an analytical model can be 
used to critically analyse participatory portals.  
This piece focuses on the three main participatory 
platforms available in Russia today (the Russian Public 
Initiative [8], Petition to the President [9], and Change.org 
[10] the four-mode model (describing representations, 
textures, structures and connections) helps to compare them 
while suggesting ways of expanding the analysis to other 
platforms in the future.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
briefly describes the state of participatory spaces in Russia, 
theoretical considerations are discussed in Section III. 
Section IV is devoted to the methodology and the four-mode 
model of analysis and results are outlined in Section V. A 
critical discussion is provided in Section VI. The paper 
concludes with Section VII. 
II. OPENING POLITICS IN RUSSIA 
Russia has opened several participatory spaces [11], but 
research insists on pointing at an endemic disconnection 
between civic participation and executive power. Mamay 
[12] underlined that the concepts of e-government and e-
participation were relatively new in Russia and unexplored 
in scientific discourse. Kuryachaya [13] criticised the 
development stage of the Russian e-democracy based on 
information shortage about the activities of the authorities, 
the absence of appropriate legal regulation, and the general 
inefficiency of the citizens’ participation practices. The 
question looms, thus, on why do existing participatory 
portals not succeed at sorting this gap. Currently, several 
participatory platforms at a local level, such as “Active 
citizen” [14] in Moscow (launched in 2014) or “Our 
Petersburg” [15] also launched in 2014 [16]. Such platforms 
are aimed at building dialogue with local authorities; 
however, they do not provide any legislative power to the 
citizens, and because of their municipal range, they were not 
included in this study.  
Instead, this piece considers three active portals that link 
citizens' direct participation with legislative processes at a 
national level. First, the Russian Public Initiative (ROI - The 
acronym comes from the Russian title “Российская 
Общественная Инициатива” and the web address “roi.ru”) 
was established in 2012. It allows citizens to submit 
legislative initiatives on the federal, regional, and municipal 
levels. Second, Petition to the President - PP (established in 
2007) collects initiatives directed to the President of the 
Russian Federation. The third platform, Change.org is the 
most active, however, it does not have any legislative power 
or responsibility towards its contributors [16]. To bridge the 
relative distance of these platforms from the executive 
power, the 2013 law RF N183 [17] called for the creation of 
expert groups liaised with Parliament. These groups assess 
the ROI initiatives with more than 100 000 signatures on the 
federal level. The political effectiveness of the two other 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

platforms, instead, depends exclusively on actual 
parliamentary mediation. 
III. COMMUNICATIVE SPACES, INTERFACES AND 
ANALYSIS OF PLATFORMS 
Platforms for citizen participation are interfaces and 
communicative spaces. For Scolari et al. [18], interface is a 
network that includes various actors, users, individuals, 
institutions, organisations or technological actors. Interfaces 
are also described as “the connections between human 
psychological, perceptual, and motor systems on the one 
hand and codes, software, and hardware on the other 
hand.” [19]. Furthermore, new platforms of a cultural 
metainterface are built on the capitalisation of a net culture 
[20] and their industry is based on a “semio-capitalism” that 
generates data that can be used to anticipate user behaviour. 
In this sense, platforms of citizen participation are interfaces 
that facilitate connections between the highly bureaucratic 
governmental processes and grassroot initiatives. Platforms 
are allegedly aimed at reducing the e-participation divide.  
Communicative spaces are structurally necessary for 
democracy, as they set the conditions for civic 
(dis)agreement and struggle [21]. Platforms, thus, are also 
communicative spaces because, as in the public sphere, they 
are places for meaningful interaction where the differences 
between participants, their access, and critical discourse are 
necessary conditions for achieving consensus on public 
issues [22][23].  
Even if the Internet public sphere can be fragmented 
[24], citizen participation platforms can function in their 
double role as interfaces and as communicative spaces 
facilitating deliberation by allowing the complex flows of 
communication within the interface: “...discussion forums, 
chat rooms, and other virtual communities‘ may very well 
be ideal discursive spaces for political deliberation” [25]. In 
this sense, the democratic potential of the Internet which 
functions globally and enjoys the freedom of regulations has 
been seen as a utopian rebirth of the Habermasian concept. 
Yet, research insists on showing that there is an “e-
participation divide” – when the initiatives of the citizens do 
not meet the requirement of “the bureaucratic complexity of 
official decision-making procedures” [16] and while the 
European Union (EU) rhetorics includes the “potential shift 
from government-led to community-led planning” [1], the 
success rates and implementation levels of the initiatives are 
low. Factors are diverse, but evaluation of the viability of 
the platform seems favourite - “its ability to sustain the level 
of efficiency, popularity and, broadly, the changes in 
government – society relations it brings.” [16]. The 
participation of the public “relies heavily on whether 
political leadership is stable and long-lasting to suppress or 
change stable informal institutions” [16]. 
Antecedents in the analysis of participatory platforms 
[26] identified four groups of factors to assess ROI: 1) 
organisational development; 2) technological parameters of 
the portal; 3) regulatory support, review procedure; and 4) 
the openness of procedures for citizens and feedback 
possibilities. Each group contained four discrete sub-factors 
to answer with “yes” or “no”. Also, Fedotova et al. [27] 
developed a model assessing e-informing, e-consulting, e-
involving, e-collaborating, and e-empowerment 
participation levels of various Portuguese platforms, 
indicating, in percentages, the degree of public availability 
of these factors per platform. These authors employed 
quantitative approaches to measure efficiency and compare 
the portals. Chugunov et al. [16] used a combination of 
quantitative and qualitative techniques to study the 
popularity and viability of the portals.  
Following Scolari et al. [18] and the concept of 
metainterfaces, we argue that a quantitative approach to 
analyse these platforms is not sufficient and that instead, a 
qualitative approach can bring a more comprehensive 
understanding, particularly if considering the involvement 
of specific narratives, attributes, and contexts embedded in 
the design of the platforms. 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
This paper analyses the three platforms available in 
Russia: ROI, PP, and Change.org. The analysis of the 
platform interfaces follows the four-mode model for the 
analysis of communicative spaces as described by 
Rodriguez-Amat and Brantner [28]. The model assumes the 
non-neutrality of the communicative spaces and helps 
dismantle the assumption that the public sphere is neutral. 
As an empirical tool, the four-mode model discerns the 
features of such non-neutrality, highlighting where 
participatory platforms become factors of inequality. The 
four modes upon which the analysis rests are:  
1) Representations: the mode involves how platforms 
are perceived (by third parties), used (by participants), and 
how they are designed (as agents/actors) in the intentional 
shaping of the (conflicting) understandings of the public 
debate. Questions that guide this mode are the following:  
a) What are the prevalent contents and the recurrent 
topics, what is understood as politically relevant? 
(Narratives); 
b) What types of actors do the platforms distinguish? 
(Actors); 
c) How much participation had the petitions? What 
is the success rate? (Diffusion and reach). 
2) Textures: the symbolic charge of the site in which 
interactions happen. Some precedents identified as textures 
include the communicative value of places on their own, 
nuancing the conditions for the debate and the speech 
formulated from a historical balcony adding value to its 
contents [19]. The discussion of the historical success rates 
of the platforms settles a non-intentional precedent for 
forthcoming initiatives. The following questions may be 
asked:  
d) Who owns the platform and where is this platform 
hosted? (Ownership);  
e) When was it established and why? (Symbolic 
capital); 
f) What ideological or political attributes does the 
platform have? (Attributes). 
3) Structures: explain the (communicative) inequalities 
generated by the platforms: (un)equal access, barriers, 
transparency, direction, and channelling of information, 
priorities, centrality and peripheral interactions, or 
communication flows. This requires an analysis of the 
conditions for participation and the implicit conditions for 
success. The guiding questions are:  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

g) What mechanisms are there to disable or enable 
participation to the citizens? Are the contents moderated? 
(Access and Moderation); 
h) What data is collected from the participants? 
(Privacy and Transparency). 
4) Connections: explain what virtual possibilities of 
interaction enabled by the platforms and the identification of 
factors that multiply the network of contacts (social media 
sharing, engagement, media coverage). Connections are the 
imaginary territory of possibilities of interaction. The 
following questions are in the centre of attention:  
i) Does the platform facilitate the sharing of the 
initiative across social media platforms? (Shareability); 
j) Does the platform incorporate spaces of 
participation (such as comments, support, fundraising)? 
(Engagement). 
The extension of this paper allows only to open the 
strands of future specific analyses of the Russian 
participatory platforms and sheds some light on the 
possibilities and challenges of the model to be applied in 
this context. 
V. RESULTS 
Tables I-IV represent a comparative overview of the 
analysis of the three Russian platforms for citizen 
participation aligned by the four modes – representations, 
textures, structures and connections. Tables I-IV visualise 
the answers to the ten questions a)-j) formulated in the 
Section IV (all data from June-July 2020). 
A. Representations 
The analysis of representations was structured along 
with three sets of questions (columns) that identified 1) 
Narratives and Understandings, 2) Actors, and 3) Diffusion 
and Reach (see Table I). The combination of the three and 
the general diversity or homogeneity of the contents are 
good indicators of how the platform can become an 
emerging space of discussion or rather a closed territory of 
status-quo confirmation.  
 The first look at the most popular topics (Figures 1-3) 
presents these differences: whereas the Change.org calls for 
more universalist principles such as human rights, the ROI 
is more specifically oriented towards regulatory decisions. 
The initiatives submitted through ROI are aimed at the 
legislative system and describe the measures, policies, or 
laws (for example, medical education reform with >50k 
votes). The PP includes more general value-loaded measures 
(against an increase of retirement age with >160k votes or 
increase of the period for legal abortion). Most of the 
petitions do not include any legislative propositions, and 
instead are broader and connected to general values: 
ecologic statements, animal protection, and health 
protection issues are considered politically relevant on this 
platform. Change.org has more human rights entries and has 
more cases-oriented character (for example, petitions to 
“free a journalist”). 
The analysis of actors and participants is a fundamental 
feature of representational mode. The latent presence of 
“The President” in the same title of the Petition to the 
President gives a specific frame to that platform. This 
actoral analysis also needs to include the possibility of 
interactivity between participants. The anonymity seems to 
increase the participation but at the same times does not let 
identify the iteration - how many times one posts a petition 
or if there is a political organisation behind a petition (in 
case of PP). Instead, the necessity to sign with official state 
documents (ROI) grants the traceability of the authors. In 
the representation mode the perception plays a central role, 
for example, the chance of writing comments (Change.org) 
helps to believe that the ‘debate’ is permitted even if the 
platform has clearly fewer chances of generating laws. The 
official character of ROI is further consolidated by the 
presence of the Committee and its reports written in 
bureaucratic language. 
 
Figure 1. The main topics for discussion (ROI) 
 
Figure 2. The main topics for discussion (PP) 
Figure 3. The main topics for discussion (Change.org) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Similarly, with the analysis of the diffusion and reach of 
each platform, the possibility of success should taint the 
activity in the platforms. Instead, the blind leap between the 
Committee publishing the assessment of the petitions and 
the Parliament results opens a space of uncertainty to the 
reliability of the platform as political space. PP does not 
count on this connection with the parliamentary activity and 
this makes the platform free in terms of content, the same is 
true for Change.org. This also turns the platforms into the 
spaces of discussion without further political consequences.  
B. Textures 
The textural analysis involves the values that come from 
the platform itself, as an aprioristic condition. Textures, 
therefore, derive from the crystallisation of the 
representations. The analysis of textures is done along three 
lines: ownership, symbolic and cultural capital, and 
attributes (see Table II).  
The ownership of the platforms nuances their role. For 
instance, the distance of the site from the centres of power is 
the first point of reference. Whereas the owner of ROI is a 
former vice-Minister of Digital Development, PP was 
initially embedded within the Presidential official (currently 
it is disconnected). The aim of PP was to provide a more 
direct and personal channel of communication with the 
President. Change.org, instead, is a lucrative global platform 
with servers located in the United States of America (USA). 
Such nuance is also built by the accumulated cultural and 
symbolic capital: PP appeared within the liberal agenda of  
President Medvedev in 2007, which explains its 
disconnection from the current Presidential site. Change.org 
was created by Ben Rattray – a private individual (citizen of 
the USA), whereas ROI belonged to Putin’s presidential 
campaign in 2012. The ideological colours of the three 
platforms also have a strong weight: Russian national 
symbols are visible in the outline of the interfaces of PP and 
ROI against the global map that characterises Change.org as 
a platform.  
C. Structures 
Structures of communicative spaces are the settings that 
generate centres and peripheries of the interactions: who can 
interact with whom, and where are the barriers and the 
operations allowing or restricting these activities. The 
structures describe the efficiency of these barriers, their 
validity, and capacity to affect. Therefore, two columns 
helped the analysis of structures (see Table III): one 
involving access features such as identification and 
moderation, and another about privacy, transparency, and 
data management features of the site.  
The condition of access to online platforms is a key 
factor explaining the e-divide. PP makes it particularly easy 
for Russian citizens to register and to participate since it 
does not require any official digital identification. Both ROI 
and PP require knowledge of Russian, which limits 
inhabitants not knowing the language. The case of 
Change.org requires online registration which means access 
to an email account. The possibility of logging in from other 
platforms (such as Google or Facebook profiles) is also 
indicative of flows of data between the corporations, and 
ultimately how the citizens and participants’ digital footprint 
can be traced back to other sources of information. 
The data collected by the platforms, and the policies 
involving its storage have multiple implications, such as 
secrecy of the vote or ideological leaning of the Russian 
citizens who aim to participate. The possibility of deleting 
the digital footprint of inappropriate initiatives immediately 
shows the conditions for participation and the presence of a 
TABLE I. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE REPRESENTATIONS
Representations
Platform
Narratives and Understandings 
Actors
Diffusion and reach
ROI 
Established 
in 2012
Popular initiatives: medical 
education reform, toughening 
liability for offences on trains, 
prevention of domestic violence, 
“waste” reform, animal protection, 
e-government, corruption, 
retirement age, labelling of drugs.
- Authors (not visible); number of votes 
(visible). Number of votes on main page 
(votes against only on the page of initiative).  
- Committee resolves to forward (or not) 
initiatives to Parliament. Committee reports 
are available online. Committee Chair is 
known, not the rest of members.
- 17219 initiatives (8 years), 1983 active. 12 
initiatives with >10 000 votes, (2 under revision). 35 
(0,002% revised and approved by Committee, 
claimed success rate of 51%). 7 initiatives were 
supported by expert Committee (27,7%). 
- 2 were approved by Parliament and implemented: 1) 
Equip all railway crossings with video registration 
systems; 2) Green Shield around Moscow.
PP 
Established 
in 2007
Popular initiatives: against raising 
the retirement, increase of the 
“legal abortion” period, ban of 
animal hunting, suggestions to 
award Putin, support of a 
convicted mayor, suggestions 
regarding coronavirus, revival of 
monarchy or the Soviet Union.
- Authors are visible (pseudonyms allowed). 
Anonymity allows provocations: “Stalin” 
posted initiative for revival of Soviet Union. 
Comments can be logged in from any of 19 
social media sites. 
- There is free legal chat support available. 
on site 
- 1 902 petitions published (13 years)  
- 6 petitions >10 000 signatures.  
- Petitions allow comments. 
- Latest comments featured on the main page.
Change.org 
Established 
in 2007
Popular initiatives: petitions 
related to coronavirus payments, 
proposal of 5 steps to support the 
Russian economy.
- Authors, politicians, organisations, victims, 
promoters, etc. Network of actors on the 
platform. 
- Author or organisation are visible; can be 
followed. Some initiatives can be followed 
too.
- Petitions allow comments. Not discussion. 
- It is not possible to choose most popular or petitions 
with more than N votes.  
- Algorithms decide on “popularity”.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

dominant-authoritative operation of decision making. The 
moderation of petitions also establishes invisible conditions 
regarding what can and what cannot be petitioned and voted 
for, what can be discussed or not. It is impossible to 
determine which of the many possibilities of initiatives have 
been simply dismissed on ROI due to pre-moderation. In 
this sense, the diversity of calls on PP shows a more open 
approach as it allows all types of initiatives not necessarily 
formulated as legislation initiatives. 
D. Connections 
Connections explore the virtual network of possible 
interactions. The connectivity of a communicative space is a 
factor to make it legitimate and valid. To analyse the 
connections, Table IV shows two columns: shareability and 
engagement. The former refers to how much social media 
platforms can help expand and increase the knowledge and 
impact of the campaign. If the initiative is located only on 
the platform, citizens are required to visit it, whereas if it 
can be shared on social media, other users might show 
interest. The case of engagement involves the chances of the 
campaigns to be grown by activating new users in the 
promotion and development of the initiative, for instance, 
fundraising.  
ROI and PP incorporate a possibility to share the 
initiatives on the social media platforms that are more 
visible within the Russian cultural landscape such as 
Odnoklassniki (“Classmates” with 200 million users mostly 
from the former Soviet Republics), vk.com (“Russian 
facebook” - social media platform with more than 500 
million accounts, mostly Russian speaking) or the service 
Mail.Ru, as well as on Facebook, Twitter or via email. Such 
similar connectivity of both platforms shows a preference 
for the Russian social media landscape, as a difference to 
what Change.org offers. The platform requires a vote before 
sharing while enabling the possibility of fundraising, events, 
news, campaigns, as well as the involvement of celebrities 
and politicians.  
VI. DISCUSSION 
The four aspects analysed in the communicative spaces 
as modes are not independent of one another. In this section, 
the columns defined as analytical operations are explored in 
TABLE II. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE TEXTURES
Textures
Platform
Ownership
Symbolic 
Capital
Attributes
ROI
- Non-profit 
organisation 
- Private but 
known owner 
(linked to the 
Gov-t)
Established 
for Putin's 
presidential 
campaign 
(sign of 
Internet 
Freedom) 
- Colours of Russian 
flag.  
- Similar design to 
Parliament sites.  
- Interactive map of 
Russia with regional 
numbers of petitions
PP
- Hosted in 
presidential 
website (no 
longer 
connected to 
it)
Product of  
Medvedev’s 
liberalisation 
agenda
- Cyrillic URL 
- Design not changed 
since 2007 
- Flag (movicon) 
- Flag and Russian 
Kremlin as background
Change.org
Private 
organisation, 
servers in the 
USA
Links to 
Russian 
Gov-t not 
known
World map as icon
TABLE IV. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE 
CONNECTIONS
Connections
Platform
Shareability
Engagement
ROI
- Initiatives can be shared: via 
platforms: Odnoklassniki, 
vk.com, mail.ru, Facebook, 
Twitter, Mail 
- Petitions need to be structured: 
Problem-Result of 
implementation-Steps to be taken
No other forms of 
engagement
PP
- It can be followed and shared 
via platforms: Odnoklassniki, 
vk.com, mail.ru, Facebook, 
Twitter, Google+.  
- Initiatives can be followed on 
social media
No other forms of 
engagement
Change.org
- Sharing and donation request  
- Comments allowed if voting, 
comments can be liked 
- Change.org has Facebook and 
Twitter account
Alternative forms: 
fundraising, events, 
news, campaigns, 
involvement of 
celebrities or 
politicians
TABLE III. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE 
STRUCTURES
Structures
Platform
Access and Moderation
Privacy and 
Transparency
ROI
- Russian language, Version for 
visually impaired. Registration 
through Russian e-government 
system (18+) 
- Petitions published after 
moderation (up to two months)  
- Singular votes collected for a year, 
a vote is permitted once
Login through the 
system of e-
government
PP
- Russian Language 
- No registration required for 
voting: vote permitted every 24h 
with no log-in 
- Petitions pre-moderated, 
comments not
Comments after 
login from 19 
social platforms
Change.org
- Many Languages 
- Registration required 
- Author can chose vote target 
- Petitions not pre-moderated
Login with 
Google and 
Facebook 
accounts 
(asks for photo 
when publishing)
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

combination to eventually respond to the underlying 
question: do participatory platforms in the Russian political 
landscape demonstrate serious efforts to enhance 
participation? 
The analysis of the platforms has shown that the level of 
diversity and dispersion of topics among them is not 
straightforward. Whereas there are some overlapping 
combinations amongst them, and they could be assumed to 
give a comprehensive understanding of the political 
relevance and efficiency of the e-democratic participation, 
the differences between platforms show that they are 
established with different purposes. There is a clear 
tendency on Change.org to engage with topics beyond the 
strictly national debates and involve universal values. The 
textural analysis has shown, precisely, that the three 
platforms are loaded with aprioristic intentions and that they 
emerge as part of previous political strategies: PP is related 
to a Medvedev strategy that ceased with his presidency and 
ROI aligns with Putin’s strategic interests.  
The analysis of the structures also complements those 
findings. There are clearly several forms of barriers that 
insist on the nationalistic framing of the debates. Even then, 
if they do not say it explicitly, the platforms set rules and 
conditions about who can and who cannot participate. Even 
if from the representations the debates seem diverse, 
structures show three kinds of barriers: 
- identity (established through conditions for 
registration); 
- language (established by the conditions of the 
interface access, impaired access enabled only in PP); 
- skills and legislative knowledge.  
ROI requires a high level of formality for an initiative to 
be considered by the Commission. The set of requirements 
and rules (a necessary high number of adhesions, and a 
complex niche legislative language used by highly 
bureaucratic and law-educated committees) work as the 
perfect mechanism of exclusion for the public participation 
in the debate. These three structural barriers still do not 
consider other external factors: how many citizens have 
access to the Internet to participate in the public debate, how 
many of those citizens know about the platform, and how 
many of them would try publishing initiatives that would 
later be moderated as irrelevant. Connections also insist on 
the setting of national and cultural boundaries to the 
participation in the platforms. This includes, for example, 
the prioritization of Russian social media platforms. The 
sovereignty of legislation still resides on the national 
citizenry, but considering the formal difficulties identified in 
the structures, this operation of visually and conceptually 
appealing to the national community might respond more to 
a form of flagging the nation than an actual form of 
empowering citizens. Allegedly, the apparent openness of 
Change.org could be a counter-argument to this, but the fact 
that it is a for-profit platform and that it does not have any 
link to the Russian government only confirms that the gap 
remains. These initial considerations are already pointing 
out that the platforms are not immediately empowering 
spaces to enhance the public debate. Some of those 
interfaces work more as activating devices of national pride 
through language and flagging symbols, or as 
propagandistic tools to “consolidate” a democracy for a 
show, or eventually to channel the social outrage as 
disconnected spaces of highly emotional interaction.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
This article has analysed the main three platforms of 
political participation in Russia. The analysis has been done 
by considering them as interfaces planted as a way of 
sorting the gap between the society and government and as a 
communicative space that should enable the citizens to 
engage in public debates. This analysis is based on a model 
that identifies four aspects of the communicative spaces: 
representations, textures, structures, and connections. Such a 
model helps move beyond the quantitative research that 
could count the effectiveness of the initiatives by simply 
measuring their success. Instead, the analysis has led to the 
formulation of questions about the openness and closure of 
the three platforms. However, there are still some 
limitations: even if the model could incorporate the press 
coverage as forms of representations of the platforms, it 
cannot analyse invisible processes such as the petitions that 
were not considered or moderated out or external factors 
such as the extension of Internet access among the citizenry 
or their knowledge of the platforms.  
The analysis has shown that the three platforms are not 
neutral. They are neither innocently enabling the flow of 
information from the debate to the parliament, nor are they 
free of intentional preferences. All the platforms considered 
are loaded with historical and symbolic capital that taints the 
result and balances the expected equality of opportunities of 
the initiatives. All three platforms appear disconnected and 
limited in their capacity of fulfilling their expected role. 
ROI includes highly complex legislative features while 
requiring the participation of rather broad citizen numbers, 
PP's openness and lack of moderation make it a space of 
fast-spinning emotional posts. Similarly, Change.org seems 
to have more in common with any social media platform 
than with a political participatory platform. The initiatives 
expect to have some impact on the public opinion and then 
to be picked either by the media or by the political 
organisations. The gap seems, therefore, to remain. The 
signs suggest that the platforms were never established as a 
real instrument of political participation, but rather as one-
directional interfaces from power.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Da Silva, L. G. Horlings and E. Figueiredo, “Citizen 
initiatives in the post-welfare state,” Social  
Sciences, vol. 7, 
no. 252, pp. 1-21, 2018. 
[2] L. Schulpen and H. Huyse, “Citizen Initiatives for Global 
Solidarity. The New Face of European  Solidarity,” Forum for 
Development Studies, Routledge, May 2017, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 
163-169. 
[3] Z. Papacharissi, A private sphere: Democracy in a digital age. 
Polity, 2010. 
[4] J. Organ, “EU citizen participation, openness and the European 
citizens’ initiative: the TTIP legacy,” Common Market Law 
Review, 2017. [Online]. Available from: https://
livrepository.liverpool.ac.uk/3010694/ [retrieved: August, 2020].  
[5] P. Vigier, “Towards a Citizen-driven Innovation System in 
Europe: A governance approach for a European innovation 
agenda,” Innovation, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 191-202, 2007. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[6] J. R. Rodriguez-Amat and C. Brantner, “Occupy the squares 
with tweets. A proposal for the analysis of the governance of 
communicative spaces,” Obra Digital, vol. 11, pp. 2-19, 2016. 
[7] Y. Belinskaya, C. Brantner, and J. R. Rodriguez-Amat, 
“Revisiting the (urban) public sphere: A model of 
analysis” [Revisitando la esfera pública (urbana): un modelo de 
análisis], LIS Letra. Imagen. Sonido. Ciudad Mediatizada, vol. 20, 
pp. 106-133, 2019. 
[8] Russian Public Initiative / Российская Общественная 
Инициатива. [Online]. Available from: http://roi.ru/ [retrieved: 
October, 2020]. 
[9] Petition to the President / Петиция Президенту. [Online]. 
Available from: http://петиция-президенту.рф/ [retrieved: 
October, 2020]. 
[10] Change.org. [Online]. Available from: http://change.org/ 
[retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[11] O. N. Demushina, “Portals of electronic petitions as a form of 
interaction between government institutions and Russian citizens. 
State and municipal government” [Порталы электронных 
петиций как форма взаимодействия институтов власти и 
граждан в России. Государственное и муниципальное 
управление]. Scientific notes, vol. 4, 2016. 
[12] E. Mamay, “Citizens’ inclusion and eParticipation initiatives 
in Russia,” Proceedings of the International Conference for E-
Democracy and Open Government (edited by P. Parycek, and N. 
Edelmann), pp. 99-110, 2014. 
[13] М. М. Kuryachaya, “E-Democracy in modern Russia: the 
establishment, development and prospects,” Kutafin University 
Law Review, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 93-105, 2016. 
[14] Active citizen / Активный Гражданин. [Online]. Available 
from: https://ag.mos.ru/ [retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[15] Our Petersburg / Наш Петербург. [Online]. Available from: 
http://gorod.gov.spb.ru/ [retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[16] A. V. Chugunov, Y. Kabanov, and Y. Misnikov, “Citizens 
versus the government or citizens with the government: a tale of 
two e-participation portals in one city-a case study of St. 
Petersburg, Russia.” Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, 
Mar. 2017, pp. 70-77. 
[17] Decree of the President of the Russian Federation N183 “On 
consideration of public initiatives by citizens of the Russian 
Federation using the Internet resource ‘Russian Public 
Initiative’ (with amendments and additions)”, Mar. 2013 [Online]. 
Available from: hhttp://base.garant.ru/70326884/ [retrieved: 
October, 2020].  
[18] C. A. Scolari and F. Pires de Sá, “Media ecology, transmedia 
literacy, and redesign of interfaces,” Matrizes, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 
129-39, 2018. 
[19] P. C. Adams and A. Jansson, “Communication geography: A 
bridge between disciplines,” Communication Theory, vol. 22, no. 
3, pp. 299-318, 2012. 
[20] C. U. Andersen and S. B. Pold, The metainterface: The art of 
platforms, cities, and clouds. MIT Press, 2018. 
[21] A. M. Schlesinger, The cycles of American history. HMH, 
1999. 
[22] J. Habermas, The Theory of Communicative Action: Jurgen 
Habermas; Trans. by Thomas McCarthy. Heinemann, 1984. 
[23] H. Arendt, Hannah Arendt: critical essays. Suny Press, 1994. 
[24] J. Habermas, “Political communication in media society: Does 
democracy still enjoy an epistemic dimension? The impact of 
normative theory on empirical research,” Communication theory, 
vol. 16(4), pp. 411-426, 2006. 
[25] R. S. Geiger, “Does Habermas understand the Internet? The 
algorithmic construction of the blogo/public sphere,” Gnovis. A 
Journal of Communication, Culture, and Technology, vol. 10, no. 
1, pp. 1-29, 2009. 
[26] L. Bershadskaya, A. V. Chugunov, and D. Trutnev, “E-
participation development: a comparative study of the Russian, 
USA and UK e-petition initiatives.” Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic 
Governance, Oct. 2013, pp. 73-76. 
[27] O. Fedotova, L. Teixeira, and H. Alvelos, “E-participation in 
Portugal: evaluation of government electronic platforms,” Procedia 
Technology, vol. 5, pp. 152-161, 2012. 
[28] J. R. Rodriguez-Amat and C. Brantner, “Space and place 
matters: A tool for the analysis of geolocated and mapped 
protests,” New Media and Society, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1027-1046, 
2016.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

