Exploring Security Risks in Virtual Economies 
Caroline Kiondo, Stewart Kowalsk,  Louise Yngström 
DSV SecLab, Stockholm University/Royal Institute of Technology 
SE-16440 Kista, Sweden 
kiondo@dsv.su.se, stewart@dsv.su.se, louise@dsv.su.se  
 
 
Abstract —A most recent, phenomenon within new socio-eco-
systems is the so called Virtual Economies.  This paper 
presents an exploratory study of information security risks 
that are inherent with the Virtural Economies.  A Dynamic 
Network Analysis Tools (DNAT) was used to perform a risk 
analysis in the Second life virtual world. The analysis indicates 
that the currency and user account are the most important 
assets. User accounts provide access to virtual trading and are 
critical to  the flow of currency within the virtual economy. 
The removal of both of these from the system will affect the 
dynamics of the system and defeat the whole purpose of the 
system. The analysis further identified selling and creation of 
virtual goods to be important tasks in order to maintain a 
successful Virtual Economy. If a threat occurs that 
manipulates the creation of virtual goods then it would affect 
the trading of virtual goods between the users of the system 
hence affecting the economy. It is important that users who 
invest in such an economy to be aware of possible risks 
associated with this. As the field expands and more internet 
communities adopt this business model all parties involved 
need to think of strategies to protect assets that exist within 
this type of environment. 
 
Keywords - Virtual Economy; Security Risks; Dynamic Network 
Analysis; Second Life; Virtual Worlds 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A Virtual Economy is an emergent economy existing in 
Virtual Worlds as a result of the exchange of Virtual Goods 
for real or virtual currency. A Virtual World is an online 
environment that can be accessed by thousands or millions 
of users [1]. Not only can these environments be accessed 
by multiple users simultaneously, but the environment is 
persistent in the sense that it continues to exist whether or 
not a user is logged into the system. The Virtual 
infrastructure allows for inter-connectivity of users through 
the use of networked computers [2].   
The user in this environment is represented by an avatar 
in the case of MMORPGS (Massively Multi-player Online 
Role-Playing Games) or a profile in the case of social 
networks. These entities have the ability to use virtual 
currency or real currency to obtain virtual goods and 
services.  
Initially, the main purpose of such an economy was 
purely for entertainment purposes, however the demand for 
virtual goods and services and the value of these goods to 
users, has prompted users to either legally or illegally use 
real money to trade for virtual items. According to the 
European Network and Information Security Agency, as of 
2008, the Real Money Trade (RMT) for virtual items was 
estimated at about $2 billion [3]. A variety of security risks, 
threats and attacks have emerged in Virtual Economies 
because of this. Since virtual items and currencies are only 
representation of code within a virtual system, there is a real 
world motivation to manipulate the system in order to obtain 
real profit.  
Virtual Economies are rapidly gaining popularity not 
only in virtual games such as MMORPGS but also in Social 
Networking communities. More and more people chose to 
spend their free time in Virtual Worlds as compared to other 
forms of entertainment. KZERO an independent research 
firm has estimated that there are now about 1Billion Virtual 
World registered users [4]. Due to this popularity most real 
world organizations and businesses are now ceasing the 
opportunity to actively participate in Virtual Worlds.  Amidst 
the widespread adoption of Virtual Worlds by various 
businesses and organizations, the management of risks 
associated 
in 
conducting 
businesses 
within 
such 
environments has yet to be studied. This paper aims to 
explore the various security risks inherent in this new 
emergent Virtual Economy.  
This paper is divided into 5 sections. In the next section, 
we present some background to virtual worlds' economies 
problems and discuss some of current ongoing research in 
the area. In section 3, we give more detailed background on 
the Second life virtual world and outline some of the current 
security threats and security contra measures used there. In 
the fourth section we, present a risk analysis of Second Life 
using the Dynamic Network Analysis Tool. In the last 
section, we discuss our findings and proposal future 
research work. 
II. 
VITRUAL WORLD PROBLEMS 
Previous research in this area has shown that Virtual 
World environments are places where users are encouraged 
to explore new areas, create content and share the content 
with others. Security related problems that arise within 
Virtual Economies are also motivated due to the fact that 
“profit” can be made either within the world or on a 
secondary black market. Exploitation of bugs and 
“scamming”, are becoming more and more prevalent within 
Virtual Economies. Obtaining real money from virtually 
world is a key factor in the increasing attacks experienced 
within Virtual Economies. 
Most of the issues within Virtual Economies are those 
that are propagated by either sharing of accounts, or selling 
of advanced user accounts that is to say “power levelling”. 
Power leveling is when one member logs in to another 
61
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

members account to play their character so that it can 
advance in the game. These kinds of problems are also based 
on permission settings within the systems [5]. Time and state 
bugs are also a problem in these types of environments 
because of the underlying architecture [6]. Integration of 
media and code from third party applications can cause bugs 
within the system as well. Users can also experience invasion 
of privacy through surveillance, unwanted marketing and 
revelation of on-line and off-line identities [7]. There are also 
issues in regards to trust when it comes to trading within a 
Virtual Economy. How can one make sure that they will 
receive a virtual item they are paying for with real money? In 
a study conducted in China, it was found that Chinese users 
conduct what is known as FCTs (Face-to-Face Transactions) 
where they meet in person for example at an internet cafe to 
perform the transaction [8]. There are users who take 
advantage of these trust issues present in Virtual Trading. A 
user purchasing a Virtual good or service can either claim 
that they have not received the object and ask for a refund or 
stop payment to their credit card account. Hence the seller 
incurs the loss; this can also happen in vice versa [9]. 
Various organized crimes do occur as a result of the 
value attached to virtual items within Virtual Worlds. Crimes 
such as fraud, gambling, hacking and robbery have been 
found to take place [10]. Thus in virtual worlds, where 
people hold valuable property, security of the virtual 
economies data must be a top priority. Privacy, security, and 
the integrity are factors that have been found to be of critical 
importance [11]. 
In regards to legal issues within Virtual Worlds, the main 
research conducted tries to understand how various real 
world laws apply within Virtual World Environments. There 
is quite a number of research studies that have discussed the 
legal implications of Virtual Property [10], [11], [12], [13], 
[14], [15], [16].  These papers have attempted to answer 
questions such as, “What are the rights of a user in terms of 
virtual property?” and how it relates to copyright laws 
[17],[18],[19], What rights do users have? What jurisdiction 
is one under? Where the game servers and developers are 
located? Or where the player is located?  The general 
question of governance and how crime and gambling 
activities that are conducted within Virtual Worlds are 
handled in the real world [20], [21], [22], [23] are also 
important issues. 
Other Issues that have been of particular interest to 
scholars are how taxes that are obtained from Virtual 
economic trades are handled [24], [25], [26]. Currently there 
is a large gray area that is undefined, and a few countries 
such as China and the USA have tried to pass legislation in 
regards to taxes. However, the governance of Virtual worlds 
and their implications to the society as a whole are still under 
study, as debates continue between governments and law 
officials. 
 
A. CASE STUDY: SECOND LIFE  
B. Background  
To focus our research, we selected one of the dominate 
virtual worlds Second Life. Second Life (SL) was founded 
by Linden Research Inc. in San Francisco and was launched 
in June 2003. SL users or inhabitants are known as 
Residents. The residents of SL use the (L$) to trade for 
goods and services. As of March 2010 it was reported that 
there are about 826,214 users who are active and there were 
user transactions worth about $160 million [27]. 
To become a SL Resident one must register an account. 
In SL, there are two types of membership accounts. A basic 
membership, which is a free account, this type of account has 
certain limitations upon the user. The second type is the 
Premium membership which requires the user to pay a fee of 
US$72 per year. In return, users have additional access to 
technical support, the ability to own private regions, land and 
increased access to in world areas. Members also enjoy the 
benefit of receiving a weekly stipend of L$300.  This type of 
membership is suitable for entrepreneurs, businesses and 
organizations wanting to develop their own islands. 
 
C. Economy 
In order to make purchases within SL for goods and 
services, residents need to own Linden Dollars (L$) which is 
the main currency within the world. A resident has several 
options for purchasing L$.  This can be done at “Linden Web 
MarketPlace”, the official L$ Exchange (LindeX) or other 3rd 
Party exchange services. Residents can buy L$ at L$ 260 for 
US$1 plus a service fee of US$0.30. The currency can be 
purchased using a PayPal account, Visa, MasterCard and 
other 3rd party affiliates. Apart from purchase of currency, 
one may choose to be employed in one of the many 
businesses running within SL in order to earn their L$. There 
is a wide range of jobs that an avatar can undertake. These  
include being a real estate agent, a sales person, an avatar 
billboard, customer service and support, being a DJ at the 
clubs, a dancer, answering surveys and camping to attract 
other avatars. Otherwise an avatar can become an 
entrepreneur and use their creativity to produce virtual goods 
such as clothes, furniture, houses and planes to sell to others 
in return for L$[28]. 
Once residents possess L$ they have the ability to 
purchase anything from items to personalize their avatar, 
their homes, transportation or virtual land. The most 
important purchase apart from the personalization of an 
avatar is land ownership. Land purchased can be used to 
lease to other avatars, to build homes, offices, shopping 
malls, points of attraction, nightclubs and anything the land 
owner wishes to do with their land, the only limitation being 
creativity and skill base. The minimum amount of land 
purchased is about 512m². 
SL has taken a different approach to its business model 
than the earlier traditional Virtual Worlds. In SL, the End 
User License Agreements (EULA) and Terms of Service 
(TOS) state that the residents of SL possess ultimate control 
62
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

over their creations giving them full rights to their 
intellectual property. 
SL encourages its residents to create and trade their 
creations, unlike other Virtual Worlds. SL's main vision for 
its Economy is to have “a fully integrated economy, 
architectured to reward risk, innovation and craftsmanship.” 
[29]. SL does so by granting its residents copyright to their 
creations. These creations, can be sold to others for Linden 
Dollars (L$) which can either be exchanged back to real 
currency hence earning an income or can alternatively be 
saved in a Linden Bank to accrue interest.  Through virtual 
trade and creativity residents are able to accumulate assets. 
Earlier, SL had decided to tax users for L$ earned 
through trading within the SL Virtual Economy. However, 
the residents were not very pleased with this model and felt 
that it restricted them from earning a substantial amount off 
their creations. This eventually led to a “Second Life Tax 
Revolt”. SL decided to modify this model to fit its residents‟ 
needs. In this modified model the residents are only charged 
a flat subscription fee and for purchase of land. The value of 
the land, just like in the real world is determined by location, 
“aesthetics” and traffic [30]. Therefore the balance between 
the currency and trading of Virtual Goods is very important 
in SL's business model.. 
D. Some Security Threats 
SL's game architecture follows the traditional structure for 
most Virtual Worlds, which is a massive distributed grid of 
client server system architecture. Specifically in SL's case 
they use Debian servers for their technology, where each 
server instance located on a server simulates each SL region. 
This means that several clusters of servers, host different 
parts of the SL world. According to SL, each item created 
within the environment is known as an asset within the 
database and is given its own Universal Unique Identifier 
(UUID).These assets are located on MYSQL server farms 
separate from the regions. During high traffic, where 
multiple requests occur to the databases, the servers are 
vulnerable to slow response times. This can cause users to 
experience objects loading at a slower pace than the normal 
rate and difficulty in accessing asset inventory, regions or 
searching for other users. This type of architecture is 
vulnerable to race conditions, where hackers can take 
advantage of the fact that different transactions are taking 
place on multiple databases hosted in different servers. The 
outcome of this attack is the ability for a hacker to perform 
duping, a practice that enables them to duplicate assets 
within the system [6].  
SL's game client is open source, meaning any one has 
access to the code. The advantage of this approach is that SL 
is sharing the creative power with their users. Users can 
contribute modules and code that will benefit SL's current 
environment and its security. Furthermore, this proves 
advantageous to those who wish to leverage the platform for 
business opportunities. However, the disadvantage in this is 
that hackers can study the code and easily manipulate it to 
introduce exploits into the system [32]. 
Furthermore, even though corporations operating in SL 
have the capability of owning their own Island, the servers 
are remotely controlled by SL. Therefore it may be hard for 
them to link the system to their internal systems. They also 
lack control over the security implementation and 
consequently security measures and levels are dependent on 
Linden Labs and their developers. 
 
When creating a basic membership account, currently SL 
does not check the identity of the user. Therefore there is a 
possibility for users to create multiple accounts and abuse the 
system. In the case of accounts that have been banned for 
violating the TOS, users can easily create a second account 
under a different name and continue to be part of the SL 
environment. The lack of control over the authentication of 
membership registration makes the environment vulnerable 
to people who want to perform illegal activities such as 
griefing, gambling and hacking. To provide security to 
account information, SL encrypts credentials and makes use 
of a secure HTTP connection. 
SL users have the ability to develop client side code 
using the LSL scripting language. This language gives the 
users capabilities to enhance certain attributes of objects 
including animation. This is a useful feature for users to 
enable them to add functionality to their items. For example 
a user who wants to create aircrafts can use the animation 
functions to simulate the flying motion. When abused, this 
ability may give griefers and hackers the ability to cause 
destruction and exploit the SL environment. Furthermore, 
developers have the ability to create scripts that are useful 
and sell them to others as third party tools. The problem with 
this is that, if there are any bugs or vulnerabilities within the 
tool it proves to be a risk to the environment. There have 
been instances where SL management has had to restrict the 
use of some programs created by users due to possible 
malicious code and denial of service attacks. 
Currently Linden Labs and its affiliate websites use 
cookies to keep track of user sessions. It is up to the user to 
enable or disable them. However, disabling cookies on the 
clients browser may unable some functionality when 
operating their systems. Linden Labs uses information stored 
in cookies to access client account information including 
transactions that take place on “The Marketplace”. 
SL has provided some guidelines to its users on how to 
deal with “Password stealers”. Some scams that they caution 
against include users being asked to provide credentials in-
world during various transactions. The only legitimate login 
form is when logging into SL, beyond that it is not necessary 
to log in again. 
SL also caution against phishing scams, emails that 
requires users to submit their Second Life credentials and 
links to third party websites asking for this information. 
Some phishing scams may include giving free assets to users 
for example Linden dollars after providing passwords. 
In terms of copyright management, SL does not have a 
legal way of protecting user creations. The only measure 
taken by SL is to track copied materials and manually ban 
users. As SL and other virtual world's grow it will be much 
harder to only impose such measure when protecting user 
assets. Furthermore, this may result in fear of using the 
63
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

system, as valuable assets are at stake of simply being copied 
by others. 
SL also has a hard time enforcing real world laws within 
the system. The only way SL has control is by banning users 
who violate the TOS. If users of SL conduct crimes within 
the Virtual World, they are under the jurisdiction of the 
country where they reside in. This means that every user is 
governed differently when it comes to taxed income and 
other violations.  
E. Security service and Mechansims 
Within SL's environment, users‟ posses information that 
needs to be kept hidden to protect their assets. This includes 
information such as those within their accounts. (Log-In 
credentials, L$Balance and contact lists). However, 
information concerning assets possessed by an avatar is 
contained within SL Viewer Cache in an unencrypted form. 
Information transmitted through audio and chat can be 
eavesdropped by others as it is not encrypted. It is possible to 
observe and follow other avatars and even eavesdrop on their 
conversations. Furthermore, video recordings can be used to 
monitor and perform surveillance on other avatars within the 
environment without their consent or knowledge [33]. To 
combat issues regarding confidentiality SL does offer full 
control on permission settings to private region owners. 
Private region owners are able to choose who has access to 
the region and the type of information they have access to.  
Integrity of the assets exchanged within SL is important 
to ensure that the economy is not flooded with fake or 
duplicate Virtual objects as this creates a loss of value. Users 
who sell Virtual Goods may be concerned about the 
possibility of their creations being illegally copied or 
transferred to others without their permission. This may also 
lead to problems concerning Intellectual Property rights. 
Buyers also need to make sure that they have received an 
authentic copy of a Virtual Good that has been purchased. It 
is also of outermost important that the L$ is not falsely 
duplicated, hence causing inflation within SL's Economy.  
The availability of the SL system overall and parts of its 
regions are critical to the ongoing activities that promote 
exchange of virtual currency, trading and creation. If parts of 
the servers are unavailable and a user's business is located on 
those servers, there is a risk of loss of traffic and revenue. 
Instances of DOS attacks have happened within SL causing a 
loss of service. Activities such as griefing may also cause 
users to avoid certain areas hence limiting the availability of 
these areas.  
There are users who purchase virtual goods and later 
contact their credit cards companies to dispute the charges. 
Therefore these users keep both the virtual goods and their 
money. These charge backs are a type of fraud propagated 
within Virtual Worlds that posses a business model allowing 
free trade of virtual goods. 
Apart from the fact that users can be monitored through 
their behavior, avatar body language and chats, some 
functions within the world can be used to collect data. For 
example the use of the LlGet LandOwnerAt function returns 
data regarding a user's virtual property. Such information can 
be used by hackers to target user accounts. Second Life 
states on their privacy policy that they keep aggregated 
information in their databases in regards to IP addresses, 
session data, how SL is used in terms of frequency and 
specific pages visits. Also the third party affiliates have 
limited access to user data. 
F. Stackholders 
There are two models that have already derived 
stakeholders of Virtual Worlds at large are the Yee 
Motivation Model [34] and the Manninen model [35]. These 
two models will be used to mapped the various SL roles  
with different types of risks and threats. This information 
will prove useful in categorizing the assets for each 
stakeholder. SL, identifies four types of user roles, these 
include “Business Owners”, “Creators”, “Educators”, 
“Landowners” and “Solution Providers”.  
In the Motivation Model created by N. Yee, [34] it is 
suggested that sometimes users are motivated by the 
structure and design of some Virtual Worlds. This model 
defines users‟ motivation according to three main factors, 
“Achievement”, “Social” and “Immersion”.  
The second Model [35], has assessed stakeholders of 
Virtual Worlds by applying the Social Construction of 
Technology 
SCOT 
framework 
to analyze the 
key 
participants who interact with assets within a Virtual 
Economy. This framework divides the stakeholders into 
three main categories; “The Players”, “Game Controllers” 
and “Third Parties”. The first type of users, “The Players” 
may be divided further, in order to obtain different type of 
users who overlap with [34] Motivation Model. These are 
the “Achievers”, “Socializers”, “Explorers”, “Competitors”, 
“Griefers”, “Leaders” and “Performers”. 
First and foremost because SL is a social environment, 
most of its players engage in making friends, chatting with 
others and in creation of relationships. These types of users 
are most likely to value their social status and the contacts 
they make. Therefore if they accumulate assets, those assets 
that give them an identity and help them form relationship 
with others are the most valuable to them. These users are 
known as the “Socializers”[35]. 
 “Achievers” want to gain something extra from their 
experiences. Therefore these types of users may want to earn 
more money and accumulate the most virtual property. In 
SL, this would be the users who are entrepreneurial in 
nature; they are motivated the most by the feeling of 
achievement. These users will value their creative assets in 
their inventory and those that they sell to others. Also, they 
will value their social contacts because through these 
contacts they are able to sell and showcase their creations 
and assets. The ownership of virtual property is a very 
important, valuable asset to these users. From the 
aforementioned SL roles, “Achievers” could be “Business 
owners”, “creators” or “landowners”. 
Another category of SL stakeholders are the “Game 
controllers”; these are the users who directly have stake in 
the business model of the virtual world. In SL, we can 
64
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

describe this category as Linden Labs the owner of SL and 
other third party companies who provide SL with additional 
infrastructure or features for their experience. In the 
following section the assets for these identified stakeholders 
is assessed as well as the various threats and vulnerabilities. 
G. Assets match with vulnerablities and Threatss 
After having identified the various Stakeholders of SL, 
their assets are analyzed and identified here. Due to space 
limitation only some of the assets matching to the vulnerable 
will be presented here 
The avatar is the player's identity and the central point of 
existence within a Virtual World. It is through the avatar that 
other assets are derived and possessed. It is emphasized that 
an avatar as an asset is detrimental to a users Virtual World 
existence [35], [36], [37]. It is through the Avatar that a user 
possesses assets such as virtual goods and land. Since the 
avatar is the point of access to the SL environment, its 
importance security-wise is equivalent to a user account.  
The account consists of login credentials including the 
username and passwords as the means to controlling an 
avatar. This account also has other important information 
regarding the avatar's activities within the Virtual World, 
including how much virtual property they own, how much 
virtual currency they have on their balance, business 
transactions and their contacts which may be friends or 
business clients. A hacker may try to gain access to this 
using social engineering, spam or malicious code, if 
successful they can steal the user's virtual property and 
continue to deceive the user's contacts as well [10]. 
The SL Currency Linden$ is the most valuable asset to 
the Virtual Economy. If a hacker is able to duplicate the 
currency, then the whole Economy can collapse. This can 
cause serious damage to all operating within SL and 
especially to Linden Labs. Since the currency can be 
exchange to real money, its loss to an individual means loss 
of real money and is equivalent of credit or debit card theft. 
For social residents who do not trade within SL and those 
that have the basic account may not be affected by this asset 
because they may not own a significant amount of it. 
Residents, who are entrepreneurs, regard currency as a very 
critical asset, because their main reason for using SL is to 
earn money. 
Land on SL can be used to create virtual houses where an 
avatar “lives”, or can be rented to others as virtual real estate 
or it may be an island for an organization‟s business. Anshe 
Chung who was the first self made SL millionaire, owns land 
estates on multiple servers which she rents and sells as part 
of her main business, for an entrepreneur such as herself she 
cannot afford to lose her valuable land or have one of these 
servers hacked into. For other organizations that conduct 
meetings or provide distance learning, it may be important 
that the land is protected for unauthorized access. Loss of an 
Island would be detrimental in such instances..  
According to the aforementioned assets, there are several 
threats and vulnerabilities that can pose risks to the 
stakeholders. 
Hackers can pretend to be SL employees and easily 
extract important information from users. This may include 
information such as their user name and password. Another 
way a hacker can phish for this information is through a 
user‟s e-mail. A user may receive an e-mail asking for their 
credentials, once they provide this information. The hacker 
can take control of their avatar and account information. In 
this case assets such as social contacts, virtual property, 
virtual currency and land are at risk. They can also use the 
avatar to con others who trust the user [38]. Phishers may 
also find it easy to obtain credentials in this type of 
environment because young people tend to have the habit of 
sharing their credentials. Moreover, the credentials may be 
used in other systems which can make it easier for hackers 
who phish for these credentials to gain access elsewhere as 
well [8]. In some cases, threats in other web applications 
such as emails can endanger assets in the Virtual World. In 
this case if a user has opened an attachment with a trojan 
horse which is logging activities on their computer. The 
hacker may gain access to the user's passwords to SL and in 
turn steal their virtual currency or contacts. Also the hacker 
may have the ability to impersonate the user and conduct 
social engineering attacks to friends and colleagues [39]. 
Organizations that have employees in SL Islands run the 
risk of hackers engaging in Social Engineering tactics to 
obtain information. A hacker can contact any employee and 
engage in conversations with them which may result in 
confidential information being given out. Hackers can then 
use this information to break into other systems out of the 
virtual world of SL. Also because most of the content in SL 
can be viewed by others, hackers can use this information 
freely to collect data for social engineering purposes which 
may lead to identity theft. 
Cheating is a violation of EULA agreement between the 
user of a Virtual World and its providers. This violation 
employs the use of tools to ensure that tasks are automated. 
Cheating is usually performed via 3rd party software tools; 
this type of software is usually known as Bots. Cheating has 
been classified as a threat to the Virtual Economy, because it 
may include activities such as exploitation of the system to 
take advantage of bugs or social engineering of others within 
the system [40]. In the instance of SL, the use of bots can be 
employed to make illegal copies of other users creations. 
This may cause copyright infringement and loss of value to 
goods hence destroying other's businesses. Also, bots can be 
used to cause DOS attacks to the system.. 
Griefing is the process where other users perform 
activities or actions that may tarnish the image or cause 
damage to ones avatar, business and reputation. Griefers rely 
on the fact that basic accounts do not require identity 
verification; anybody can create an account and use it to 
harm damage or cause disruption to others. 
65
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

Charlie Miller and Dino Dai Zovi set out to execute “a 
proof of concept exploit” in Second Life. In this case, the 
intention was to try to “steal” another user's Linden Dollars 
and convert it to real money.  
At the time of the exploitation, Apple's QuickTime 
Player, which SL uses for rendering media such as audio, 
video and pictures contained a vulnerability. This 
vulnerability meant there was an opportunity to take 
advantage of the stack overflow. The researches created a 
malicious QuickTime file, hosted on their remote servers. In 
SL they created a cube which pointed to the URL of the 
malicious QuickTime file.  At this point if an avatar 
happened to pass by the area containing the cube, a hacker 
could take control of the avatar. In this particular case the 
researchers were able to create a DLL to access functions 
within SecondLife including 
III. 
RISK ANALYSIS 
The use of Network analysis tools to understand the 
behavior of complex systems has been employed for more 
than eight decades. Throughout history this science has been 
adopted 
by 
sociologists, 
anthropologists, 
biologists, 
psychologists, mathematicians and economists to study 
various systems that exist within the society [41]. The data 
collected from the Case Study Analysis of SL was formatted 
and analyzed in a DNAT.  
To conduct analysis and extract these measurements, the 
Organizational Risk Analyzer (ORA) was used. “ORA is a 
network analysis tool that detects risks or vulnerabilities of 
an organization‟s design structure.” It has over 100 measures 
with 3 classifications based on risks and vulnerabilities.  It is 
one of the DNAT developed by CASOS in order to measure 
Risk in Organizations [48].  However the data input in this 
tool are not only limited to Organizations, one can use this 
tool to analyze any type of scenario that can be depicted as a 
network. Previous research studies which have used this tool 
include impact analysis of weaponized biological attacks on 
cities, impact analysis of actions in asymmetric warfare 
simulation 
and 
estimating 
impact 
of 
organizational 
downsizing. 
In order to analyze data in ORA, objects are identified 
and their relationships are defined according to the 
aforementioned five elements in rows and columns. These 
objects and relationships form a collection of networks 
known as the meta-matrix. This meta-matrix is the main 
input that is analyzed by ORA in order to detect potential 
risk.   
The case study analysis of SL was used as a source to 
extract all the information possible in order to construct the 
required meta-network. To accomplish this, the first step was 
to create nodes and nodesets necessary to build the network. 
The first node set created was for all the key stakeholders as 
identified previously. The relationship between each is 
mapped by a binary number „0‟ or „1‟. The task nodeset 
consisted of tasks that were needed in order to facilitate 
trading of virtual goods amongst the stakeholders. The 
knowledge nodeset was represented by those skills that were 
necessary to make money and socialize in the environment. 
The events depicted in the nodeset were those that could 
pose threat to the virtual economy of SL. Lastly the resource 
nodeset included the assets as categorized previosly. Each of 
the created nodes were combined to create subnetworks 
based on their relationships. The nodesets created for the 
experiment were: agent x agent, agent x knowledge, agent x 
resource, agent x task, agentNodeset, event x event, event x 
resource, 
eventNodeset, 
knowledgeNodeset, 
resourceNodeset, taskNodeset.  All these nodesets were then 
imported into ORA. The outcome was a metamatrix 
identifying points of risk within the system. According to 
this input ORA performed statistical analysis to indicate 
probable risks within SL‟s Virtual Economy.  
The SL Meta Network consists of six networks and five 
nodesets. The agent who in this case is the SL Stakeholder 
was the most important factor to the system. Without the 
stakeholders participating in SL‟s Virtual Economy, the 
system will cease to exist. The stakeholder was analyzed in 
terms of the resources, tasks, knowledge, events and to each 
other‟s interaction within the system. Finally the resources 
were also analyzed based on the various threats (events) that 
can affect them. 
When visualizing the relationship between the stakeholders 
and the assets it is clearly demonstrated by ORA that the 
most critical assets are currency and avatar accounts.  The 
currency and avatar account as critical assets relationship 
can be viewed by looking at the Agent X Resource 
Relationship within the SL Metanetwork as presented in 
figure 1. Also this can be seen in the relationship depicted 
by Agent Event X Resource. Here we can see that the 
currency is directly connected to the event currency 
inflation demonstrating its close link. Also currency appears 
the most central resource with the most connections, which 
means that removing this link from this equation will 
collapse the network and evidently it is a large risk. In the 
case of the avatar and accounts the relationship diagram 
shows that this is the most targeted asset. Four out five of 
the events are directly linked to the avatar and account asset, 
hence having direct impact and risk. These events are 
phishing, malware and bots, griefing, social engineering and 
currency inflation. 
According to this visualization it can be concluded that 
the currency is the foundation of the economy and the 
accounts provide access to the trading of the economy. The 
removal of both of these from the system will affect the 
dynamics of the system and defeat the whole purpose of the 
system.  All users of the system rely on these two resources 
to ensure that the system continues to operate at optimum 
efficiency. This is not to say the other resources are of no 
importance to the system whatsoever, it just shows that these 
are the most critical. 
 In addition to the visualization tool, various measures 
were used to analyze the risks of certain events within the 
economy. The capability measure depicted by Event X 
Resource shows which events are most capable of affecting 
66
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

each resource. This illustrated that the resources had a high 
risk from threats such as malware, bots and currency 
inflation. The malware and bots could affect the alteration of 
the resources and the trading of goods within the system.  
 
Currency inflation would affect the economy by 
rendering the monetary value of goods useless. The 
Centrality measure of Agent X Resources depicted that 
avatar, accounts and currency as having the highest measure.  
This confirmed that the accounts and the currency were 
resources that ran the highest risk if a threat were to occur 
within the system. Also this measure illustrated that the 
creation of virtual goods and their sales were the most 
important tasks within the virtual economy shown by the 
Centrality Agent X Task.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The Second Life MetaNetwork. 
 
 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSIONS 
The main goal of this paper has been to explore 
security risks that are inherent within Virtual Economies 
of Virtual World Systems. The paper outlines a high level 
case study analysis of the Virtual World Second Life. It is 
first viewed as a holistic system and the various 
implications to security are discussed including real world 
scenarios. This analysis is the basis for extraction of 
information regarding assets, vulnerabilities and threats 
within such an environment which in turn is used to 
construct data for risk analysis using DNA Tools.   
The various stakeholders of SL‟s Virtual Economy 
were identified; also the assets that are related to these 
stakeholders and their threats and vulnerabilities were also 
identified and discussed. Finally all the data was formatted 
accordingly to Organizational Risk Analyzer (ORA) 
model which was identify Currency and Avatar/accounts 
being the most vulnerable assets, also that currency 
inflation was the biggest risk to the Virtual Economy of 
Second Life.   
The findings have confirmed that there are real threats 
within Virtual Economies of Virtual Worlds, the most 
critical assets being user accounts and currency which are 
most vulnerable to malware, bots and inflation. Because of 
this discovery it is important for users especially those 
who are going to put their real resources within a Virtual 
Economy to be aware of the risks and how to protect 
themselves against these possible threats.  
Future Work 
According to the work performed in this paper it has 
become apparent that Virtual Economies are a new 
untapped research field. This field has a potential of 
becoming very important in the future as more and more 
67
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

social networking systems and virtual worlds embrace 
trading of virtual goods, especially if this new type of 
commerce emerges as a new platform for transaction 
processing on the Internet.     
There are still a great numbers of questions that need to 
be researched in terms of security in Virtual Worlds and 
their economies. Specifically to complement the scenario 
based simulation conducted by the Dynamic Network 
Analysis Tool, other research methods and risk analysis 
techniques can be used to further explore the results and to 
understand their implications in a real world setting. Since 
the goal of this paper was to explore this new area, it 
hoped that other researcher can build on these findings to 
help individuals and organization better understand what 
real risks they are facing in these new virtual worlds. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  E. Castronova, “Virtual Worlds: A First-Hand Account of Market 
and Society on the Cyberian Frontier,” CESifo Working Paper No. 
618, December 2001. 
[2] M. Bell, “Toward a Definition of Virtual Worlds,” Journal of 
Virtual Worlds Research, (2008). 
[3] [ENISA, “Virtual Worlds, Real Money,” Position Paper November 
2008.  
[4] KZERO, “2010 Virtual Worlds and Beyond: Key Market Trends 
and Developments.” URL:http://www.kzero.co.uk [Retrieved 
on May, 2011] 
[5] J. Bardzel, “Virtual Worlds and Fraud: Approaching Cybersecurity 
in Massively Multiplayer Online Games.” Situated Play 
Proceedings of DiGra 2007 Conference  
[6] G. McGraw and  G. Hoglund,"Online Games and Security," IEEE 
Security and Privacy, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 76-79, Sep./Oct. 2007 
[7] T. Zarsky, “Privacy and Data Collection in Virtual Worlds”. STATE 
OF PLAY - LAW, GAMES AND VIRTUAL WORLDS, Jack M. 
Balkin and Beth Simone Noveck, eds., NYU Press, 2006. [8] Y. 
Wang, S. Mainwaring, “Human-Currency Interaction: learning 
from virtual currency use in China”, Proceeding of the twenty-
sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing 
systems, April 05-10, 2008, Florence, Italy 
[8] S. Lindtner, “A Hybrid Cultural Ecology: World of Warcraft in 
China.” In: Proc. of CSCW 2008. 
[9] Y. Chen, “Online Gaming Crime and Security Issues – Cases and 
Countermeasures from Taiwan” Canadian Council.2004 
[10] J. Fairfield,“Virtual Property” Boston University Law Review. 85, 
2005. 
[11] R. Reynolds, “Hands off My avatar! Issues with claims of virtual 
property 
and 
identity” 
Proceedings 
of 
Digital 
Games 
Industries(2003) 
[12] I. MacInnes, “The Implications of Property Rights in Virtual 
Worlds.” Proceedings of Tenth Americas Conference of 
Information Systems (AMCIS 2004). 
[13] A. Eriksson and  K. Gril, “Who owns my avatar? - Rights in virtual 
property.” Proceedings of DiGRA 2005 Conference: Changing 
Views – Worlds in Play. 
[14] [15] M. Meehan, “Virtual Property: Protecting Bits in Context.” 
Richmond Journal of Law and Technology. (2006) 
[15] A. Jankowich, “Property and Democracy in Virtual Worlds”. 11 
B.U.J. SCI & TECH. L. 173 2005 
[16] J.M. Balkin, “Virtual Liberty: Freedom to Design and Freedom to 
Play in Virtual Worlds.” Virginia Law Review. 90, 2004. 
[17] P.S. Jenkins, “The Virtual World as a Company Town – Freedom 
of Speech in Massively Multiple Online Role Playing Games.” 
Journal of Internet Law.8 (1)2004 
[18] A.D. Schwarz and  R.  Bullis, “Rivalrous Consumption and the 
Boundaries of Copyright Law: Intellectual Property Lessons from 
Online Games.” Intellectual Property Law Bulletin 2005. 
[19] T. Burke, “Play of State: Sovereignty and Governance in MMOGs” 
2004 
[20] G. Lastowka and D.Hunter, “Virtual Crimes” New York Law 
School Law Review. 49(1) 2004 
[21] I. MacInnes, Y.J Park and L S-M Whang, “Virtual World 
Governance: Digital Item Trade and its Consequences in Korea.” 
Telecommunications Policy Research Conference 2004. 
[22] J. Grimmelmann, “Virtual Worlds as Comparitive Law.”, New 
York law School Law Review.47, 2004 
[23] T. P Seto, “When is a Game Only a Game? The Taxation of Virtual 
Worlds.” Loyola-LA Legal Studies 2008. 
[24] B. Camp, “The Play's the Thing: A Theory of Taxing Virtual 
Worlds.” Hastings Law Journal. 59(1) 2007 
[25] L. Lederman, “Stranger than Fiction: Taxing Virtual Worlds.” New 
York University Law Review. 82 2007 
[26] M. Wagner M, 2010, “Second Life CEO looks to the future, after 
massive 
layoffs” 
ComputerWorld 
http://blogs.computerworld.com/16303/second_life_layoffs/ 
[Retrieved on May, 2011] 
[27] M. Rymaszewski, “Second Life: The Official Guide.” 1st ed. 
Hoboken, N. J.: 2007, Wiley. ISBN 047009608X 
[28]  Z. Dongsong and S. Prabodh, “Doing business in Second Life: e-
commerce in 3D online environment.” IJEB 8(2): 148-169 (2010) 
[29] C. Ondrejka, “Aviators, Moguls, Fashionistas and Barons: 
Economics and Ownership in Second Life”..  
[30] C. Miller, “Virtual worlds, real exploits”, Network Security, 
Volume 2008, Issue 4, April 2008, Pages 4-6 
[31] C. Y. Lee, 2009, “Understanding Security Threats in Virtual 
Worlds”. AMCIS 2009 Proceedings. Paper 466.  
[32] N. Yee, “Motivations for play in online games”. Cyberpsychol 
Behav. 2006; 9:772–5 2006 
[33] J. Bromberger “The Social Construction of Virtual Assets: Step 
One: Relevant Social Groups and Interpretive Flexibility.” 2006. 
[34] T. Manninen and  T. Kujanpהה, “The Value of Virtual Assets – The 
Role of Game Characters in MMOGs,” International Journal of 
Business Science and Applied Management, Vol. 2, No. 1: 21-33, 
2007. 
[35] T. Manninen, T. Kujanp, L. Vallius, 2007, “What‟s My Game 
Character Worth – The Value Components of MMOG Characters." 
Situated Play, Proceedings of DiGRA 2007 Conference. (2007): 
327-334. 
[36] J. Elliott and  S. Kruck, “Help – Somebody Robbed my Second 
Life Avatar!.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research, North America, 
1, Jul. 2008. 
[37] I. Muttick, “Securing Virtual Worlds against Real Attacks”, 
McAfee, 2008.  
[38] S. De Paoli and A. Kerr, “We Will Always Be One Step Ahead of 
Them”, A Case Study on the Economy of Cheating in MMORPGs. 
Journal of Virtual Worlds Research, North America, 2, Feb. 2010. 
[39]  [41] H. Armstrong and I. McCulloh, "Organizational risk using 
network analysis." In Proceedings of the South African information 
security multi-conference, edited by Nathan Clarke, Steven Furnell 
and Rossouw von Solms, 132-141, Plymouth, UK: Centre for 
Security, Communications & Network Research, 2011. 
[40] K. Carley and J. Reminga, "ORA: Organization Risk Analyzer." 
Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science, Institute 
for Software Research International, Technical Report CMU-ISRI-
04-106, 2004 
 
68
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

