Blockchain:
The Emergence of Distributed Autonomous Institutions
Mariusz Nowostawski
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Gjøvik, Norway
Email: mariusz.nowostawski@ntnu.no
Christopher K. Frantz
Otago Polytechnic
Dunedin, New Zealand
Email: cf@christopherfrantz.org
Abstract—We present a novel institutional perspective on the
distributed consensus and ledger technology known as blockchain.
We discuss the concept of Distributed Autonomous Institutions
that are able to facilitate global interactions, contracts, and
value transfers, all of which are achieved without the need
for the human-based third party trust. We argue that due to
its properties and design blockchain technology represents a
disruptive change in the modelling paradigms of socio-technical
systems. Distributed trust and consensus mechanisms offered
by blockchain technology represent a novel, qualitatively dif-
ferent, phenomenon. We present the general design principles,
stakeholders, the dynamics between those stakeholders, the
incentive models, and the consensus protocols currently used
in blockchains, before highlighting the potential of blockchain
technology to develop distributed autonomous institutions. We
conclude with a discussion of challenges associated with the
adoption of blockchain technology.
Keywords–blockchain; governance; autonomy; distributed au-
tonomous institutions; public ledger; mining; consensus; smart
contracts; Bitcoin; DashCoin; Ethereum
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the important enablers for modern civilization
has been the invention of language. Spoken language has
enabled the evolution of complex, yet stable communica-
tion patterns [1], whereas written language has provided
persistence [2] and added the ability to communicate asyn-
chronously, sometimes across centuries or millennia. Commu-
nication and persistence have further played a fundamental
role in the development of modern computing paradigms.
Since the invention of the von Neumann architecture, hu-
man development and institutional automation has accelerated,
as evidenced in increasingly complex forms of social and
economic organisation and associated regulation. Example
phenomena include the increasing numbers of digital nomads
and ﬂexible organisational boundaries based on procurement of
external services. We claim that the accelerated development
and growth in complexity in human institutions ultimately
relies on the three fundamental elements: (1) communication:
the ability to communicate and synchronize; (2) persistence:
the ability to store communication or data; and (3) the ability
to compute: ie. automatically execute an algorithm, or in
other words, a ﬁnite set of computational steps. This parallels
the characteristics of what we refer to as institutions [3],
or “manifestations of social behaviour” [4], which are char-
acterised by (a) social interaction, (b) stability, i.e., institu-
tions’ ability to survive the constituting behaviour [5], and
TABLE I. INSTITUTIONAL CHARACTERISTICS AND ASSOCIATED
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY
Technology
Communication
Persistence
Distributed Computation
Internet
•
P2P Technology
•
•
Blockchain
•
•
•
(c) procedural prescription of desirable behaviour (or pro-
scription of undesirable behaviour) that may or may not be
explicitly codiﬁed [6] (e.g., as laws vs. social norms). While
the internet enabled communication across organisational and
national boundaries, laying the foundation for modern virtual
organisations, its primary focus was the facilitation of general
human communication. The actual state was held within the
endpoints, not the network itself. Only the introduction of
peer-to-peer technology in the early 2000s (e.g., [7]) moved
state into the network itself. Thus state did no longer rely
on individual endpoints, but was rather distributed across a
collection of participating network nodes. Therefore, the state
could be managed in the network itself, the modiﬁcation
required explicit intervention by individual nodes based on
externally negotiated semantics. In this context ‘externally
negotiated’ implies that the higher-level application-speciﬁc
semantics (beyond the primitive CRUD operations Create,
Read, Update and Delete) are not managed by the system itself.
Even though cloud technology reinforced the virtualisation
and decentralisation of computation, it did not change the
institutional status: the control is retained with a single well-
deﬁned entity, generally the owning organisation. The inability
to delegate the guaranteed execution of complex instructions,
along with assurance of transaction safety to the network itself,
limits the adoption for critical services outside the control of
organisations such as banks, insurances and governments. We
argue that the ﬁnal missing pillar, the decentralised execution
of procedural prescriptions makes all the difference in building
truly open institutional environments, enabling us to relay
critical coordination tasks, such as digital payments, tendering
of governmental contracts, or even democratic voting processes
to the network itself. Table I summarises the institutional
properties of the highlighted technologies.
We believe that blockchain technology reﬂects the natural
evolution towards loosely coupled, user-centric, distributed
and autonomous institutions, that will fundamentally change
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

the nature in which humans engage with computers, and, in
extension, with other humans. In this context the autonomous
nature of institutions reﬂects the continuous operation without
the need for any human intervention.
In Section II we brieﬂy introduce the principles that un-
derlie blockchain technology and highlight the central char-
acteristics that produce the added value that has the potential
to redeﬁne the modern economic landscape. We further intro-
duce Bitcoins and DashCoins as example implementations of
blockchain technology, before introducing the more advanced
blockchain-enabled decentralised computation in Section III.
In Section IV, we introduce the concept of Distributed Au-
tonomous Institutions, before discussing their impact on socio-
technical systems as well as society in the wider sense in
Section V, along with an outlook on future work.
II.
BLOCKCHAIN
Blockchain technology facilitates the fundamental shift
based on automated, yet ﬂexible mechanisms that deal with
trust and liability based on adaptive incentive systems. The
underlying cornerstone of public blockchain technology is
solving the consistency problem, that is, ensuring a consistent
indisputable representation of state and transitions outside of
the control of either single stakeholder. The mathematical
consistency of events, or transactions, is assured by aligning
the incentive model with the goals of the distributed network
of peers. In this context ‘public’ implies that blockchain
applications operate in the open public sphere and coordinate
interaction between unknown participants in a permissionless
fashion, i.e., in principle anyone can participate.
Whereas the distributed nature of state is unproblematic, its
synchronised modiﬁcation is. In an open distributed environ-
ment all the nodes need to achieve consensus about whether
an individual transaction is accepted or rejected. Accepted
transactions must be subsequently integrated into the shared
chain of transactions held within the blockchain. Decision-
making generally operates based on social choice protocols,
such as voting (e.g., majority-based voting). Thus stakeholders
cannot modify the distributed shared state or cheat without
collaboration by the majority of other stakeholders. The prob-
ability of colluding is reduced by network size and anonymity,
as well as ensuring that cheating carries a risk of value loss.
In this context value loss means waste of computational re-
sources or loss of the managed resources, e.g., digital currency.
However, any modiﬁcation puts a computational burden on
all members of the network. This aspect could be exploited
by injecting large numbers of transactions and reducing the
blockchain’s ability to process those, while maintaining global
consistency. The associated expectation is that fraudulent trans-
actions (e.g., declaring multiple transactions of the same funds
at the same time) will be accepted by a critical number of
hosts and eventually be accepted into the global blockchain.
In the absence of a central sanctioning authority, blockchain
modiﬁcations (i.e., transactions) need to be cheap enough
not to discourage the system’s use, yet expensive enough
to prevent opportunistic abuse (e.g., by submitting fraudulent
transactions). Mechanisms that facilitate this trade-off include
the consumption of high amounts of processing power or per-
transaction payments. This balance of incentive and deterrence
is the proof of work [8]. An alternative approach that avoids
the inefﬁciencies associated with the proof of work, such as
wasted power and processing time, as well as to limit the
computational ‘arms race’ for computing power, is the proof
of stake. In the proof of stake [9] the individual participants’
inﬂuence is constrained by their commitment to the system,
such weighing the inﬂuence by the amount of resources indi-
vidual participants hold. Naturally, this introduces hierarchical
characteristics into the system, but increases the efﬁciency of
the system without unproductive use of computing resources.
Whatever the speciﬁc protocol employed by a given blockchain
implementation, the proof of work, proof of stake, and the
voting model used for validation work in unison; the stable
long-term strategy is not to cheat. Decentralised blockchain
technology offers third-party trust without any single entity
taking the full responsibility or having full authority.
What this means for institutional settings [10] is that trust
and liability can now be ﬂexibly shifted on a spectrum ranging
between the institution itself and the participating individuals.
Let us take an example of a simple asset, e.g., a currency.
Let us assume that selﬁsh individuals only trust themselves
completely, i.e., one cannot cheat or misuse one’s own trust.
Being a custodian of one’s own assets carries liability, e.g., for
safekeeping. To relieve oneself from the liability, one can give
custody of the asset to a trusted institution (Institution A in
Fig. 1), such as a bank. Once an individual deposits an asset,
the bank is liable for the safety and security of that deposit.
The liability has been transferred from the individual to the
institution. However, that transfer also introduces the need for
trust. The individual must now put their trust in the bank.
Individuals
Trust
Liability
Individuals
Institution A
Trust
Liability
Individuals
Institution B
Compliance 
check
Figure 1. Trust Relationships in the Traditional Institution Concept
To relieve one from liability, and to pass the liability to
the bank, one thus has to trust the bank, or, more precisely,
institutions that regulate and control the bank’s operation
(Institution B in Fig. 1), since the inner workings are in-
accessible to trusting individuals and are thus not openly
veriﬁable. But what if one trusts none but oneself, but still
wants to pass the reliability to an institution? The solution is
a Decentralised Autonomous Organisation (DAO) [11] – an
algorithm, that codiﬁes the participants, governed resources as
well as protocols. The algorithm that is guaranteed to work
according to its speciﬁcation and, if well constructed, never
fails. Once instantiated, it would thus never break the trust
one puts into it, since the algorithm exhibits veriﬁable trust.
Therefore, with the blockchain it is possible to achieve the
liability transfer from individual to institution, without the
putting trust into a traditional institution that operates based on
human intervention (e.g., a notary). That said, any DAO can
only be as good as its implementation. A DAO is governed
by veriﬁable code and reliable execution, but that does not
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

protect it against bugs introduced at design time. A good
example for the importance of thorough development is the
recent exploitation of the most prominent DAO and the theft
of around one third of all entrusted funds [12].
As another example for a blockchain-enabled application,
consider a simple escrow service. Typically, an escrow service
is used to assure atomicity of a transaction between two non-
trusted entities, and to have the ability to roll back a partially
fulﬁlled transaction. An escrow service, a trusted third party
is used to work as a trusted intermediary to facilitate the
transaction. With the blockchain, such transactions are atomic
by design, without the need for a trusted third party. What
those examples demonstrate is that many centrally-managed
services, in particular those provided by insurance companies,
banks, or governments, can be made more secure and more
transparent with the use of blockchain technology. This means
that the human element can be eliminated from selected
institutions or contractual agreements, especially in areas in
which the ability to maintain accountability is challenging.
This has a fundamental impact on how we will perceive and
deal with fraud, data leaks or power abuse. This potential
and the associated challenges become clearer when exploring
examples of blockchain technology with respect to structural
and governance characteristics. In the following subsections
we thus highlight some examples of blockchain technologies
to illustrate the sketched potential.
A. Bitcoin
The ﬁrst deployment of the blockchain technology and cur-
rently the most dominant virtual currency is known as Bitcoin.
The creator of the system, known as Satoshi Nakamoto, wrote
about the system in a founding white paper [13]. The global
network of miners and users is one of the largest and most
powerful computational resources currently in operation.
Developers
Users
Validating 
Nodes
Miners
Figure 2. Blockchain Stakeholders
Stakeholders. At its essence the Bitcoin network relies on
two operations, a) the mining of the currency (i.e., production
or minting of the currency tokens), and b) the validation of
transactions (i.e., facilitating the use of the currency). This is
mediated by a set of stakeholders, a schematic overview of
which is depicted in Fig. 2. The developers provide code for
the mining and the consensus library. The miners generate new
blocks that contain the individual transactions. The validating
nodes run software to accept or reject transactions. In addition,
validating nodes also accept or reject blocks mined by the
miners. To regulate individual inﬂuence, the acceptance relies
on majority-based voting between the validating nodes. The
detailed workings of the system are further explained in [13]
and in [14].
Instead of exploring the technical complexity here, we only
focus on the circular dependencies between all three stake-
holders. Validating nodes are not able to inﬂuence the process
alone, because they lack the computational power necessary
to compute the blocks. Miners, who possess the necessary
computational resources, are not capable of inﬂuencing the
voting process directly, as the network of validating nodes
is larger than the mining network. This makes it difﬁcult to
obtain 51% of voting power. The developers shape the rules
and the consensus protocol, but can neither control the mining
nor the network. In principle, all parties thus have a strong
incentive to maintain the trust and operational integrity of the
network, without the risk of any other group exerting full
control, thus giving the system characteristics of a common
pool resource [15] with distributed governance.
Centralisation. In the early days of the deployment the
users of Bitcoin used to be the ones running the mining as
well as contributing their computing resources as validating
nodes. That was the initial assumption of Satoshi, and mining
as well as validating was built into the Bitcoin wallet software.
The goal was to keep the network as large and as distributed
as possible. However, over time an interesting phenomenon
occurred, similar to the development of internet services:
centralisation. Due to increased popularity of simpliﬁed wal-
lets, increased demands on storage and trafﬁc to maintain
fully validating nodes, and the escalation of computational
resources needed for mining, most contemporary Bitcoin users
are neither miners nor validating nodes. This model has severe
limitations, and the community has yet to work out how to
address the increase in centralisation of the system. A related
phenomenon that exempliﬁes the complexity of inﬂuence
factors on the structural characteristics of the network is the
fact that majority of mining power for Bitcoin now resides
in China [16]. A reason for this lies in the exceptionally
cheap access to electricity and the direct access to the mining
hardware that is produced in China. Thus micro-economical
incentives have tangible impact on the network structure itself.
The other property of Bitcoin is that it does not control who
the miners or who the validating nodes are. The network can
be inﬁltrated by malicious nodes in an attempt to destabilise
the network, or simply to monitor the transactions in order
to de-anonymise network participants [17], an aspect we will
discuss in the following.
Anonymity and Traceability. Anonymity in Bitcoin net-
work takes a weak form of pseudonymity. That implies that
users’ identities are hidden behind pseudonyms that can be
tracked through the blockchain. Bitcoins are not fungible.
Fungibility is the property of a good or a commodity such
that its units are completely interchangeable, and can be
easily substituted. The Bitcoin protocol allows traceability of
transactions between the pseudonyms, and as soon as a given
pseudonym is attached to a real person, there is a possibility
of de-anonymising other transaction participants. In order to
maintain anonymity, specially crafted mixing services need to
be used to make tracking harder, or statistically impossible.
Those services work in such a way that they generate a large
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

number of bogus transactions that obfuscate the true coin
ownership in the transaction graph.
Governance. From a socio-technical perspective, the most
interesting element of the Bitcoin blockchain is its governance
model, or, to be precise, the lack of it. The network is fully
self-organising, and there is no governance model built in.
The decision making and protocol reﬁnement happen through
iterative decision-making processes and community adoption.
In theory, it means progress can be achieved by the community
through majority-based voting. In reality, due to lengthy iter-
ations between the discussions, development, and partitioning
of the development efforts, the progress and adoption of ideas
is slow. With focus on the reliability and long-term viability
of the currency, this can be a desirable property, since it is
based on the democratic consensus-based decision-making. On
the other hand, consensus-building involves an inherent risk
of community partitioning, or even a hard fork. A hard fork
occurs if the community and the network splits into two chains,
out of which one is likely not to persist in the long term. This
means assets stored in the eventually discontinued fork are
ultimately lost. However, hard forks can occur intentionally:
Ethereum’s (see Section III) recent funds theft led to precisely
that decision based on community consensus [18] in an attempt
to revert the fraudulent transactions.
B. DashCoin
To address some of the shortcomings of the original Bitcoin
structure, alternative currencies have emerged. One example
for this development are DashCoin, whose structural charac-
teristics we will compare to Bitcoin, in order to disambiguate
blockchain technology from speciﬁc applications built on its
principles.
Stakeholders. The Dash network is fundamentally similar
to the Bitcoin network. However, there are some interesting
modiﬁcations. The Dash protocol introduces a concept of
second layer nodes, called master nodes. Those are selected
nodes that provide a certain proof of stake, or collateral, such
that only a limited amount of nodes ever exist in the network.
Those nodes are rewarded for participating in the network and
they provide certain services, such as governance and voting on
new services, allocation of funds, and consensus rules. Those
nodes can also provide a distributed oracle service, that is,
provide a veriﬁable ground truth without the need for a trusted
third party. Because there is a limited amount of those, and the
fact that they can be veriﬁably trusted (due to the collateral
that they deposit), certain operations, such as the conﬁrmation
of transactions, can be done much faster than in the Bitcoin
model.
Centralisation. The Dash network addresses the issues of
centralisation by delegating some of the duties to second-tier
nodes (master nodes). The number of those is kept within
the range of 3500-4000 nodes, which is sufﬁcient to sustain
a robust network. Each of those nodes has deposited 1000
DASH, which means those are core stakeholders in the net-
work, whose incentives are aligned with the group incentives as
a whole. Besides the proof of stake, the network also employs a
proof of work algorithm that bears no beneﬁts if implemented
in hardware – anyone can participate in mining using their
graphics processing unit (GPU), and it is not beneﬁcial to
implement the algorithm in hardware (e.g., in application-
speciﬁc integrated circuits (ASICs)).
Anonymity. Coins can be passed in pseudo-anonymous
fashion, similar to the Bitcoin. However, there is a built-
in transfer mode that mixes the coin in transit, using the
master nodes for this purpose. Therefore, the coins can be
transferred in statistically anonymous fashion without the need
for additional services.
Governance. The most interesting feature is the gov-
ernance model, consisting of the group of major network
stakeholders, i.e., the master nodes. Each master node has the
right to vote on resolutions and the majority of voters decide on
the structure and future of the network itself. Due to the design,
the objectives of the network as a whole, its customers/users,
and the master node operators are aligned to promote privacy,
consistency, and security. The Dash network does not suffer
any of the limitations of the Bitcoin blockchain governance.
C. Example Applications
Fully anonymous, atomic, and reliable peer-to-peer trans-
fer of value is one of the most common examples of the
blockchain technology application. It offers the potential to
facilitate fully automated micro payments and full remittance
automation. Due to built-in mechanisms for delayed payment
and multi-party signatures, it is possible to build more complex
contractual agreements between parties, and involve multiple
participants in the value transfer. Bitcoin and Dash blockchains
can be used to issue digital assets, or work as a public
registry of ownership (e.g., land title management [19]). Re-
cent developments include prospective adoption of blockchain
technology to regulate insurance subsidies based on real-time
risk pooling [20]. Alternative use cases involve decentralised
identity management [21], or the use of the blockchain to
verify and validate the existence of documents based on their
hash, without making the actual content public [22]. Despite
the novelty of those approaches, all applications share the
public ledger concept as the essential operational principle.
III.
DECENTRALISED COMPUTATION
Existing public ledgers, such as the Bitcoin blockchain,
provide a decentralised, veriﬁable and mathematically consis-
tent transaction tracking. Each newly created transaction is
atomic, that is, it is either fully included into the chain, or it is
discarded. This is similar to a distributed database system. The
difference being that everyone can participate in maintaining
that database, and there is no single central authority that
dictates the rules.
The computational expressiveness of such a ledger is
limited to several cryptographic operations. This has been a
carefully chosen design decision to keep the computational
complexity of validating and verifying transactions simple,
so as to ensure broad participation. However, this effectively
limits the computational capabilities of the ledger itself. Any
state transitions or computations that do not use crypto-
primitives must be executed by a trusted third party.
Ethereum [11] takes the next incremental step towards
automating institutions. It has been designed from ground up to
enable execution of arbitrary, Turing-complete code within the
transaction itself, making it a distributed ledger and distributed
execution environment at the same time. This means that
the blockchain itself can host a transparent and inspectable
process: a sequence of steps that express an algorithm, or
state machine transitions that are monitored and executed by
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

the network itself. The user who wishes to invoke the logic
must remunerate the network for the execution of all the
operations. No single node or potentially inconsistent client
implementations can be held responsible for executing that
computation. Though the collective of nodes provides the
computational capabilities, the computation itself is distributed
across those nodes and cannot be unilaterally modiﬁed or
prevented. To prevent or circumvent the execution, the entire
network would have to be taken down, the prospect of which
is unrealistic once a critical adoption level is reached. Going
beyond the sovereignty-agnostic currency ﬂow enabled by
cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and DashCoin, this means that
speciﬁc executions do no longer underlie a single determinable
jurisdiction, making the execution truly distributed in the sense
of transparency and fungibility.
In practice, the system relies on ether (and its subdenom-
ination wei) as fundamental unit of exchange that is needed
to pay for deploying code. Ether is generated by miners but
can be procured via exchanges. The users specify contracts,
which can be as simple as modiﬁable objects, or as com-
plex as long-running decision-making processes, like voting
or deploying one’s own cryptocurrency inside the Ethereum
network. The required payment (gas) is estimated based on
code complexity and charged to the deploying party. Contracts,
or smart contracts, are created using the companion Javascript-
inspired programming language Solidity [23]. Solidity allows
the speciﬁcation of a contract’s stakeholders, permissible modi-
ﬁcations, execution conditions (e.g., triggers for voting) as well
as termination conditions. Deployed contracts are uniquely
identiﬁed and publicly visible. The required remuneration for
contract deployment deters from excessive use and is deposited
during deployment. Unused funds are reimbursed if the initial
projection was too high.
The new quality of automated enforcement of codiﬁed
contracts highlights the importance of thorough development
and testing, an aspect that has become evident in the recent
ﬁrst massive hack of an Ethereum DAO [12]. But in this young
and dynamic ﬁeld, solutions are already on the horizon. A
proposed solution to this problem is the use of child chains to
coordinate asset-based transactions as implemented in the new
blockchain alternative Ardor/NXT 2.0 [24], which is under
development and to be released for production use in 2017.
In contrast to Ethereum’s support for general-purpose code,
Ardor will concentrate on speciﬁc asset-based transactions.
The concept of child chains permits the delegation of speciﬁed
operations onto a given sub chain, and thus increasing the
security by limiting the visibility to relevant stakeholders. The
security model is further strengthened by supporting complex
preconditions for the execution of transactions. In addition, the
delegation to child chains increases the scalability of the entire
network by reducing the necessary decentralised computations.
The concept furthermore includes built-in mechanisms to man-
age governance and decision-making processes in a reliable
and anonymous fashion.
However the blockchain landscape will develop in the
future, we see speciﬁcally the delegation of code execution
into the blockchain itself as the game-changing feature, and
the foundation of what we refer to as Distributed Autonomous
Institutions. Table II provides an overview of essential insti-
tutional functions as performed in the discussed instances of
blockchain technology.
TABLE II. BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INSTANCES AND
DISCUSSED CHARACTERISTICS
Technology
Validation
Governance
Managed
Artefacts/
Capabilities
Bitcoin
majority-based vot-
ing
informal
community-
based
transactions
DashCoin
stake-based representative voting
transactions
Ethereum
majority-based vot-
ing
informal
community-
baseda
transactions
&
stateful
autonomous code execu-
tion
a The community-based governance system is currently undergoing revision
in the light of the recent DAO theft, with directions pointing towards
the explicit appointment of governing entities based on constitutional
principles (see e.g., [25]).
IV.
DISTRIBUTED AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS (DAI)
The outlined technological developments suggest that crit-
ical cooperative tasks can now be fully automated while
retaining oversight, but without the ability to intervene. On ﬁrst
sight, this suggests the complete codiﬁcation and delegation of
cooperative tasks to the blockchain into a DAO. However, this
na¨ıve conception obscures the reality of useful socio-technical
systems. As with conventional socio-technical systems, the
value of any system is determined by its usefulness to solve a
speciﬁc, more or less well-deﬁned task. However, the central
determinant of usefulness remains the human stakeholder that
interacts with the system, or, in extension, employs an artiﬁcial
entity to interact with the system on one’s behalf. Instead of
replacing existing structures, the technological developments
allow new formal organisational structures to emerge in such
a way that it is the software that is at the centre of explicitly
speciﬁed objective coordination tasks, freeing external enti-
ties from economically inefﬁcient and potentially corruptible
third-party oversight. We call those Distributed Autonomous
Institutions (DAI) (see Fig. 3).
Compliance check
Individuals
Liability
Individuals
Institution A
Blockchain
Liability
Liability
Figure 3. Relationships in Distributed Autonomous Institutions
In DAI the need for trust is eliminated, since the entire
workings of the institution (Institution A in Fig. 3) are now
transparent. The compliance-enforcing role is taken up by
individuals. There is no need for a second institution (In-
stitution B in Fig. 1) that overlooks workings of Institution
A. Furthermore, the liability can be partially delegated to
individuals.
The software and blockchain technology is capable of
providing a transparent, veriﬁable process to achieve the
same effects that traditional organisations achieve with the
help of trusted human institutions and governmental services.
The essential difference is that DAIs can be made difﬁcult
to circumvent and impossible to penetrate. For example, in
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

economically critical services, such as those offered by banks
or governmental agencies, a closed system susceptible to
manipulation or fraud can be replaced by a DAI that is
more efﬁcient, effective, and which cannot be circumvented
by the human element. In contrast to DAOs, the proposed
DAI construct includes the consideration of the physical, legal
and social environment, as well as contractual relationships
residing outside the blockchain. This is not meant to reﬂect
a compromise of opportunity and reality, but the merger of
the best of two worlds, enabling novel forms of multi-party
business-to-business (B2B) operations in which the trust does
not need to be mutually negotiated (e.g., relationships between
k companies would require (k(k − 1))/2 contracts) but be
attached to an externalised single smart contract accessible
and veriﬁable by either party. This raises enormous potential
to construct ad-hoc operations, while providing opportunities
to smaller market players that would otherwise not have the
capacity to engage in formal negotiations. We speciﬁcally want
to highlight the explicit formal speciﬁcation, which, in princi-
ple, removes any need for ex-post legal interpretation, since the
programmatically encoded agreement is indisputable in legal
proceedings, substituting the judicative element necessary for
the interpretation of conventional contracts.
The mechanisms discussed above have the potential to
fundamentally change the way in which organisations can deal
with any form of agreement enforcement, such as individual
or collective employment contracts, voting in unions, crowd-
funding of startups, or research and development initiatives.
However, this notion of veriﬁable institutions offers novel
applications for the revision of the transparent management
of funds in governmental organisations, or to facilitate elec-
tions. In April 2016, the Minister for the UK Cabinet Ofﬁce
and Paymaster General, Matt Hancock, delivered a speech
on Central Government Efﬁciency, Government Transparency,
and Accountability [26], and argued for the use of blockchain
technology in the governmental sector:
“We are exploring the use of a blockchain to manage the
distribution of grants. Monitoring and controlling the use of
grants is incredibly complex. A blockchain, accessible to all
the parties involved, might be a better way of solving that
problem. [...] Bitcoin proved that distributed ledgers can be
used to track currency as it is passed from one entity to
another. Where else could we use that? Think about the student
loans company tracking money all the way from treasury to
a student’s bank account. Or the department for international
development tracking money all the way to the aid organisation
spending the money in country. [...]”
Currently, we are experiencing the dawn of this technol-
ogy, and we will experience the rise and demise of various
blockchain instances, but we can be certain that the technology
core is here to stay. Consequently, we will need to observe how
it will change the structure of organisations, how we model
socio-technical systems, but also what the ethical implications
of concepts such as smart self-enforcing institutions are for
our disciplines and society.
Inasmuch as we highlighted the beneﬁts of the technol-
ogy, we consequently need to be aware of the associated
risks that follow suit. Will smart contracts and distributed
autonomous institutions mimic the existing brick-and-mortar
organisational structures, or will we observe new, qualitatively
different loosely-coupled socio-technical systems? Can we
provide mechanisms that control the advent of novel schemes
in which users enter contractual agreements they do not
fully understand? Is the lack of case-based control, fraud or
manipulation always desirable? Will democratic governments
or public companies be expected to adopt transparent and
veriﬁable processes based on the blockchain technology? Can
blockchain technology be a solution to facilitate effective
and efﬁcient electronic voting? An important aspect in this
context is to deﬁne how to redraw the line between public
and private information (and to implement it). Does this
technology prevent novel creative accounting practices (based
on improved transparency), or will the low adoption threshold
in fact stimulate the emergence of new variants of complex
services (e.g., mortgage-backed securities) that have caused
economic turbulences in the past? What will the accessibility
of smart contracts mean for personal privacy in general?
V.
SUMMARY, DISCUSSION & OUTLOOK
Distributed ledgers and distributed consensus protocols
replace the need for third party trust. We have argued that the
new technology enables the formation of private, anonymity-
preserving, yet trustworthy automated institutions. This new
ﬂavour of institutions will have characteristics not found in
current institutional constellations, due to the nature in which
trust and liability are managed. This has the potential to funda-
mentally change the nature of institutions, because the human
element can be eliminated. The blockchain technology allows
new forms of governance, liability and trust to be shifted from
traditional institutions (such as governments, banks, courts) to
individuals and delegated to automated distributed autonomous
institutions. The old and the new forms of organisations will
co-exist by forming complex structures and interdependencies
between human-centric and DAIs. We argued that those new
forms of organisational structures are qualitatively distinct
from existing institutions. Developing such systems will re-
quire a change in how we model systems in general, how we
interact with them, but most importantly, how to determine and
control the authority we delegate to those systems. This will
inevitably involve research and analysis into the impact that
DAIs will have on society at large.
To realise the beneﬁts of developing transparent open
coordination systems, substantial amount of work is required.
Beyond the obvious technical challenges, this requires the
consideration of social and legal implications. The potential
anonymity enabled by the technology requires careful consid-
eration for applications that may afford some public display
of identity-related or pseudonymous information, such as in
crowd-funding systems, or land title management. An essential
aspect here is to prevent potential defamation by anonymous
parties, e.g., by levering a comparable level of identiﬁability
for all involved parties. Those are important design decisions
that lie outside the technical platform provided by Ethereum,
or blockchain technology more generally, and precede the
implementation of a speciﬁc contract. An associated problem is
the public nature of the blockchain. This implies the awareness
that deployed code is and will be publicly accessible, both for
inspection but also potential abuse, which lifts the challenge
of developing high-quality non-exploitable code, an aspect we
discussed in Section III.
Another important aspect revolves around the handling
of conﬂicts. Whenever operating across system boundaries
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

– such as conventional private organisational environments
and publicly-accessible institutions – conﬂicts can develop
and manifest themselves based on changing local operations
or environmental inﬂuences. The current state of blockchain
technology in Ethereum does not consider a dynamic nature
of contracts. Once deployed, contracts have a ﬁxed interaction
interface and codiﬁed operations. This neither considers the
potential to adapt contracts at runtime, nor does include mech-
anisms to mediate conﬂicts directly. Instead, an alternative
reﬁned contract could be negotiated to replace the original
contract (that could continue to coexist or simply be discarded).
A central consideration in this context is the management
of ownership of a given contract, i.e., the party/parties that
manage/s the life cycle of a given contract. Per default,
the instantiating party gains ownership, an aspect that is
important for handling of funds that are allocated to a given
contract, etc. Unlike conventional contractual agreements, the
technically guaranteed executable contract speciﬁcation affords
the explicitly encoding of infrastructural aspects, such as the
redistribution of outstanding funds to individuals, the payment
of obligations by individual parties to sponsor the contract
execution in the ﬁrst place (i.e., the necessary gas), and the
necessary actions for discarding a contract (e.g., multi-party
invocation of a speciﬁed discard function).
These interdisciplinary aspects are grounded in technology,
but reach far beyond the purely technical domain into manage-
ment and the legal discipline. This makes it only more impor-
tant to ensure the safe speciﬁcation, deployment, and operation
of smart contracts. To make smart contracts truly accessible,
future development needs to provide mechanisms that allow
non-technical users to write prototypical contracts while main-
taining the essential institutional content. A possible approach
includes the modelling in a widely accessible speciﬁcation
language and the translation into the corresponding execution
language in a (semi-)automated manner. An alternative is to
provide domain-speciﬁc ‘building blocks’, e.g., for the purpose
of ‘voting’ or ‘auctioning’, in order to compose executable
contracts that could be speciﬁed and reviewed by domain
experts. An intermediate step would be the speciﬁcation of
best practices and provision of pattern repositories that contain
thoroughly tested contracts ready for immediate instantiation.
Further support for developing smart contracts is com-
plemented by the demand to make existing smart contracts
easily accessible or interpretable to use blockchain technology
for its essential purpose: to coordinate veriﬁable state in a
decentralised manner. This would stimulate the broad adoption
of this coordination infrastructure by applications and services
in a potentially loosely-coupled manner, and extend the playing
ﬁeld beyond the current currency-centric niche existence of
blockchain technology.
Bearing the potential and challenges of this novel technol-
ogy in mind, one thing is certain: Lawrence Lessig captured
the essence of DAI, and blockchain technology more generally,
when he stated: “code is law” [27].
REFERENCES
[1]
G. M. Hodgson, “The Evolution of Institutions: An Agenda for Future
Theoretical Research,” Constitutional Political Economy, vol. 13, no. 2,
pp. 111–127, 2002.
[2]
L. Bloomﬁeld, Language.
New York (NY): Holt, 1933.
[3]
D. C. North, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Perfor-
mance.
New York (NY): Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[4]
C. K. Frantz, M. K. Purvis, B. T. R. Savarimuthu, and M. Nowostawski,
“Modelling Dynamic Normative Understanding in Agent Societies,”
Scalable Computing: Practice and Experience, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 355–
378, 2015.
[5]
W. R. Scott, “Approaching Adulthood: The Maturing of Institutional
Theory,” Theory and Society, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 427–442, 2008.
[6]
D. C. North, “Institutions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 5,
no. 1, pp. 97–112, 1991.
[7]
I. Stoica, R. Morris, D. Karger, M. F. Kaashoek, and H. Balakrishnan,
“Chord: A scalable peer-to-peer lookup service for internet applica-
tions,” in SIGCOMM’01, 2001, pp. 149–160.
[8]
C. Dwork and M. Naor, “Pricing via processing or combatting junk
mail,” in Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Cryptology
Conference on Advances in Cryptology, ser. CRYPTO ’92.
London,
UK, UK: Springer-Verlag, 1993, pp. 139–147. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=646757.705669
[9]
QuantumMechanic, “Proof of stake instead of proof of work,”
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=27787.0, 2016, accessed on: 1st
May 2016.
[10]
M. De Oliveira, M. Purvis, S. Craneﬁeld, and M. Nowostawski, “A
distributed model for institutions in open multi-agent systems,” in
Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems.
Springer, 2004, pp. 1172–1178.
[11]
G. Wood, “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction
ledger,” Ethereum Project Yellow Paper, 2014.
[12]
K. Finley, “A $50 million hack just showed that the dao was
all too human,” http://www.wired.com/2016/06/50-million-hack-just-
showed-dao-human/, 2016, accessed on: 1st June 2016.
[13]
S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2008.
[14]
A. M. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin: unlocking digital cryptocur-
rencies.
O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2014.
[15]
E. Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for
Collective Action. New York (NY): Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[16]
E.
Smart,
“Does
china’s
control
over
bitcoin
mining
threaten
bitcoin?”
http://dcebrief.com/does-chinas-control-over-bitcoin-mining-
threaten-bitcoin/, January 2016, accessed on: 1st June 2016.
[17]
J. Harrington and G. Caffyn, “Chainalysis network monitoring,” http:
//bit.ly/chainalysis 1, http://bit.ly/chainalysis 2, 2015, accessed on: 1st
June 2016.
[18]
A.
Quenston,
“Ethereum
reaches
unanimous
agree-
ment
to
hardfork,”
https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/
ethereum-reaches-unanimous-agreement-hardfork/,
2016,
accessed
on: 10th July 2016.
[19]
Bitland,
“bitland
-
land
title
protection
ghana,”
http://www.bitland.world/, 2016, accessed on: 1st June 2016.
[20]
S. Higgins, “Congressional committee hears testimony on blockchain
in
health
care,”
http://www.coindesk.com/us-think-tank-suggests-
blockchain-application-insurance-risk-pooling/, 2016, accessed on: 1st
June 2016.
[21]
Blockstack, “What is blockstack?” https://blockstack.org/docs/what-is-
blockstack, 2016, accessed on: 1st June 2016.
[22]
M. Araoz, “Proof of existence,” https://proofofexistence.com/, 2015,
accessed on: 1st June 2016.
[23]
Ethereum
Team,
“Solidity,”
http://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/,
2016, accessed on: 1st May 2016.
[24]
NXT, “Announcing nxt 2.0!” http://nxt.org/roadmap/, 2016, accessed
on: 1st June 2016.
[25]
m88888m, “Ethereum with a constitution and legislative initiatives
can become a true democracy. while bitcoin still lingers in a pluto-
cratic civil war,” https://www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4qhpo1/
ethereum with a constitution and legislative/, 2016, accessed on: 10th
July 2016.
[26]
M. Hancock, “Digital transformation in government and blockchain
technology,”
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/digital-
transformation-in-government-and-blockchain-technology,
April
2016, accessed on: 1st June 2016.
[27]
L. Lessig, Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace.
New York (NY):
Basic Books, 1999.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

