Counterinsurgency Through Civil Infrastructure Networks  
David Walker, Simon Reay Atkinson 
Complex Civil Systems Research Group 
Faculty of Engineering and IT 
University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia 
[david.walker, simon.reayatkinson]@sydney.edu.au 
 
Liaquat Hossain 
Department of Informatics 
Lund University, Sweden 
Liaquat.hossain@ics.lu.se
Abstract—We investigate opportunities and risks to counter-
insurgency (sometimes referred to as COIN) that are inherent 
in the civil networks surrounding infrastructure projects. It is 
argued here that  a)  successful counter-insurgency largely 
comprises the ‘engineering’ of robust and trusted civil net-
works that are capable of re-channelling insurgent designs; 
and b) introduction of externalized-exclusive control networks 
poses a significant risk to such network development. In this 
conceptual paper, we propose a number of network models, 
each hypothesizing a risk and / or opportunity. These models 
will be tested and refined using a case study methodology that 
draws on documentary evidence and interviews with subject 
matter experts. We propose two fundamental relationships: 
Coordination by rule and control (CRC), and; Collaboration 
by social influence (CSI). CRC is based on mechanical (rule 
and time based) structures, while CSI is based on organic 
(informal, trusted and shared aware) social networks. We posit 
that COIN is primarily a CSI interaction / exchange that can 
be supported (but also obstructed) by CRC. We therefore 
propose that the design of successful COIN operations must 
adhere to the hybrid notion providing an interface between 
CRC and CSI. 
Keywords - civil networks; infrastructure; insurgency; 
coordination; collaboration 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT  
A. Introduction 
Organisational communication literature maintains that 
hierarchical structures, e.g. organograms, provide a superfi-
cial representation of how work actually gets done [1]. Here, 
we posit (after Hossain and Wigand [2]) that organisations 
need to be seen as dynamic (elastic and plastic) social-
influence networks. In these collaborative [3] networks of 
complex operations, requiring tacit knowledge exchange [4], 
which is achieved through social (and in this regard civil) 
interactions beneath and sometimes masked by the formal 
hierarchical organisational chart. Organisational co-adaptive 
[5] viability in maintaining operational effectiveness and 
efficiency may therefore be largely dependent on how we 
synergistically socialise and capitalise ‘our’ formal (hierar-
chical) and informal (social) networks to achieve shared 
common goals. In this paper, we set the context as relating to 
counterinsurgency which we then explore through the medi-
ation of hierarchical-formal and informal-social networks as 
applied to civil infrastructure projects. In this paper we also 
ask whether the success and/or failure related to COIN is 
attributed to the conceptual misunderstandings of how we 
provide synergy between hierarchical formal-control-rule 
(CRC) and informal-collaborative-social-influence (CSI) 
networks. In this regard, we distinguish between Command, 
as in Leadership and Control, as in Management and consid-
er, after Reay-Atkinson and Moffat, that: Control is a func-
tion of rules, fidelity, time and bandwidth whereas command 
is a function of trusts, shared awareness, influence and agili-
ty [6]. 
Securitization emerged along with Contractorization 
from the ‘politics’ of Privatization put in play in many de-
mocracies 
from 
the 
1980s 
onward. 
Whereas 
contractorization (of security) was manifested through Pri-
vate Finance Initiatives (PFIs) and Private Security / Military 
Companies (PS/MCs); privatization was more often intro-
duced through Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs), for exam-
ple the privatization of British Defence Research into Dstl 
and QinetiQ. Building on Grotius [7], we posit three inter-
connected and interactive conflict phases: jus bello (justice 
to war); jus bellum (just war) and jus post bellum (justice 
after war). In our understanding, the trusts established before 
during and after conflict underpin the public assurances, 
trusts, safety and security subsequently established. No one 
phase trumps the other. This has specific implications for 
how counter-insurgencies are engaged, or not. The Civil 
Infrastructure Networks we identify in this paper are not 
limited in scale and connect the social (people) with civil 
programmes; including IT, transport, Cyber-, water and 
energy networks. Post Privatized forces tended to optimise 
out these very skills / trusts through PPPs, PFIs and PS/MCs.  
This had a number of effects. The first was to create warrior 
cast structures with front line troops at the top of the pyramid 
and engineering / logistics even health care at the bottom. 
Secondly, it created incoherence in command / collaboration 
between divided force structures for which many of the ‘en-
ablers’ were now under contract, e.g. tank transportation. 
Thirdly it created a reliance of the fighting force on struc-
tures that a) could not necessarily be put ‘under disciplined 
control’ and / or b) expected to be collaboratively deployed 
into hazardous areas. Fourthly, it created private and some-
times competing armies – very often employed by other 
government departments (OGDs), such as the UK Foreign 
and Commonwealth Office. Fifthly, the opportunity to con-
tract one’s own security / reconstruction programmes re-
moved the need for healthy local collaboration and mutuality 
between government departments, e.g. between the state 
department and the Department of Defence. 
This paper is organised as follows: first, we discuss 
COIN and its context; secondly, we discuss the application 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

of social networks in modelling risks and opportunities for 
COIN; thirdly, we discuss the social influence model within 
the context of COIN and provide conclusions, implications 
and future directions. 
B. Counterinsurgency 
US Military doctrine considers an insurgency to be: 'an 
organized, protracted politico-military struggle designed to 
weaken the control and legitimacy of an established gov-
ernment, occupying power, or other political authority while 
increasing insurgent control' [8]. Counterinsurgency is every 
effort to stop an insurgency, once started. The primary objec-
tive of COIN is to maximise the support of the civilian popu-
lation for the legally constituted government [8-13]. Insur-
gents depend on the civilian population for sustenance, shel-
ter, concealment and recruitment. Insurgents (almost always 
clandestine in nature) employ a number of strategies to shift 
the objective demographic in their favour, including  politi-
cal and judicial subversion, terrorism, guerrilla warfare, 
organised crime / the Black economy (extortion, corruption, 
smuggling etc), propaganda, and public service provision 
(including governance, security and judiciary) [8, 13]. Tech-
nological advances and demographic trends over the last 
several decades have significantly changed the nature of 
conflict. In a contest between a small-scale, agile, poorly 
funded but technically literate and socially aware clandestine 
movement and a large technologically advanced and hierar-
chical rule-based military, these trends have tended to sup-
port the former. They include urbanisation, globalisation, 
proliferation of NGOs and other civilian organisations, ubiq-
uity of news media, revolutionary advances in information 
technology, social media, increased lethality of highly mo-
bile weaponry, and global [religiously based] insurgency 
[14].  
Contemporary insurgencies (considered by this paper) 
may lack the ideological appeal of classical insurgencies 
against ‘local’ colonial forces and therefore rely on causing 
existential intervention by government / coalition forces to 
generate localised conflict – essentially localising the con-
flict for ‘home’ advantage. Kilcullen [10] develops the idea 
of an 'accidental guerrilla syndrome'. He theorizes that 'the 
accidental guerrilla emerges from a cyclical process that 
takes place in four stages: infection, contagion, intervention, 
and rejection.' Importantly, this insurgent strategy assumes 
counterinsurgents will generate interstitial conflict when 
they enter local networks. 
Effective COIN requires coherent and collective (unify-
ing) input from a multiple stakeholders including military, 
other government agencies / departments, non-government 
organisations, private contractors, and most importantly any 
functioning civil networks remaining embedded in local 
populations. Yet usually there is no remaining control struc-
ture and legal authority by which networks can be coordinat-
ed – even and although the local population continue to feed 
and fend for themselves. The inescapable corollary is that 
coordination of counterinsurgent organisations and local 
civil networks needs to be achieved by something other than 
rule and control. We call this collaboration by social influ-
ence (CSI). This paper addresses two questions: 1) How can 
the efforts of such a diverse array of actors be influenced and 
/ or coordinated? 2) What are the implications for the inter-
nal networks of counterinsurgent organisations? To address 
these questions, a number of network models are developed, 
each representing a key opportunity or risk to COIN. 
Civil infrastructure projects have a number of crucial 
characteristics that make them ideal for COIN and ideal for 
research into the dynamics of civil networks. Firstly, they 
provide justification for large scale information transfer to 
and from the population. Secondly, project stakeholders and 
their networks cover almost every facet of society and out-
side influence; including military forces, end-users, contrac-
tors, suppliers, NGOs, local government, tribal and religious 
leaders, political opposition, financial service providers, 
donors, and land owners. Thirdly, projects have clear bound-
aries and objectives. Fourthly, they provide economic stimu-
lus for development and maintenance; and fifthly, the tangi-
ble benefits of the infrastructure itself remains. Most im-
portantly from a research perspective, infrastructure projects: 
a) give rise to a large quantity of reliable network data; and 
b) provide identifiable boundaries. 
II. 
MODELLING OPPORTUNITY AND RISKS TO 
COUNTERINSURGENCY 
A. Social Networks and Their Impact on Risk and 
Opportunity 
Opportunities for CSI may be considered a type of social 
capital (SC). Coleman defines SC as ‘a variety of different 
entities, with two elements in common: they all consist of 
some aspect of social structures, and they facilitate certain 
actions of actors’ [15]. Coleman provides a few clarifications 
that are particularly important to the present study: 1) SC can 
constrain as well as enable action; 2) SC that is beneficial to 
one activity may be detrimental to another; 3) SC, like all 
capital, need not be utilised; and 4) SC created for one pur-
pose can be used for another. With regard to stabilising re-
form in COIN, it may be hypothesised that the ‘low hanging 
fruit’ is made up of two basic types of existing social capital: 
1) that which could have a stabilising effect but is currently 
not being utilised or is being utilised for some other purpose; 
and 2) pernicious structures that constitute relatively trivial 
social capital and will therefore not be vigorously defended. 
This ‘low hanging fruit’ represents the opportunities for 
reform that counterinsurgents find so difficult to identify. 
Social network analysis is one way of modelling social capi-
tal. 
Social network analysis (SNA) is 'a distinct research 
perspective', which includes 'theories, models and applica-
tions that are expressed in terms of relational concepts and 
processes' [16]. A network is made up of actors (individuals, 
organisations, or some other social unit) and relational ties 
between them. SNA attempts to model and predict patterns 
of relational ties (network structures), and to understand the 
causes and effects of these patterns. Laumann et al [17] ob-
serve two ontological perspectives of networks: realist and 
nominalist. From a realist perspective, a 'network is treated 
as a social fact only in that it is consciously experienced as 
such by the actors composing it'. With a nominalist approach 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

the analyst 'imposes a conceptual framework constructed to 
serve his or her own analytic purposes' [17]. This paper 
adopts the nominalist approach, which provides greater flex-
ibility in network definition and enables the analysis of dis-
connected networks. 
1) Network Dynamics. Balance Theory developed by 
Austrian psychologist Fritz Heider specifies that a triad 
(group of three actors) is balanced if all ties are positive or 
if two are negative and one is positive [18]. In SNA, the 
well observed tendency for triads to become 'balanced' is 
called transitivity [16]. In the present study we are 
particularly concerned with the effect of new actors entering 
a social network. If actors A and B are friends and new 
actor C becomes an enemy of A, by the theory of 
transitivity it can be expected that B and C will become 
enemies. This is a risk for C. Less obviously there is also 
risk to C in creating positive (friendship) ties. If A and B are 
enemies and new actor C becomes friends with A, it can be 
expected that B and C will become enemies. Homophily, 
which is the tendency of people to make connections with 
others that are similar to themselves [19, 20], may amplify 
or dampen the effects of transitivity. 
The dynamics of conflict pacification and escalation 
within networks are crucial. Humans tend towards a 'tit-for-
tat' strategy in response to acts they consider unreasonable 
[21]. In relation to the actions of others, humans have a ten-
dency to perceive their own contributions more significant, 
their own gains more deserved, and their own losses more 
unjust. The logical (and observable) outcome of these human 
conditions is a positive feedback cycle within which animos-
ity and conflict (once initiated) escalates between two actors. 
Importantly, an actor responds to his/her perceptions of an-
other actor's behaviour and intent, so the positive feedback 
loop can begin without any actual acts (or even intent) of 
aggression. Transitivity also dictates that conflict relation-
ships may cause other actors in the network to become con-
flicted.  
Trust, like conflict, may propagate or collapse exponen-
tially through a network. Dasgupta [22] concludes that "trust 
is a public good, a social lubricant which makes possible 
production and exchange...[It] is based on reputa-
tion...acquired through behaviour over time in well-
understood circumstances." Trust is dependent on social 
networks, and it "is this interconnectedness which makes 
trust such a fragile commodity." Individuals place trust ac-
cording to their (often intuitive) calculations of risk and 
return. A significant element of that risk exists in relation to 
the reliability of their information on a potential exchange 
partner. Therefore, significant gains in social capital are 
made by the provision of reliable information to all parties. 
This may lower the cost of trusting below some point of 
criticality and so generate a chain reaction (or cascade) of 
trusting relationships. Such an effect is a worthy objective of 
temporarily intervening actors. 
Knowing how people ‘connect’ makes collaboration 
work better; see Mintzberg et al [3]. They suggest that col-
laboration may ultimately depend on trust. Collaboration 
depends on the ability to trust each other, and to appreciate 
one another’s expertise. Perhaps, surprisingly, they argue, 
the best collaboration may be the least realised as collabora-
tive, giving the example of interdepartmental collaboration 
for new product development. In the best of such collabora-
tions of joint learning whilst designing, people focus intently 
on ‘shaping’ but may not even realise they are collaborating, 
so that shifting their focus to formal techniques of collabora-
tion may, in fact, reduce their capacity and propensity to 
collaborate. Building on this concept of trust, Marsh [23] 
suggested the following definition of trust: 
‘…trust, (or symmetrically, distrust) is a particular level 
of the “subjective probability” with which an “agent” 
will perform a “particular action”, both before he can 
monitor such action (or independently of his capacity to 
monitor it) and in a “context” in which it “affects” his 
own action.’ 
2) Information and Control. Building on the theory of 
transitivity, Granovetter [24] proposed that most novel 
information is attained through weak ties. The Strength of 
Weak Ties (SWT) theory is based on the relatively simple 
logic that a person’s strong ties most likely lead to people 
that are also strongly tied (due to transitivity). This means 
that information coming to an individual through one strong 
tie is likely to be the same as information coming through 
another strong tie. Weak ties on the other hand are more 
likely to lead to people that would otherwise be only 
distantly connected or not connected at all. In Granovetter’s 
seminal study he provides empirical evidence for this theory 
by showing that people are more likely to find a job through 
a weak tie than a strong one. 
Ronald Burt’s structural holes (SH) theory also seeks to 
explain how network structure contributes to an individual’s 
access to novel information. Structural holes are the gaps in 
a social network between two actors that are not connected. 
If another actor manoeuvres into that gap by forming a rela-
tionship with each of those actors, he or she is then in a posi-
tion to control the flow of information and resources be-
tween them [25]. One’s network is effective to the extent that 
it reaches many other actors (through primary contacts and 
their close ties) and efficient to the extent that the ratio of 
total contacts reached to total primary contacts is large. The 
effective size of one’s network is deemed to be the total 
number of non-redundant contacts. Non-redundant contacts 
are those between which there is a structural hole and there-
fore those that provide access to novel information. 
Burt considers the SH explanation superior to that of 
SWT because “the causal agent in the phenomena is not the 
weakness of a tie but the structural hole it spans…[and] the 
weak tie argument obscures the control benefits of structural 
holes” [25]. The control benefits of structural holes are in-
deed very important to SH theory and very important to this 
study. If actor A spans a hole between actors B and C, actor 
A has control benefits to the extent that B and C make mutu-
ally exclusive demands (or requests) on A. The traditional 
auction is a simple case in which an offer from B is used to 
raise the offer from C. For most negotiations, however, it is 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

secondary holes that infer most control. Secondary holes 
exist between an actor’s contacts and others that could re-
place that contact. Where one actor could substitute for an-
other, they are considered to be structurally equivalent. The 
simplest example is a market. A buyer has power to drive the 
price down to the extent that there are multiple sellers com-
peting for that sale. The competing sellers are structurally 
equivalent. Structurally equivalent actors can avoid being 
played against one another by coordinating their actions. 
This type of coordination takes many forms within the econ-
omy, e.g. labour unions and price fixing cartels.  
Network exchange theory provides an alternative way to 
examine power relations and brings to light at least one 
counterintuitive insight that is not easily identified through 
SH theory.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Powerful Central Actor 
 
Figure 2.   Weak Central Actor 
While "centrality measures have typically been used as 
indicators of power, influence, popularity and prestige" [26, 
27], Markovsky et al [28] demonstrate that under certain 
conditions central actors may be considerably weaker than 
those that are not particularly central. In Figure 1 actor B is 
the most central and the most powerful in negotiations. In 
Figure 2, however, the most central actor (C) is less power-
ful than B and D. This is because B and D can extract very 
high returns from A and E respectively and so reduce their 
dependence on C, possibly cutting C out altogether: social 
power can thereby depend on connections to others in weak-
er positions.  
Network models of power are highly relevant to our un-
derstanding of COIN. As well as competition with the insur-
gency, counterinsurgents can find themselves in competition 
with one another (they are structurally equivalent and not 
coordinated). 'Competition' may also come from other global 
powers posturing for influence in a region and from NGOs 
reluctant to cooperate with any central or Government or 
International authority, or even from local coalition allies. In 
Afghanistan, there were examples of some Coalition partners 
refusing / being unable within their [control] rules-of-
engagement to collaborate with local partners due to their 
previous criminal / conflict linkages and records. In some 
cases, local partners turned to another Coalition ally who, 
while maintaining their political and bureaucratic influence, 
also inadvertently preserved the power base and rationale for 
the insurgency in the first instance.   
B. Network Models of Social Influence 
Building on the context and theory, in this section we 
present a number of network models that hypothesise on the 
dynamics of social influence during COIN. Through these 
models we identify risks and opportunities inherent in the 
structures of social networks and the actions of key players. 
In accordance with the nominalist approach, networks may 
be defined on any conceivable tie. Conceiving possible net-
works is a crucial task of domain experts. Productive use of 
these models requires close cooperation between domain 
experts (practitioners) and theoretical experts (academics). 
The inevitable shortcomings of each type of expert acting 
without the other has been recognised as an important barrier 
to research [29].  
1) Unintended Exclusion (the danger of strong ties). 
Figure 3 presents network dynamics in response to 
counterinsurgents entering a network and forming a strong 
tie with one actor while inadvertently (or deliberately) 
excluding structurally equivalent others.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Unintended Exclusion 
From a ‘realist’ perspective Figure 3 may show three 
tribes or three warlords (A, B and C). However this is only 
one of many possibilities, even if a valid interpretation. From 
a nominalist perspective it is posited that such a dynamic 
might be observed within any network built on inferred 
power relations.  
Structural equivalence provides the capacity and intent to 
perform some function and exercise some control. Networks 
that make up structurally equivalent actors vary depending 
on the type of tie under consideration. Networks may be 
formed by ties that, for example, determine land tenure, 
opium production, trucking (or other goods and services), 
spiritual guidance, political leadership, judicial authority and 
policing. Each type of tie produces a different network sig-
nature which may be observed. We suggest that insurgents 
may be ‘spread’ throughout local networks. Insurgents seek 
to infiltrate and suborn (‘infect’) local networks by breaking 
down their immune systems and occupying traditional roles, 
marrying into tribes, creating business partnerships and con-
verting susceptible minds to their cause.  
From this model it is hypothesised that: 1) strong ties in-
crease the likelihood of negative response from unknown 
others; 2) Weaker ties with all actors may result in more 
positive (or neutral) ties (collaboration) with unknown oth-
ers; but 3) Maintaining weaker ties requires counterinsur-
gents to look beyond the rather more obvious / recognisable 
(like) and accessible / attractive strong ties generally availa-
ble.  
 
 
2) Self Fulfilling Prophecy. The network model 
presented in Figure 4 represents the inadvertent escalation 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

of conflict that may begin with nothing more than a 
perceived display of hostility. Instigating this dynamic 
through deception and intimidation is a key strategy of 
insurgents. The presence of counterinsurgents provides the 
insurgency with ‘initiation’ opportunities. Through their 
detailed understanding of collaborative-co-adaptive and 
cooperative-competitive relationships, insurgents can shape 
the ecology to their advantage by convincing otherwise 
peaceable citizens that their way of life is under attack. The 
easy thing for counterinsurgents to do is to target an 
insurgent. Yet often an insurgent may also be part of other 
Black Economy type activities essential for supporting the 
well-being of the local population. In this instance the 
counterinsurgents will frequently be better off observing 
and not contesting these agents; while working to convince 
networks to reject more malign or un-reconcilable actors.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Self Fulfilling Prophecy 
3) Coercion. A key task of COIN is to identify local 
civil system-networks that are capable of resisting / being 
immunised against coercion. In this model (Figure 5), 
coercion is perceived as a star network with a coordinated 
coercer at the centre connected to a number of other 
networks that might (if sufficiently collaborative) be able to 
reject (or rechannel the designs of) the coercer. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Coercion 
Each of the networks is defined on a different tie, so a 
single actor may exist in more than one network. We assume 
that within any given population there exists a number of 
networks through which power and influence is distributed. 
Networks will reject malign actors to the extent that they are 
capable, motivated and immunised to do so. The capability 
of each network to reject (or rechanneled the designs of) 
malign actors is a function of the network's coordination, 
social power (implicit in the type of tie that forms the net-
work), and reach (collaboration). We assume motivation is 
based on cost / benefit appreciation with some appropriate 
weighting for risk aversion / acceptance.  
The tacit knowledge necessary to build this model is a 
critical information requirement of COIN. Importantly, this 
is information about licit networks, not clandestine insurgent 
networks. We assume coercion exists. The information we 
seek to attain and distribute is that which will influence ex-
isting networks to collaboratively coordinate and exclude 
malign elements. Military organisations (particularly intelli-
gence assets) have deeply entrenched tendencies towards 
information control; often precluding the kind of knowledge 
exchange and shared awareness required to build such a 
model. See Flynn et al [30] for a cathartic account of mili-
tary intelligence failures. 
The potential of a given network to improve its capabil-
ity, capacity and intent is also critical. Some networks are 
fixed, while others may have potential to dynamically 
change size, power-relationships and purpose. An example 
may be the National Solidarity Programme (NSP) in Af-
ghanistan. It was designed to decentralise the control of civil 
infrastructure projects and disaggregate legitimacy and con-
trol to the local level. In the absence of trusted [nationwide] 
judicial and political systems, it became a common source of 
impartial judgment so a) preventing and b) resolving local 
disputes through collaborative social influence [31]. 
4) Ideal Instance of CSI. Figure 6 represents a network 
dynamic that is a key objective of COIN. Based on theory 
and the risk profiles previously identified, we posit that 
opportunity for these network dynamics may emerge from a 
number of conditions. Firstly, counterinsurgents are 
sufficiently coordinated to avoid being played against one 
another - so enabling them to make explicit and credible 
promises of withdrawal. Secondly, counterinsurgents avoid 
empowering any single local network that is structurally 
equivalent to multiple others. Thirdly, local civil networks 
are identified which: a) have a significant collaborative 
interest in sustained support from counterinsurgents, and b) 
are capable of rejecting / being immunised against (or 
rechanneling the designs of) malign actors. Fourthly, hostile 
action or intent (and the impression thereof) towards any 
individual or group is minimised through shared awareness 
and the threat being seen as an attack on the whole. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Local Networks Rejecting Malign Actor 
Infrastructure projects provide the ideal context to study 
and exercise this process. Black Market / criminal elements 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

will seek to extract resources as long as they can portray 
themselves as enemies of counterinsurgents as opposed to 
the public good. Such a ‘posture’ requires a very high stand-
ard of project management (to identify, prevent and prose-
cute hostile activity) while collaborating effectively with the 
civil networks within which some black marketeers / crimi-
nals will inevitably seek to hide. This scenario is an example 
of CRC (to produce evidence with high legitimacy) support-
ing CSI (to influence perceptions and motivate actions by 
local networks). 
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTION 
Drawing on theories of social capital, strength of weak 
ties, structural holes, network balance, and network ex-
change we have developed a set of models of network dy-
namics in COIN. The hypotheses of this paper are implicit in 
these models and the deductions drawn from them. We rec-
ognise the underlying moral requirements underpinning the 
effective deployment and use of Armed Forces in a counter-
insurgency.  And this moral / ethical underpinning – identi-
fied in just war theory – underpins not only the success of 
the operations but also the ability of our Armed Forces and 
the local population to recover from instability.  In this re-
spect we can see the significant reduction in the extent and 
subsequent impact of PTSD on deployed forces. We see civil 
infrastructure networks – at all scales from the Cyber- to 
‘bridge building’ – as underpinning a successful counterin-
surgency and re-connecting shattered communities after 
conflict; an example being the Mostar Bridge. 
From this conceptual starting point, the study will pro-
gress through two phases. An interview protocol will be 
developed and an initial set of interviews with subject matter 
experts will be used to test that protocol and further refine 
the theoretical models. The second phase will be a rigorous 
testing of these models through case studies selected for 
theoretical replication; utilising the case study framework 
developed by Yin [32]. This qualitative approach is consid-
ered most appropriate because it allows us to "retain the 
holistic and meaningful characteristics of real-life", which is 
important when investigating complex social phenomena 
[32].  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Stacey, "Creative Organizations: The Relevance of Chaos and 
Psychodynamic Systems," Social creativity, vol. 2, 1999, pp. 61. 
[2] 
L. Hossain and R. T. Wigand, "Ict Enabled Virtual Collaboration 
through Trust," Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 
10(1), 2004. 
[3] 
H. Mintzberg, J. Jorgensen, D. Dougherty, and F. Westley, "Some 
Surprising Things About Collaboration-Knowing How People 
Connect Makes It Work Better," Organizational Dynamics, vol. 
25(1), 1996, pp. 60-71. 
[4] 
S. Reay-Atkinson, S. Lesher, and D. Shoupe, Information Capture 
and Knowledge Exchange: The Gathering, Testing and Assessment 
of Information and Knowledge through Exploration and Exploitation, 
2009, DTIC Document. 
[5] 
S. Reay-Atkinson, A. Goodger, N. Caldwell, and L. Hossain, "How 
Lean the Machine: How Agile the Mind?," The Learning 
Organization, vol. 19(3), 2012, pp. 183 - 206. 
[6] 
S. Reay Atkinson and J. Moffat, "The Agile Organization," 
Publication of the US Department of Defense Command and Control 
Research Program (CCRP), 2005. 
[7] 
H. Grotius, De Jure Belli Ac Pacis - on the Law of War and Peace. 
2nd ed. Paris (2nd ed. Amsterdam 1631), 1625. 
[8] 
US-Army, Field Manual 3-24 Counterinsurgency Washington, DC: 
HQ Department of Army, 2006. 
[9] 
D. Kilcullen, "Counter-Insurgency Redux," Survival, vol. 48(4), 
2006, pp. 111-130. 
[10] D. Kilcullen, The Accidental Guerrilla: Fighting Small Wars in the 
Midst of a Big One. Melbourne: Scribe Publications, 2009. 
[11] B. Hoffman, "Insurgency and Counterinsurgency in Iraq," Studies in 
Conflict & Terrorism, vol. 29(2), 2006, pp. 103-121. 
[12] K. I. Sepp, Best Practices in Counterinsurgency, 2005, DTIC 
Document. 
[13] D. Galula, Counterinsurgency Warfare: Theory and Practice. 
Westoprt, CT: Praeger Security International, 1964. 
[14] ADF, Complex Warfighting: Future Land Operating Concept.  
Canberra 2006. 
[15] J. Coleman, "Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital," 
American Journal of Sociology, vol. 94(S1), 1988, pp. 95. 
[16] S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Network Analysis: Methods and 
Applications. Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
[17] E. O. Laumann, P. V. Marsden, and D. Prensky, "The Boundary 
Specification Problem in Network Analysis," Research methods in 
social network analysis, vol. 61, 1989, pp. 87. 
[18] F. Heider, "Attitudes and Cognitive Organization," The Journal of 
Psychology, vol. 21(1), 1946, pp. 107-112. 
[19] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, "Birds of a Feather: 
Homophily in Social Networks," Annual review of sociology, 2001, 
pp. 415-444. 
[20] P. F. Lazarsfeld and R. K. Merton, "Friendship as a Social Process: A 
Substantive and Methodological Analysis," Freedom and control in 
modern society, vol. 18, 1954, pp. 18-66. 
[21] R. Axelrod and W. Hamilton, "The Evolution of Cooperation," 
Science, vol. 211(4489), 1981, pp. 1390-1396. 
[22] P. Dasgupta, "Trust as a Commodity," Trust: Making and Breaking 
Cooperative Relations, electronic edition, Department of Sociology, 
University of Oxford, 2000, pp. 49-72. 
[23] S. Marsh, "Formalising Trust as a Computational Concept," 
University of Stirling, Department of Mathematics and Computer 
Science, PhD dissertation, 1999. 
[24] M. Granovetter, "The Strength of Weak Ties," American Journal of 
Sociology, vol. 78(6), 1973, pp. 1360-1380. 
[25] R. S. Burt, Structural Holes : The Social Structure of Competition. 
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1992. 
[26] J. Scott and P. Carrington, The Sage Handbook of Social Network 
Analysis. Sage Publications Ltd, 2011. 
[27] L. Hossain, A. Wu, and K. K. S. Chung. Actor Centrality Correlates 
to Project Based Coordination. 2006. ACM. 
[28] B. Markovsky, D. Willer, and T. Patton, "Power Relations in 
Exchange Networks," American Sociological Review, 1988, pp. 220-
236. 
[29] R. C. van der Hulst, "Terrorist Networks: The Threat of 
Connectivity," The SAGE Handbook of Social Network Analysis, 
2011, pp. 256. 
[30] M. Flynn, M. Pottinger, and P. Batchelor, "Fixing Intel: A Blueprint 
for Making Intelligence Relevant in Afghanistan," Center for a New 
American Security, Washington DC, Jan. 2010. 
[31] Economist, "Democracy in Afghanistan - Wise Council," in The 
Economist, 25 Mar. 2010. 
[32] R. K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Vol. 5. Sage 
publications, INC, 2009. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-228-8
SOTICS 2012 : The Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

