What Do People Affected by Cancer Talk about Online?  
Text analysis of online cancer community usage in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 
Suncica Hadzidedic Bazdarevic, Alexandra I. Cristea  
Department of Computer Science 
University of Warwick 
Coventry, United Kingdom 
e-mail: s.hadzidedic@warwick.ac.uk, a.i.cristea@warwick.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Studies report that health information searching is 
among the top three activities on the Internet. Internet 
resources are a good alternative for initial information and 
health managing support, due to their accessibility and 
availability. However, little is known about the type of support 
and information that people affected by cancer seek for and 
exchange via the Internet, in online communities, especially in 
non-English speaking environments. To bring light to this 
important matter, we conducted a text analysis on an online 
cancer-related forum from Bosnia-Herzegovina. It revealed 
that the predominant topics of discussion are: general cancer-
related and time-wise discussions, various treatments, diet, 
doctors and how to interpret medical reports, information 
exchange on specific cancer-types, advice to caregivers, religious 
support, and community support to members suffering from 
cancer. The most frequently exchanged word referred to the 
state of: being, being and doing something alone and by 
oneself. The majority of users of the online community were 
cancer patients’ caregivers. This study represents a starting 
point for identifying areas for improvement of online support 
and information for people affected by cancer, primarily in 
online communities, specifically for Bosnia-Herzegovina, but 
can be generalized to countries with similar social, cultural, 
economic and public-health situation.   
Keywords-online health communities; text analysis; cancer; 
online health information; Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Cancer is still recognized as the leading cause of death 
worldwide [1]. To this day the “number [of deaths globally 
caused by cancer] is far greater than the total number of 
deaths caused by HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria 
combined” [2]. The latest worldwide statistics show that 14.1 
million adults had cancer [1]. Cancer does not only affect the 
person suffering from it. It impacts the life of the cancer 
patient‟s closest family, extended family and friends [3]. 
This research refers to all the people affected by cancer, 
which includes those on whose life cancer had a direct and 
indirect influence, and even those who are interested in 
informing themselves about cancer for prevention purposes. 
The global population affected by cancer is, thus, evidently 
much larger. Moreover, given cancer prevalence, the 
duration for which caregivers are needed, in most cases, 
expands over the period of several years or more [3].  
Despite the fact that the health sector is one of the most 
resistant-to-change industries, technology adoption for 
healthcare service improvements has been witnessed in some 
countries, but progress and needs are not uniform, even in 
the Western developed countries [4]. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (B&H) was selected as the 
environment to conduct the study in, due to the particular 
situation in the country. Public health services in B&H are 
still in the process of recovery and reform after the  1992-95 
war; they are characterized by institutional fragmentation, 
existence of powerful interest groups, informal payments, 
unequal access to health care and low service quality and 
efficiency [5]. Support groups and cancer associations do not 
cover all types of cancer, are not vocal enough, and are not 
always easy to access offline.  
The accessibility and availability of Internet resources 
could present a good alternative to people affected by cancer 
to find initial information and support. Electronic health 
(eHealth) contributes to disease management by facilitating 
information exchange between and among interest groups – 
medical 
professionals, 
patients 
and 
caregivers, 
and 
empowers patients by providing improved online support [6] 
[7]. However, a preliminary investigation of online health 
resources in B&H revealed that those from B&H institutions 
and in Bosnian language are but a few [8]. These are mainly 
endeavors by non-governmental cancer organizations (NGO) 
or private initiatives that aim at promoting their activities. 
Importantly for this study, the information and facilities 
presented are not always relevant. Information provided is 
mainly related to general health, and reused from online 
health services from other countries. Little consideration is 
given to reliability and comprehensiveness of cancer-specific 
online support and information. Moreover, the actual needs 
and interests of the country-specific population who are 
suffering from cancer are not addressed.  
Even worldwide, patient input and opinions are often 
disregarded in health-related product adoption decision [4]. 
Nevertheless, when it comes to introducing improvements in 
eHealth, what is essential is a deeper understanding of how 
these applications are utilized by the target users, and what 
they consider useful and easy to use technology [6].  
This study addresses an issue in eHealth - little is known 
about the type of support and information that people 
affected by cancer seek for and exchange via the Internet, 
expressed by their behavior and activities, in online 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

communities, 
especially 
in 
non-English 
speaking 
environments, as is B&H. The goal was, therefore, to “listen” 
to the conversations led on the Internet by those members of 
the B&H population who are affected by cancer. In order to 
understand what it is they require, the usage of existing 
online cancer-related information and services was evaluated 
applying text analysis. This work extracted topics most 
frequently discussed in a cancer-related online community. 
The classification of topics of interest should serve in 
devising a set of content- and service-improvement 
recommendations for online communities for people affected 
by cancer, especially those from B&H.  
This paper is structured around four remaining sections. 
Section II gives an overview of the research area and the 
related work. Analysis and results are presented in the third 
section, followed by a discussion of the findings. The last 
section concludes the paper and overviews future directions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
One of the primary purposes of Internet usage is to seek 
information about health [9]. While the traditional means for 
obtaining health information have stagnated [10], there has 
been a worldwide growth in online health information usage 
[11], but a particularly noticeable increase of around 50% in 
European countries in the period 2001 to 2009 [10][12]. The 
Pew Internet Project [13] concluded that 59% of adults in the 
U.S. have used the Internet to look for health information, 
usually (55% of the cases) about a specific illness or medical 
problem, and 43% searching for available treatments; 
followed by topics related to diet, particular doctor and 
experimental treatments [9][14]. Moreover,  Internet health 
seekers look in equal percentage (39%) for health and 
medical information for themselves or for someone else [15].  
The research presented here focuses on online health 
information usage by people affected by cancer. In a US 
based study, approximately 40% of the sample used the 
Internet to search for cancer-related information [9]. While 
exploring how Internet usage influences men and women 
affected by one of five different types of cancer in the UK in 
the period 2001 to 2002, [16] found that cancer patients used 
the Internet for three main reasons: the extent of resources 
available; to secretly verify what was told to them by their 
physicians; the need to show others and prove to themselves 
that despite their illness they are socially fit. 
Health information available on the Internet is 
particularly appealing to people affected by cancer, as the 
sheer amount and variety of this type of information “which 
could be used by cancer patients for treatment decisions, 
medical consultations and social support, as well as by non-
cancer patients for prevention, screening and risk evaluation” 
becomes a means to ease their physical and psychological 
ordeal with this illness [17].  
There are various major health portals worldwide, such 
as the US-based PubMed [18], the UK‟s NHS [19], the 
German GoPubMed [20], as well as those that provide 
cancer-specific services and support, including the UK‟s 
Cancer Research UK [21] and Macmillan Cancer Support 
[22], and the US American Cancer Society [23]. The step 
forward in healthcare is home care, in particular with the 
aging of world population and increase in those requiring 
long term care [7]. Online health resources are the 
indispensable means for home care, and, thereby, patient 
empowerment. However, it is often the case that health 
consumers have to navigate through a sea of information, 
which is often difficult to understand [24], and sometimes 
irrelevant [25]. A user affected by cancer, whose needs are 
very specific, and who receives unsuitable, irritating 
information, might quickly terminate the visit to the health-
website. To increase user engagement, online health services 
should address three main points: information quality, user 
interaction and tailoring information to user‟s needs [26].   
Information better matched to user‟s health literacy and 
health situation, with a particular focus on patients with 
chronic medical conditions [25], is argued would lead to 
improved user engagement. Design of web tools for people 
with special health needs is another consideration. Including 
patients and caregivers in the decision making process [27] 
for eHealth design and information tailoring would result in 
more empowered patients, participating more actively in 
personal healthcare [14][25]. 
The lack of B&H online health services was mentioned 
in the previous section – the lack in number, but also in the 
provision of cancer-specific support. Some of the B&H 
health portals with an online presence are: klix.ba – a news 
portal offering health-related news and a forum feature used, 
among others, by cancer affected population; port.org.ba  – a 
portal and community provided by an NGO for people with 
malignant diseases, mainly offering cancer-related articles 
from 
other 
sources; 
source.ba 
– 
a 
news 
portal; 
srcezadjecu.ba – a website, by a cancer association helping 
children suffering from cancer, used to present the NGOs 
projects and activities; bhzdravlje.ba – a health portal 
offering general health information, provided by a private 
organization in cooperation with one of the cantonal 
ministries of health. But often, online resources from the 
neighboring, similar-language-speaking, countries are used 
as an alternative, “the next best thing”, solution.   
Moreover, in order to evidence patient empowerment, via 
their improved online engagement, health service providers 
would have to show interest in exploring and understanding 
cancer patients‟ and caregivers‟ needs, to be able to match 
these with adequate information and support.  However, to 
the best of our knowledge, studies on online health 
information seeking among people affect by cancer in B&H 
are lacking. We have addressed this in a previous pilot study 
[8], which showed that the target population in B&H does 
use the Internet to seek cancer information - the main reason 
for going online to seek for cancer information or advice is 
having someone close diagnosed with a medical condition.  
However, this was an isolated study applied to the B&H 
population, and one that focused on collecting participants‟ 
perception on the matter. A gap still exists in understanding 
the actual behavior and activities of cancer affected people 
in B&H, and wider, when searching for cancer-related 
support and information on the Internet. To reduce the global 
burden of cancer, the specific needs of individual 
communities have to be addressed, primarily by the public 
health services, including those provided on the Internet. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

III. 
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
A. Data Collection and Pre-processing  
A health forum „Cancer and fighting cancer‟ accessible 
from Klix.ba [28] - the most popular B&H online portal, 
with the most diverse forum that has the largest member 
base, was used. The forum content was in Bosnian language. 
All forum posts between December 2012 and April 2014, 
were extracted, as semi-structured text. Participants who 
made a minor number of posts (up to 3 posts) and had an 
insignificant amount of text posted compared to other forum 
participants, were excluded from the current analysis. The 
resulting sample was that of 38 users, 9597 unique words 
(length 1 character and above), and total word count of 
38,387. Participation in the forum varied: membership 
ranged from < 1 to 12 years; some participated in a number 
of Klix.ba forum discussion boards and others participated 
specifically in the here studied cancer-related part of the 
forum; thus, the number of posts ranged from 3 to 28087.    
Publicly available demographic data about the forum 
participants was collected from their user profiles, such as: 
username, number of posts, start of membership, age and 
location. Gender was automatically extracted from the text 
posted by the participants, given that in Bosnian language 
there is a gender difference in the third person tense. 
B. Data Analysis 
Word frequency analysis was performed using the QSR 
NVivo 10 tool [29] - as the available software to the 
researchers and the one popular for analyzing unstructured 
data, e.g., online textual content. The most frequent 1000 
words of 3 or more characters were searched for in the 
sampled posts in Bosnian language; most stop words 
(including connector words: but, which, when, and similar) 
were excluded or manually removed from further analysis. 
Figure 1 shows a word cloud representation of the most 
frequent words encountered after this process. 
Using the NVivo tool to analyze Bosnian text introduced 
a limitation to the study. While this tool has the functionality 
to identify stemmed words and synonyms for English, it was 
able to detect only slight changes in Bosnian words, and thus 
almost in no cases were stemmed words for the root word in 
Bosnian included in the frequency calculation. 
C. Results 
The demographics of the users showed 60.5% were 
female and 26% male; the remaining 13.5% was unknown. 
Those participants that did provide personal data were in 
their thirties and one a senior citizen, and lived in larger 
cities such as Sarajevo, Tuzla and Mostar. 
The most frequent word in the sampled forum posts, as 
shown in Figure 1, is „sam’ (weighted percentage 0.79). The 
word „sam‟ occurs in 26 of the 38 sources, and in total 305 
times in the sampled text.  This is the highest count for a 
single word occurrence under the selected conditions. 
Translated into English the word „sam‟ can be used as a verb 
„[I] am‟ or „[I] have‟, or otherwise it can mean „alone‟ or  „by 
him/her/your-self‟. In all cases, it indicates that participants 
of the sampled forum posts were most frequently referring to  
 
 
Figure 1.  Word cloud representation of the most frequent words  
themselves, that the opinion they were expressing is theirs, to 
have done or gone through something related to cancer 
themselves, or to be affected by cancer themselves. It can 
also be implied that they had to go through something alone, 
such as perform a cancer-related activity by themselves. The 
greatest number of references to the word „sam‟ was found 
in the posts made by two participants (further anonymized 
here): user VH (86) and user J (37). Both of these forum 
members were cancer patients, as extracted from a more 
detailed analysis of their posts.  
Forum posts analysis further reveals other frequently 
occurring words, which can be indicative of the type of 
topics of greatest interest to people affected by cancer in 
B&H. A sample of highly ranked cancer-related words from 
the forum posts‟ 1000 most frequent words is listed in Table 
1. The table presents the Bosnian words, along with their 
respective translation into English language and the weighted 
percentage - representing the frequency of the word relative 
to all the words counted from the sampled forum posts. The 
word ‘mama’ (i.e., mother in English), for example, occurs 
in the posts made by 13 of the 38 sampled forum members. 
Analyzing the word in relation to other words within the 
posts, it is evident that „mother‟ is the person mentioned as 
the one suffering from cancer. The indirectly affected forum 
participants mainly discussed: problems with treatments, the 
cause of positive and negative moods of their caretaker 
(mainly mothers), their health condition, the type of cancer 
they are fighting (mainly breast cancer, but not only limited 
to this cancer-type), and asking for treatment and diet advice. 
The 1000 most frequent words (≥ 3 characters) were 
manually grouped into 9 categories of frequent discussions 
on the analyzed cancer forum. Words such as connectors, 
pronouns, and cancer discussions‟ unrelated words were 
excluded from the categorization.  
Figure 2 represents the relative frequencies of the 9 
discussion categories. The most frequently exchanged words 
are those belonging to the category General cancer-related 
discussions (sum of words count is 1775). However, there 
was also great interest in time-related discussions - Time 
(sum of word counts: 1378), which was not one of the  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

TABLE I.  
FREQUENT WORDS IN THE KLIX.BA FORUM 
Selected frequent 
words in Bosnian 
Selected frequent words – 
translation in English 
Weighted 
percentage 
(%) 
sam 
am / have / alone / by oneself 
0.79 
rak(a) 
(of) cancer 
0.47a 
danas 
today 
0.40 
mama 
mom / mother 
0.21 
bolesti 
disease, illness(es) 
0.18 
godina 
year(s) 
0.18 
nalaze 
find, finding, medical report 
0.17 
doktor 
doctor 
0.13 
terapije 
therapy(s), treatment(s) 
0.12 
tumor 
tumor 
0.11 
piti 
drink, drinks, drinking 
0.10 
vrijeme 
time 
0.09 
bogu 
God (to God) 
0.09 
dojke 
breast(s) 
0.09 
ulje 
oil 
0.09 
b17 
Vitamin B17  
0.09 
user VH 
user VH  
0.09 
lijek 
treatment / cure / medication 
/ medicine  
0.08 
abd 
abbreviation for „God 
willing‟ 
0.07 
caj 
tea 
0.07 
herceptin 
Herceptinb 
0.07 
hemoterapije 
chemotherapy(s) 
0.06 
a. The sum of weighted percentages for rak (cancer) and raka (of cancer), i.e., 0.19 and 0.28, 
respectively.  
b. Treatment which can be used for breast and stomach cancer. 
 
frequently sought topics found in previous research on target 
population‟s perception. Categorization of forum discussions 
was self-developed by the authors, nevertheless, it was based 
on the findings of previous studies [9][13][14] that reported 
the most frequently searched online health information were 
the topics included in the 9 categories next presented. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Categories of forum discussions and the sum of  frequencies of 
the consisting words.  
The 9 categories are listed below, sorted descending, 
based on the category level frequency (sum of counts of 
words making up the category). Each category is assigned 
the consisting total number of words, after excluding 
repeating occurrences of the same word (due to misspelling 
or missing symbols for affricates) and stemmed words. 
 
General discussions about cancer (76 words, e.g., 
cancer, tumor, illness) 
 
Time (45 words, e.g., year, time); which could be, 
but is not limited to, time since cancer has been 
diagnosed, duration of treatments and cancer 
prevalence, days stayed in hospital, or when a visit 
to the doctors is scheduled. 
 
Various types of treatment and medication (51 
words, e.g., therapies, b17 vitamin, cure, Herceptin, 
chemotherapy); 
including 
alternative 
and 
experimental treatment, chemotherapies, and similar, 
and where to find it. 
 
Nutrition and diet (34 words, e.g., oil, tea, drink) 
 
Doctors and medical reports and findings (27 words, 
e.g., doctor, find/finding/medical report); who are 
the most renowned oncologists in the city, where 
they can be reached, experience others had with a 
specific doctor, doctor‟s advice given, where specific 
medical analysis can be conducted, how to read 
medical findings and what they mean, are all 
questions asked within this topic category.  
 
Type of cancer (17 words, e.g., breast, carcinoma, 
tumor); narrowing down and specializing experience 
and information exchange to a specific type of 
cancer, and part of body where cancer occurred, 
rather than generic cancer information. 
 
Caregivers (9 words, e.g., mother); in this type of 
discussions, text analysis indicated that participants 
most often asked for support when a member of their 
closest family or a friend was affected by cancer, 
usually their mothers.  
 
Religious support (10 words, e.g., God, God 
willing); belief in God and help by a higher power. 
 
Virtual community (14 words, e.g., user VH); 
personal story sharing by forum participants who are 
suffering from cancer or are caregivers, and empathy 
and advice expression by their supporters. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
As cancer is not a local, but a global issue, all initiatives 
at supporting the needs of those affect by it resonate at a 
global level. The sample used for this study was 
geographically explicit, collected from an understudied 
population. Understanding what topics concern those who 
are affected by cancer in online communities around the 
world, not just in the Western developed countries, has 
various applications - from developing more geographically-
tailored online support, to improved cancer prevention.  
People affected by cancer in B&H are taking an action in 
improving their and their loved ones‟ personal health, and/or 
doing this by themselves,  as implied by the most frequent 
word - 'sam,' in the analyzed cancer forum. This study 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

indicates that women are predominant participants in B&H 
online health communities. It could be ascribed to the B&H 
culture, in which being a man still means hiding personal 
vulnerabilities. Nevertheless, worldwide studies also confirm 
that it is women who are more frequently online, seeking for 
health information and support [15]. What is remarkable in 
the B&H forum case is that the only two participants who 
were directly affected by cancer, and openly discussing their 
condition, were men. This occurrence also coincides with the 
B&H [30] and world statistics [31], which show that cancer 
is more frequent among the male population. On the other 
hand, the findings do suggest there is still a need to 
encourage the male population affected by cancer to reach 
out for help and speak out about their health-related 
problems. The majority of those using a cancer-related 
online community in B&H have joined these services in the 
desire to find support for their loved one who was diagnosed 
with cancer. The members of the community mainly offer 
support – both emotional and information related – to other 
members, who are cancer patients, or caregivers of cancer 
patients. Assistance is exchanged in interpreting the 
diagnosis and approaching the specific type of cancer.  
The findings imply the primary type of conversation led 
in online health communities in B&H are those related to 
general discussions about cancer – admitting to be affected 
by cancer, the type of illness it is, finding out it metastasized, 
how it makes the person feel, what impact it has on the 
person‟s psyche and body, the pain it causes, help sought, the 
fight put into it, and similar. This type of online health 
information – about a specific medical problem, in addition 
to information on treatments, diet and doctors, has been 
reported the most frequently sought in Western countries 
[9][13][14]. However, this study is the first account, to the 
best of our knowledge, of Internet usage for health 
information seeking in B&H, based on actual user behavior 
on online health services, which, moreover, reports on 
cancer-specific information seeking. Furthermore, the 
findings show that people affected by cancer in B&H, when 
participating in online communities, are preoccupied with a 
type of discussion not commonly reported in previous 
studies on health information seeking on the Internet, this 
namely being the time-related discussions.  They share 
information about when they had a medical appointment, the 
date of the next operation, how long they were receiving 
treatment, how long a loved one battled with cancer, up to a 
point of sharing how long their doctors said they are 
expected to live. Turning to online communities seems 
sensible for this type of personal story sharing; members 
want to exchange experiences, in an anonymous way, with 
others who have been in similar situations and, perhaps, to 
find consolation and a possibility for an alternative outcome. 
But, it is evident that this is a major concern of people in 
B&H who are affected by cancer, and thus, effort should be 
made by health professionals to inform this population about 
the time-related effects of cancer.  
Similar conclusion can be drawn from turning to an 
online community to interpret medical reports. The doctors 
and medical findings category of discussions implies that 
health professionals are neglecting to explain the diagnosis to 
their patients, and are not cooperating with each other to 
inform their patients of the best specialists for their type of 
cancer. The result is that those affected by cancer have to 
turn to each other for advice from personal experience and 
for interpreting the doctor‟s notes on medical reports.  
Another issue that was revealed is the variety of types of 
treatments (especially alternative and experimental) and diets 
suggested by the forum participants. These include: 
cytostatic drugs, Herceptin, Laetrile (or Vitamin B17), 
Zofran, Alimta, Avastin, Melatonin, Ecomer, sodium 
bicarbonate, cannabis, marihuana, plant roots, oil, petroleum, 
teas, etc. Many of these are very expensive, have side effects, 
some are illegal in B&H, and some diets suggested are even 
of questionable effect on human health. Health professionals 
and agencies in B&H, should invest into informing about all 
available treatments, raise awareness about the specific types 
of treatments and foods, verify or dispute the information 
exchanged by laymen, and assist in making available to the 
target population the needed effective treatments.  
The frequently occurring categories of forum discussions 
related to virtual community, caregivers, religious support 
and time imply that the greatest benefit of online 
communities for cancer-affected people is, moreover, having 
a place to express oneself in an anonymous way; exchange 
experience, talk about the burden of cancer, knowing 
someone is listening and responding even if all they can offer 
is empathy and a kind word. Providing additional, cancer-
specific online communities, assisted by health professionals 
for information verification, and raising awareness about 
these online services in the cancer-affected population, is the 
type of support that could have a resonating effect. 
To extend this and the previous work [8], and confirm the 
findings of other related research [16], further ongoing work 
looks at the cancer patients‟ motivators for internet-based 
usage. In future studies, the intention is to explore the 
relationship between user-created content and their emotions 
with the application of different text analysis tools, e.g., 
LIWC: Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
One of the approaches to reducing the global burden of 
cancer is diminishing the sense of helplessness and 
loneliness in those who are cancer sufferers, but also the 
sense of loss in those who are their caregivers. Electronic 
health can empower people affected by cancer, however, 
these online applications have to address the specific 
requirements of individual communities. This study 
evaluated the information exchange in an existing online 
community formed by people affected by cancer in B&H. 
Thereby, it identified the topics of discussions, type of 
support required, their concerns and information sought. It is 
primarily the obligation of public health institutions to take 
these findings into account to provide the target population 
the type of support they are evidently lacking. It is also up to 
online health service providers to offer people affected by 
cancer reliable information on the identified topics and the 
form of support this target population voiced a need for via 
their conversations. Thus, the future direction of this research 
is to enhance an existing major community platform with 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

personalized cancer-focused services, and evaluate the end-
user acceptance and satisfaction via both actual behavior and 
surveyed perception. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] International Agency for Research on Cancer. GLOBOCAN 
database: Cancer Fact Sheets. [Retrieved: September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://globocan.iarc.fr/Pages/fact_sheets_cancer.aspx 
[2] Norwegian Cancer Society. Reasons for our international 
involvement. [Retrieved: September, 2015]. Available 
from: 
https://kreftforeningen.no/en/international-
collaboration/ 
[3] American Cancer Society. Who are caregivers, and what 
do they do? [Retrieved: September, 2015]. Available from: 
http://www.cancer.org/treatment/caregivers/caregiving/wha
tyouneedtoknow/what-you-need-to-know-as-a-cancer-
caregiver-who-and-what-are-caregivers  
[4] S. Hengstler, “Wireless Health: Making Your Devices Talk 
- A Review, Solution, and Outlook for Wireless Health 
Connectivity,” International journal on advances in life 
sciences, vol. 6, 2014, pp. 147-156. 
[5] Federal Ministry of Health, Federation of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. 
Strategic 
basis 
for 
adopting 
and 
implementing the Project for Strengthening the Health 
Sector. [Retrieved: September, 2015]. Available from: 
http://www.fmoh.gov.ba/index.php/projekt-jacanja-
zdravstvenog-sektora 
[6] M. Wentzel, d. N. Jong, L. Nijdam, v. R. Drie-Pierik, and 
v. J. Gemert-Pijnen, “Understanding eHealth use from a 
Persuasive System Design perspective: an Antibiotic 
Information Application for Nurses,” International journal 
on advances in life sciences, vol. 6, 2014, pp. 210-219. 
[7] F. Sieverink, et al., “The Diffusion of a Personal Health 
Record for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in 
Primary Care,” International journal on advances in life 
sciences, vol. 6, 2014, pp. 177-183. 
[8] S. Hadzidedic Bazdarevic and A. I. Cristea, “Does the use 
of cancer-related websites depend on personalizaation 
services and user emotions?,” unpublished. 
[9] M. A. Bright, et al., “Exploring e-Health usage and interest 
among cancer information service users: the need for 
personalized interactions and multiple channels remains,” 
Journal of health communication, vol. 10, 2005, pp. 35-52. 
[10] P. E. Kummervold, et al., “eHealth trends in Europe 2005-
2007: a population-based survey,” Journal of medical 
Internet research, vol. 10, 2008, doi: 10.2196/jmir.1023. 
[11] R. Siliquini, et al., “Surfing the internet for health 
information: an italian survey on use and population 
choices,” BMC medical informatics and decision making, 
vol. 11, 2011, p. 21, doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-11-21. 
[12] S. Ek, K. Eriksson-Backa, and R. Niemelä, “Use of and 
trust in health information on the Internet: A nationwide 
eight-year follow-up survey,” Informatics for Health and 
Social 
Care, 
vol. 
38, 
2013, 
pp. 
236-245, 
doi: 
10.3109/17538157.2013.764305. 
[13] L. Rainie. E-patients and their hunt for health information. 
[Retrieved: 
September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/10/10/e-patients-and-
their-hunt-for-health-information/ 
[14] E. Huang, C.-c. A. Chang, and P. Khurana, “Users' 
preferred interactive e-health tools on hospital web sites,” 
International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Healthcare 
Marketing, 
vol. 
6, 
2012, 
pp. 
215-229, 
doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/17506121211259395. 
[15] S. Fox and M. Duggan. Health Online 2013. [Retrieved: 
September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/01/15/health-online-
2013/ 
[16] S. Ziebland, et al., “How the internet affects patients' 
experience of cancer: a qualitative study,” Bmj, vol. 328, 
2004, 
p. 
564, 
doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.328.7439.564. 
[17] N. Xiao, R. Sharman, H. R. Rao, and S. Upadhyaya, 
“Factors influencing online health information search: An 
empirical analysis of a national cancer-related survey,” 
Decision Support Systems, vol. 57, 2014, pp. 417-427, doi: 
10.1016/j.dss.2012.10.047. 
[18] National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubMed. 
[Retrieved: 
September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed 
[19] National Health Sservice. NHS Home Page. [Retrieved: 
September, 2015]. Available from: http://www.nhs.uk 
[20] GoPubMed. 
GoPubMed 
Searching 
is 
now 
sorted. 
[Retrieved: 
September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://gopubmed.org/web/gopubmed/ 
[21] Cancer Reasearch UK. Let's beat cancer sooner. 
[Retrieved: 
September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/ 
[22] Macmillan Cancer Support. We are Macmillan Cancer 
Support. [Retrieved: September, 2015]. Available from: 
http://www.macmillan.org.uk 
[23] American Cancer Society. Cancer.org - Join the fight 
against cancer. [Retrieved: September, 2015]. Available 
from: http://www.cancer.org/ 
[24] R. Jucks and R. Bromme, “Choice of words in doctor–
patient communication: An analysis of health-related 
Internet sites,” Health Communication, vol. 21, 2007, pp. 
267-277. 
[25] L. Alpay, J. Verhoef, B. Xie, D. Te'eni, and J. Zwetsloot-
Schonk, 
“Current 
challenge 
in 
consumer 
health 
informatics: 
Bridging 
the 
gap 
between 
access 
to 
information and information understanding,” Biomedical 
informatics insights, vol. 2, 2009, p. 1. 
[26] E. Sillence, L. Little, and P. Briggs, “E-health,” Proc. 22nd 
British HCI Group Annual Conference on People and 
Computers: Culture, Creativity, Interaction-Volume 2, 
2008, pp. 179-180. 
[27] M. Span, et al., “An Interactive Web Tool to Facilitate 
Shared Decision Making in Dementia: Design Issues 
Perceived by Caregivers and Patients,” International 
journal on advances in life sciences, vol. 6, 2014, pp. 107-
121, doi:  10.3389/fnagi.2015.00128. 
[28] Klix.ba. Cancer and fighting it. [Retrieved: September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.klix.ba/forum/karcinom-i-borba-sa-njim--
t26209.html. 
[29] QSR International. NVivo 10 for Windows. [Retrieved: 
September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.qsrinternational.com/products_nvivo.aspx 
[30] International Agency for Research on Cancer. Country: 
Bosnia, Most frequent cancers in both sexes 2012. 
[Retrieved: 
September, 
2015]. 
Available 
from: 
http://eco.iarc.fr/eucan/Country.aspx?ISOCountryCd=70 
[31] WebMD. Study Suggests Diagnosis of Cancer Is More 
Frequent for Men. [Retrieved: September, 2015]. Available 
from: 
http://www.webmd.com/cancer/news/20110712/men-have-
higher-cancer-death-rates-than-women 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

