Emoji Trends Between Abnormal Usage and
Cultural Differences: A Case Study of Emojis
Ahmed Almohanadi
Tokyo Metropolitan University
Tokyo, Japan
email:ahmed-almahanadi@ed.tmu.ac.jp
Shohei Yokoyama
Tokyo Metropolitan University
National Institute of Informatics
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
email:shohei@tmu.ac.jp
Abstract—Emojis can be used to understand people’s emotions
through non-lexical language around the world, and through
different techniques, they can be used to study and understand
people’s trends and cultural traits and gauge abnormal activities
or events. This paper analyzes a monthly data period consisting of
multiple activities where unique trends and abnormal emojis are
highly likely to occur. An established method has been created,
and map projection was used to establish this relation. We
found interesting cultural traits, special events, and coronavirus
pandemic-related emojis projected on a clustered map, showing
a strong relation between certain emojis and specific regions.
All these are common emojis that can be seen daily and unique
emojis that appear in special events.
Keywords—Emoji; Twitter; Clustering; Geolocation Data; Data
Analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Emojis in today’s online communication are very popular
due to their brevity, conciseness, and ability to give the
message an emotional coloring. Moreover, these special char-
acters greatly facilitate global communication, allowing people
to convey ideas and even complex narratives concisely and
understandably.
As a result, emojis have become an integral part of almost
any digital communication, from interpersonal communication
to brands and companies communicating with their customers.
Since emojis have become commonplace in modern commu-
nication, trends in their use have been repeatedly explored.
According to Kaur et al. [1], emojis can be used to portray
emotional reactions among social media users who understand
the emoji similarly. The images facilitate non-verbal commu-
nication cues on social media that enhance user exchange and
interaction.
Using Emojis is a dynamic concept. The Emoji set in
smartphones is constantly updated as a reaction to events in
the world. Moreover, often, long-standing images take on new
meanings, reflecting the ever-changing landscape of cultural,
social, and technological development.
This evolution provides researchers with a unique opportu-
nity to delve into the complex relationships between emojis
and the societies that use them. In addition, emojis contribute
to formulating and expressing public opinion regarding signif-
icant incidents and events.
Therefore, this research paper analyzes the emoji trends that
are common today, as well as the features of their formation
due to geographic and cultural differences between users.
Analyzing the patterns and frequency of emoji usage across
countries and regions, this study seeks to discover an exciting
insight into the cultural nuances of digital expression. Since
emojis are a cultural characteristic, this study suggests that
different figures’ usage patterns and meanings may differ from
country to country.
Moreover, countries and regions may have localized sym-
bols reflecting the interplay between regional cultures and
digital language, providing a glimpse into the nature of online
communication worldwide. An analysis of the geographical
features of Emoji will help establish the universality of this
form of communication and try to understand the global
trends.
The prominence of emojis applies across many parts of the
world, from the West to the East. According to Dyer and Kolic
[2], the state of California in the United States has been found
to have a high concentration and multiplicity of emoji usage,
especially along the coastal area. The trend is connected to the
high population in the state’s central coastal cities, including
San Diego, Los Angeles, Palo Alto, San Francisco, and others
(Kejriwal et al., [3]). The high usage is also correlated to the
linguistic and cultural diversity of the area, which promotes
greater exchange and interaction.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reports related work. Section 3 describes our proposed method.
Section 4 presents the results and findings in three sub-
sections. Section 5 concludes the paper and discusses future
work.
II. RELATED WORK
The peculiarities of using emojis have attracted considerable
attention from researchers. However, due to geographical
factors, the distinctive features of this type of communication
have been identified relatively recently.
Moreover, most researchers in this field emphasize more
than the influence of the region’s geographical features but
the cultural trends of the countries that determine the use of
Emoji [4]. Assessing the influence of the country’s cultural
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-103-9
SOTICS 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

characteristics on the use of Emoji, the researchers found
variability in the interpretation of Emoji in different cultures.
Moreover, the fewer ways of communication between differ-
ent countries and cultures, the more pronounced the difference
in the use and meanings of emojis. For example, Guntuku
et al. [4] found that there are significant differences in the
interpretation and frequency of emoji usage between the East
(China and Japan) and the West (United States and United
Kingdom). Representatives of Eastern cultures often use text
messages instead of using the corresponding figures.
In addition, since emojis were initially conceived as a way to
color messages emotionally, their meaning in different cultures
is influenced by general trends regarding the manifestation of
emotions and feelings. Continuing to analyze the difference in
emoji usage between Western and Eastern countries, Gao and
VanderLaan [5] found that Westerners and Easterners appear
to perceive emotions differently.
This difference in perception has been established even
with basic emotions like happiness and sadness. Therefore,
the researchers concluded that people might perceive the
intent of the communication more accurately during exchanges
with others of the same, compared with a different cultural
background. This casts doubt on the claim that Emojis are a
universal way of global communication.
On the other hand, using these figurines has demonstrated
its ability to facilitate intercultural communication. Research
has explored how these symbols bridge language barriers and
facilitate interaction between different language communities,
enriching global digital discourse.
In addition, the development of Emoji contributes to form-
ing a diversified and inclusive world society. For example, the
appearance of images with different skin colors or pairs in
different combinations contributed to the unification of people
since everyone can express themselves.
Despite the presence of regional differences, Kimura-
Thollander and Kumar [6] note that the use of Emoji con-
tributes to global cultural exchange and the formation of
a common background among representatives of different
communities.
Moreover, the participants in their survey came to the con-
clusion that it is necessary to create universal emojis that will
have the same meaning in all countries of the world. Such an
approach has the potential to simplify global communication
but, at the same time, threatens to destroy global cultural
diversification.
The use of emojis is constantly evolving and adapting to
changing human needs. Therefore, many people attach par-
ticular meanings to individual images that are understandable
only to them. Schouteten et al. note that in modern digital
interpersonal communication, it is common for people to use
emojis as a kind of shorthand.
At the same time, this form of communication may be
meaningless for other people. Brands often use the same
approach to create a specific image of the company in the
consumer’s perception. Distributing unique, localized emojis
works the same way, with a group of people defined according
to their nationality or where they live.
After collecting statistics on the most popular emojis in
different countries, Cohen [7] determined that the red heart
and the laughing face with tears are the most popular around
the world. At the same time, the national flags of countries are
in second place in popularity, which expresses their patriotic
sentiments.
A rather remarkable figure is the image of two folded hands,
which in some cultures is interpreted as a high-five, while in
others, such as India, it expresses gratitude [8]. These patterns
are due to distinctive cultural, linguistic, and national features
that are characteristic of a particular region.
Finally, Emojis are a universal way to express public
sentiment on social media. In addition, emoji usage trends
may change in response to national situations or significant
global events. Analyzing user pages on Twitter allows you
to determine public opinion regarding certain global events,
for example, as was the case with the COVID-19 pandemic.
At the same time, due to the global nature of the incident,
corona-related emojis are universal and have the same meaning
regardless of region or country. In addition, there are unique
emojis that do not have global popularity but are often used
by certain groups of people. Examples of such images are
sunflower, unicorn, rocket, artist palette, and top hat emojis
[9].
These symbols may not be universally accepted, but their
meaning in a particular community makes them invaluable
for conveying subtle meanings. For example, they can be a
manifestation of cultural self-identification, belonging to a
particular subculture, and a form of self-expression. Unique
emojis often have a distinct visual style that draws attention
and catches the eye, which is why they are gaining popularity
among social media users.
III. METHOD
In this study, the data collected for the research comprised
using Twitter analysis tool for the period selected was one
month between the 19th of November and the 18th of Decem-
ber of 2022; during this period, the Qatar World Cup 2022 was
conducted, and Winter started in many areas of the world.
The gathered tweets were filtered with two criteria: first,
they must include geolocation information, and second, the
tweet must be classified as English according to the Twitter
API dataset.
In the next step, the data was processed through multiple
functions to be ready for final usage, including filtering from
spam and duplication. The geolocation data was converted into
radians to calculate the distance between points and establish
density-based clusters.
For the abnormal analysis method, all emojis were extracted
from the text each day of the month and used to calculate
the Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF)
method, which is used to estimate the frequency and im-
portance and calculate the z-score for each Emoji for the
perspective day. The z-score threshold was set, and a search
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-103-9
SOTICS 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

for a high difference in this value was conducted to search for
abnormality.
Lastly, the map clustering method used was Density-based
spatial clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN).
IV. RESULT
In this research paper, we have divided the results into three
parts based on the clustering type and result category we have
found.
A. Corona Related Emoji Map Clustering
In this experiment, random emojis were fed to the clustering
map to find a unique emoji with a massive presence in one
area besides the others. The corona-related Emoji, the mask
face (
), was populated within the US area, which matched
a period where the coronavirus spread in another wave.
B. Culture Related Emoji Map Clustering
Another interesting Emoji that popped out was the skull
emoji (
). Its population was focused on African countries
on the west coast of Africa. After studying the Emoji, reading
the comments, and further research, it is inferred that the
meaning of skull emoji has the same meaning as the Emoji
with the Face with Tears of Joy Emoji (
). It is inferred
that dark humor in the Emoji type is used to indicate interest,
awkwardness, and irony.
C. Abnormal Emoji Trend
In this experiment, TF-IDF was used to search for abnormal
usage of all emojis; using a z-score table, the maximum
threshold estimated for the period was 4, a very high value that
resulted in many low spike points due to having many emojis
being used extreme rare cases, most of them are random usage.
Three interesting findings were made where an unexpected
high point was estimated.
a) Nazar (amulet) emoji
: This emoji had a peak on
the 30th of 11 It was found mostly in America and India
shown in Fig 1 It is a special day related to religion, marriage,
and personal matters across all regions; many people are
getting married on this day. The combination of religious
Indian culture, with an interesting number of days, along with
personal matters, made this Emoji spike.
Fig. 1. Clusters mostly found in India and the United States
b) Goat emoji
: This Emoji has been recently re-
ferred to by its acronym GOAT as Greatest Of All Time, which
is typically used for superstars across all fields, including
music, art, gaming, and sports. It spiked on the 14th of
December, shown in Fig 2, because of the awaiting match
between Argentina and Croatia, where Argentina won 3-0 with
Lionel Messi opening the scoring and getting the MVP for that
match. Messi has been called goat by fans across the world
the GOAT, considering him the best player in the world, and
he did win the 2022 Qatar World Cup with his team.
Fig. 2. Sentimental Values of the collected sample
c) Weather emojis
and
: Both of the emojis
have experienced a spike on the 14th of December. Going
by the map clustering, the most significant spikes are in two
areas: the east coast of the US and the second one is the UK
and around the England channel areas. It was reported on the
14th of December that thunderstorms were spotted from New
York on the east coast; however, in the UK, it was snowing
beautifully, and it was one of the most beautiful days to share
on social media. Therefore, the simultaneous events caused
the spike in these emojis together.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Clustering tweets with Geolocation and Emojis have yielded
exciting results, from pandemic conditions and weather confir-
mation to unique traits and global trends. However, this study
has been limited to many factors that might have reduced or
hindered exciting discoveries.
The selected period was interesting for many reasons, and
events happened all at the same time of that year. However,
other periods may provide different results that can be inter-
rupted differently.
The data sample was filtered using English language tweets
where it is spoken globally. This restriction was necessary
because local languages created massive clusters in their
countries, causing an imbalance in the results. With that being
said, it might yield interesting results when including different
languages together, and it will definitely affect the result of the
culture-related Emoji map.
An overall point to point out is that people with high-
security alerts toward privacy tend to limit access to their
location and prevent social media from accessing any related
information. Such trivial denial of access can cause such kinds
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-103-9
SOTICS 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

of studies to lose their opportunity to add value to an important
field that could change understanding in NLP studies.
We urge to spread awareness and ask the general people to
allow providing location access and show the importance of
the studies being done on such data and the current protection
provided by the companies where location is not provided
accurately for other parties but somewhat slightly adjusted for
the provider’s safety.
TF-IDF has generated reliable examples, but we were ex-
pecting more results; therefore, an investigation for a different
abnormal spike detection should be prioritized. Detecting by
number count or trend might require training a model to
understand the different emojis and types of spikes required
for the study.
DBSCAN has generated reliable clusters that could be ana-
lyzed and examined. Although other methods were considered,
they were deemed inferior due to the outstanding performance
of DBSCAN in these kinds of studies. However, this should
be reconsidered as new methods are getting updated rapidly.
Overall, if added, automating the process within a long-
term period can yield more interesting findings; the next phase
will focus on automation and training models that can detect
and provide the most interesting results in terms of clustered
areas and abnormal changes, discovering unique traits unseen
discoveries in the emoji language that is being used on a daily
basis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was conducted as part of “COVID-19 AI
& Simulation Project” run by Mitsubishi Research Institute
commissioned by Cabinet Secretariat, JAPAN
REFERENCES
[1] Kaur, S., Kaul, P., & Zadeh, P. M. (2020). Monitoring the dynamics
of emotions during COVID-19 using twitter data. Procedia Computer
Science, 177, 423–430.
[2] Dyer, J., & Kolic, B. (2020). Public risk perception and emotion on
Twitter during the Covid-19 pandemic. Applied Network Science, 5(1).
[3] Kejriwal, M., Wang, Q., Li, H., & Wang, L. (2021). An empirical study
of emoji usage on Twitter in linguistic and national contexts. Online
Social Networks and Media, 24,
[4] S. C. Guntuku, M. Li, L. Tay, and L. H. Ungar, "Studying cul-
tural differences in emoji usage across the east and the west," Pro-
ceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and So-
cial Media, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 226-235, 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://doi.org/10.1609/icwsm.v13i01.3224. [Accessed: the 16th of
September, 2023].
[5] B. Gao and D. P. VanderLaan, "Cultural influences on perceptions of
emotions depicted in emojis," Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 567-570, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2020.0024. [Accessed: the 16th of Septem-
ber, 2023].
[6] P.
Kimura-Thollander
and
N.
Kumar,
"Examining
the
’global’
language
of
emojis:
Designing
for
cultural
representation,"
Proceedings
of
the
2019
CHI
Conference
on
Human
Factors
in Computing Systems, pp. 495-508, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300725.
[Accessed:
the
16th
of
September, 2023]. [Accessed: the 16th of September, 2023].
[7] B. Cohen, "The most popular emoji in each country around the
world," The Gate, the 15th of May, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://thegatewithbriancohen.com/the-most-popular-emoji-in-each-
country-around-the-world/ [Accessed: the 16th of September, 2023].
[8] M. Kejriwal, Q. Wang, H. Li, and L. Wang, "An empirical study of
emoji usage on Twitter in linguistic and national contexts," Online
Social Networks and Media, vol. 24, pp. 1-23, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.osnem.2021.100149.
[9] J. J. Schouteten, F. Llobell, S. L. Chheang, D. Jin, and S. R. Jaeger,
"Emoji meanings (pleasure–arousal–dominance dimensions) in con-
sumer research: Between-country and interpersonal differences," Journal
of Food Science, vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 106-121, 2023. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-3841.16374. [Accessed: the 16th of
September, 2023].
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-103-9
SOTICS 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

