Understanding User-Based Modifications to Information Quality in Response to 
Privacy and Trust Related Concerns in Online Social Networks  
Brian P. Blake and Dr. Nitin Agarwal 
University of Arkansas at Little Rock 
Little Rock, Arkansas, USA 
e-mail: bpblake@ualr.edu nxagarwal@ualr.edu 
 
 
Abstract—As online social networks have surged in popularity, 
a new wave of privacy discussions are taking place as evolving 
technology influences perceptions and demands in regard to 
privacy. From a practitioner’s perspective, there is a need to 
model, measure, and understand information quality in social 
networks and its relationship to data privacy and trust. From a 
user’s perspective, there is a need to more fully understand 
both the trust aspects and the visibility and other privacy 
aspects of information shared online as well as implications 
from future use of that data. The goal of this research 
therefore is to model user based modifications to information 
quality due to data privacy and trust related concerns within 
online social networks in order to more fully explore the 
interrelationships and trade-offs between data privacy, trust, 
and information quality. This research focuses on: 1) 
development and validation of relationship matrices for data 
privacy, online social networks, information quality, and trust 
as a research framework, 2) development of syntax for a 
conceptual model of data privacy, trust, and information 
quality in online social networks, and 3) development of a 
structural equation model for understanding the trade-offs and 
influences between data privacy, trust, and information quality 
in online social networks. The greatest implications of this 
research come through development of integrated matrix 
frameworks, a privacy/trust/information quality modeling 
syntax, and structural equation scoring measures that will be 
applicable to future research efforts. The research will enhance 
methods of modeling and measuring data privacy, trust, and 
information quality within online social networks. In 
application to online social networks, it lends itself to a better 
understanding of the quality of shared information in given 
data privacy and trust scenarios. It provides future researchers 
with a formal framework for relating privacy, trust, and 
information quality as well as a formal way to understand 
information quality modification. 
Keywords-Information quality; privacy; trust; online social 
networks. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Social media as communication media have surged in 
popularity over the past decade. Social networking websites 
such Facebook, MySpace, and Twitter have been the 
champions of this social phenomenon [1]. As the use of 
social media networks increases there are growing concerns 
about data privacy. A recent paper [2] noted that as 
information technology evolves it greatly influences 
perceptions and demands in regard to privacy. Because of 
this, developments in social computing are driving a new 
wave of privacy discussions. Government and corporate 
database privacy issues are often discussed and remain 
highly important, but according to Zittrain [3] these are 
“dwarfed by threats to privacy that do not fit the standard 
analytical template for addressing privacy issues”. He used 
the term Privacy 2.0 to refer to this non-standard view. 
Zittrain argued that governments or corporations are not 
always the ones managing surveillance and that control of 
the transfer of personal information can be eliminated by 
peer-to-peer technologies. 
Frederick Lane, when discussing privacy in a webbed 
world as part of American Privacy, declared that 
“information wants to be free” [4]. He continued that social 
network sites succeed because individuals crave community 
and will share personal information in order to build it. 
“Online social networks,” he stated, “thrive because they 
enable us to share personal information more quickly and 
easily than ever before, creating the impression that we are 
all newsworthy now”. Lane further noted that individuals 
make seemingly rational decisions to post information online 
in order to receive perceived benefits, but fully rational 
decisions require complete information and most individuals 
don’t understand what little control they hold over 
information posted on social networking sites or personal 
websites. In a similar vein, Zittrain stated that “people might 
make rational decisions about sharing their personal 
information in the short term, but underestimate what might 
happen to information as it is indexed, reused, and 
repurposed by strangers” [3]. 
A. Research Focus 
In research related to the general concepts of privacy, 
trust, and information quality (IQ) each is often addressed in 
a multi-faceted manner focusing on dimensions, aspects, and 
properties. To further this, trust, privacy, and information 
quality as areas of study are interrelated and overlapping in 
relation to online information disclosure, but how they 
interact with each other is not fully defined. This is 
especially true in relation to online social networks (OSNs). 
Previous research, such as Bertini [5], has noted that there is 
a direct relationship between privacy, trust, and an 
individual’s willingness to share information of increasing 
quantity and quality. This creates an opportunity for 
research. From a practitioners’ perspective, there is a need to 
model, measure, and understand social network information 
exchanges in regard to privacy, trust, and information quality 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

trade-offs and modifications. From a users’ perspective, 
there is a need to more fully understand both the trust aspects 
and the visibility of information shared online as well as 
implications from future use of that data. The goal of this 
research therefore is to apply an information quality 
perspective to the modeling of data privacy within social 
media networks in order to enable the exploration of the 
interrelationships and tradeoffs between data privacy, trust, 
and information quality. 
This research will address two problem areas. First, a 
standard way to frame, model, and measure the relationship 
of the sub-aspects of data privacy, trust, and information 
quality to facilitate understanding does not exist. This limits 
research in relation to a comprehensive understanding and 
restricts cross-discipline communication. Second, a specific 
understanding of how information quality modification is 
used by members of online social networks as a reaction to 
privacy and trust related concerns has not been fully 
addressed by the information quality research field. This 
limits the understanding of outcomes based on existing 
research models in regard to both antecedent influence and 
behavioral intentions vs. actual behavior within online social 
networks from an information quality perspective. A greater 
understanding of these factors can facilitate online social 
network organization changes to encourage greater sharing 
while simultaneously giving a deeper insight into how 
information is shared from an information quality point of 
view. 
B. Research Implications 
The greatest implications of this research will come 
through development of integrated matrix frameworks, a 
privacy/trust/information quality modeling syntax, and 
structural equation scoring measures that will be applicable 
to future research efforts. The research can enhance methods 
of modeling and measuring data privacy at both the data 
element and entity levels. In application to online social 
networks, it may lend itself to raised awareness of data 
visibility in social media as well as a better understanding of 
the quality of shared information in given data privacy and 
trust scenarios. 
C. Structure 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II describes background issues and related literature. 
Section III presents research methodologies. Section IV 
discusses initial results of the research. Section V considers 
challenges, limitations, and future research opportunities. 
 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED LITERATURE 
A. Privacy 
According to Daniel Solove in Understanding Privacy 
[6], nearly 120 years after “The Right to Privacy” by Warren 
and Brandeis was first published in the Harvard Law 
Review, current views in the field of privacy form a 
“sweeping concept” that includes “freedom of thought, 
control over one’s body, solitude in one’s home, control over 
personal information, freedom from surveillance, protection 
of one’s reputation, and protection from searches and 
interrogations”. He highlighted others who describe privacy 
as “exasperatingly vague”, “infected with pernicious 
ambiguities”, and “entangled in competing and contradictory 
dimensions”. Helen Nissenbaum [7] noted that privacy is 
commonly characterized in literature as either a constraint on 
access or a form of control. As theorists conceptualize 
privacy, they are typically searching for a core common 
denominator that forms the essence of privacy, but Solove 
argued that privacy is not easily conceptualized in this 
manner. He stated that a common denominator approach 
broad enough to include the varied aspects of privacy is 
likely to be vague and overly inclusive, while narrower 
approaches risk being too exclusive and restrictive. Privacy 
conceptualizations in existing literature can therefore be 
grouped into targeted common core definitions and broader 
privacy frameworks. 
Major privacy frameworks have been offered by Solove 
[6], Nissenbaum [7][8], Holtzman [9], and Rössler [10]. 
From a research perspective, these broader privacy 
frameworks have a strong structural relationship to the 
predominant multi-dimensional framework of information 
quality. Commonalities can be found across most of these 
privacy frameworks. The sub-components of the Solove and 
Rössler frameworks have a strong relationship to each other. 
Generally, sub-components of these frameworks, as 
Nissenbaum contended, focus around the twin concepts of 
access and control. In addition, varied determinations and 
combinations of these framework sub-components will form 
key aspects of the contextual norms on which Nissenbaum’s 
contextual integrity framework is based. 
Solove presented privacy as “a cluster of many distinct 
yet related things”. His privacy framework conceptualization 
presented in Understanding Privacy organizes privacy into 
four areas containing related sub-aspects in which privacy 
concerns have been be historically raised (see Table I). His 
framework has a strong focus on the collection, processing, 
and dissemination of information. This aligns well with 
online social networks and standard information product 
flows. Solove’s framework also aligns well with common 
multi-dimensional information quality concepts. Because of 
this, as well as his recognition as a privacy expert, Solove’s 
privacy conceptualization is used as a basis for the privacy 
aspects of this research. 
B. Social Media Networks 
Social media is media designed to be disseminated 
through social interactions created using highly accessible 
and scalable publishing techniques. It uses internet and web-
based 
technologies 
to 
transform 
broadcast 
media 
monologues (one to many) into social media dialogues 
(many to many). It supports the democratization of 
knowledge and information, transforming people from 
content consumers to content producers [11]. Social media 
networks have been growing in popularity in part due to the 
increased affordability and proliferation of internet enabled 
devices that bring social connectivity through personal 
computers, mobile devices, and internet tablets [12]. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Boyd and Ellison [13] describe online social networks as 
services that enable individuals to “construct a public or 
semi-public profile within a bounded system”, to “articulate 
a list of other users with whom they share a connection”, and 
to “view and traverse their list of connections and those 
made by others within the system”. Aggarwal [12] states that 
social networks can be generalized as “information 
networks, in which the nodes could compromise either actors 
or entities, and the edges denote the relationship between 
them”. Online social networks are rich in data and provide 
unprecedented opportunities for knowledge discovery and 
data mining. From this perspective, there are two primary 
TABLE I.  
A TAXONOMY OF PRIVACY 
A Taxonomy of Privacy 
Information Collection 
Surveillance 
The watching, listening to, or recording of an 
individual’s activities 
Interrogation 
Various forms of questioning or probing for 
information 
Information Processing 
Aggregation 
The combination of various pieces of data about 
and individual 
Identification 
The linking of information to a particular 
individual 
Insecurity 
Carelessness in protecting stored information from 
leaks and improper access 
Secondary Use 
The use of collected information for a purpose 
different from the use for which it was collected 
without the data subject’s consent 
Exclusion 
The failure to allow data subjects to know about 
the data that others have about them and participate 
in its handling and use 
Information Dissemination 
Breach of 
confidentiality 
Breaking a promise to keep a person’s information 
confidential 
Disclosure 
The revelation of truthful information about a 
person that affects the way others judge his or her 
reputation 
Exposure 
Revealing another's nudity, grief, or bodily 
functions 
Increased 
accessibility 
Amplifying the accessibility of information 
Blackmail 
The threat to disclose personal information 
Appropriation 
The use of the data subject's identity to serve 
another's aims and interests 
Distortion 
Disseminating false or misleading information 
about individuals 
Invasions 
Intrusion 
Invasive acts that disturb one's tranquility or 
solitude 
Decisional 
interference 
Incursions into the data subject's decisions 
regarding her private affairs 
 
social network data types. The first type is linkage-based 
structural data and the second is content-based data. In 
relation to privacy, Aggarwal highlights three types of 
disclosure: 
 
[S]ocial networks contain tremendous information about 
the individual in terms of their interests, demographic 
information, friendship link information, and other 
attributes. This can lead to disclosure of different kinds of 
information in the social network, such as identity 
disclosure, attribute  
disclosure, 
and 
linkage 
information disclosure. [12] 
 
From a more structural perspective, Bruce Schneier [14] 
proposed that social network data can be divided into six 
categories (see Table II). Hart and Johnson [15] noted that 
Schneier’s taxonomy highlights three primary sources 
through which information can be disseminated: through the 
users themselves, through other individuals, or through 
inference. In regard to privacy, all three of these sources can 
lead to privacy compromises. A similar structured view of 
data is also shared by Facebook [16] in its published data use 
policy. 
TABLE II.  
TYPES OF SOCIAL NETWORK DATA 
Types of Social Network Data 
Service Data 
Data users give to a social networking site in 
order to use it 
Disclosed Data 
What users post on their own pages 
Entrusted Data 
What users post on other people's pages 
Incidental Data 
What other people post about a user 
Behavioral Data 
Data the site collects about user habits by 
recording what users do and who users do it with 
Derived Data 
Information about users that is derived from all 
the other data 
C. Information Quality 
Information quality (also known as data quality) is a 
multidisciplinary field with research spanning a wide range 
of topics, but existing researchers are primarily operating in 
the disciplines of Management Information Systems and 
Computers Science [17]. Within quality literature, the 
concept of “fitness for use” has been widely adopted as a 
definition for data quality [5][17]-[20]. But in order to be 
applicable, this definition of fitness for use needs to be 
contextualized [5]. In this regard, previous writings and 
research have presented data quality as a multi-dimensional 
concept [17]-[21]. 
In 1996, Wang and Strong published a hierarchical 
framework to capture the multi-dimensional aspects of 
information quality that are most important to data 
consumers [19]. This research was presented in application 
by Strong, Lee and Wang in “Data Quality in Context” the 
following year [20]. Since that time, their framework has 
been widely cited in information quality literature. The 
Wang Strong Quality Framework [19] contains four 
categories of data quality: Intrinsic DQ, Contextual DQ, 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Representational DQ, and Accessibility DQ. These four 
categories contain fifteen data quality dimensions (see Table 
III). 
TABLE III.  
WANG STRONG QUALITY FRAMEWORK 
DQ Category 
DQ Dimensions 
Intrinsic DQ 
Accuracy, Objectivity, Believability, 
Reputation 
Accessibility DQ 
Accessibility, Access Security 
Contextual DQ 
Relevancy, Value-Added, Timeliness, 
Completeness, Amount of Data 
Representational DQ 
Interpretability, Ease of Understanding, 
Concise Representation, Consistent 
Representation 
D. Trust 
Trust, like privacy and quality, is a widely studied 
concept across multiple disciplines. This has led to the 
development of a broad array of definitions and 
understandings of trust over time [22]-[26]. Marsh [22] 
highlighted that trust values have no units, but can still be 
measured by such notions as ‘worthwhileness’ and ‘intrinsic 
value’. At the same time, trust is an absolute medium in 
which one either trusts or does not trust. This implies that 
trust in application is based on threshold values above which 
or below which an entity is either trusted or not trusted as 
seen in Fig. 1. These thresholds will also vary with different 
entities and in different circumstances. In a similar manner, 
Kosa [27] noted that “[t]rust can be examined as a 
continuous measure, as in evaluation or reliability 
assessments, or a binary decision point when referring to a 
decision”. 
Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman [28] strove to differentiate 
trust from other related constructs. They presented an 
integrative model of organizational trust. Within this 
research, they expanded upon the characteristics of a trustee 
and presented a concept of perceived trustworthiness. The 
identified characteristics, or primary factors, of perceived 
trustworthiness they presented are Ability, Benevolence, and 
Integrity. In this, Ability relates to the skills, characteristics, 
and competencies that enable someone to have influence 
with a specific domain. Benevolence is related to the level of 
goodwill a trustee is believed to have toward a trustor. 
Integrity relates to how a trustee is perceived to adhere to an 
acceptable set of principles. The authors proposed that “trust 
for a trustee will be a function of the trustee's perceived 
ability, benevolence, and integrity and of the trustor's 
propensity to trust”. They further noted that, while related, 
these three attributes are separable and may vary 
independently of one another.  
Gefen [26] drew on concept of trustworthiness presented 
by Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman to develop a validated 
scale specifically related to online consumer trust. The 
results of his research showed that each of the aspects of 
trustworthiness as tested against online behavioral intentions 
is different. This may suggest that each of the three aspects 
of trustworthiness “affect different behavioral intentions 
because 
different 
beliefs 
affect 
different 
types 
of 
vulnerability”. 
Gefen’s 
research 
also 
illustrated 
the 
measurability of aspects such as trust in regard to 
interactions in an online domain. This is important to the 
research at hand. 
 
 
Figure 1 - Positive and Negative Thresholds for Trust [22] 
 
In specific regard to social networks, Adali et al. [29] 
highlighted that trust also has a major role in the formation 
of social network communities, in assessing information 
quality and credibility, and in following how information 
moves within a network. They further noted the social 
mechanisms of trust formation in online communities are a 
new research area and there are many unknowns. 
E. Interdependencies 
Prior research presented by Bertini [5] begins to 
highlight the interdependencies between data privacy, trust, 
and information quality. If quality is defined as fitness for 
use and accuracy, reliability, and trustworthiness are key 
aspects of high quality data, then “high quality data require 
data subjects to disclose personal information raising some 
threat to their own privacy”. Bertini, citing Rose (2001), 
Hoffman et al. (1999), Neus (2000), and Hui et al. (2006), 
noted that “studies reveal that data subjects often provide 
incorrect information or withdraw from interaction when 
they consider the risks of disclosing personal data higher 
than the reward they can get from it”. As stated previously, 
control is a key aspect in several conceptualizations and 
definitions of privacy. Bertini emphasized that lack of 
control leads to increased concern over “unauthorized 
secondary use, excessive collection of data, improper access 
and processing or storing errors”. Citing research by Gefen 
(2002), Paine et al. (2006), and Hoffman et al. (1999), 
Bertini built on the concept that “[d]ata subjects’ level of 
trust determine both the quantity and the quality of 
information they disclose” by presenting the relationship 
between privacy and data quality as a trust mediated 
process. Bertini noted that the concept of benevolence as 
presented by Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman is a central trust 
factor in that both trustee and trustors need to believe that 
the other is sincere, otherwise data sharing processes 
breakdown or become cumbersome. He believed that giving 
users control and allowing them to interact with their data, 
especially dynamic data, will both increase trust and 
spontaneously improve data quality. Conversely, when 
privacy or control is threatened, it causes a loss of trust, 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

which leads to an immediate decrease in the quality of data 
being disclosed. 
Kosa [27] stated that “research on privacy and trust as 
linked phenomena remains scarce”. She noted that the 
formalization of trust is much more mature than the 
formalization of privacy and proposed that because of their 
conceptual similarities formalization concepts developed in 
relation to trust could be utilized in the formalization of 
privacy. Kosa highlights that both trust and privacy are 
highly information type and sensitivity specific, relationship 
dependent, purpose driven, and measured on a continuous 
scale. In example of the application of trust formalizations 
to privacy, she diagramed, as seen in Fig. 2, proposed 
thresholds for privacy based on the trust threshold detailed 
by Marsh [22]. 
 
 
Figure 2 - Proposed Thresholds for Privacy [27] 
 
Further, Kosa presented trust as positively correlated to 
privacy, but privacy as negatively related to trust. She stated 
that “Perceptions of trustworthiness may increase the 
tendency of people to share information willingly, thus 
giving up their privacy” but the “exercise of privacy may 
impede trust; if [one chooses] to withhold information, 
about for example, [his] identity the second party is less 
likely to trust [him] in the given exchange”. This seems 
counter to the privacy/trust view presented by Bertini [5] 
above, but it is really a reflection on the relationship of 
different dimensions between trust and privacy. 
For this research, the interdependency between trust, 
privacy, and information quality as well as the multi-
dimensional nature of these concepts highlighted in this 
section are key foundations. These concepts will be extended 
in specific relation to online social network sites with a focus 
on modeling data privacy and measuring the corresponding 
trade-offs in information quality and/or trust. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The research will contain three components that build 
upon each other. The first will be the development and 
validation of select relationship matrices for data privacy, 
online social network data, trust, and information quality as a 
research framework. The second will be the development of 
a syntax and conceptual model as a standard way to 
document the trust, privacy, and information quality aspects 
within online social networks. Finally, a structural equation 
model will be developed to measure and validate expected 
information quality modifications as a reaction to calculated 
privacy risks based on data elements of different data types, 
content sensitivity, and data visibility. While these 
components can be generalized across multiple online social 
networks, for this research, when analyzing online social 
networks, Facebook will be used as a primary reference 
because of the size and activity levels of its user base. 
A. Framework Matrix 
This research will focus on the general overlap of the 
multi-faceted dimensions, aspects, and properties of trust, 
privacy, information quality, and online social networks. It 
seeks to identify where these areas overlap both in regard to 
online social networks and to each other. This phase of the 
research hypothesizes that: 
 
1) The multi-faceted dimensions, aspects, and properties 
of trust, privacy, and information quality can be 
effectively overlaid within a series of related matrices. 
 
2) An understanding of intersections of these sub-aspects 
lends itself to a broader understanding of the relationship 
of these concepts. 
 
3) An understanding of intersections of these sub-aspects 
lends itself to specific target areas for future research. 
 
As a starting point for this research, a framework matrix 
has been developed to map the points of intersection between 
Solove’s [6] taxonomy of privacy, Schneier’s [14] divisions 
of social network data, Wang and Strong’s [19] multiple 
dimensions of information quality, and the trustworthiness 
characteristics of Ability, Benevolence, and Integrity as 
presented by Mayer et al. [28] and Gefen [26]. As noted 
above, the development and validation of select relationship 
matrices 
for 
data privacy, 
online social networks, 
information quality, and trust as a research framework will 
be the first deliverable from this research. This will be 
accomplished in part through a validation in current 
literature. Hogben [31], for example, highlighted specific 
online social network privacy threats that include digital 
dossier aggregation, secondary data collection, recognition 
and identification, data permanence, infiltration of networks, 
profile squatting and ID theft related reputation slander, and 
cyberstalking/cyberbullying. These can be shown to align 
neatly with the proposed privacy components within the 
framework matrix. In addition, a select survey of information 
quality, online social network, and privacy related 
professionals and experts whose opinions will be gathered 
and reconciled. 
B. Syntax and Conceptual Modeling 
In regard to modeling privacy in social networks, one 
general approach is the mapping of entity level social graph 
connections of the network. This high level node and edge 
view is the most common social graph view. This approach 
visualizes the issue, but focuses on privacy at the level of 
overall connections. A second approach presented by Lui 
and Terzi [32] and others is the calculation of mathematical 
data element level and entity level privacy scores. This is a 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

more detailed approach focused on the numeric scoring of 
data privacy. The concepts of Lui and Terzi were an early 
influence on the development of this syntax. This research 
gives the opportunity to blend previous research into an 
expanded approach. This is done by developing a method to 
model the data privacy of specific data elements that can 
then be incorporated in the future into trade-off scoring 
research. This method may also lend itself in future research 
to the creation of elemental data privacy social graphs which 
will allow for the visualization of actual data sharing, not 
just entity level connections. 
The second key aspect of this research is to develop a 
syntax and conceptual model as a standard way to document 
the trust, privacy, and information quality aspects within 
online social networks. This phase of the research 
hypothesizes that: 
 
1) Instances of trust, privacy, and information quality 
interactions can be expressed at the data element level in 
notation sets expressing element, users, privacy, trust, 
and quality components. 
 
2) Instances of trust, privacy, and information quality 
interactions can be expressed at the data element level as 
a conceptual model. 
 
A further research question, if these hypotheses hold 
true, is whether this be implemented in a way that can 
aggregate 
to 
an 
overall 
user 
level 
notation 
and 
conceptualization. This research will seek to validate these 
hypotheses through illustration of the conceptual model 
using synthetic and real world examples as well as 
validation by extension through structural equation 
modeling. To control for scope, this research will focus on 
the user controlled social sharing aspects of online social 
network information such as Disclosed, Entrusted, and 
Incidental data rather than organizational (system and third 
party) aspects such as Behavioral, Derived, and Service 
data. In this regard, the following syntax structures are being 
proposed as a concept to be further developed in this 
research. 
For disclosed data elements that users post on their own 
pages, the most apparent privacy aspect is the visibility level 
of the data element set by the users’ privacy settings. 
Visibility levels are typically set by users’ overall privacy 
settings or by specific selection when posting a data 
element. One research question related to this is how trust 
and information quality are related to a users’ determination 
of visibility related privacy settings. This syntax follows the 
form of Disclosed Data as D1(J1, PJ1) where D1 = 
Disclosed Data Element with a descriptive set of J1 = 
Posting Entity and PJ1 = User Privacy Factors. 
For entrusted data elements that users post on other 
people’s pages, there are two main privacy considerations 
related to the visibility level of the data element. The first is 
the posting entity’s own privacy settings. The second is the 
receiving entity’s privacy settings. Generally, the posting 
entity’s privacy settings are the controlling factor in regard 
to data visibility. This syntax follows the form of Entrusted 
Data as E1(J1, J2, PJ1, PJ2) where E1 = Entrusted Data 
Element with a descriptive set of J1 = Posting Entity, J2 = 
Receiving Entity, PJ1 = Privacy Factors of the Posting 
Entity, and PJ2 = Privacy Factors of the Receiving Entity. 
For incidental data elements that users post about others, 
there are also two main privacy considerations. As with 
entrusted data, the first consideration is the Posting Entity’s 
own privacy settings. This most typically relates to the 
visibility of the data element. The second consideration is the 
exclusion factor of the Topic Entity. A Topic Entity is the 
person, group, or thing which is the subject of a posted data 
element. Exclusion relates to the level of control and 
involvement a user has in regard to information that is shared 
about or actions taken that affect him or her. Within online 
social networks, this relates to whether or not the incidental 
data element is directly linked, often through tagging, to the 
Topic Entity. Topic Entities can often reduce visibility of 
shared data by preventing tagging or removing tags on 
incidental data elements, but preventing tagging will increase 
a user’s exclusion factor because the user will be less likely 
to be directly linked and therefore will not be notified when 
incidental data is posted. In addition, while a user can reduce 
visibility by blocking or removing user tags, he or she 
usually cannot prevent the comments or references 
themselves from being made by other users. Because of this 
lack of control, the trustworthiness characteristic of 
benevolence plays an important role in incidental data. This 
syntax follows the form of Incidental Data as I1(J1, J3, PJ1, 
EJ3) where I1 = Incidental Data Element with a descriptive 
set of J1 = Posting Entity, J3 = Topic Entity, PJ1 = Privacy 
Factors for the Posting Entity, and EJ3 = Exclusion factor of 
Topic Entity. 
In expansion of this syntax, an important question to be 
addressed in this research is whether and how quality and 
trust components such as Q1 as Data Element Quality, 
TJ1J2/TJ1Jx as Relational Trust between Entities, and TS as 
System Trust can be incorporated directly into this model 
syntax. This will need to be developed to facilitate 
comparative measurement of trade-offs between data 
privacy, information quality, and trust. This syntax could 
follow the form of Entrusted Data with Trust and Quality as 
E1(J1, J2, PJ1, PJ2, TS, TJ1J2, TJ1Jx, QE1) where E1 = 
Entrusted Data Element with a descriptive set of J1 = Posting 
Entity, J2 = Receiving Entity, PJ1 = Privacy Factors for the 
Posting Entity, PJ2 = Privacy Factors for the Receiving 
Entity, TS = System Trust, TJ1J2 = Relational Trust between 
Posting and Receiving Entities (subset of TJ1Jx), TJ1Jx = 
Relational Trust between Connected Entities, and QE1 = Set 
of Data Element Information Quality Factors (see Fig. 3). 
C. Structural Equation Modeling 
The goal of the comparative scoring component of this 
research is to tie the conceptual modeling syntax back to 
information quality, trust, and data privacy relationships 
identified in the framework matrices in the first research 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

PJ1
QE1
PJ2
J2
E1
J1
TS
TJ1J2
TJ1Jx
SubGroups 
of Friends
All Friends
Friends of Friends
Network
Public
User
or
or
or
or
or
Visibility Levels
 
Figure 3 - Data Privacy Modeling of Entrusted Data with Trust and Quality 
 
component. This will have a strong research impact through 
the creation of a comparative mathematical model of data 
privacy attributes, information quality dimensions, and trust 
characteristics. This research phase will develop a structural 
equation model to measure and validate expected 
information quality modifications as a reaction to calculated 
risks based on data elements of different data types, content 
sensitivity, and data visibility. Previous research showed the 
benefit of structural equation models in the development and 
validation of the Internet Users' Information Privacy 
Concerns [33] and User Privacy Concerns and Identity in 
OSNs [34] constructs. This research will also use structural 
equation modeling to extend and build upon those concepts. 
Malhotra, Kim, and Agarwal [33] developed the Internet 
Users' Information Privacy Concerns (IUIPC) construct 
based on the extension of personal dispositions to data 
collection, privacy control, and privacy awareness to beliefs 
regarding trust and risk and how those beliefs affected 
behavioral intention in regard to Internet usage. This 
proposed research will extend the IUIPC casual model to 
online social network specific contextual variables of varied 
data element type and data sensitivity. It will also incorporate 
aspects of information quality modification rather than 
utilize the direct share/not share behavioral intention utilized 
by Malhotra, Kim, and Agarwal. 
Krasnova, Günther, Spiekermann, and Koroleva [34] 
developed a model for Privacy Concerns and Identity in 
Online Social Networks (PCIOSN). This cross-discipline 
research comes more from the social sciences and is 
developed through a social identity disclosure perspective. 
They argue that while IUIPC has been widely utilized these 
applications are lacking because “OSN members are subject 
to the specific privacy-related risks rooted in the public and 
social nature of OSNs”. They further noted that in terms of 
primary privacy concerns individuals differentiate between 
online social network users and provider or third-party 
organizations. Their research model has a degree of overlap 
with the proposed framework matrix found in this research. 
It is based on specific privacy concerns affecting the amount, 
accuracy, and control aspects of shared information. This 
research will extend their model to directly map specific 
privacy and trust aspects from the framework matrix into the 
threat components of the PCIOSN model. The proposed 
research will also specifically map dimensions of individual 
self-disclosure [34] to specific IQ dimensions, as well as 
incorporate other relevant IQ dimensions, from the proposed 
framework matrix. Of additional research interest is whether 
or not the IUIPC and PCIOSN models can be incorporated 
into a single view through the modeling aspects of this 
research. This research hypothesizes that: 
 
1) Behavioral intent to share information is not a simple 
binary response. Instead it is a degree based response that 
uses information quality modification to mitigate privacy 
and trust concerns between the thresholds of open 
disclosure and full non-disclosure (see Fig. 4). 
 
2) Data element types (wall posts, photos, comments, 
shares, likes, check-ins, etc.) have measurably different 
thresholds for content sensitivity. 
 
3) Completeness, Accuracy, Accessibility, Amount, 
Understandability, and similar quality dimensions of 
shared information are negatively related to calculated 
privacy and trust concerns as a modification control. 
 
Non-Disclosure Threshold
Degrees of Information 
Quality Modification
Total Amount of
Information Disclosure
Open Disclosure Threshold
Higher IQ
Lower IQ
 
Figure 4 - Initial Information Quality Modification Concept 
 
Hypothesis 1 is an extension of Marsh’s Positive and 
Negative Thresholds for Trust [22] and Kosa’s Proposed 
Thresholds for Privacy [27] as applied to information 
quality. It should also be noted that any modification of 
Accessibility IQ dimension mitigates privacy and trust 
concerns by changing the visibility of a given piece of 
information rather than changing the shared information 
itself. As with the second research component, this research 
will be confined to specific data elements within selected 
social network data types to control for scope. It will focus 
first on the user controlled social sharing aspect of Disclosed 
data, but may easily extend to Incidental and Entrusted data 
in future research. Specific trust characteristics, information 
quality dimensions and data privacy aspects will be selected. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

For these selected attributes, measurable indicators within 
online social networks will be identified and corresponding 
variables and questions for metrics and measurement will be 
determined. Structural equation modeling will be utilized as 
a method for measuring the balance trade-offs present 
between specific trust characteristics, information quality 
dimensions and data privacy aspects. 
IV. 
CURRENT RESULTS 
This paper presents in process doctoral dissertation 
research. To this point, the relationship matrices for data 
privacy, online social networks, information quality, and 
trust as a research framework have been developed and a 
corresponding validation survey has been created but not yet 
implemented. Furthermore, an initial syntax for conceptual 
modeling has been presented. Currently, elements of the 
proposed structural equation model and its required survey 
as a validation instrument are under development. 
The developed framework matrices are presented in full 
in Appendices A-D, but as noted in the Section III, only 
syntax for conceptual modeling of Disclosed, Entrusted, and 
Incidental data has been developed. This framework matrix 
subset is presented in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
FRAMEWORK MATRIX SUBSET 
 
 
Table IV illustrates several key factors. First, intersection 
points of the matrix may highlight different or similar 
aspects of privacy, trust, and information quality. 
Differentiations are shown for only data privacy issues in 
this subset, but they can be seen more readily in the full 
framework matrix presented in Appendix A. Second, related 
social sharing aspects of online social network information 
such as the user controlled areas of Disclosed, Entrusted, 
and Incidental data will be more similar to each other than 
to organizational (system and third party) aspects such as 
Behavioral, Derived, and Service data. It should also be 
noted that aspects as currently presented in the matrix 
intersection points are not in any specific rank order. Even 
when similar aspects are presented, those aspects may have 
different levels of importance based on the social 
networking data type being researched. Finally, the dotted 
lines found in the data privacy grids for Entrusted and 
Incidental data are there to indicate distinctions between 
data privacy violations that may happen to a user and data 
privacy violations that a user may cause to happen to others.  
V. 
CHALLENGES, LIMITATIONS, AND LOOKING AHEAD 
This research faces several challenges and limitations. 
First, while a broad framework matrix can be presented, the 
scope for validation and deeper research will be limited to 
social network data types that relate to user specific aspects 
of the framework matrix. The role of provider and third-party 
related online social network data types are highly 
noteworthy, but they will be addressed in only a limited 
manner, if at all, in this research. Second, to limit scope 
during the development of a syntax and conceptual model, 
not all variations of data element types and entity 
interactions will be addressed. Once again, in order to 
control research scope, the focus will be on select user 
specific aspects of the framework matrix as well as a targeted 
set of matrix overlays. This series of scope limitations is 
detailed more specifically within the Methodology section of 
this paper.  
Challenges for this research may include determining and 
attracting a diverse set of respondents to create a 
representative population in phase three of this study. For 
measurements within structural equation modeling to be 
considered valid certain minimum respondent thresholds 
need to be met based on the number of components within 
the model. In addition, structural equation modeling analysis 
requires the identification of alternate models. Because of the 
dynamics of social networks, identifying all alternative 
models may be difficult. Further, finding field experts 
willing to participate in the framework matrix validation 
survey may also be difficult, but since only a small number 
are required it may be a challenge that is more easily 
overcome. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Blake, N. Agarwal, R. Wigand, and J. Wood, “Twitter Quo Vadis: 
Is Twitter Bitter or are Tweets Sweet?” The Seventh International 
Conference on Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG), 
2010, pp. 1257-1260. 
[2] 
K. Borcea-Pfitzmann, A. Pfitzmann, and M. Berg, “Privacy 3.0 := 
Data Minimization + User Control + Contextual Integrity,” it - 
Information Technology, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 34-40, 2011. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://tu-dresden.de/Members/katrin.borcea-
pfitzmann/ 2016.07.16 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[3] 
J. Zittrain, The Future of the Internet - And How to Stop it, New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008.  
[4] 
F. S. Lane, American Privacy: The 400-Year History of our Most 
Contested Right, Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 2009. 
[5] 
P. Bertini, “Trust Me! Explaining the Relationship Between Privacy 
and Data Quality,” Information Technology and Innovation Trend in 
Organization, 
2010. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://www.cersi.it/itais2010/ 2016.07.16 
[6] 
D. J. Solove, Understanding Privacy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2008.  
[7] 
H. F. Nissenbaum, Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy, and the 
Integrity of Social Life. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
2010.  
[8] 
H. Nissenbaum, Privacy as contextual integrity. Washington Law 
Review, vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 101-139, 2004. Available from 
http://www.nyu.edu/projects/nissenbaum/main_cv.html#pub 
2016.07.16  
[9] 
D. H. Holtzman, Privacy Lost: How Technology is Endangering Your 
Privacy, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2006.  
[10] B. Rössler (Ed.), Privacies: Philosophical Evaluations, Stanford, 
Calif: Stanford University Press, 2004. 
[11] N. Agarwal, Types of Social Media, lecture presented for Social 
Media Mining and Analytics course at the University of Arkansas at 
Little Rock, Feb. 2011. 
[12] C. C. Aggarwal, Social Network Data Analytics, New York: 
Springer, 2011. 
[13] D. M. boyd and N. B. Ellison, “Social Network Sites: Definition, 
History, 
and 
Scholarship,” 
Journal 
of 
Computer-Mediated 
Communication, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 210-230, 2008. 
[14] B. Schneier, “A Taxonomy of Social Networking Data,” IEEE 
Security & Privacy Magazine, vol. 8, no. 4, p. 88, 2010, doi: 
10.1109/MSP.2010.118  
[15] M. Hart and R. Johnson, “Prevention and Reaction: Defending 
Privacy in the Web 2.0,” 2010. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.w3.org/2010/policy-ws/papers/04-Hart-stonybrook.pdf 
2016.07.16 
[16] Facebook, 
Data 
Policy, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.facebook.com/about/privacy/your-info 2016.07.16 
[17] S. E. Madnick, R. Y. Wang, Y. W. Lee, and H. Zhu, “Overview and 
Framework for Data and Information Quality Research,” Journal of 
Data and Information Quality, vol. 1, pp. 2:1-2:22, 2009. 
[18] C. Fisher, E. Lauria, S. Chengalur-Smith, R. Wang, Introduction to 
Information Quality, M.I.T. Information Quality Program, 2006  
[19] R. Y. Wang and D. M. Strong, “Beyond Accuracy: What Data 
Quality Means to Data Consumers,” Journal of Management 
Information Systems, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 5-33, 1996. 
[20] D. M. Strong, Y. W. Lee, and R. Y. Wang, “Data Quality in 
Context,” Commun. ACM, vol. 40, pp. 103-110, May 1997.  
[21] L. L. Pipino, Y. W. Lee, and R. Y. Wang, “Data Quality 
Assessment,” Commun. ACM, vol. 45, pp. 211-218, Apr. 2002. 
[22] S. 
P. 
Marsh, 
Formalising 
Trust 
as 
a 
Computational 
Concept, unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Stirling, 
1994. [Online]. Available from: https://dspace.stir.ac.uk/ 2016.07.16  
[23] C. D. Schultz, “A Trust Framework Model for Situational Contexts,” 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on Privacy, 
Security and Trust: Bridge the Gap between PST Technologies and 
Business Services (PST '06), New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pp. 
50:1-50:7. 
[24] D. McKnight and N. Chervany, “Conceptualizing Trust: A Typology 
and E-commerce Customer Relationships Model,” Proceedings of the 
34th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
2001, p. 10. 
[25] A. Gutowska, Research in Online Trust: Trust Taxonomy as a Multi-
Dimensional Model, Technical Report, School of Computing and 
Information Technology, University of Wolverhampton, 2007.  
[26] D. Gefen, “Reflections on the Dimensions of Trust and 
Trustworthiness Among Online Consumers,” SIGMIS Database, vol. 
33, pp. 38-53, 2002. 
[27] T. Kosa, “Vampire Bats: Trust in Privacy,”  Eighth Annual 
International Conference on Privacy Security and Trust (PST), 2010, 
pp. 96-102, doi: 10.1109/PST.2010.5593227. 
[28] R. C. Mayer, J. H. Davis, and F. D. Schoorman, “An Integrative 
Model of Organizational Trust,” The Academy of Management 
Review, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 709-734, 1995. 
[29] S. Adali, R. Escriva, M. K. Goldberg, M. Hayvanovych, M. Magdon-
Ismail, B. K. Szymanski, and G. Williams, “Measuring Behavioral 
Trust in Social Networks,” 2010 IEEE International Conference on 
Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 2010, pp. 150-152.  
[30] D. L. Hoffman, T. P. Novak, and M. Peralta, “Building Consumer 
Trust Online,” Commun. ACM, vol. 42, pp. 80-85, Apr. 1999.  
[31] G. Hogben (Ed.), ENISA Position Paper No. 1: Security Issues and 
Recommendations for Online Social Networks, European Network 
and Information Security Agency, Nov. 2007. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/archive/security-
issues-and-recommendations-for-online-social-networks 2016.07.16 
[32] K. Liu and E. Terzi, “A Framework for Computing the Privacy 
Scores of Users in Online Social Networks,” Ninth IEEE 
International Conference on  Data Mining (ICDM '09), 2009, pp. 288-
297, doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2009.21. 
[33] N. K. Malhotra, S. S. Kim, and J. Agarwal, “Internet Users' 
Information Privacy Concerns (IUIPC): The Construct, the Scale, and 
a Causal Model,” Information Systems Research, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 
336-355, 2004. doi: 10.1287/isre.1040.0032. 
[34] H. Krasnova, O. Günther, S. Spiekermann, S., and K. Koroleva, 
“Privacy Concerns and Identity in Online Social Networks,” Identity 
in the Information Society, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 39-63, 2009, doi: DOI 
10.1007/s12394-009.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

APPENDIX A - FRAMEWORK MATRIX: INFORMATION QUALITY, DATA PRIVACY, AND TRUST IN SOCIAL MEDIA NETWORKS 
APPENDIX B - FRAMEWORK MATRIX: DATA PRIVACY AND INFORMATION QUALITY 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

APPENDIX C - FRAMEWORK MATRIX: DATA PRIVACY AND TRUST 
APPENDIX D - FRAMEWORK MATRIX: TRUST AND INFORMATION QUALITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

