Remote Anger Management Support using Mobile Technology 
An Android Phone Application for persons with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
 
Schmer-Galunder, Sonja 
 Smart Information Flow Technologies (SIFT)  
Minneapolis, USA 
e-mail: sgalunder@sift.net 
Wu, Peggy 
Smart Information Flow Technologies (SIFT) 
Minneapolis, USA 
e-mail: pwu@sift.net 
 
Keller, Peter 
 Smart Information Flow Technologies (SIFT) 
Minneapolis, USA 
e-mail: pkeller@sift.net 
Sayer, Nina 
Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical Center (MVAMC) 
Minneapolis, USA 
e-mail: ninaileen@gmail.com
Abstract— Continuous Anger Level Monitoring (CALM) is a 
prototype for Android smartphones addressing the needs of 
persons with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or 
emotion/impulse control problems. The application combines 
physiological 
monitoring 
and 
evidence-based 
group 
psychotherapy (Anger Management Therapy, developed by 
O’Reilly and Shopshire). CALM allows the recording of highly 
emotional and stressful events and for monitoring of these 
events by remote therapists. The system helps identify 
undesirable response behaviors and patterns by creating 
awareness around one's own behaviors, triggers and coping 
strategies.  The application integrates with the Zephyr 
BioHarness BT belt to allow for continues physiological 
monitoring, biofeedback and Respiratory Sinus Arrhythmia 
(RSA) breathing exercises.  
Keywords: Mobile Mental Health Application, Biofeedback, 
PTSD, Remote Monitoring, Cognitive Control of Emotions, 
Anger Management Therapy, Virtual Avatars. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Each of us has, at one point or another, experienced 
difficulty 
feeling, 
processing 
or 
expressing 
anger 
appropriately. For some of us, however—particularly 
returning veterans attempting to reintegrate into civilian life, 
sometimes with co-morbidities such as Post Traumatic Stress 
Disorder (PTSD)—the problem is so serious as to be 
debilitating ([1], [2], [3], [4]).  Studies have associated anger 
with hyper-arousal symptoms like sleep problems, being “on 
guard”, irritability and difficulty concentrating and as a 
common symptom of PTSD.  Anger is a reaction to 
perceived environmental threat and a warning sign that 
consists of 3 components: physical sensations (i.e., increased 
heart rate), cognitive (i.e., perceived unfairness) and 
behavioral expressions of anger (i.e., slam a door). We 
developed a tool that can facilitate and enhance clinical 
practice in the treatment of anger control issues. Effective 
treatment of anger in veterans has to address all components 
of anger - physiology, destructive thinking patterns and 
behavioral change. The only form of treatment addressing 
these issues and currently offered at VAs throughout the 
country is “Anger Management Therapy” developed by 
Patrick Reilly and Michael Shopshire [5]. The Minneapolis 
VA Medical Center Mental and Behavioral Health Patient 
Service Line offers this group based treatment to all Veterans 
with anger dysregulation who have been clinically 
determined to be able to benefit from this treatment. It is a 
12-session manualized intervention that uses Cognitive 
Behavioral Therapy (CBT) techniques to teach patients to 
monitor their anger and identify triggers and cues as well as 
develop coping strategies and skills.  
CALM not only integrates evidence-based therapy 
specifically targeting “anger”, but also remote physiological 
monitoring. The completely wireless collection (via the 
Zephyr BioHarness BT3 belt), analysis and storage of 
physiological data in a single application allows for 
unobtrusive real-time tracking. In particular, CALM looks at 
heart rate variability (HRV) because 1) HRV is an excellent 
marker for cognitive control of emotions [6] and 2) HRV 
biofeedback in Respiratory Sinus Arrhythmia (RSA) 
breathing exercises has been shown to reduce symptoms of 
PTSD [7], chronic stress and anger [8].  
CALM is a smart phone application specifically designed 
to be integrated with ongoing Anger Management Therapy, 
addressing all components of anger and hostility. The system 
also provides completely new ways to facilitate and enhance 
communication and therapeutic work between patients and 
providers. With CALM we are introducing a well-defined 
prototype with detailed specifications able to address post-
deployment mental health problems and ready to be used for 
clinical testing. Finally, CALM is not only a phone 
application, but a patient-therapist system that allows 
tracking of a number of treatment efficacy and performance 
metrics in a simple, timesaving, user-friendly and easily 
modifiable way. 
  
The application provides, for example, an interface for 
patients to record and track anger events, create awareness 
of cues and triggers and identify personal coping strategies. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

Furthermore, the application enhances existing Anger 
Management Therapy by providing feedback (general and 
specific visualizations of recorded metrics) and motivation 
(personalization 
of 
application, 
avatars, 
etc.). 
Most 
importantly, CALM provides a meeting point for therapists 
and patients, allowing common reviews of subjective and 
objective measures indicative of changes to mental health 
and personal progress.   
In this paper we will explain the overall structure of the 
system and its components, i.e. evidence-based therapy, the 
integration of remotely monitored physiological measures 
and a socially intelligent avatar (section II.), as well as the 
various functions the application is able to perform (section 
III.). We will end this paper with the conclusions section 
(IV.).  
II. 
OVERALL SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
 Only two hardware components are needed in order to 
provide full functionality to the patient: 1) a mobile phone 
(to date, we have implemented versions for Android) with 
installed CALM application, and 2) a physiological 
monitoring belt (for example, BioHarness BT by Zephyr) 
with the ability to transfer Bluetooth data between the phone 
and the monitoring belt.  
The data transfer happens between the phone and the 
monitoring belt; the application transforms the data to 
provide easy-to-use readings of physiological indicators of 
mental health and also provides real-time biofeedback if 
patients choose to do a breathing exercise. Patients, on the 
other hand, are asked to provide subjective inputs of well-
being by answering a few questions. Both objective and 
subjective metrics are presented back to patients. These 
metrics can also be shared with a therapist. Figure 1. shows 
the components required for the CALM application and the 
information flow between monitoring device, mobile phone 
application, patient and clinician. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  CALM System Architecture 
A. Evidence-based Therapy 
A number of evidence-based therapies address the needs 
of post-deployment mental health issues. These include: 
trauma 
desensitization, 
hypnotherapy, 
psychodynamic 
therapy, image exposure, cognitive restructuring, eye 
movement desensitization and reprocessing, biofeedback-
assisted relaxation, exposure therapy, stress inoculation 
training, wait-list control condition, individual or group 
CBT, and possibly other forms. However, CALM’s approach 
focuses on the following criteria:  
 
• Integration 
with 
physiological 
monitoring 
and 
biofeedback options 
• The ability to provide help remotely  
•  Specific needs of patients with anger/stress/emotion 
control issues 
• Allows integration with final application and meets 
technical requirements 
 
Given these criteria, we decided that Anger Management 
Therapy (AMT) is most suitable to integrate with our 
system. AMT provides a conceptual framework for 
addressing specific and concrete emotional states along with 
strategies for coping with the inability to control emotions 
(anger), which is the primary symptom among our patient 
population. The therapy’s manual and workbook are suitable 
for easy integration with biofeedback and physiological 
monitoring in a phone application.  
Specific enhancements that CALM can provide over 
paper-based delivery of AMT are summarized in Table 1.  
 
TABLE I. BENEFITS OF CALM 
 
While the workbook is divided into several sessions 
where patients learn about the causes and effects of anger, 
our application has adapted and enhanced the most important 
features that patients will need throughout the course of 
therapy. For example, an “Anger Meter,” a way to visualize 
anger levels, is similar to our idea of the “CALMeter,” a way 
to not only visualize anger levels continuously, but also to 
Manual-guided AMT 
CALM-enhanced AMT 
Printed workbook 
Phone application can serve as 
workbook 
Homework assignments with pencil 
and paper 
Homework assignments with few taps 
on phone 
Anger Events recorded after they 
happen 
Anger Events can be recorded in real-
time 
No feedback to patients 
Feedback in form of logs and 
visualizations of objective and 
subjective data 
No feedback to therapist about 
efficacy of AMT Anger Control 
Plan and its application to real-life 
anger events. 
Physiological and behavioral efficacy 
metrics of real-life application of 
AMT Anger Control Plan 
No objective feedback to therapists 
about frequency of workbook 
usage, time spent on assignments, 
how often relaxation exercises are 
done, etc. 
Therapist is able to monitor 
therapeutic progress outside of group 
meetings 
Simple breathing exercise: no 
knowledge about effectiveness 
HRV-Biofeedback enhanced 
breathing exercise: guided 
visualization and real-time HRV 
biofeedback teach and guide correct 
RSA breathing [16]/ 
Anger Control Plan is written on 
piece of paper 
Anger Control Plan is easy to modify 
and lives in phone. 
No build in motivational 
enhancement 
Increased motivation via fun app, 
reminders and personalized avatars 
that can be injected with desired 
human characteristics expressed in 
language. 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

provide meaningful objective feedback. The application 
provides audio files of “learning material,” which are 
updated forms of coping strategies, as well as personal 
customization of the application. Most importantly, in 
comparison to the workbook, CALM can be used for 
recording an anger event in a simple and fast way whenever 
and 
wherever 
needed. 
Another 
enhancement 
over 
conventional Anger Management Therapy is the integration 
of biofeedback into a breathing exercise. The strongest 
evidence for Anger Management Group Therapy, however, 
is that it is the only form of therapy addressing anger control 
issues offered at VA Medical Centers nationwide.  
 
B. Heart Rate Variability, Biofeedback and RSA Breathing 
 
A growing body of psychological research supports an 
association between parasympathetically mediated HRV and 
outcome 
measures 
relevant 
to 
regulated 
emotional 
responding (e.g., coping). Heightened levels of resting 
respiratory sinus arrhythmia have been associated with 
greater self-reported emotion regulation and the use of 
constructive coping strategies, and lower HRV is associated 
with greater negative emotional arousal in response to stress 
[10]. Conversely, greater HRV is a physiological indicator of 
adaptive emotion regulation and a decreased mental load [9]. 
A meta-analysis of HRV and neuroimaging studies by 
Thayer et al. [6] links HRV to markers of stress and health, 
and shows correlations between HRV and brain regions 
involved in emotion control. Cerebral blood flow increases 
during emotion control tasks and can peripherally—via the 
vagal nerve—be linked to HRV. HRV is therefore not only 
an excellent index for a person’s ability to regulate responses 
to threatening environments, but baseline HRV is a good 
indicator of mental health since it is depressed in patients 
suffering from psychopathologies such as PTSD, anxiety and 
depression.  
A typical ECG tracing of the cardiac cycle (heartbeat) 
consists of a P wave, a QRS complex, a T wave and a U 
wave, which is normally visible in 50-75% of ECGs. The RR 
signal is the interval between two R waves and is obtained 
by detecting the R peak in the QRS complex of an ECG 
trace. It is a stepwise constant with transitions at the quasi-
periodic occurrences of the peak R. There is consensus in the 
literature that the high-frequency (HF) components of HRV 
are related to respiratory rhythm and are a marker of vagal 
modulation 
[11], 
and 
that 
the 
low-frequency 
(LF) 
components are thought to be under both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic 
control. 
Sympathovagal 
balance 
is 
characterized by the relationship between these two rhythms 
[12].  
HRV analysis is commonly based on non-parametric 
methods such as Fourier or wavelet frameworks, or 
parametric methods like Autoregressive Models (AR) [13, 
14]. For CALM, the power spectrum of the RR signal in the 
range of 0.015-0.5 Hz (LF to HF) is computed by describing 
the RR with a p order AR model. To limit computation time, 
the signal is downsampled while allowing access to spectral 
information in the range of interest.  
CALM provides visualizations that integrate objective 
data, such as heart rate, breathing rate and HRV data from 
use of the BioHarness belt with subjective measurements 
from the subject. In particular, CALM presents summarized 
data representing the movement of power from the LF to HF 
frequency bands of the HRV over time, because HF activity 
has been found to decrease under conditions of emotional 
strain and during states of elevated anxiety, in individuals 
reporting a greater frequency and duration of daily worry and 
in those suffering from PTSD [8]. HRV and its HF 
component are reduced whilst the LF component is elevated.  
 
HRV biofeedback and RSA breathing. Biofeedback is the 
process of displaying involuntary physiological processes 
and learning to voluntarily influence processes “feed” them 
back to users by making changes in cognition. This approach 
provides a transparent and empirical demonstration of 
consciously manipulating autonomic functions for improving 
health. Biofeedback instruments measure and transform 
information from physiological processes into simple, direct 
and easy-to-read signals. HRV biofeedback training includes 
instruction in breathing at a frequency related to optimal 
low-frequency band power, i.e. resonant frequency [7].  
The cardiovascular system is characterized by specific 
resonance frequencies of HRV that exist at a particular 
frequency for an individual, within the low-frequency range 
of the HRV spectra. The resonance frequency for an 
individual lies at the frequency at which the system, when 
rhythmically stimulated, produces the maximum HRV, 
usually around 0.1 Hz or about 6 breathing cycles per 
minute. When a person breathes at about 6 breaths per 
minute, the respiratory stimulus causing HR to rise occurs 
precisely at the same time as the baroreflex impulse. This 
causes a persistence of the augmented HR oscillation at the 
resonant frequency; only at this frequency are HR and 
respiration in sync with each other and HR oscillations 
become very large. HR and blood pressure oscillate in 
opposite direction and the baroreflex is stimulated with every 
breath, causing an increase in HR oscillation. Baroreflex 
training, which uses RSA breathing, can be achieved with 
HRV biofeedback. CALM provides HRV biofeedback 
visualization on how to slow down breathing to meet a 
patient’s personal resonance frequency.  Patients learn how 
to the control color and size of a circle using biofeedback.  
 
Breathing exercises carried out over long periods of time 
 
 
Figure 2.  CALM visualizations of RSA breathing exercise  
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

with HRV biofeedback have been shown to positively affect 
asthma, hyperventilation, anxiety, depression or pain. Figure 
2 indicates how CALM will facilitate breathing exercises, 
specifically addressing increases in HRV. Patients learn how 
to control the color, edge size, and radius of a filled circle via 
biofeedback. The filled circles represent where the HRV data 
is most powerful: red in the LF range and blue in the HF 
range. As patients successfully move their HRV towards the 
desired range, the color will transition from red to blue. The 
thickness of a white border around the filled area represents 
patient heart rate. A thinner border corresponds to a faster 
the heart. The circle’s radius represents patient breathing 
rate, where a larger circle represents a slower breathing rate. 
A slowly increasing purple glow around the outside of the 
white edge signifies that a patient is maintaining their 
biofeedback statistics at a near constant and near optimal 
value. The time of participation, exercise length, and all 
biofeedback data are recorded for later analysis. 
 
C. Motivation via Personalization and Avatars 
Personalization 
as 
motivation. 
Many 
forms 
of 
psychotherapy require a therapist’s guidance precisely 
because they demand highly individualized approaches. 
While CALM does not replace a human clinician, its 
customization features provide a unique selection of settings 
that fit a particular user’s needs.  On a therapeutic level, 
CALM allows users to create a truly personalized Anger 
Control Plan. Users will be able to modify and add cues, 
triggers and strategies, add personal notes with written or 
audio-recorded memos, set reminder features informed by 
SIFT’s Etiquette Engine ™ (shown to increase compliance 
[15]) or set gender preferences for virtual avatars and audio 
files. The purpose of CALM’s personalization is two-fold: 
(1) to build a therapeutic alliance between a user and 
therapist 
using 
CALM 
as 
a 
tool 
for 
structured 
communication, and (2) to facilitate pattern recognition for 
users and their therapists. For example, by recording a user’s 
individual triggers as episodes occur, the user can then share 
this information with the human therapist. Therapists can 
retrieve greater detail from these records, rather than purely 
relying on an individual’s recall, making therapists better 
equipped to tweak a patient’s treatment plan. Although the 
same result may be achieved by patients using a pencil and a 
notepad, therapists and patients alike agree anecdotally that 
this method usually fails because (1) it requires patients to 
recognize anger events as they are occurring and be 
organized enough to physically have the notepad and pencil 
on hand, and (2) although they understand the benefits of the 
recording activity, patients are not always motivated to do it 
because they do not experience the benefits directly. Often, 
patients forget to do this type of therapeutic homework 
assignment, making it difficult to retroactively share 
important information with their therapists. By facilitating 
information recording and sharing by providing highly 
customizable options, CALM connects therapists with users’ 
day-to-day experiences.   
Motivation via socially intelligent avatars. Many 
veterans shy away from face-to-face mental health treatment, 
but may be open to using more anonymous alternatives (e.g., 
online forums). To address this, DARPA has recently funded 
a new project called “SIM Sensai,” a virtual therapist that 
identifies patients who need help most acutely [16]. Virtual 
therapy and telemedicine are uniquely equipped for wide and 
cost-effective 
distribution 
even 
to 
remote 
locations, 
especially in environments where care demands can’t always 
be met. The main element of this treatment option is the use 
of a virtual avatar. While CALM is not intended as virtual 
therapy, it integrates socially intelligent avatars on the 
following basis: 
1) Avatars, especially those that display socially 
appropriate behavior (see Figure 3.), can impact human-
machine trust which has emerged as having a considerable 
impact 
on 
human-machine 
performance 
[17, 
18]. 
Definitions of trust stem from work in sociology associated 
with human-human trust, and are applicable based on 
Reeves 
and 
Nass’ 
theory 
that 
humans 
regularly 
anthropomorphize technology, treating machines as social 
agents. As a result, humans (intentionally or not) react to the 
social queues displayed by machines. If a machine has been 
deemed untrustworthy, a human may reject the use of it 
regardless of its efficiency or reliability [19]. 
 
Figure 3. Avatar with adjusted speech level reflective of high-to-
medium social distance and imposition.  
 
III. 
CALM FUNCTIONALITIES 
As part of this project, we have implemented and 
evaluated all features necessary for a fully functioning 
prototype. Figure 4. provides screenshots for the main 
functionalities integrated to date. These functionalities 
include: 1) A CALMeter, allowing the user to record the 
intensity of an anger event on a scale from 1 to 10, 2) An 
Anger Control Plan, consisting of the possibility to record 
the details of a particular anger event, including time, 
triggers, cue, strategies used, effectiveness of strategies and 
optional notes, 3) Data Visualizations of subjective 
recordings of events as well as physiological measures, 4) 
Breathing and Muscle Relaxation Exercises including 
Biofeedback, 5) an Education Center providing basic 
information about anger habits and 6) an Emergency Button.   
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

 
 
Figure 4.  Summary of CALM functionalities 
  
 
For detailed descriptions of all CALM functionalities 
please contact the authors.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This prototype was developed in collaboration with 
psychotherapists from Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center (MVAMC) in order to meet the needs of veterans 
returning from deployment. CALM integrates with ongoing 
Anger Management Therapy offered at VAs nationwide. 
Currently, Anger Management Therapy is a manual-based 
12-week group therapy. The core of this form of therapy is to 
become aware of what causes anger. With a mobile 
application anger triggers, cues and strategies can be 
recorded in real-time as well as reflected upon later. The 
application help to gives context a situation that seems 
difficult to handle – what times of the day or week, which 
other persons where involved and most importantly how was 
a situation handled. In addition, physiological measures can 
provide further cues to recovery progress. For patients, 
CALM provides opportunities to do therapeutic work at their 
own pace, it is a cost-effective and widely distributable form 
of intervention, it can offer support for a large group of 
people (e.g., in times of disasters of when the resources of 
clinicians are limited), people who otherwise may not week 
treatment can be reached and virtual avatars increase 
motivation and engagement. For clinicians, CALM can help 
to efficiently and cost-effectively treat a larger number of 
patients, it increases the realism of the social and 
environmental components influencing treatment and it 
offers feedback on efficacy of patient treatment.  
To validate and further improve CALM, clinical testing 
is needed in the future.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The project was supported by the US Army Medical 
Research and Materiel Command (USAMRMC) and the 
Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center 
(TATRC), Contract # W81XWH-12-C-0065. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
N. A. Sayer, S. Noorbalochi, P. Frazier, K. Carlson, A. Gravely,  M. 
Murdoch, “Reintegration Problems and Treatment Interests Among 
Iraq and Afghanistan Combat Veterans Receiving VA Medical Care”, 
Psychiatric Services, vol. 61(6), June 2010, pp. 589-597. 
[2] 
W. P. Nash, L. Krantz, N. Stein, R. J. Westphal, & B. Litz, 
“Comprehensive soldier fitness, battlemind, and the stress continuum 
model: Military organizational approaches to prevention,”  American 
Psychological Association, 2011, pp. 193-214, doi: 10.1037/12323-
009. 
[3] 
M. Jakupcak, D. Conybeare, L. Phelps, S. Hunt, H. A. Holmes, B. 
Felker, M. E. McFall, “Anger, hostility, and aggression among Iraq 
and Afghanistan war veterans reporting PTSD and subthreshold 
PTSD,” Journal of Traumatic Stress, vol. 20, 2007, pp. 945–954. 
[4] 
N. A. Sayer, G. Friedemann-Sanchez, M. Spoont, M. Murdoch, L. E. 
Parker, C. Chiros, R. Rosenheck, "A qualitative study of determinants 
of PTSD treatment initiation in veterans," Psychiatry,  January 2009, 
pp. 238-255. 
[5] 
P. M. Reilly and M. S. Shopshire, “Anger management group 
treatment for cocaine dependence: Preliminary outcomes,” The 
American journal of drug and alcohol abuse, vol. 26, pp. 161–177, 
2000.J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, 3rd 
ed., vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon, 1892, pp. 68–73. 
[6] 
J. F. Thayer, F. Ahs, M. Fredrikson, J. J. Sollers III, and T. D. Wager, 
“A meta-analysis of heart rate variability and neuroimaging studies: 
Implications for heart rate variability as a marker of stress and 
health,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, vol. 36, 2012, pp. 
747-756, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.11.009.  
[7] 
P. M. Lehrer, E. Vaschillo, B. Vaschillo, "Resonant frequency 
biofeedback training to increase cardiac variability: Rationale and 
manual for training, " Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback, 
vol. 25 (3), 2000, pp. 177–191. 
[8] 
G. Tan, T. K. Dao, L. Farmer, R. J. Sutherland, and R. Gevirtz, 
“Heart rate variability (HRV) and posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD): A pilot study,” Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback, 
vol. 36, no. 1, 2011, pp. 27–35. 
[9] 
B. M. Appelhans and L. Luecken, L, “Heart Rate Variability as Index 
of 
Regulated 
Emotional 
Responding,” 
Review 
of 
General 
Psychology, vol. 10, 2006, pp. 229-240.  
[10] T. F. Denson, J. R. Grisham, and M. L. Moulds, “Cognitive 
reappraisal increases heart rate variability in response to an anger 
provocation,” Motivation and Emotion, vol. 35, 2011, pp. 14–22. 
[11] P. Nickel and F. Nachreiner, "Sensitivity and Diagnosticity of the 0.1-
Hz Component of Heart Rate Variability as an Indicator of Mental 
Workload", Human Factors, vol. 45(4), 2003, pp. 575–590. 
[12] F. Lombardi, A. Malliani, M. Pagnai and S. Cerutti, “Heart rate 
variability and its sympatho-vagal modulation,” Cardiovascular 
research, vol. 3292(208), 1996, pp. 208-216. 
[13] S. Cerutti and C. Marchesi, “Advanced Methods of Biomedical 
Signal Processing,” Wiley & Sons, Inc. New Jersey, 2011. 
[14] M. Malik, “Heart rate variability: standards of measures, 
physiological interpretations and clinical use,”  Circulation, Vol. 93, , 
1996, pp. 1043-1065.  
[15] R. Parasuraman and C. Miller,  “Trust and etiquette in high-criticality 
automated systems,” Communications of the Association for 
Computing Machinery, vol. 47(4), 2006, pp. 51–55. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

[16] K. Drummind, “Darpa to Troubled Soldiers: Meet Your New 
Simulated Therapist,” Wired Magazine,  Accessed September 2013: 
http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2012/04/darpa-virtual-therapy/ 
[17] J. D. Lee and K. A. See, "Trust in automation: Designing for 
appropriate reliance," Human Factors, vol. 46, 2004, pp. 50-80. 
[18] B. Reeves and C. Nass, “The Media Equation: How People Treat 
Computers, Television, and New Media Like Real People and 
Places,“ Cambridge University Press, 1996.  
[19] R. Parasuraman and V. Riley, “Humans and automation:  Use, 
misuse, disuse, abuse,” Human Factors, vol. 39, 1997, pp. 230-253.  
 
 
 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-312-4
SOTICS 2013 : The Third International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

