The Perceived Psychological Empowerment of Women Using Mobile Dating 
Applications: The Case of Tinder 
 
Mandlakazi Ndlela, Maureen Tanner  
Department of Information Systems 
University of Cape Town  
Cape Town, South Africa 
email: ndlman015@myuct.ac.za , mc.tanner@uct.ac.za    
 
 
Abstract— Modern romance and dating are currently 
experiencing a ‘digital revolution’ that is powered by online 
dating platforms. Different forms of social media and social 
networks, such as dating apps, are gradually tapping into the 
Internet’s acclaimed ability to empower users. Social media 
has been described a tool which plays a significant role in 
enabling women to gain control of and improve the quality of 
their lives. Literature suggests that online dating is of 
particular importance to women who seek to gain more control 
of their dating lives. While online dating apps and literature 
may cite women empowerment as the  overall goal of dating 
apps such as Tinder, there is a need to empirically investigate 
the extent to which the use of dating apps empower women. 
The purpose of this study was therefore, to explore how 
women’s use of mobile dating apps promote or hinder their 
psychological empowerment. This study applied a qualitative, 
single case-study strategy of the Tinder dating app. A 
deductive approach was taken, as the study relied upon a 
conceptual model to illustrate Tinder’s affordances and 
features 
alongside 
the 
components 
of 
psychological 
empowerment. The research findings confirm that the use of 
mobile dating app affordances and features, to some extent, 
promote 
as 
well 
as 
hinder 
particular 
psychological 
empowerment components. The identified findings could 
further contribute to the understanding of how the use of 
specific online dating app affordances and features influence 
the psychological empowerment of women. An enhanced 
understanding of how women use these affordances and 
features, may encourage mobile dating app developers to 
rethink the design of their apps, in the context of women and 
their psychological empowerment. 
Keywords- Online dating; Mobile dating apps; Tinder, 
Women; Psychological Empowerment; Affordances; Features      
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Modern romance and dating are currently experiencing a 
‘digital revolution’ [1]. This revolution is powered by online 
dating sites and applications (apps). Online dating platforms 
have claimed the role of conventional matchmakers, which 
used to include families, friends, and dating agencies [1].  
Online dating platforms, such as Tinder, are often 
referred to as social media applications or social networking 
sites [2] [3]. Stavrositu et al. [4] claim that social media and 
social networks are gradually tapping into the Internet’s 
claimed ability to empower its users. According to Hamid et 
al. [5], social media plays a significant role in specifically 
enabling women to gain control, and improve the quality, of 
their lives, which is consistent with the definition of 
Psychological Empowerment [PE] provided by Tahir et al. 
[6]. 
Literature suggests that online dating is particularly 
interesting to women who wish to gain more control of their 
dating lives, as it presents an opportunity for them to partake 
in activities that cannot be achieved by traditional means of 
dating [7]. Similar sentiments regarding a woman’s role in 
her dating life are shared by the creators of Mobile Dating 
Apps (MDAs), such as Tinder. Tinder has stressed that one 
of its overall goals is to empower women [3]. While online 
dating apps and literature may cite women empowerment as 
the platform’s overall goal, there is a need to empirically 
investigate the extent to which the use of dating apps 
empower women.  
It 
is 
important 
to 
specifically 
investigate 
the 
empowerment of women, as they have been subject to a 
greater level of disempowerment when compared to their 
male counterparts [8]. Although development initiatives are 
still in the process of bridging this gap, scholars have 
stressed that third parties are unable to directly empower, but 
they can attempt to create empowering conditions [9] [10]. 
While significant attention has been given to women’s 
economic empowerment, there is a need to address their PE, 
since the construct has been disregarded in the past [8].  
To better understand how women’s use of dating apps 
influenced their perceived PE, this study applied a case study 
research strategy of the Tinder MDA and collected data from 
women who participated in semi-structured interviews. The 
data analysis process was guided by the proposed conceptual 
model, along with a thematic analysis approach [11]. It is 
hoped that this research will provide future scholars, as well 
as dating app designers, insight into how women may use 
MDA affordances and features to influence their perceived 
PE. 
In Section 2, this research paper will discuss a literature 
review on MDA affordances, features, and PE. Section 3 will 
describe the methodology used. The findings will be 
presented and discussed in Section 4, followed by a 
conclusion in Section 5. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

II. 
LITERAURE REVIEW 
The following section will discuss the literature 
reviewed on MDA affordances, features, and PE. The 
reviewed 
affordances 
include 
mobility, 
immediacy, 
proximity, visual dominance, and multimediality. The 
features are discussed in terms of swiping and un-matching, 
followed 
by 
an 
explanation 
of 
the 
intrapersonal, 
interactional, and behavioural components of PE.  
A. Affordances of Mobile Dating Applications 
Schrock [12] emphasises that an individual has agency in 
deciding how a tool should be used. In this study, agency 
refers to a woman’s capacity to make personal choices [47]. 
It is therefore, important to note that this study acknowledges 
the role of one’s agency by asking the primary research 
question: How does women’s use of mobile dating apps 
influence their perceived psychological empowerment? 
According to Willemse et al. [13] affordances are “the 
perceived and actual properties of an object, primarily the 
functional properties that determine just what and how the 
object could possibly be used” (p. 2). While affordances are 
not always visible [14], they structure the way in which one 
can interact with an object by either allowing or prohibiting 
various actions [15].  
In discussing the affordances of MDAs, it is necessary to 
first discuss the role of mobile media in dating apps. Mobile 
media fall under a category of mobile technologies, such as 
smartphones and tablets, which are used to run mobile 
applications [12]. Users therefore, interact with MDAs by 
using mobile media [16].  
Mobile media consists of four generic communicative 
affordances: 
portability, 
availability, 
locatability, 
and 
multimediality 
[12]. 
MDAs 
depend 
on 
all 
four 
communicative affordances [16], but also consist of 
affordances which are specific to dating apps. This study will 
consider the following MDA affordances: mobility, 
immediacy, 
proximity, 
visual 
dominance, 
[15] 
and 
multimediality [17]. Although literature has not identified 
multimediality as a specific MDA affordance, the Tinder app 
has made changes to its design, which now allows for 
multimediality [17]. After noticing that users were manually 
adding their Instagram page links to their accounts, Tinder 
decided to incorporate the feature into their design [17]. As 
this study focuses on the Tinder app, it will include the 
multimediality affordance.   
1) Mobility: Tinder’s mobility affordance is consistent 
with the generic ‘portability’ communicative affordance of 
mobile media [16]. Mobility encourages users to interact 
with MDA in various locations [15]. The affordance implies 
that having Tinder on a smartphone or tablet gives one the 
freedom to use it wherever one desires [18]. There are no 
restrictions as to where the app can be used, which allows 
for interaction in private, public, and semi-public spaces 
[16]. 
2) Immediacy: MDAs aim to provide immediate social 
interactions [19]. Tinder enables interactions between users 
to take place quicker, by alerting them to new matches 
(indicating mutual interest between two users) or messages 
[15].  
3) Proximity: 
Proximity 
is 
associated 
with 
the 
‘locatability’ communicative affordance. Both proximity 
and locatability are provided by Tinder’s location-based 
services [20], as users are required to indicate the preferred 
distance between them and potential matches [3].  
4) Visual dominance: Visual dominance refers to how 
Tinder encourages one to review users based on their profile 
photos which tend to take up a large proportion of a phone’s 
screen [18]. 
5) Multimediality: The multimediality affordance allows 
users to connect their other social media profiles, such as 
Instagram, to their Tinder accounts [16]. The linking of 
different social media profiles allows women to further 
present themselves to other users [16]. 
B. Features of Mobile Dating Applications 
For this study, the swiping and un-matching features 
were considered. For a match to be made, users must both 
swipe right on each other’s profiles [17]. Users may also use 
the un-match feature which allows them to remove 
previously matched people from their list. The person who 
has been unmatched will not be able to contact the user that 
initiated the action [21]. 
C. Psychological Empowerment  
Psychological empowerment has been described as, “a 
mechanism by which people gain mastery of their affairs” 
(p. 144) [22]. It is important to note that PE is not static, as 
it changes over time [10]. There are several studies, which 
have conceptualised PE in different manners, however, they 
mainly rely on the Zimmerman [10] PE conceptual model 
[23]. Zimmerman [10] warns that in order to holistically 
investigate the PE of an individual, the intrapersonal, 
interactional, and behavioural components must all be 
considered. It is also stressed that when applying the PE 
nomological framework, studies should only consider the 
measures which are context appropriate [10].  
1) Intrapersonal PE 
The intrapersonal component refers to an individual’s 
beliefs about their ability to have an impact on their 
environment and to achieve their personal goals [11].  
Zimmerman [10] lists motivation to control, perceived 
control, self-efficacy, and mastery as sub-components of 
intrapersonal 
empowerment. 
Table 
I 
defines 
each 
intrapersonal PE factor in the context of this study. 
2) Interactional PE 
The interactional component emphasises an individual’s 
choice to act in a manner that will help them achieve their 
goals. In order to have control in a particular setting, one 
must be aware of one’s options [10]. The interactional 
component also includes an individual’s intellectual 
comprehension of their social environment and whether they 
possess the necessary resources and knowledge to effect 
change [10]. These factors include critical awareness, 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

understanding causal agents, resource mobilisation, decision-
making skills, and problem-solving abilities [10]. Table II 
defines each interactional PE factor in the context of this 
study. 
TABLE I.  
INTRAPERSONAL PE DEFINITIONS 
TABLE II.  
INTERACTIONAL PE DEFINITIONS 
PE Factor 
Definition 
Critical awareness  
The degree to which a woman is aware that a 
dating app may be used as a resource to create 
close relationships [26].   
Understanding 
causal agents 
Causal agents are authoritative figures that can 
exert control over situations [27]. It is important to 
understand 
these 
agents, 
their 
role 
and 
involvement in the relevant issue and the factors 
which may affect their decision-making [27]. 
Acknowledging these factors is important as they 
can hinder or promote one’s attempt to gain 
control in one’s environment [10]. This study will 
consider the users of dating apps as causal agents. 
Resource 
mobilisation 
Resource mobilisation refers to being able to 
manage an acquired resource to achieve a goal 
[10]. In this study, resource mobilisation will refer 
to a woman’s ability to manage a dating app. 
Decision-making 
A woman’s ability to decide whether she wants to 
interact with another dating app user [28]. 
Problem-solving  
Problem-solving refers to how women deal with 
problems related to online dating [20].  
3) Behavioural PE  
The behavioural component of PE is described as the 
actions which are necessary for a desired result [29]. The 
interactional component of PE prepares individuals to carry 
out behaviours which are necessary for achieving their 
desired goals [10] Table III defines three behavioural PE 
factors: community involvement, participation, and coping 
behaviours.  
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The 
following 
section 
describes 
the 
research 
methodology that was followed for this study. The research 
model is presented first, followed by a discussion on the 
nature of this study and its research questions. The 
methodology then describes the case, followed by a 
discussion regarding sampling, data collection and analysis, 
ethical considerations, validity and reliability.  
 
 
TABLE III.  
BEAHVIOURAL PE DEFINITIONS 
PE Factor 
Definition 
Community 
involvement  
 
The degree to which one can openly 
participate in interactions with other users, 
beyond the one-on-one style usually allowed 
on dating apps [30]. 
Participation 
The extent to which a woman engages in 
dating app activities [31]. 
Coping   
Coping describes the, “behaviours and 
thoughts which are consciously used by an 
individual to handle or control the outcome of 
dealing with responsibilities or problems 
successfully or in a composed manner” (p.6) 
[11]. This study will consider the coping 
behaviours of women using dating apps.   
A. Research Model 
The conceptual model which was used for this study is 
presented in Figure 1. The model has been adapted from 
Osman et al. [11] by replacing telecentre components with 
MDA affordances and features. The affordances and features 
appear alongside each PE component. 
B. Nature of study  
The nature of this study was exploratory, interpretive, 
qualitative, deductive, and applied a case study research 
strategy. Osman et al. [11] suggest that a case study strategy 
allows for a modern phenomenon to be empirically explored 
and thoroughly understood in its real-life context. A single 
case study approach, therefore, assisted in answering the 
primary research question, ‘How does women’s use of 
mobile dating apps influence their perceived PE?’ 
C. Research Questions 
The following Secondary Research Questions (SRQ) 
aided in answering the primary question:  
• 
How are women using mobile dating apps? (SRQ1) 
• 
How does women’s use of mobile dating app 
affordances 
and 
features 
promote 
their 
perceived 
psychological empowerment? (SRQ2) 
• 
How does women’s use of mobile dating app 
affordances and features hinder their perceived psychological 
empowerment? (SRQ3) 
D. Case Study: Tinder 
Tinder is an MDA which was released in October 2013 
[19]. The app aims to connect people who do not know each 
other but live near each other [20]. The app is often referred 
to as the female counterpart of the all-male user app ‘Grindr’ 
which connects gay and bisexual men to each other [3]. 
Unlike ‘Grindr’, Tinder is not restricted to users of specific 
sexual identities and has accumulated a growing number of 
heterosexual females since its launch [20]. The app asks a 
user to select their gender, age, sexual preferences and the 
distance of other user’s profiles they would like to view [3]. 
Once signed in, users can indicate their interest by swiping 
right or their disinterest by swiping left. Only after a match is 
made can a conversation be initiated [1].  
 
PE Factor 
Definition 
Motivation to 
control  
Motivation to control is the extent to which a woman 
using an online dating app wants to be in control of 
her self-presentation [17] [24].   
Perceived 
control  
A woman’s belief about the level of control she has 
over her self-presentation when participating in 
online dating [17].  
Self-efficacy 
Self-efficacy is a woman’s belief about her ability to 
reach her online dating goals [25]. One’s self-efficacy 
influences the extent to which one will take part in 
certain behaviours [25]. 
Mastery  
Mastery relates to how competent one finds oneself to 
be [6]. A woman’s self-efficacy will determine her 
mastery of online dating behaviours [25]. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Sampling, Data collection and analysis 
The sample consisted of ten women. While there is no 
widely accepted method for choosing an appropriate number 
of interviews to be conducted, it is suggested that a sample 
size of seven to ten participants is sufficient for qualitative 
studies [45]. A purposive and convenience sampling strategy 
was used. Women who were over the age of 18, living in  
South-Africa, and had ever registered as Tinder users, served 
as the unit of analysis and participated in audio-recorded, 
semi-structured interviews (Appendix A). To make sense of 
the transcribed data, a thematic analysis approach was used. 
To generate initial codes, the researcher made use of the 
conceptual model of PE for women who use mobile dating 
apps (Figure. 1), while thematic analysis was used to search, 
define, and name the crucial themes [11]. Saturation was 
reached at 10 interviews. At this point, there were no new 
themes that emerged from the data collected. 
F. Ethical considerations,Validity and Relaibility  
This research was conducted in an ethical manner, as all 
of the participants were informed about the purpose of the 
research and were asked to sign a consent form. Validity 
and reliability is of utmost importance in qualitative  
research [40]. Validity refers to the extent to which a study 
accurately reports on the views expressed by its participants  
[41]. Leung [42] describes reliability as the consistency in a 
study’s procedures and its findings. While Noble et al. [40]  
argue that there is no unanimously agreed upon criteria to 
evaluate the validity and reliability of qualitative studies,  
they suggest several strategies to ensure the credibility of 
findings. To enhance the credibility of findings, this study  
adopted verification strategies proposed by Noble et al. [40] 
as well as Morse et al. [43]. Table IV illustrates each 
verification strategy along with a description of how it was 
applied to this study.  
I. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
The following section will present and discuss the 
findings of this study. Findings will be discussed in relation 
to each MDA affordance, feature, and various PE constructs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV.  
VALIDITY & RELIABILITY VERIFICATION STRATEGIES 
Verification 
Strategy  
Application 
Methodological 
coherence [43] 
Methodological coherence is the extent to 
which the research question is consistent with 
the different elements of the research method 
used [43]. The primary research question, 
‘How does women’s use of mobile dating apps 
influence their perceived PE?’ was matched 
with an exploratory, interpretive, and 
qualitative research method. The method 
ensured that the question was answered 
according to the accounts given by the women 
interviewed.   
Appropriate sample 
[43] 
The sample used was appropriate for this 
study. Purposive sampling ensured that each of 
the participants were selected based on their 
ability to answer the research questions. The 
sample consisted of ten women who had ever 
had a Tinder account.  
Reflexivity [40]  
 
A reflective journal was kept throughout the 
duration of the study. The journal was mainly 
used to take note of interesting points made by 
participants. The decision to add to or amend 
the interview questions was partly based on the 
points highlighted in the journal.  
Representation of the 
findings [40] 
  
The audio recorded, semi-structured interviews 
used in this study allowed for the researcher to 
revisit the collected data to identify new 
themes. The flexibility of the interviews also 
ensured that participants were allowed the 
opportunity to provide an in-depth account of 
their Tinder experiences.   
To support the findings, ‘rich’ and ‘thick’ 
quotes were taken verbatim. This allowed the 
study to maintain the true nature of each 
participant’s account.  
Collecting and 
analysing data 
concurrently [43]  
Similar to reflexivity, simultaneously 
collecting and analysing data allowed the 
researcher to identify issues that had been 
addressed and those which still needed to be 
further investigated.   
 
Figure 1.  The PE of women using mobile dating apps, adapted from Osman and Tanner [11] 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

A. Mobility  
Findings reveal that women’s use of mobility influences 
the intrapersonal, interactional, and behavioural components 
of their PE. 
1) Intrapersonal and Interactional PE 
While literature mainly discusses the ‘motivation to 
control’ component when referring to a user’s desire to 
control their self-presentation [17] [24], findings revealed 
that women were motivated to control aspects beyond self-
presentation. Due to Tinder being available on their mobile 
devices, five of the participants were motivated to control 
the privacy of their dating lives, as well as where and when 
they could engage in mobile dating. Participants expressed 
that the mobility of the app allowed for private use in public 
spaces, which would not be possible on a computer. 
Respondent 1 explained that she does not want people to 
know that she uses Tinder and that using the app on her 
phone, as opposed to a computer, allows her to keep her 
dating life private. She added that it would be embarrassing 
to interact with the app on a computer, as the larger screen 
would make it obvious to others that she participates in 
mobile dating.  
“I feel like it’s more privatised on my phone 
because…sometimes I don’t want people to know that 
I’m using Tinder.” (Respondent 1) 
a) Perceived control 
Findings revealed that women’s need to control the 
privacy of their social interactions was satisfied by the 
control they felt they had gained. Respondent 7 felt that by 
using the app on her phone, she controlled the extent to 
which people saw her taking part in mobile dating. The 
findings which describe the motivation to control one’s 
privacy, as well as the perceived control felt over privacy, 
are supported by literature. Studies show that there are no 
restrictions as to where dating apps can be used, which 
allows for interaction in private, public, and semi-public 
spaces [16]. Studies also suggest that there is a stigma 
attached to online dating, as its users may be perceived as 
being desperate [19]. 
b) Resource mobilisation (interactional PE) 
Tinder’s mobility affordance enhanced five of the 
participants’ ability to use the app as a resource for meeting 
new people while travelling or moving to a new city. This 
finding is supported by Lean et al. [34], who explained that 
women use the Tinder app as a travel tool.  
2) Behavioural PE  
a) Participation 
Findings revealed that being able to interact with the 
Tinder app on a mobile phone enhanced the extent to which 
the majority (9) of the respondents participated on the 
Tinder app. Timmerman et al. [15] support this finding by 
stating that Tinder’s mobility increases how often users are 
able to use the app. Respondent 9 did, however, mention 
that her participation was negatively affected by only being 
able to access the app on her phone. Due to the considerable 
amount of time she spends on her laptop, she would prefer a 
desktop version of the app. Table V summarises the 
occurrence of each mentioned theme.  
TABLE V.  
MOBILITY THEMATIC ANALYSIS  
B. Immediacy  
Findings reveal that women’s use of the immediacy 
affordance 
influenced 
their 
resource 
mobilisation 
(interactional PE component). A new finding indicates that 
while dating apps claim to offer immediacy, four 
participants reported that the Tinder app did not deliver or 
notify them of any new messages from users. This hindered 
the extent to which some women could manage the app to 
interact with their matches. Table VI summarises the 
occurrence of each mentioned theme.  
TABLE VI.  
IMMEDIACEY THEMATIC ANALYSIS  
C. Proximity  
Emerging findings indicate that women’s use of the 
proximity 
affordance 
influences 
the 
intrapersonal, 
interactional, and behavioural components of their perceived 
PE.  
1) Intrapersonal PE 
a) Motivation to control  
Five of the participants reported that it was crucial for 
them to have control over their maximum distance settings, 
to ensure that they would only interact with users within a 
specific distance. The proximity affordance of the app 
enhanced the extent to which women wanted to have control 
over their maximum distance settings. 
“… when I first got Tinder I had the location settings 
very narrow, because I was like, why do I want to swipe 
for people that I’m not ever going to be in contact 
with?” (Respondent 5) 
b) Perceived control  
PE 
Component 
Theme 
Sub-theme 
Count 
Resp. 
Intrapersonal 
Motivation to 
control  
Motivation to 
control 
privacy 
5 
1, 4, 7, 
8, 10 
Perceived 
control 
Control over 
privacy 
5 
1, 4, 7, 
8, 10 
Interactional  
Resource 
mobilisation 
Travel/ New 
city 
5 
1, 2, 3, 
5, 8 
Behavioural 
Participation  
Encouraged 
participation  
9 
1, 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6, 
7, 8, 10  
Limited 
participation 
1 
9 
PE 
Component 
Theme 
Sub-theme 
Count 
Resp. 
Interactional  
Resource 
mobilisation 
Faulty 
notification 
system 
4 
3, 4, 5, 9 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 When asked how they felt about the proximity 
affordance, four participants expressed that being able to 
adjust their maximum distance settings allowed them to 
have some control over the matching process and possibly 
meeting with nearby users.  
 “..you get people closer to you and it increases the 
probability of you meeting the person if they're closer to 
you.” (Respondent 9) 
An emerging finding suggests that a few women’s 
feelings of control over the matching process and their 
safety were hindered. For example, three participants 
reported that although a preferred distance would be set, the 
app would return user profiles outside of the participant’s 
location boundary. It is important to draw special attention 
to this finding, as Tinder stressed that the app was 
developed in a way which considered women’s issues, such 
as ‘proximity and control’ [3]. 
2) Interactional and Behavioural PE  
a) Critical awareness and resource mobilisation 
By indicating the distance between women and other 
users, participants were made more aware of how Tinder 
could be used as a resource to locate potential matches. 
Tinder’s proximity affordance enhanced women’s ability to 
use the app as a resource for specifically meeting users who 
were nearby. Participants were able to eliminate users who 
were too far to meet up with.  
“I love that because then you know who’s close by and 
who isn’t.”  (Respondent 6) 
This finding is supported by literature which explains that 
the proximity affordance encourages users to match, 
exchange messages, and meet face-to-face with matches that 
are nearby [15] [16] [19]. The enhanced perceived control, 
critical 
awareness, 
and 
resource 
mobilisation 
also 
contributed to women’s participation (behavioural PE) on 
Tinder. This finding is partially supported by Zimmerman 
[10], who stated that there is an association between 
perceived control and an individual’s participation. Table 
VII summarises the occurrence of each mentioned theme. 
D. Visual dominance  
Findings reveal that visual dominance influences the 
interactional component of women’s perceived PE 
1) Interactional PE 
a) Decision-making 
Five women expressed that their decision to interact 
with a potential partner is influenced by that person’s 
appearance. Tinder’s visual dominance contributed to 
women’s ability to review several users’ looks and decide 
on who they wanted to interact with. 
“So, I feel like that is like good about Tinder..I can 
choose how the people look that I am talking to.” 
(Respondent 3) 
Respondent 8, however, suggested that it was slightly 
difficult to decide on a potential partner based on their 
profile photo, instead of considering their personality. This 
finding is supported by Hess et al. [35] who criticise visual 
dominance (as well as the swiping feature) for forcing users 
to make hasty judgements based on images. Table VIII 
summarises the occurrence of each mentioned theme. 
TABLE VII.  
PROXIMITY THEMATIC ANALYSIS  
TABLE VIII.  VISUAL DOMINANCE THEMATIC ANALYSIS  
E. Multimediality  
Findings reveal that women’s use of the proximity 
affordance influences the intrapersonal and interactional 
components of their perceived PE. 
1) Intrapersonal PE  
a) Motivation to control  
Four participants expressed that they needed to be in 
control of how much other Tinder users knew about them. 
Respondent 10 revealed that if she was not given the option 
to link her Tinder profile to other social media sites, such as 
Instagram and Facebook, she would not have signed up to 
use the app. Respondent 6 similarly expressed that by being 
presented with the option to apply multimediality, she was 
motivated to control how much other users knew about her. 
Three other participants also revealed that multimediality 
added to their motivation to control how they were 
presented to other users. Respondent 7 shared that she 
wanted to present herself as someone who has both 
masculine and feminine characteristics, and used the social 
media linking option to do so. 
PE 
Component 
Theme 
Sub-theme 
Count 
Resp. 
Intrapersonal  
Motivation 
to control 
Motivation to 
control maximum 
distance settings 
5 
1, 5, 
6, 7, 
9 
Perceived 
control  
Enhanced control 
over matching 
process 
4 
1, 9, 
6, 7 
Incorrect location 
boundary 
3 
4, 5, 
9 
Less control over 
safety 
2 
8, 10 
Interactional 
Critical 
awareness 
Awareness of 
potential matches 
5 
1, 5, 
6, 7, 
9 
Resource 
mobilisat-
ion 
Locating nearby 
potential matches 
5 
1, 5, 
6, 7, 
9 
Behavioural 
Participatio
n  
Encouraged 
participation  
5 
1, 5, 
6, 7, 
9 
PE 
Component 
Theme 
Sub-theme 
Count 
Resp. 
Interactional  
Decision-
making 
Assists in 
choosing a 
potential 
match 
5 
3, 4, 
5, 6, 
9 
Difficulty in 
choosing a 
potential 
match 
1 
8 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

   David et al. [17] support these findings by explaining 
that the “motivation to control how one is seen” (p. 4) is 
apparent in the manner in which users learn how to present a 
particular version of themselves on online dating apps. This 
presentation may include using pictures from social media. 
b) Perceived control  
 For some participants, the motivation to control self-
presentation was followed by the experience of perceived 
control. Respondent 9 reported that she was able to provide 
users with a “more rounded view” of who she is. This 
finding is supported by Ward [24], who claims that 
individuals that operate in online platforms experience more 
control over self-presentation.  
Other participants felt that their level of control over 
privacy was limited, as signing up with a Facebook account 
or linking one’s Instagram account created an opportunity 
for strangers to easily contact them on those platforms. 
Participants explained that while Tinder only allowed users 
to communicate if there was consent from both parties, 
linking one’s Facebook or Instagram account to their Tinder 
profile encouraged other users to initiate unwanted contact. 
“And then another guy invited me on Facebook and 
Tinder, ag (I mean) Instagram in like a day of me like 
just like swiping around in his profile. And I was just 
like, ‘that is creepy’.” (Respondent 3) 
This finding is supported by a study conducted by Pond et 
al. [36], in which other women also described the unwanted 
contact via other social media sites as ‘creepy’. This type of 
privacy is referred to as social privacy which includes 
receiving unwanted and inappropriate friend requests on 
social media platforms [16]. Emerging findings from the 
study reveal that while enhanced control through self-
representation was an attractive outcome for some women, 
others 
were 
concerned 
about 
how 
multimediality 
compromises the control they have over their social privacy. 
2) Interactional PE  
a) Understanding causal agents 
Mutimediality allowed half of the interviewed women to 
gain a better understanding of potential matches. This was 
due to being able to review the social media profiles of other 
users. Respondent 6 revealed that checking a match’s other 
social media profiles gives her ‘a more holistic’ perspective 
of who they are. 
“I’ve gone into someone’s Instagram and gone as far as 
looking at Twitter for instance and see what they post 
and what they say.”  (Respondent 6) 
This finding is confirmed by Pond et al. [36] who reported 
that it is a common practice for women using dating apps to 
visit a user’s other social media accounts in an effort to 
“learn more about them” (p. 15). 
b) Decision-making  
Findings revealed that to some extent, multimediality 
contributed to a woman’s ability to decide whether she 
would interact or meet face-to-face with another user. Four 
participants decided to interact with other users based on 
Tinder’s mutual friend feature, which identifies common 
Facebook friends between two users. A study conducted by 
Timmermans et al. [15] supports this finding by explaining 
that Tinder users often use the ‘mutual friends’ indicator to 
choose which other users they want to interact with. Table 
IX summarises the occurrence of each mentioned theme. 
TABLE IX.  
MOBILITY THEMATIC ANALYSIS  
F. Swiping  
Findings show that women’s use of the swiping feature 
affects the intrapersonal, interactional, and behavioural 
components of their perceived PE.  
1) Intrapersonal PE 
a) Perceived control  
The swiping feature played a critical role in promoting 
women’s perceived control. While existing literature has 
emphasised a dating app user’s control in terms self-
presentation [24], swiping allowed the majority (8) of 
women to feel a sense of control over other aspects of mobile 
dating. By allowing women to indicate their interest or 
disinterest, the use of the swiping feature improved their 
sense of control regarding who they matched up with. 
“I think it’s because you literally are in control, you 
choose who you like, so if you haven’t liked anyone back 
there is no way they can match with you.  So, you’ve sort 
of eliminated them.” (Respondent 10) 
This finding is supported by Timmermans et al. [15] who 
revealed that using the swiping feature enhances a user’s 
sense of control. Participants also conveyed that the swiping 
feature allowed them to control who had the ability to 
directly send them messages. Respondent 7, who had 
previously used the online dating website OKCupid, 
explained that she preferred Tinder, as when she was last on 
OKCupid, she did not have control over which users could 
interact with her. Timmerman et al. [15] support this finding 
by stressing Tinder’s need for mutual interest and consent in 
allowing one user to interact with another, unlike online 
dating websites which allow users to freely contact one 
another. In December of 2017, OKCupid made changes to its 
messaging system in an effort to reduce unwanted messages  
PE 
Component 
Theme 
Sub-theme 
Count 
Resp. 
Intrapersonal  
Motivation to 
control  
Motivation to 
control privacy 
4 
3, 5, 6, 
10 
Motivation to 
control self-
presentation 
3 
1, 7, 9 
Perceived 
control 
Limited control 
over social 
privacy 
2 
3, 8 
Control over 
self-
presentation 
3 
1, 7, 9 
Interactional 
Understandin
g casual 
agents 
Learning about 
other users 
5 
1, 2, 3, 
6, 7 
Decision-
making  
Social 
Interaction 
choices  
4 
1, 4, 5, 7 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

from other users [44]. 
 
2) Interactional PE 
a) Resource mobilisation  
It is interesting to note that Tinder was used for more 
than just a resource for finding romantic partners. For 
example, respondents 3 and 7 used Tinder as a way to 
improve their self-confidence, by swiping and reviewing the 
list of users who were interested in them. Sumter et al. [37] 
support this finding by adding that both men and women 
used Tinder’s swiping (and matching) features to validate 
their self-worth. 
b) Decision-making  
Respondents 5 and 7 felt empowered by the swiping 
capability as it encouraged them to be more decisive in terms 
of choosing which users to interact with.  
“It allows us to be decisive and that’s empowering, and it 
encourages us too...Here in this space you have no 
choice, you have to put either left or right there isn’t a 
maybe.” (Respondent 7) 
Literature supports the role of swiping in decision making by 
explaining that the swiping gesture demands a “firm, 
decisive, micro-action” from its users (p. 7) [17]. It is, 
however, necessary to consider the extent to which the quick 
swiping action improves a woman’s decision-making 
capability. Similar to visual dominance, a participant 
acknowledged that swiping limited her criteria to make 
decisions by requiring a quick action while emphasising the 
appearance of a user. Respondent 8, who also had issues 
with the app’s visual dominance, felt that the fast-paced 
nature of the decision-making led her to place greater value 
on a user’s looks, as opposed to considering their possible 
personality traits. This finding is supported by a study in 
which users felt that the decision-making process is fast 
paced and at times involuntary [17]. While online dating 
apps insist that users make a decision, it is important to 
question the quality of the decisions made. There is no 
indication of whether urging a user to decide to swipe left or 
right affects their ability to make a successful and effective 
choice [38]. 
3) Behavioural PE 
a) Coping behaviours  
When asked about how it feels when another Tinder user 
does not reciprocate a right swipe (interest), three 
respondents felt disappointed while four others exhibited a 
way of thinking which helped them cope with the feeling of 
being rejected. These four women were able to develop 
coping behaviours to deal with unfavourable circumstances.   
“You’re allowed to say no, you’re allowed to have 
preferences, you’re allowed to like who you like or not 
like who you like.” (Respondent 6) 
Due to Tinder only allowing users to view their match list, 
users are encouraged to focus on people who are interested in 
them, as opposed to those who have rejected them [39]. 
Table X summarises the occurrence of each mentioned 
theme. 
 
TABLE X.  
SWIPING THEMATIC ANALYSIS  
G. Un-matching  
Findings indicate that women’s use of the swiping feature 
affects the intrapersonal and behavioural components of their 
perceived PE. 
1) Intrapersonal PE 
a) Perceived control 
When asked about being able to un-match someone on 
Tinder, most (9) participants expressed that they felt they had 
control over who they interacted with, while two others also 
emphasised control over their safety 
“I think it is extremely important to have things like 
that...I have been in a situation where I am very grateful 
that you can block people off all of your social medial 
accounts Like, especially as women, you have to be 
aware of your safety.” (Respondent 3) 
When asked about how it feels to be un-matched, the 
majority (7) of participants reported that they were 
unaffected by the feature, as they did not notice that they had 
been unmatched, or they soon forgot about it. Two of the ten 
participants felt that they were no longer in control of their 
Tinder interactions. The two participants explained that the 
same platform which initially improved their sense of 
control, by allowing them to indicate interest in potential 
partners (swiping), deteriorated that control by allowing 
other users to un-match them without an explanation as to 
what they had done wrong. Respondent 4 did not speak to 
issues of control but felt that her level of confidence was 
negatively affected by being un-matched. 
2) Interactive PE 
a) Problem-solving 
Un-matching provided participants with a way to solve 
problems related to social interactions on Tinder. Respondent 
1 controlled the outcome of her conflicts by un-matching 
users who harassed her. She explained, “so, the thing about 
Tinder is, right, if you harass me online and I unmatched 
PE 
Component 
Theme 
Sub-theme 
Count 
Resp. 
Intrapersonal 
Perceived 
control  
Control over 
matching 
8 
1, 2, 4, 
5, 7, 8, 
9, 10 
Control over 
social 
interactions 
(messaging) 
2 
6, 7 
Interactional 
Resource 
mobilisatio
n 
Improving 
self-
confidence 
2 
3, 7 
Decision-
making  
Interaction 
choices 
2 
5,7 
Difficulty in 
choosing a 
potential 
match 
1 
8 
Behavioural 
Coping 
behaviours 
Acceptance 
of being 
rejected 
4 
2, 6, 7, 
8 
Disappointme
nt in being 
rejected 
3 
3,10, 9 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

you, I will never ever get to see you again”. Harassment was 
a common theme mentioned by seven other participants. 
Unlike the majority of the participants, respondent 5 
interestingly said that she preferred to ignore users who 
harassed her and only un-matched those who she had 
accidentally swiped right for. Respondent 7 did not feel the 
need to un-match people due to being harassed. She added, 
“I think it’s mostly because I interact with women. Women 
aren’t like that. I haven’t experienced a woman who’s been 
vulgar, obsessing or…” 
b) Coping behaviours 
Respondents 8 and 9 used the un-matching option to cope 
with men who they felt fetishised black women. 
“Ja (yes), so if white guys are just like, mentioning 
things like you can be my chocolate queen…I can be 
your white man, ja. Ooh, I'm going to un-match with 
you, I cannot entertain that bulls**t.”(Respondent 8) 
These findings are partially supported by Richey [21] who 
concluded that being able to use the un-matching feature 
allows one to manage the process of dealing with 
inappropriate users. Table summarizes the occurrence of 
each mentioned theme.  
TABLE XI.  
UN-MATCHING THEMATIC ANALYSIS  
II. 
CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK 
The purpose of this study was to investigate the extent to 
which women’s use of mobile dating apps influenced their 
perceived PE. The research strategy was a case study of the 
Tinder app. Data were collected from women who 
participated in audio-recorded, semi-structured interviews. 
To answer the primary research question, this study analysed 
how women’s use of each affordance (mobility, immediacy, 
proximity, visual dominance, multimediality) and feature 
(swiping, 
un-matching) 
hindered 
or 
contributed 
to 
components of their perceived PE. 
It is important to note that although this study presented 
its findings in a manner which identified the thematic count 
for each investigated mobility or feature, the goal of 
qualitative 
research 
is 
not 
to 
necessarily 
produce 
generalisable findings [46]. The aim is to thoroughly explore 
issues related to a phenomenon and to provide more 
understanding [46]. 
The first secondary research question for this study was:  
how are women using mobile dating apps? Findings revealed 
that women use MDAs not just for seeking romantic 
partners, but for making friends, meeting new people while 
travelling, and improving their self-confidence. Two 
additional secondary research questions asked: how does 
women’s use of mobile dating app affordances and features 
promote (SRQ2) or hinder (SRQ3) their perceived PE? 
Findings suggest that women found the mobility and 
proximity affordances to be empowering, while the 
immediacy affordance hindered their sense of PE due to 
Tinder’s faulty notification system. Findings also revealed 
that women’s use of the majority of affordances and features 
resulted in an ambiguous effect on their PE. Affordances, 
such as visual dominance and multimediality, along with 
features, such as swiping and un-matching, were found to 
both promote and hinder women’s PE. Women’s sense of 
control can be highlighted as the most common theme 
throughout this study. Women expressed that using certain 
affordances and features influenced the control they had over 
their safety, privacy, social privacy, app usage, self-
presentation, and interactions. 
It must be emphasised that although women’s use of 
online dating apps hindered or contributed to certain PE 
components, there was no indication of whether participants 
were able to achieve PE outside of the Tinder platform. 
Participants highlighted that certain actions, such as 
anonymously communicating one’s interest or disinterest in 
a potential romantic partner (by using the swiping feature), 
or permanently disallowing someone from communicating 
with them (by using the un-matching feature), cannot be 
replicated outside of the mobile dating space. It can, 
however, be argued that there may be a few PE factors, such 
as coping-behaviours, which women may apply to their 
everyday lives. It is also important to note that most of the 
findings were only partially supported by literature, as there 
is a lack of studies which have specifically highlighted 
women’s use of dating apps in relation to PE components. 
Existing studies have mainly focused on users (both men and 
women), as opposed to differentiating between the two. 
The contribution of this research is twofold. First, it 
proposes a conceptual model which can be used by the wider 
research community to investigate the PE of women who use 
mobile dating apps. The model provides a way to holistically 
evaluate PE by taking into account the affordances and 
features of mobile dating apps, as well as the relevant PE 
constructs. Second, the findings of this study are addressed 
to those involved in mobile dating app development. This 
research provides app developers with more insight into the 
experiences of women using dating apps, while shedding 
light on critical issues, such as security and social privacy. 
Engaging with the findings of this study will encourage 
developers to address these issues by evaluating the design 
of their apps. 
The exploratory nature of this study allowed for each 
participant to openly share their Tinder experiences. It is, 
however, necessary to conduct further studies in which 
PE 
Component 
Theme 
Sub-theme 
Count 
Resp. 
Intrapersonal 
Perceived-
control 
Control over 
social interactions 
9 
1, 2, 3, 
4, 6, 7, 
8, 9, 10 
Control over 
safety 
2 
3, 8 
 
Interactional  
Loss of control 
(being-
unmatched) 
2 
8, 10 
 
Problem-
solving  
Unaffected 
(being-
unmatched) 
7 
1, 2, 3, 
5, 6, 7, 
9 
Harassment  
7 
1, 2, 3, 
4, 6, 8, 
9 
 
Coping-
behaviours 
Accidental Swipe 
1 
5 
Fetishisation of 
Black women 
2 
8, 9 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

certain themes can be explored with more depth. Future 
studies should consider drawing special attention to the role 
of certain features, such as swiping and their role in PE, as 
there seemed to be a degree of ambiguity regarding the 
influence of swiping on women’s decision making. A 
possible research question would be: How does the swiping 
feature on mobile dating apps influence a woman’s decision-
making? It would also be interesting to conduct a similar 
study which includes both men and women. This would 
allow for comparisons to be made between the two groups. 
APPENDIX A 
General Opening Questions 
1. How long have you been using Tinder? 
2. Why did you download Tinder? 
3. Do you still use Tinder? (Why or why not) 
4. In what ways does Tinder allow you to achieve 
the goals you just mentioned? 
5. Is there anything challenging about using the 
app? 
6. How did you overcome this challenge? 
7. What does empowerment mean to you?  
8. Why do you choose to use Tinder over 
traditional manners of meeting people? 
9. Would you say you’re a person who likes to 
have control in situations? 
10. Does that extend to your dating life or the 
relationships you have with others? 
11. When you use the Tinder app, do you feel that 
you have or don’t have control over any parts 
of your life?  
12. In what ways does Tinder give you more or 
less control over certain parts of your life?  
Immediacy  
13. How do you feel when you receive a match 
notification from the app? 
14. What do you do once you receive the 
notification? 
Proximity  
15. What do you think about the location settings? 
16.  How do you feel about being able to pick a 
maximum distance? 
Visual Dominance  
17. How did you set up your profile? 
18. How did you choose your pictures? 
19. Do you ever feel commodified or objectified 
because of your profile? 
Mobility  
20. How do you feel about being able to use the 
app through your mobile device instead of 
having to use a computer? 
Swiping 
21. How do you feel about being able to swipe left 
or right on someone’s profile? 
22. How do you feel about people swiping your 
profile left or right? (Do you ever feel like 
you’re a commodity?) 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hobbs, S. Owen, and L. Gerber, “Liquid love? Dating apps, sex, 
relationships and the digital,” Journal of Sociology, vol. 53, pp. 271-
284, Sept. 2016, doi:1440783316662718 
[2] F. MacKee, "Social media in gay London: Tinder as an alternative to 
hook-up apps," Social Media+Society, vol.2, pp. 1–10, July-Sept. 
2016, doi: 10.1177/2056305116662186. 
[3] C. L. Mason, “Tinder and humanitarian hook-ups: the erotics of 
social media racism,” Feminist Media Studies, vol. 16, 822-837, Feb. 
2016, doi: 10.1080/14680777.2015.1137339. 
[4] C. Stavrositu and S. Sundar, “Does blogging empower women? 
Exploring the role of agency and community,”. Journal of computer-
Mediated Communication, vol. 17, pp. 369-386, July 2012, 
doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2012.01587.x. 
[5] N. A. Hamid, S. I. Mohd, and Y.  Norhafezah, “Assessing validity 
and reliability of social media as an empowerment tool for a group at 
risk in Malaysia,” Jurnal Komunikasi, Malaysian Journal of 
Communication, vol. 32, pp. 193-207, 2016, doi: 10.17576/JKMJC-
2016-3201-09. 
[6] M. A. Tahir and S. A. Rana, “Balochistan: an evaluation of the level 
of Psychological Empowerment and well-being among Baloch and 
other ethnic groups,” The Dialogue, vol.8, pp. 85-97, Jan-March 
2013.  
[7] S. McWilliams and A. E. Barret, “Online dating in middle and later 
life: gendered expectations and experiences,” Journal of Family 
Issues, 
vol. 
35, 
pp. 
411-436, 
Feb. 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1177/0192513X12468437. 
[8] P. X. Francina and M. V. Joseph, “Women Empowerment: The 
Psychological dimension,” Rajagiri Jojurnal of Social Developmet, 
vol. 5, pp. 163-176, Dec. 2013, ISSN: 0973-3086.  
[9] S Mosedale, “Assessing women's empowerment: towards a 
conceptual framework,” Journal of international development, vol.17, 
pp. 243-257, Feb. 2005, doi: 10.1002/jid.1212.  
[10] M. A. Zimmerman, “Psychological Empowerment: Issues and 
Illustrations,” American Journal of Community Psychology, vol. 23, 
pp. 581-599, 1995, doi:10.1007/BF02506983.  
[11] M. A. Osman and M. Tanner, “The influence of telecentre 
components on the psychological empowerment of underserved 
community members in the Western Cape, South Africa,” Electronic 
Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries (EJISDC), 
vol. 
81, 
pp.1-29, 
Dec. 
 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1002/j.1681-
4835.2017.tb00596.x.  
[12] A. R. Schrock, “Communicative affordances of mobile media: 
Portability, 
availability, 
locatability, 
and 
multimediality,”  
International Journal of Communication , vol.9, pp.1229-1246, 2015,  
ISSN: 1932-8036. 
[13] J. J. Wilemse and V. Bozalek, “ Exploration of the affordances of 
mobile devices in integrating theory and clinical practice in an 
undergraduate nursing programme,” Curationis, vol. 38, pp. 1-10, 
Sept. 2015, doi: 10.4102/curationis.v38i2.1510.     
[14] D. Norman, “The design of everyday things: Revised and expanded 
edition,” Basic Books (AZ), 2013, ISBN 978-0-465-05065-9.  
[15] E. Timmermans and C. Courtois, “From swiping to casual sex and/or 
committed relationships: Exploring the experiences of Tinder users,” 
The Information Society, vol. 34, pp. 59-70, March 2018, doi: 
10.1080/01972243.2017.1414093. 
[16] G. Ranzini and C. Lutz, “Love at first swipe? Explaining Tinder self-
presentation and motives,” Mobile Media & Communication, vol. 5, 
pp. 80-101, Jan. 2017, doi: 10.1177/2050157916664559. 
[17] G. David and C. Cambre, “Screened Intimacies: Tinder and Swipe 
Logic,” Social Meda + Society, vol. 2, pp. 1-11, April 2016, doi: 
10.1177/2056305116641976.  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[18] S. L. Chan, “Who uses dating apps? Exploring the relationships 
among trust, sensation-seeking, smartphone use, and the intent to use 
dating apps based on the Integrative Model,” Computers in Human 
Behavior, 
vol. 
72, 
 
pp. 
246-258, 
 
Feb. 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.053.  
[19] E. March, R. Grieve, J. Marrington, and P. K. Jonason, P, “Trolling 
on Tinder® (and other dating apps): Examining the role of the Dark 
Tetrad and impulsivity,” Personality and Individual Differences, vol. 
110, pp. 139–143, Feb. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2017.01.025.  
[20] S. Duguay, “Dressing up Tinderella: interrogating authenticity claims 
on the mobile dating app Tinder,” Information, Communication & 
Society, 
vol. 
20, 
pp. 
351-367, 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1080/1369118X.2016.1168471.  
[21] L.A Richey, “ ‘Tinder Humanitarians’: The Moral Panic Around 
Representations of Old Relationships in New Media,” Javnost-The 
Public, 
vol. 
23, 
pp. 
398-414, 
Nov. 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1080/13183222.2016.1248323.  
[22] A. M. Browning, “CNE article: moral distress and psychological 
empowerment in critical care nurses caring for adults at end of life,” 
American Journal of Critical Care, vol. 22, pp. 143-151, March 2013, 
doi: 10.4037/ajcc2013437.  
[23] Z. Li, “Psychological empowerment on social media: Who are the 
empowered users?” Public Relations Review, vol. 42, pp. 49-59, 
March 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2015.09.001.  
[24] J. Ward, “What are you doing on Tinder? Impression management on 
a matchmaking mobile app,” Information, Communication & Society, 
vol. 
20, 
Nov. 
2016, 
pp. 
1644-1659, 
doi: 
10.1080/1369118X.2016.1252412.  
[25] J. L. Gibbs, N. B Ellison, and C. H. Lai, “First comes love, then 
comes Google: An investigation of uncertainty reduction strategies 
and self-disclosure in online dating,” Communication Research, vol. 
38, pp. 70-100,  Feb.  2011, doi: doi.org/10.1177/0093650210377091.  
[26] L. Frischlich,  D. Rieger, T. Dratsch, and G. Bente, “Meet Joe Black? 
The effects of mortality salience and similarity on the desire to date 
in-group versus out-group members online,” Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, vol. 32, pp. 509-528, June 2015, doi: 
10.1177/0265407514536305.  
[27] A. 
Zimmerman, 
“Empowerment 
Theory: 
Psychological, 
Organizational and Community Levels of Analysis,” Handbook of 
Community Psychology, Springer,  pp. 43-63, 2000, doi: 
doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-4193-6_2. 
[28] D. Zytko, S.A. Grandhi, and Q. Jones, “Impression management 
struggles in online dating,” The 18th international conference on 
supporting group work, Association for Computing Machinery 
(ACM), pp. 53-62, Nov. 2014, doi: 10.1145/2660398.2660410.  
[29] N. A. Peterson, C. H. Peterson, L. Agre, B. D. Christens, and  C. M. 
Morton, 
“Measuring 
youth 
empowerment: 
Validation 
of 
a 
sociopolitical control scale for youth in an urban community context 
,” Journal of Community Psychology, vol. 39, pp. 592-605, June 
2011,  doi:10.1002/jcop.20456.  
[30] C. Masden and W.K. Edwards, “Understanding the role of 
community in online dating,” The 33rd annual ACM conference on 
human factors in computing systems, Association for Computing 
Machinery 
(ACM), 
pp. 
535-544, 
April 
 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1145/2702123.2702417.  
[31] M. R. Lopes and C. Vogel, “Women's perspective on using Tinder: a 
user study of gender dynamics in a mobile device application,” The 
35th 
ACM 
International 
Conference 
on 
the 
Design 
of 
Communication, Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), pp. 
1-10, Aug. 2017, doi: 10.1145/3121113.3121220.  
[32] M. Tanner and M. L Pan, “The Impact of Impromptu User Story 
Modifications on the Project, Customers and Team Members During 
a Sprint,” The MakeLearn and TIIM Joint International Conference, 
ToKnowPress, Jan.  2015, ISSN: 2232-3309.  
[33] J. Buchan, M. Bano, D. Zowghi, S. MacDonell, and A. Shinde, 
“Alignment of Stakeholder Expectations about User Involvement in 
Agile Software Development,” The 21st International Conference on 
Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering, Association for 
Computing Machinery (ACM), pp. 334-343, June 2017, doi: 
10.1145/3084226.3084251.  
[34]  . Lean and J. Condie, “The Curious Case of Tinder Tourism,” 
Critical Tourism Studies Proceedings, Digital Commons. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
digitalcommons.library.tru.ca/cts-
proceedings/vol2017/iss1/69 [retrieved: Aug. 2018]. 
[35] A. Hess and C. Flores, “Simply more than swiping left: A critical 
analysis of toxic masculine performances on Tinder Nightmares,” 
New media and society, vol. 20 , pp. 1-18,   Dec. 2016, doi: 
1461444816681540.  
[36] T. Pond and P. Farvid, “ ‘I do like girls, I promise’: Young bisexual 
women’s experiences of using Tinder,”  Psychology of Sexualities 
Review, vol. 8, pp. 6-24, Nov. 2017, ISSN: 2047-1475.  
[37] S. R. Sumter, L. Vandenbosch, and L.  Ligtenberg, “Love me Tinder: 
Untangling emerging adults’ motivations for using the dating 
application Tinder,” Telematics and Informatics, vol. 34, pp. 67-78, 
Feb. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.tele.2016.04.009.  
[38] K. L. Modecki, M. J. Zimmer-Gembeck, and N. Guerra, “Emotion 
Regulation, Coping, and Decision Making: Three Linked Skills for 
Preventing 
Externalizing 
Problems 
in 
Adolescence,” 
Child 
Development, 
vol. 
88, 
pp. 
417-426, 
Feb. 
2017, 
doi:10.1111/cdev.12734.  
[39] G. Orosz et al., “The personality, motivational, and need-based 
background of problematic Tinder use,” Journal of behavioral 
addictions, vol. 7, pp. 1-16, April 2018, doi: 10.1556/2006.7.2018.21.  
[40] H. Noble and J. Smith, “Issues of validity and reliability in qualitative 
research,” Evidence-Based Nursing, vol. 0, pp. 1-2, Feb. 2015, doi: 
10.1136/eb-2015-102054.  
[41] K. Yilmaz, “Comparison of Quantitative and Qualitative Research 
Traditions: 
epistemological, 
theoretical, 
and 
methodological 
differences,” European Journal of Education, vol. 48, pp. 311-325, 
May 2013, doi: 10.1111/ejed.12014.  
[42] L. Leung, “Validity, reliability, and generalizability in qualitative 
research,” Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care, vol. 4, pp. 
324-327, Jul-Sep. 2015, doi: 10.4103/2249-4863.161306.  
[43] J. M. Morse, M. Barret, M. Mayan, K. Olson, and J. Spiers, 
“Verification strategies for establishing reliability and validity in 
qualitative research,” International journal of qualitative methods, 
vol. 1, pp. 13-22, June 2002, doi: 10.1177/160940690200100202.  
[44] okCupid. Why OkCupid is changing how you message. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://theblog.okcupid.com/why-okcupid-is-
changing-how-you-message-f14d492e7853  
[45] T. R. Osborne et al., “Improving the assessment of quality of life in 
the clinical care of myeloma patients: the development and validation 
of the Myeloma Patient Outcome Scale (MyPOS),” BMC cancer, vol. 
15, pp. 1-12, April 2015, doi: doi.org/10.1186/s12885-015-1261-6.  
[46] C. Mackintosh, “Protecting the self: A descriptive qualitative 
exploration of how registered nurses cope with working in surgical 
areas,” International Journal if Nursing Studies, vol. 44, pp. 982-990, 
Aug. 2007, doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2006.04.009.  
[47] F. C. I. Yang, “Remediating Japanese Dramas: Exploring the Politics 
of Gender, Class, and Ethnicity in Loser‐Dog Queen in Taiwan,” 
The Journal of Popular Culture, vol.46, pp. 1070-1091, Oct. 2013, 
doi: 10.1111/jpcu.12067.  
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

