 
Understanding Digital Ethnography:  
Socio-computational Analysis of Trending YouTube Videos
Muhammad Nihal Hussain1, Kiran Kumar Bandeli1, Serpil Tokdemir1, Samer Al-khateeb2, Nitin Agarwal1 
1University of Arkansas at Little Rock (UALR) 
Little Rock, Arkansas, USA 
{mnhussain, kxbandeli, sxtokdemir, nxagarwal}@ualr.edu 
2Creighton University 
Omaha, Nebraska, USA 
sameral-khateeb1@creighton.edu 
 
Abstract— The online video sharing website - YouTube, which 
was launched in February 2005 to help people share videos of 
well-known events, has rapidly grown to be a cultural 
phenomenon for its massive user-base. According to Alexa, the 
web traffic monitoring tool by Amazon, YouTube is the second 
most popular website globally. Still there is a lack of systematic 
research - both qualitative as well as quantitative - focusing on 
the video-based social networking site as compared to other 
social media sites. Video comments serve as a potentially 
interesting data source to mine implicit knowledge about users, 
videos, categories, and community’s interests. In this research, 
we studied top 200 YouTube videos trending daily for a 40-day 
period separately in the United States of America (USA) and 
the Great Britain (GB) regions. We collected data for 7,998 
videos trending in the USA throughout the 40-day time period 
and 7,995 videos trending in the GB regions. We studied 
content engagement behavior of users in the USA and GB 
regions by analyzing views, likes, dislikes, and comments on 
the set of trending videos. The study helped us glean some of 
the digital ethnographic behaviors of the users in these two 
regions. This paper presents highlights of the similarities and 
differences observed in such behaviors between the USA and 
GB regions. 
Keywords-YouTube; digital ethnography; USA; GB; social 
network analysis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
YouTube, an online video sharing website was launched 
in early 2005 to help people share videos [1]. Since then 
sharing video content has become a cultural phenomenon. 
According to Alexa, the web traffic monitoring service 
owned by Amazon, YouTube accounts for 15.3% of traffic 
from search on Internet [2]. YouTube is also the second 
most popular website globally with over 300 hours of 
videos uploaded every minute and 5 billion videos watched 
every single day [3]. YouTube overall, and even YouTube 
on mobile alone, reaches more 18–34 and 18–49-year-olds 
than any cable network in the USA. YouTube has launched 
local versions of its platform in more than 88 countries. One 
can navigate YouTube in 76 different languages covering 
95% of the Internet population [3].  
Several 
investigations 
have 
reported 
digital 
communication tools especially social media plays an 
important role in how people interact, communicate, and 
share information. As evident in the mass protests and cyber 
campaigns, social media platforms help individuals to 
coordinate, spread messages, organize, and mobilize support 
for their efforts. While YouTube and other social media 
sites have helped frame and change the nature of online 
discourse, prolific linking of the content across multiple 
social media sites has helped spread narratives at lightning 
fast speeds. Hence, it is imperative to examine the emerging 
video-based social media platforms.  
While significant body of work exists that analyze 
Twitter and other such social media platforms, there is a 
lack of systematic research focusing on video-based social 
networking sites. A few studies shed insights into the 
dynamics of online discussions on YouTube [4]. In addition 
to easy publishing and distribution of nearly any kind of 
video content, YouTube provides various features to engage 
with the video content, such as liking or disliking a video, 
commenting on a video, replying to a comment, liking or 
disliking a comment, or posting a video response. 
Comments on the videos may also be studied to extract 
insights into audience reactions to important issues or 
towards particular videos. Comments serve as a potentially 
interesting data source to mine implicit knowledge about the 
video’s content, viewers, regions, and community interests. 
While some studies have focused on specific genre of 
videos (e.g., childbirth, coming out for lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender and queer – LGBTQ – communities) 
[5] to understand the society’s pulse, others have focused on 
the type of information in these videos [6] and the threats 
these videos pose to the societies [7]. 
In this research, we study the content engagement and 
consumption behaviors on YouTube that further helps 
develop a digital ethnographic mapping of user behaviors in 
terms of likes, comments, sentiments, and cross linking with 
other social media channels – compared across the United 
States of America (USA) and the Great Britain (GB). We 
analyzed top 200 YouTube videos trending daily for a 40-
day time period separately in the USA and the GB regions. 
The dataset was obtained from Kaggle [8] and includes title, 
category, URL, ID, comments, views, likes, and dislikes for 
each video. Further, we enhanced the dataset by extracting 
associations with other social media platforms from the 
YouTube channels of these trending videos. This enhanced 
dataset was used to conduct a digital ethnographical 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
mapping of users’ video content generation, sharing, and 
consumption behaviors. We found interesting correlations 
between various ways users engage with videos for both 
USA and GB regions. We also found multiple similarities 
and stark differences in behavior of users of these regions. 
We further studied how prolific YouTubers leverage other 
social media platforms to disseminate their content more 
widely 
and 
gain 
audience. 
Detailed 
analysis 
and 
implications of the findings are presented in Section III. 
Next, we present literature review in Section II. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Steady rise in YouTube’s popularity has attracted a surge 
of research. This section summarizes studies on YouTube 
users’ watching preferences, the video recommendation 
system, users commenting behaviors and deviant behaviors. 
For online video watching in general, a study of USA 
internet users in 2009 [9] focused on viewer’s preferences of 
categories. The study found that 50% of adults had watched 
funny videos, 38% had watched educational videos, 32% 
had watched TV shows or movies, and 20% had viewed 
political videos. In terms of common content categories in 
YouTube, music videos are a significant presence in 
YouTube, probably accounting for about a quarter of videos 
with entertainment, comedy and sports categories [10]. 60% 
of videos are watched at least 10 times during the first day 
in which they are posted [11]. One of the very first studies 
also showed that videos that did not attract many viewers 
within the first few days of publication were unlikely to 
grow an audience later on [11]. Even so, once a viewer is on 
the YouTube website, by showing related videos (or 
recommended videos) to him/her, YouTube attempts to 
increase the time spent by individuals on the site itself. 
Davidson et. al [12] explain the video recommendation 
system of YouTube. YouTube uses association rule mining 
(videos watched in within same session) to generate sets of 
related videos. To compute personalized recommendations 
for a user, user’s activities or interactions like videos 
watched, liked, rated, or added to playlist, are used to build 
a seed set of recommended videos. Videos related to these 
seed set are selected as relevant videos but to enhance user 
experience, a subset of these videos with/from diverse 
categories are ultimately recommended to the user. Zhou et. 
al [13] argue YouTube’s recommendation system has 
significant impact on views and virality of videos. 
Although there have been some large-scale quantitative 
investigations into YouTube [4], few have focused on 
discussions in comments. Most YouTube research seems to 
be small-scale and qualitative that give insights into how 
discussions can occur around videos without giving broad 
overall patterns that are of use. However, the study [14] was 
an exception, which identified patterns in user types that can 
be used to predict users’ likely behaviors. Yet, a little is 
known about YouTube discussions/comments in general 
including the role of sentiments. YouTube comments are 
textual and much research has investigated the limitations 
and peculiarities of the electronic text. Early studies were 
particularly concerned that the absence of the nonverbal 
channel in textual communication would lead to widespread 
misunderstanding, particularly in short message formats, 
such as mobile phone texting [15]. In response, however, a 
number of conventions have emerged to express sentiment 
in short informal text, such as emoticons and deliberate non-
standard spellings [16]. Work on sentiment classification 
and opinion mining such as [17][18] deals with the problem 
of automatically assigning opinion values (viz., positive, 
negative, or neutral) to documents or topics using various 
text-oriented and linguistic features. Recent works in this 
area also use SentiWordNet [19] to improve sentiment 
classification performance. 
The rise in usage and popularity of social media sites, 
such as YouTube, has made them particularly vulnerable for 
abusive behaviors from bots and troll accounts that can post 
spam comments in large volumes [20]. According to 
O’Callaghan et. al. [21], bot-posted spam comments are 
often associated with orchestrated campaigns and can be 
detected by assessing the similarity in their comments. 
Authors noted that these cyber campaigns remain active for 
long periods of time and popular videos are usually targets 
of these spam comments. Although, it is unknown how far 
user comments in this context may promote hate speech or 
which videos are thought to deliver their aimed potential to 
users.  
However, the problem setting in these papers differs 
from ours as we conduct a comparative behavioral analysis 
of users’ engagement and consumption of content on 
YouTube in terms of likes, comments, sentiments, and cross 
linking with other social media platforms across the USA 
and GB regions.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Here, we describe the datasets used for the research, 
overall methodology and discuss results from our analysis. 
A. Data Collection 
We obtained the dataset consisting of a list of top 
trending videos on YouTube from Kaggle [8]. YouTube 
provides top 200 videos daily that are trending or popular. A 
dataset of these top 200 videos trending daily in USA and 
GB regions from September 13, 2017 to October 22, 2017 
was obtained from Kaggle [8]. There were 7,998 videos 
trending in the USA throughout the 40-day time period with 
2,395 unique videos and 7,995 videos trending in the GB 
with 1,769 unique videos. Out of the 4,164 videos, 770 
videos were trending in both the countries. The original 
dataset from Kaggle has the following attributes: URL of the 
video, video ID, title of the video, title of the channel that 
published the video, category in which the video belongs to, 
number of views, number of likes, number of dislikes, 
number of comments the video received at the time data was 
collected, and the date the video was trending.   
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
We enhanced the dataset obtained from Kaggle by 
adding the description of the video, date the channel was 
created, and the number of subscribers of the channel. It is a 
common practice among prominent YouTubers to associate 
their various social media accounts with their YouTube 
channel. Using Web Content Extractor (WCE) [22], we 
collected these social media associations and used them to 
study the cross-media integration. Due to the noisy nature of 
the data, several data processing steps such as data 
standardization, noise elimination, and data formatting were 
performed. 
In Table I, we present high-level statistics of the 
attributes used from USA and GB regions. 
TABLE I.  YOUTUBE DATA STATISTICS FOR THE USA AND GB REGIONS. 
Attributes (total number 
of) 
USA 
GB 
Trending videos 
7,998 
7,995 
Unique trending videos 
2,364  
1,736  
Views 
1,652,652,122 
1,105,805,449  
Likes 
109,231,965 
91,084,832 
Dislikes 
5,249,389 
3,763,875 
Comments 
6,528,503 
4,894,060 
Commenters 
3,824,862 
3,083,770 
Likes on comments 
45,816,147 
35,514,209 
Replies on comments 
2,112,200 
1,605,248 
B. Analysis and Findings 
We conducted comparative analysis on the trending 
videos. First, we examined differences and similarities 
between users’ interests in USA and GB regions by 
analyzing the categories of the trending videos in each 
region. Videos in the Entertainment, Music, and People & 
Blogs categories tend to trend more for both USA and GB 
regions (see Figure 1). Comedy videos are watched more in 
USA, while Sports videos trend in GB. Further, Political 
videos trend more in USA than in GB.   
Next, we study the lifespan of trending videos in the 
USA and GB regions. We analyzed the number of days a 
video would trend on YouTube in the USA and GB regions 
(see Figure 2). We found that in both the regions there is a 
sharp decline in the popularity of videos after a certain 
number of days, i.e., for USA, videos trend for the first 4 
days, where their popularity increases gradually after which 
their popularity declines sharply. There was no video that 
was popular for more than 8 days, i.e., the longest lifespan. 
For GB region, a similar trend is observed; however, a sharp 
decline in popularity occurs after the 6th day. From Figure 
2, we can observe that videos in the GB region have longer 
lifespan as compared to USA videos. The longest lifespan 
for videos trending in USA region was 8 days, while for GB 
region the longest lifespan was 13 days. This dissimilarity 
between the two regions raises multiple questions, do users 
in GB tend to watch trending videos more repeatedly? 
And/or does the information stays longer in the social 
networks in GB than USA? In other words, it takes longer 
for information to become obsolete in GB than USA, 
suggesting information propagation is either slower or more 
long-lasting in GB than USA. We investigate this 
phenomenon further and reflect on the possible reasons later 
in the paper.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Number of trending videos per category for USA and GB 
regions. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Lifespan of trending videos in USA and GB regions. 
Next, we examine the role of integration of other social 
media platforms with YouTube for the trending videos in 
both regions. From the enhanced data, we know the various 
social media platforms that are associated with the trending 
videos. Top social media platforms that were found to be 
linked to the trending videos in USA and GB regions are 
Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Google Plus, and Tumblr, in 
that order. In the USA region, most videos are affiliated 
with 5 social media sites, while most views were obtained 
by videos that were affiliated with 10 social media sites. 
This implies having 5 social media platforms associated 
with the video increases its possibility of going viral but 
associating more social media platforms increases the 
probability of video getting more views. Having other social 
media platforms associated with the video certainly brings 
more visibility through shares or other cross-media 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
information spillovers. This might be one of the reasons for 
weak correlation, in Figure 3, between number of views and 
number of social media sites affiliated. A similar finding 
was observed for the GB region (Figure 4), where most 
videos are affiliated with 5 social media sites, while most 
views were obtained by videos that were affiliated with 20 
social media sites. 
 
Figure 3.  Social media affiliation of the trending videos in USA. 
 
Figure 4.  Social media affiliation of the trending videos in GB. 
 
Next, we look at the network of various social media 
affiliations for the trending videos in both regions. The 
network map presented in Figure 5 helps us understand the 
integration of other social media sites with YouTube in the 
USA region. Different colors denote different clusters. 
Clustering analysis is done by Gephi network visualization 
using modularity algorithm. The network shows us the 
clusters of the most commonly used social media websites 
and how those social media platforms connect/relate and 
interact with each other. We found that Facebook, 
Instagram, Twitter, Google Plus, Pinterest, and Tumblr are 
the most popular social media sites. Same set of social 
media sites are also more frequently associated with the 
trending videos in the GB region (Figure 6). It is clear from 
the USA region’s social media map that social media 
platforms related to the Music category (green colored 
nodes in top left corner of the network) clustered 
independently compared to other social media sites. This 
implies that the videos posted in the Music category were, 
quite understandably, shared or affiliated to completely. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Social media map of the trending videos in USA 
 
Figure 6.  Social media map of the trending videos in GB 
different family of social media sites. However, the media 
map of the GB region seems more well-connected than the 
USA region implying that the trending videos in GB region 
tend to have a richer cross-media integration on their 
YouTube channels that could further help explain the longer 
lifespan of trending videos in GB as compared to USA 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
 
Figure 7.  Correlation analysis of the trending videos in USA. 
 
Figure 8.  Correlation analysis of the trending videos in GB. 
To examine users’ content engagement behavior on 
YouTube, next, we conduct correlation analysis among 
number of views, number of likes, number of dislikes, 
number of comments, sentiments of comments, and 
sentiment of video description for the trending videos in 
both regions. The correlation charts for the USA region are 
shown in Figure 7. We observed that the more comments a 
video has the more neutral the sentiments are. On the other 
hand, fewer comments a video has more polarized the 
sentiments are (column 3 and row 4). A similar behavior 
was observed between sentiments of comments and number 
of views on videos, i.e., the more views a video has the 
more neutral the sentiments are, and the fewer views a video 
has more polarized the sentiments are (column 1 and row 
4).We observed a strong correlation (0.82) between the 
number of comments and number of likes (column 2 and 
row 3) as well as between number of comments and number 
of views (column 1 and row 3 with correlation coefficient of 
0.71). A weak correlation (0.07) was observed between 
sentiments from comments and sentiments from video 
description (column 4 and row 5). Further research is 
needed to investigate the reasons for a relatively weak 
correlation between sentiments from the comments and 
video description, which might be attributed to unrelated 
comments generated by bots or troll accounts. A similar 
analysis is conducted for the trending videos in GB region. 
The correlation charts for the GB region are shown in 
Figure 8. Comparing the correlation analysis of the trending 
videos in both regions resulted in similar findings. In both 
the regions, number of likes and number of views show a 
stronger correlation as compared to number of dislikes and 
number of views. This implies that if a viewer watches the 
whole video he/she is more likely to like the video than 
dislike it. A weak correlation (0.07) was observed between 
sentiments from comments and sentiments from video 
description (column 4 and row 5). Further investigations are 
required to test the causal relationship of these correlations. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Although YouTube is the second most popular website 
globally with over 300 hours of videos uploaded every 
minute and 5 billion videos being watched every single day, 
there is a lack of systematic research focusing on the video-
based social networking site as compared to other social 
media sites. There are a few studies that shed insights into 
the dynamics of online discussions on YouTube. Video 
comments serve as a potentially interesting data source to 
mine implicit knowledge about users, videos, categories, 
and community interests.  
In this research, we studied top 200 YouTube videos 
trending in the USA and GB regions. We did a comparative 
study of users’ video consumption behaviors and 
engagement to find stark difference in preferences of users 
of these regions. Trending videos in each region provided a 
glimpse of the interests of the viewers. For instance, viewers 
in USA are more interested in Comedy and Politics, while 
viewers in GB are more interested in Sports. Additionally, 
videos in the GB region tend to have longer lifespan 
compared to the USA region. Furthermore, videos in GB 
region are shared on more social media platforms than in 
USA.  
We found correlation between various aspects of user 
engagement, such as number of comments a video received, 
and the polarity of these comments was inversely correlated, 
number of views of a video and its comments were strongly 
correlated. We did not test the causality of this relationship 
and intend to collect more data to do the same. We also 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 
found 
correlation 
coefficient 
for 
above 
mentioned 
relationships are different for USA and GB regions. Since 
the data for this analysis was collected only on a 40-day 
period, more data samples are needed for validation. 
Although we observed a strong correlation between number 
of comments and number of likes and number of views, a 
weak correlation was observed between sentiment of 
comments and sentiments of video description. The fact that 
commenting behavior is somewhat unrelated to the videos’ 
content, warrants further analysis of a likely presence of 
spam comments from bots or troll accounts.  
This research has attempted to shed light on content 
consumption and engagement behaviors on one of the most 
prominent video-based social media platforms, i.e., 
YouTube, in USA and Great Britain regions. As exciting as 
these findings are, the analysis is limited to the 40-day study 
period and result might vary for different time-periods. We 
plan to investigate the reasons for the observations in more 
depth and identify the ethno-digital cultural factors that help 
manifest the differences in the content consumption and 
sharing behaviors. We envision this study will help open 
doors for innovative and foundational work in analyzing 
digital behaviors of our societies (good, bad, and the ugly) 
as the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
landscape evolves. For instance, we can study complex 
questions such as, what is the role of the platform and its 
users in disseminating misinformation? Which societies or 
strata 
within 
a 
society 
are 
more 
vulnerable 
to 
misinformation? More broadly, our study motivates the 
need for development of methodologies to diagnose novel 
pathologies of online social media.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is funded in part by the U.S. National Science 
Foundation (IIS-1636933, ACI-1429160, and IIS-1110868), 
U.S. Office of Naval Research (N00014-10-1-0091, 
N00014-14-1-0489, 
N00014-15-P-1187, 
N00014-16-1-
2016, N00014-16-1-2412, N00014-17-1-2605, N00014-17-
1-2675), U.S. Air Force Research Lab, U.S. Army Research 
Office (W911NF-16-1-0189), U.S. Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (W31P4Q-17-C-0059) and the 
Jerry L. Maulden/Entergy Fund at the University of 
Arkansas at Little Rock. Any opinions, findings, and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material 
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the funding organizations. The researchers 
gratefully acknowledge the support. 
REFERENCES 
 
 [1] J. Hopkins, “Surprise! There’s a third YouTube co-founder - 
USATODAY.com.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://usatoday30.usatoday.com/tech/news/2006-10-11-youtube-
karim_x.htm. [Retrieved: Aug 19, 2018]. 
[2] 
“Youtube.com Traffic, Demographics and Competitors - Alexa.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/youtube.com. 
[Retrieved: August 19, 2018]. 
[3] 
S. Brain, “YouTube Company Statistics,” 2017 Statistic Brain 
Research 
Institute, 
01-Sep-2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.statisticbrain.com/youtube-statistics/. [Retrieved: August 
16, 2018]. 
[4] 
P. Gill, M. Arlitt, Z. Li, and A. Mahanti, “Youtube traffic 
characterization: a view from the edge,” in Proceedings of the 7th 
ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement, 2007, pp. 
15–28. 
[5] 
K. Thorson, B. Ekdale, P. Borah, K. Namkoong, and C. Shah, 
“YouTube and Proposition 8: A case study in video activism,” 
Information, Communication & Society, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 325–349, 
2010. 
[6] 
P. L. Steinberg, S. Wason, J. M. Stern, L. Deters, B. Kowal, and J. 
Seigne, “YouTube as source of prostate cancer information,” 
Urology, vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 619–622, 2010. 
[7] 
S. P. Lewis, N. L. Heath, J. M. St Denis, and R. Noble, “The scope of 
nonsuicidal self-injury on YouTube,” Pediatrics, p. peds. 2010-2317, 
2011. 
[8] 
M. J, “Trending YouTube Video Statistics and Comments,” Kaggle, 
Oct-2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.kaggle.com/datasnaek/youtube/data. [Retrieved: August 
18, 2018]. 
[9] 
K. Purcell, “The State of Online Video,” Pew Research Center: 
Internet, Science & Tech, 03-Jun-2010. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2010/06/03/the-state-of-online-video/. 
[Retrieved: August 18, 2018]. 
[10] X. Cheng, J. Liu, and C. Dale, “Understanding the characteristics of 
internet short video sharing: A youtube-based measurement study,” 
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1184–1194, 
2013. 
[11] M. Cha, H. Kwak, P. Rodriguez, Y.-Y. Ahn, and S. Moon, 
“Analyzing the video popularity characteristics of large-scale user 
generated content systems,” Ieee/Acm Transactions On Networking 
(Ton), vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1357–1370, 2009. 
[12] J. Davidson et al., “The YouTube video recommendation system,” in 
Proceedings of the fourth ACM conference on Recommender 
systems, 2010, pp. 293–296. 
[13] R. Zhou, S. Khemmarat, and L. Gao, “The impact of YouTube 
recommendation system on video views,” in Proceedings of the 10th 
ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement, 2010, pp. 
404–410. 
[14] M. Maia, J. Almeida, and V. Almeida, “Identifying user behavior in 
online social networks,” in Proceedings of the 1st workshop on 
Social network systems, 2008, pp. 1–6. 
[15] J. B. Walther and M. R. Parks, “Cues filtered out, cues filtered in,” 
Handbook of interpersonal communication, vol. 3, pp. 529–563, 
2002. 
[16] D. Derks, A. E. Bos, and J. Von Grumbkow, “Emoticons and online 
message interpretation,” Social Science Computer Review, vol. 26, 
no. 3, pp. 379–388, 2008. 
[17] K. Denecke, “Using sentiwordnet for multilingual sentiment 
analysis,” in Data Engineering Workshop, 2008. ICDEW 2008. IEEE 
24th International Conference on, 2008, pp. 507–512. 
[18] B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan, “Thumbs up?: sentiment 
classification using machine learning techniques,” in Proceedings of 
the ACL-02 conference on Empirical methods in natural language 
processing-Volume 10, 2002, pp. 79–86. 
[19] M. Thomas, B. Pang, and L. Lee, “Get out the vote: Determining 
support or opposition from Congressional floor-debate transcripts,” 
in Proceedings of the 2006 conference on empirical methods in 
natural language processing, 2006, pp. 327–335. 
[20] A. Sureka, “Mining user comment activity for detecting forum 
spammers in YouTube,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1103.5044, 2011.. 
[21] D. O’Callaghan, M. Harrigan, J. Carthy, and P. Cunningham, 
“Network Analysis of Recurring YouTube Spam Campaigns.,” in 
ICWSM, 2012. 
[22] Newprosoft, “Web Content Extractor,” Newprosoft Web Data 
Extraction 
Software, 
2004. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.newprosoft.com/web-content-extractor.htm. 
[Retrieved: 
August 18, 2018]. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-673-6
SOTICS 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

