Learning Support Method of Information Ethic by a Virtual Network Isolating 
 Risky Messages to SNS 
 
Hajime Iwata ,  Kento Inoue 
Kanagawa Institute of Technology 
Department of Information Network and Communication 
Atsugi, Japan 
e-mail: hajimei@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp, inoue@nwlab.org 
 
 
Abstract—Social networking services (SNSs), which are global 
phenomena, allow users to share messages with others, result-
ing in a rapid widespread distribution. Because an inappropri-
ate post may cause trouble for a user, it is important for a user 
to be aware of potential issues. In this study, we propose an 
information ethics system to determine the degree of risk of a 
post. When the system detects a high-risk post, it isolates the 
post on a virtual network. 
Keywords- SNS; Social Networking Service; Information 
Ethics; Virtual Network; OpenFlow . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Internet is ubiquitous, and many users enjoy social 
networking services (SNSs), which promote communica-
tions with others around the globe. On a SNS network, a 
user posts a message willingly and other users provide feed-
back in a short timeframe, allowing a user to receive ap-
proval from others. Occasionally a user receives negative 
feedback when sharing an inappropriate post, image, or 
video. Often inappropriate content spreads quickly before 
the user can retract the post. Thus, a user must always be 
aware of whether a post contains problematic content. How-
ever, users, especially those unfamiliar with SNSs, have a 
low consciousness of a post’s risk.  
In this study, we suggest a system that can learn infor-
mation ethics by checking the degree of risk of a user’s 
posts. The user posts on a SNS via a virtual network. The 
virtual network evaluates the risk of the post. Typically, the 
virtual network posts directly to the SNS. However, if the 
system detects a high-risk post, it isolates the post on a vir-
tual network and sends a warning to the user, allowing the 
user to naturally learn about information ethics. 
Section 2 describes the feature of our study. Section 3 de-
scribes the architecture of the proposed virtual network 
system. Finally, section 4 concludes this paper. 
 
II. 
FEATURE OF OUR STUDY 
Twitter is one example of a SNS with many users. In 
Twitter, the privacy settings are public and protected. When 
other users see a post, they can easily share a public post via 
the retweet function. Furthermore, many users post messag-
es that unconsciously include personal information, which 
others can easily extract. Through this process, posts, in-
cluding inappropriate ones or those with sensitive infor-
mation, spread in a short time. In addition, the likelihood 
that emotional contents are included is high because Twitter 
users post in short sentences. Herein we suggest an infor-
mation ethics learning support system for Twitter users. 
We established a risk analysis system server on a virtual 
network. This system transmits a user’s post once to a virtu-
al network. If the content is problematic, this system stops 
the post from going public, reducing fears of inappropriate 
posts from being scattered on the Internet. This system also 
issues a warning to the user that a post is inappropriate by 
transmitting a message to the user from the virtual network. 
In addition, posts with privacy breaches of the users are 
stored in the virtual network. Because such posts are han-
dled in a virtual network, the contents are not watched by a 
third party nor are they rapidly spread on the Internet. 
 
III. 
SYSTEM SUMMARY 
Fig. 1 overviews the constitution of the network. The vir-
tual network increases the flexibility of the overall constitu-
tion and the placement of the system by controlling it using 
OpenFlow [1]. For OpenFlow controller, we set a packet of 
SNS client software installed in a client PC. The OpenFlow 
switch can divide a posting packet to SNS in two from a 
packet transmitted from a client PC. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Constitution of the network  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

This system is easy to install in existing networks. Be-
cause this system is implemented using JAVA, it is inde-
pendent of the platform. In addition, we intended for Twitter 
by this system as SNS. The access to Twitter uses Twitter4j 
[2] as a library and free (no cost) open use is possible.  
 
Fig. 2 shows the structure of the risk analysis system. The 
system initially reads the new post of the user and evaluates 
it based on the user’s previous Twitter posts. Then the sys-
tem conducts a morphological analysis for a message. Cur-
rently, the system only supports posts written in English or 
Japanese. The English morphological analysis uses Stanford 
Log-linear Part-Of-Speech Tagger [3], while the Japanese 
morphological analysis uses lucene-gosen [4]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Structure of the risk analysis system 
A morphological analysis library allows the system to 
evaluate the words in a post. This system is based on three 
factors:  
 
1. Component analysis of the swearwords 
The risk analysis system reads a list of swearwords stored 
on the server. This system compares each word in the mes-
sage to the list of swearwords and analyzes the risk based on 
the number of swearwords. Currently, the list of swearwords 
is compiled manually. The swearwords include profanity, 
inflammatory, discriminative, and crime-related terms. In 
addition, the swearwords are converted into a basic form 
after the morphological analysis and a conjugation before 
converting to a list. 
 
2. Number of the onomastic appearances 
The risk analysis system stores proper nouns, including 
names and locations. Proper nouns in a message are not 
immediately considered risky. However, a proper noun be-
comes an identifiable factor when it appears consecutively 
in a short timeframe. When the number of the onomastic 
appearances continues, this system warns the user. Thus, 
this system can highlight risks to the user.  
 
3. Component analysis of an image link and the positional 
information 
When a link to an image is included in a post, the risk 
analysis system warns the user. Because automatically ana-
lyzing the content of image data is difficult, the system con-
firms that inappropriate contents are not included. In addi-
tion, this system determines whether a post contains GPS 
information because such information increases the risk that 
personal information such as the user’s home address can be 
identified. When positional information is included in a post, 
this system provides a warning to the user.   
 
If a message is problem-free according the risk analysis 
system, the virtual server posts the message to Twitter. 
When an item is risky, the virtual server sends a warning to 
the user and does not post the message to the actual Twitter 
server. This system encourages users to correct the content. 
Because the contents of the messages accumulate on the 
server in a virtual network, the user can ignore the warning. 
However, the message is not transmitted outside the virtual 
network, preventing public comments and retweets on a 
public server. However, the server on the virtual network 
allows replies and retweets from virtual users, and the sys-
tem displays issues with the message. Thus, the user can 
experience the consequence of an inappropriate post virtual-
ly, allowing the user to learn information ethics on a non-
public server. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we propose a system that learns and then 
teaches users about information ethics of SNSs. Our system 
teaches users about risky situations and the consequences of 
an inappropriate message on a virtual system, which is more 
effective than a user learning on a public SNS. 
Future works include: 
 
 
Implementation of the server on a large-scale virtual 
whole network  
 
Automation of the system populating the swearwords 
list  
 
Improvement of the examples of trouble from a risky 
message  
REFERENCES 
[1] N. McKeown, et al., “OpenFlow: enabling innovation in 
campus 
networks”, 
ACM 
SIGCOMM 
Computer 
Communication Review,38, 2 (March 2008), pp.69-74, 2008. 
[2] “Twitter4J - A Java library for the Twitter API”, 
http://twitter4j.org/en/ (July, 2016) 
[3] The Stanford Natural Language Processing Group,  “Stanford 
Log-linear Part-Of-Speech Tagger”, 
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml, (July, 2016) 
[4] “lucene-gosen”, 
https://github.com/lucene-gosen/lucene-
gosen, (July, 2016) 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

