Restatement of Subjects of Design in Engineering as a Contribution to the 
Training of Engineers with a Sustainable Approach
José Bernardo Parra-Victorino 
División de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación
Instituto Tecnológico de Puebla
Puebla, México
bernardoparra@hotmail.com
Misael Murillo-Murillo
premi168@yahool.com.mx
María Leticia  Ramírez-Castillo
Universidad Politécnica de Puebla
Puebla, México
letyram@unam.mx
Abstract—This paper proposes a new  methodology for the 
training of engineers in Mexico.  The authors propose that 
engineering  courses  incorporate  the  process  of  recovery 
management and waste management for the design of new 
products.  This  methodology  contributes  toward  improving 
ecological  justice  because  many  factories  make  products 
without evaluating the use of recycled materials. If every new 
product  incorporated  the  processes  associated  with  waste 
management  and  recovery  in  question, future  engineers, 
whom these new skills develop, may think about products not 
only in terms of utility, but also in terms of reuse or recycling. 
According  to  Reverse  Logistics,  we  will  be  able  to  create 
quality standards in productive process based on a sustainable 
model. In Information Technologies, we make use of several 
tools  such as AutoCad, CAM, Databases, agents and mobile 
technologies for making decisions. This methodology has been 
effectively tested in a classroom, using mobile technologies and 
agents.
Keywords-  Reverse  Logistics;  sustainable  approach  to 
engineering;  Recovery  Management;  Waste  Management; 
agents and mobile technologies  
I.
INTRODUCTION
Currently,  there exists  a  problem  in  engineering 
education  in  Mexico, and  other  countries,  because  the 
curriculum does  not  have an  approach  to  evaluate 
production including reduction, recycling and reuse. If  the 
public policies of the state government had established these 
kinds  of  ecological  engineering  plans,  many  enterprises 
could have evaluated other production alternatives. Within 
the current paradigm of the professional engineer with the 
tools to solve technical problems by applying scientific and 
technological knowledge,  several  important functions are 
referred to. These are designing and making process designs 
and  prototypes  for  industry.  We  seek  to optimize  all 
processes  by  using  different  ICT  (Information  and 
Communication Technologies) and to design tests to verify 
that these processes and prototypes accomplish performance 
standards  established  in  both  domestic  and  international 
regulations,  taking  into  account  that  we  are  engaged  in 
commercial  globalization [1]. This  means  that  design  is 
identified  as  a  central  and  distinctive  element  of  the 
activities of an engineer.
In  this  regard,  when  a  design  is  carried  out,  the 
importance of teamwork is highlighted combining efforts on 
a specific objective can include, for example, team members 
working together on forms, features or materials that are 
included in new products. 
In addition to the cited substantive function,  we now 
have the obligation of proposing, especially in developed 
countries, sustainable production projects, i.e., those which 
ensure, through good use of existing natural resources, the 
survival of future generations of human beings.
Thus, the need to start the formation of  ecologically 
conscious engineers is crucial. Universities must encourage 
students to focus, from the design stage and prototyping 
stage of industrial products to production processes, on a 
sustainable approach. 
We propose that a sustainable engineer be able to create 
and  manage  new  materials,  and  analyze  designs  and 
proposals for improvement. The engineer must contemplate 
the  use  of  color,  create designs  that  improve  space 
utilization and consumption of energy, and give priority to 
designs inspired by nature. 
Some of the objectives that should arise in the context of 
the functions of "sustainable engineer" are as follows: 
•
To  conceive,  create  and  characterize  composite 
materials,  plastics  or  meta-materials  with  new 
properties,  different  from  their  original 
components.
•
To analyze specific designs as a starting point for 
the  detection  of  engaging  experiences  not  yet 
offered. 
•
To learn to deal with the current trends of color and 
shape, its application in product manufacturing, the 
psychology of color in its use and consumption. 
•
To create designs which improve the use of space 
and energy. 
•
To  create  designs  for  everyday  items  that  are 
inspired by nature, in their form and functionality. 
31
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

Within  this  new  approach,  solutions  to  minimize 
environmental  impacts  should  extend  to  methods  of 
production  and  packing  materials  and  shipping.  To 
accomplish this task, the use of recycled or biodegradable 
materials  should  be  a  priority.  All  of  this  represents  a 
conceptual  and  technical  basis  as  a starting  point  for 
proposing  innovative  designs.  We  must  now  focus  our 
attention on the tools needed to lead to efficient designs. 
There  are  some  commonly  used  software  tools,  e.g., 
Solid Works, EDCAM Professional, and uPrint Plus, among 
others  [2]  that  facilitate  the  achievement  of  the  posed 
objectives, at least in regard to conception, design of parts, 
accessories or complete products. 
One way to evaluate if the new scopes of engineering 
education are showing results is  by comparing the costs, 
time and advantages in the production of prototypes  made 
by any engineering student with a sustainable formation. In 
our university, we  did some tests in a new course, which 
will be shown in this paper.
This new course proposal, which has been incorporated 
into engineering education in the Master of Engineering at 
the Instituto Tecnológico de Puebla, must be evaluated by 
other university professors who will assess the success of 
the program in order to make it a requirement. 
II.
STATE OF THE ART
The integration of sustainability issues into a regular 
industrial engineering product design course is a challenge. 
Experiences at Delft University of Technology show that in 
course development, one of the most important aspects is 
credibility in written and spoken form.
Additionally, by putting sustainability in a wider scope 
to include social issues like safety, it is likely both students 
and  staff  without  sustainability  backgrounds  will  feel 
enthusiastic about  the new approach,  which  is  likely to 
result in better learning processes and assignments, with a 
higher credibility and more acceptance. 
According  to  [3],  Delft  University  has  proposed  the 
following elements to foster sustainability:
•
Agreements between organizations (such 
as  ANUIES  in  Mexico)  and  government 
institutions,
•
Professors  at  institutions  of  higher 
education  that  develop  coursework 
focused on this area, and
•
Some higher education institutions must 
implement sustainable development processes 
to support teaching.
However,  no  one  has  proposed  a  methodology  that 
covers a deeper level, which is the aim of our evaluation of 
prototype development under a sustainable approach. We 
propose a model of engineering  education  that seeks  to 
improve the manufacturing processes.
This  model  has  a  great  advantage  over  operations 
previously carried out:
a)
The master of engineering program at Instituto 
Tecnológico  de  Puebla  has  established  an 
innovation  course,  with  the  sustainable 
approach,  that  involves  the  development  of 
products under this approach; so far a product 
with  the  sustainable  approach  has  been 
developed  in  partnership  with  Universidad 
Politécnica de Puebla.
b)
There is a learning process for all engineering 
programs, not only for those that include the 
sustainable approach.
At  Instituto  Tecnológico  de  Puebla,  knowledge  of 
sustainable developing and design is applied when students 
create innovative products; we have gone beyond teaching 
ecological culture [4].
III.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Based on the model proposed by [6], which is explained 
below, we propose a model that includes several additional 
aspects  such  as  management of  how inputs will  react, 
energy  and  production  time.  This  model  will  be 
implemented in the areas of product design for engineering 
students at the Instituto Tecnológico de Puebla.
Additionally,  we are hoping for  improved production 
yields, based on the new engineering education. It seeks to 
promote good, sustainable practice and to take the first step 
in creating high added value from low cost materials. And, 
in addition, the new education seeks to aid in the future the 
creation of patents and self-employment. Some background 
in RL management is listed below. 
Europe has been the continent where RL has been most 
developed. RL arose during the '80s from the concern, over 
rising levels of electronic wastes and the return needs of 
defective  products.  This  led  to  the European  Directive 
2002/95/EC on electrical  waste and electronic equipment 
collection. 
In  2005,  member  countries  of  the  European  Union 
established  a plan  for collecting  this type  of waste and 
determined that the manufacturers would be responsible for 
financing  the  collection  and  processing  of them.  In  the 
United States (U.S.), this practice spread during the '90s. In 
Mexico, the electronics industry is investing in RL. 
Different authors agree to some extent on the activities of 
RL that are applied in industry. To carry out this work, the 
cited  activities  in  Figure  1  were  done.  They  are  briefly 
explained below. 
Let  us  define  some  of  the  terms  considered  in  the 
scheme shown in Figure 1.
32
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

 Figure 1. Activities of RL [5].
A. Reuse 
This term means to recover a full product to give it a 
new use. It is difficult to apply widely, largely because of 
the  fast  obsolescence  of  products  in  an  age  of  strong 
technological evolution. 
B. Repair, Remanufacturing and Cannibalization 
These  three  options  involve  an  overhaul  and 
improvement of product quality. Repair options differ in the 
complexity  of  treatment,  so  that  means  less  effort  than 
restoration,  but  this  option  is  less  desirable than 
remanufacturing.  Cannibalization is based on the recovery 
of  certain  components  to  be  incorporated  into  other 
products. 
C. Recycling 
Recycling  is  commonly understood  as  a reuse  of 
materials,  i.e.,  recovery  of  materials  for  reuse as  raw 
material in another manufacturing process. 
D. Energy Recovery
This alternative consists of removing, by combustion, 
the energy content of certain parts of the products.  This 
option is not recommended because obtaining energy from 
the combustion of these wastes could be a new source of 
emissions that must be strictly controlled. 
E. Discharge 
Although  it  really  would  not  be  a  valid  recovery 
alternative  this would be the last resort in the disposal of 
products at the end of their useful life. 
It  should  be  noted  that  all  these  activities  of  RL, 
constitute a development and adaptation to the concept of the 
so-called strategy of the three "R's” (Reduce, Reuse, and 
Recycle) considered within the so-called recycling logistics.
IV.
RL STRATEGIES
A.
Approaches
The  RL strategy  is  a  coherent  model,  unifying  and 
integrating decisions that determine and reveal the purpose 
of the organization in terms of long-term objectives. The RL 
strategy focuses on prioritizing the allocation of resources 
and selecting the current or future products of the business, 
in order to achieve a long term sustainable advantage [6] 
In developing a strategy, it is very important to have the 
reasons for implementing such a strategy clearly defined. In 
the literature about RL, possible reasons why companies 
around  the world  use RL strategies are cited. Among the 
reasons listed in [5], we are particularly interested in the 
following ones: 
•
Legal and environmental problems of landfills
•
Retriving the value of the product and/or resources
B.
Strategic Aspects of RL
The  implementation  of  RL  strategies,  along  with 
considerations of the environmental impact of disposal and 
recycling products, at the end of their useful life, lead to a 
change in design criteria and manufacturing processes. 
RL strategies are characterized by practical production 
needs. These strategies can generate significant differences, 
especially in the cost-effectiveness of a production process 
because using recycled material  is cheaper, in addition to 
being more sustainable. However, we do need to think about 
the  cost  of  collecting  the  recycled  material.  It  is  also 
necessary to define the time requirements for transporting 
the materials to the production site. 
For the reason that they satisfy the RL strategy, pure 
generic strategies and their hybrids can be implemented. 
1) Environmental Strategy 
This strategy is aimed  at minimizing the negative 
environmental impact of waste, for which reason it 
can be costly [5] [7]. 
2) Recovery Strategy 
This strategy is focused on recovering all that can 
be  reused  in  order to  reduce  production  costs. 
According  to  [8],  "RL  is  the  last  frontier  for 
reducing  costs".  According  to  the  designed  RL 
strategy, different objectives will be present, which 
may be present either in one or another strategy, so 
that the corresponding target-strategy will depend 
on the importance accorded to them. Listed below 
are some objectives  that  may be present  in the 
strategies of RL [5] [9]. 
a)
Maximize the value added to products and materials 
that have returned to the company, making maximum 
use of recycled resources. 
b)
Minimize  the  cost  of  returning  the  goods  and 
materials, i.e., the network to operate efficiently. 
c)
Minimize the negative impact of these products and 
materials on the environment. 
d)
Increase customer service. 
e)
Reduce the cost of production.
V.
 REVERSE LOGISTICS IN ENGINEERING EDUCATION 
A.
Subjects Involved
According to what has been stated so far, it is obvious 
that RL is a methodology that can have wide applications in 
industry due to the benefits it represents. However, Mexican 
institutions of higher education have not included it in their 
curriculum as a compulsory subject or optional, at least. 
In  this  sense,  as  new  generations  of engineers  must 
reverse the current paradigm of industrial design, especially 
33
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

because  of its  environmental  consequences,  universities 
should incorporate such methodologies in the curriculum of 
engineering degrees. 
To  illustrate  the  changes  that  must  be  made in  an 
engineer’s  education,  we have taken  as  an  example the 
curriculum and syllabus of a course taught in the industrial 
engineering  degree  from  the  Instituto  Tecnológico  de 
Puebla.
Synthetically, this proposed change seeks to modify the 
content of the design subjects for the practices carried out 
including the development of products that take into account 
the selection of materials and processes from the point of 
view of sustainability. The main idea is to always add to the 
waste and composing parts recovery process, as done in the 
European electronics industry. 
An  existing  course  within  an industrial  engineering 
degree, in which certain issues relating to RL are touched, is 
modified as follows. 
B.
 Courses
Course Title: Marketing 
Field: Industrial Engineering 
Contribution to Graduate Profile:
Students  will  learn  techniques  and  qualitative  and 
quantitative  methods  for  decision  making  related  to  the 
conditions set by different markets.
Main Objective of Course: 
This  course  focuses  on  conceptualizing  the  role  of 
marketing  in order  to improve its application in several 
processes.  Students  will  study  market  research,  product 
development, pricing decisions and distribution in order to 
have a basis for decision making in marketing. They can use 
these  skills  to  provide  the  customer  with  the  quality, 
quantity and opportunities her or she needs.
Topics: 
1. Overview of Marketing 
2. Market research 
3. Market Segmentation 
4. Design and Product Development 
5. Price Allocation 
6. Distribution of the Product 
7. Promotional Mixture 
8. Cases of Successful Marketing 
As can be seen in the previous agenda, there are clear 
areas  of  opportunity  in  regard  to  design  and  product 
development,  especially  in  those  areas  that  involve 
primarily packing  materials,  packaging  and  shipping,  as 
product characteristics. Reverse Logistics is also applicable 
to  the  life  cycle  of  the  product.  Our  proposal  is  to 
incorporate the subject of RL in the training of all engineers, 
with  the aim  of fulfilling the objectives  outlined  in the 
introduction. 
A  suggested  course,  which  incorporates  the 
environmental focus mentioned in this paper, would have 
the following outline.
Course Title: Reverse Logistics 
Field: All Engineering Degrees
Main Objective of Course: 
This course seeks to analyze the factors which determine 
the selection of sustainable materials in the manufacture of 
products. Students will acquire basic skills for managing 
processes of waste management and material recovery.
Topics:
1. Importance of Reverse Logistics 
1.1 Strategic Use
1.2 Barriers to RL
2. Returns Management 
2.1 Improving the Returns Process 
2.2 Lifecycle 
2.3 System Information in Reverse Logistics 
2.4 Zero Return 
2.5 Remanufacture and Restoration 
3 RL and Environment 
3.1 Availability and Cost of Landfills 
3.2 Packaging 
3.3 Returnable Packaging
3.4 Case Study 
C.
Suggested Practices
•
Development of new materials 
•
Conception and design of new products, including 
their packing 
•
Recovery  of  materials  from  a  product  and  its 
packing
The suggested practices are described in Figure 2, where 
the stage of the manufacturing process of a prototype that a 
student should perform is observed. Particularly noteworthy 
is the process of testing the prototype.  This  is the stage 
where one makes use of IT to perform and make decisions. 
As they have to solve difficult implementation problems the 
students  have  strong  support,  from  instructors  and 
laboratories. 
Although the  course was  suggested  in an  industrial 
engineering degree, it is currently being implemented in the 
Master of Engineering at Instituto Tecnológico de Puebla.
Students of  the  pilot  RL  course created  innovative 
products such as a discrete camera, USB carrying devices, 
and  carrying  devices for  a professor, among  others. To 
illustrate  the creativity  of the students,  we selected  one 
product which exemplified the use of recycled materials.
34
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

Figure 2. Process development of a prototype manufacturing 
practice and process of reuse and component recovery. 
One  student  invented  a  unique  backpack  umbrella, 
which was named Handy Umbrella. To develop a prototype 
of the Handy Umbrella, the following skills were applied by 
the student: Marketing, to determine the market niche, and 
Reverse Logistics. 
For this prototype, various tests were carried out. Three 
people with different physical characteristics of weight and 
height used three different Handy  Umbrella models. The 
umbrellas used had the following characteristics:
1. Light weight, thin handle, and pole height of 65 cm.
2. Heavy weight, medium handle, pole height of 78 cm.
3. Average weight, handle, pole height of 53.5 cm.
The Handy Umbrella fits nicely on to, people's backs, but it 
occasionally needs to be modified to fit the individual. Like 
clothing  or footwear, backpacks have varying  sizes  for 
better comfort, though they are perfectly adaptable.
As for the umbrellas, the best adapted to the end product 
was of average weight.
The product was tested for protection on sunny days and 
rainy days, showing good performance in both situations. It 
was also tested on a windy day.
The only drawback the evidence presented is  that  it 
becomes a cumbersome umbrella if you are in a very small 
or crowded place, which could lead to an improvement in 
future work.
The  proposed  design at  first  yielded an ergonomic, 
adjustable, stable, lightweight, reusable and easy  to install 
product. The product is also hands free because the umbrella 
is placed in the backpack. 
In addition to being practical, the student’s umbrella was 
made from previously processed products. Table 1 shows 
the product  compared  to  other  products on  the  market. 
Highlighted are some features of the Handy Umbrella such 
as cost, average weight, and which materials used.
TABLE I. 
FEATURE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MODELS
Product     Stability   Weight   Recycl.  Handy   Mex.Cost    USD
Shoulder
brella
middle
220 gr.
No
Middle
354
30.33
Nubrella
high
1000 
gr.
   N
o
Low
765.50
65.59
Porbel
high
     -
No
Middle
316.20
27.09
Handy 
umbrella
middle
470 gr.
Yes
Yes
180.0
15.42
As can be seen, by the end of the course the student had 
created a product that was not only original but also more 
sustainable and cheaper than other similar products on the 
market.
Commenting on the reception of the course, we can say 
that the course was popular among students because for the 
first time they gave suggestions that  will be incorporated 
next semester.
VI.
RESULTS 
So far, there have been some laboratory practices which 
have been able to obtain designs of products that include the 
3D model of the product: label design, process design and 
recovery of waste materials. The latter is aided by creating a 
database  accessible  by  design.  When  students  require 
information to design a new product, when they modify a 
previous design or  when they need to find out about the 
recovery process, they can access the database.
The databases  are the repository for agents (software 
programs that monitor the development of a model meets the 
specifications) [10] that take the information and report back 
to the designer about how well the prototype is developing. 
This reporting happens in real time.
When the designer is making the prototype test of the 
product, the agent retrieves information from the product of 
the database server and the user's request is to modify the 
timely intervention part design or material recovery process. 
Similarly, when you are doing performance testing of the 
product, in the laboratory, usually in a workshop, it is best to 
make  inquiries  of  other  materials  through  access  to 
performance  information  from  the  experience  of  using 
different components.
Accessing this information is valuable because  in situ 
people  need  to  make  decision  based  on experience. 
Undoubtedly,  the  crux  is  this  part  of  the  proposal,  i.e., 
discussing the support of mobile technology tools and agents 
simultaneously to provide support and enrich the experience 
of an engineering student learning to make decisions. Who, 
under  pressure,  can  decide  how  to  implement  the  most 
appropriate  material  selection,  taking  into  account  the 
performance of the material, the lifetime of the components, 
and the recovery cost of the selected material. In short, the 
students apply the main criteria for deciding how to the 
manufacture a sustainable product.
Another important part of these courses is the instructors, 
who  must  be  prepared  to  evaluate  product  prototypes 
35
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

designed by students. The instructors must also analyze the 
use of new material, make test for each type of product and 
reach an agreement with student as to the expected quality of 
the product.
Once a student has acquired skills in RL, it is clear that 
this is the fundamental approach to training as a sustainable 
engineer and, therefore, it will not be difficult to incorporate 
these experiences in the register of practices of  his or her 
professional life in industry. In order to evaluate the success 
of this proposal student work can be compared with the 
items produced under traditional criteria.  Companies will 
appreciate this approach. In a few years it will be a quality 
standard applied throughout in the country, and employers 
will  choose  to  hire  engineers  trained  in  sustainable 
production process.
Thus, incorporating this model in universities, for the 
benefit of future generations, is expected. This method of 
teaching could even become a state policy in the near future.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Because it has been accepted as a model for training 
students, the process of prototype development is expected to 
improve and it is expected there will be an external user for 
each product manufactured.
It  is expected  that all items proposed  in RL will be 
incorporated  in a required  course for all the engineering 
branches  in the  Instituto  Tecnológico  de  Puebla  once  a 
university committee university has evaluated the results of 
the pilot RL course. We predict that the state government 
will evaluate the usefulness of RL and thus enact a public 
policy to mandate all universities in the state to include RL 
courses.
We conclude that the training of engineers should be 
modified. For the sake of environmental justice, engineering 
education  should  include  an  assessment  of  sustainable 
product elaboration. As has been shown with work in the RL 
course,  students  can  acquire  new  skills  and  designed 
innovative items that consumers demand from producers.
The  use of  Information  Technology  supports  all 
production processes in several ways: i) the use of databases 
to manage information and materials and products designed, 
ii) the search for information on the Web through agents, iii) 
the administration of the reminders of the scheduled dates of 
project activities by agents [10]. 
So far there has been one production test in a course, but 
if this model is extended to all engineering degrees, then 
there will be benefits to the environment. The RL method 
can  also  complement  engineering  specialties  where 
prototypes  are designed  based  on methods like Learning 
Based  on  Problems  [11]  and  Development  of  Corporate 
Learning [12], thus amplifying the practice of sustainability 
in engineering.
We are only beginning to see the positive results of using 
Reverse Logistics in engineering education. If RL is widely 
adapted, it has the potential to create a better world for future 
generations. 
REFERENCES
[1]     Education requirements for engineers
http://www.careertoolkits.com/engineering/engineering-
education.html, retrieved 07-20-2011.
[2]    The first free publishing and viewer software
http://www.edrawingsviewer.com/pages/features/index.html. 
Retrieved 07-20-2011.
[3]   Solís Segura, Luz Ma. and Jerónimo Amado López Arriaga, 
Principios básicos de Educación Ambiental (Basic principals 
of  environmental  education).  Universidad  Autónoma  del 
Estado de México, 2003.
[4]    Boks, Casper  and Jan Carel Diehl,“Design for Sustainability 
Program, Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering,” Delft 
University  of  Technology,  Landbergstraat  15,  2628  CE 
Delft, the Netherlands, 2006.
[5]
Tibben-Lembke, Ronald and Dale Rogers.  El concepto de 
Logística inversa (parte 1). Boletín “El lenguaje global de los 
negocios” (The global language of business), GS1, Panama, 
2007, retrieved 07-20-2011, from, 
http://www.gs1pa.org/boletín-ago07-art4-html
[6]
Stock, James, and  Julio César Angulo..  Logística inversa, 
una  alternativa  al  deterioro  medioambiental.  (Reverse 
logistics,  an  alternative  to  environmental  degradation). 
Mexico, 1998, retrieved 07-20-2011 from, 
http://monografías.com/trabajos46/deterioro-
medioambiental.shtml#top
[7]
González Torre, Pilar, María José Álvarez Gil, Adenso Díaz 
Fernández,  Logistica  inversa  y  medio  ambiente  (Reverse 
logistics  and  the  environment),  McGraw-Hill,  EAN/isbn: 
9788448141806, Spain, 2009.
[8]
Caldwell, John T., “Screen studies and industrial,” Review 
Screen, Oxford Journals, vol 50, number 1 pp 167-179.
[9]
 Marien, Edward J., “Reverse logistics as competitive 
strategy,” Supply Chain Management Review, Winter 1999.
[10] Oraifige,  Amal,  Mian  Wu,  Barry  Mills,  and  Ilias 
Oraifige, ”An online intelligent system for teaching design 
technologies  to  engineering  students,”
 Engineering 
Education:  Journal  of  the  Higher  Education  Academy 
Engineering  Subject  Centre,  6  (1).  Retrieved  08-01-2011, 
from, 
http://www.engsc.ac.uk/journal/index.php/ee/article/view/174
/250
[11]  Poitras,  Gérard  J.,  and  Eric  G.  Poitras,  “A  cognitive 
apprenticeship approach to engineering education, the role or 
learning  styles,  “Engineering  Education:  Journal  of  the 
Higher  Education  Academy  Engineering  Subject  Centre, 
6(1). Retrieved 08-01-2011, from,
 http://www.engsc.ac.uk/journal/index.php/ee/article/view/174/2
50
[12] Godat,  Meredith  and  Brian  Atkin,  “Reframing  the 
Development  of  Corporate  Learning,”
 Engineering 
Education:  Journal  of  the  Higher  Education  Academy 
Engineering  Subject  Centre, 6(1).  Retrieved  08-01-2011, 
from, 
http://www.engsc.ac.uk/journal/index.php/ee/article/view/17
4/250
36
SOTICS 2011 : The First International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2

