Facebook as an Interaction Platform in Higher Education: 
The Case of an Egyptian Private University 
 
Nourhan Hamdi 
Cardiff School of Management 
Cardiff Metropolitan University 
Western Ave, Cardiff CF5 2YB, United Kingdom 
e-mail: nourhamdi@gmail.com 
Rasha Abdel Aziz 
Business Information Systems Department 
Arab Academy for Science & Technology 
Miami P.O. Box 1029, Alexandria, Egypt 
e-mail: rashaayo@gmail.com 
Abstract—Current research is continuously examining the 
benefits of using Social Networking Sites, particularly 
Facebook, in higher education to enhance the learning 
process. More specifically, a few researchers have tackled the 
nature of interaction that takes place on social networks 
between students and educators, outside the learning and 
teaching setting. This paper aims to classify and investigate 
the types of interaction that take place on a closed Facebook 
group between undergraduate students, faculty members and 
administration staff in the College of Management at a private 
university in Egypt. A web application was developed to 
extract the posts and discussions taking place on the group 
using the Facebook Graph API. The application then helps in 
classifying and analyzing the extracted data. Results show that 
the Facebook group acts as an information-sharing hub for 
news and announcements, as well as a question and answer 
platform for academic and non-academic topics involving 
students, faculty, and college administration staff. The study 
shows interesting results, such as the appearance of implicit 
types of interaction due to important features like tagging and 
liking. 
Keywords- 
Social 
Networking 
Sites; 
Facebook; 
Online 
Interaction; Higher Education; Facebook Groups. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The role of social networks is increasingly gaining 
momentum in today’s web-oriented society. Social media 
can be defined as a group of Internet-based applications 
built on the ideology and technology of Web 2.0 that allow 
for the creation and exchange of user-generated content [1]. 
Social media is known to play an essential role in 
collaboration, community building, participation and 
sharing. 
One vital aspect of social media is that it uses mobile 
and web-based technologies to create highly interactive 
platforms through which individuals and communities can 
share, discuss, and modify user-generated content [2]. This 
technology exists in different forms, such as Internet 
forums, web logs, social blogs, micro blogging, wikis, 
podcasts, ratings, social bookmarking and social networks 
[3]. 
According to Facebook statistics, 1.04 billion users on 
average were active each day in December 2015; 934 
million of them were active daily through their mobile 
devices [4]. With 22.4 million users as of mid-2014, Egypt 
is ranked 14th worldwide in terms of audience size, and 
ranked 1st among Arab countries. 
Facebook in Egypt is a youthful community, users 
younger than 35 years old represent about 85% of total 
users, while users aged 45 years or older only make up 
about 5% of total users. Eighteen-year-old users are the 
largest single-year group on Facebook, with about 1.3 
million users, alone representing more than 6% of the total 
Facebook users in Egypt. The age group ranging from 19 to 
24 represents 31% of the Facebook users in Egypt; this is 
the same age group of the youth studied in this research [5]. 
Students feel the need to get together, collaborate, have 
discussions, and exchange information with others who 
share similar interests [6].  
This study analyzes the use of the closed Facebook 
group created for the Student Union of the College of 
Management (CMT) and Technology at the Arab Academy 
for Science and Technology (AAST) [7] in Alexandria, 
Egypt. The research aims to investigate how Social 
Networking Sites, in this case Facebook, could be used by 
the college community in the educational context. This 
Facebook group was initially created in March 2011 by the 
college administration to notify students of important 
general announcements. The admins of the group were all 
college staff members at that time. Currently, the group 
admins include both staff members and member students of 
the CMT Student Union. The admins are responsible for 
approving the addition of new members and monitoring 
language and content to make sure it’s relevant to the 
purpose of the group. 
The students of CMT are middle/upper class youth, 
with an age range between 18 and 23. All students must 
pass an admissions test to prove their English language 
proficiency, unless they are enrolled in the Arabic 
department, which comprises 27% of the total number of 
students enrolled in all departments. 
On Facebook, users can perform three actions on each 
post: like, comment, and share [8]. The group studied in 
this paper is closed only for members participation and did 
not allow the option of sharing posts, therefore the data 
collected only includes the post content, with all its details 
including number of likes, and the comments that it 
received. 
Previous work that tackled the same area of research are 
discussed in section 2, followed by the detailed research 
method and steps in section 3. Section 4 presents and 
discusses the findings of the research after showing the 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

analysis results. Finally, in section 5 the conclusion, 
limitations, and future work are presented and reviewed. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORK 
Many previous studies have focused on exploring the 
use of social media by as an educational tool [9]. Gafni and 
Deri have studied the costs and benefits of using social 
networking in the learning and teaching environment [10]. 
In a study focused on the Facebook walls of 
undergraduate students at a UK university [11], Selwyn 
investigated why and how students communicate on 
Facebook in relation to their studies. He believes that 
communication over Social Networking Sites (SNS) 
corresponds in an electronic way with face-to-face social 
learning contexts at academic institutions, and further 
suggests that the conversational and collaborative potential 
of SNS can be utilized for academic purposes. His study 
points out how SNS can be used educationally to support 
communication 
between 
students 
during 
learning 
situations, as well as for educator-learner dialogue. SNS 
provide channels for informal and unstructured forms of 
learning. On the other hand, Selwyn notes that educators 
are concerned that social networking may distract learners 
from their studies.  
Selwyn [13] regularly logged in to sites of 909 students, 
not to participate or interact, but to observe the sites and 
profiles that were publicly accessible and to systematically 
archive relevant exchanges. A pattern that emerged was the 
use of Facebook for practical information, such as 
schedules and venues. Although this was also available on 
official channels, some students preferred accessing 
Facebook for this information. In this paper we decided to 
explore how SNS can be used to connect a college’s 
community outside the boundaries of a specific course or a 
specific group. In the case of the group we are studying, the 
group is considered one of the official college channels of 
information sharing, as it was created and is moderated by 
the college administration. Furthermore, Selwyn explored 
the possibility of merging social and educational 
environments in order to understand students’ purposes for 
using Facebook and the relationship of their interactions to 
educational aspects. Five themes emerged from his analysis 
of over 2000 education-related posts: (1) recounting and 
reflecting of university experience; (2) exchange of 
practical 
information; 
(3) 
exchange 
of 
academic 
information; 
(4) 
displays 
of 
supplication 
and/or 
disengagement; and (5) banter (i.e., exchanges of humor 
and nonsense). 
Another study by Pollara [12] explored the use of 
Facebook to determine if the implementation of social 
networking in education would strengthen the relationship 
between mentors and mentees and increase student 
participation and dialogue outside formal settings. Results 
indicated that the use of Facebook positively affected the 
relationships between mentors and mentees. In addition, 
students believed they learned more by using Facebook and 
would prefer using it for other educational purposes. 
In her study, de Villiers [13] described and discussed a 
venture in which postgraduate distance-learning students 
joined an optional group on Facebook for the purpose of 
discussions on academic, content-related topics, largely 
initiated by the students themselves. The study revealed 
that learning and insight were enhanced by these 
discussions and that the students were benefiting from 
contact with fellow students. 
Most of the studies in the literature have investigated 
the effect of social networks, especially Facebook, on the 
learning process and ignored the perspective of exploring 
what the features and functions, like Facebook groups, 
could offer to academic institutions and its stakeholders; 
that is what this paper aims to explore. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
This study analyzes the use of a closed Facebook group 
created for the Student Union of the College of 
Management and Technology at the Arab Academy for 
Science and Technology in Alexandria, Egypt. This 
Facebook group was initially created in March 2011 by the 
college administration to notify students of important 
general announcements.  
Using the classification in Mouton’s map of research 
designs [14], the methods used in the study are a 
combination of content analysis of the posts and 
quantitative descriptive statistical analysis of the dataset.  
A. The Closed Facebook Group 
The purpose of using the Facebook group within the 
college community has evolved over the four years since it 
was first created. This study analyzes the posts and 
interactions that happened within the group during the fall 
semester of the 2015/2016 academic year. Since the 
Facebook group is a closed group, the researcher was 
granted administrator permission to have access to content 
and advanced controls in the group. 
a) Group Members 
As of January 2016, the number of members in the 
group had reached 4500 members. This number includes all 
the faculty, admin staff members, and students that have 
joined the group since March 2011. Joining the Facebook 
group is not mandatory, therefore the active number of 
students is estimated to be a little below the total number of 
students that are currently enrolled in the College of 
Management, which is a total of 1701 students. 
b) Departments and Courses 
The Facebook group is neither course-specific nor 
department-specific. The members of the group include 
students from the seven academic departments of the 
College of Management who are enrolled in the more than 
282 courses offered that semester. 
B. The Web Application 
A web-based application which uses the public 
Facebook Graph API was developed to retrieve all the 
posts and comments that took place on the group page 
starting at the end of September 2015 and ending in 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

January 2016. The posts were then saved in a database and 
later analyzed to reach the research findings. 
In addition to the post content itself, information like 
the number of likes, and the name of the user who posted 
were also extracted from Facebook and stored in the 
database. To prepare the dataset for analysis, the 
application helps add descriptive attributes to each post and 
each comment. The following attributes were used to 
describe each post: 
 
Who made the post? 
 
A classification of the content of the post. 
 
The language used in the post. 
 
What was the feedback on the post? 
Additionally, special remarks were added to each post 
to further describe its content and the feedback it received 
(see Fig. 1). 
C. Ethical Considerations 
Ethical clearance was obtained from the college’s 
research ethics committee before starting the study. A 
disclaimer was posted on the group to notify all members 
that the content posted during the semester was subject to 
academic research. All information and identities were to 
be kept anonymous and any member was given the right to 
withdraw his participation and actions from the study. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS 
A total of 1344 posts and 4580 comments on these posts 
were collected. After classifying the posts according to 
content, the role of the user who posted, and the feedback 
and number of likes, the following analysis were 
conducted. 
 
 
A. Who Posts on the Group 
As shown in Fig. 2, the largest number of users who 
posted on the group was students and student union 
members (SU students), with a total of 69% of the collected 
posts. This was followed by faculty and instructors, 
representing 22% of the total posts for the semester. The 
admin 
staff 
represented 
only 
7% 
of 
the 
total 
announcements. Some advertisements were also allowed to 
be posted on the group by approved training centers and 
AAST institutes outside CMT. 
 
Figure 2. Users Who Posted on the Group 
B. Posts Classification 
After the posts were reviewed, the following 
classifications were created to describe the content of the 
posts. The classification process was semi-automated, as it 
had to include human intervention at some cases. Two 
major notification types were classified: enquiries and 
announcements. These two classifications were further 
grouped 
into 
sub-classifications 
according 
to 
the 
occurrences found in the post content (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 
4). 
The third frequently used classification was sharing of 
academic content by students and faculty. Students shared 
content to help each other before exam times; and some 
interesting posts were extracted where students took 
pictures of their handwritten notes and posted them on the 
group. Faculty also shared course material files like PDFs, 
PPTs, and video tutorials. 
 
 
Figure 3. Classification of Posted Announcements 
Other types of posts were also identified, such as 
student complaints, condolences on the occasion of death, 
and some advertisements posted by entities and other 
institutes in AAST (e.g., Graduate School of Business, 
AAST Alumni).  
Figure 1. Screenshot of Post Classification Page 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

The highest post type used on the group was enquiries 
(51% of total posts), followed by announcements (36%) see 
Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 4. Classification of Posted Enquiries 
 
Students posted 97% of the total enquiries, whereas the 
announcements were posted by faculty members, student 
union members and administration staff. 
The term ―Good Luck‖ occurred in a total of 37 faculty 
posts before exam times, to encourage them, and received a 
high number of likes relative to the average of the total 
posts by faculty members.  
It was detected that the rate of new posts being added to 
the group increased during specific time periods. After 
further investigation, Fig. 6 shows how that academic 
calendar highlights were the reason behind the high rate of 
posting. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Post Types 
 
Posts were grouped according to the time span of the 
academic calendar highlights. The highest percentage of 
post 
types 
consisted 
of 
enquiries, 
followed 
by 
announcements, and shared academic material during exam 
times. Example of student enquiries during exam times are 
asking about exam schedule, chapters included in exams, 
and asking about grades. Announcements during exam 
times were made by faculty, Student Union members and 
admin staff regarding schedules, exam rooms, and course 
content covered in exams. Furthermore, course material 
was shared by faculty and students. During registration 
time, the enquiries were all posted by students to ask about 
course availability, tuition payment and semester starting 
dates. 
 
 
Figure 6. Post Types During Academic Calendar Highlights 
 
C. Language Used 
Out of the total number of students enrolled in CMT at 
the time of the study, 99% were native Arabic speakers, 
which was reflected in the language of the discussions on 
the group page. The language was classified into English 
and Arabic, and then further classified according to the 
script used for writing. The language was classified as 
shown in Fig. 7. 
Fig. 8 shows that the highest number of posts were 
written in a mix between English and Arabic text written in 
Latin script; this dual language was used in 92% of the 
enquiry posts made by students. 31% of the posts were 
written in English using Latin script, mostly by faculty and 
SU students in official announcements. 14% of the posts 
were written in the Latin transliteration of the Arabic 
language with no English words included. 
 
 
Figure 7. Classification of Language and Script Used 
 
7% of the posts were fully written in Arabic using the 
Arabic script and were almost all announcements posted by 
faculty or staff members in the Arabic department of the 
CMT that were directed to the enrolled students. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

D. Discussions and Feedback on Posts 
A total of 4580 comments was extracted and added to 
the database to represent the feedback on the posts, along 
with the number of likes, which could also be extracted 
using the Facebook API. 
 
 
Figure 8. Languages and Scripts Used in Posts 
 
a) Comments 
The average number of comments on all the posts in 
the dataset was 3.4 per post, but not all posts had users 
comment on them. The posts were classified into seed and 
non-seed posts [15], the seed posts being those that have 
developed a thread of comments and discussions, and the 
non-seed posts being those who have failed to attract 
engagement from the group members. Posts that received 
likes but no comments were not counted as seed posts. 
Interestingly, only 41% of all posts were seed posts, while 
the rest were non-seed posts. An example of a seed post 
that gathered a relatively high number of comments is 
when the campus had to close due to bad weather 
conditions and the responsible faculty member posted that 
the following day’s classes were cancelled. The post was 
written in both English and Arabic, and the Arabic 
language had some humor in it, because the professor who 
posted knew that students would like taking a day off from 
college. 
Post exclusivity has also been found to have an effect 
on the post feedback; the post with the highest number of 
comments was posted by a student who had an exclusive 
announcement. The same content was posted later three 
times but did not receive the same amount of feedback. 
The comments on enquiry posts were analyzed and 
classified into positive and neutral feedback. Where 
positive feedback included helpful information that answers 
the enquiry and neutral feedback didn’t really help with 
answering the enquiry. Interestingly 83% of the comments 
on enquiries were positive feedback comments that helped 
the students by giving them either the solution or answer to 
their enquiries or helped leading them to it (e.g., tagging 
friends who had answers). 
b) Likes 
The like feature on Facebook allows users to press the 
like button, either on a post or a picture or a comment, 
which signifies that a user liked that particular content. In 
the dataset, the average number of likes on posts was 2.5 
and the average number of likes on comments was 0.7. The 
types of posts with the highest average number of likes 
were announcements, such as exam schedules or exam 
results. Fig. 9 shows a scatter chart of the number of likes 
and the number of comments each post in the dataset 
received. The correlation coefficient r=0.552 which 
indicates a low positive correlation between the number of 
likes and the number of comments on each post. The post 
with the highest number of likes, 239 likes, was a video 
shared by a student after the graduation projects 
presentations. The student shot a video including all his 
friends and all students of the marketing department who 
were presenting that day. The post received the highest 
number of likes because everyone could see themselves in 
the video and the students were proud of their work. The 
same post received a total of 43 comments, of which 40 
comments were students tagging their friends. 
 
Figure 9. Likes and Comments on Posts 
 
c) Tagging 
The tagging feature in Facebook allows users to add 
the name of another user in a post or a comment, so that the 
tagged user understands that the posting user wants him 
involved in that specific topic. Tagging was used in 87% of 
the comments, where students tagged their friends, or 
tagged certain faculty members, when they needed them to 
either answer an enquiry or felt that they needed to notify 
them with the information being shared in a specific post. 
Faculty members explicitly asked the students to tag 
their classmates in 21 occurrences, when they posted 
important and urgent announcements. Two posts by 
students also included a request to tag the teaching 
assistants, in urgent enquiry posts. On Facebook you can 
only tag someone who is already on your friend list, hence 
the need for the tagging request in the posts. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
After analyzing the content of the posts and comments 
and discussions, as well as all the descriptive data and 
classification, we concluded that a group on a SNS can act 
as a variety of interesting platforms for interaction in higher 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

education institutions. A study by Mbodila et al. [16] on the 
effect 
of 
social 
media 
on 
students 
engagement 
recommended that in order to communicate effectively 
with students, higher education professionals must embrace 
new technologies and explore opportunities to implement a 
social media presence; this is what was taking place on the 
CMT closed Facebook group. The interaction between the 
members of the group allows us to conclude that SNS can 
help the higher education communities, outside interact by 
acting as a (1) notification center; (2) question and answer 
platform; 
(3) 
student 
affairs 
portal; 
(4) 
learning 
management system. 
A. Notification Center 
The group acted as a notification center where 
announcements were made about all activities that can 
happen on a college campus. It was used for information 
sharing between students, as well as between students and 
faculty and college admin staff. 
B. Question and Answer Platform 
The group acted as a question and answer platform 
where students could enquire about anything related to their 
studies, courses and exams. They were either answered by 
other students or by faculty and staff members. This created 
engaging collaboration between students, outside the 
boundary of a specific course or educational setting. 
C. Student Affairs Portal 
The student affairs administration staff used the group 
to share information and announcements; students also 
used it for their student affairs-related enquiries. 
D. Learning Management System 
10% of the total collected posts were shared academic 
content of different courses, either by students or by faculty 
members. Moodle [17] is being used by CMT as a learning 
management system since 2009 for all courses in course 
material sharing, assigning submissions etc. Despite this 
fact, it was interesting to observe that both faculty and 
students also used the Facebook group as a mean of 
material sharing. 
E. Implicit Interaction 
Interesting implicit interaction was detected when 
students used the Facebook tagging feature to tag their 
friends on important notification posts. After seeing the tag, 
the friends often liked the comment that included the tag, as 
confirmation that they were aware of the announcement of 
the post. This was possible due to the tag and like features 
provided by the Facebook, and occurred in 81% of the total 
posts announced by faculty and staff members. 
Although the frequency of their appearance was 
relatively low, emojis [18] found in posts and comments 
did sometimes hide implicit meanings like sarcastic smiles, 
or conveying a message without actually typing it in text. 
The use of emojis could be further investigated in future 
work. 
F. Limitations 
It is inevitable that interaction on the group continues 
after the dataset was collected, more likes and comments 
are added by the users. This results in extended discussions 
that could not be included in the dataset because they did 
not exist at data collection time. In March 2013, Facebook 
announced a new feature [19] that enables the users to 
directly reply to specific comments left on any post instead 
of generally replying to the post. This feature makes it easy 
to keep relevant conversations connected, but when the 
comments in our study were collected, there was not 
differentiation between comments on a specific post, and 
comments replied to a specific comment on that post. All 
comments were treated equally in our study. 
A further limitation that hindered the study from 
having more elaborate statistical results of the students 
interacting on the group, is that the total number of students 
enrolled in the Facebook group includes students that have 
already graduated. Furthermore, not all the students 
registered at the college during the semester have Facebook 
accounts or are members of the group. 
G. Future Work 
As a result of the study, we observed that some 
important posts were not found interesting and were 
neglected by students. As future work, the reasons behind 
this could be explored and we could help recommend how 
to create more interesting content for students with which 
they will be willing to interact. 
This paper is not intended to prove that Facebook is 
better than learning management systems that are originally 
designed for educational purposes, but a comparison 
between the two could be further explored in future 
investigations. 
Furthermore, the degree of formality of the used 
language and the sentiments detected from the comments 
were also observed and could be explored in future work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Our thanks goes to the administration of the College of 
Management at AAST for granting us access and admin 
permissions to the college’s closed Facebook group to 
conduct our research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, ―Users of the world, unite! 
The challenges and opportunities of Social Media,‖ Bus. 
Horiz., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 59–68, 2010. 
[2] J. H. Kietzmann, K. Hermkens, I. P. McCarthy, and B. S. 
Silvestre, ―Social media? Get serious! Understanding the 
functional building blocks of social media,‖ Bus. Horiz., vol. 
54, no. 3, pp. 241–251, May 2011. 
[3] J. P. Mazer, R. E. Murphy, and C. J. Simonds, ―I’ll See You 
on,‖ Commun. Educ., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 1–17, Dec. 2006. 
[4] Facebook Newsroom, ―Facebook Statistics,‖ 2016. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/. 
[Accessed: 10-Aug-2016]. 
[5] E-Marketing Egypt, ―Facebook In Egypt 
- Online 
Competitive Intelligence Report,‖ 2014. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[6] N. Eteokleous, D. Ktoridou, I. Stavrides, and M. Michaelidis, 
―Facebook -a Social Networking Tool for Educational 
Purposes: Developing Special Interest Groups,‖ ICICTE 
Proc., no. 2008, pp. 363–375, 2012. 
[7] ―AAST 
Website.‖ 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.aast.edu/en/. [Accessed: 10-Aug-2016]. 
[8] K. Taylor and O. Alonso, ―Insights From Brands in 
Facebook,‖ Proc. 2014 ACM Conf. Web Sci., 2014. 
[9] F. Tiryakioglu, ―Use of Social Networks as an Education 
Tool,‖ Contrmporary Ecucational Technol., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 
135–150, 2011. 
[10] R. Gafni and M. Deri, ―Costs and benefits of Facebook for 
undergraduate 
students,‖ 
Interdiscip. 
J. 
Information, 
Knowledge, Manag., vol. 7, pp. 45–61, 2012. 
[11] N. Selwyn, ―Faceworking: exploring students’ education 
related use of Facebook,‖ Learn. Media Technol., vol. 34, no. 
2, pp. 157–174, 2009. 
[12] P. Pollara and J. Zhu, ―Social Networking and Education: 
Using Facebook as an edusocial space,‖ Proc. Soc. Inf. 
Technol. Teach. Educ. Int. 2011, pp. 3330–3338, 2011. 
[13] M. R. R. De Villiers, ―Academic Use of a Group on 
Facebook : Initial Findings and Perceptions Literature Study 
General Use by University Students,‖ Informing Sci. IT 
Educ. Conf., pp. 173–190, 2010. 
[14] ―Mouton, J. (2001) How to Succeed in Your Master’s and 
Doctoral Studies: A South African Guide and Resource 
Book. Van Schaik, Pretoria. - Open Access Library.‖ 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.oalib.com/references/15496255. [Accessed: 24-
Jan-2016]. 
[15] M. Rowe and H. Alani, ―Mining and comparing engagement 
dynamics across multiple social media platforms,‖ Proc. 
2014 ACM Conf. Web Sci. - WebSci ’14, pp. 229–238, 
2014. 
[16] M. Mbodila, B. Isong, and K. Muhandji, ―The Effect of 
Social Media on Student ’ s Engagement and Collaboration : 
a case study of University of Venda using Facebook,‖ J 
Commun., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 115–125, 2014. 
[17] L. Deng and N. J. Tavares, ―From Moodle to Facebook: 
Exploring students’ motivation and experiences in online 
communities,‖ Comput. Educ., vol. 68, no. January 2016, pp. 
167–176, 2013. 
[18] L. Stark and K. Crawford, ―The Conservatism of Emoji: 
Work, Affect, and Communication,‖ Soc. Media + Soc., vol. 
1, no. 2, p. 2056305115604853, 2015. 
[19] ―Facebook comment replies feature.‖ [Online]. Available: 
https://www.facebook.com/notes/journalists-on-
facebook/improving-conversations-on-facebook-with-
replies/578890718789613/. [Accessed: 10-Aug-2016]. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-504-3
SOTICS 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

