Social Network Analysis Tools for Career Advancement 
 
Timothy Arndt 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
Cleveland State University 
Cleveland, OH 44115, U.S.A. 
t.arndt@csuohio.edu
 
 
 
Abstract—Social networks, which have been studied by 
sociologists for many decades, have risen greatly in visibility 
due to the widespread growth of online social networks like 
Facebook, which facilitate the analysis of social network 
structures by special purpose software tools. Sociologists have 
long recognized that special advantage can accrue to 
individuals who occupy certain strategic locations in their 
social networks, or whose local neighborhood in their social 
network exhibits certain characteristics. In this paper 
describing our initial research directions in this area, we 
propose to develop social network analysis tools which will 
allow individuals to analyze their social networks with the 
express purpose of cultivating or pruning social ties which will 
enhance their career advancement prospects within an 
organization. This paper presents our work in progress in this 
area. 
Keywords-social networks; software tools; social simulation; 
legal aspects. 
I.  
 INTRODUCTION 
Social networks have been the object of study by 
sociologists for many decades. In recent years, with the 
availability of software for analysis of the social network 
structures, as well as with the growth of online social 
networks like Facebook, LinkedIn, and Google+, the 
computer science community has become interested in 
studying, analyzing and categorizing social networks of 
various types, both online information networks as well as 
the more traditional informal social networks which 
sociologists have studied [1]. 
Social networks can be modelled by a graph structure 
where the nodes represent individuals and the links (ties, in 
social network terminology) represent some relationship 
between individuals. An illustration of part of an example 
social network is shown in figure 1. The social network has 
eight individuals (A through H) and 13 ties among those 
individuals. 
Depending on the amount or degree of interactions 
between two individuals, we may characterize a tie between 
them as either a strong tie (much interaction) or a weak tie 
(little interaction) [1]. One famous result in the field of social 
network analysis is that reported by Granovetter [2], who 
found, surprisingly, that most persons reported that they 
found a new job not through persons with whom they had 
strong ties, but rather among those with whom they had 
weak ties. The reason for such a result is that those 
colleagues with which we have strong ties are likely to have 
the same knowledge which we have, so new opportunities, 
such as job openings are likely to come from those 
individuals with which we have only weak ties. 
For example, in figure 1, maybe all of the ties are strong 
ties except for that between C and E, which is a weak tie. 
Individuals A through D might be members of one 
organization while E through H might be members of a 
different organization. C might learn of an opening in E’s 
department through his (weak) tie with E. Furthermore, the 
theory of triadic closure suggests that if E had a strong tie to 
C, then ties would develop between E and A, B, and C 
(either weak or strong) as well. 
 
 
Figure 1 – Part of a social network 
 
The theory of social networks suggest that social capital 
exists when people have an advantage over their rivals 
because of their position in some social network. Normally, 
social structures have a dense structure of strong ties among 
the participants in the network. This dense structure of strong 
ties tends to engender trust among the participants, and thus 
is usually something to be cultivated. On the other hand, in 
large scale networks, not all of the individuals are members 
of the same cluster. There may thus exist multiple clusters. 
When two clusters contain non-redundant information . there 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

is said to be a structural hole between them [6]. A node 
which is the only (local) connection between two such 
clusters as said to be a (local) bridge. The person who is the 
bridge between two clusters gains much social capital, since 
he can act as a broker for the flow of information between 
two clusters. 
 
 
Figure 2 – A structural hole 
 
It has long been recognized that one’s position in a social 
network can play a very important part in one’s career 
success [3]. However, on the part of the participants 
themselves (as opposed to those who study them), this 
understanding is more or less inchoate. As these concepts 
enter more and more into the mainstream due to the success 
of online social networking platforms such as Facebook and 
LinkedIn, we expect that individuals will become more 
aware of the role such networks and their place within the 
network can play in their career success. Further, we expect 
that they will purposefully cultivate those ties which will 
benefit them, and attempt to suppress ties among others 
which would hurt them. Since cultivating ties which might 
be advantageous is time consuming, any one individual can 
only cultivate a limited number of ties, thus part of the active 
process of improving his social capital might be the 
downgrading (strong tie to weak) or jettisoning those ties 
which are less advantageous. The ultimate goal of the 
research described in this paper (preliminary work) is to 
develop 
software 
tools 
to 
support 
this 
purposeful 
manipulation of one’s place in social networks in order to 
support career advancement. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
sketches our main research goals in the area of social 
network analysis and section 3 presents future research and 
conclusions. 
II.  
PURPOSEFUL MANIPULATION OF SOCIAL NETWORKS 
Much research has been done on the analysis of social 
network structures as they exist at a moment in time or as 
they evolve over time. Less study has been done, however, 
on the purposeful cultivation and manipulation of the social 
network structure of an individual in order to enhance the 
career opportunities of that individual and/or maximize his 
opportunities in an organization. 
Podolny and Baron [3] examined how the structure and 
content of individuals’ networks in the workplace affect 
intraorganizational mobility. They found that an individual’s 
mobility is enhanced by having a large, sparse network of 
informal ties for acquiring information and resources and 
that well-defined performance expectations are more likely 
to arise from a small, dense network of individuals. For the 
purposes of the present research, the first of these findings is 
most important. We would like to empower individuals to 
develop and cultivate such large, sparse networks of informal 
ties. 
With the rise of online social networks, software tools to 
manipulate those networks have been developed. For 
example, Vizster [9] is a tool for end-user visualization, 
navigation, and exploration of large-scale online social 
networks. It builds upon familiar node-link network layouts 
to contribute techniques for exploring connectivity in large 
graph structures, supporting visual search and analysis, and 
automatically 
identifying 
and 
visualizing 
community 
structures. In addition many GUI (graphical user interface) 
based software packages for online social network analysis 
have been developed such as Pajek [10] and UCINet [11]. 
In order to describe the social network being analyzed, it 
is necessary to classify the ties in the network as being either 
weak or strong. That this can be done in an automated way is 
demonstrated by [5] in which a predictive model was used to 
map social media data to tie strength. The model was 
exercised on a data set of two thousand social media ties 
from Facebook and achieved 85% accuracy in classifying the 
ties as either weak or strong. Another work on Facebook data 
is described in [4] in which distinctions are drawn between 
the different types of interactions users have on Facebook. 
One to one communications (receiving messages from 
friends) is associated with bridging social capital, but other 
uses are not. However, even using the site passively  to 
consume news assists those with lower social fluency draw 
value from their connections. 
In order to meet our requirements, the software we are 
developing should incorporate the functionality of the above-
mentioned 
packages 
such 
as 
GUI 
and 
extensive 
visualization, navigation and exploration of large-scale 
online social networks, but it should do more to enable 
purposeful manipulation of an individual’s social network 
for career advancement. First, it should attempt to construct 
the user’s social network from multiple sources, both online 
social networks such as Facebook, LinkedIn and Google+, as 
well as informal social networks using information gathered 
from such sources as email logs, phone call records, 
organization charts, etc. Notice that except in exceptional 
circumstances, the software will not have complete access to 
data such as email or phone records, due to privacy and legal 
requirements. For these sources, it is more likely that the 
software will have access only to the Ego network (or a 
portion thereof) of the user – that is, that part of the social 
network consisting of the user (the “ego”), those nodes to 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

whom the ego is directly connected (the “alters”) plus the 
ties, if any, among the alters. See figure 3 for an example of 
an ego network. Incorporating these multiple, possibly 
contradictory, likely incomplete networks into a complete 
network representing the individual’s context in an 
organization is a major part of the research. 
It will also be a part of the required functionality of the 
software we are developing to provide hints for the user, 
beyond just allowing for freeform navigation and exploration 
of an online social network. So, for example, after having 
integrated the various social networks from the sources 
available, the software should analyze both the social 
network 
as 
a 
whole 
(representing 
the 
individual’s 
organization) as well as the user’s place in the network. It 
should then point out, for example, structural holes in the 
network, offering hints on how the user can fill that 
structural hole by cultivating (weak) ties with other 
employees. Since there are likely to be many such 
possibilities in a large organization, the opportunities will 
have to be prioritized by the system, possibly involving user 
interaction to clarify information such as the roles that the 
user and others play in an organization. A plan for 
cultivating ties might be generated. 
 
 
Figure 3 – An ego network 
 
The overall data flow of the proposed system is shown in 
Figure 4. In the following paragraphs we give a very hiogh 
level, conceptual description of the system. The algorithms 
and data structures which will be used in the actual 
implementation 
of 
the 
system 
are 
actively 
under 
investigation and will be incorporated as the research 
proceeds. The input to the system consists of all of those 
pieces of information which will be used to construct the 
user’s social network in the context of the organization in 
which he works. This will include online social networks 
such as Facebook, LinkedIn and Google+ (probably 
delimited to those contacts who are relevant for the career 
advancement objective), ego networks for the user which 
might be constructed by scraping data from the user’s 
contact list, email client, phone records, etc., and other types 
of documents such as organization charts which can help to 
fill in those parts of the social network which the other two 
collections of information might miss. It is expected that this 
information 
will 
be 
incomplete, 
overlapping 
and 
contradictory. The first module of the system attempts to 
disambiguate and flesh out the network as much as possible 
automatically. The output of the first module is a preliminary 
aggregate social network for the user (preliminary because it 
is not expected that the fully automatic system will be able 
complete the network without manual intervention).  
 
 
 
Figure 4 – High-level system data flow 
 
The next module of the system will carry out a number of 
rounds of interrogation of the user. It will ask the user to 
correct any errors in the preliminary social network, 
performing such tasks as aggregating nodes which represent 
the same actor, if such has not been correctly performed by 
the automated portion of the system. The user will also be 
asked to fill out any missing information – such as roles for 
individuals which can help with the network classification 
algorithm and prioritization of equally useful ties in the 
social network. The user may also enter his career goals and 
any other information which may help the system produce 
the desired output. This process is an interactive one, and 
proceeds in a loop until a desired level of refinement is 
reached. 
The final output of the system is an action plan (or a set 
of action plans) which can be employed by the user to 
enhance his social capital (for the advancement of his 
career), for example by filling structural holes, cultivating a 
denser network of strong ties in a department in order to 
increase trust, and hence productivity, in the department, etc. 
Note that the action plan (or plans) which are the final result 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

of the process will normally be acceptable to the user, since 
if they weren’t, the previous stage would just go through one 
or more additional rounds of refinement. 
III.  
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
This paper has introduced my current work in progress 
research in the area of social network analysis for career 
advancement. I am currently at a very early stage in this 
research. The theme of the future research has been chosen, 
and currently available social network analysis software has 
been chosen, installed and tested for suitability. Sample data 
sets have been installed and tested. 
The immediate next stage of the research will be to 
identify a set of social network data that can be used for an 
empirical study. Possibilities include Facebook or LinkedIn 
data sets, email data for an organization, cell phone trace 
data, etc. The use of at least some of the data sets will raise 
privacy and legal issues, so these will need to be studied as 
well. In the extreme case, simulated data may need to be 
used.  
The overall structure of the system has been constructed, 
as outlined in the previous section, however specific 
algorithms and data structures need to be chosen. An 
algorithm for integrating diverse social networks, some of 
which may be incomplete and which may contain 
contradictory information, will be an interesting topic of 
future research. We are currently investigating the possibility 
of using an ontology-based approach in the part of the 
system. 
An interesting question which might be a topic of future 
research is how the widespread adaption of tools such as 
those proposed in this paper would affect the social networks 
of organizations in the long term. Several researchers have 
looked at similar questions for the evolution of social 
networks. Burt, Merluzzi, and Burrows [7] analyzed network 
volatility as something akin to the hum of a running engine. 
People active in a network produce vibration and wiggle 
where the connections and the network structure around 
these people changes frequently. They distinguish four 
dimensions to network volatility (churn, variation, trend, and 
reversals), measure them with panel data on a population of 
bankers, and then add them to analysis predicting 
compensation from status and structural-hole measures of 
network advantage. They find that volatility creates a slope 
adjustment that enhances the returns to network advantage. 
They identify two stability traps that destroy advantage, but 
the key is not to avoid the traps so much as to avoid them in 
a particular way. The volatility that enhances is reversal. 
Bankers who go through reversals were shown to enjoy 
significantly higher returns to their network advantage. 
Even more pertinent for our research, Buskens and van 
de Rijt [8] examine the question of whether those who strive 
to fill structural holes can gain and maintain an advantage 
over time. Burt’s informal treatment and economic models 
of information network evolution suggest as equilibrium 
network the star, in which a single broker acquires all of the 
access and control benefits. The work of the authors, on the 
other hand, shows that if everyone is seeking the same type 
of advantage, adding beneficial links and removing costly 
ones, the predominant equilibrium turns out to be the 
“balanced complete bipartite network.” Paradoxically, this 
network,– in stark contrast to the star – distributes benefits 
evenly, so no one has a structural advantage. So, if the tools 
we propose were adopted universally, they would not result 
in an advantage for anyone! Luckily, such a prospect is far 
in the future (if it is ever achieved). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Timothy Arndt's research was supported by a Dean's 
Faculty Development Grant from the Monte Ahuja College 
of Business of Cleveland State University. Cleveland State 
University MCIS  student Pranjal Shah helped with the 
installation and testing of the social networking software. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]   D. Easley and J. Kleinberg, Networks, Crowds, and Markets: 
Reasoning about a Highly Connected World, New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
[2]    M. Granovetter, Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and 
Careers, University of Chicago Press, 1974. 
[3]   J. Podolny and J. Baron, “Resources and Relationships: Social 
Networks and Mobility in the Workplace,” American 
Sociological Review, vol. 62, no. 5, July 1996. 
[4]   M. Burke, R. Kraut, and C. Marlow, “Social capital on 
facebook: differentiating uses and users,” Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems 
(CHI 
'11), 
ACM, 
2011, 
pp. 
571-580. 
doi:10.1145/1978942.1979023  
[5]   E. Gilbert and K. Karahalios, “Predicting tie strength with 
social media,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '09), ACM, 
2009, pp. 211-220. 
[6]   R. Burt, Structural Holes: The Social Structure of 
Competition, Harvard University Press, 1992. 
[7]   R. Burt, J. Merluzzi, and J. Burrows, “Path dependent 
network advantage,” Proceedings of the 2013 conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work (CSCW '13), ACM, 
2013, pp. 1-2. DOI=10.1145/2441776.2441778 
[8]   V. Buskens and A. van de Rijt, “Dynamics of Networks if 
Everyone Strives for Structural Holes,”American Journal of 
Sociology, Vol. 114, No. 2 (September 2008), pp. 371-407 
[9]   J. Heer, and D. Boyd, “Vizster: visualizing online social 
networks,” Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information 
Visualization, 2005. INFOVIS 2005, pp. 32-39, 2005. 
[10]   W. De Nooy, A. Mrvar, and V. Batagelj, Exploratory social 
network analysis with Pajek. Vol. 27. Cambridge University 
Press, 2011. 
[11]   S. Borgatti, Ucinet for Windows: Software for Social 
Network Analysis. Harvard, MA: Analytic Technologies, 
2002.
 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-443-5
SOTICS 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

