Electronic Word-of-Mouth Spread in Twitter as a Function of Message Sentiment
Benny Bornfeld, Sheizaf Rafaeli, Daphne Ruth Raban
Faculty of Management
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
bennyb@ruppin.ac.il, sheizaf@rafaeli.net, draban@univ.haifa.ac.il
Abstract - Which is more viral, positive or negative electronic
word-of-mouth? Can you tell which of the following tweets will
spread more in Twitter: "saw the movie … last night, must see
it" or "saw the movie … last night, avoid at any cost"? This
study is about electronic Word-Of-Mouth spread as a factor of
its sentiment. Some theories support a negative bias, while
others support a positive bias. Some suggest that both biases
are possible, depending on the product type. This paper
presents the main theories, related studies and the results of
quantitative research based on movie related tweets containing
sentiment polarity. Due to the dual nature of Twitter, as mass
medium and social network, the research focuses on Twitter's
social sub network which contains ordinary users having a
small to medium number of followers. The main findings are
that tweets with positive sentiment polarity spread 15-20
percent
more than tweets containing negative sentiment
polarity.
Keywords-Information
flow;
Information
Dissemination;
Sentiment Analysis; electronic Word Of Mouth; Twitter.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Word-of-mouth (WOM) is known to have a strong
influence on the user's purchase decision. In addition to
marketing aspects, message spread or virality is important
for intellectual, learning and political reasons. Several books
on this topic were recently published; amongst them are
"Going Viral" [1] and "Memes in Digital Culture" [2].
The recognition of the importance of WOM in the two-
step flow theory dates back to Lazarsfeld and Katz [3].
Electronic
Word-Of-Mouth
(eWOM)
is
an
important
product-related
message
spreading
mechanism.
The
Internet-based
WOM,
eWOM,
travels
fast
and
can
potentially reach very large audiences. One of the most
salient Internet services today is Twitter. Twitter is a
powerful platform for spreading many kinds of messages,
including eWOM. Some eWOM messages carry a negative
sentiment polarity and others carry positive or neutral
polarity.
Does message sentiment polarity influence the
extent of message spread? The old marketer's belief that
"bad is stronger than good" dominated the pre-Internet
WOM era. Is this negative bias still dominant in the Internet
social networks of today? Or is the spirit of Facebook's only
“Likes”
and
no
“dislikes”
catching
in
the
eWOM
communication?
Looking at the question of eWOM spread and influence
as a function of the eWOM sentiment polarity, there are
several theories and evidence, elaborated in the next
sections, which provides support for both directions. Those
contradicting directions were the trigger for this study,
hoping to make a contribution to this open question.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows:
In the
theoretical background, we present differing views by the
Negativity Bias and Product Moderator Theory, followed by
an overview of the data source, Twitter. In the related work
section, we discuss and summarize related work on this and
similar topics. We continue with presenting the research
hypotheses and the method followed by a discussion of the
finding. We finalize with conclusions and future work
section.
II.
THEORY
Looking at the question of WOM spread and influence
as a function of the WOM sentiment polarity, several
theories and evidence provide support for both directions.
Some theories postulate that negative is more influential and
some claim that positive is more influential. Others state
that both directions are valid and the effect depends on the
type of the product. In principal, message dissemination
depends on two factors: the message value and the
messenger’s preference. The information value theories
presented here are (1) the negativity bias and (2) the product
moderator theory which distinguishes the bias according to
different product types.
A. Negativity bias
When examining the literature and theory related to the
WOM and sentiment polarity, there is strong evidence for
the negativity bias. Several articles [4][5][6] show evidence
in support of the WOM negativity bias for products and
services. They report that negative WOM is twice to 4 times
stronger than positive WOM. These sources fit the statement
"Bad is stronger than good", which is the title of an article
[7] . They state that "The greater power of bad events over
good ones is found in everyday events, major life events
(e.g., trauma), close relationship outcomes, social network
patterns, interpersonal interactions, and learning processes.
Bad emotions, bad parents, and bad feedback have more
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

impact than good ones, and bad information is processed
more thoroughly than good". Cheung and Thadani [8]
provided a mapping of studies showing the prevalence of
the negativity bias over a broad range of areas from
information
processing,
memories,
feedback,
emotion,
marital status, WOM, impression formation, choice, value
and frames and customer satisfaction. Baumeister et al. [7]
present a social evolutionary argument that this cross-area
prevalent phenomenon shows that it is a human adaptive
mechanism. They postulate that "The relative strength of
bad over good is an adaptive response of the human
organism to its physical and social environment. In view of
how pervasive the relative strength of bad is, it seems
unlikely that this pattern is maladaptive". They explain why
it is more adaptive in the following manner -"bad events
signal a need for change, whereas good ones do not. If
satisfaction and pleasure were permanent, there might be
little incentive to continue seeking further benefits or
advances. The ephemeral nature of good feelings may
therefore stimulate progress (which is adaptive). If bad
feelings wore off, however, people might repeat their
mistakes, so genuine progress would best be served by
having the effects of bad events linger for a relatively long
time." More evidence and possible explanations to the
negativity bias is summarized in the work of Rozin and
Royzman [9].
Another argument in support of the negative bias is the
rarity argument. This argument claims that since negative
information is rarer, it is highly informative by definition. In
order to support the rarity argument, we first need to
describe and validate the positivity dominance in languages.
Rozin and Royzman [9] provide a summary of evidence
based on the work of Osgood [10], showing that positive
adjectives are used more frequently. They present a study
done on 17 languages, which validated the positivity bias.
Quantitative analysis studies by Blenn et al. [11] and Asur
and Huberman [12] observed that there are more positive
than negative tweets. The biased feedback features provided
by social networks platforms like Facebook's “Like” and
Google's “Plus One” contribute to the overall positive
polarity in social networks. Back to the rarity argument,
given the positivity bias in language, negative information is
rarer and therefore more informative.
The reliability argument: In many online systems, such
as recommender systems, the anonymity of the writer makes
the user suspicious as to the credibility of the information,
especially towards positive information. Lam et al. [13]
studied
the
credibility
issue
and
gave
the
following
example: “consider a dishonest seller on eBay who wishes
to increase his feedback score. He could create a large
number of identities and use them to leave himself positive
feedback.” According to attribution theory [40], the reader
may attribute the positive information to the reviewer self-
serving or other non-product-related reasons, leading him to
discount positive information.
B. Product type moderator theory
Trying to settle the contradicting findings in different
studies, several studies postulated and provided evidence
that the effect is subject to the product type. Two
contemporary studies, of “hedonic vs. utilitarian” and
“promotion vs. prevention consumption” products, relate to
the same basic factor of product type. Zhang et al. [14] draw
on
regulatory
focus
theory
and
propose
that:
"the
consumption goals that consumers associate with the
reviewed product moderate the effect of review valence on
persuasiveness". Higgins et al. [15] who phrased the
regulatory focus theory provide the following description of
their theory: "A promotion focus would involve a state of
eagerness to attain advancement and gains where as
prevention focus would involve a state of vigilance to assure
safety and non-losses".
Based on Attribution Theory, Sen and Lerman [16]
examined the usefulness of published consumer reviews for
the reader. They claim that: "trust that the reviewer’s
opinions are based on external (product, or other related
aspect) and not internal (subjective, or reviewer related)
reasons will determine the review’s usefulness to the
reader." Attribution theory examines whether the reader
attributes
the
reviewer’s
opinions
to
product
related
motivations, or believes that they are motivated by self-
serving or other non-product-related reasons. The authors
find that: "compared with the utilitarian case, readers of
negative hedonic product reviews are more likely to
attribute the negative opinions expressed, to the reviewer's
internal (or non-product related) reasons; and therefore are
less likely to find the negative reviews useful". Referring to
the previously mentioned study, hedonic products map to
product with promotion consumption goals and utilitarian
products map to products with prevention consumption
goal.
C. The Messenger’s preferences
Messages spread only if the messengers decide to pass
them. In WOM communication, the messengers have the
choice to pass the message or not. One factor on their pass-
or-not decision would be the message value, which was
discussed in the previous paragraph. Another important
factor is their subjective preference. In his seminal book,
"The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life", Goffman
writes about how people present themselves in a way they
want to be perceived by others. Berger and Milkman [17]
stated that “Consumers often share content for self-
presentation purposes [18]
or to communicate identity, and
consequently positive content may be shared more because
it reflects positively on the sender. Most people would
prefer to be known as someone who shares upbeat stories or
makes others feel better rather than someone who shares
things that make people angry or upset”. People often relate
the message to the messenger. This is the perception in the
roots of the phrase "shooting the messenger". Relating this
theory to the question of eWOM dissemination in social
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

networks, people will prefer to repeat positive eWOM in
order to present themselves in a positive way.
D. Theory summary
Message dissemination depends on the information
value
and
the
messenger
preference.
Regarding
the
information value, there are more theories and evidence in
support of a negative bias. The prevalence of the negativity
bias across many areas, the adaptive argument, the rarity
argument and the reliability issue associated mainly with
positive eWOM lead to the hypothesis that negative
messages spread more. On the other hand, the reliability is
less of an issue in Twitter because the follower knows who
sent the message. The regulatory focus theory, present the
moderator role of product type. It predicts a positive bias for
hedonic
promotion
consumption
goal
products.
Since
movies are definitely a hedonic, promotion consumption
goal product it predicts that negative information will be
"discounted". Regarding the messenger preference, the need
to present oneself in a positive light contributes to a positive
bias.
E. The research framework
The research question is: Does the eWOM message
sentiment
polarity
influence
the
extent
of
message
dissemination?
We studied the dissemination of eWOM in Twitter as a
function
of
message
sentiment
polarity.
This
study
examined the spread of tweets via the retweet mechanism in
the movies domain. Hence, the presentation and discussion
of related work focus on studies which share one or more of
this research characteristic.
F. Twitter
Twitter is currently the most popular microblogging
service. Microblogging is a broadcast medium in the form
of blogging, which differs from typical blogging by its small
content length. Twitter enables its users to send text-based
posts called tweets to their followers. A tweet length is up to
140 characters. Users may subscribe to other users' tweets -
this is known as “following” and subscribers are known
as “followers”. Tweets are publicly visible by default.
Twitter carries hundreds of millions of tweets per day.
Like social network sites, profiles are connected through an
underlying articulated network, but these connections are
directed rather than undirected. The number of user’s
followers varies from zero to millions. Among the many
ordinary users which have up to hundreds of followers there
are some highly followed users. Those highly followed
celebrities, politicians, news channels, corporations and
others use this network as a mass medium communication
channel. Participants have different strategies for deciding
who they follow - some follow thousands, while others
follow few. Some follow only those that they know
personally, while others follow celebrities and strangers that
they find interesting. In the following section, we further
discuss if Twitter can be considered to be a social network.
Several social conventions
were introduced
and
then
embraced by the service users’ community itself. The most
notable conventions are:
1.
Reply: a way to reply to, or to mention another
user. Syntax: @user (e.g., @barackobama)
2.
Hashtag: a way to indicate the message topic.
Syntax: #topic (e.g., #iranelections)
3.
Retweet: forwarding others messages to
your
followers.
Syntax:
RT
@user
(e.g.,
RT
@ladygaga). This spreading mechanism plays a
major role in this research method and in many
other studies and services. We elaborate on its role
when answering question 5 in the next section.
III.
RELATED WORK
Related work covered in this section presents studies
which asked similar questions or methods. This review aims
to bridge theory, methods and their findings.
The related work is divided into the following research
questions:
1.
From studies related to valence effect on product
eWOM: What is the effect of positive versus
negative product eWOM on message dissemination
and influence in Twitter and in recommender
systems?
2.
Moving from product related information to the
neighboring
non-product
information
dissemination,
several
studies
researched
the
following question: What is the effect of positive
versus negative polarity on non-product related
message dissemination and influence in Twitter
and other media channels?
3.
To show the practical relevance of this question,
several
studies
asked:
Does
eWOM
polarity
influence product sales?
4.
To validate the selection of Twitter as the data
source, several studies examined the question: Is
Twitter a social network?
5.
Due to the key role of the retweet mechanism,
several studies explored the question: What are the
roles and characteristics of the retweet mechanism?
1.
Spread and influence of positive and negative product
eWOM in Twitter and in recommender systems.
The question of dissemination and influence of messages
within online social network was explored from three
different angles: the nodes, the arcs, and the substance.
1.
The networks' node angle is focusing on the people
and asking: who is influential?
2.
The network structure angle examines the ties
(arcs) between people and exploring how the
networks structures affect the spreading.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

3.
The content angle examines spread as a function of
the message content attributes, such as topic,
emotion and sentiment (this is this research angle)
Barbagallo et al. [19] studied tweets containing tourist
information about the city of Milan in Italy. They found that
negative posts are retweeted more. Sen et al. [16] researched
online reviews and found support for the negative bias. In
addition, they observed that: "in the case of hedonic
products however, readers were more likely to discount than
value the negative reviews. Readers found 72% of reviews
“not helpful” as compared to 28% being “helpful”".Jansen
et al. [20] Twitter-based eWOM research covered products
from several industries. They found that on average 50% of
the tweets were positive and 33% were critical of the
company or product. Zhang et al. [14] conducted an
experiment in which they measured the reaction to positive
and negative Amazon product reviews. The reviews covered
two types of products: a promotion consumption goal
product and a prevention consumption goal product. In
accordance with Attribution Theory, they found that: "For
products associated with promotion consumption goals,
consumers show a positivity bias, whereby they rate
positive reviews as more persuasive than negative ones.
Conversely, consumers show a negativity bias for products
associated with prevention consumption goals". In the
preventive
consumption
product,
the
experiment
participants were suspicious towards positive reviews. One
common perception is that some of those reviews might be
written by non subjective reviewers, such as the product
seller. On the other hand, negative reviews for promotion
consumption product were attributed to the reviewer’s
subjective perspective. With regard to Attribution Theory,
there is a difference between classic recommender systems
and Twitter. In recommender systems, the reader has no
information/acquaintance with the review writer. Therefore,
she derives the attributes from cues in the review content. In
Twitter, the reader is presumed to be familiar with the
person she is following who sent the tweet.
2.
What is the effect of positive versus negative content on
non-product related message (e.g., news) dissemination
and influence in Twitter and other media types?
Several scholars examined the dissemination of non
product related content, such as news, articles and phatic
communication. Berger and Milkman [17] studied the
spread of NY Times articles by email. They found that the
spread is related to activation "Content that evokes either
positive (awe) or negative (anger or anxiety) emotions
characterized by activation (i.e., high arousal) is more viral.
Content that evokes deactivating emotion (sadness) is less
viral". Stefan and Dang-Xuan [21] studied German politics
related tweets and found that emotionally charged Twitter
messages (positive or negative) tend to be retweeted more
often and more quickly compared to neutral ones. Hansen et
al. [22] Twitter based research found that negative news and
positive
phatic
communication
are
more
viral.
They
proposed that "if you want to be cited: Sweet talk your
friends or serve bad news to the public". Somewhat
contradicting results were presented by Bakshy et al. [23] .
They found that tweets containing URLs linking to positive
stories where more dominant in the top retweeted list.
Thelwall et al. [24] studied tweets peaks around large
events. They observed that "popular events are normally
associated with increases in negative sentiment strength and
some evidence that peaks of interest in events have stronger
positive sentiment than the time before the peak". The rise
in both positive and negative sentiment is at the expense of
neutral tweets. Another interesting observation by this
research
supports
the
writers
subjectivity
claim:
"a
surprisingly small average change in sentiment associated
with popular events (typically 1% and only 6% for Tiger
Woods’ confessions) is consistent with events affording
posters opportunities to satisfy pre-existing personal goals
more often than eliciting instinctive reactions".
3.
How does eWOM polarity influence sales?
The very practical question regarding the relation
between eWOM and sales was addressed by several studies.
Many of them chose to focus on the movies industry. Some
studies took the challenge of solving the eWOM and sales
chicken and egg question, using time series analysis. Some
studies aimed at finding sales predictions based on eWOM
characteristics, such as influencers, overall chatter and
message sentiment. Some of those studies are based on
recommender systems while others are Twitter based.
Liu et al. [25] found that positive Twitter WOM increases
movie sales while negative WOM decreases it. They divided
the tweets to pre-consumption (e.g., I want to watch the
movie) and post consumption (e.g., the movie was….).
They found that the strongest effect on movie sales comes
from pre-consumption tweets where the authors express
their intention to watch. Asur and Huberman [12] presented
evidence that although eWOM volume is the main predictor
for movie sale, sentiments extracted from Twitter can be
utilized to improve the forecasting power of social media.
Addressing the chicken and egg problem [26] conducted a
study based on reviews from recommender web sites. They
state that WOM is both a precursor to and an outcome of
retail sales and that WOM polarity significantly influences
the WOM volume. Those studies, showing the relation
between sentiment, WOM and sales provide ground for
tying the terms of influence and spread.
4.
Is Twitter a social network?
Twitter's popularity, the buzz around it, the open nature
of its communication and the opportunity it provides for
computational social science research has made it a fertile
ground
for
scientific
research.
Twitter
combines
characteristics of both mass media, broadcasting news and
advertisement and characteristics of social network with
relations and interaction between the users. The question of
the nature of Twitter and how its users perceive it has
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

implications to this research and others which explore
phenomena within social networks.
The 2010 article "What is Twitter, a Social Network or a
News Media?" by Kwak et al. [27] addressed this basic
question by conducting a large scale quantitative analysis.
They showed that Twitter is not a classic social network: “In
its follower-following topology analysis I have found a non-
power-law follower distribution, a short effective diameter,
and low reciprocity, which all mark a deviation from known
characteristics
of
human
social
networks
[28].Among
reciprocated users we observe some level of homophily”.
Huberman et al. [28] studied the interaction between users
on Twitter and came to the following conclusion: "most of
the links declared within Twitter were meaningless from an
interaction point of view. Thus the need to find the hidden
social network; the one that matters when trying to rely on
word of mouth to spread an idea, a belief, or a trend".
Other studies took a more qualitative approach. Gruzd et
al. [29] conducted a case study on Barry Wellman's twitter
followers and friends and stated: "there is a possibility that
Twitter
can
form
the
basis
of
interlinked
personal
communities—and even of a sense of community. The
analysis of Barry’s Twitter network shows that it is a basis
for a real community, even though Twitter was not designed
to support the development of online communities". Boyd et
al. [30] examined tweets and retweets and found that
"Spreading tweets is not simply to get messages out to new
audiences, but also to validate and engage with others".
Marwick [31] conducted a research by tweeting questions to
Boyd's Twitter followers and analyzing their answers.
Among them was a question aimed at understanding to
whom are they tweeting. They found that some users
"imagined their audience as people they already knew,
conceptualizing Twitter as a social space where they could
communicate with pre-existing friends".
A comparison to another "quasi social" network may
shed some light on this question. Social questions and
answers sites, such as Yahoo! Answers also possess a dual
nature. Golbeck [32] showed that this service fully meets
the Golbeck's accessibility, relationship and support criteria
for a web-based social network. Furthermore, a study by
Rechavi and Rafaeli [33] showed that within this service
there are actually two interdependent networks, a social and
an informational network.
5.
What are the roles and characteristics of the retweet
mechanism?
Twitters' retweet feature receives a lot of attention in
Twitter-based studies. Some studies provide descriptive data
concerning retweet probability. Some studies correlate it
against other characteristics, such as number of followers,
number of friends, tweeting rate, mentions, hashtags, urls,
etc. Other studies try to predict the retweet probability based
on the user and content characteristics. Besides its obvious
role in message spreading, several researchers claim that the
retweet is an important indicator of influence in Twitter.
In a world where endless amount of information is
flowing through social networks, competing for the user's
attention, the message sender has to overcome the basic
passivity of the message receiver. Based on retweets,
Romero et al. [34] propose an algorithm to determine the
influence and passivity of users based on their information
forwarding activity (retweets).They see the retweet as an
action performed by the retweeterer. Driving the user to take
an action indicates influence. Cha et al. [35] compared three
possible measures of influence, indegree, retweets and
mentions. They argue that: "it is more influential to have an
active audience who retweets or mentions the user. Retweets
are driven by the content value of a tweet, while mentions
are driven by the name value of the user.". Zaman et al. [36]
built a model for retweet probability based on the tweeterer
and the tweet content. Suh et al. [37] conducted a large scale
study of retweets and found that "URLs and hashtags have
strong relationships with retweetability. Amongst contextual
features, the number of followers and followees as well as
the age of the account seem to affect retweetability, while,
interestingly, the number of past tweets does not predict
retweetability of a user’s tweet".
Boyd et al. [30] studied retweeting as conversational
practice and claim that: "While retweeting can simply be
seen as the act of copying and rebroadcasting, the practice
contributes
to
a
conversational
ecology
in
which
conversations are composed of a public interplay of voices
that give rise to an emotional sense of shared conversational
context. For this reason, some of the most visible Twitter
participants retweet others and look to be retweeted. This
includes users of all kinds, but notably marketers, celebrities
and politicians". A research on celebrities influence in
Twitter [38] defined influence in the following manner: "the
ability to, through one's own behavior on Twitter, promote
activity and pass information to others". He found that
retweet-based influence is the most significant type of
influence.
A. Related work summary
Most product related WOM studies report a negative
bias. Some studies derive from the regulatory focus theory
and show the moderator role of the product type, leading to
a positive bias in hedonic promotion consumption goal
products. Studies on non-product content dissemination,
such as news, present contradicting results. Some studies
focus on the emotions the message arouses and the message
affordance.
Several
studies
support
the
two
ways
relationship between the movie's Tweets dissemination and
its box office success. Several studies pondered over the
nature of Twitter and found that it exhibits also social
network characteristics. Studies that focused on the role of
Twitter's retweet feature found that it plays an important
role in the social sub-network and that retweet is an
indicator of influence.
In light of the theory and related work, there were three
motivations for this research:
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

1.
The contradicting evidence from different studies.
2.
The tension between theories supporting positive
versus negative bias.
3.
Modest availability of evidence based on updated
high volume data collected from online social
networks.
In order to be consistent with the view of Twitter as a
social network, the focus of the research is on WOM flow
between ordinary users and not WOM originating from the
highly followed users.
Related studies show that this research stands on solid
ground when choosing Twitter as the data collection field,
examining the retweet dissemination and choosing to study
the movies domain.
IV.
RESEARCH HYPOTHESES
Consistent with other researches which used movies and
other products tweets and the language positivity bias
previously described -
H1: There are more positive than negative tweets in
movie-related Twitter messages.
Following the theory and studies that show support for more
spread of positive polarity messages in hedonic, promotion
consumption goal -
H2: Positive polarity movie tweets will spread more, in
number of retweets and audience size, than negative
polarity movie tweets.
V.
METHOD
The
method
is
based
on
measuring
the
message
dissemination (the dependent variable) as a function of the
message sentiment polarity (the independent variable). The
basic categorical values in sentiment polarity are positive,
neutral and negative.
The retweet mechanism drives
dissemination. The collected data contains tweets about
movies which came out between the end of 2011 and the
beginning of 2012. The focus was on new movies since they
were more tweeted about. The rationale of choosing movies
was discussed in the related work section. Due to the dual
nature of Twitter as mass medium and social network, the
research focuses on Twitter's social sub network which
contains
ordinary
users
having
medium
number
of
followers. The cutoff number below which we considered a
user to be an ordinary user was having 1000 followers. This
number was chosen due to its being the round number above
Dunbar's number for social group size and wanting to
address a significant portion of Twitter users. 70% of twitter
users have 50-1000 followers (Figure 4). The reason there is
a lower limit of 50 followers is that there was almost no
retweet activity for tweets sent by users with fewer than 50
followers.
A. Research process description
This section describes the research process and results,
discussing the rationale of the different steps, challenges and
results. The main steps were:
1.
Data collection
2.
Data cleaning
3.
General tweets and retweets statistics
4.
Followers analysis
5.
Sentiment classification
6.
Manual sentiment classification
7.
Naïve Bayes classification endeavour
8.
Study of tweets dissemination as a factor of the
sentiment
1) Data Collection
About half a million movie related tweets were collected
during 4 months using a service by a company called GNIP
[39] (see Figure 1). GNIP provides full access to tweets
which was not available directly from Twitter in the time
this data was collected.
Figure 1.
Tweets collection architecture.
2) Data Cleaning
After the tweets collection step, where ~500,000 tweets
containing movie names were collected, the large data set
was analyzed using an application that we've developed for
this purpose, called Twitter Analyzer. The application main
features are presenting, sorting and filtering all tweet's and
user's fields. It also calculates and aggregates number of
retweets and exposure.
Manual inspection of the tweets using the Twitter
Analyzer indicated that many of the tweets do not contain
WOM content. The first step was cleaning the data set in
order to get a higher percentage of WOM content. The
cleaning process first step was removing several movies
related tweets which contained a large number of non WOM
content. The second step was using a white list for filtering
tweets which contained words indicating that the user had
seen the movie (was, were, went to, saw, have seen, had
seen, watched, is). After the cleaning process, the clean data
set contained 21,000 tweets. Eventually we verified that our
data set contained low level of spam in it (less than 3%).
3) General tweets and retweets statistics
For the second hypothesis, we're interested in the retweet
mechanism and followers count. The relative share of
retweets to the overall traffic is described in Table 1. It is
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

based on the initial data set of 108,000 tweets. The data
shows that ~9% (7/78) of the tweets were retweeted and that
22% of the total number of tweets is due to retweets.
4) Followers
Analysis of the number of followers showed that the
distribution is according to a power law and 70% of the
users have 50 – 1000 followers (see Figure 2). The power
law distribution of number of followers is the reason that the
100 most retweeted tweets (~1%) are responsible for about
half the retweets in the data set.
TABLE I :MESSAGE TYPE DISTRIBUTION IN THE INITIAL DATASET.
Retweets
22%
Original tweets that were retweeted
7%
Tweets that were not retweeted
71%
Total
100%
Figure 2: Distribution of users according to the number of followers (log
2).
5) Sentiment Classification
The following categories were defined (*):
•
Positive (e.g., "… WAS SOOOOOO GOOD!!!! ")
•
Negative (e.g., "… is the first movie where i
actually fell off to sleep...#flop")
•
Neutral (e.g., "Just saw … and now I think Im
Keke Palmer singing all these slow jams lmao")
(*) Two other categories were used to classify the tweets, "Not Relevant"
and "Before" (e.g., "going to see the movie"). Due to their relatively low
number, they were joined with the Neutral category in order to simplify the
analysis.
The following classification guidelines were set:
•
In cases where the tweet contained both positive and
negative content (e.g., "the movie was too long but
interesting"), it was classified as neutral.
•
The sentiment classification refers to the movie and not
to the general sentiment of the tweet. For example, the
following tweet: "had a great time with my friend but
the movie been boring" was classified as negative.
6) Manual classification
Two human coders classified 8,600 tweets according to
the categories described above. The 8,600 tweets were
sampled randomly from the clean data set and contained all
the messages that were retweeted and part of the messages
that
were
not
retweeted.
The
human
coders'
inter-
classification-agreement rate was ~84% (7195/8600). Those
7195
classified
tweets (Table 2)
were
used
for the
dissemination analysis. This data set is called the classified
set. The main result of this stage is that the ratio between
negative and positive eWOM is 0.18 (7.3/40.4).
7) Naïve Bayes classification endeavour
Having a large tweets data set, our goal was to use the
manual classification to train a Naïve Bayes classifier. The
low percentage of negative tweets (~7%) led to a relatively
high classification error rate which made it unsuitable for
usage as a reliable classifier for the larger data set.
Unbalanced data sets are a known issue with naïve bayes
classifier.
8) Tweets dissemination as a factor of the sentiment
The overall ratio: The overall ratio between negative and
positive retweet count was 0.18 (table 3), which is the same
as the ratio between negative and positive tweets.
Ordinary users' retweet ratio: A closer examination of
retweets count for ordinary users (50 – 1000 followers)
showed that positive retweets are retweeted about 15% more
on average (Figure 3). Further, neutral tweets get retweeted
more times (Table 3) than both positive and negative tweets,
this is due to a lot of retweets of neutral tweets that were
tweeted by highly followed users.
TABLE II: MANUAL SENTIMENT CLASSIFICATION DISTRIBUTION RESULTS.
Retweets
Negative
Positive
Neutral
Total
Quantity
527
2907
3761
7195
Percent
7.3%
40.4%
52.3%
100%
TABLE III: SUM OF THE TIMES THE TWEETS GOT RETWEETED.
Retweets
Negative
Positive
Neutral
Total
Count(*)
173
976
5365
6514(**)
%
2.7%
15%
82.3%
100%
(*) After removing the highest record in every category
(**) Retweets from the classified data were counted from the large data set
Figure 3: Average number of the times a tweet was retweeted for ordinary
users.
TABLE IV: TOTAL EXPOSURE OF TWEETS.
Tweets
Negative
Positive
Neutral
Total
Count(*)
233349
1289641
4867790
6390780
%
3.6%
20%
76.4%
100%
Exposure ratio: Counting the number of users who received
the tweet, the negative/positive ratio for the total exposure
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

was again 0.18 (3.6% / 20% in Table 4). Consistent with
the previous observation, neutral tweets get the highest
exposure.
Ordinary users' exposure ratio: A closer look at the
distribution of exposure count of users who received
(exposed to) the retweet showed a significant difference of
~15%-20% more positive tweets in the range of 100-600
exposure level (Figure 4).
Figure 4: Retweet exposure distribution in the 100-600 exposure range.
9) Dissemination as a factor of sentiment - results summary
The negative/positive ratio of ~0.18 was consistent over
the full classified tweet set. This ratio, showing positive
dominance over negative in the original tweets (Table 2) is
consistent with other studies, such as Blenn et al. [11] and
Asur and Huberman [12]. When focusing on ordinary users,
in the 100-1000 followers range, there is a positive bias:
positive tweets are retweeted more times (Figure 3) and
positive retweets exposure is higher (Figure 4).
B. Results summary
General characteristics and statistics of the retweet
mechanism: Retweets constitute 7% of all tweets, and
counting the repeats they amount to ~29%. The retweets are
power law distributed. Some tweets are retweeted in high
numbers, 1% of the tweets that were retweeted were
responsible for 50% of the total number of retweets.
Followers' distribution: 70% of the users have 50 to 1000
followers. This is the group that is referred to as ordinary
users in our analysis.
There is a lower boundary of 50
followers below which there are almost no retweets.
Tweets dissemination:
•
Full classified data set (7195 tweets):
•
Positive tweets outnumber negative tweets by a
ratio of 5.5 (1 / 0.18).
•
Neutral tweets are the most retweeted.
•
Ordinary users subset (50 – 1000 followers) (4627
tweets):
•
There was a positive bias of (15%-20%) in
dissemination measurements
1)
Limitations
The generalization power of these findings is somewhat
limited due to the focus on one product type in a specific
network. Nevertheless, Twitter is a very big network and
movie related tweets are popular (see Asur and Huberman
[12]).
VI.
DISCUSSION
Our findings support H1 by showing that there are five
times more positive than negative sentiment polarity tweets.
This is consistent with the language positivity bias.
An
alternative explanation is that since the dataset contains
tweets about movies, most people enjoy the movie they see
and avoid going to movies which they will not like by
reading reviews and getting recommendations from friends.
Regarding the main hypothesis, this study provides support
for H2 which predicts that positive sentiment polarity tweets
spread more than negative tweets in the social sub-network
of Twitter. While the dissemination results of the full
classified set showed no preference to positive or negative
polarity, a closer look at the ordinary users showed a
positive bias of about 15%-20%. These results support the
regulatory focus theory and messenger preference, both
predicting a positive bias / negative discount, for promotion
consumption goal product, such as movies.
The limited explanatory of power of 15-20% suggests
that there are other significant factors that affect messages
dissemination, such as content, attributes, structure and user
characteristics. Some of them are described in the studies
referenced in this paper.
The justification of using Twitter as our data field relies
on the existence of a social sub-network for ordinary users.
Marwick [31] and Gruzd et al. [29] claimed that Twitter has
social
network
aspects
in
addition
to
mass
medium
characteristics. We extricated the social sub-network by
restricting the analysis to ordinary users, those with 50-1000
followers. This is a novel approach, following Liu et al. [22]
who also split their Twitter users by follower count.
Empirically, there are two findings which support the dual
approach view. With a cutoff parameter of 600-1000
followers we found significant differences in sentiment
dissemination and in tweets length between the two groups.
A repeated finding shows high exposure and number of
retweets of neutral tweets. This can be explained in light of
the two sub networks approach. Most of the neutral tweets
are tweeted by highly followed users. Those highly followed
users are often channels of information.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Positive tweets get the stage on the social sub network of
Twitter with the topic of movies. Furthermore, the positivity
bias hypothesis for hedonic promotion consumption goal
products received support in these data.
Future work: A complimentary focus on the same
question can study the results for eWOM spread on different
products. It may be interesting to compare a promotion
consumption goal product with a prevention consumption
goal one. Message dissemination of the same product
(movies) can be studied in other social networks and
compared to the results presented here.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the I-CORE Program of
the Planning and Budgeting Committee and the Israel
Science Foundation (grant no. 1716/12) and with affiliation
and support of the Internet Research Center.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Nahon and J. Hemsley, Going Viral, Polity, 2013, .
[2] L. Shifman, Memes in Digital Culture, MIT Press, 2013, .
[3] P. F. Lazarsfeld and E. Katz, "Personal influence," Glencoe, Free
Presse, 1955.
[4] J. Arndt, "Role of product-related conversations in the diffusion of a
new product," J.Market.Res., 1967, pp. 291-295.
[5] M. L. Richins, "A multivariate analysis of responses to dissatisfaction,"
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 15, 1987, pp. 24-31.
[6] C. W. L. Hart, J. L. Heskett and W. E. Sasser, "The profitable art of
service recovery," Harv.Bus.Rev., vol. 68, 1990, pp. 148-156.
[7] R. F. Baumeister, E. Bratslavsky, C. Finkenauer and K.D. Vohs, "Bad
is stronger than good." Review of General Psychology, vol. 5, 2001, pp.
323.
[8] C. M. K. Cheung and D. R. Thadani, "The Effectiveness of Electronic
Word-of-Mouth Communication: A Literature Analysis," 23rd Bled
eConference eTrust: Implications for the Individual, Enterprises and
Society, Bled, Slovenia, 2010.
[9] P. Rozin and E. B. Royzman, "Negativity bias, negativity dominance,
and contagion," Personality and Social Psychology Review, vol. 5, 2001,
pp. 296-320.
[10] C. E. Osgood, Cross-cultural universals of affective meaning,
University of Illinois Press, 1975, .
[11] N. Blenn, K. Charalampidou and C. Doerr, "Context-Sensitive
sentiment classification of short colloquial text," NETWORKING 2012,
2012, pp. 97-108.
[12] S. Asur and B. A. Huberman, "Predicting the future with social
media," Arxiv Preprint arXiv:1003.5699, 2010.
[13]
S.
Lam,
D.
Frankowski
and
J. Riedl,
"Do you
trust your
recommendations? An exploration of security and privacy issues in
recommender
systems,"
Emerging
Trends
in
Information
and
Communication Security, 2006, pp. 14-29.
[14] J. Q. Zhang, G. Craciun and D. Shin, "When does electronic word-of-
mouth matter? A study of consumer product reviews," Journal of Business
Research, vol. 63, 2010, pp. 1336-1341.
[15] E.T. Higgins, J. Shah and R. Friedman, "Emotional responses to goal
attainment: strength of regulatory focus as moderator." J.Pers.Soc.Psychol.,
vol. 72, 1997, pp. 515.
[16] S. Sen and D. Lerman, "Why are you telling me this? An examination
into negative consumer reviews on the Web," Journal of Interactive
Marketing, vol. 21, 2007, pp. 76-94.
[17] J. Berger and K. Milkman, "Social transmission, emotion, and the
virality of online content," Wharton Research Paper, 2010.
[18] A. Wojnicki and D. Godes, "Word-of-mouth as self-enhancement,"
HBS Marketing Research Paper no.06-01, 2008.
[19] D. Barbagallo et al, "An empirical study on the relationship between
Twitter sentiment and influence in the tourism domain." in Information and
communication technologies in tourism 2012, Helsingborg, Sweden,
January 25-27, 2012. 2012.
[20] B. J. Jansen, M. Zhang, K. Sobel and A. Chowdury, "Twitter power:
Tweets as electronic word of mouth," J.Am.Soc.Inf.Sci.Technol., vol. 60,
2009, pp. 2169-2188.
[21] S. Stieglitz and L. Dang-Xuan, "Political Communication and
Influence through Microblogging--An Empirical Analysis of Sentiment in
Twitter Messages and Retweet Behavior," in System Science (HICSS),
2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on, 2012, pp. 3500-3509.
[22] L. K. Hansen, A. Arvidsson, F. A. Nielsen, E. Colleoni and M. Etter,
"Good friends, bad news-affect and virality in twitter," Future Information
Technology, 2011, pp. 34-43.
[23] E. Bakshy, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason and D. J. Watts, "Everyone's
an influencer: quantifying influence on twitter," in Proceedings of the
fourth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining,
2011, pp. 65-74.
[24] M. Thelwall, K. Buckley and G. Paltoglou, "Sentiment in Twitter
events," J.Am.Soc.Inf.Sci.Technol., vol. 62, 2011, pp. 406-418.
[25] Y. Liu, H. Rui and A. Whinston, "Whose and What Chatter Matters?
The Impact of Tweets on Movie Sales Framework," Working Papers, 2011.
[26] W. Duan, B. Gu and A.B. Whinston, "The dynamics of online word-
of-mouth and product sales—An empirical investigation of the movie
industry," J.Retail., vol. 84, 2008, pp. 233-242.
[27] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park and S. Moon, "What is Twitter, a social
network or a news media?" in Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on World wide web, 2010, pp. 591-600.
[28] B. Huberman, D. Romero and F. Wu, "Social networks that matter:
Twitter under the microscope," 2008.
[29] A. Gruzd, B. Wellman and Y. Takhteyev, "Imagining twitter as an
imagined community," Am.Behav.Sci., vol. 55, 2011, pp. 1294-1318.
[30]
D. Boyd, S. Golder and G.
Lotan, "Tweet, tweet, retweet:
Conversational aspects of retweeting on twitter," in System Sciences
(HICSS), 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on, 2010, pp. 1-10.
[31] A. E. Marwick, "I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users,
context collapse, and the imagined audience," New Media and Society, vol.
13, 2011, pp. 114-133.
[32]
J.
Golbeck,
"The
dynamics
of
web-based
social
networks:
Membership, relationships, and change," First Monday, vol. 12, 2007.
[33] A. Rechavi and S. Rafaeli, "Knowledge and Social Networks in
Yahoo! Answers," in System Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii
International Conference on, 2012, pp. 781-789.
[34] D. Romero, W. Galuba, S. Asur and B. Huberman, "Influence and
passivity in social media," Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
Databases, 2011, pp. 18-33.
[35] M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto and K.P. Gummadi, "Measuring
user influence in twitter: The million follower fallacy," in 4th International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2010, pp. 10-
17.
[36] T. R. Zaman, R. Herbrich, J. Van Gael and D. Stern, "Predicting
information spreading in twitter," in Workshop on Computational Social
Science and the Wisdom of Crowds, NIPS, 2010.
[37] B. Suh, L. Hong, P. Pirolli and E.H. Chi, "Want to be retweeted?
Large scale analytics on factors impacting retweet in Twitter network," in
Social
Computing
(SocialCom),
2010
IEEE
Second
International
Conference on, 2010, pp. 177-184.
[38] E. T. R. Rosenman, "Retweets—but Not Just Retweets: Quantifying
and Predicting Influence on Twitter," 2012.
[39] http://gnip.com (last visited June 2014)
[40] B. Weiner, "An attributional theory of achievement motivation and
emotion", Psychological review, 92(4), 548, 1985.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-372-8
SOTICS 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics

