Voting Rights on Equity used as Financial Collateral 
 
Ivan Tot 
Department of Law 
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Economics and Business 
Zagreb, Croatia 
E-mail: itot@efzg.hr
 
 
Abstract— The right to vote in a company's general meeting is 
one of the key statutory rights for shareholders. Regularly it is 
an irrefutable presumption that a shareholder is only the 
person who is registered as a shareholder. In the case of equity 
used as financial collateral, it can be questionable who is 
entitled to voting rights attached to the financial collateral. 
Securities lending and repos are the two main types of 
securities financing transactions in the European market. In 
both, the collateral provider transfers the legal ownership of 
equities to the collateral taker. If a collateral provider wishes 
to exercise the voting rights attached to the transferred 
equities, he needs to recall the collateral. The main master 
agreements widely used in the European repo and securities 
lending market employ different solutions regarding the right 
of a collateral provider to substitute the financial collateral. 
These distinctions are explored in the paper, along with the 
analysis of the relevant provisions of the Financial Collateral 
Directive. 
Keywords- voting rights; securities lending; repurchase 
agreement; financial collateral; Financial Collateral Directive. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Repos and securities lending are the two main types of 
the securities financing transactions in the European cross-
border market. Securities financing transactions are 
transactions under which securities are used as collateral to 
borrow cash or other securities. Due to their similarities, 
repos and securities lending can be used as substitutes for 
each other, depending on the economic motives of the parties 
which drive these transactions. 
In both repos and securities lending, one party transfers 
the full legal title to securities to the other party for a limited 
period of time. Therefore, repo and securities lending 
agreement are both covered by the definition of a ‘title 
transfer financial collateral arrangement’ provided in the 
Article 2/1/b of the Financial Collateral Directive [1], which 
states that a ‘title transfer financial collateral arrangement’ 
means an arrangement ‘under which a collateral provider 
transfers full ownership of financial collateral to a collateral 
taker for the purpose of securing or otherwise covering the 
performance of relevant financial obligations’.  
The Financial Collateral Directive is intended to 
eliminate the so-called re-characterization risk associated 
with the collateralized transactions which transfer the 
ownership of the collateral from the collateral provider to the 
collateral taker. The re-characterization risk is a risk that the 
transfer of title in these transactions would be treated under 
national law as a security interest, under which not 
ownership but only a limited property interest is delivered. 
Article 6/1 of the Financial Collateral Directives imposes the 
obligation of the Member States to ‘ensure that a title 
transfer financial collateral arrangement can take effect in 
accordance with its terms’. The elimination of the re-
characterization risk in title transfer financial collateral 
arrangements is explicitly stated as the aim of the Financial 
Collateral Directive in its recital 13: ‘This Directive seeks to 
protect the validity of financial collateral arrangements 
which are based upon the transfer of the full ownership of 
the financial collateral, such as by eliminating the so-called 
re-characterization of such financial collateral arrangements 
(including repurchase agreements) as security interests’. 
The provisions of the Financial Collateral Directive are 
to be applied to the title transfer financial collateral 
arrangements, as well as to the security financial collateral 
arrangements, regardless of ‘whether or not these are 
covered by a master agreement or general terms and 
conditions’ (Article 2/1/a of the Financial Collateral 
Directive). Both repos and securities lending transactions are 
typically entered into under a master agreement concluded 
between the parties to these transactions. The purpose of the 
master agreement is to provide a framework under which 
individual transactions can be concluded and documented. 
The industry’s standard master agreements are widely used 
in the European repo and securities lending market. The repo 
market in Europe is represented by the European Repo and 
Collateral Council (ERCC) of the International Capital 
Market Association (ICMA), whereas the securities lending 
market is represented by the International Securities Lending 
Association (ISLA). The standard master agreement for 
repos published by ICMA is the Global Master Repurchase 
Agreement (GMRA). The present version of the GMRA is 
the one revised in 2011 [2]. Securities lending transactions 
are typically documented and governed by the Global Master 
Securities Lending Agreement (GMSLA), which was 
updated by ISLA in 2012 [3]. 
Securities lending market typically uses government 
bonds and equity securities, such as ordinary shares, as a 
collateral. In repos the fixed-income instruments, such as 
bonds, are most-widely used as collateral, but a part of the 
repo market also deals with equities as collateral. As GMRA 
generally does not apply to equity repos (see paragraph 1(a) 
of the GMRA), parties wishing to use equity as collateral in 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

repo have to amend and supplement their master repo 
agreement with a separate annex. For this purpose, a 
standard annex to the GMRA is provided by ICMA and 
widely used in the repo market: GMRA Equities Annex [4]. 
Section II of the paper highlights the main features of 
repos, while the structure of the securities lending 
transactions is explained in the Section III. The provisions of 
the standard master agreements governing these two types of 
transactions which are concerned with the voting rights 
attached to the equity used as collateral are analyzed in the 
Section IV. Conclusion is given in the Section V of the 
paper. 
II. 
THE MAIN FEATURES OF REPOS 
Although the modern form of repo and a cross-border 
repo market emerged in Europe in the late 1980s, the 
European repo market started to rapidly grow in mid-1990s 
[5]. According to the latest survey conducted by the ERCC 
of the ICMA, the total value of European cross-border and 
domestic repos in December 2016 was 5,656.2 billion euro 
[6]. 
‘Repo’ is an abbreviation of ‘sale and repurchase 
agreement’. The term ‘repo’ is commonly used in the market 
jargon as a generic term for two similar transactions: (1) 
repurchase agreement (also known as classic repo, US-style 
repo or all-in repo), and (2) sell/buy-back transaction. 
A repurchase agreement or classic repo is an agreement 
that one party (the seller) will sell securities to another party 
(the buyer) at a certain date (the purchase date) at an agreed 
price (the purchase price), with a simultaneous commitment 
by the seller to buy equivalent securities from buyer at a 
future date or on demand (the repurchase date) at a different 
price (the repurchase price). The transaction is referred to as 
a ‘repo’ when looked at from the point of view of the seller, 
whereas from the buyer’s point of view the same transaction 
is referred to as a ‘reverse repo’. ‘Every repo is a reverse 
repo, and the name given is dependent on whose viewpoint 
one is looking at the transaction’ [7]. 
In the repo market jargon, the securities sold on the 
opening leg of the repurchase transaction are referred to as 
‘collateral’. However, these securities are not collateral in the 
traditional legal sense of this term. While in secured lending 
the secured lender is given a property interest in the asset 
provided as collateral and the borrower remains the owner of 
the asset, in classic repo the full legal title to the securities 
delivered as ‘collateral’ is transferred outright from the seller 
to the buyer. The buyer in a classic repo can deal with the 
securities as he wishes, while his main contractual obligation 
is to deliver the equivalent securities to the seller at the 
closing leg of the repurchase transaction. 
At the repurchase date the securities equivalent to the 
securities purchased at the purchase date (i.e., the securities 
that are of the same issuer, are part of the same issue and are 
of an identical type, nominal value, description and amount 
as the purchased securities) are delivered to the seller against 
the payment of the repurchase price, which is higher than the 
purchase price paid by the buyer on the purchase date. The 
repurchase price equals the sum of the purchase price and the 
agreed pricing differential, which is calculated on the basis 
of the agreed repo rate [8]. 
Although the transaction is legally structured by the 
parties as a combination of two sale agreements, parties to 
the repurchase agreement are usually not economically 
motivated by the need for securities that are sold and 
repurchased between them. Most repurchase agreements are 
for general collateral and therefore are usually cash-driven 
transactions in which the parties are motivated by the need to 
borrow and lend cash. Cash-driven repurchase agreements 
are in their economic substance essentially secured loans of 
cash (see [7]). However, a segment of the repo market is 
driven by the demand to borrow particular securities (special 
collaterals or ‘specials’). The party that needs collateral that 
is ‘on special’ will be willing to lend funds at a lower repo 
rate in order to obtain the collateral [9]. The difference 
between general and special collaterals in equity repo market 
is of little significance; since almost all trades in equity repo 
market are specific securities-driven transactions (see [7] and 
[10]). 
The same practical effects as with the repurchase 
agreements or classic repos can be achieved through similar 
transactions known as sell/buy-backs [11]. As in repurchase 
transaction, in a sell/buy-back transaction the full legal title 
to the securities delivered as collateral is transferred outright 
to the buyer. Therefore, sell/buy-backs are also covered by 
the definition of a ‘title transfer financial collateral 
arrangement’ provided in the Article 2/1/b of the Financial 
Collateral Directive. Unlike repurchase agreements, in which 
the two legs of the transaction form a single contract, in a 
sell/buy-back transaction the opening and the closing leg of 
the transaction form two separate contracts. In a sell/buy-
back transaction, parties enter simultaneously in a spot sale 
and a forward repurchase. The repo rate is not explicit as in 
repurchase agreement, but is however implied in the forward 
price agreed on the onset of transaction [7]. Parties wishing 
to document their sell/buy-back transactions may do so by 
supplementing their master repurchase agreement with a 
separate annex. The standard GMRA Buy/Sell-Back Annex 
is published by ISMA for this purpose [12]. Despite the 
availability of the standard GMRA Buy/Sell-Back Annex, in 
Europe still exists a large market in undocumented sell/buy-
backs which is mainly concentrated in domestic markets, 
whereas in the European cross-border market documented 
sell/buy-backs are more common [5]. 
III. 
THE MAIN FEATURES OF SECURITY LENDING 
The structure of the security lending transaction is similar 
to the structure of a classic repo. A security lending 
agreement is an agreement that one party (the lender) will 
transfer securities to another party (the borrower) at a certain 
date against the transfer of collateral (cash or other 
securities) by borrower to lender, with a simultaneous 
commitment by the borrower to transfer to the lender 
equivalent securities at a future date or on demand against 
the transfer of assets equivalent to collateral to borrower by 
lender (see [8] and [13]). 
Although securities lending market jargon uses the 
expressions ‘borrower’ and ‘lender’, in secured lending 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

transaction the full legal title to the ‘borrowed’ securities is 
transferred outright from the ‘lender’ to the ‘borrower’ (see 
paragraph 2.3 of the GMSLA). Similar to repurchase 
agreement, the main contractual obligation of the borrower is 
to deliver equivalent securities to the lender at the closing leg 
of the security financing transaction.  
The securities lending agreement is legally structured as 
a combination of two loan agreements under a single 
contract. From the perspective of the borrower, securities 
lending is a specific securities-driven transaction in which 
the borrower is motivated by the need to borrow special 
securities. These special securities are typically either equity 
securities or government bonds. In recent years, the 
European securities lending market has seen most growth in 
the segment which deals with the government bonds [14]. 
IV. 
VOTING RIGHTS ATTACHED TO THE EQUITIES USED IN 
REPOS AND SECURITIES LENDING 
When equities are used as financial collateral in repos 
and security lending transactions, the question arises who is 
entitled to exercise the voting rights attached to the equities 
during the lifetime of the transaction. As both repos and 
security lending transactions transfer the full legal title to the 
equities used in transaction, in both types of transactions the 
new owner is entitled to exercise the voting rights. 
Both GMRA Equities Annex and GMSLA explicitly 
regulate the question of whether the original owner of the 
transferred equities can give voting instructions that have to 
be carried out by the new title-holder. Paragraph 6.6 of the 
GMSLA provides that where any voting rights fall to be 
exercised in relation to either to loaned equities or the 
equities used as collateral, neither the borrower nor the 
lender have any obligations to arrange for voting rights to be 
exercised in accordance with the instructions of the other 
party. The parties to the securities lending agreement can 
agree otherwise in writing (see paragraph 6.6 in connection 
with paragraph 1.2 of the GMSLA). Whereas the previous 
version of the Equities Annex to GMRA provided as the 
main rule that the original title-holder can give voting 
instructions that have to be carried out by the transferee of 
equity securities (see [15]), Equities Annex to the GMRA 
2011 has taken the equal stance as GMSLA. Paragraph 5(b) 
of the GMRA Equities Annex provides that where any 
voting rights fall to be exercised in relation to any purchased 
equities, the buyer is not obligated to arrange for voting 
rights to be exercised in accordance with the instruction of 
the seller, unless otherwise agreed between the parties. It 
should be noted that, even if the parties to the security 
lending agreement or to the repurchase agreement have 
expressly agreed that a new title-holder of equities is obliged 
to vote according to the instructions of the original owner, 
voting contrary to the given instructions nonetheless does not 
render void the decision delivered on the basis of that vote. 
If the original title-holder of equities wishes to exercise 
the voting rights attached to the equities transferred under a 
security lending agreement or a repurchase agreement before 
the equivalent securities are delivered to him at the closing 
leg of the transaction, he can only do so if he is entitled to 
activate the technique of substitution of collateral. A right of 
substitution is governed in different manner in GMRA and 
GMSLA. 
Paragraph 5.3 of the GMSLA entitles the borrower to call 
for the delivery of equities equivalent to those delivered to 
the lender at the opening leg, prior to the date on which the 
same would otherwise be deliverable. The borrower’s right 
to recall of collateral is conditioned with the delivery of 
alternative collateral from borrower to lender. Alternative 
collateral must have a market value equal to the substituted 
collateral. The right of the lender to substitute the loaned 
securities is not explicitly governed by the GMSLA. 
GMRA contains provisions on substitution of the 
delivered securities during the life of a repurchase 
transaction in the paragraph 8 of the GMRA. Under these 
provisions, the seller is not generally entitled to a right to 
substitute the previously sold securities. He may request the 
substitution from the buyer but the substitution technique 
will be executed only if the buyer agrees to the requested 
substitution. In exchange for the buyer’s permission to 
substitute the collateral at any time between the purchase 
date and the repurchase date, the seller will usually agree to 
pay a higher repo rate [16]. 
In case of documented sell/buy-backs the provisions of 
GMRA regarding the substitution of securities are applicable 
in the same manner as in the case of repurchase agreements. 
In general, a seller in an undocumented sell/buy-back does 
not have the right to substitute collateral. 
The Financial Collateral Directive seeks to protect the 
validity of such substitution mechanisms developed in the 
marked practice. Under the Article 8/3/b of the Financial 
Collateral 
Directive, 
where 
a 
financial 
collateral 
arrangements contains ‘a right to withdraw financial 
collateral on providing, by way of substitution or exchange, 
financial collateral of substantially the same value’, the 
Member States are obliged to ensure that substitution of the 
financial collateral shall not be treated as invalid or reversed 
or declared void on the sole basis that, inter alia, the relevant 
financial obligations were incurred prior to the date of 
substitution. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper intended to explore and highlight the main 
common features as well as the basic differences between 
securities lending and repurchase agreements, in particular 
those connected to the issues of voting rights attached to the 
equities used as financial collateral in these transactions. As 
both transactions belong to the family of title transfer 
financial collateral arrangements, in both security lending 
agreement and repurchase agreement the voting rights are 
transferred to the new title-holder together with the transfer 
of the title to equity securities used in transaction. Under the 
current versions of standard master agreements, in both 
security lending and repurchase transactions the new title-
holder is not obliged to vote in accordance to the instructions 
of the original title-holder, unless the parties had expressly 
agreed otherwise. A party wishing to exercise voting rights 
attached to the equities transferred to the other party may do 
so only if entitled with a right to substitute the transferred 
equities with equities equal in market value to the transferred 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

equities. Whereas the borrower in security lending 
transaction usually has the right of recall of collateral, the 
seller in repurchase transaction is not allowed to recall the 
delivered securities unless a right of substitution is 
specifically agreed between him and the buyer. 
A particular problem with the securities lending 
agreements and equity repos, which was not addressed in 
this short paper, is that these transactions may be used as 
means of obtaining voting control. As the voting rights 
attached to the borrowed securities will be transferred 
together with the full legal title to the borrower, while also in 
the case of equities used as collateral the voting rights 
attached to the collateral will be transferred to the lender, 
securities lending transactions could be used by the board of 
directors with an aim to influence the voting in the 
company’s general meeting. The same can occur with the 
equity repurchase agreements. These issues will be explored 
in the continuation of the research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Directive 2002/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 6 June 2002 on financial collateral arrangements, 
OJ L 168, 27.6.2002. 
[2] Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association / 
International Capital Market Association, Global Master 
Repurchase Agreement – 2011 version. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.icmagroup.org/Regulatory-Policy-and-
Market-Practice/repo-and-collateral-markets/icma-european-
repo-and-collateral-council/ 2017.08.31 
[3] International Securities Lending Association, Global Master 
Securities Lending Agreement – version January 2010. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.isla.co.uk/ 2017.08.31 
[4] Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association / 
International Capital Market Association, Global Master 
Repurchase Agreement (2011 version) – Equities Annex – 
Supplemental terms and conditions for transactions in 
equities. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.icmagroup.org/Regulatory-Policy-and-Market-
Practice/repo-and-collateral-markets/icma-european-repo-
and-collateral-council/ 2017.08.31 
[5] R. Comotto, “The European Repo Market,” in Securities 
Finance, F. J. Fabozzi and S. V. Mann, Eds. Hoboken, New 
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp. 241-253, 2005. 
[6] International Capital Market Association, European Repo 
Market Survey – Number 32 – Conducted December 2016, 
Zurich:  International Capital Market Association, 2017.  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.icmagroup.org/Regulatory-Policy-and-Market-
Practice/repo-and-collateral-markets/icma-european-repo-
and-collateral-council/ 2017.08.31 
[7] M. Choudhry, The Repo Handbook, Oxford: Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2010. 
[8] J. Benjamin, Financial Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2007. 
[9] F. J. Fabozzi and S. V. Mann, “Repurchase and Reverse 
Repurchase Agreements,” in Securities Finance, F. J. Fabozzi 
and S. V. Mann, Eds. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., pp. 221-240, 2005. 
[10] F. J. Fabozzi and S. V. Mann, “Equity Financing Alternatives 
to Securities Lending,” in Securities Finance, F. J. Fabozzi 
and S. V. Mann, Eds. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., pp. 317-332, 2005. 
[11] E. Lomnicka, “Financing Devices Involving the Transfer or 
Retention of Title,” in The Law of Security and Title-Based 
Financing, H. Beale, M. Bridge, L. Gullifer and E. Lomnicka, 
Eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012. 
[12] Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association / 
International Capital Market Association, Global Master 
Repurchase Agreement (2011 version) – Buy/Sell Back 
Annex – Supplemental terms and conditions for Buy/Sell 
Back 
Transactions. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.icmagroup.org/Regulatory-Policy-and-Market-
Practice/repo-and-collateral-markets/icma-european-repo-
and-collateral-council/ 2017.08.31 
[13] M. Haentjens and P. de Gioia-Carabellese, European Banking 
and Financial Law, London – New York: Routledge, 2015. 
[14] International Securities Lending Association, ISLA Securities 
Lending Market Report – 6th Edition – December 2016, 
London: International Securities Lending Association, 2016. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.isla.co.uk/ 2017.08.31 
[15] T. R. M. P. Keijser, Financial Collateral Arrangements, 
Amsterdam: Kluwer, 2006. 
[16] International Capital Market Association - European Repo 
and Collateral Council, A Guide to Best Practice in the 
European Repo Market, Zurich: International Capital Market 
Association, 2017. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-595-1
SOTICS 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

