Studying Risks in Space Mission Communications 
Objectives, approach and expected results 
 
Julio Vivero 
Consulting Area 
GMV 
Barcelona, Spain 
jvivero@gmv.com 
Luca del Monte 
Senior Strategy Coordinator 
European Space Agency 
Paris, France 
luca.del.monte@esa.int
 
 
Abstract—The paper presents the study on cybersecurity risks 
for space missions launched by the European Space Agency. 
This one-year study covers all lifecycle phases within civilian 
space missions and includes all their actors and elements both 
at the ground and the space. However, the paper focuses in 
how mission communications are addressed in the study, the 
approach followed to identify their risks and the expected 
results. 
Keywords-Risk; safeguards; communications; missions; 
taxonomy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cybersecurity is a growing concern for governments, 
public and private entities, and citizens [1][2]. Our reliance 
on information systems and technology for most of our daily 
activities is a reality. This fact converts Information 
Technology and Communications (ITC) into a more 
attractive target for strategic advantage, espionage, fraud, 
notoriety, etc. 
Space missions are not an exception to this general trend 
[3]. Nowadays, space missions provide valuable services to 
society in many fields: from navigation, to earth observation, 
weather forecasting or communication, sometimes even 
providing significant revenues to the operators. As such, 
cyber threats to space missions will continue to grow in the 
near future [4].  
The European Space Agency (ESA) has perceived this 
trend in the last years and has launched a study to analyze 
cybersecurity risks to space missions and recommend 
remediation safeguards. The goals of the study are providing 
tools to mission planners in order to introduce adequate 
levels of security in missions in an easier and more efficient 
way and promote awareness on the increasing cybersecurity 
risks. The study assesses risks during all phases in the 
lifecycle of space missions [5] and on all elements and actors 
involved in the mission. 
As crucial element in most, if not all, space missions, the 
communication links and equipment are carefully addressed 
in the study. Furthermore, ground-space communications are 
one particularly critical element in space missions due to 
their exposure as it is based in an open and easily accessible 
physical media: the radio channel. 
Although the study is broad and generic in nature, this 
paper focuses in the methodology that will be followed to 
identify, categorize, and mitigate risks on space mission 
communications. 
In Section II, the study main objectives and how they will 
be addressed will be described. The methodology followed 
to identify, assess, and manage risks on communication 
elements will be explained in Section III. The expected 
outcomes and impact of the study will be defined in Section 
IV. Finally, Section V summarizes the main conclusions, 
future work, and milestones of the study. 
II. 
OBJECTIVES 
The main goal of the study is “to support ESA in the 
establishment of technical recommendations and a policy” 
that help mission planners determine which security 
safeguards shall be implemented within each particular phase 
of their mission lifecycle. 
It is understood that the result of the study is expected to 
be an important tool for mission planners. With this tool 
mission planners shall be able to easily understand the 
threats, vulnerabilities, and resulting risks that apply to their 
specific mission category, including all communications 
issues, and more importantly, safeguards they should 
implement to reduce that risk to an acceptable level. 
The concept behind the study is, given the similarities in 
missions from the same category in the taxonomy 
developing, a-priori, a risk assessment and risk treatment 
plan for each category so that it can be reused in all 
subsequent missions. Tailoring of the results with mission 
particularities, such as the relative value of the mission 
(when compared with its peers in the same mission category) 
will be possible.  
Another complementary objective is to “raise awareness 
in the space community about the cyber-security issues”. In 
this sense, both the final report and the executive summary 
will present the information in a way that is easily readable, 
understandable, and usable by a broad audience in the field 
of space operations. 
To accomplish the above objectives a new risk 
assessment methodology has been designed specifically for 
the study. The following section describes in detail this 
methodology focusing on how space mission communication 
aspects are addressed. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. 
Principles 
The proposed approach leverages IT-Grundschutz [6] 
risk assessment methodology, defined by the German 
Federal Office for Information Security, and adapts it to the 
particular needs of the study. IT-Grundschutz is based on the 
modules concept. Modules are representations of threats, 
safeguards, 
and 
ultimately 
risks 
for 
technological 
components that can be easily applied by organizations 
saving the effort of performing risk assessments for these 
technological components since these assessments are done 
beforehand and reflected in the modules.  
Our methodology follows this concept and creates 
modules for each mission category and lifecycle phase which 
can be tailored in a number of ways to fit in mission 
particularities. This approach provides some benefits in 
respect to other risk assessment and risk management 
approaches, namely the possibility to customize and tailor 
the risk assessment to the concrete particularities of the space 
mission and the ease of use from the mission planner 
perspective. 
In addition to this modularity and customization 
principles, the methodology is also systematic, to guarantee 
that no relevant aspect is left aside. Efficiency is essential to 
optimize the effort required to produce the modules. 
Commonalities of space missions, even in different 
categories, shall be exploited to minimize the effort required. 
Finally but no less important, the methodology and its 
instantiation shall be well documented to provide evidences 
and justifications for decisions taken and to guarantee that 
results are consistent among methodology instantiations. 
B. 
Phases 
Fig.1 shows the methodology phases and their 
interactions. 
The first phase is the taxonomy definition. This is a 
crucial activity in the study since a great percentage of the 
results applicability and study success depends on how 
missions are categorized. All missions falling with the same 
category shall share attack motivations for attackers, threats, 
mission elements, vulnerabilities, resultant risks. Also, 
identified safeguards shall be applicable to all of them. There 
shall not be too many categories because the effort efficiency 
principle would be lost, neither too few because the risk of 
results not being applicable to all missions that fall within 
that category. 
There are several aspects which are security relevant but 
do not depend on the mission category, but rather on 
business models, or mission specific design decisions. 
Examples of these aspects are subcontracting of mission 
facilities, sites or even operations, or more relevant to the 
current paper, the type of communications present in the 
mission: ground-space, ground-ground or space-space. To 
address these aspects additional packages will be defined to 
complement modules with the threats, vulnerabilities, risks, 
and safeguards linked with them. Hence, the mission planner 
will select the main mission module applicable for its 
mission category plus the additional packages applicable to 
that mission.  
Ground-space communications is considered applicable 
to almost all space missions and hence will be included in 
the mission category modules. However, ground-ground and 
space-space communication packages will be developed 
covering all the risk relevant elements for this kind of 
communications. 
Figure 1. Cybersecurity Study Methodology. 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

The second phase in the study is the threats assessment 
for each lifecycle phase of each mission category. The 
identification of threats will be developed based on threat 
catalogues (such as IT-Grundschutz catalogue [7], ISO27005 
threats catalogue [8] or CCSDS 350.1-G-1 [9]), knowledge 
of the study team members and the results of a poll among 
different satellite organizations. These threats, and especially 
those affecting communications, shall be tailored to space 
mission particularities. Aspects, such as jamming, protocol 
efficiency, lag, and space and earth weather shall be taken 
into account. Jamming is clearly the main threat in relation 
with space-ground communications but there are other 
threats which shall not be neglected neither, e.g. 
eavesdropping, replay attacks or even man in the middle 
types of attack.  
Vulnerabilities will be identified for each asset at each 
lifecycle phase of the space mission categories. Common 
weaknesses, insecure configurations, safeguard gaps or 
implementation flaws will be analyzed as sources of 
vulnerabilities. The lack of encryption and authentication in 
messages, weak cryptographic key management practices, 
single points of failure in communication channels, lack of 
Denial of Service (DoS) resilience, inexistent or insufficient 
anti-jamming safeguards and other issues will be examples 
of vulnerabilities considered from the communications 
standpoint.  
GMV Atalaya service will support the previous phases 
by providing evidences that justify threat and vulnerabilities 
values. Atalaya monitors the internet to identify potential 
attack information, data of interest to attackers or 
vulnerabilities evidences. 
When a threat has been identified with the potential to 
exploit existing mission vulnerabilities a risk is derived. 
Resulting risks are assessed based on safeguards traditionally 
implemented in missions, and then aggregated and 
prioritized.  
During the last phase of the methodology, a set of 
safeguards will be recommended to mitigate identified risks. 
As with threats, safeguards will be obtained from catalogues 
[7][9][10][11], study team knowledge and the satellite 
organizations poll. 
Several 
safeguard implementation 
alternatives will be proposed, each with a cost-benefit 
analysis and a description of the remaining residual risk. 
Also, safeguards will be classified in basic safeguards 
(recommended for all kind of missions within the category) 
or high protection safeguards which would be applicable for 
those missions with higher protection requirements. In some 
cases areas of further research will be pointed out for 
investigating more efficient safeguards for particular threats, 
e.g. innovative anti-jamming techniques, new telemetry, 
tracking and commanding (TT&C) approaches, etc.  
IV. 
EXPECTED RESULTS 
The main results of the study are the modules and 
additional packages. Each module will contain the risk 
assessment and risk treatment result for a lifecycle phase of a 
mission category.  
Contents of the modules include the list of applicable 
threats for each asset and actor, the vulnerabilities, the 
associated risks, and the recommended safeguards. 
Additional packages present the same contents as 
modules but focused in aspects which are specific of each 
mission and cannot be extrapolated from the mission 
category. It is planned to produced additional packages for 
space-space 
communications, 
ground-ground 
communications, multi-organizational missions, outsourced 
mission elements, missions with high public visibility and 
for the type of spacecraft bus used (serial or ad-hoc). 
Mission planners will then need to select the appropriate 
module and complement it, as needed, with the additional 
packages to get the list of recommended safeguards to 
include in the mission so that cyber-security risks are 
mitigated. 
The mission taxonomy elaborated during the first phase 
of the study is another interesting result by itself. It provides 
a classification of space missions per their cyber-security 
properties.  
At this date, the mission taxonomy phase of the study has 
been concluded. The following mission categories have been 
identified: 
 
Launchers 
 
Space Tourism 
 
Manned 
In-Orbit 
Infrastructure 
/ 
Planetary 
Exploration 
 
Supply and Re-Entry Vehicles. 
 
Navigation 
 
Communications 
 
Weather Forecast 
 
Earth Observation Mapping 
 
Earth Observation Surveillance 
 
Earth Observation Environmental Monitoring 
 
In-Orbit Servicing 
 
Scientific – Up to GEO Orbit 
 
Scientific – Above GEO Orbit 
 
Space Situational Awareness (SSA) 
Fig.2 below shows the percentage of past, present, and 
future ESA missions that fall within each mission category 
according 
to 
public 
information 
at 
ESA 
website 
(www.esa.int/ESA/Our_Missions). 
 
Figure 2.  Percentage of ESA missions per category 
The above deliverables are clearly presented, described, 
and explained in a final report and executive summary. 
These reports will summarize all information in a way to be 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

easily readable, understandable, and usable by a broad 
audience in the field of space operations  
One element included in the methodology, and relevant 
to the expected results, is the Experts Board concept. To 
guarantee the quality, applicability, and accuracy of all 
results, an Experts Board formed by highly qualified and 
experienced GMV personnel has been formed to review all 
study deliverables before they are published. In this way, 
threats, vulnerabilities, risks, and safeguards will be fully 
useful and applicable to mission planners. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
GMV and ESA are convinced of the potential benefits 
which can be generated by the study results. Namely, 
increasing awareness in cyber-security among space mission 
stakeholders and actors, enhancing the security of current 
and future missions and thus mitigating their cyber-security 
risks and finally reducing the effort and knowledge required 
for mission planners to decide what safeguards shall be 
implemented in the mission and how. 
These benefits will only be achieved if certain conditions 
are given. First, and most important, the results shall be very 
easy and intuitive in their exploitation by mission planners. 
That is, the effort to learn how to use them and apply them 
shall be as low as possible. Second, risk modules shall be 
fully applicable to every mission according to its category. If 
a high percentage of threats, vulnerabilities and safeguards 
within a module are clearly not applicable to the mission; 
then mission planners will be discouraged and discard its 
use.  Third and last, recommended safeguards included 
within the modules shall be effective in the mitigation of 
space mission risks. Otherwise, the study results would be 
either complemented or replaced with a different approach.  
Looking further into the future it is also important to 
consider that results shall be simple to maintain and easily 
updateable with new modules and additional packages to 
accommodate new mission categories or aspects to consider 
in terms of cybersecurity. To facilitate these maintenance 
tasks the methodology shall be described in detail, including 
guidelines on how to implement the methodology, criteria to 
consider and rationale followed. 
The study started in July 2013 and is expected to be 
executed during one year, until July 2014. 
REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission, “EU Cybersecurity plan to protect 
open internet and online freedom and opportunity – Cyber 
Security strategy and Proposal for a Directive,” Digital 
Agenda for Europe, February 2013  
[2] National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
“Cybersecurity 
Framework,” 
Information 
Technology 
Laboratory, February 2013. 
[3] Staff Writers, “The State of NASA’s Cybersecurity,” Space 
Safety Magazine, March 2012. 
[4] Kris Osborn, “Air Force Faces Increasing Space Threats: 
Shelton,” DefenseTech, September 2013. 
[5] European Coordination for Space Standardization, “Project 
planning and implementation,” ECSS-M-ST-10C rev1, 3rd 
issue rev. 1, March 2009. 
[6] German 
Federal 
Office 
for 
Information 
Security, 
“Methodology for evaluating usage and comparison of Risk 
Assessment and Risk Management items,” Deliverable 
2 
version 1, April 2007. 
[7] German Federal Office for Information Security, “Reference 
source for threats, vulnerabilities, impacts and controls in IT 
risk assessment and risk management,” Deliverable 3 version 
1, April 2007. 
[8] International 
Standards 
Organization, 
“Information 
technology — Security techniques — Information security 
risk management,” ISO/IEC 27005, 1st ed., June 2008. 
[9] Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems, “Security 
Threats Against Space Missions,” CCSDS 350.1-G-1, 
October 2006. 
[10]  National 
Institute 
of 
Standards 
and 
Technology, 
“Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information 
Systems and Organizations,” SP800-53 rev.3, August 2009. 
[11] International 
Standards 
Organization, 
“Information 
technology - Security techniques - Code of practice for 
information security management,” ISO/IEC 27002:2005, 2nd 
ed., June 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

