New Optical Communication Capabilities Using Nanosatellites 
F. Sansone, L. Olivieri, A. Francesconi 
Centre of Studies and Activities for Space CISAS “G. Colombo" 
University of Padova 
Padova, Italy 
francesco.sansone@studenti.unipd.it, lorenzo.olivieri@studenti.unipd.it, alessandro.francesconi@unipd.it  
 
Abstract—In this paper, the benefits derived from the 
exploitation of nanosatellites for complex telecommunication 
missions are presented, along with their limitations, and laser 
technology is identified as a viable solution to dramatically 
increase the downlink and crosslink capabilities of such 
miniature platforms. Then, the critical technological issues 
concerning the integration of an optical telecom terminal on a 
nanosatellite 
platform 
are 
discussed, 
considering 
the 
perspective advancements in areas such as power generation, 
propulsion and attitude control. The incompatibility of laser 
terminals pointing requirements with the current and 
perspective nanosatellite attitude stability has been identified 
as the most critical issue to be addressed in order to implement 
optical links on nanosatellites. A possible solution is presented 
at the end of the discussion. 
Keywords-nanosatellite; optical link 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The term nanosatellite refers to the class of satellites 
weighting between 1 and 10 kg, which were initially 
conceived to offer students and young engineers valuable 
educational experiences with real flight programs; their 
exploitation was boosted by the introduction of the CubeSat 
standard in 2003. The interest showed by space agencies 
and academic institutions in such miniature platforms is 
constantly increasing because of their inherent advantages. 
The reduced mass, prototyping and production time of 
nanosatellites, as well as low launch cost as piggyback 
payloads allow universities, corporations and small 
companies to access to space easily. As of December 2012, 
149 missions based on nanosatellites were flown and many 
others are on schedule [1], [2].  
The inherent low cost of a single nanosatellite can be 
further reduced when mass production of standard units is 
applied, making these miniature platforms particularly 
appealing for the realization of satellite constellations 
suitable 
for 
earth 
observation, 
mapping 
or 
telecommunication applications. In particular, LEO telecom 
constellations based on nanosatellites could be attractive 
since they can provide global continuous coverage, 
overcoming the visibility limitations of large GEO 
platforms, and can be cost-effective even with respect to the 
existing LEO systems. The integration of high data rate, 
compact telecommunication terminals on nanosatellite 
platforms could pave the way to mission scenarios 
unexpected to this day. 
In this work, three illustrative perspective scenarios have 
been identified and are briefly presented below. 
 
1) Extension of GEO satellites coverage to polar areas 
and 
urban 
canyons. 
A 
LEO 
constellation 
of 
nanosatellites providing continuous coverage over polar 
regions can be used as a bridge to extend the coverage 
of GEO telecom satellites (see Fig. 1a), which is 
usually limited to the ±71° latitudinal band when a 
minimum elevation angle of 10° is considered. Also, 
the system can be used to better cover densely 
urbanized areas. This way, the capabilities of GEO 
satellites can be increased at a very low relative cost. 
2) Data relay constellation for scientific satellites in LEO. 
Scientific missions in LEO produce a large amount of 
data, while few, short windows are available for 
downlink to ground stations. A constellation of 
miniature platforms capable of high data rate 
down/crosslinks providing continuous global coverage 
will make it possible to download data to ground 
stations not visible to the scientific satellites, almost in 
real time, as shown in Fig. 1b. 
3) Low cost constellation for situational awareness. In 
case of unavailability of ground infrastructures due to 
natural or man-made disasters, situational awareness 
can be maintained exploiting a LEO nanosatellite 
constellation, as depicted in Fig. 1c. Crosslink 
capabilities could dramatically reduce the access time 
to any point of the Earth surface. 
 
However, the advantages given by the exploitation of 
nanosatellites are counterbalanced by severe technical 
limitations, which make them unattractive for complex or 
high performance missions. Such limitations are represented 
by the short life (few years) and the limited on-board 
resources in terms of power and volume available to the 
payload, attitude control and telecommunications. In 
particular, downlink and crosslink capabilities are limited by 
both the on-board power and the poor attitude stabilization 
typical of nanosatellites, which often rely only on permanent 
magnet bars and hysteresis rods, preventing the exploitation 
of narrow-beam antennas for high data rate links. Typically, 
nanosatellite communication systems use the VHF or UHF 
frequency band, and are based on monopole or microstrip 
patch antennas, with wide beamwidth and data rate often 
bounded to a few tens of kbit/s. Sometimes the S band is 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 1.  
Illustrative new mission scenarios: (a) extension of GEO satellites coverage to polar areas and urban canyons, (b) data relay constellation for 
scientific satellites in LEO, (c) low cost constellation for situational awarness. 
exploited for higher data rate. This is the case of the Generic 
Nanosatellite Bus [3], whose dual communication system 
uses a UHF monopole antenna receiver system for uplink at 
4 kbps and an S-band transmitter patch antenna set for 
downlink, capable of data rates between 32 kbps to 256 
kbps. 
 
In this paper, the advantages of exploiting optical links 
on nanosat platforms are discussed in section II. The state of 
the art of the main technologies required for the realization 
of the aforementioned mission scenarios is summarized in 
section III, along with the perspective advancements in 
those fields. Finally, section IV presents the system that is 
developed by the authors to cope with the current 
technological limitations which these days prevent the 
integration of laser communication terminals onboard 
nanosatellites. 
II. 
CREATING NEW COMMUNICATION CAPABILITIES 
USING NANOSATELLITES 
In this section, the benefits derived by the exploitation of 
optical link devices onboard nanosatellites are discussed. 
Telecom systems based on laser technology are 
characterized by very narrow beamwidth and high 
frequency carriers (hundreds of THz), which make it 
possible to obtain very high data rate transmissions with 
more compact and less power consuming devices, with 
respect to RF systems. In addition, optical links can provide 
secure channels, as they are immune to jamming and cannot 
be intercepted. Moreover, there are no licence regulations 
on the use of optical frequency bands and bandwidths, so 
great commercial opportunities are possible. Although it 
cannot be considered a standard technology yet, several 
optical link devices were developed and tested in the last 
years [4]-[6]; among them, examples of compact devices are 
represented by STRV-2 [7] and SOTA [8].  
As an example, two RF and one laser-based 
communication systems for high data rate links are 
compared in order to determine which technical solution is 
more suitable for integration on nanosatellites class 
platforms. The carriers of the two RF systems are set to 2.5 
and 20 GHz respectively, the former representing the state 
of the art of RF communication systems for miniature 
satellites 
and 
the 
latter 
representing 
perspective 
advancements in this field [9]. The selected laser 
wavelength is 1.55 μm. A LEO – LEO crosslink scenario is 
considered with an intersatellite distance of 5000 km and the 
link requirements are expressed in terms of desired data rate 
and BER, which are set to 500 Mbit/s and 1E-6 respectively. 
The former is set roughly 3 orders of magnitude greater than 
typical maximum data rates for nanosatellites. Then, in 
order to compare systems with equivalent performance, the 
RF and optical terminals design assumptions, such as 
antenna diameter and bandwidth, are set in order to provide 
the same link margin. For simplicity, the emitter and 
receiver terminals are supposed to be identical. After that, 
the link budget is assessed, leading to the estimation of the 
required power and system mass for all the considered 
solutions.  As regards the optical system, the total mass and 
power 
consumption 
are 
estimated 
using 
empirical 
correlations between these parameters and the telescope 
aperture, which were derived from a literature survey on 
existing optical link devices. The estimates account also for 
the mechanical active pointing system. On the other hand, 
the antenna and transmitter mass, as well as the transmitter 
input power for the RF systems have been estimated 
considering the relations provided by [10]. An additional 
mass of at least 1 kg is added to account for the antenna 
steering mechanism, derived from a literature survey of 
analogous systems [11]-[12]. Table 1 summarizes the 
terminals design assumptions and presents the results given 
by the link budget calculation and the total mass and power 
consumption estimation; the total mass of the RF systems is 
given by the sum of the antenna, transmitter and steering 
mechanism masses. The pointing accuracy required by each 
system was also calculated according to [13] and is reported 
in the last line of Table 1.  
The results point out that the laser-based system requires 
a much lower power input with respect to the RF systems 
and its mass is considerably lower. In fact, the total 
estimated masses of the RF terminals exceed the nanosat 
standard limits. However, the pointing accuracy needed to 
achieve the communication requirements is much more
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

TABLE I.  
RESULTS FROM THE LINK BUDGET FOR A RF SYSTEM AND A 
LASER-BASED TERMINAL PROVIDING A LINK WITH DATA RATE OF 500 
MBIT/S, BER OF 10-6 AND SAME LINK MARGIN 
DESIGN ASSUMPTIONS 
 
Unit 
RF 1 
RF 2 
Optical 
Antenna diameter  
[m] 
0.3 
0.3 
0.02 
Carrier frequency  
[GHz] 
2.5 
20 
193.5E3 
Wavelength  
[m] 
0.120 
0.015 
1.55E-6 
Bandwidth  
[MHz] 
500 
500 
500 
Modulation  
[/] 
BPSK 
BPSK 
BPSK 
RESULTS 
 
Unit 
RF 1 
RF 2 
Optical 
Trx gain  
[dB] 
15.31 
33.37 
91.34 
EIRP 
[dB] 
54.97 
54.97 
76.71 
Trx power 
[W] 
>1000 
144.62 
0.035 
Eb/N0  
[dB] 
12.00 
12.00 
12.00 
Link margin  
[dB] 
1.30 
1.30 
1.30 
Beamwidth 
[rad] 
0.49 
0.06 
96E-6 
Total mass 
[kg] 
>100 
15 
3.5 
Total power 
[W] 
>1000 
395 
20 
Pointing accuracy 
[rad] 
0.020 
0.003 
4E-6 
 
stringent for the optical system, as a consequence of the 
very narrow beamwidth. 
III. 
TECHNOLOGICAL GAPS 
In this section the main technological issues that must be 
addressed to enable the exploitation of nanosatellite 
platforms for optical communication are briefly discussed. 
A. Miniaturized Optical Link Terminal 
The mass of existing laser-based communication 
terminals for space applications ranges between 5 and 160 
kg, while their power consumption is within 28 and 150 W. 
The main drivers for sizing an optical terminal are the 
telescope aperture and the laser output power, which together 
contribute to the transmission gain. With the recent 
availability of compact, reliable and more powerful laser 
diodes the telescope dimensions can be reduced while 
maintaining a high transmission gain, thus enabling the 
realization of low-mass terminals. An optical communication 
system for microsatellite platforms, with preliminary mass, 
power consumption and data rate assessment of 5 kg, 45 W 
and 2.5 Gbit/s respectively, is currently under development 
[14]; therefore, it is expected that in the near future terminals 
suitable for integration on nanosatellite platforms can be 
realized with current technology. 
B. Power Generation 
An estimated power consumption of 20 W for the 
miniaturized laser terminal results from the analysis 
performed in section II. According to [15], so far the 
average available power on-board nanosatellite platforms 
does not exceed 10 W, even when GaAs solar cells are used. 
The limiting factor is essentially the small area available to 
solar cells, even when deployable solar arrays are exploited. 
A promising solution to this issue is represented by rollable 
solar arrays based on thin polymide foils, which are 
characterized by a very high specific power generation 
(>200 W/kg) [16], [17]. A total power consumption of 60 W 
can be delivered by a deployable, thin film solar array of 0.4 
m2, for a total weight of only a few hundred grams. Thus, it 
seems that power available on nanosatellite platforms will 
increase dramatically in the next years.  
C. Propulsion 
Considering a mission scenario in which a nanosatellite 
constellation is exploited for telecommunication, propulsion 
capabilities are essential for orbit maintenance and 
correction. In high LEO (1000 km or more), the most 
significant long-term semi-major axis perturbation is due to 
solar radiation pressure, as the Earth atmosphere density is 
almost negligible; for a 10 kg platform, a total ΔV of 50 m/s 
is estimated for orbit corrections throughout a 5 years 
mission. It seems that such performance can be achieved 
using currently available technology, as promising results 
were obtained in the last years exploiting pulsed plasma 
thrusters and field emission electric propulsion systems 
[18], [19]. 
D. Pointing Accuracy and Stability 
As pointed out in section II, lasercom devices require 
very stringent pointing accuracy and stability as a 
consequence of their narrow beamwidth. The needed 
pointing accuracy is at least in the order of a ten 
microradians. To this date, this requirement is far beyond 
the capabilities of any kind of attitude control system 
considering both nanosatellites and larger platforms. In 
addition, the bus attitude stability is critical to establish an 
optical connection between two spacecraft. As a reference 
point, the ADCS of the Generic Nanosatellite Bus for the 
BRITE mission [20], which is scheduled to launch in 2013, 
will be capable of unprecedented performance for 
nanosatellites, with attitude accuracy and stability of  <1° 
and 60’’ respectively, exploiting a miniature startracker for 
fine attitude determination and a set of nano reaction 
wheels. Such performance do not meet the aforementioned 
requirements, so it is clear that they can be achieved only 
with a dedicated pointing system. However, moving 
gimbals could generate additional disturbances the bus 
ADCS must deal with, which sums to the vibrations 
generated by large deployable solar arrays based on thin 
polymide films. At best, considering a nanosatellite 
platform provided with 3-axis attitude control and damping 
system, the residual vibrational environment of the bus in 
LEO is characterized by a few milliradians amplitude 
oscillations at low frequency (<5 Hz). 
 
In summary, in the near future the capabilities of 
nanosatellites are expected to increase significantly as 
power generation and propulsion are concerned; in addition, 
recent advancements in laser technology will enable the 
realization 
of 
miniaturized 
optical 
terminals 
for 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

telecommunications. However, both the state of the art of 
ADCS and the expected advancements in this area seem 
insufficient to meet the attitude stability requirements 
needed for a steerable laser communication terminal.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The exploitation of LEO constellations based on 
nanosatellites for telecommunication scenarios is attractive 
for the benefits derived from the low mass, production time 
and overall cost of such miniature platforms. However, the 
exploitation of nanosatellites for complex missions is still 
prevented by their current severe resources limitations. In 
this paper, optical communication has been identified as a 
viable solution to increase significantly the communication 
data rate available to payloads onboard nanosatellites. The 
technological aspects which play a key role in the 
realization of new mission scenarios have been discussed 
considering the current state of the art of nanosatellite 
technologies and their perspective advancements in the near 
future. Considering the actual limitations of ADCS of 
nanosatellites, the laser terminal pointing accuracy and 
stability have been identified as the most critical issues 
which must be addressed to enable the exploitation of 
optical telecom terminals onboard nanosatellite platforms. 
In this framework, the exploitation of a miniaturized, 
actively stabilized platform as an interface between the 
optical terminal and the host spacecraft is the chosen 
solution to cope with the current nanosats ACDS 
limitations. The active rejection of both low and high 
frequency vibrations from the bus to the laser terminal and 
viceversa not only will enable the exploitation of optical 
links on miniature satellites, but it will also allow to relax 
the requirements on both the ADCS of the host spacecraft 
and the pointing mechanism of the optical terminal. The 
authors are currently developing an integrated system 
composed by a miniaturized laser communication terminal 
and an actively controlled ultra-stable parallel platform with 
3 rotational dof (shown in Fig. 2). This system is conceived 
to be mounted on top of a nanosatellite bus with 3-axis 
attitude control based on standard technologies (3 reaction 
wheels and 3 torquerods), but provided with sufficient 
power generation capabilities to sustain the optical 
communication terminal. The system performance will be 
evaluated though laboratory test using an attitude simulator 
testbed. 
 
Figure 2.  Preliminary configuration of the actively-stabilized platform. 
REFERENCES 
[1] http://www.slideshare.net/mpariente/nanosatellite-industry-
overview - retrieved: February 2013  
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_CubeSats 
- 
retrieved: 
February 2013 
[3] F. M. Pranajaya and R. E. Zee, “Generic nanosatellite bus for 
responsive mission,” Proc. 5th Responsive Space Conference, 
Loa Angeles, CA, USA, April 2007, pp. 134-140 
[4] G. Griseri, “SILEX pointing acquisition and tracking: ground 
test and flight performances,” Proc.4th ESA International 
Conference on Spacecraft Guidance, Navigation and Control 
nn Systems, Noordwijk, The Netherlands, 18–21 October 
1999, pp. 467-472 
[5] Y. Fujiwara et al., “Optical inter-orbit communications 
engineering test satellite (OICETS),” Acta Astronautica 61, 
2007, pp. 163 – 175 
[6] G. Baister, P. Gatenby, J. Lewis, and M. Witting, “The SOUT 
optical intersatellite communication terminal,” IEE Proc on 
Optoelectronics, , Vol. 141 No. 6, December 1994, pp. 345-
355 
[7]  A. Biswas, G.Williams, K. E. Wilson, H. Hakakha, R. 
Steiger, and E. J. Korevaar, “Results of the STRV-2 lasercom 
terminal evaluation tests,” Proc. SPIE Free-Space Laser 
Communication Technologies X, Vol. 3266, January 1998, 2-
13, San Jose, California, USA 
[8] Y. Koyama et al., “SOTA: small optical transponder for 
micro-satellite,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Space Optical Systems 
and Applications, Santa Monica, CA, USA, May 2011, pp. 
97-101 
[9] J. A. King, J. Ness, G. Bonin, M. Brett, and D. Faber, 
“Nanosat Ka-band communications - a paradigm shift in 
small 
satellite 
data 
throughput,” 
Proc. 
26th 
Annual 
AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, Utah, 
USA, August 2012 
[10] J. R. Wertz and W. J. Larson, “Space Mission Analysis and 
Design,” Microcosm Press and Kulver Academic Publishers, 
1999 
[11] http://www.astrium.eads.net/en/equipment/antenna-pointing-
mechanism-electronics-apme.html - retrieved: February 2013 
[12] SSTL Antenna Pointing Mechanism Sales Brochure, July 
2012 
[13] V. W. S. Chan, “Optical satellite networks,” J. Lightwave 
Technol. 21, NO. 11, November 2003, pp. 2811-2827 
[14] T. Dreischer, B. Thieme, M. Bacher, K. Buchheim, and P. 
Hyvönen, “OPTEL-µ: a compact system for optical 
downlinks from LEO satellites,” Proc. 12th International Conf. 
on Space Operations, Stockholm, June 2012 
[15] J. Bouwmeester and J. Guo, “Survey of worldwide pico- and 
nanosatellite 
missions, 
distributions 
and 
subsystem 
technology,” Acta Astronautica 67, December 2010, pp. 854 –
862 
[16] K. Otte, L. Makhova, A. Braun, and I. Konovalov, “Flexible 
Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin-film solar cells for space application,” Thin 
Solid Films 511 –512, July 2006, pp. 613-622 
[17] R. Barrett et al., “Development of a passively deployed roll-
out solar array,” AIAA  Journal, 2006, 21(12), pp. 4011-4023.  
[18] C. Scharlemann et al., “Propulsion for nanosatellites,” Proc. 
32nd 
International 
Electric 
Propulsion 
Conference, 
Wiesbaden, Germany, September 2011, pp. 11–15  
[19] P. Shaw, “Pulsed plasma thrusters for small satellites,” 
doctoral thesis, University of Surrey, June 2011 
[20] K. A. Carroll, S. Rucinski, and R. E. Zee, “Arc-minute 
nanosatellite attitude control: enabling technology for the 
BRITE stellar photometry mission,” Proc. 18th Annual 
AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, Utah, 
USA,  August  2004, SSC04-V-2 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

