Cognitive Radars (CRs) Could Improve Target Engagement Success Rate 
 
Paul Labbé 
National Defence 
Defence Research and Development Canada (DRDC) 
Canada 
Email: Paul.Labbe@drdc-rddc.gc.ca / Paul.Labbe@forces.gc.ca 
 
 
Abstract— Based on information available on Cognitive Radar 
(CR) technologies, one can anticipate their potential impact on 
target track quality that may improve target engagement 
success rate. CR could multiply force capabilities to respond to 
threats posed by nefarious groups using advanced technologies 
against our nations and our allies. However, so far there seems 
to be no CR technologies currently deployed on military 
platforms or for military applications but there are indications 
that some are in development. In the future, CR is expected to 
offer the capability to detect and track small targets (or stealth 
platforms) over much extended range than current radar 
under the same conditions. It could contribute to enabling a 
drone to disable an opposing force platform or to eliminate 
drones representing threats to civilian aircraft. 
Keywords-cognition; radar; target engagement; success rate. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is based on research done by the author [1] for 
the Defence Research and Development Canada (DRDC) 
Science and Technology Outlook function to address the 
following question: What are cognitive radar (CRs), their 
technology enablers, their applications and their implications 
on the Defence and Security (D&S) domains and systems? In 
addition, a method for assessing target engagement success 
rate will be summarised and used to illustrate the potential 
advantage of CR over traditional radar. 
The concepts of CRs were developed in the 90s. 
Haykin’s initial thoughts about radar cognition can be found 
in his 1990 paper [2]: “…we have coined the term radar 
vision. The goal here is to make radar an intelligent remote 
sensing device, such that it is capable of developing 
cognition of the surrounding environment.” Later he 
expanded these CR concepts in several seminal papers 
[3][4]. Activities under the Defence Advanced Research 
Project Agency (DARPA) addressed the development of 
CRs with similar concepts starting from a Knowledge-Based 
(KB) system point of view with the work led by Guerci who 
reported in 2014 on Cognitive Fully Adaptive Radar 
(CoFAR), which was tested in a real environment: “A new 
and fully adaptive environmentally aware (cognitive) radar 
and signal processing architecture is introduced to meet the 
challenges of increasingly complex operating environments” 
[5]. CoFAR uses a radar centric Sense-Learn-Adapt (SLA) 
approach based on an ‘observe, orient, predict, decide and 
act’ (OOPDA) loop from cybernetics [6][7] well known to 
Command and Control (C2) where the learn part is a 
Knowledge-Aided (KA) expert system with supervised 
training. While becoming environmentally aware, a 
cognitive system develops some self-awareness of its 
purpose (metacognitive or introspective capacity) [8]. 
DARPA and sibling defence organizations offer perspective 
extending academic works into higher level of technology 
readiness. They report on radar system development and 
publish results from trials in real environments.  
Section II presents the evolution of radar technologies 
from adaptive to cognitive ones. Section III relates to 
examples of applications. Section IV provides some of the 
claimed performance. Section V presents a method to 
evaluate the trend of CRs in improving target engagement 
success rate. Section VI offers comments on work in 
progress. Section VII provides a summary of findings.  
II. 
FROM ADAPTIVE TO COGNITIVE RADAR 
Basic radar transmits a signal via an antenna to illuminate 
a scene. That signal bounces back from scene objects to the 
same antenna (monostatic) which feeds the receiver. 
Processing of signal echoes allows performing a variety of 
measurements such as location, velocity and trajectory. A 
Traditional Active Radar (TAR) offers some adaptive 
capabilities compared to basic radar. TAR was improved 
with adaptive receiver processing, beamforming, and 
constant false alarm rate. Basic radar and TAR heavily relied 
on the cognitive abilities of their expert operators to select, 
for example, waveforms and time duration on an observation 
area where a target was suspected to be. CRs provide some 
of these cognitive abilities through a learning process using 
statistical methods and retention of information from 
previous observations. A first step toward CR capabilities, 
besides what experienced operators could perform, was 
achieved by adding feedback from the receiver to the 
transmitter, as described in [9]. This closed-loop feedback 
control radar system or fully adaptive radar was labelled 
Fore-Active Radar (FAR) by Haykin [10]. FARs are 
advanced radar systems with feedback loops between fully 
adaptive receivers and adaptive transmitters including 
antenna beamforming [10] as illustrated in Figure 1. 
There is no unambiguous definition of CR. Guerci [5] 
proposed a practical definition as follows: CR “is a system 
that is capable of sensing, learning, and adapting to complex 
situations with performance approaching or exceeding that 
achievable by a Subject Matter Expert (SME), especially for 
real time operations which demand automation.”  
13
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 1.  Simplified diagrams of adaptive and cognitive radars. 
Figure 1 provides a simplified block diagram of a CR 
adopting SLA as one block. Haykin [10] stated that: CR 
“differs from TAR as well as FAR by virtue of the following 
capability: the development of rules of behavior in a self-
organized manner through a process called learning from 
experience that results from continued interactions with the 
environment.”  
“The key idea behind this new paradigm is to mimic the 
human brain as well as that of other mammals with 
echolocation capabilities (bats, dolphins, whales, etc.)” [11]. 
This overarching principle of a CR was inspired by the 
ability of bats and dolphins to track and home in on their 
prey. “There is much that we can learn from the echo-
location system of a bat” [4]. The principle was extended 
keeping in mind that useful CR is expected to track multiple 
targets [12]. In addition, long-range detection may require 
different strategies or principles than biologically inspired 
homing in on a close target optimisation techniques. 
In his 2006 CR paper [9], Haykin proposed a CR target-
tracking system that continuously learned about the 
environment, intelligently adjusted the transmitter, and 
incorporated receiver-to-transmitter feedback. 
In general we can say that adaptive systems react to their 
environment using predefined rules, but cognitive ones can 
develop new rules in real time with or without supervision. 
Cognitive systems designed to reach users’ goals use 
different machine learning techniques and memory retention 
to:  
1. address immediate reaction types (parasensory and 
premotor);  
2. plan tactics (complex and abstract information of 
perceptual or executive character); or  
3. change strategy toward goals (dynamics of the 
perception–action cycle in sequential behaviour and 
reasoning). 
A CR can learn from the observed effects from stimuli 
that the CR designed and generated. It can create new 
algorithms based on observations of its manipulation of the 
environment. CRs are proactive (anticipative or predictive) 
while TARs are responsive—they wait until something 
happens. CRs probe the environment to see what happens if 
they transmit a signal with a given waveform or pulse shape. 
A. Enabling Technologies 
CR shares technology enablers with TAR, Phased-Array 
Radar (PAR) systems and Digital-Array Radar (DAR) [13], 
these include Software Defined Radios (SDRs), SDR 
Sensors (SDRSs) [14], software defined radar [15], field-
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), Graphics Processing 
Units (GPUs), cell phone Application Specific Integrated 
Circuits (ASICs) and Digital Signal Processors (DSPs) [16]. 
These common enablers include an evolution to modern 
phased array architectures [17] from Passive Electronically 
Scanned Array (PESA) to Active Electronically Scanned 
Array (AESA). AESAs have been deployed in missile, 
fighter aircraft, surveillance platforms, drones and air 
defence systems. AESAs’ Transmit/Receive Modules 
(TRMs) for each antenna element, or group of antennas, 
enable 
them 
to 
accomplish 
multiple 
functions 
simultaneously such as radio communications, cellphones, 
jamming and multi pencil beams.  
B. Evolution 
Interestingly, “The continued ‘digitization’ of radar front-
ends and resultant TRM flexibility, coupled with advances in 
advanced KA high performance embedded computing have 
afforded a unique opportunity for a leap-ahead capability in a 
radar's ability to adapt to complex target-environment 
scenarios...from the nascent field of cognitive radar” [18]. 
One also notes impressive capabilities such as “Deep 
learning cognitive radar for Micro Unmanned Aircraft 
Systems (UAS) detection and classification,” Mendis (2017) 
[19] showed the exceptional capabilities of this type of 
cognitive radar to distinguish between very small drones at 
relatively low signal to noise ratios. Used of a strategy to 
select waveforms, as for the airborne CARABAS radar, to 
provide good resolution to distinguish targets [20][21] at 
short ranges [22][23], and High Frequency (HF) Over-The-
Horizon (OTH) radar by dynamically selecting frequencies 
and waveforms in response to sensed spectrum occupancy 
[23][24] and ionospheric conditions, approach cognitive 
radar [23][25] but lack SLA ability to design new strategies.  
III. 
EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION 
Cognitive Radar Information Networks (CRINs) were 
proposed in [26] to secure large, unmanned borders such as 
the 3,700 km Canada/U.S. border that runs through the Great 
Lakes. Border security represents a major challenge given 
the limited sensor capabilities to cover continuously the 
various ships and platforms crossing in such large areas. 
Using cognitive sensors and radars in a network of 
collaborative systems could be a sensible approach to 
enhance risk mitigation and for reducing operator overload. 
CRIN and CR should be considered as a source of 
inspiration in studies for updating the North Warning System 
14
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

(NWS) to provide support for North American Aerospace 
Defense Command (NORAD) aerospace warning and 
control missions for insuring a continuous coverage of the air 
and maritime approaches to and within North America. 
Currently DRDC is investigating the value of adding some 
cognitive capabilities to our military radar systems. 
IV. 
CR CLAIMED PERFORMANCES 
In the unclassified domain one can find several CR test 
results from simulations and a few experiments in real 
environment scenes. In general the results obtained show 
significant improvements in all the parameters radar systems 
can provide about a target such as position, trajectory, 
velocity, 
acceleration, 
distance, 
altitude, 
jet 
engine 
modulation, and early target detection. In most operational 
scenarios, providing early accurate positional information is 
critical [27]. Reported experimental results show that CR 
outperformed TAR by at least one order of magnitude when 
using the same signal processing performance metric [10]. In 
a real environment using a CoFAR, [5] reports a 10 to 15 dB 
Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR) for Moving 
Target 
Indicator 
(MTI) 
improvement 
against 
non-
homogenous clutter. This means that the reported results 
show some evidence that CR significantly outperforms TAR 
in the situations described. 
Several advantages of CR over TAR, when using the 
same signal processing technique, were reported in [28], e.g., 
to reach a Root-Mean-Square Error (RMSE) of the velocity 
of about 7.5 m/s, CR took 0.17 s and TAR 2.4 s, which is 
more than one order of magnitude faster. 
The cumulated evidence from CR publications allows 
inferring that a substantial advantage can be gained by 
adopting new military CR technologies against current and 
emerging threats, e.g., such advanced capabilities could 
better defeat threats from low cost emerging technologies for 
Cognitive Electronic Warfare (CEW) and weaponized 
drones.  
Assuming that CRs could rapidly change their 
modulation or transmitting schemes, it may make such radar 
signal difficult to jam with legacy jamming techniques. If 
advanced CRs use noise-like signal and radiation patterns 
with a high degree of unpredictability, they would be more 
difficult to jam even with CEW.  
When compared to TARj with similar antenna 
performance, there are specific advantages that could be 
attributed to CRs such as: 
1. Extend detection range [28]. 
2. Shorten the time to acquisition in target tracking [29]. 
3. Improve the accuracy of positional information of 
tracked targets [30]. 
4. Reduce risk in selecting an intelligent choice of 
decision-making mechanism in the transmitter for a 
prescribed goal of interest when confronted with 
environmental uncertainties and disturbances in real 
time [31]. 
5. Offer the agility necessary to defeat ‘Digital Radio 
Frequency Memory’ based jammer/spoofing technology 
which essentially captures the transmitted signal and 
reradiates it towards the radar receiver, typically with 
some delay or modulation attached [31][32]. 
6. Detect smaller radar cross section (RCS) targets such as 
drones and stealth platforms [33]. 
7. Increase capabilities of passive radar and multistatic 
radar systems which could detect some stealth aircraft 
better than conventional monostatic radars, since first-
generation stealth technology (such as the F-117) 
reflects energy away from the transmitter's line of sight, 
effectively increasing RCS in other directions, which 
multistatic passive radars can monitor [20]. 
8. Increase the likelihood of defeating standard electronic 
warfare and CEW by unexpectedly and rapidly changing 
waveform characteristics [31]. 
9. Use difficult to detect waveforms including wideband 
signals, limit opposing force opportunities to use or 
trigger their electronic countermeasures to reduce a 
potential range advantage a radar system may offer in 
targeting opposing force assets or platforms [32]. 
10. Reduce the susceptibility (lower likelihood) of being 
fooled by artificial coherent target energy, including 
decoys [31]. 
11. Use built-in shielding against misdirecting/degrading 
Direction-of-Arrival (DOA) measurements [31]. 
12. Offer enhanced geolocalization by networked CRs 
[31][34]. 
13. Deliver faster high precision information about targets 
[5][28]. 
14. Can contribute to communications when other means 
are jammed [34]. 
V. 
POTENTIAL IMPACT OF CR ON TARGET ENGAGEMENT 
SUCCESS RATE 
Cybernetic models were used in analyzing coalition live 
and simulated exercises. These cybernetic models allowed 
simulating the decision-making processes made by operators 
at command centers including: 
1. monitor the situation; 
2. assess the situation and estimate adversarial intent; 
3. develop alternative Courses-Of-Action (COAs); 
4. predict consequences for both sides (own and opposing 
forces); 
5. decide a COA; and 
6. direct the COA execution while monitoring an evolving 
situation in the environment (repeat 1 to 6). 
By using cybernetic models to interpret data and 
information collected during experiments, one can process 
and evaluate the stages through a set of Measures Of 
Performance (MOPs). Similarly, Measures Of Effectiveness 
(MOEs) can provide an assessment of the resulting degree of 
mission accomplishment in scenarios to scale MOPs 
relatively to MOEs, i.e., asserting both that the system 
performs its tasks well and that those are the correct tasks. 
When running these cybernetic models over data 
collected from a large number of trials, one obtains a graph 
like the one depicted in Figure 2 relating interception success 
rate as a function of system time delay and track data 
accuracy and their timeliness. From these trials, the main 
delay was due to the human in the loop and imposed 
15
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

transmission timing. However, track data timeliness and 
accuracy were also affecting target interception success rate. 
If legacy radars are replaced by CRs delivering more 
accurate data with less delay, one can infer from Figure 2 an 
increase in target interception success rate.  
 
Figure 2.  Potential mission success rate as function of input information 
age and accuracy (inverse of Circular Uncertainty Area, CUA) for a fixed 
effector's strategy [35]. 
A possible interpretation of Figure 2 is that track data in 
the red area and below are not appropriate for targeting with 
a specific effector. If a given CR track is delivered to this 
effector ten times earlier (blue arrow) than from a TAR and 
that the accuracy is several times better (green arrow), then 
this track data may reach the yellow/white area where it 
might be considered of “targeting grade”. That is, this 
engagement has a higher likelihood of success. 
In [36][37], we posited that with the advent of cognitive 
networks, sensors, and shooters, it seems more achievable 
today to accelerate and improve the sensor-to-shooter loop 
with a high likelihood of lower fratricide, lower collateral 
damage, and precise effects on intended targets or end state. 
VI. 
MULTISTATIC MULTIBAND COMPLEXITY ADDS 
CAPABILITIES 
Recently the author identified some new aspects of 
cognitive radar when adding other dimensions such as 
multistatic, multiband and the agility offered by the AESA 
approach in order to reduce the infrastructure of antennas on 
a platform (ship or aircraft). Platform Radio Frequency (RF) 
systems to provide radar, communications and Electronic 
Warfare (EW) functions are evolving towards an integrated 
system approach know as MultiFunction RF (MFRF) 
systems [38]. This adds some complexity to the systems but 
offers several advantages in trying to defeat new threats such 
as stealth aircraft and hypervelocity cruise missiles.  
The hypothesis is how much is feasible and advantageous 
to build a Cognitive-Multistatic-Multiband-Radar Network 
(CMMRN)? 
Essentially, a CMMRN is a system made of 
interconnected radar systems with the following capabilities:  
A. Multistatic  
Monostatic radar uses one antenna for transmitting a 
signal illuminating a scene that may include a target and uses 
the same antenna for receiving reflections of the signal. 
Multistatic radar uses at least either two transmitting or two 
receiving antennas, providing multistatic beam angles 
between the illuminating signal(s) and the reflected ones. 
When these beam angles are sufficiently large, such complex 
radar configurations are outweighed by the potential 
advantages of early detection of cruise missiles and stealth 
platforms, which increases the likelihood of successfully 
intercepting incoming threats [39]. Different types of 
multistatic radar systems exist: active and passive [40]. 
Passive radar uses transmitters of opportunity while active 
radar uses own transmitter. Currently, transmitters of 
opportunity are not available in Canadian Air Defense 
Identification Zone (CADIZ), which includes the entire 
Canada’s Arctic Archipelago as part of the overall North 
American 
Aerospace 
Defense 
Command 
(NORAD) 
modernization, aka, Evolution of North American Defense 
(EvoNAD). This CADIZ is substantially extended from the 
previous CADIZ of the North Warning System (NWS). The 
modernization of the NWS not only needs to address this 
extended area but the range of potential threats to the 
continent which are more complex and increasingly difficult 
to detect, such as threats posed by adversarial cruise missiles 
and new ballistic missiles. However, with the advent of new 
Low-Earth-Orbit 
(LEO) 
satellite 
constellations, 
new 
transmitters of opportunity [41] illuminating Canadian Arctic 
are becoming a reality to consider. 
 
Figure 3.  Monostatic, bistatic and multistatic radar systems. 
B. Multiband 
Radar operating in one band offers advantages and 
disadvantages specific to that band. A multiband radar may 
optimally combine advantages from operating in several 
bands for predefined operational goals, e.g., using the S-band 
for its strong immunity against weather clutter and good 
detection range, X-band to generate narrower beams for 
target tracking and improving spatial resolution, and VHF 
for extended range and its abilities to detect stealth targets. 
Multiband 
radar 
systems 
allow 
enhancing 
target 
16
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

classification and detection, and exploiting multispectral 
imaging of complex targets [42]. 
C. AESA of New Military Radars 
AESAs’ Transmit/Receive Modules (TRMs) for each 
antenna element or group of antennas enable them to 
accomplish multiple functions simultaneously such as radio 
communications and multi-pencil beams. TRMs decrease the 
total energy demand, provide linearity and reduce nearby 
spectrum pollution from non-linearities of legacy radar main 
powerhouse (magnetron, klystron and travelling wave tube) 
[1]. Using a large number of TRMs increases reliability 
compared to single point of failure of legacy radars. 
D. Expected Performance 
According to [41], based on LEO satellites operating in 
the L-band, the theoretical and experimental studies show 
that the power budget of bistatic radar for air target detection 
is sufficient for some practical applications such as detecting 
typical air-targets against a white-noise background at 
distances of 30 km and more. Such radar has unique 
advantages from the passive mode of operation, such as not 
being seen as an active surveillance radar and not having to 
power the transmitters. 
There is the challenge of the direct satellite signal 
competing with the faint reflected signal from the target. 
This interference is many orders of magnitude stronger than 
the reflected signal. Another challenge is the high Doppler 
induced by the orbiting satellites illuminating the scene and 
frequent hand over from one satellite to the next in the 
correct position for an appropriate multistatic angle. This 
induced Doppler may compete with the clutter Doppler shift. 
The favorable results reported [41] in the power budget 
evaluation are encouraging for further research into air-target 
detection with multistatic radar based on LEO satellite 
signals at higher frequencies as for the new constellations 
under deployment. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
CR is expected to provide improved situational 
awareness with more timely and precise information. It is 
expected to accelerate evolution of our D&S capabilities. 
This evolution could be managed by progressively 
introducing these capabilities as in service upgrades or 
integrated in the development of future systems. Replacing 
legacy radar systems as soon as possible with AESA TARs 
would enable updates to CR capabilities later when CR 
technologies are ready and mature. Upgrading to AESA 
TARs and then to AESA CRs would certainly provide 
progressively significant advantages to coalition forces in 
most demanding combat and surveillance situations.  
It is worth noting that using AESA TRMs decreases the 
total operational energy demand and reduces nearby 
spectrum pollution from the non-linearities of legacy radar 
main powerhouse, i.e., magnetron, klystron and travelling 
wave tube. 
Other cognitive sensors of interest to D&S were noted 
during this research. According to several references on 
SOund Navigation And Ranging (SONAR), cognitive 
technology and associated signal processing and pattern 
recognition have already proven to be advantageous in 
underwater operations. Similarly cognitive Light Detection 
And Ranging (LiDAR) provides accurate representations of 
the environment as applied to autonomous cars. 
Another aspect is that the development of CRs may have 
stimulated work on CEW technology since most traditional 
electronic warfare techniques would not be able to 
effectively counter the nimble and unpredictable wave 
patterns of agile CRs. 
Overall, there is overwhelming evidence that the 
advantages of adopting CR technologies outweigh the risk 
represented by their complexity. 
As illustrated in Figure 2, one can infer that CR’s shorter 
time to deliver higher accuracy track data increases the 
likelihood of target engagement success rate. This is a trend 
that several analysts would like to confirm with field trials in 
the near future. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Labbé, “Cognitive radars (CRs) and their implications,” 
Defence Research and Development Canada, Scientific Letter, 
DRDC-RDDC-2019-L025, January 2019. 
[2] S. Haykin, “Radar vision,” in Record of the IEEE 1990 
International Radar Conference, Arlington, VA, USA, 1990, 
pp. 585-588: IEEE, 1990. 
[3] S. 
Haykin, 
“Cognitive 
Radar 
Networks,” 
in 
IEEE 
Computational Advances in Multi-Sensor Adaptive Processing 
(CAMSAP), 
2005: 
First 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Computational 
Advances 
in 
Multi-Sensor 
Adaptive 
Processing, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, 2005, pp. 1-3: IEEE, 
2005. 
[4] S. Haykin, “Cognitive radar - A way of the future,” IEEE 
Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 30-40, Jan 
2006. 
[5] J. R. Guerci, R. M. Guerci, M. Ranagaswamy, J. S. Bergin 
and M. C. Wicks, “CoFAR: Cognitive Fully Adaptive Radar,” 
in 2014 IEEE Radar Conference, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 2014, 
pp. 984-989, 2014. 
[6] N. Wiener, Cybernetics: or Control and Communication in 
the Animal and the Machine, 2nd ed. MIT press, 1961. 
[7] J. G. Camacho et al., “Open architecture as an enabler for 
FORCEnet Cruise Missile Defense,” Monterey, California. 
Naval Postgraduate School, 2007. 
[8] M. T. Cox, “Perpetual self-aware cognitive agents,” AI 
magazine, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 32-46, 2007. 
[9] D. J. Kershaw and R. J. Evans, “Optimal waveform selection 
for tracking systems,” IEEE Transactions on Information 
Theory, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1536-1550, 1994. 
[10] S. Haykin, Y. B. Xue and P. Setoodeh, “Cognitive Radar: Step 
Toward Bridging the Gap Between Neuroscience and 
Engineering,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, no. 11, pp. 
3102-3130, Nov 2012. 
[11] A. D. Maio and A. Farina, “Cognitive Radar Signal 
Processing,” North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 
Science and Technology Organization (STO) NATO HQ, 
Brussels 2015. 
[12] S. Haykin and J. M. Fuster, “On cognitive dynamic systems: 
Cognitive neuroscience and engineering learning from each 
other,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 102, no. 4, pp. 608-628, 
2014. 
17
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

[13] W. Chappell and C. Fulton, “Digital array radar panel 
development,” in 2010 IEEE International Symposium on 
Phased Array Systems and Technology (ARRAY), Waltham, 
MA, USA, 2010, pp. 50-60: IEEE, 2010. 
[14] W. Wiesbeck, “SDRS: software-defined radar sensors,” in 
IEEE 2001 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium, IGARSS'01. , Sydney, NSW, Australia, Australia, 
2001, vol. 7, pp. 3259-3261: IEEE, 2001. 
[15] M. R. Sladic and E. Fehratovic, “Software Defined Radar 
System: Hardware application development,” Bachelor’s 
degree in electrical engineering, Department of Signals and 
Systems, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, 
Sweden, 2014. 
[16] U. Ramacher, “Software-Defined Radio Prospects for 
Multistandard Mobile Phones,” Computer, vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 
62-69, 2007. 
[17] J. S. Herd and M. D. Conway, “The evolution to modern 
phased array architectures,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 
104, no. 3, pp. 519-529, 2016. 
[18] J. R. Guerci, “Cognitive radar: The next radar wave?,” 
Microwave Journal, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 22-36, January 2011. 
[19] G. J. Mendis, J. Wei and A. Madanayake, “Deep learning 
cognitive radar for Micro UAS detection and classification,” 
in Cognitive Communications for Aerospace Applications 
Workshop (CCAA), 2017, Cleveland, OH, USA, 2017, pp. 1-
5: IEEE, 2017. 
[20] A. Martone, K. Sherbondy, K. Ranney and T. Dogaru, 
“Passive sensing for adaptable radar bandwidth,” in 2015 
IEEE Radar Conference (RadarCon), 2015, pp. 0280-0285, 
2015. 
[21] R. Klemm et al., Novel Radar Techniques and Applications. 
Two Volume Set. SciTech Publishing, 2017. 
[22] J. Jakabosky, S. D. Blunt and B. Himed, “Optimization of 
“over-coded” radar waveforms,” in Radar Conference, 2014 
IEEE, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 2014, pp. 1460-1465: IEEE, 
2014. 
[23] NATO STO SET, 
“Radar 
Spectrum 
Engineering 
and 
Management,” in "STO technical report TR-SET-182," April 
2017. 
[24] J. D. Poston and R. M. Buehrer, “Spectrum Sharing with 
Rotating 
Radar: 
Implications 
for 
Cognitive 
Radio 
Rendezvous,” in 2014 IEEE Antennas and Propagation 
Society International Symposium (APURSI), Memphis, TN, 
USA, 2014, pp. 1204-1205, 2014. 
[25] A. Ponsford, R. McKerracher, Z. Ding, P. Moo and D. Yee, 
“Towards a Cognitive Radar: Canada's Third-Generation High 
Frequency Surface Wave Radar (HFSWR) for Surveillance of 
the 200 Nautical Mile Exclusive Economic Zone,” Sensors, 
vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1-13, Jul 2017. 
[26] T. J. Nohara and S. Haykin, “Cognitive radar information 
networks for security-Enhancing risk mitigation for reducing 
operator overload,” in Radar Conference (RADAR), 2013 
IEEE, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2013, pp. 1-6: IEEE, 2013. 
[27] P. Labbé and R. Proulx, “Impact of Systems and Information 
Quality on Mission Effectiveness,” in Proceedings of the 5th 
International 
Command 
and 
Control 
Research 
and 
Technology Symposium, 5th ICCRTS, Canberra, Australia, 
2000, p. 37, 2000. 
[28] K. Krishnan, T. Schwering and S. Sarraf, “Cognitive Dynamic 
Systems: A Technical Review of Cognitive Radar,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1605.08150, 2016. 
[29] S. Haykin, A. Zia, I. Arasaratnam and Y. B. Xue, “Cognitive 
Tracking Radar,” in 2010 IEEE Radar Conference, 
Washington, DC, USA, 2010, pp. 1467-1470, 2010. 
[30] R. F. Yuan, R. B. Gan and G. F. Tang, “Performance of 
cognitive radar detection under EMI environment,” in 
Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on 
Mechanical Science and Engineering, Qingdao, China, 2016, 
vol. 66, pp. 1-8, 2016. 
[31] F. Smits, A. Huizing, W. van Rossum and P. Hiemstra, “A 
Cognitive Radar Network: Architecture and Application to 
Multiplatform Radar Management,” in 2008 European Radar 
Conference, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2008, pp. 312-315, 
2008. 
[32] A. W. Doerry and B. Marquette, “Shaping the Spectrum of 
Random-Phase 
Radar 
Waveforms,” 
Sandia 
National 
Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico, , September 2012. 
[33] L. Fan, J. K. Wang and B. Wang, “Time Allocation in 
Cognitive Radar for Multiple Target Detection,” in 
Proceedings of 2009 Third International Symposium on 
Intelligent Information Technology Application, Shanghai, 
China, 2009, vol. 2, pp. 169-172: IEEE, 2009. 
[34] J. Jakabosky, B. Ravenscroft, S. D. Blunt and A. Martone, 
“Gapped 
Spectrum 
Shaping 
for 
Tandem-Hopped 
Radar/Communications & Cognitive Sensing,” in 2016 IEEE 
Radar Conference (Radarconf), Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2016, 
pp. 22-27, 2016. 
[35] P. Labbé et al., “Recommendations for Network-and Internet-
based Synchronized E-activities for Location-and Time-
dependent Information,” in 7th International Command and 
Control Research and Technology Symposium, 7th ICCRTS, 
Loews Le Concorde, Québec City, Canada, 2002, pp. 1-28: 
CCRP, 2002. 
[36] P. Labbé, “Potential advantages of cognitive sensor-to-
effector loops (CStELs),” in 23rd International Command and 
Control Research and Technology Symposium (23rd ICCRTS), 
Florida Institute for Human & Machine Cognition (IHMC), 
Pensacola, Florida, USA, 2018, vol. Topic 4: Cognitive and 
Socio-technical Challenges, Paper # 84, pp. 1-20: ICCRTS, 
International Command and Control Institute, 2018. 
[37] P. Labbé, “Cognitive Networks and Systems to Improve 
Coalition Operations Effectiveness,” in 2019 IEEE 6th Asian 
Conference on Defence Technology (ACDT), Bali, Indonesia, 
2019, pp. 182-187: IEEE, 2019. 
[38] P. Moo and D. DiFilippo, “Multifunction RF Systems for 
Naval Platforms,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1-37, 2018. 
[39] A. G. Westra, “Radar versus stealth: Passive radar and the 
future of US military power,” JFQ, vol. 4th quarter, no. 55, 
pp. 136-143, 2009. 
[40] M. Ben Kilani, “Multistatic Radar Optimization for Radar 
Sensor Network Applications,” Ph.D., École de Technologie 
Supérieure Université du Québec, Montréal, 2018. 
[41] M. Cherniakov, D. Nezlin and K. Kubik, “Air target detection 
via bistatic radar based on LEOS communication signals,” 
IEE Proceedings-Radar, Sonar and Navigation, vol. 149, no. 
1, pp. 33-38, 2002. 
[42] F. Scotti, F. Laghezza, P. Ghelfi and A. Bogoni, “Multi-Band 
Software-Defined Coherent Radar Based on a Single Photonic 
Transceiver,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 546-552, 2015. 
  
18
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

