Public Protection and Disaster Relief by Satellite-based Communications Network 
 
Yong-Min Lee 
Satellite & Wireless Convergence Research Dept.  
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
ymlee01@etri.re.kr 
Bon-Jun Ku and Do-Seob Ahn 
Satellite & Wireless Convergence Research Dept.  
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
bjkoo@etri.re.kr, ahnds@etri.re.kr
 
 
Abstract— Various communication means which are not only 
possible technologies of the moment but also from a peanut-
size network to an extensive scale should be integrated for 
public protection and disaster relief (PPDR). Wireless fixed ad 
hoc network and mobile ad hoc networks is useful to quickly 
establish an instant communications system to support 
emergency management and the urgent missions in the 
incident disaster area. The competent area network is used for 
dedicated communication and information sharing between 
rescue teams and 3G/4G mobile networks could be deployed to 
expand local networks reaches the working terrestrial base 
stations. To interconnect the long distance remote disaster site 
and cover the wide area a satellite system is mainly used for 
transferring the collected data by sufficient link capacity. The 
example of homogenously integrated network for PPDR is 
described and IP-based satellite network is proposed to 
provide emergency management services which facilitate the 
matter of high data rate and quick deployment. 
Keywords- PPDR; disaster; management; satellite-based 
communication; interated;  network  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Almost every day, many kinds of disaster are reported by 
newspapers, radio and television channels from over the 
world. A disaster can be defined as “A serious disruption in 
the functioning of the community or a society causing wide 
spread material, economic, social or environmental losses 
which exceed the ability of the affected society to cope using 
its own resources”[1]. 
A disaster is a result from the combination of hazard, 
vulnerability and insufficient capacity or measures to reduce 
the potential chances of risk. Various disasters like 
earthquake, landslides, volcanic eruptions, fires, flood and 
cyclones are natural hazards that kill thousands of people and 
destroy billions of dollars of habitat and property each year. 
The recurrent occurrences of various natural and manmade 
disasters like the December 2004 Tsunami, the bomb blasts 
in the cinema halls of Delhi and many such incidences have 
diverted our focus towards safety of one’s own life. 
Disasters are as old as human history but the dramatic 
increase and the damage caused by them in the recent past 
have become a cause of national and international concern.  
Communication means provide the critical path for relief 
in emergency and disaster situations. Once a disaster has 
occurred, however, local infra structure – including 
microwave, cellular and other most communications 
facilities are destroyed. In the immediate aftermath of such a 
major emergency situation, one of the reliable solutions of 
communications is satellite-based communication. 
Satellite technology can provide narrowband and 
broadband IP communications (Internet, data, video, or voice 
over IP) with speeds starting at 64 Kbps from handheld 
terminals up to 4 Mbps bi-directional from portable VSAT 
antennas normally. Fixed installation can bring the 
bandwidth up to 40 Mbps [2]. 
In fact, a disaster can be occurred very variously – 
various size, place, causes, etc. but it should be effectively 
controlled and managed in any emergency and disaster 
situations. This discussion would be complete with the quick 
and reliable establishment of a temporary communications 
network which has feasible technologies to support 
emergency management. 
The aim of this paper is suggesting a complete wireless 
communications solution that can be deployed immediately, 
reliably, and easily before/after disaster. For this work all 
different systems should be hierarchical and enabling an 
interworking properly between different technologies as well 
as communication devices. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces 
the 
recent trends 
of disasters 
and the 
needs of 
telecommunications hierarchy during a disaster situation, 
Section 3 explores the integrated PPDR network to mitigate 
the unpredictable disaster effectively and also suggests a 
hierarchical architecture of integrated PPDR network, and 
Section 4 discusses IP-based satellite network for PPDR as a 
generic solution for provision of multimedia services via 
satellite access network.  
II. 
DISASTER TRENDS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
HIERARCHY 
A. Trends of Disasters 
Over the past decade we have seen an increase in the 
intensity of natural disasters worldwide as shown in Fig. 1. 
Through the media, and for some of us, through firsthand 
experience, we have witnessed the awesome force of nature. 
In the recent past, we have had natural disasters created by 
the tsunami in Asia, the earthquake in Pakistan, and the 
hurricane Katrina in the US. These caused unprecedented 
devastation and great loss of life which have been etched in 
our minds due to the magnitude of the devastation. Disaster 
impact statistics show the global trend – there are now more 
63
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

disasters but fewer people die in proportion, even though 
more population is affected and economic losses are 
increasing [3].  
 
Figure 1.  Number of natural disasters reported 1975-2009 (Source: 
EM−DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database − 
www.emdat.be − Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels – Belgium) 
 
Figure 2.  Technological disasters reported 1975-2005 (Source: EM-DAT: 
The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database - www.em-dat.net - 
Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels – Belgium) 
Technological disasters often resulting from major 
accidents associated with industrialization and forms of 
technological innovation have significant socio-economic 
and environmental impact. Although technological hazards 
have been part of society for hundreds of years, the trends 
are showing an increasing impact in Fig. 2 [4].  
Technological advancements, specifically in the energy, 
transport and industrial sectors, are developing innovations 
with associated risks that are not always understood or 
heeded. The adverse effects of some technological disasters, 
both on society and on the environment, can considerably 
outlast the impacts associated with natural disasters.  
Comparing the last three decades, the trend shows an 
increase in the number of natural hazard events and of 
affected populations. Even though the number of disasters 
has more than tripled since the 1970s, the reported death toll 
has decreased to less than half. This is among other factors 
due to improved early warning systems and increased 
preparedness. This statistic varies enormously depending on 
region and figures used. One need to bear in mind those large 
disasters is rare events that defeat any statistical analysis in 
the short term. Perhaps more significant in the life of many 
are those daily disasters, generally underreported and not 
reflected at all in global figures on losses, but accumulating 
to probably large tolls of both economic and health losses. 
B. Telecommunications Hierarchy for Disaster Situation 
In the recent trend, disaster management has emerged as 
an important management system to cope with any disaster 
events. Efficient disaster management shall able to estimate 
the scale of disasters and its quick responses in any incidents. 
Nowadays, the system of disaster management is purely a 
scientific phenomenon. There are three phases of disaster 
management which are namely Pre-Disaster Management, 
During-Disaster Management and finally Post-Disaster 
Management [5]. Pre-Disaster Management is a vital phases 
of this entire management system. It includes the preparation 
of various action plans by the relevant organizations and 
their objective is to minimize the risk and hazards from the 
specific disaster’s events. The second phases of its 
managements are to provide responses at the time of disaster 
and last phases include how to tackle with the operation of 
relief & rehabilitation. It is really understood that the perfect 
Pre-Disaster Management helps with the efficient disaster 
management system in the strategic time. 
Many types of wireless communications can help to 
coordinate an effort of the disaster management inside and/or 
outside disaster area to bridge the disaster zone to the other 
zone, providing telecommunications, broadcasting, logistic, 
and tele-medical support. Furthermore, in many scenarios, 
especially in disaster situations, wireless represents the only 
viable delivery mechanism [6]. 
Generally speaking, the wireless solutions in the 
management of emergency situations have been identified 
for a long time. Nowadays, however, just one wireless 
solution could not be capable of delivering the services to 
cover the complex emergency situations which are being 
wide area, underground area, and under constructed infra 
area for instance. In these areas communications networks 
could be either unavailable to damage and congestion or 
totally missing.  
Very hierarchical telecommunications infrastructure is 
needed and it should be operated organically. Immediate 
availability, rapid deployment, and reliability are key factors 
for communication network infrastructure in emergency 
situations. In order to keep the telecommunications 
infrastructure hierarchically, it is acquired a particular 
significance in terms of various facets, which can be 
summarized as follows: 
• 
A mobile ad-hoc network should be rapidly 
deployed in a disaster area. 
• 
Broadband 
services 
(Multimedia, 
Internet, 
Telemedicine, etc.) should be deliverable to monitor 
the disaster situation deeply. 
• 
Operator’s terminal should be equipped with 
portable, compact, and easy-to-use as well as 
interconnected all operators. 
Table I shows the comparison of mobile ad hoc network 
(MANET), terrestrial, and satellite system as a means of 
telecommunication for PPDR. 
64
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF MANET, TERRESTRIAL, AND SATELLITE 
SYSTEM 
 
MANET 
Terrestrial 
GEO Satellite 
Typical Cell Size 
No cell 
0.1-1 km 
400km min. 
Service Coverage 
Varies 
< 1 km 
Up to global 
Maximum  
Transmission rate 
 per user 
Varies from 
node scenario 
< 100 kbps 
Spot service 
155Mbps 
Quasi-global 
155 Mbps 
System Deployment 
Flexible, a  
set of mobile  
hosts 
Serveral base 
stations before  
use 
Flexible, but 
long lead time 
Estimated Cost of 
Infrastructure 
Low  
Varies 
High  
III. 
INTEGRATED PPDR NETWORK 
Disasters 
generate 
intense 
human 
need 
for 
communication to coordinate response activities to convey 
information about affected groups and individuals, and as a 
panic reaction to crisis. The critical disasters are the most 
intense generators of telecommunication traffic, and the 
resulting surge of demand can clog even the most well-
managed networks. In addition, for economic reasons, most 
communications networks are engineered for peak load at 
levels well beneath the demands placed on them during 
disasters. 
Generally, most of disaster might be occurred in small 
area which can be covered by terrestrial communications 
network. But sometimes the terrestrial infrastructures are 
damaged or missing and high risk areas damaged by disaster 
on the ground need to be deeply monitored in particularly. In 
this case satellite network can offer a stable and wide range 
of services. Such services may be particularly valuable 
where the terrestrial network is damaged severely. 
So, in order to mitigate the unpredictable disaster 
effectively a public protection and disaster relief (PPDR) 
network should be integrated by various communication 
means which are not only possible technologies of the 
moment but also from a small-size network to an extensive 
scale in terms of coverage, data rate, and users. 
 
A. Incident Area Network (IAN) 
When a disaster occurs, a commonly accepted concept is 
to need a communication infrastructure that is rapidly 
deployable at the disaster site and able to interconnect 
organically among the personnel of emergency agencies such 
as police, fire fighter, a first-aid team, etc [7]. 
The quick deployment, availability, and reliability of 
such emergency communication network in disaster 
situations is of great values considering life and property of 
the distressed. 
Wireless fixed ad hoc network and mobile ad hoc 
networks as shown in Fig. 3 can be quickly established as an 
instant communications system to support emergency 
management and the urgent missions in the disaster relief 
situation. Especially mobile ad hoc networks could be 
considered 
as 
a 
ultra-fast 
deployable 
network 
by 
automatically establishing “self-healing” network and 
“moving hot spot”. 
 
Figure 3.  Wireless fixed ad hoc network and mobile ad hoc networks 
This kind of ad hoc networks can be applicable to 
“mobile robotics” such as hazardous material removal, anti-
terrorist action, rescue in hazardous locations, and remote 
inspection as well as “remote patient monitoring” in terms of 
blood pressure, cardiac activity, encephalographic data,  
body temperature, and positioning.   
B. Competent Area Network (CAN) 
Dependent on the nature of a disaster, there are usually 
many personnel requiring communications and because of 
the urgency of communications, a good Grade of Service 
(GoS) is required. These factors mean that a significant 
amount of network capacity needs to be available throughout 
the disaster and affected areas to support effective PPDR 
communications.  
Generally the mobile telecommunications network will 
not have the capacity to provide effective PPDR 
communications because most of them located in a disaster 
area have been designed to support normal traffic loads [8]. 
Therefore, the dedicated communication network is needed 
to be secure communications to provide stable and additional 
capacity in competent area. 
TETRA system shown in Fig. 4 is the preferred 
technology for constructing a competent area network 
because 
TETRA 
has 
some 
advantages 
over 
other 
technologies which are very fast call set-up and provide a 
number of fall-back modes such as the ability for a base 
station to process local call unlike most cellular technologies. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Competent area network by TETRA trunking system 
65
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
Figure 5.  Extended area network by 3G/4G networks 
C. Extended Area Network (EAN) 
Telecommunication technologies used for emergency 
telecommunications are often no different than those used for 
routine public safety telecommunications. 
3G/4G mobile systems using W-CDMA, WiMax, LTE 
technologies could be easily deployed to expand local 
networks reaches the working terrestrial base stations. These 
wireless technologies are likely to be combination of 
narrowband, wideband and broadband, and nature of 
application use public or private networks in order to 
establish the extended area network (EAN) as shown in Fig. 
5. 
• 
Public: GPRS and 3/4G 
• 
Private: Wideband TEDS and Broadband PPDR 
D. Wide Area Network (WAN) 
Satellite communication is still unbeatable for broadcast 
and multicast services for wide area – especially cost per 
delivered bits independent of user position and number of 
users inside wide coverage area. 
Furthermore satellite communications have not only high 
data rate capacity and long distance transmission compared 
other terrestrial networks but also robustness against most 
natural or man-made disaster that can be harmful to 
terrestrial infrastructure. 
In addition, WAN including satellite system have own 
advantages which other network is not easy to provide as 
follows. 
• 
Disaster prediction and detection – meteorological 
and earth exploration satellite services 
 Operated in the main by government and 
international agencies 
 Play a major role in prediction and detection of 
disasters (such as hurricanes, earthquakes and 
tsunamis, floods, fires, dangerous pollution, etc.) 
• 
Disaster alerting – broadcasting, fixed, mobile and 
related satellite services 
 Alert 
the 
 
central/regional/local 
authorities 
responsible for warning the public – broadcasting, 
fixed, mobile, fixed/mobile-satellite systems 
 Issue warnings to the people likely to be affected 
 Broadcasting (sound and television) 
 Mobile (such as TV, Radio, DMB, SMS/Cell 
broadcasting) 
• 
Disaster relief – amateur, broadcasting, fixed, mobile 
and related satellite services 
 Earth exploration satellite – damage assessment 
and relief planning 
 Fixed/mobile satellite – to rapidly restore 
communications capabilities, coordination of 
relief activities 
E. Example of Integrated PPDR Network Architecture 
Emergency 
telecommunications 
should 
cover 
all 
communication services, including voice and non-voice, data, 
location, and so forth. 
The need for emergency telecommunications includes 
many scenarios ranging from a minor road traffic accident, 
for example, to a major incident like a passenger train crash, 
a terrorist incident, a natural disaster (e.g. an Earthquake, 
Tsunami). 
In order to consist of the integrated PPDR network as 
shown in Fig. 6 and to manage the network systematically, 
“Standards” for emergency communications and “Standard 
Operation Procedure (SOP)” are essentially needed. 
While the different technologies are used, the followings 
are basically considered to guarantee access and successful 
interconnection.  
• 
Interoperability of diverse communications systems 
and diverse protocols 
• 
Interagency and cooperation between organizations 
• 
Rapid deployment 
A SOP is a set of written instructions that document a 
routine or repetitive activity followed by an organization to 
deal with the emergent situation effectively. SOPs define 
precisely how operations were to be conducted and also 
describe clearly what is expected and required of personnel 
during emergency response and non-emergency activities.  
 
Figure 6.  Conceptual architecture of integrated PPDR network  
66
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
Figure 7.  Hierachical architecture of integrated PPDR network 
Since a disaster occurs, different and consecutive phases 
can be identified for the network deployment of rescue teams 
in the disaster area. So the reactive mechanism should be 
used for the rescue and recovery of any disaster by optimal 
hierarchical communication network. 
The proposed hybrid system architecture which is for the 
formation of tree structure as shown in Fig. 7 provides a 
strong mobility management support in order to bring 
seamless mobility to PPDR communication network. 
IV. 
IP-BASED SATELLITE NETWORK FOR PPDR 
The broadband multimedia satellite system is intended as 
a generic solution for provision of multimedia services via 
satellite access networks. It is required that repletion and 
enlarging the role of broadband mobile wireless internet 
through the satellite communication which has mobility, 
wide coverage and broadband channel as following aspects. 
• 
Wireless internet service requests increasing the 
bandwidth and users also request high speed services 
as wire network 
• 
Necessity of technique development for getting over 
the limitations of current mobile communications 
and Wireless LAN technologies 
• 
Necessity 
of network device techniques for 
providing high quality of multimedia services via 
mobile wireless internet 
• 
Satellite communications make possible for using 
whole the country and providing broadband internet 
multimedia services 
In fact, a satellite network can offer large bandwidth and 
allow small aperture antenna as well as even hand held 
terminal like terrestrial terminal that could provide a various 
multimedia services for PPDR.  
IP-based architecture for broadband satellite access is as 
shown in Fig. 8 for broadband PPDR services and it can be 
adapted independently to the particular GEO or LEO satellite 
technology adopted in the satellite link [9]. This rapid 
deployable IP-based satellite network can provide the 
following advantages. 
• 
Point-to-Multipoint burstable remote emergency 
Control Center- to-Incident Site 
• 
Dedicated SCPC Point-to-Point Circuit 
• 
Data Rates up to 5 Mbps [9] 
• 
Quality of Service (QoS) support for voice & video 
• 
IP-based flexible voice and data termination 
• 
Real-time monitoring and reporting 
• 
Seamless global coverage  
This IP-based satellite communication capabilities-fixed 
and mobile is vital for effective multimedia communication, 
especially in video transmission and high data rate 
broadcasting as well as data collection, distress alerting, 
position location and coordinating relief operations in the 
field. 
Recently a number of companies – including TerreStar 
Global – are planning to focus on the provision of PPDR 
services by mobile satellite services (MSS). They enable the 
satellite and terrestrial communications networks to provide 
a ubiquitous platform for communications and data transfer 
by integration of mobile satellite and ground component 
technologies. 
In case of this the unique benefit to PPDR services of 
MSS/CGC(Complementary Ground Components) is the 
ability for the user to seamlessly switch between using the 
terrestrial component to connect a call and using the satellite 
to connect a call, thus providing network redundancy in 
times of need. These technological and regulatory factors 
combine to increase connectivity for emergency responders 
in service coverage. 
 
 
Figure 8.  IP-based Satellite Network Configuration for integrated PPDR 
67
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Disasters are often combined with the destruction of the 
local telecommunication infrastructure, causing severe 
problems to the rescue operations. In these cases the only 
possible way to guarantee communication services is to use 
satellites to provide a backhaul connection to the intact 
network infrastructure [10]. The objective of this paper is to 
describe briefly the existing communication technologies for 
disaster management and to suggest the satellite-based PPDR 
(for public protection and disaster relief) communications 
network as an integrated system which is integrated not only 
possible technologies of the moment but also from an ad hoc  
network to an extensive scale network. It can be used for 
wideband applications (e.g. wireless transmission of large 
blocks of data and video) and/or broadband applications (e.g. 
high-speed data, high quality digital real time video and high 
volume data exchange) dependent on the use of spectrally 
efficient technologies and insuring interoperability like a IP-
based satellite system. Such a system could be quickly set up 
anywhere in the disaster area where there is satellite 
coverage. The aim of this paper is also to identify possible 
candidate system when the draft standardization on PPDR 
communications for next generation is developed in Korea. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Dey and R.B. Singh, Natural Hazards & Disaster Management, 1st 
Edition, 2006, pp.3-4. 
[2] http://www.iaem.com/resources/links/documents/satellitewhitepaper0
60906.pdf, 27 Nov. 2010. 
[3] http://www.spiritualresearchfoundation.org/articles/id/spiritualresearc
h/spiritualscience/naturaldisasters Climate Change and Natural 
Disasters, 27 Nov. 2010. 
[4] http://www.emdat.be/natural-disasters-trends, 
EM-DAT, 
The 
International Disaster Database, 28 Nov. 2010. 
[5] http://www.adrc.asia/publications/LWR/LWR_abridged/preface3.pdf 
Emerging trends in disaster impact, hazards and vulnerability patterns, 
28 Nov. 2010. 
[6] P. Pace and G. Aloi, “ Disaster Monitoring and Mitigation using 
Aerospace 
Technologies 
and 
Integrated 
Telecommunication 
Networks”, IEEE A&E System Magazine, Apr. 2008, pp.3-9. 
[7] G. Iapichino, C. Bonnet, C. Baudoin, and I. Buret , “A Mobile Ad-
hoc Satellite and Wireless Mesh Networking Approach for Public 
Safety Communications”, 10th International Workshop on Signal 
Processing for Space Communications, 24 Nov. 2008,  pp.1-6. 
[8] http://www.tetramou.com/tetramou.aspx?id=2238, 9 Jan. 2011. 
[9] D. Pompili, F.D. Priscoli, and T. Inzerilli, “Enhanced IP-based 
satellite architecture compatible with many satellite platforms”, IST 
2004, Nov. 2004,  pp.1-5. 
[10] Y.M. Lee, B.J. Ku, and D.S. Ahn, “A Satellite Core Network System 
for Emergency Management and Disaster Recovery”, ICTC2010, Jeju, 
17-19 Nov. 2010,   pp.1-4. 
 
68
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

