In Orbit Antenna Pattern Tests and Service Coverage Measurements of COMS 
Jin Ho Jo, Moon Hee You, Seong Pal Lee, Jae Hoon Kim 
Satellite & Wireless Convergence Research Department, 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), 
Daejeon City, Rep. of Korea 
E-mail: jhjo@etri.re.kr, moon@etri.re.kr, spallee@etri.re.kr, jhkim@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Communication, Ocean and Meteorological Satellite  
(COMS) is the multi-purposed Korean geostationary satellite 
funded by Korean government ministry, and is to supply 
communication services, ocean and weather observation for 7 
years. COMS was launched by Ariane-5 on 26th June 2010 and 
arrived successfully to operational geo-stationary orbit 128.2E.  
It features a multi-beam Ka-band Communications package, a 
set of equipments to study Ocean Ecosystem to aid the fishing 
industry and a Metrological weather observation system. The 
multi beam Ka-band antenna in orbit test campaign was 
conducted by Electronics and Telecommunications Research 
Institute team.  A brief outline on functional and operational 
capability including software and hardware used for in orbit 
test validation of Ka-Band antenna system is addressed. After 
successful in orbit test, service coverage measurement for 
COMS Ka-band antenna was performed. Methodology and 
results for service coverage measurement are addressed also. 
The antenna in orbit test results show COMS Ka-band 
antennas performance was not degraded by satellite launch 
and service coverage are formed as we designed over the south 
Korea peninsula. 
Keywords-Communication, 
Ocean 
and 
Meteorological 
Satellite; Ka-band payload; In orbit test; Service coverage 
measurement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Communication, Ocean and Meteorological Satellite 
(COMS) is a multi-mission satellite and one of the key 
features 
of 
this 
satellite 
is 
the 
Electronics 
and 
Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI) developed 
multi-beam Ka-band antenna system [1] that consists of two 
spot beams; South Korea and North Korea as shown in 
Figure 1.  The antenna system consists of two reflectors 
installed on the east and west panel of the spacecraft. COMS 
is first of its kind that incorporates both earth observation 
and communications payloads from single geostationary 
satellite [2][3][4].  This paper describes field measurement of 
COMS antennas pattern and coverage of this unique satellite. 
Correlation between ground and field measurement shape for 
this multi beam Ka-band antenna pattern and coverage is 
presented. 
In this paper, COMS Ka-band antenna configuration was 
reviewed at Section 2. In orbit test methodology for antenna 
pattern measurement was reviewed at Section 3 and in orbit 
test results was reviewed at Section 4. Section 5 and Section 
6 describe filed measurement of COMS Ka-band payload 
service coverage and conclusion, respectively. 
 
Figure 1.  COMS service coverage for SK and NK beams 
 
II. 
COMS ANTENNA AND GROUND TEST 
The antenna system consists of two reflectors installed on 
the east and west panel of the spacecraft.  Each reflector 
mounted on Antenna Deployment and Trim Mechanism 
(ADTM) comprised of offset reflector integrated with 
backing structure and sun shield, as illustrated in Figure 2.  
The ADTM provides on orbit capability to adjust beam 
pointing. The reflecting surface is graphite and support 
structures are honeycomb sandwich with graphite/epoxy face 
sheets and aluminum core. East reflector is illuminated by 
two feed horns generate South Korea and China Beams. 
West reflector is illuminated by single a feed horn to 
generate North Korea beam.  
 
Figure 2.  Illustration of Antenna Configuration (East Panel) 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

At unit level, pattern tests were performed at ETRI 
(Daejeon, Korea) Near Field Range before and after 
environmental tests for various parameters, such as gain, 
side-lobe, 
cross-polarization, 
co-polarization 
isolation, 
alignment information between reflector and feed. At the 
system level, these tests were independently performed by 
MDA (Montreal, Canada) in Compact Antenna Test Range 
(CATR). The two sets of test results are summarized in 
literature [5]. 
 
III. 
IN ORBIT TEST METHODOLOGY  
After successful launch of a satellite and bus In Orbit 
Test (IOT), a series of measurements are performed to 
verify and identify if any mechanical or RF parameters of 
satellite antennas are degraded or changed.   The satellite 
antenna IOT is essentially Power Flux Density (PFD) and 
Effective Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP) measurements 
over selected points of the coverage pattern carried out by 
accurately measuring at an earth station.  One of the most 
important tasks is thus earth station and test equipment 
calibration.  ETRI did this calibration on the earth station 
located 
at 
Daejeon, 
South 
Korea, 
prior 
to 
IOT 
commencement using operating KOREASAT satellites.  
Antenna pattern tests involve a number of single (E- or H-) 
plane radiation pattern cut measurements [6][7].  The 
measurement can be done point by point (direct 
measurement, no processing required).  In modern satellites, 
a antenna pattern cut can also be performed much faster by 
slewing the satellite at known speed and recording in a 
computer the earth station power level measurements time 
stamped that need complex data processing 
A. Antenna IOT Objectives 
The Antenna IOT, also known as antenna mapping, is not 
a replacement of range test because IOT tests are subject to 
many uncertainties and is not as detailed as CATR.  IOT is a 
confirmation test with following objectives: 
• Confirm that no RF or mechanical or damage due to 
harsh launch environment 
• Ascertain correct reflector pointing and recommend 
if ADTM adjustment required 
• Confirm pattern shape integrity and identify if there 
is any RF performance degradation 
• Validation of TED model 
B. Special Test Considerations 
At Ka-Band IOT, weather impact is significant and 
antenna IOT was carried out only during dry periods.  
Antenna pattern cuts are relative measurements and error 
will be minimized if the variations of measurement 
uncertainties attributed by weather and equipment drift can 
be minimal during each of the pattern cuts.  In consideration 
of above, for COMS Ka-band antenna pattern cut 
measurements, spacecraft slewing method [8] has been 
selected that implies measuring the SFD and EIRP at 
Daejeon earth station while the satellite with antenna is 
moved at known speed that results a pattern cut.  An 
antenna pattern cut was completed within 15~20 minutes 
instead of couple of hours with point by point method [8]. 
C. IOT Data Processing  
Astrium (Toulouse, France), the satellite manufacturer 
using their restitution software processed the satellite 
positional time stamped data and ETRI, Korea processed the 
ground measured data also time stamped.  ETRI/Telesat 
software was used to synchronize the two data sets that 
enabled to extract each pattern cut plots.  The IOT measured 
pattern cut plot is then compared with ground based 
measurements to evaluate in orbit performance.  Antenna 
IOT, also known as antenna mapping, is not a replacement of 
range test because IOT tests are subject to many 
uncertainties and is not as detailed as in CATR. 
 
IV. 
IOT TEST RESULT SUMMARY 
Astrium, using their restitution software processed the 
satellite positional time stamped data.  ETRI extracted 
satellite position to measured signal strength data for each 
cuts. Because the beams are unshaped circular, it was 
considered to have only two pattern cuts (E- and H) for each 
beam instead of multiple cuts [9] for shaped beam antennas.  
This philosophy was adopted primarily to save antenna IOT 
time.  ETRI/Telesat software was used to compare each 
pattern cut with ground based CATR measurements to 
validate beam shape integrity and identify precisely the 
desired bore-sight adjustment.   In simple terms the software 
did try to match each pattern cut by shifting incrementally in 
both azimuth and elevation until best match is achieved for 
both E- and H-plane cuts.  
A. Antenna Pattern Shape Integrity 
Figures 3 and 4 show typical E- and H-plane plots of 
antenna pattern cuts measurements respect to the CATR 
measurement for South Korea and North Korea Beam.  The 
plots show that the antenna patterns measured during IOT 
are very similar with CATR measurement. 
 
Figure 3.  South Korea Beam Plot (East Reflector) 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 4.  North Korea Beam Plot (West Reflector) 
B. Antenna Beam Pointing Adjustment 
The IOT data analysis predicted an average de-pointing 
of 0.0450 for South Korea and 0.0400 for North Korea Beam.  
This implies re-pointing of 0.0250 for East reflector and 
0.0200 for West reflector considering that feeds are fixed and 
ration between mechanical and RF beam shift is 1+BDF 
(~1.9).  But, antennas still meet the specified EIRP and G/T 
requirements with above de-pointing.  Such a small de-
pointing is within measurement tolerance, and therefore, it is 
considered that no ADTM adjustment is necessary for either 
reflector 
C. Antenna Thermo Elastic Distortion (TED) Validation 
  An extensive thermal deformation analysis were carried 
out during design phase and maximum deformation is found 
to be 0.276mm for West reflector at begin of life for sun 
normal illumination, which corresponds to directivity loss of 
less than 0.2dB at edge of coverage.  The thermal analysis 
also shows that maximum de-pointing due to TED is less 
than 0.020 and occurs around equinox.  The IOT was 
performed around summer solstice when the deformation is 
minimal and gain loss is below measurement tolerance and 
therefore no useful thermal distortion tests could be 
conducted. 
D. Cross-polarization and pointing Confirmation Tests 
Antenna IOT had been performed at a single frequency 
and it is industrial standard to perform IOT based on co-
polarization measurements.  This is because cross-
polarization measurements are not accurate enough to get a 
meaningful result.  Both co- and cross-polarization 
performances were measured at three selected locations for 
each beam at low, mid and high frequency transponder.  
These results were compared to ground based predicted 
EIRP and SFD.  The measured values were within 
measurement uncertainties (0.5dB for co-polarization and 
2dB for cross-polarization) and thus confirms both pointing 
and cross-polarization. 
 
V. 
SERVICE COVERAGE MEASUREMENT OVERVIEW 
The purpose of service coverage measurement is to check 
how much EIRP contour map of COMS in orbit is similar 
with contour map gathered from the ground test in CATR 
facility. For the service coverage measurement, it needs to 
measure COMS Ka-band signal power over the South Korea 
area. The service coverage measurements need two system 
supports, master ground station and mobile station. The 
master ground station located in ETRI transmits un-
modulated RF signal and experimental 3DTV broadcasting 
signal to COMS. The master ground station receives measure 
returned un-modulated RF signal from the COMS and it also 
receives Ka-band beacon signal from the COMS. The 
measured un-modulated RF signal levels in the master 
ground station were used for reference values for mobile 
station measurements. The measured beacon signal was used 
for signal compensation attenuated by atmosphere.  
The mobile station receives un-modulated RF signal 
generated by master ground station and repeated by COMS. 
Received beacon signal level was used for signal 
compensation attenuated by atmosphere to eliminate 
disturbance form the atmosphere condition changes. 3DTV 
broadcasting signal quality was measured by professional 
receiver to check Es/No and packet CRC errors. Figure 5 
shows the simplified diagram for service coverage 
measurement [10]. 
 
 
Figure 5.  COMS service coverage measurement diagram 
Master ground station has 7.2 meter size of diameter 
satellite antenna and 175W output power high power 
amplifier. Mobile station has 1.8 meter size of diameter 
antenna with auto tracking equipment. Figure 6 shows the 
master ground station and mobile station, respectively, used 
for COMS service coverage measurement. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Master ground station antenna and mobile station 
The 17 measurement points over the South Korea 
peninsula are selected for mobile station measurement. 
Except reference point, all measurement points were selected 
on coast area because field measurements are to check 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

service coverage of COMS Ka-band payload. Selected 
measurement points are shown in Figure 7. 
 
 Reference point: ETRI in Daejeon(14) 
 West coast area: Ganghwa(1), Taean(2), Byeonsan 
(3),  Jindo(4) 
 South coast area: Goheung(5), Geoje(6), Busan(7) 
 East coast area: Pohang(8), Uljin(9), Sokcho(10), 
Goseong(11) 
 North area: Chuncheon(12), Pochecon(13) 
 Jeju island: Chagwido(15), Mosulpo(16), Sungsan 
(17) 
 
 
Figure 7.  Measurement points for service coverage 
VI. 
SERVICE COVERAGE MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
Measurement data from the mobile station at 17 
measurement point were normalized by the measurement 
data at the reference point. The signal variation due to the 
atmospheric condition was compensated by the beacon 
signal level data. Figure 8 shows the service coverage 
contour map for South Korea beam and Figure 9 shows the 
service coverage contour map for North Korea beam 
respectively.  
 
-0.46
-0.2
-0.9
-0.9
-1.01
-0.3
-0.84
-1.17
-1.13
-1.47
-1.81
-1.84
-
1.1
1
-
1.8
5
-1.59
-2.37
-2.51
-1dB
-2dB
-3dB
 
Figure 8.  Service coverage map of South Korea beam 
-2.5
-2.38
-4.17
-6.28
-6.88
-6.0
-6.43
-6.28
-3.5
-1.75
-1.07
-1.78
-0.91
-1.52
-10.0
-11.6
-12.0
-1dB
-2dB
-3dB
-4dB
-5dB
-6dB
-7dB
-8dB
-9dB
-10dB
-11dB
-12dB
-13dB
 
Figure 9.  Service coverage map of North Korea beam 
The above figures show that field measurement results 
over the South Korea at 17 points are similar with ground 
test results (solid line). The deviation between field 
measurement and ground test results are less than 1dB. This 
deviation value is acceptable when we consider measurement 
equipment stability of each ground stations and mobile 
station antenna pointing errors during field measurement. 
The reception of experimental 3DTV service was good for 
all measurement points. There were enough Es/No margins 
(3.5~8.5dB) and no packet CRC errors for 3DTV service 
over the South Korea. The field measurement results show 
that COMS Ka-band service coverage is formed well in orbit 
as we designed. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we reviewed in orbit antenna pattern test 
results and service coverage measurement results of COMS. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

The in orbit antenna pattern cuts have shown excellent 
agreement confirming beam shape integrity.  The EIRP and 
SFD measurement at selected locations was well within 
measurement uncertainties when compared to that predicted 
from ground based measurements. The field measurement of 
COMS service coverage for South Korea beam and North 
Korea beam show similar results with ground measurement 
contour maps in CATR facility. The similarity between in-
orbit test results and ground test results are confirms that Ka-
band antenna was well withstands launch environments and 
also performances are not degraded in space environments. 
At this moment, 3D-HDTV broadcasting and broadband 
VSAT communications are in trial service through COMS 
Ka-band payload. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. H. Lee, J. H. Kim, S. P. Lee, and H. J. Lee, “Multi-Beam Satellite 
Antenna Design” IEEE Intl Symp on Antennas and Propagation, 
Session 84, July 2004  
[2] S. P. Lee, “Development of Satellite Communication System for 
COMS”, APSCC 2004, pp. 71-76  
[3] S. P. Lee, J. W. Eun, K. S. Choi, C. S. Sin, J. W. Park, and Y. M. Lee, 
“Conceptual Design of the Satellite Communication System for 
Communications, Ocean and Metrological Satellite”, KICS 2004 fall 
conference, pp. 148-152. 
[4] Yoola Hwang, Byoung-Sun Lee, Hae-Yeon Kim, Hedong Kim, and 
Jaehoon Kim, "Orbit Determination Accuracy Improvement for 
Geostationary Satellite with Single Station Antenna Tracking Data", 
ETRI Journal, Vol. 30, No. 6, pp. 774-782, 2008. 
[5] J. S. Choi, S. P. Lee, and I. B. Yom, “Performance Test of Ka Band 
Multi-Beam Antenna”, Ka and Broadband Communications, 
Navigation and Earth Observation Conference, Cagliary, Italy, Sept 
2009. 
[6] Y. Imaizumi, Y. Suzuki and K. Ohata “In-Orbit Antenna Pattern 
Measurement of ETS-VIII”, European Conference on Antennas and 
Propagation  EUCAP 2007, Edinburgh, 11-16 November 2007. 
[7] F. Rahman, A. Shoamanesh, N. Martens, P. Margittai, S. Reid, and T. 
Auyeung, “In Orbit Measurement of Satellite Communication 
Payload”, IEEE Pacific Rim Conference, Victoria, Canada, May 1993 
[8] W. D. Kelley, J. W. Opiekun, and S. L. Teller, “In orbit Satellite 
Antenna Measurement” IEEE Intl Symp on Antennas and 
Propagation Salt Lake City, USA, pp. 542-545, July 2000 
[9] F. Rahman,  “Boresight Pointing Calibration of Satellite through In-
Orbit Antenna Tests”, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and 
Measurement, vol.42, pp. 553–556, April 1993 
[10] J. H. Jo, M. H. You, and S. P. Lee, “Field measurement of beam 
coverage for COMS Kaband communication payload” KICS summer 
conference, 8A-38, June 2011 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

