The OFDM Joint Radar-Communication System:
An Overview
Yoke Leen Sit, Christian Sturm, Lars Reichardt, Thomas Zwick, Werner Wiesbeck
Institut f¨ur Hochfrequenztechnik und Elektronik
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany
{leen.sit|christian.sturm|lars.reichardt|thomas.zwick|werner.wiesbeck}@kit.edu
Abstract—This paper presents an overview of the OFDM
joint radar and communication system concept which has been
developed for automotive radar applications. Using an OFDM-
based signal, the range and Doppler estimation algorithm are
independent of the payload data and overcomes the typical
drawbacks of correlation-based processing. The derivation of
parameters for the operation at 24 GHz suited for automotive
applications are then shown. The system concept is then veriﬁed
with MATLAB simulation and measurement. A brief description
of the on-going work to adapt this system to a realistic multipath-
multiuser environment along with simulation results are also
presented.
Keywords—Doppler
processing;
interference
cancellation;
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing; radar; ray-tracing
I. INTRODUCTION
The idea of combining a radar and a communication system
on a single platform has long been proposed [1] but a
relevant system concept has never been developed till now.
Initially the major hurdle was that communication and radar
systems utilize very different frequency ranges but as more and
more radio frequency front-end architectures are replaced by
processing in the digital domain nowadays, the gap between
the hardware requirements for the radar and communication
systems becomes narrower and the devices more similar.
A popular choice for the common radar and communication
signal is the orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM) signals in combination with phase-shift keying
(PSK) as OFDM offers advantages such as robustness
against multipath fading and relatively simple synchronization.
OFDM-like signals has been shown to be suitable for
radar applications [2] and the feasibility of integrating
communication functions in radar networks [3], [4] have also
been explored. For the case of the radar function, it has
also been been pointed out in another study [5] that OFDM-
coded radar signals are comparable with linear frequency
modulation (LFM) signals and furthermore, experiences no
range-Doppler coupling. Hence the merging of the two
platforms becomes a possibility and would lead to a signiﬁcant
cost-efﬁcient measure in targeted application areas such as in
the intelligent transportation networks which require the ability
of inter-vehicle communication as well as reliable environment
sensing.
The
concept
of
the
Orthogonal
Frequency
Division
Multiplex joint radar and communication (RadCom) [6], [7]
is presented here. The system uses OFDM communication
signals as radar signals leading towards its dual role in
object sensing and communication between systems. Unlike
conventional radar processing approaches that use correlation-
based processing [8], the ranging algorithm presented utilizes
only Fourier transformations. Such a method not only allows
for a relatively faster procesing speed but also reduces the
sidelobe levels (as compared to [9]) while being independent
of the transmitted data.
The OFDM RadCom concept as well as the range and
Doppler processing schemes are presented in Section II. The
requirements for its operation in the 24 GHz ISM band
is discussed in Section III followed by the system concept
veriﬁcation with Matlab and measurement results in Section
IV. Finally, the current on-going work to extend the RadCom
for use in a multipath-multiuser scenario is presented in
Section V.
II. OFDM RADCOM CONCEPT
The OFDM transmit signal consist of parallel orthogonal
subcarriers, each modulated with a data. The resulting time
domain signal is expressed by
x(t) =
M−1
X
µ=0
N−1
X
n=0
D (µN + n) exp (j2πfnt) ,
0 ≤ t ≤ T
(1)
with N denoting the number of subcarriers used, M, the
number of consecutive symbols evaluated, fn, the individual
subcarrier frequency, T, the OFDM symbol duration, and
{D(n)}, called the ’complex modulation symbol’, is the
arbitrary data modulated with a discrete phase modulation
technique e.g., phase-shift keying (PSK). Interference between
individual subcarriers is avoided based on the condition of
orthogonality given by
fn = n∆f = n
T ,
n = 0, ..., N − 1
(2)
In the presence of a reﬂecting object at the distance R from
the RadCom with the relative velocity of vrel, which results
in the Doppler frequency of fD, the received OFDM symbol
in time domain becomes
69
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

y(t) =
M−1
X
µ=0
N−1
X
n=0
Dr(µ, n) exp (j2πfnt)
(3)
where
Dr(µ, n) = D(µ, n) exp

−j2πfn
2R
c0

exp (j2πfDt)
(4)
Based on (4), it can be seen that the distortions due to
the channel is fully contained in the received complex
modulation symbol {Dr(n)}, which is obtained at the receiver
at the output of the OFDM demultiplexer prior to channel
equalization and decoding. Thus comparing the transmitted
signal {D(n)} with the soft-side received signal {Dr(n)}
would yield the frequency domain channel transfer function.
This is computed by simply performing an element-wise
division
Idiv(µ, n) = Dr(µ, n)
D(µ, n)
(5)
In this manner, the acquisition of the range and Doppler
proﬁles will be independent of the payload data.
A. Range Processing
For an object at the distance R from the radar, all subcarriers
within the same reﬂected OFDM symbol will experience a
linear amount of phase shift equivalent to two times the time
length taken to travel the distance R. Assuming that the object
is stationary, the corresponding channel transfer function is
Idiv(n) = exp

−j2πn∆f 2R
c0

(6)
The channel impulse response containing the range proﬁle
of the object can then be determined by taking an inverse
discrete Fourier transform (IDFT) of {Idiv(n)}
h(p) = IDFT ({Idiv(n)})
= 1
N
N−1
X
n=0
Idiv(n) exp

j2π n
N p

,
p = 0, ..., N − 1
(7)
B. Doppler Processing
Unlike with communication signals, the reﬂected radar
signal of an object moving with a relative velocity of vrel
will experience twice the amount of Doppler shift according
to
fD = 2 vrel
λ
(8)
where λ = c0/fc, with c0 being the speed of light and fc, the
carrier frequency.
This causes a phase shift of 2πµfDTsym on every subcarrier
of the µ-th OFDM symbol, where Tsym is the transmit OFDM
symbol duration. It can be assumed that the Doppler affects all
subcarriers by the same amount since the system bandwidth
is much smaller than the carrier frequency. Thus for an
object having a non-zero relative velocity to the radar, the
corresponding time-varying channel transfer function (due to
the Doppler only) is
Idiv(µ) = exp (j2πfDµTsym) ,
0 ≤ µ ≤ M − 1
(9)
By taking the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) through the
time axis the Doppler term can be estimated.
h(q) = DFT ({Idiv(µ)})
= 1
N
M−1
X
µ=0
Idiv(µ) exp

−j2π µ
M q

,
q = 0, ..., M − 1
(10)
III. SYSTEM PARAMETERIZATION
The system parameterization presented here is oriented
towards automotive applications since one of the intended
application area for such a system is in the intelligent
transportation systems. The operation at the frequency of
24 GHz ISM band which is suitable for both the radar and
communication operations has been chosen.
A. Common constraints
There exist two major constraints pertaining the joint
operation of the RadCom; the ﬁrst is the subcarrier spacing
and the second is the cyclic preﬁx (CP) length. The subcarrier
spacing is limited by the Doppler frequency which has
the potential to shift the alignment of the subcarriers thus
destroying their orthogonality. Assuming a maximum relative
velocity for typical trafﬁc scenarios to be vrel = 200 km/h
=
55.6 m/s, according to (8) this would result in the
maximum Doppler shift of fD,max = 8.9 kHz for fc = 24
GHz. Following a rule-of-thumb, it can be assumed that the
subcarrier spacing of ∆f > 10 fD,max will ensure that the
orthogonality remains.
To avoid inter-symbol interference (ISI), each elementary
OFDM symbol is prepended with a preﬁx containing a
repetition of some of its last values (thus rendering the time
domain symbol ’cyclic’). This CP duration TCP is governed
by the maximum excess delay which is the maximum time
difference between the arrival of the ﬁrst and last propagation
path in a multipath environment. Assuming that due to the high
attenuation of the scattering process the maximum detectable
distance is 200 m and taking into account that the reﬂected
signal to the radar has to travel twice the distance, we obtain a
time duration of 1.33 µs which corresponds to the maximum
delay difference between the propagation path of 400 m.
Hence, setting TCP
> 1.33 µs would ensure that ISI is
avoided.
As such, in order to obtain round numbers, the elementary
symbol length of T = 11 µs was chosen which is equivalent
to ∆f = 90.909 kHz. The CP length is chosen to be TCP =
70
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

1/8 T = 1.375 µs, resulting in the total transmitted OFDM
symbol duration of Tsym = T + TCP = 12.375 µs.
B. Range resolution
The maximum unambiguous range of the radar is given by
rmax =
c0
2∆f = Tc0
2
(11)
It can be seen that the unambiguity of the radar range
proﬁle is highly dependent on the elementary OFDM symbol
duration. Hence for a good radar range proﬁle, T must be
chosen to be as large as possible. This also coincides with
the need to obtain a sufﬁciently high signal-to-noise ratio. For
practical applications where the transmit power is limited, the
integration time of the processor must be chosen to be as long
as possible to obtain a higher processing gain. Therefore T
must be chosen to be as long as possible without violating the
constraints due to the Doppler effect.
One of the key performance parameters of a radar is
its range resolution, ∆r. It is only dependent on the total
bandwidth occupied by the transmit signal and the relation
is given as
∆r = c0
2B =
c0
2N∆f
(12)
For the intended automotive application, a range resolution
of between 1 m to 2 m is sufﬁcient. Typically a power
of 2 number is chosen for the number of subcarrier N, as
this allows for an efﬁcient implementation of the necessary
DFT and IDFT processing. Within the required context,
N = 1024 is chosen. With the chosen values, rmax = 1650 m
and ∆r = 1.61 m. This corresponds to a total signal bandwidth
of 93.1 MHz which is compliant with the regulations of the
24 GHz ISM band.
C. Doppler resolution
The unambiguous Doppler frequency is related to the
symbol duration Tsym and can be expressed by
vmax =
λ
2Tsym
(13)
Substituting the parameter values, vmax
=
505 m/s is
obtained. Since Doppler can be both positive and negative,
it should rather be expressed as vmax = ±252.5 m/s. This
then corresponds to around ±910 km/h which is more than
required for an automotive application.
The Doppler resolution is dependent on the number of
evaluated symbols M, and amounts to
∆fD =
1
MTsym
(14)
or in terms of velocity resolution, taking into account that
twice the Doppler of the relative velocity occurs for a reﬂected
wave
TABLE I
OFDM SYSTEM PARAMETERS
Symbol
Parameter
Value
fc
Carrier frequency
24 GHz
N
Number of subcarriers
1024
∆f
Subcarrier spacing
90.909 kHz
T
Elementary OFDM symbol duration
11 µs
TCP
Cyclic preﬁx duration
1.375 µs
Tsym
Transmit OFDM symbol duration
12.375 µs
B
Total signal bandwidth
93.1 MHz
∆r
Range resolution
1.61 m
rmax
Maximum unambiguous range
1650 m
vmax
Maximum unambiguous velocity
±252.5 m/s
M
Number of evaluated symbols
256
∆v
Velocity resolution
1.97 m/s
∆v =
λ
2MTsym
(15)
In principle, evaluating a greater number of OFDM symbols
would give a ﬁner velocity resolution. This is however
impractical as moving objects must remain within one range
resolution cell during the evaluation. Hence, by evaluating
over M = 256, with the duration of 3.17 ms, an object
traveling at the maximum unambiguous velocity would have
traveled only 0.8 m, which is still within the resolution cell
size of 1.61 m. With this, the velocity resolution becomes
∆v = 1.97 m/s or 7.1 km/h, guaranteeing an appropriate
performance for practical automotive applications. All system
parameters are summarized in Table I.
IV. SIMULATION & MEASUREMENT RESULTS
For the veriﬁcation of the range and Doppler processing
presented in Section II, a simulation of two point-scatterers
has been implemented in MATLAB. The simulation model
comprises a transmitter, receiver and a point-scatterer channel
model utilizing the parameters in Table I. The point-scatterer
channel model computes the distance, velocity, phase and
attenuation for every pre-deﬁned point scatterers and is able
to support an arbitrary number of them. At the receiver, the
received baseband signal is processed with the algorithm as
described in (6) and (9) without prior channel equalization
and decision.
Two identical point scatterers placed at R = 20 m from the
radar with the respective relative velocities of v1 = 0 m/s and
v2 = 7 m/s were set in the simulation. At the FFT processing,
a Hamming window is applied to minimize the sidelobes. The
resulting radar image is as shown in Fig. 1. The two objects
are clearly separable in range and Doppler and the sidelobes
only occur due to the FFT processing.
In verifying the simulation results, a measurement emulating
the simulation scenario has also been done. The measurement
setup is as shown in Fig. 2. A stationary corner reﬂector with
the radar cross section (RCS) of σ = 16.3 dBm2 and a car
moving at 25 km/h (7 m/s) are located 20 m away from the
71
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Fig. 1.
Simulation of 2 point scatterers
Fig. 2.
Measurement scenario
radar at the time of measurement. The resulting radar image
is as shown in Fig. 3.
Thus it can be seen that the measured result corresponds
highly with the simulated result. Although the reﬂection from
the car is approximately 15 dB weaker than the reﬂection
of the corner reﬂector, it is nevertheless sufﬁcient to be
distinguished in the radar image. Also seen in the ﬁgure are
other reﬂecting objects which are the result of the metal road
signs behind the car and reﬂections from the ground. Hence
this demonstrates the capability of the processing algorithm in
resolving multiple reﬂecting objects. The measurement setup
for performance veriﬁcation can be found in [10].
V. CURRENT WORK
The current work focuses on extending the OFDM RadCom
to cope in a realistic road environment i.e. in multipath and
multiuser scenarios. The following sections outlines the work
undertaken and its outcome.
A. Multipath scenario
Within a multipath environment, a certain transmitted signal
will not only arrive at the receiver over the Line-of-Sight
Fig. 3.
Measurement result of the setup in Fig. 2
(LOS) path but also over Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS) paths
which interact in a complex manner with the objects (e.g.
buildings, vehicles, persons, trees) within the propagation
vicinity. These NLOS signals experience reﬂection, diffraction
and scattering, resulting in their different attenuations, time
delays, phase shifts and even polarizations. It is precisely
due to the superposition of these NLOS signals that give rise
to the frequency-selective, time-variant and direction-selective
behavior of the mobile radio channel. As such, an accurate
description of these multipath waves propagation in a given
scenario is necessary to produce realistic time series of the
Channel Impulse Response (CIR).
For modeling the wave propagation in a multipath scenario,
a three-dimensional fully polarimetric Ray-tracing algorithm
developed by [12], [13], [14] is used. This channel model
is based on Geometrical-Optics (GO) and describes the
asymptotic behavior of the electromagnetic ﬁelds at high
frequencies with the assumption that the wavelength is very
small compared to the dimensions of the modeled objects in
the simulation scenario. Each propagation path is represented
by a ray which may experience several different propagation
phenomena.
The 3D scenario for modeling the deterministic channel
model is as shown in Fig.4. This urban scenario comprises
two lanes and four cars (one moving in the same direction and
two moving towards the radar) with buildings and vegetation
on both sides of the street. The green ’rays’ depict the path
traveled by the electromagnetic waves.
B. Multiuser scenario
In a multiuser scenario, the reﬂected OFDM signal at the
receiver contains not only the effect of the channel, but also
communication signals from interferers and noise. We consider
here another user of the same OFDM RadCom system which
is also transmitting a message-radar signal, denoted henceforth
as the interferer. The analysis is made from the view point of
the ﬁrst RadCom system, denoted as the radar.
72
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Fig. 4.
Ray-tracing scenario
The Signal-to-Interferer ratio (SIR) at the radar can be
estimated by taking the ratio of the receive power due to the
reﬂecting objects in the radar’s surrounding (radar equation)
and the receive power due to the interferer (Friis equation),
which gives:
SIR =
R2
int σ
(4π)2 R4
obj
(16)
where Rint and Robj are the distance of the interferer to the
radar, and the reﬂecting object to the radar respectively, and
σ is the RCS of the reﬂecting object. A reﬂecting object with
10 dBm2 RCS located at 10 m, and the interferer at 50 m
respectively from the radar would give an SIR of -18 dB. That
is to say, the interferer signal is almost always higher than
the reﬂected radar signal (even though the reﬂecting object is
located nearer the radar) and hence appears as noise in the
radar image, impairing the dynamic range.
From the ray-tracing results, the SIR is -48.2 dB and
the
strongest
multipath
component
of
the
interferer
is
11.7 dB weaker than its LOS. The resulting radar image for the
scenario of Fig. 4 is as shown in Fig. 5 where the mean noise
ﬂoor is at -20.2 dB while the dynamic range (peak-to-sidelobe
level) is a mere 8.46 dB. Consequently no distinguishable
object reﬂection is visible in the radar image.
C. Interference cancellation
As can be seen in Fig. 5, the communication signals end up
as noise on the radar image. Since the radar also has access
to the communication data, with a near-precise reconstruction
of the interfering signal as received, this signal can then be
subtracted from the radar signal.
In order to obtain an adequate reconstruction of the
interfering signal, good time and frequency synchronization
as well as channel estimation are necessary. The severity of
erroneous frequency offset estimation on the reconstruction
of the interferer signal is such that the difference of a mere
20 Hz residue from the real frequency offset will cause a
Fig. 5.
Radar image of the ray-tracing scenario, before interference
cancellation
Fig. 6.
Dynamic range (after interference cancellation) vs. residue frequency
offset
degradation of more than 20 dB to the dynamic range, as can
be seen in Fig. 6.
For the purpose of time and frequency synchronization, the
Schmidl and Cox algorithm (SCA) [15] has been implemented.
The OFDM frame is thus extended by the length of two
symbols which does not cause any impairment to the radar’s
ranging capabilities. The channel estimation is done by having
regularly distributed pilot symbols within the OFDM frame
[11].
It has been observed however that in a multipath-multiuser
environment that when the LOS or strongest signal is less than
15 dB in difference with other NLOS and reﬂected signals, the
SCA is incapable of correctly estimating the frequency shift.
This frequency shift occurs largely due to the Doppler of the
reﬂecting objects and also the possibility of local oscillator
mismatch between the transmitter and the receiver. Thus a
ﬁne frequency offset estimator has been developed [11], which
73
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Fig. 7.
Flow diagram of the interference cancellation
Fig. 8.
Radar image after interferer’s LOS component cancellation
when used with the SCA is capable of estimating the frequency
offset to the accuracy of 2.5 Hz and below.
The ﬂow of the interference cancellation scheme is as
shown in Fig. 7. Interference cancellation is done based on
the ’reliability’ of the received signal. A signal is ’reliable’
if the the SCA synchronization is able to ’identify’ a signal
through correlation. Shown in Fig. 8 is the resulting radar
image after interference cancellation of the interferer’s LOS
path, where the residue frequency offset amounts to only
1.2 Hz and the mean noise ﬂoor is now at -51.8 dB along
with 35.2 dB of dynamic range (peak-to-sidelobe ratio). With
this, all reﬂecting objects in the path of the rays are visible.
VI. CONCLUSION
An
OFDM
system
which
is
able
to
support
both
communication and radar applications on a single platform
has been presented whereby the processing scheme is
independent of the payload data, and is capable of resolving
multiple objects. The parameterization for automotive radar
applications has also been derived and its implementation
feasibility veriﬁed by simulations and measurements. In the
subsequent step for extending the RadCom to function in
a multipath-multiuser environment, the challenges of the
realistic multipath scenario setup and the implication of
another user in the radar’s vicinity have been discussed. It has
also been shown that the interfering signal severely corrupts
the radar’s dynamic range. Hence an interference cancellation
scheme using the availability of the receive communication
signal to the radar has implemented and the performance
of the radar has been seen to improve by 33.3 dB after the
cancellation of the strongest (LOS) path of the interferer.
REFERENCES
[1] M.
Uchida,
Y.
Kagawa,
and
A.
Okuno,
“A
vehicle-to-vehicle
communication and ranging system based on spread spectrum technique-
SS communication radar,” in Vehicle Navigation and Information
Systems Conference. Proceedings, Aug. 1994, pp. 169 –174.
[2] N. Levanon, “Multifrequency complementary phase-coded radar signal,”
Radar, Sonar and Navigation, IEE Proceedings -, vol. 147, no. 6, pp.
276 –284, Dec. 2000.
[3] G. Lellouch and H. Nikookar, “On the Capability of a Radar Network
to
Support
Communications,”
in
Communications
and
Vehicular
Technology in the Benelux, 2007 14th IEEE Symposium on, Nov. 2007,
pp. 1 –5.
[4] D. Garmatyuk, J. Schuerger, Y. Morton, K. Binns, M. Durbin, and
J. Kimani, “Feasibility study of a multi-carrier dual-use imaging radar
and communication system,” in Radar Conference, 2007. EuRAD 2007.
European, Oct. 2007, pp. 194 –197.
[5] G. Franken, H. Nikookar, and P. van Genderen, “Doppler Tolerance of
OFDM-coded Radar Signals,” in Radar Conference, 2006. EuRAD 2006.
3rd European, Sept. 2006, pp. 108 –111.
[6] C. Sturm, T. Zwick, and W. Wiesbeck, “An OFDM System Concept for
Joint Radar and Communications Operations,” in Vehicular Technology
Conference, 2009. VTC Spring 2009. IEEE 69th, Apr. 2009, pp. 1 –5.
[7] C. Sturm, M. Braun, T. Zwick, and W. Wiesbeck, “A Multiple Target
Doppler Estimation Algorithm for OFDM based Intelligent Radar
Systems,” in Proceedings 7th European Radar Conference, Paris,
France, Sep. 2010.
[8] R. Tigrek, W. de Heij, and P. van Genderen, “Multi-carrier radar
waveform schemes for range and Doppler processing,” in Radar
Conference, 2009 IEEE, May. 2009, pp. 1 –5.
[9] D. Garmatyuk and K. Kauffman, “Radar and data communication fusion
with UWB-OFDM software-deﬁned system,” in Ultra-Wideband, 2009.
ICUWB 2009. IEEE International Conference on, Sept. 2009, pp. 454
–458.
[10] C. Sturm, T. Zwick, W. Wiesbeck, and M. Braun, “Performance
Veriﬁcation of Symbol-based OFDM Radar Processing,” in Radar
Conference, 2010 IEEE, May. 2010, pp. 60 –63.
[11] Sit, Y. L. and Reichardt, L. and Sturm, C. and Zwick, T., “Extension
of the OFDM Joint Radar-Communication System for a Multipath,
Multiuser Scenario,” in Radar Conference, 2011 IEEE, May. 2011.
[12] J. Maurer, “Strahlenoptisches Kanalmodell f¨ur die Fahrzeug-Fahrzeug
Kommunikation,” Ph.D. dissertation, Institut f¨ur Hochfrequenztechnik
und Elektrotechnik, Universit¨at Karlsruhe (TH), May 2005.
[13] T. F¨ugen, J. Maurer, T. Kayser, and W. Wiesbeck, “Capability of 3-D
Ray Tracing for Deﬁning Parameter Sets for the Speciﬁcation of Future
Mobile Communications Systems,” Antennas and Propagation, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 3125 –3137, Nov. 2006.
[14] L. Reichardt, T. Schipper, and T. Zwick, “’Virtual Drive’ Physial Layer
Simulation for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communications,” in Proceedings
of the 2010 International Symposium on Electromagnetic Theory
EMTS2010, Berlin, Germany, Aug. 2010.
[15] T. Schmidl and D. Cox, “Robust Frequency and Timing Synchronization
for OFDM,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 45, no. 12,
pp. 1613 –1621, Dec. 1997.
74
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

