Manufacturing and Testing of Ka-band Communication Payload of COMS 
 
Jin Ho Jo, Moon Hee You, Seong Pal Lee, Jae Hoon Kim 
Satellite & Wireless Convergence Research Department, 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), 
Daejeon City, Rep. of Korea 
E-mail: jhjo@etri.re.kr, moon@etri.re.kr, spallee@etri.re.kr, jhkim@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Communication, Ocean and Meteorological Satellite  
(COMS) is the multi-purposed Korean geostationary satellite 
funded by Korean government ministry, and is to supply 
communication services, ocean and weather observation for 7 
years. As part of Communication, Ocean and Meteorological 
Satellite, Ka-band communication payload is developed by 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute. The 
purpose of Ka-band payload development in Communication, 
Ocean and Meteorological Satellite program is to acquire space 
proven technology of Ka-band payload and to exploit 
advanced 
multimedia 
communication 
services. 
The 
Communication, Ocean and Meteorological Satellite was 
launched at end of June 2010 at French Guiana. The Ka-band 
payload function and performance were verified by in-orbit 
test after launch. In this paper, we will review development 
and 
in-orbit 
test 
of 
Ka-band 
payload 
system 
in 
Communication, Ocean and Meteorological Satellite program. 
Keywords- Communication, Ocean and Meteorological 
Satellite; Ka-band payload; In orbit test 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Communication, Ocean and Meteorological Satellite 
(COMS) named Chunrian is the first geostationary satellite 
developed 
by 
local 
developers 
funded 
by 
Korean 
government Ministries including Ministry of Education and 
Technology, Korea Communication Commission, Ministry 
of Land, Transport and maritime Affairs, and Korea 
Meteorological Agency. COMS will be used for multi-
purposes such as communication services, ocean and 
weather observation for 7 years.  Ka-band communication 
payload development, as a part of COMS program, is 
sponsored by Korea Communication Commission and 
developed by Electronics and Telecommunications Research 
Institute (ETRI) with Korean local companies [1][6].  
The purpose of Ka-band Payload development is to 
acquire space proven technology of Ka-band equipment and 
system and to exploit advanced multimedia communication 
services. ETRI with domestic technologies successfully 
finished Ka-band payload equipments development and 
system integration and testing at ground facility [3][4][5]. 
After satellite launch, ETRI verified all Ka-band payload 
function and performance are normal state by In Orbit Test 
(IOT) [7]. 
Ka-band Payload of COMS will be applied for R&D 
experiment, Test-bed for new technology verification and 
Public services test. Domestic developed technology of Ka 
communication payload will be contributed to exploit new 
multi-media services [1][6]. 
In this paper, we will review integration, manufacturing 
process and test validation status of Ka-band communication 
payload of COMS. COMS configuration will be reviewed in 
Section 2, followed by Ka-band payload configuration in 
Section 3. Manufacturing and ground test activities will be 
reviewed in Section 4. Finally, in orbit test results of Ka-
band payload will be reviewed in Section 5. Section 6 will 
present the conclusion and future works. 
II. 
THE COMS OVERVIEW 
The COMS is a multipurpose hybrid geostationary 
satellite launched at the end of June 2010. Many of Korean 
research institutes and industries are participated in COMS 
program for first Korean hybrid satellite program success. 
COMS program has been led by Korea Aerospace Research 
Institute (KARI) with the collaboration with EADS Astrium. 
ETRI was involved in Ka-band payload development with 
cooperation with Korean industries. 
The COMS is a geostationary three-axis body-stabilized 
platform, which can support more frequent observation of 
atmosphere and ocean. This feature enables the COMS 
system to provide large volume of source data with high 
quality for meteorological and ocean research organizations 
[1]. 
Three mission payloads consist of Meteorological Imager 
(MI), Geostationary Ocean Color Imager (GOCI) and Ka-
band Communication Payload System (COPS). 
The MI is a radiometer, which measures energy from 
Earth’s surface and atmosphere, which has one visible 
channel with 1km spatial resolution and four infra-red 
channels with 4km spatial resolution. The MI can scan a 
scene as large as the full Earth disc every 30 minutes, or 
smaller area as 1000km×1000km in less than 60 seconds. 
Radiometric data collected with MI is useful for cloud and 
pollution detection, storm identification, cloud height 
measurement, water vapor wind vectors, surface and cloud 
top temperature, etc. 
The GOCI is the first ocean observation instrument 
operating in a geostationary orbit. It has eight visible 
channels with a spatial resolution better than 0.5km at the 
center of imaging area. The GOCI imaging area is 
2500km×2500km around Korean peninsula. The GOCI is a 
step-stare type instrument to get sufficient radiometric 
energy within limited imaging time. 
51
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

The Ka-band payload consists of transponder subsystem, 
antenna subsystem, and beacon assembly for the Ka-band 
fixed satellite service in the required service coverage. The 
Transponder 
subsystem 
includes 
all 
the 
necessary 
microwave hardware in order to receive, switch, amplify and 
transmit microwave signals. The antenna subsystem 
generates the three Ka-band beams for the South Korea,   
North Korea and Donbei region of China. The Beacon 
assembly generates Ka-band beacon signal for the rain 
attenuation experiment and antenna tracking. Figure 1 shows 
the COMS configuration in space [3][4][5][6][7].  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  COMS configuration in space 
III. 
KA-BAND PAYLOAD OVERVIEW 
The Ka-band payload provides 100MHz wide four 
channels for fixed satellite service. Three channels are 
assigned for on-board switching for multi-beam connection 
and one channel is assigned for bent pipe connection. The 
uplink is frequency band is 30GHz and the downlink 
frequency band is 20GHz. The multi-beam switching is 
performed at 3.4GHz band. Channel allocation and 
frequency plan of Ka-band payload are shown in Figure 2. 
The Ka-band payload will provide communication 
services for natural disaster such as its prediction, prevention, 
recovery service in the government communication network 
and high-speed multimedia services such as Internet via 
satellite, remote-medicine, and distance learning in the 
public communication network. The Ka-band payload was 
designed to meet link availability 99.7% during the service 
period at BER 10-6 quality.  
As shown in Figure 3 service coverage for the Ka-band 
payload system is two regions named by beam 1, 2 and 3. 
Beam 1 was assigned to the South Korea for national disaster 
service network and satellite multimedia service network, 
while beam 2 and 3 will be assigned to the North Korea and 
North-east of China respectively. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Ka-band payload frequency plan 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Ka-band payload beam coverage 
The Ka-band payload consists of multi beam antenna and 
on-board switching transponder subsystem, which includes 
all the necessary microwave hardware in order to receive, 
switch, amplify and transmit microwave signals within the 
defined coverage area. The Ka-band payload system was 
designed to be capable of the communication service 
function among the individual beams [2][3][4]. 
The transponder subsystem supports beam switching 
function for high speed satellite multimedia services between 
each beams. To accomplish this mission 3.4GHz band 
Microwave Switch Matrix (MSM) was integrated in the 
transponder panel. The Figure 10, at end of this paper, shows 
the block diagram of Ka-band payload system. The antenna 
subsystem generates three Ka-band multi beams for the 
required coverage areas and simultaneously transmits and 
receives the microwave signal to and from the Earth station 
via beams, respectively. The China beam channel is reserved 
for standby channel for South Korea and North Korea 
channels. Table I shows the main specification of the Ka-
band payload. 
 
 
 
52
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

TABLE I.  
MAIN SPECIFICATION OF KA-BAND PAYLOAD 
Parameters 
Specifications
G/T 
13dB/K 
EIRP 
58dBW 
Power 
< 1.1KW 
Mass 
< 100Kg 
Frequency 
TX: 19.8 ~ 20.2GHz
RX: 29.6 ~ 30.0GHz
Satellite Longitude 
128.2oE 
Polarization 
Linear 
 
IV. 
MANUFACTURING AND TESTING 
The Spacecraft (S/C) structure was equipped and tested 
with the combined propulsion system by EADS Astrium and 
shipped to Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) in 
Korea. Spacecraft Assemble, Integration and Test (AIT) 
activities were then started with structure preparation and bus 
harness installation, just before unit level mechanical and 
electrical integration. Then, Spacecraft Functional Test 
(SFT) was performed [5]. The Ka-band transponder 
integration was performed at ETRI, in parallel, on a wall 
provided by EADS Astrium, and verification tests were 
performed at equipment level and subassembly level. Then, 
the wall equipped with Ka-band was delivered to KARI for 
spacecraft level integration and system level testing. MI and 
GOCI were delivered to KARI and assembled, integrated 
and tested at subassembly level. 
The S/C system level activities were started with the 
transfer and the electrical coupling of the Ka-band payload 
onto the bus. Then, MI and GOCI were mechanically 
installed and electrically integrated on the bus. 
The test program was continued with the “integrated 
system test” to baseline the satellite electrical performance 
prior to environmental exposures: complementary functional 
tests to check the integrity of both bus and payloads and to 
cover modified hardware and interfaces during payloads/bus 
mating; a conducted EMC was performed to measure the 
spacecraft performances. 
Before mechanical qualification, the spacecraft assembly 
was completed with the integration of antennas and solar 
array wing. At this stage, all the spacecraft alignments and 
all the release, deployment, and trimming tests of 
mechanisms were performed. 
The fully assembled spacecraft was submitted to a first 
S/C health check test then to mechanical qualification tests 
(sine vibration, acoustic noise). At the end of the mechanical 
tests, the fully assembled spacecraft was submitted to a 
second S/C health check test in order to verify S/C integrity 
and 
to 
a 
launch 
vehicle 
adaptor 
fit-check. 
Release/deployment tests of mechanisms, alignment checks 
were performed to verify the system integrity and 
performances after mechanical exposures. After solar array 
wing and the deployable antennas were removed, the 
spacecraft was submitted to the thermal balance and thermal 
vacuum exposure. Functional and performance tests are 
performed for selected thermal conditions. 
After thermal qualification, Chemical Propulsion System 
(CPS) performance test was performed to verify the system 
integrity. The deployable reflectors were re-integrated on the 
spacecraft, the release / deployment / trimming tests of the 
mechanisms and the alignments checks was performed in the 
RF compact range. With the reflectors deployed and clamped 
in the nominal flight position, the final SFT with the same 
hard-line connections than the previous ones, a ground 
segment compatibility and authentication test, the antennas 
performance tests and the RF compatibility was performed to 
complete 
the 
spacecraft 
integrity 
and 
performance 
verification. The spacecraft integration was achieved with 
the final integration of solar array. After external finishes, the 
spacecraft physical property was measured. The spacecraft 
was ready for storage or shipment to the launch site. The 
Figure-4 shows the Ka-band payload AIT flow. 
Figure 4.  Ka-band payload AIT flow 
V. 
IN ORBIT VALIDATION 
After the successful launch of a satellite and verification 
that it has reached its geosynchronous orbit position, the 
spacecraft antennas have been deployed. This was followed 
by an intensive test program called In Orbit Test (IOT). The 
purpose of IOT is to determine whether the satellite and its 
subsystem have survived the launch, and whether subsystem 
performance is as expected. Hereinafter we will review IOT 
system configurations and review Ka-band payload IOT 
results. 
A. IOT System 
An 
integrated 
suite 
of 
microwave 
measurement 
equipment, computer hardware, and measurement software 
was designed, fabricated, and installed into a unified test 
facility for measuring the performance of Ka-band payload 
of COMS. IOT measurements are performed by transmitting 
test signals to spacecraft and comparing their power, 
frequency with the signals re-transmitted from the satellite. 
The major components of the Ka-band IOT facility are the 
IOT equipment, the Earth station equipment, and the large 
size reflector TX/RX antenna. The Earth station equipment 
Transponder AIT
on dummy panel
Transponder AIT
on FM panel
FM panel 
coupling on S/C
S/C Functional 
Test(SFT)
Conducted EMC 
Test
Vibration Test
Thermal 
Vacuum Test
Auto-
Compatibility 
Test
Final 
Preparation
Launch 
Campaign
Antenna 
Environmental 
Test
CATR Test
@ MDA Canada
NFR Test
@ ETRI
Transponder Subsystem Level AIT
Antenna Subsystem Level AIT
Spacecraft Level AIT
53
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

receives uplink signal generated by the IOT hardware, 
perform frequency conversion from L band to Ka-band, 
amplifies them, and transmits them to the antenna system. It 
then receives downlink signal from the spacecraft, amplifies 
them, perform frequency conversion from Ka-band to L band, 
and transmits them to the IOT equipment for measurement.  
Table II shows the Ka-band IOT system equipment 
description and Figure 5 shows the IOT system diagram 
respectively. 
TABLE II.  
IOT SYSTEM EQUIPMENT 
 
Equipment 
Description 
Earth 
station 
equipment 
Antenna 
Reflector size: 7 meters
Gain: 63.5dB in 30GHz 
60.4dB in 20GHz
Up-converter 
Frequency conversion 
from 1.2GHz to 30GHz
HPA 
Up to 175W output
LNA 
Gain: 50dB 
Down-converter 
Frequency conversion 
from 20GHz to 1.2GHz
IOT 
equipment 
Signal generator 
Up to 3GHz 
Spectrum analyzer
Up to 3GHz 
Power meter 
Up to 33GHz 
Frequency counter
Up to 40GHz 
IOT console 
PC with windows-xp
 
Signal
Generator
ANT
Spectrum
Analyzer
Frequency
Counter(A)
Power
Meter
Frequency
Counter(B)
UC
DC
A
B
IOT
console
GPIB
HPA
LNA
 
Figure 5.  Ka-band IOT system diagram 
 
B. IOT Results 
Ka-band payload IOT was performed in two phases. The 
first phase is antenna pattern measurement and the second 
phase is payload RF performance measurements. 
1) Antenna Pattern Measurements 
The roles of the Antenna Pattern Measurements (APM) 
are to check that the satellite antennas were not damaged 
during the launch and to check that the antenna pointing 
alignment were not disturbed by the launch. For the APM, 
the spacecraft needs to be rotated during IOT station transmit 
test signal to satellite and receive returned signal from the 
satellite. The spacecraft was rotated ±1o from the beam 
center in azimuth angle and elevation angle respectively with 
0.1o/min. speed. The IOT station transmit CW signal to 
satellite and measure returned signal from the satellite to get 
relationship between signal strength vs. spacecraft rotation 
angle. During the APM, Channel Amplifier mode of Ka-
band payload was selected to Fixed Gain Mode (FGM) and 
Automatic Level Control (ALC) respectively. The antenna 
Transmit (TX) pattern can be measured in ALC mode, 
whereas antenna Receive (RX) pattern can be derived from 
the measurements in ALC mode. 
The antenna patterns measured during the IOT were 
compared with Compact Antenna Test Range (CATR) 
measurement results performed on ground facility. The APM 
of IOT and CATR are very similar and this confirms there 
was no antenna performance degradations by the vibration 
during the satellite launch. The Figure 6 and Figure 7 show 
APM results of IOT and compared with the CATR results 
performed in ground facility [4][7].  
Figure 6 shows satellite antenna TX pattern of beam 1. 
The dotted line is APM results from IOT and solid red line is 
APM results from CATR measurement in ground. The two 
patterns similarity shows that satellite antenna performance 
was not degraded by the launch vibration. Figure 7 shows 
combined TX and RX pattern of beam 1.  
 
 
 
Figure 6.  TX pattern of beam 1 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  TX+RX pattern of beam 1 
 
54
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

2) Payload RF Performance Tests 
The purpose of payload RF performance tests are to 
check Ka-band transponder was not damaged during the 
launch. The test parameters are as followings. 
z 
IPS/EIRP (Transfer characteristics) 
z 
Amplitude vs. Frequency Response (AFR) 
z 
Frequency conversion characteristics 
z 
Payload G/T 
z 
FGM function 
z 
ALC function 
 
a) IPS/EIRP Measurements 
IOT station generates CW carrier and transmit to the 
spacecraft. The returned CW signal from the spacecraft is 
monitored by the Spectrum Analyzer in the IOT station and 
compare with the transmission signal. The uplink CW 
carrier signal power was increase 1dB step until monitored 
downlink signal power was saturated. When the downlink 
signal power is in saturation, input power to the spacecraft 
transponder is called Input Power Saturation (IPS) and 
transponder output power is called saturation Effective 
Isotropic Radiation Power (EIRP). The measured IPS/EIRP 
of the Ka-band payload was similar with ground test results. 
Figure 8 shows the transponder input and output power 
transfer characteristics. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Transfer characteristics of channel 1 
b) Amplitude vs. Frequency Response Measurements 
The amplitude vs. frequency response measurement is to 
be performed when transponder in linear condition. The 
uplink signal is swept from starting frequency to stop 
frequency over the channel band with 2MHz steps. The 
downlink signal is measured by spectrum analyzer and 
compensate uplink path and downlink path frequency 
response to get satellite transponder frequency response. The 
measured amplitude vs. frequency response during the IOT 
was similar with ground test results. Figure 9 shows 
transponder amplitude vs. frequency response characteristic 
of the channel 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Amplitude vs. frequency response of channel 4 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we reviewed integration, manufacturing 
and test validation of Ka-band communication payload of 
COMS. The similarity between in-orbit test results and 
ground test results are confirms that Ka-band payload was 
well withstands launch environments and also performances 
are not degraded in space environments. At this moment, 
3D-HDTV 
broadcasting 
and 
broadband 
VSAT 
communications are in trial service through Ka-band payload. 
The first made in Korea Ka-band telecommunication payload 
of Chunrian satellite will be used for satellite R&D 
experiments, test-bed for new satellite telecommunication 
technology verification test and public services test. The 
space proven technologies from the COMS program will be 
used for next telecommunication satellite development. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S.P. Lee, “Development of Satellite Communication System for 
COMS”, Proceedings of APSCC 2004, pp. 71-96. 
[2] J.H. Lee, J.H. Kim, S.P. Lee, and H.J. Lee, “Multi-beam Satellite 
Antenna Design”, IEEE International Symposium on Antenna and 
Propagation and USNC/URSI National Radio Science Meeting, July 
2004, Session 84. 
[3] J.S. Choi, Y.D. Lee, and S.P. Lee, “Development of Ka-band 
Multibeam Antenna”, 13th Ka and Broadband Communications 
Conference, 2007, K000055. 
[4] J.S. Choi, Y.D. Lee, and S.P. Lee, “CATR Test for Ka-band Multi-
beam Antenna”, 26th International Communications Satellite Systems 
Conference (ICSSC), June 2008, AIAA 2008-551. 
[5] J.H. Jo, H.J. Woo, and S.P. Lee, “The Design and Implementation of 
Electrical Ground Support Equipment (EGSE) for COMS Ka-band 
Transponder Testing”, 26th International Communications Satellite 
Systems Conference (ICSSC), June 2008, AIAA 2008-5436. 
[6] S.P. Lee, J.H. Jo, M.H. You, J.S. Choi, and K.B. Ahn, “Ka-band 
Communication Payload System Technology of COMS”, JC-
SAT2010, October 2010, pp. 19~24. 
[7] S.P. Lee, J.H. Jo, M.H. You, J.S. Choi, “Integration, Testing and In 
Orbit Validation of Ka-band Communication Payload of COMS”, 
ICTC-2010, pp. 309~313. 
 
 
 
55
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
 
Figure 10.  Block diagram of Ka-band payload system 
 
56
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

