Setting up a Student Satellite Receiving System in the United Arab Emirates 
 
Yousef El-Haj, Mustafa Harbaji, Lutfi Albasha 
Department of Electrical Engineering,  
College of Engineering 
American University of Sharjah 
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates 
e-mail: lalbasha@aus.edu  
Nidhal Guessoum 
Department of Physics 
College of Arts and Sciences 
American University of Sharjah 
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates 
e-mail: nguessoum@aus.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The successful setting up of a research satellite 
system (signal receiving and data acquisition station) in the 
United Arab Emirates is reported.  The process of drawing 
up the basic system architecture and determining the 
essential requirements of the receiving station that isthe 
satellite dish and components and the reception unit 
(hardware and software) is described. The challenges 
encountered and the mitigations and report on the success 
achieve so far: system set up, signal acquisition, quick data 
analysis and image processing is discussed. Preliminary 
conclusions are presented from this first phase of the project.  
Keywords- satellite receiving station; EUMETSAT; students 
project 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The aim of this project is to set up a satellite reception 
station by students in a multi-phase timeline. There are 
various educational, scientific, and technical objectives to 
this project – the first of its kind in the region. A few 
similar projects have been undertaken elsewhere [1, 2, 3]. 
In the first phase, the station was constructed from a 
blueprint as recommended by the European Organization 
for 
the 
Exploitation 
of 
Meteorological 
Satellites 
(EUMETSAT).   
EUMETSAT’s network provides useful meteo-
rological and environmental data; its scheme allows it to 
transmit weather, climate, and geographical data to large 
regions of the world [4]: the data is sent to a ground 
station (the European uplink) which acts as a router; then 
the received signal is sent to a geostationary satellite.  
In order to receive the signal in the United Arab 
Emirates (UAE), the need arised to turn to the Atlantic 
Bird 3 geostationary satellite, which receives the data 
from the African Service station. Atlantic Bird 3 covers 
mainly the African continent; however, the UAE is just 
within the footprint covering Africa [5]. This has posed an 
interesting challenge, that had to be dealt with. 
This paper presents a project of building a receiving 
station that can receive EUMETSAT satellite data.  In the 
first phase, the receiving station was built from off-the-
shelf components; that is, the station was assembled from 
components that are available in the market. Students then 
moved to the second phase where the receiving station 
was designed and built essentially from scratch. The main 
task was to build the appropriate receiver for obtaining a 
good-quality satellite signal (a good signal-to-noise ratio). 
The second phase, well under way, will be considered 
complete once the data, thus obtained and analyzed, 
matches with that from Phase One. A later phase will 
consist of a full scientific analysis of the data [6]. 
The first task was to perform a simulation analysis on 
the link budget to determine the required technical 
specifications of the needed components  as shown in 
Figure 1. This analysis considers the signal strength, the 
data type, the hardware, software and components gain, 
noise and linearity requirements. 
 
 
Figure 1: Block diagram of the simulation analysis using AWR 
tool of the Low Noise Block (LNB) 
II. 
PROCEDURE 
The next task was to assemble the receiving station 
using ready-made components in order to acquire, record, 
and test the signal from the Atlantic Bird 3 satellite. A 
block diagram showing the main components of the station 
is given in Figure 2. 
81
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
Figure 2 – Block diagram of the project 
 
 
Figure 4: LNB selected in the AUS Student Satellite 
receiving station.  
 
 
Figure 6 – Technisat™ SkyStar 2 DVB PCI Card 
A.  The satellite dish and Low Noise Block (LNB) 
An essential part of any receiving station is the 
antenna. At United Arab Emirates, it is possible to receive 
both Ku-band and C-band signals, but the geographical 
coverage of the C-band signal is much better as 
recommended by EUMETSAT . Figure 3, at the end of the 
paper, adapted from a EUMETSAT diagram, shows the 
recommended satellites for each region. 
An appropriate Low Noise Block converter (LNB) had 
to be selected for the purpose of receiving a C-band 
signal; however, we installed an LNB with a duality 
feature for the future possibility of using the Ku band 
(perhaps with a different satellite). Figure 4 shows the 
LNB used and its band frequency specifications. 
As can be read on the LNB shown in Figure 4, the 
frequency of the input signal is in the range of 3.4 to 4.2 
GHz for the C band (with the possibility of detecting 
signals in the Ku band range of 10.7 to 12.75 GHz). The 
output frequency of this LNB for the C band is 950 to 
1750 MHz, with a gain of 65 dB. For the Ku band, the 
output frequency would be 950 to 2150 with 65 dB gain. 
Nevertheless, the noise level of the LNB in the C band is 
17o K, and for the Ku band it is 0.5 dB.  
Another major consideration in the design is the 
antenna’s 
dish 
size. 
According 
to 
EUMETSAT 
recommendations (Table 1 below) and taking into account 
the expected signal level due to the geographical location 
of the station (almost at the edge of the satellite’s 
footprint, as seen from Figure 2) the size of the dish to be 
used in this area should be at least 3.7 meter.  
 
 
TABLE I.  RECOMMENDED DISH SIZE ACCORDING TO THE COVERED 
REGIONS BY EUMETSAT 
Band 
Location 
Antenna 
Size 
Europe 
(Ku-
band) 
within the "core" geographical footprint of 
the spacecraft, the area bounded by the inner 
contour depicted in the Hot Bird™ 6  
85cm or 
larger 
Europe 
(Ku-
band) 
within the "extended" geographical coverage 
(remote European islands, Turkey East of 
Ankara and Eastern European countries) 
1.8m or 
larger 
Africa 
(C-band) 
within the "core" geographical footprint , the 
area bounded by the inner contour depicted 
in the Atlantic™ Bird 3  
2.4m or 
larger 
Africa 
(C-band) 
within the "extended" geographical coverage 
(e.g. Madagascar, La Reunion, Mauritius 
and parts of North America) 
3.7m or 
larger 
South 
America 
(C-band) 
within the area bounded by the 39 dBW 
contour depicted in the NSS806 graphic  
2.4m or 
larger 
South 
America 
(C-band) 
smaller antennas may be sufficient, 
depending upon individual location, for 
details for your location, please contact the 
EUMETSAT User Service 
1.8m or 
larger 
 
For this work we elected to use a 4.2 meter dish, shown in 
Figure 5,to receive a good signal as much as posiible 
 
 
Figure 5 – AUS Student Satellite Station’s receiving dish 
 
B. Personal Computer (PC) Receiving Station 
The DVB card used in our station is the Technisat™ 
SkyStar 2, which is one of the recommended DVB cards 
for receiving EUMETSAT broadcasts. The card is shown 
in Figure 6, as installed in a PCI slot of a computer. 
82
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
Figure 7 – Technisat™ SkyStar 2 DVB Card Transponder 
Status  
Figure 7 shows the LNB frequency setting on the DVB 
card and the corresponding received signal quality and 
strength. 
This, however, was not enough to ensure receiving the 
right signal and data. For that, the EUMETCast Client 
Software is used, both to insure the integrity of the signal, 
and to decode the incoming data.    
C. The Client Software 
The EUMETCast Client Software is provided by 
EUMETSAT to access, decode, and process the received 
signal through the DVB card. This software is a 
client/server system linking the server at the EUMETCast 
uplink site with the system at the user side. When the 
software is installed and run, it showed an “Active” status 
(figure 8), thus confirming that a signal was being 
received and the system was establishing a connection to 
try to decode it.  
 
 
 
Figure 8 – EUMETSAT Client Software  
 
The connection has indeed been fully established. The 
signal could then be analyzed for validity by a visualizing 
software (see Figure 9). In a later phase, the scientific 
analysis of the data can be undertaken, extracting real 
information from the data/images.   
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 – Visualized picture of the downloaded data 
 
III. 
 DISCUSSION: WORK SO FAR AND CHALLENGES 
ENCOUNTERED 
 
The main objective of this project is educational, that 
is for the students to acquire scientific knowledge and 
technical skills and apply them in a concrete task of a 
modern field. This is clearly being achieved with the 
successful setting up and completion of the main parts of 
the project and with the outcomes now produced (Figure 
9). 
Indeed, the outcomes that had been set for this project, 
or at least its first phases, are: 
♦ Constructing an electronic blueprint for the station; 
♦ Assembling the station; 
♦ Testing the reception of the satellite signal; 
♦ Ensuring the integrity and validity of the data; 
♦ Producing images. 
All the above objectives have been achieved and by 
visualizing the data, phase one has been completed 
successfully. 
This first part of the project, though simple in concept 
and apparently straight-forward to implement (assembling 
dish, LNB, and computer hardware, and installing and 
executing the appropriate software), was actually far from 
trivial and raised some very useful issues, which were 
tackled as pedagogical (learning) opportunities. 
Once the EUMETSAT satellite network and its data 
had been settled, the remained part was to determined 
which specific satellite was needed to target and how to 
ensure that a good signal was to be detected and recorded. 
As the UAE is located at a far point of the contour 
footprint of the Atlantic Bird 3 satellite’s C band coverage 
area, the dish size had to be at least 3.7 meters wide, 
though for the reasons explained above aconclusion was 
drawn to havea satellite about 4.2 meter. However, most 
markets in the UAE offer only dishes that range between 
90 and 120 centimeter in diametre.  However,  a company 
which would install a 4.2 meter parabolic dish was found.       
Once the dish was installed, wthe strength of the signal 
was checked. The Technisat™ SkyStar 2 DVB PCI Card 
software contains a pre-setting for most used satellites, 
like Hotbird 13E and Nilesat 101/102 7 W (see Figure 
10), a setting which can determine and show the signal 
strength and quality.  
83
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Figure 3 – The location of UAE with respect to the contour of the footprint of the Atlantic Bird, C-Band 
 
 
Figure 10 – Hotbird example for available Satellites  
 
Not surprisingly, the Atlantic Bird 3 satellite is not 
included in this pre-setting, as it is not a satellite which 
consumers normally access. To overcome this issue, we 
updated the software of the Technisat™ SkyStar 2 DVB 
PCI card manually by contacting the manufucature. After 
this modification, access to the signal from Atlantic Bird 3 
was possible. But in order to make sure that we were 
indeed receiving a real signal we measured the Signal-to-
Noise ratio, using the following connection: 
  
Figure 11: Testing the Signal using Spectrum Analyzer 
Circuit Diagram  
 
The DC power supply is adjusted to 14 Volt to model 
the vertical polarization. The inductor bank acts as an 
open circuit in which the final circuit diagram in AC small 
signal analysis will be the model of the LNB and SA only. 
By testing the signal we found a signal-to-noise ratio of 
65 dB.     
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this report we have summarized the main steps and 
procedures we followed in setting up a satellite receiving 
station in the UAE. Phase One of our project has enabled 
us to acquire multi-faceted experience and expertise on 
such a project. It was important to start with a phase in 
which we take ready-made components and assemble 
them, as this helps the project participants begin with 
basics before launching into more ambitious electronic 
design topics. 
This project has now moved to Phase 2, as the first 
phase has been completed and a signal has been obtained 
and confirmed by visual display of the data, and the 
learning has been substantial and important. 
The project is now proceeding with the building of a 
receiver unit, mainly the DVB card, from scratch. We 
anticipate this part of the project to be both challenging 
and of great potential rewards, as the students will be able 
to show their technical knowledge, skills, and capabilities, 
and may produce units that might be of much better 
performance than the ready-made components that were 
used in Phase 1. All in all, the receiver should have a high 
sensitivity to receive the signal at high SNR that is to have 
a signal strength of 4.9 dB, as the UAE is located at the 
far edge of the satellite footprint.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was in large part supported by a grant from 
the Emirates Foundation (UAE). We also thank 
administrators and staff of the American University of 
Sharjah for their assistance and support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Maathuis and V. Retsios, “Installation, setup and use of a low 
cost C-band Meteosat-8 ground receiving station in Rwanda,” 
2006, 
http://www.cgisnur.org/IMG/pdf/full-paperAARSE2006-
MSG-CGIS.pdf [March 31, 2011] . 
[2] 
J. D. Mazimpaka, “Meteosat second generation ground receiving 
station at CGISNUR: reinstallation and reconfiguration technical 
report”,  2009, 
http://www.cgisnur.org/IMG/pdf/Meteosat_Reinstallation.pdf 
[March 31, 2011] . 
[3] 
Mercury: A Satellite Ground Station Control System – 
http://gs.stanford.edu/mercury/main.php [March 31, 2011]. 
[4] 
EUMETSAT: 
http://www.eumetsat.int/Home/Main/DataAccess/EUMETCast/Sys
temDescription/index.htm?l=en [March 31,2011]. 
[5] 
EUMETSAT’S 
Africa 
(C-band) 
geographical 
footprint: 
http://www.eumetsat.int/Home/Main/DataAccess/EUMETCast/ind
ex.htm?l=en [March 31, 2011].  
[6] 
A. K. Maini and V. Agrawal, Satellite Technology: Principles and 
Applications, Wiley, 2007,  pp. 394–410. 
 
Spectrum 
Analyzer 
From 
Dish 
North 
America 
South 
America 
Europe 
Africa 
Australia 
Asia 
84
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

