The ‘C’ Trinity
- Converged, Cross-layer and Cooperative Integration of Satellite Communication System
Su Gao, Yufei Shen, Ying Tao, Houtian Wang, Na Zhou, Zhicheng Zhou
Institute of Telecommunication Satellite,
China Academy of Space Technology,
Beijing, China
E-mail: 15712889970@163.com
Abstract—Application
is
the
driving
force
of
system
evolvement. Satellite communication has seen its progression
based on service provisioning capability and user experience.
In this paper, we present an ‘integrated’ next-generation
architecture, providing global users seamless connectivity,
improving quality of service, and achieving synergy by robust
network design. Satellite plays an important role in various
aspects
of
our
system.
Techniques,
such
as
powerful
regenerative
onboard
processing,
multi
spotbeams
with
tunable
structure,
tailored
frequency
plan
and
flexible
intersatellite links, etc., enable satellites with remarkable
competence. Based on these, converged satellite-terrestrial
network, cross-layer protocol stack and cooperative robust
framework, as a trinity, together accomplish the integration of
satellite communication system.
Keywords-integration; satellite; communication; converge;
cross-layer; cooperative.
I.
INTRODUCTION
People appreciate the profound impact that modern
wireless communication brings to us, while expecting more
influential pervasion to all aspects of our daily life.
Ubiquitous architecture distributing wireless services will
become prominent in the next generation system [1]. It is
important to design an interface for seamless connectivity
while users change from terrestrial to satellite network, and
vice versa. In addition, the system needs to consider and
compensate deficiencies caused by various transmission
environments. The protocol needs to be optimized to
overcome deficiencies of the current separate structure,
which is accomplished by cross-layer design. Furthermore,
from the macrostructure point of view, the overall system
performance needs to be promoted by applying suitable
system engineering methods, on the basis of the above
converged and Quality of Service (QoS)-based cross-layer
design. To boost overall performance, cooperative strategies
should be designed to combine information provided by
different links in order to reduce data redundancies and
improve transmission efficiency [2].
The remaining of this article is organized as follows.
Section II portrays the system architecture we considered and
illustrates converged, cross-layer and cooperative integration
concepts. Section III describes integration challenges and
solutions. Section IV concludes this article.
II.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The system architecture is portrayed in Figure 1. Note
this is a generalized system illustrating concepts in our
discussion.
Figure 1.
System Architecture
The system includes:
•
Terrestrial network: well-established ground-based
communication system. Base stations connect user
terminals with traditional communication model.
Here, the figure only shows a simplified layered
framework including application layer, network
layer, Media Access Control (MAC) layer and
physical layer. These layers will be used in our
discussion in the following sections.
•
Satellite gateway: communicates with satellites via
feeder links. In the figure, the gateway is shown
within the terrestrial network but it does not have
ground cell network communication functionality.
•
Space segment: contains satellites. This framework
does not target any particular satellite constellation
type. The satellites are assumed to be bidirectional
interactive, with transparent structure or OnBoard
processing (OBP) capabilities. Satellites can provide
mobile or fixed satellite communication service.
Geosynchronous Earth Orbit (GEO) satellite can
either carry deployable antenna for mobile users or
generate C/Ku/Ka band multi-beams to produce
broadband services. Medium Earth Orbit (MEO)/
Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite constellations may
vary and have a certain design in the following
sections. InterSatellite links (ISLs) are assumed.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

•
User terminals: are interactive. Terminals have
access to satellite and terrestrial networks. Terminals
may be fixed or mobile.
According to the analysis in the previous section, our
system is designed as an integrated one. The integration is
considered in three dimensions. First, to bridge the digital
divide, converged integration is carried out in the interface
dimension, providing seamless connectivity and effective
merge between satellite and terrestrial networks. Second, to
optimize QoS metrics, cross-layer integration is carried out
in the protocol dimension, overcoming deficiencies of the
current separate structure by joint modeling of different
layers in the protocol stack. Third, to boost overall
performance, cooperative integration is carried out in the link
dimension, achieving synergy among transmission links for
higher throughput and network robustness.
Each of the three integrations over three different
dimensions solves one aspect of the system deficiencies
according to user experience. They also reflect the sequence
while
optimizing
the
system:
providing
seamless
connectivity for all users is the first step, followed by
improving quality of service, and overall performance
advancement brings all the users the best communication
experience. These three integrations, which together form
our design guidelines for satellite communication system, are
a trinity.
III.
INTEGRATION CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS
In this section, we discuss various integration issues in
detail.
A.
Converged Integration
This is the first guideline of unifying the system. The
converged integration considers the interaction and interface
design of satellite and terrestrial networks which is mainly
reflected in radio interface design. It will be seen from our
discussion that satellite design plays an important role as the
satellite ability and performance affects various aspects of
the converged interface.
1)
Radio Interface and Satellite Design
To improve satellite communication capability and
reduce system deployment cost, satellite design advancement
plays a key role in aerospace systems. Therefore, it largely
influences performance of the unified satellite-terrestrial
system and its air interface design. An integrated solution
should reflect satellite characteristics and modify the air
interface design accordingly. For voice services, flexible
transformation and routing onboard enabling the satellite to
support single-hop communication among user terminals
gives better service quality; for broadband access services,
advanced antenna techniques can produce multiple and
movable
spotbeams
providing
users
dynamic
service
management. All these satellite technology advancements
inspire
radio
interface
design
to
better
satisfy
user
requirements.
In this subsection, we present an example that user and
system requirement leads the satellite design, and how novel
satellite ability affects radio interface architecture. We
consider GEO mobile communication satellites carrying
unfurlable antenna, which gives greater equivalent isotropic
radiated power (EIRP) for ground users to have better
receiving gain. This type of large diameter mesh antenna,
together with the feed array, generates multiple spotbeams to
achieve seamless coverage for a large number of users,
where each beam can cover hundreds of square kilometers.
This new characteristic brings some design issues for
mobile radio interface design. Due to variation of space
environment and mechanical insensitiveness, the antenna
oscillates,
resulting
in
the
satellite
antenna
pointing
inaccurately during the oscillation lifecycle [3]. From the
user experience point of view, this phenomenon mainly
influences system performance and radio interface design in
two aspects: synchronization and interruption. The first one
affects communication system in various layers and is the
basis in establishing the phone call for a single user. The
second one guarantees the basic QoS during the phone call
and usually measured in system level as interruption
probability of the whole network. These two aspects are the
most important aspects for users in the network and directly
connected with users’ communication experience, thus are
essential in analyzing the effects of antenna oscillation to
radio interface design.
2)
Interruption
Radio link failure is the main reason of interruption.
When
errors
occur,
messages
cannot
be
received
successfully and certain system parameters are reset. Then,
the
radio
link
failure
occurs
and
communication
is
interrupted [4].
Network interruption needs two conditions to happen,
the location condition, where the user must be located at the
edge of some beams, and the time condition, where the
interruption must occur during the communication process.
These two conditions are independent so can be analyzed
separately and combined together as the whole interruption
probability. To reduce interruption probability, two methods
may be applied:
•
Design channel allocation strategy according to time
and frequency of antenna oscillation. The receiving
C/N can not only be increased but also be more
stable, thus guaranteeing sufficient and stable link
budget.
•
Modify terrestrial telecommunication protocol by
increasing the number of re-transmissions of access
channel and paging channel. This can reduce the
probability of error as the probability that antenna
oscillation
causing
the
failure
of
multiple
transmissions is reasonably low.
3)
Satellites in the Future Converged System
It can be seen from previous discussion that radio
interface
design
issues
such
as
synchronization
and
interruption are closely related to satellite characteristics
such as deployable antenna oscillation. It is important to
investigate satellite antenna structure to know more about the
oscillation process in various circumstances [1]. It is also
important to design a tailored control strategy based on the
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

satellite bus’s ability to maintain position and attitude of the
spacecraft to ensure satellite position is not changed by the
oscillation.
Not all future satellites are equipped with deployable
antenna. Some of them provide Ka broadband services and
with multiple spotbeams. They allow tunable power level
and
dynamically
changeable
EIRP
to
reach
balanced
receiving power among users. Other characteristics include
digital payload with onboard processing, advanced frequency
reuse and optical intersatellite links, etc. These advanced
techniques [1] make the convergence of satellite system to
the mature terrestrial radio interface easier, but at the same
time introduce new issues specifically applicable to satellite
transmission
such
as
channel
environment
and
long
transmission
delay,
which
urges
modifications
to
the
terrestrial network.
B.
Cross-Layer Integration
Cross-layer design is essential for wireless system design
and
has
already
been
widely
used
in
terrestrial
communication systems [5]. It plays a key role in optimizing
QoS metrics. For an integrated satellite communication
system, the upper layer design uses the cross-layer concept.
We mainly consider two aspects: cross-layer design of radio
resource management and network layer routing. In the
following, a generalized optimization model is given and the
mechanisms
to
solve
it
are
analyzed
according
to
characteristics of relevant parameters. As an example,
network layer routing optimization problem is simulated. It
can be seen from the discussion that for this dimension of
integration, more powerful satellites are required.
1)
Optimization Model
To improve the robustness of satellite communication
networks and realize better performance in a dynamically
changing communication environment, cross-layer design
should be carried out and models should be built to optimize
the relevant cost function in the considered layer. Other
layers’ parameters should be included as constraints so that
the optimization problem contains the whole system’s
impact, thus forming an integrated design solution.
The current trend toward the migration to satellite-
terrestrial integrated services opens new opportunities for
cross-layer system design [6]. Designing an efficient, reliable
and
flexible
resource
allocation
or
network
routing
mechanism in satellite networks has always been a big
challenge. Cross-layer optimization can integrate the layers
of the protocol stack into a comprehensive classification
framework, which can meet the requirement of QoS in
satellite networks. The cross-layer architecture proposed is
shown in Figure 2.
2)
Solvable Mechanism
It should be noted that balance should be found between
computational complexity and optimality, i.e., in a multiple-
access/network scheme with few parameters, few degrees of
freedom are left to resource/routing optimization, whereas
including lots of parameters and constraints may result into
computationally unaffordable approaches. Therefore, the
application of optimization model to resource management
and network routing in satellite communication networks
need
to
be
reasonable
and
feasible.
In
addition,
a
computationally and numerically solvable mechanism of the
model is essential. It depends on system characteristics and
model properties.
For resource allocation, slots allocated to the user
terminal are integer in satellite networks. So the problem of
cross-layer dynamic bandwidth resource allocation can be
solved by transforming the optimization model into a
nonlinear integer programming problem, which is more
accessible.
For network routing, optimization is usually to provide a
set of numbers, paths, destinations, etc. Integer programming
is not suitable for this type of problem and dynamic
programming needs to be applied. Take ant colony method
[7] as an example. The process of ants looking for a path is
similar to path discovery process from source to destination.
There are two kinds of agents in this type of method: forward
agent and backward agent. The basic idea is that the former
travels through the satellite networks and collects routing
information and the latter updates the routing table. When
data packets are sent from the source satellite and reach an
intermediate satellite, this satellite node will forward them
according to the routing table. The process continues, until
data packets reach the destination. The key idea is that a set
of routes needs to be found during each step of the
mechanism, so the optimization model is transformed into a
dynamic programming problem.
Figure 2.
Cross-Layer Optimization
3)
Simulation Results
In this part, we consider network routing as an example
to explain the advantage that cross-layer design brings. The
performance of a model designed based on the above idea,
Cross-layer design and Ant-colony optimization based Load-
balancing routing algorithm for LEO Satellite Networks
(CAL-LSN) [8] is studied. Note that although the method is
designed for LEO, it can be transferred into a network with
hybrid constellation.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

The simulation model is shown in Figure 3. An iridium-
like satellite constellation is considered with two intra-plane
ISLs (namely, links to the adjacent satellites in the same
orbital plane) and two inter-plane ISLs (that is, links to the
neighbouring satellites in the right-hand and left-hand orbital
planes). While intra-plane ISLs are maintained for the whole
satellite period, interplane ISLs are broken as satellites come
close to the poles due to adverse pointing and tracking
conditions, when satellites move to lower latitudes, inter-
plane ISLs are re-established. Moreover, cross-seam ISLs,
namely links between satellites in counter-rotating orbits, are
not used.
Figure 3.
Cross-layer simulation model
The methods proposed in [9] and [10] are chosen to
compare with CAL-LSN. The reason to choose these two
algorithms is as follows. In [9], an adaptive routing
algorithm based on an Improved Ant Colony System (IACO)
was made use of in LEO satellite networks. The authors
improve the original ant-colony algorithm in LEO satellite
networks with its own cyclical and regular characteristics. In
[10] the Distributed QoS-based Algorithm (DQA) was
proposed. This algorithm is also based on ant-colony system.
To meet QoS requirements minimum bandwidth constraints
are also considered in DQA.
We first compare the performance of the receiver’s
throughput when CAL-LSN, DQA and IACO are utilized in
the satellite networks. Figure 4. (a) shows the comparison.
The reason why CAL-LSN has the highest throughput is that
it can collect information from the physical layer. Comparing
with DQA and IACO, the throughput is about 6.32% and
7.53% higher when CAL-LSN is used.
The average utilization of all inter- and intra-satellite
links over the whole constellation is also compared between
the above mentioned three strategies. We can see from
Figure 4. (b) that although IACO improves the original ant-
colony algorithm, it does not consider the influence of the
residual bandwidth on QoS requirement. CAL-LSN has the
same trends as DQA as the user number increases but has
better
performance.
Comparing
with
the
other
two
algorithms, the link utilization is the highest when CAL-LSN
is used. It is about 6.52% and 29.24% higher comparing
CAL-LSN with DQA and IACO respectively.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.
Throughput and link utilization comparison
4)
Satellite Design Issues
Cross-layer
design
brings
a
system
with
better
performance in a dynamically changing communication
environment. However, it also brings some challenging
issues to satellite design. When the converged satellite-
terrestrial system is built, layered design guideline and cross-
layer
optimization
of
terrestrial
wireless
network
is
introduced to satellites, making the space segment system
more complicated [2].
First, the cross-layer design of satellite constellations
requires ISLs with high transmission capacity while satellites
needs a flexible pointing adjustment mechanism. Interplane
ISLs are difficult to maintain when satellites come close to
the poles due to adverse pointing and tracking conditions.
Second, powerful onboard processing capability is required
for
computational
complex
tasks.
However,
signal
processing onboard need to be flexible to some extent for
dynamically changeable tasks, so advanced and flexible
payload structure such as channelization and software
defined radio (SDR) may be applied. Third, constellation
design should be investigated to make network routing and
resource management more efficient and realizable.
C. Cooperative Integration
Cooperative integration is the last dimension in our
architecture
and
mainly
aimed
at
increasing
network
robustness. It is on the basis of converged satellite-terrestrial
and cross-layer QoS-based integration, which were discussed
in the above sections. By applying cooperative strategies,
data redundancies are reduced and transmission efficiencies
are improved, thus allowing more users in the network with
better QoS. In this section, cooperative diversity to use
multi-path in receiver is first discussed followed by network
coding which mixes different data flows to save resources.
We again present satellite design issues as a final remark.
1)
Cooperative Diversity
In satellite communication system, the satellite-to-ground
channel is a typical fading channel. In order to assure the
communication
quality,
efficient
technology
to
defeat
wireless fading is necessary. The advantage of diversity
technology on improving the impact of channel fading
gradually attracts attention. By sending the same signals
through
several
independent
paths
and
adopting
a
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

combination technology at the receiver, the power of
the
received signal is significantly enhanced.
Cooperative diversity technology in ground wireless
communication system has been well studied. In satellite
cooperative communication system, we investigate three
cooperative strategies according to the processing scheme at
relay satellite: amplify-and-forward (AF) scheme, decode-
and-forward (DF) scheme and coding cooperative (CC)
scheme.
We simulate the performance of the outage probability
for the above satellite cooperative diversity scheme. Outage
probabilities for satellite cooperative diversity are illustrated
in Figure 5. Meanwhile, the performance of non-cooperative
system is also provided for comparison. The readers may
refer to [11] for theoretical modeling and deviation. The
simulation and analytical results of outage probability are
mostly coincident. We can also see that:
•
Satellite
cooperative diversity schemes
lead
to
considerable improvement on the outage probability
compared with the non-cooperative system. Among
these three cooperative strategies, CC achieves the
lowest outage probability.
•
As SNR increases, the outage probability of AF and
CC schemes decreases faster than that of the DF
scheme. The DF scheme outperforms the AF scheme
when the SNR is low, but becomes inferior at high
SNR. This is because when SNR is high, transparent
satellite structure in AF introduces less noise and the
decoded scheme becomes less effective.
•
The outage probability under urban scenario is
greater than that under suburban one. However, the
performance
of
DF
scheme
under
these
two
scenarios seems similar.
Figure 5.
Cooperative diversity outage probability under urban and
suburban scenarios
2)
Network Coding
The basic idea of network coding is to allow conflict and
combination of several data packets on the same time slot or
the same frequency band. A network node receiving such a
signal should broadcast the processed data, in order to assist
the data recovery at other network nodes. We design network
coding architecture for various applications:
•
Transparent
transmission
satellite
system:
the
satellite and the ground station are connected
through a feeder link and the combination of them
forms the relay node in the network. The satellite is
equivalent to antenna of the relay node and ground
station is responsible for signal processing.
•
On-board
processing
satellite
system:
such
complicated processing procedure is difficult to
implement using today’s satellite ability. However,
complexity
can
be
reduced
if
reliable
coding
techniques are applied with some loss of link
performance.
•
Relay satellite system: for an application where
ground relay is used, the received signal can be
transmitted to ground station regardless whether the
satellite has the onboard processing ability or not.
The signal can be encoded by the ground station and
transmitted to user terminals. However, to complete
the
communication
process,
terminals
communicating with each other must be located in
the coverage area of the same ground station or the
ground station can be interconnected through the
network.
•
Satellite systems with inter satellite links: a virtual
relay channel can be formed by many satellites
communicating with each other. In this case, design
of resource scheduling algorithm is very important.
The above discussion assumes a three-point model. We
now present design ideas of network with many points where
many
data
streams
are
transmitted.
In
this
case,
corresponding routing and resource management algorithms
are important. From the above discussion, we know that, if
data transmitted between two nodes is equivalent, PNC
technology
can
be
used
to
save
resources.
In
real
communication system, there are many unidirectional links
and many relay nodes serving different communication links.
Moreover, even communication link is two-way, data
transmitted in the two directions is not equal. In this case,
virtual communication links that data transmitted in two
directions can be constructed by designing corresponding
scheduling algorithm, so that PNC technology can be used
by this link to save resources [12].
3)
Satellite in Cooperation
The cooperative strategy in our discussion above forms
the third dimension of integration. Similar to the previous
two,
the
cooperative
integration
ability
in
satellite
communication
systems
is
closely
related
to
satellite
performance [2].
•
The satellite is always used as an active component
instead of a transparent medium; thus, a regenerative
structure is necessary in many scenarios. However as
analyzed above, demodulation, decoding and parity
information
regeneration
put
heavy
burden
on
satellite and raise challenges in on-board processing
design.
•
In advanced multi spotbeam satellite system, it was
mentioned in [12] that the system does not perform
well, as it requires the downlink beam to cover both
satellite terminals. The likelihood of this situation is
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

lower for multi spotbeam satellites. However for
other
applications
as
multicast,
channel
independency is a key element for reaping the
benefits of network coding multicast.
•
From the simulation results, we can also see that
cooperative strategy performs differently in various
channel conditions. So, satellite payload that can
adapt to channel conditions is essential for users to
receive consistent service.
•
Satellite
mechanism
enabling
effective
synchronization plays a key role in engineering
realization in lots of cooperative scenarios.
IV.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Satellite communication has seen evolvement in recent
years according to service provisioning requirements while
global ubiquitous connectivity is on the way. Following this
trend, our research considered system integration in three
dimensions. Converged integration in interface dimension
bridges the digital divide with satellite-terrestrial co-design
providing seamless connectivity. Cross-layer integration in
protocol dimension optimizes users’ service quality with
joint modeling of different layers in the protocol stack.
Cooperative
integration
in
link
dimension
promotes
performance for all users by improving overall network
robustness.
Our discussion revealed that satellite, in various aspects,
plays an essential role [2] in the integrated system design.
•
Powerful onboard processing capability based on
advanced telemetry and command design is needed
for computational complicated integration tasks,
though a transparent structure can be used in some
applications.
•
Flexible regenerative structure should be applied to
further reduce burden and adapt to variable channel
conditions.
•
Multi
spotbeam
techniques
with
dynamically
allocation capability provide tunable structure for
multiple users, which are useful in future broadband
systems.
•
Tailored
frequency
plan
and
frequency
reuse
schemes based on beam design should be applied to
provide sufficient carrier to interference (C/I) ratio.
•
Intersatellite
link
(ISL)
giving
intraplane
and
interplane
connectivity
needs
flexible
pointing
adjustment
mechanism,
thus
requires
satellite
mechanics innovation.
•
Telemetry,
command
and
other
communication
workforce
onboard
guarantees
effective
synchronization in various application scenarios.
In conclusion, future satellite communication system
providing universal service requires satellite-based design
throughout its construction [2]. It is thus possible to
maximize the system capacity at present, make use of the
benefits brought up by technical development and accelerate
the
accomplishment
of
newly
integrated
satellite
communication system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 91438205, 61675232).
REFERENCES
[1]
M.
Sadek
and
S.
Aissa,
“Personal
satellite
communication:
technologies and challenges,” IEEE Wireless Communications, 2012,
vol. 12, pp. 28-35.
[2]
Z. Zhou and G. Qu, “System design and dynamics analysis of
communication satellites,” 2013.
[3]
Z. Zhou and G. Qu, “Nonlinear finite element analysis of large mesh
deployable antenna on satellite,” Spacecraft Engineering, 2008, vol.
17, no. 6, pp. 33-38.
[4]
R. B. Dybdal and K. M. SooHoo, “Narrow beamwidth satellite
antenna pointing and tracking,” IEEE International Symposium on
Antennas and Propagation, 2011, pp. 2012-2015.
[5]
L. Zhou, M. Chen, Z. Yu, Rodrigues J. and Chao H. C., “Cross-layer
wireless video adaptation: Tradeoff between distortion and delay,”
Computer Communications, 2010, vol. 33, no. 14, pp. 1615-1622.
[6]
R. Shen, “Some Thoughts of Chinese Integrated Space-Ground
Network System,” Engineering Science, 2006, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 19-
30.
[7]
D. Maniezzo, M. Dorigo and Colorni A., “Ant System: An
Autocatalytic Optimizing Process,” Technical Report 91-106, 1991,
pp. 1-21
[8]
H. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Xin, Y. Tao and N. Liu, “Cross-Layer Design
and Ant-Colony Optimization Based Routing Algorithm for Low
Earth Orbit Satellite Networks,” China Communications, 2013, vol.
10, no. 10, pp. 37-46.
[9]
Z. Gao, Q. Guo and P. Wang, “An Adaptive Routing Based on an
Improved Ant Colony Optimization in LEO Satellite Networks,”
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Machine
Learning and Cybernetics, Hong Kong, 2007.
[10] H. Xu and S. Wu., “A Distributed QoS Routing Based on Ant
Algorithm
for
LEO
Satellite
Networks,”
Chinese
Journal
of
Computers, 2007, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 361-367.
[11] A. Iqbal and K. M. Ahmed., “Outage probability analysis of multi-
hop cooperative satellite-terrestrial network,” The 8th Conference on
Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications
and Information Technology Association, 2011, pp. 256-259.
[12] Z. C. Chen, B. Y. Zheng, X. D. Ji and X. C. Xiao, “An Improved
Joint Design of Physical Layer Network Coding and Channel Coding
Based on Trellis Coded Modulation in Two-way Relay Channel,”
Journal of Electronics and Information Technology, 2011, vol. 33, no.
11, pp. 2594-2599.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

