Performance Evaluation of Network Selection
Algorithms for Vertical Handover Procedures over
Satellite/Terrestrial Mobile Networks
Igor Bisio, Carlo Braccini, Stefano Delucchi, Fabio Lavagetto, Mario Marchese
DITEN - University of Genoa
Genoa, Italy
Email: {igor.bisio, carlo.braccini, stefano.delucchi, fabio.lavagetto, mario.marchese}@unige.it
Abstract—The network selection is a decisional process aimed
at determining the Radio Access Network (RAN) that a Mobile
Node (MN) has to use and represents the core-function of the
Vertical Handover procedure. In this paper, the authors propose
a new algorithm for the network selection, called Dynamic-
Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal So-
lution (D-TOPSIS) that is a new formulation of the TOPSIS
algorithm aimed at performing the same selection but requiring
a minor number of operations and consequently reducing the
time necessary to perform the selection. The main contribution
of this work is the evaluation of the D-TOPSIS performance in
a scenario where are available simultaneously a satellite network
and Wi-Fi and WiMAX networks. The proposed approach is
compared with other network selection methods found in the
literature in two different cases: i) pedestrian, with a MN speed
equal to 3 [m/s] and ii) vehicular, with a MN speed equal to 10
[m/s]. The numerical results show that D-TOPSIS assures a good
performance as well as a limited execution time in both cases.
Index Terms—Network Selection, Vertical Handover, Multi At-
tribute Decision Making, Satellite Networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays the multitude of heterogeneous Radio Access
Networks (RANs) available can assure ubiquitous communi-
cations to Mobile Nodes (MNs) independently of their posi-
tions. Among them, the Satellite Networks are very important
because they assure a vast coverage area without requiring
any infrastructure or any Base Station or any Access Point,
and a MN has only to be equipped by an opportune interface
to use this technology. As a consequence they are able to
support a large mobility even in environments where other
technologies, such as Wi-Fi and Wi-Max, are not available.
On the other hand the satellite network can assure worst
performance with respect to the classical wireless networks
in terms of a minor available capacity or an higher MN power
consumption to maintain active the communication. So, it is
important to deﬁne a mechanism for the cooperation of all the
aforementioned networks that enables the MN to dynamically
select to use the most appropriate one.
In this scenario, two concepts play a fundamental role: the
vertical handover and the network selection. The ﬁrst process
is referred to the change of the RAN used by a MN. This
change is vertical if the two networks, involved in the process,
belong to two different technologies. The network selection is
the decisional process that is in charge to select the RAN that a
MN has to use. The two issues are tightly linked because if the
selected RAN is not in use the MN has to perform an handover.
As a consequence, an important requirement in order to not
negatively impact the whole handover process, as reported in
[1], is a stringent time constraint for the selection problem. For
this reason the algorithm applied to solve the network selection
problem has to limit its number of operations in order to reduce
the time necessary to perform the selection.
Several works in the literature are focused on the network
selection problem. A wild used algorithm is the so called RSSI
Based (see [2] and [3] among the others), that belongs to the
mono-attribute group. This algorithm is quite simple, charac-
terized by a limited execution time but it assures poor results
because of it considers only one metric during the selection
process. In fact, this algorithm measures the Received Signal
Strength Identiﬁer (RSSI) from the Access Point (AP) of all
the networks available and selects the one with the highest
value. But it is true that there are also other metrics, such
as available Capacity, Packet Loss Rate, Packet Delay, Energy
(or Power) Consumption and Monetary Cost, that may be con-
sidered in the network selection problem. As a consequence
better performance can be obtained by a different group of
algorithms, called multi-attribute, because of they are able
to consider several parameters (i.e., attributes) simultaneously,
selecting the network that represents a compromise among the
considered attributes. Four are the most diffused algorithms of
this group: i) the Simple Additive Weight (SAW), deﬁned in
[4], [5] and [6] among the others, assigns a value, often called
cost, to each alternative computed as the weighted sum of the
normalized value of each considered attribute. ii) similarly
the Weighted Product Method (WPM) calculates a cost for
each network as the weighted product of the value of each
considered attribute. iii) The Fuzzy Logic Based is derived
from fuzzy set theory. Concerning the network selection many
papers (such as [7], [8] and [9]) present a combination of
the Fuzzy Logic theory with multi-attribute algorithms. iv)
Finally the Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity
to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS) algorithm selects the alternative
(i.e., the RAN) that simultaneously minimizes and maximizes
the distance respectively between the Positive Ideal Solution
and the Negative Ideal Solution. This algorithm represents the
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

starting point and a standard version of the algorithm proposed
by the authors.
Even if the mobile scenario is highly dynamic, some charac-
teristics of the available RANs, evaluated during the network
selection problem, remain constant until the MN is inside the
related coverage areas, independently of the position of the
MN. Such metrics are, for example, the monetary cost of the
RAN, its level of security and the power consumption. In [10]
the metrics (or parameters) are grouped in three categories:
static, dynamic and semi-dynamic. A similar classiﬁcation is
applied in this paper and a new version of the Technique for
Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOP-
SIS) algorithm, called Dynamic-TOPSIS (D-TOPSIS), aimed
at obtaining the same selection results and at reducing the
number of operations and consequently the execution time,
is presented. The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
in Section II are described the TOPSIS algorithm and the
D-TOPSIS proposed by the authors. The simulative scenario
developed is described in Section III, and the numerical results
of the execution time and of the performance comparison are
discussed in the same section. Finally, the conclusions are
drawn in Section IV.
II. THE PROPOSED NETWORK SELECTION ALGORITHM
The proposed algorithm is a modiﬁcation of the well known
TOPSIS method that, tanks to its elasticity and versatility,
can be applied not only to network selection as in [11], [12]
and [13] but also in other telecommunication ﬁelds such as
the sensor networks [14]. The new algorithm determines the
same solution of the TOPSIS but assures a great computational
complexity reduction. It is worth noticing that the deﬁnition of
the D-TOPSIS is reported in [15]. Nevertheless, the algorithm
formulation is here presented for the sake of completeness.
A. The TOPSIS algorithm
TOPSIS considers all the alternatives (i.e., all the avail-
able RANs) deﬁned by the values assumed by the consid-
ered attributes. The i-th alternative is deﬁned by the vector
Ai = (xi1, · · · , xij · · · , xin) for i ∈ [1, m] where n and m
are respectively the number of attributes and the number of
alternatives. As reported in [16], the TOPSIS approach can
be geometrically modelled with m points in a n-dimensional
space where it is possible to apply the Euclidean Norm to
compute the distance between each alternative and a reference
point.
This algorithm is composed of the following steps:
• Calculation of the weighted normalized attribute values
(1):
vij = wj
 xij



m

i=1
x2
ij
(1)
for each i = 1, · · · , m alternative, for each j = 1, · · · , n
considered attribute. wj is the weigh associated to the
j − th attribute, and the condition
n

j=1
wj = 1 must be
hold.
• Identiﬁcation of the Positive (A∗) and the Negative (A−)
Ideal Solution, shortly PIS and NIS respectively, as
reported in (2).
A∗ = (v∗
1, · · · , v∗
j · · · , v∗
n) =
=

(max
i
vij|j ∈ J1), (min
i
vij|j ∈ J2)|i = 1, · · · , m

A− = (v−
1 , · · · , v−
j · · · , v−
n ) =

(min
i
vij|j ∈ J1), (max
i
vij|j ∈ J2)|i = 1, · · · , m

(2)
where J1 represents the set of positive attributes, that
needs to be maximized, and J2 represents the set of
negative attributes that needs to be minimized.
• Calculation of the Separation Measures (SMs), to evalu-
ate the distance between alternatives and ideal point (i.e.,
the Separation Measures) applying the Euclidean Norm,
as reported in (3).
S∗
i =




n

j=1
(vij − v∗
j )2;
for
i = 1, · · · , m
S−
i =




n

j=1
(vij − v−
j )2;
for
i = 1, · · · , m
(3)
• Calculation of the Similarity Index (SI) as C∗
i
=
S−
i /(S−
i +S∗
i ). The values are in the range [0−1], where
C∗
i = 0 if the alternative coincides with the NIS (i.e.,
Ai = A−) and C∗
i = 1 if the alternative coincides with
the PIS (i.e., Ai = A∗). It means that the best alternative
is the one with the higher similarity index associated.
B. New Formulation of the TOPSIS Algorithm
The new formulation of the TOPSIS algorithm is called
Dynamic-TOPSIS (D-TOPSIS) to highlight the fact that the
decision at the generic step t, which coincides with a given
instant, takes in consideration the decision performed in the
previous step t − 1. In more detail, the attributes at a generic
step t used to evaluate the i − th alternative are divided into
two groups: the static attributes si(t), that maintain constant
their values at each t step when the alternative is available,
and the dynamic attributes di(t). So for the i − th alternative
it is true that si(t) = si(t − 1). Consequently, it is possible to
modify the formulation of the TOPSIS algorithm as described
in the following. Supposing the network selection performed,
periodically, each T second (i.e., the selection at the step t+1
is taken T seconds after the selection at the step t) and deﬁning
the i − th alternative as in (4):
Ai(t) = (si(t − 1), di(t)) = (si,1(t − 1), · · · , si,j(t − 1), · · · ,
si,ns(t − 1), di,j(t), · · · , di,j(t), · · · , di,nd(t))
(4)
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

where ns and nd represent respectively the number of static
and dynamic attributes.
The basic idea of the D-TOPSIS is to apply the standard
version of the TOPSIS algorithm each time the set of available
RANs changes (i.e., the MN enters or leaves a new RAN).
Then the results obtained are saved and reused each successive
selection in which the D-TOPSIS is applied, until the set
of available RANs does not change again (i.e., MN enters
or leaves another RAN). In other words the following steps,
necessary to perform the selection, are different depending on
the number of available alternatives at the instant t (m(t)).
In practice, if m(t) = m(t − 1) is employed the dynamic
version of the algorithm, while, if this condition is not ver-
iﬁed, the standard version of the algorithm is employed. To
clarify the D-TOPSIS approach, the aforementioned distance
is represented in Figure 1. It is worth noticing that in this
case only two attributes are considered (n = 2) for the sake
of simplicity but this choice is not a limitation. Both the
attributes are positive (i.e., they must be maximized). One of
them is static (s1) and the other is dynamic (d1). In Figure 1
is represented only the distance from the NIS, nevertheless
similar conclusions can be drawn for the PIS. In Figure 1 the
Fig. 1: Distance of the i − th alternative from the Negative
Ideal Solution (NIS)
NIS at the step t, A−(t) and t−1, A−(t−1), are identiﬁed by
two squares, red and blue, respectively. The distance between
the NIS and the i − th alternative at the t − th instant is
determined by the two components Si1(t) and Di1(t), called
in this work Partial Distances, that must be calculated for each
alternative during each execution of the TOPSIS algorithm.
It is possible to view in Figure 1 that Si1(t) = Si1(t − 1)
and, consequently, it is not necessary to calculate the value
of this parameter. It obviously reduces the number of the
operation needed to carry out the RAN selection. Obviously
this reduction becomes larger if the considered number of
static parameters or the number of alternatives increase.
Starting from these considerations, and supposing that the
number of available alternatives has not changed since the
last network selection decision, the algorithm proposed is
composed of the following phases:
• Calculation of the weighted normalized values of dy-
namic attributes only.
• Identiﬁcation of the components of the Positive A∗(t) and
the Negative A−(t) Ideal Solution referred to the dynamic
attributes. The other components of both vectors, referred
to the static attributes, computed during the last standard
TOPSIS execution, are constant, so it is not necessary to
compute them again.
• Calculation of the Partial Distances for all the dynamic
attributes between each alternative and the Ideal So-
lutions. This distance is deﬁned as the square of the
difference between the values assumed by the weighted
normalized attribute and its ideal value. Also in this
step the static attributes are not considered because their
Partial Distances are equal to the distances computed
during the last standard TOPSIS execution.
• Calculation of the Separation Measures (SMs) of each
alternative, combining the Partial Distances of the dy-
namic attributes, calculated in the previous step and the
Partial Distances of the static attributes, calculated in the
last standard TOPSIS execution. The SM for a generic
alternative is deﬁned as the square root applied to the
sum of the Partial Distances of all its attributes.
• Calculation of the Similarity Index as deﬁned in the
standard TOPSIS formulation. Clearly, also for the D-
TOPSIS the highest Similarity Index identiﬁes the best
alternative.
Starting from the described phases, the reduction in the num-
ber of necessary operations is obvious. In practice, applying
the D-TOPSIS for each alternative, it is not necessary to
calculate both values of the Partial Distances for the static
attributes. These values are stored during the last execution of
the standard TOPSIS and simply loaded during the execution
of the D-TOPSIS. Only the Partial Distances referred to the
dynamic attributes must be calculated in order to compute the
Separation Measures and the Similarity Index.
III. PERFORMANCE INVESTIGATION
A. The Reference Scenario
The scenario taken as a reference in this paper is composed
by a remote host that communicates with a MN. Two different
MN speeds are considered: 3 [m/s] (pedestrian mobility case)
and 10 [m/s] (vehicular mobility case). The communication
is constituted by a UDP trafﬁc ﬂow that is transmitted by
a remote host to a MN. Three different types of RANs are
considered: Satellite Network, with a single footprint that
covers the whole area, Wi-MAX, with again a single coverage
area and eight Wi-Fi areas. The network selection is performed
periodically each T = 5 [s]. Each simulation duration is set
equal to 500 [s].
The metrics considered during the network selection are four:
the Received Signal Strength Indicator, (RSSI), measured by
the MN, the Capacity that the network reserves to the MN (C),
the Monetary Cost (MC) paid by the user to use the network
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

and the Power Consumption (P) of the MN. Obviously the
ﬁrst two attributes are positive while the others are negative.
It is worth noticing that, according with [10], C, MC and P are
static attributes while RSSI is a dynamic attribute, computed
as a function of the distance between the MN and the AP
of the RAN in use for all the RAN except for the satellite
network in which it is kept constant in all the cell. So ns = 3
and nd = 1.
Nine network selection algorithms are considered: ﬁve multi-
attribute approaches, among them TOPSIS and D-TOPSIS are
included. The other four are representative of each group
presented in Section I. The other four are single-attribute,
each of them is focused only on optimizing one of the
considered attributes: i) Received Signal Strength Indicator
based (RSSIb), ii) Capacity based (Cb), iii) Monetary Cost
based (MCb) and iv) Power Consumption based (Pb).
The simulated scenario adopted has been developed through
the Network Simulator 2 (ns-2). The dimension and the
position of the coverage areas of each access network are
randomly set in each simulation. Likewise the values of the
considered attributes vary in each executed simulation, over
the range reported in Table I. The Monetary Cost is modelled
TABLE I: RANGE VALUE OF THE ATTRIBUTE CONSIDERED
Parameters
Range Value
Power Consumption
[0,16 - 0,22] w
Monetary Cost
[1-10]
Wi-Fi Capacity
[1 - 20] Mbps
Wi-Max Capacity
2 Mbps
Satellite Network Capacity
0.384 Mbps
as an indicative number that ranks the network from the
cheapest (MC = 1), to the most expensive (MC = 10) while
the satellite capacity is obtained considering a bandwidth equal
to 200[KHz], C/N = 5.7[dB].
The numerical results obtained through a simulative campaign
are grouped into two sets. The ﬁrst one is aimed at highlighting
the improvement assured by the D-TOPSIS, with respect
to the standard TOPSIS and also with respect to the other
algorithms, in terms of execution time. The second set reports
a comparison between the performance obtained by the two
TOPSIS versions that converge on the same solution and by
the aforementioned algorithms.
B. Execution Time Comparison
Figure 2 shows the execution time for all the considered
network selection algorithms for a different number of RANs,
from two, the minimum number of alternatives to perform
the network selection, to ten, the total number of RANs in the
simulated scenario. D-TOPSIS is the second fastest algorithm
among the considered ones; only the single-attribute method is
faster. On the other hand these algorithms give poor results and
a sub-optimal selection as highlighted in the next subsection.
The execution time of the standard TOPSIS has intermediate
performance while the fuzzy algorithm is the slowest algorithm
because it implements several operation during the so called
fuzzyﬁcation and the defuzzyﬁcation phases. So it is clear the
advantage assured by the D-TOPSIS in terms of execution
time, not only with respect to the standard TOPSIS but also
with respect to all the other multi-attribute network selection
algorithms.
Finally, it is possible to note that the difference between
the execution times increases if the number of alternatives
increases.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Number of available networks
Execution time [us]
TOPSIS Dynamic
TOPSIS Standard
GRA
SAW
WPM
Single Attrtibute
F−SAW
Fig. 2: Distance of the i − th alternative from the Negative
Ideal Solution
C. Performance Comparison
In this subsection, the performance obtained with the afore-
mentioned algorithms are compared. As it is possible to see in
Figure 3, the value of the metric H is much higher when the
MN moves at a speed of 10 m/s with respect to when it moves
at 3 m/s. This occurs because the MN is inside of each RAN
for less time if its speed increases, and the scenario changes
its characteristics more quickly.
Observing the power received by the MN, plotted in Figure 4,
expressed by the metrics RSSI, it is possible to observe that
also in this case the best results are obtained by pedestrian
mobility. In fact, the permanence time of the node inside
the Wi-Fi or WiMAX cells is higher for the pedestrian pace
with respect to the case of vehicular mobility. If the node
speed increases, it is necessary to use satellite networks more
frequently which provide worse performance but at the same
time more ample coverage.
Similar considerations can be made for the values assumed
for some other metrics, especially the allocated capacity C
(Figure 5) and the power consumption of the MN P (Figure 6).
As a matter of fact also in this case a wider use of satellite
networks corresponds to a worsening in the values assumed
by the two metrics we have considered in this paper.
Different behaviour, characterized the delay of the trafﬁc ﬂows
transmitted in downlink (D) and the monetary cost (MC) paid
by the mobile node to use the network, plotted respectively
in Figure 7 and in Figure 8. It is possible to observe similar
performance for the two mobility types considered. In fact, the
use of satellite networks guarantees minor allocated capacity at
the terminal, but this reduction does not particularly affect the
perceived delay of trafﬁc ﬂow, because the allocated capacity
is sufﬁcient to guarantee satisfying average performance. As
far as monetary cost is concerned, we have decided to impose
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

the cost in the same range for both the satellite network and
the other networks we have considered in this paper.
It is worth noticing that the comparison between the two
mobility types is not fair because the MN in the vehicular
mobility follows a longer path with respect to the pedestrian
mobility. As a consequence when the speed is 10 m/s the
MN stays outside the Wi-Fi and WiMAX coverage area for
a longer time, and, consequently, it has to use the satellite
network. Nevertheless, the performance comparison among
the network selection algorithm is fear in both the considered
mobility scenarios.
Considering the numerical results obtained through the con-
ducted simulation campaign, one can observe that with a MN
speed equal to 3 m/s the multi-attribute algorithms assure best
performance with respect to the single-attribute ones even
if these algorithms determine a minor number of handover
executions (H) and a minor execution time. Moreover, it is
possible to view that among the multi-attribute algorithms
the best performance are obtained with both the TOPSIS
algorithms that perform the same selection, choosing the
RAN that assure the best compromise between the adopted
attributes.
Similar results can be obtained considering the MN speed
equal to 10 ms. A slight difference is that in this case also
the SAW algorithm, and not only the TOPSIS algorithm, as-
sure the best compromise among the considered performance
metrics.
RSSIb
Cb
MCb
Pb
SAW
F_SAW
WPM
TOPSIS DTOPSIS
0
5
10
15
20
25
Net Sel Algorithm
H
3 m/s
10 m/s
Fig. 3: Values of the H metric for different network
selection algorithms for the two MN speed considered.
RSSIb
Cb
MCb
Pb
SAW
F_SAW
WPM
TOPSIS DTOPSIS
−120
−100
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
Network Selection Algorithms
RSSI [dBW]
3 m/s
10 m/s
Fig. 4: Values of the RSSI metric for different network
selection algorithms for the two MN speed considered.
RSSIb
Cb
MCb
Pb
SAW
F_SAW
WPM
TOPSISTOPSIS_M
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Network Selection Algorithms
C [Mbps]
3 m/s
10 m/s
Fig. 5: Values of the C metric for different network selection
algorithms for the two MN speed considered.
RSSIb
Cb
MCb
Pb
SAW
F_SAW
WPM
TOPSIS DTOPSIS
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Network Selection Algorithms
P [W]
3 m/s
10 m/s
Fig. 6: Values of the P metric for different network selection
algorithms for the two MN speed considered.
RSSIb
Cb
MCb
Pb
SAW
F_SAW
WPM
TOPSIS DTOPSIS
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
Net Sel Algorithms
D [s]
3 m/s
10 m/s
Fig. 7: Values of the D metric for different network selection
algorithms for the two MN speed considered.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
A stringent time limit requirement in the network selection
process is necessary to optimize the handover execution. Con-
sequently, the network selection algorithms should be designed
by limiting the number of operations needed to perform the
selection. Starting from this necessity, a new version of the
TOPSIS algorithm applied to the network selection problem,
called D-TOPSIS, is proposed in this paper. It is aimed at
determining the same selections but with a large reduction of
the number of required operations.
The performance obtained by using D-TOPSIS are compared
with the performance obtained by using the most important
network selection policies found in the literature. Two mobility
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

RSSIb
Cb
MCb
Pb
SAW
F_SAW
WPM
TOPSIS DTOPSIS
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Network Selection Algorithms
MC
3 m/s
10 m/s
Fig. 8: Values of the MC metric for different network
selection algorithms for the two MN speed considered.
scenarios have been considered: the pedestrian and the vehic-
ular case. The numerical results demonstrate that the TOPSIS
based approaches improve the performance of the network
selection process and, in particular, D-TOPSIS reduces the
execution time needed to carry out the network selection.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Chantaksinopas, P. Oothongsap, and A. Prayote, “Network selection
delay comparison of network selection techniques for safety applica-
tions on VANET”, Network Operations and Management Symposium
(APNOMS), 2011 13th Asia-Paciﬁc, 2011, pp. 1-7.
[2] S. Mohanty and I. Akyildiz, “A cross-layer (layer 2 + 3) handoff
management protocol for next-generation wireless systems”, Mobile
Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 10, 2006, pp. 1347-1360.
[3] G. Chen, M. Song, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, and B. Sun, “End-to-end
QoS guaranteed seamless handover scheme for cognitive heterogeneous
networks”, in Network Infrastructure and Digital Content, 2010 2nd
IEEE International Conference on, 2010, pp. 440-444.
[4] W. Shen and Q.-A. Zeng, “Cost-function-based network selection strat-
egy in integrated wireless and mobile networks”, Vehicular Technology,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 57, no. 6, Nov. 2008, pp. 3778-3788.
[5] A. Hasswa, N. Nasser, and H. Hassanein, “Tramcar: A context-aware
cross-layer architecture for next generation heterogeneous wireless net-
works”, in Communications, 2006. ICC 06. IEEE International Confer-
ence on, vol. 1, 2006, pp. 240-245.
[6] R. Tawil, G. Pujolle, and O. Salazar, “A vertical handoff decision
scheme in heterogeneous wireless systems”, in Vehicular Technology
Conference, 2008. VTC Spring 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 2626-2630.
[7] Q. He, G. Chen, and L. Zhang, “A vertical handoff decision algorithm
based on fuzzy control in WiMAX and TD-SCDMA heterogeneous
wireless networks”, in Wireless Communications Networking and Mo-
bile Computing (WiCOM), 2010 6th International Conference on, sept.
2010, pp. 1-4.
[8] J. Hou and D. OBrien, “Vertical handover-decision-making algorithm
using fuzzy logic for the integrated radio-and-ow system”, Wireless
Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 1, 2006, pp.
176-185.
[9] Q. He, “A fuzzy logic based vertical handoff decision algorithm between
WWAN and WLAN”, in Networking and Digital Society (ICNDS), 2010
2nd International Conference on, vol. 2, May 2010, pp. 561-564.
[10] L. Wang and G.-S. Kuo, “Mathematical modeling for network selec-
tion in heterogeneous wireless networks: a tutorial,” Communications
Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 15, no. 1, 2013, pp. 271-292.
[11] I. Bisio, S. Delucchi, F. Lavagetto, and M. Marchese, “Simulative Perfor-
mance Comparison of Network Selection Algorithms in the Framework
of the 802.21 Standard,” in Performance Evaluation of Computer and
Telecommunication Systems (SPECTS), 2013 International Symposium
on. IEEE, Jul. 2013, pp. 92-99.
[12] M. Lahby, L. Cherkaoui, and A. Adib, “Network selection algorithm
based on DIFF-AHP and TOPSIS in heterogeneous wireless networks,”
in Multimedia Computing and Systems (ICMCS), 2012 International
Conference on, 2012, pp. 485-490.
[13] A. Sgora, C. A. Gizelis, and D. D. Vergados, “Network selection in a
WiMAXWiFi environment,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 7,
no. 5, 2011, pp. 584-594.
[14] I. Bisio and M. Marchese, “Attributes deﬁnitions and measurement meth-
ods for madm based sink selection controls in satellite sensor networks,”
in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2008. IEEE GLOBECOM
2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1-5.
[15] I. Bisio, C. Braccini, S. Delucchi, F. Lavagetto, and M. Marchese, “Dy-
namic multi-attribute network selection algorithm for vertical handover
procedures over mobile ad hoc networks,” in Communications (ICC),
2014 IEEE International Conference on, 2014, submitted.
[16] P. K. Yoon, C.-L. Hwang, and K. Yoon, “Multiple Attribute Decision
Making: An Introduction (Quantitative Applications in the Social Sci-
ences)”. Sage Pubn Inc, Mar. 1995.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

