Telemetry Storage and Donwlink Management for a LEO Satellite 
 
 
Dongseok Chae 
Satellite Flight Software Department 
Korea Aerospace Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
dschae@kari.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Because Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite has very 
limited contact time between satellite and ground station, all 
telemetry data generated on satellite are stored in a mass 
memory and downlinked to the ground together with real-time 
data during the contact time. There are two mass memory 
modules. Normally, one mass memory module is used and the 
other is ready for backup. If required, both memory modules 
can be used at the same time. If the selected module is not 
available, the other module can be automatically used for 
telemetry storage without ground intervention. Two downlink 
channels are available at the same time but only one channel 
should be used for downlink. The downlink channel can be 
changed automatically by on-board flight software as well as 
step by step by ground command. This paper presents the 
telemetry 
storage 
and 
downlink 
management 
method 
implemented in flight software of a LEO satellite developed in 
Korea. All functions related to telemetry storage and downlink 
management were fully verified through the real satellite 
operation as well as the various tests during satellite 
development phase.  
Keywords-telemetry; downlink; flight software. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
On-Board Computer (OBC) for a LEO satellite 
developed in Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) is 
one unit box which includes primary and redundant side. It 
consists of Processor Module (PM) for supplying Flight 
Software (FSW) execution platform, Tele-command and 
Telemetry Module (TCTM) for performing uplink and 
downlink, Bus I/O Module (BIOM) for interfacing with bus 
units, Payload I/O Module (PIOM) for interfacing with 
payload units, power converter and the others [1][2]. Figure 
1 shows the telemetry data downlink interfaces.  
TCTM modules are cross-strapped with two processor 
modules and activated simultaneously as hot redundancy. 
Mass Memory Management Unit (MMU) receives telemetry 
frames from PM through space-wire interface [3] and 
transmits them to Telemetry Unit (TMU) or stores into mass 
memory and reads the stored frames from mass memory and 
transmits them to TMU. TMU receives the telemetry frames 
from MMU and transmits them to transponder. The mass 
memory for telemetry storage consists of two modules. 
TCTM has its own mass memory. PM can access each mass 
memory, but MMU can access only its own mass memory.  
 
Figure 1.  Telemetry Data Downlink Interfaces 
Telemetry uses Consultative Committee for Space Data 
Systems (CCSDS) compliant VCDU frames [4][5]. 
Telemetry data storage method is described in section 2. 
Downlink management method is described in section 3. 
II. 
TELEMETRY DATA STORAGE 
A. Mass Memory Data Structure 
Figure 2 shows the mass memory data structure. The 
mass memory for telemetry data storage is divided into 
blocks that are called pages. Each memory module has 2048 
pages and a page consists of 128 Kbytes. Normally, one 
mass memory module is used and the other is ready for 
backup. If required, both memory modules can be used at 
the same time. If the selected module is not available by 
memory full condition or interface problem, the other 
module can be automatically used for telemetry storage 
without ground intervention. The page structures are shown 
in Figure 3. 585 Virtual Channel Data Unit (VCDU) frames 
are stored on each page.  
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 2.  Mass memory structure for telemetry storage 
 
 
Figure 3.  Page structure of mass memory 
B. Telemetry Data Type and Storage 
All telemetry data are formatted into Consultative 
Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) compliant 
VCDU frames [4], and stored into mass memory. Telemetry 
types are shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
TELEMETRY TYPE 
Type 
Max # of Frame 
Period (sec) 
Real Time 
SOH 
4 
1 
Storage- 
Only 
SOH 
5 
1 
POD 
1 
1 
PAD 
4 
1 
PLD SOH 1 
5 
1 
PLD SOH 2 
4 
24 
PLD SOH 3 
3 
24 
PLD SOH 4 
3 
64 
 
Each telemetry frame has its own VCDU ID and 
sequence counter, and stored in satellite memory in 
chronological order without overwriting older data which 
has not yet been downlinked. Newly generated telemetry 
frames are stored on the memory location pointed out by 
current write pointer. If the mass memory page status is 
marked as bad, the page is not used anymore for telemetry 
storage. If the selected module is not available by memory 
full condition or interface problem, the other module can be 
automatically used for telemetry storage without ground 
intervention. In case of real-time telemetry, they are stored 
into mass memory and downlinked to the ground 
simultaneously. Two real-time SOH frames in low downlink 
rate, or two to four real-time frames in high downlink rate 
are generated, stored into mass memory and downlinked to 
the ground every second. In case of storage only telemetry, 
they can be generated and stored into mass memory 
regardless of the hardware downlink rate.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Telemetry storage example (low rate) 
 
Figure 5.  Telemetry storage example (high rate) 
Figures 4 and 5 show the examples of several cases of 
telemetry storage in the mass memory in accordance with 
the hardware downlink rate. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

III. 
DOWNLINK MANAGEMENT 
A. Downlink Rate 
There are two downlink rates, low downlink rate 
(4096bps) and high downlink rate (1.5626Mbps). Only real-
time telemetry frames can be downlinked to the ground in 
low downlink rate. In high downlink rate, there are two 
downlink modes, real-time mode and playback mode. Only 
real-time telemetry frames are downlinked in real-time 
mode and real-time and stored telemetry frames in the mass 
memory are downlinked in playback mode. Two real-time 
frames in low downlink rate and two to four real-time 
frames in high downlink rate can be downlinked to the 
ground every second. Total 762 telemetry frames including 
two to four real-time frames can be downlinked to the 
ground every second in high downlink rate. Figure 6 shows 
the downlink examples in high downlink rate.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Downlink example 
B. Downlink Operation 
Playback operation is started by ground command. 
Several types of playback command are used. Telemetry 
frames are downlinked from the last playback pointer, and 
proceed until the current write pointer is reached upon 
receipt of the PB Start command. Telemetry frames are 
downlinked from the specified location, and proceed until 
the current write pointer is reached upon receipt of the PB 
Location command. All Telemetry frames are downlinked 
upon receipt of the PB All command. Telemetry frames are 
downlinked from a start address to the end address upon 
receipt of the PB Specified Area command. The downlink 
mode is automatically switched to the real-time mode when 
playback is completed.  
C. Downlink Channel and Rate control 
Because two TCTM modules are operated as hot 
redundancy, two downlink channels are available at the 
same time but only one channel should be used for 
downlink. Each TCTM has own mass memory and is able to 
access only own mass memory. In case of real-time mode, 
any downlink channel can be used because it does not need 
to access mass memory. But, in case of playback mode, the 
downlink channel of the TCTM including the selected mass 
memory should be used. If the mass memory is changed to 
the other module, the downlink channel should be changed 
in accordance with the mass memory change. In this case, 
the downlink channel can be changed automatically by on-
board flight software as well as step by step by ground 
command. If two mass memory modules are used at the 
same time, change between two mass memory modules and 
two downlink channels are performed automatically by on 
board flight software for performing playback operation 
continuously. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Downlink channel and rate state transition diagram 
Figure 7 shows the downlink channel and rate state 
transition diagram. There are 4 states and 12 state transition 
cases to change the downlink rate and the downlink channel. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Telemetry storage and downlink management method 
implemented in flight software of a LEO satellite developed 
in Korea were described in this paper. In case all types of 
telemetry frame are selected, it takes about one day to fill up 
one mass memory module. It takes about 27 minutes to play 
back all area of one mass memory. Just one ground station is 
enough to receive the telemetry. 
Most of all functions required to manage mass memory, 
to store telemetry and to downlink telemetry data are 
automatically performed by on-board flight software. 
Operator has only to select the telemetry types to be 
downlinked to the ground or stored into mass memory, and 
to send command to start playback. If the mass memory has 
interface problem or fault in specific area, it is possible to 
change to other module and to initialize all or specific area of 
mass memory by ground command. All functions related to 
telemetry storage and downlink were fully verified through 
the real satellite operation as well as the various tests during 
satellite development phase.  
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

REFERENCES 
[1] Y. K. Lee, J. H. Won, and S. K. Lee, “A study of common 
OBC HW architecture for LEO & GEO satellite”, IEICE 
Technical Report, Oct. 2009, pp. 77-83 
[2] D. Y. Kim, K. H. Kwon, J. W. Choi, J. I. Lee, H. J. Kim, 
“Design of a new on-board computer for the new 
KOMPSAT-bus”, IEEE Aerospace conference, Mar. 2005  
[3] ATMEL, SMCS332 User Manual, DIPSAP-II Consortium, 
1999. 
[4] CCSDS 102.0-B-5 Consultative Committee for Space Data 
Systems Packet Telemetry 
[5] CCSDS 873.0-R-2, Spacedraft onboard interface services—
file and packet store services, 2011, Draft recommendation 
for space data system practices 
[6] J. R. Wertz, W. J. Larson, Space Mission Analysis and Design, 
Third edition, Microcosm Press, Torrance Ca, USA, 1999  
[7] G. Casperson, Software System Development for Spacecraft 
Data Handling & Control, TERMA Electronics AS, 1999.
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

