Satellite 5G: IoT Use Case for Rural Areas Applications
Sastri Kota
University of Oulu,
Oulu, Finland
Email: sastri.kota@gmail.com
Giovanni Giambene
CNIT - Dept. Information Eng. and Math. Sciences, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy,
Email: giambene@unisi.it
Abstract—One of the key drivers for next-generation mobile
communications, 5G, is the support of the Internet of Things (IoT)
with billions of objects being connected to the Internet with low
latency. The 5G technology will support the realization of smart
cities, smart environments, and big data applications. Within the
5G framework, the terrestrial services can be augmented with the
recent development of High Throughput Satellite (HTS) systems
and mega-Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite constellations. In this
paper, we investigate the integration of 5G technology and IoT by
means of an aerial component composed of drones and satellites
for a rural scenario. The prospected system can provide enhanced
services, e.g., ﬁre alarm detection, smart agriculture, animal
tracking, and plant disease control. A use case of an agriculture
application consisting of a number of areas whose sensor data
are collected via drones is described. The proposed architecture
consists of the drones connected to a satellite system to provide
the necessary network control and connectivity. Subsequently, the
satellite segment is connected to the terrestrial network and then
to the cloud. In this study, we refer to a rural area scenario where
drones are used to detect ﬁre alarms collecting sensors data on the
ﬁeld, aggregating them, and then delivering messages via satellite
to a control center. An analytical model has been developed to
characterize the distribution of the time to detect and deliver an
alarm. This study depends on many parameters; in particular, we
have investigated the impact of the area size served by a drone,
the maximum sensors range, and the sensor duty cycle.
Keywords–5G; Satellite Networks; UAVs.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent studies estimate that about 4 billion people still
lack Internet access [1]. The cost of a pure terrestrial coverage
will quickly become unbearable with the increasing capacity
needs for rural, remote, and urban areas. Moreover, terres-
trial networks cannot guarantee the access to the Internet to
passengers on aircrafts or high-speed trains, as well as users
on vehicles on highways or in the countryside. Under these
challenging operational conditions, the terrestrial infrastructure
has to be complemented by the satellite segment as envisaged
by 5G communication systems. Satellites will also support
machine-type communications, paving the way to new appli-
cations, ranging from smart agriculture, environmental protec-
tion, transportation, animal tracking, etc. The new 5G system
will be an umbrella system, enabling different Radio Access
Networks (RANs) to operate together, including terrestrial base
stations [now called g-Node Bs (gNBs)], aerial platforms of
different types, including drones and satellites [2].
It is commonly assumed that 5G systems must address
several challenges, including higher capacity, higher data rate,
lower end-to-end latency, massive device connectivity, reduced
cost and consistent Quality of Experience (QoE) provisioning
[3]. ITU-R M.2083 Recommendation classiﬁes three differ-
ent 5G scenarios, as Enhanced Mobile BroadBand (eMBB),
massive Machine-Type Communications (mMTC), and Ultra-
Reliable Low-Latency Communications (URLLC) [4]. The
satellite systems can support these scenarios as follows:
1)
eMBB: Users in under-served areas, passengers on
board vessels or aircrafts, disaster relief 5G services,
emergency communications, media, and entertain-
ment content broadcasts, passengers on board public
transport vehicles, etc. These applications can be
supported by satellite systems at different altitudes,
such as Low Earth Orbit (LEO), Medium Earth Orbit
(MEO), and GEostationary Orbit (GEO).
2)
mMTC: Global continuity of service for telematic
applications based on a group of sensors/actuators.
This scenario is more suitable for lower orbit satel-
lites, like LEO constellations.
3)
URLLC: Satellite systems (referring here mainly to
LEO cases) can support URLLC-like services that
require high reliability and high availability but that
do not need extremely-low latency because of the
large propagation delays.
This paper deals with, on the one hand, the system char-
acteristics of the aerial component of future 5G systems and,
on the other hand, with a use case of the mMTC type for
rural areas monitoring, ﬁre alarm, pollution detection, etc. This
paper has been developed within the framework of the 5G
satellite working group of the 5G IEEE Roadmap initiative
[5].
After this introduction, this paper is organized as follows:
Section II provides a survey on the state of the art of multi-
layer architectures explaining the originality of this work;
Section III deals with the aerial component (i.e., drones and
satellites) of 5G systems; a system architecture is described in
Section IV; sensor technologies are detailed in Section V; our
case study dealing with the monitoring of rural areas by means
of sensors connected via drones and satellites is provided in
Section VI; ﬁnally, Section VII draws concluding remarks.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
In view of future 5G systems, a multi-layer architecture is
envisaged where low altitude drones, Unmanned Aerial Vehi-
cles (UAVs) and High Altitude Platforms (HAPs) can be jointly
used to provide a focused coverage or coverage extension to
5G systems with the support of a satellite component with
LEO and/or GEO satellites. Layers typically correspond to the
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

different altitude levels, where a higher altitude implies a wider
coverage and a larger ‘responsibility’ in network management
functions and routing support. The scenario of a multi-layer
network with drones cooperating with satellites is a relatively
new system concept that has received increasing interests re-
cently. Li et al. [6] provide a very general overview on the use
of UAVs and their role in an integrated network where there is
also the possibility of UAV-to-satellite communications. Shi et
al. [7] envisage a multi-layer architecture including a terrestrial
part and the aerial component made of both drones and a
network of LEO satellites. The interest of this study is on how
to interconnect the layers optimally. This study is quite general
and does not address the sensor scenario for rural areas and
the need of providing services with low latency where there is
not a terrestrial infrastructure to interconnect to the Internet.
Huo et al. [8] study a multi-layer aerial component with
interesting details for the design of the UAV segment, but
there is no consideration of the services, the design of the
aerial component, and the impact of the latency experienced
by alarm notiﬁcations. Finally, standardization bodies [like
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI),
the Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), and the In-
ternational Telecommunication Union - Radiocommunication
Sector (ITU-R)] are also interested in the aerial segment with
drones, HAPs, and satellites cooperating with the terrestrial 5G
segment, as shown in [9] where scenarios and architectures are
addressed.
The original contribution of this work is to build on
the basis of the above architectures a feasibility study for a
scenario where the data provided by sensors are collected by
drones and sent via satellite in remote areas with no terrestrial
Internet connectivity. A modellization effort has been pursued
to characterize the service provided via drones.
III.
THE AERIAL COMPONENT OF 5G SYSTEMS
We provide below an introduction to the different tech-
nologies and related networks for the aerial component of 5G
systems.
A. Satellites
A High Throughput Satellite (HTS) has many times the
throughput of a traditional Fixed Satellite System (FSS) for the
same amount of allocated frequency in orbit. These satellites
take advantage of high frequency reuse and multiple spot-
beams to increase the throughput. A typical HTS satellite can
have a capacity of hundreds of Gbit/s. New HTSs typically
provide download speeds of more than 10 Mbit/s per user.
The different beams of an HTS satellite reuse the band-
width according to a typical 4-color reuse pattern (two fre-
quency slots and two polarizations). The satellite capacity can
be increased if the different antenna beams of the satellite can
use the same frequency band (i.e., full frequency reuse). This
approach causes signiﬁcant interference on a beam because of
adjacent beams. A possible solution to reduce the inter-beam
interference is adopting a precoding scheme (at the gateway,
forward path) where the different transmitted signals on the
distinct beams are multiplied by suitable coefﬁcients aimed to
orthogonalize them. To do so, an accurate channel estimation
is needed so that it is possible to compute the coefﬁcients of
the precoding matrix used at the sender to compensate for the
interference [10].
HTS platforms have been designed to serve the consumer
broadband broadcast market; however, some of them are also
offering services to government and enterprise markets, as
well as to terrestrial cellular network operators experiencing
a growing demand for broadband backhaul to rural cell sites.
For instance, ViaSat-2 [11] is a commercial-communication
GEO HTS with a throughput of 300 Gbit/s. This satellite will
provide satellite Internet to North America, parts of South
America, including Mexico and the Caribbean, and to air and
maritime routes across the Atlantic Ocean.
The propagation delay from a GEO satellite to the earth is
about 256 ms and that from a MEO or LEO with an altitude
lower than 10,000 km is in the range 10 - 70 ms, which is
comparatively shorter, but still not negligible. This is why
researchers have been more interested in MEO and LEO satel-
lites in recent years. These non-GEO systems have global or
quasi-global coverage, but many satellites (i.e., a constellation)
are needed to cover all the earth. We consider here mega-LEO
satellite constellations that are being developed with services
foreseen by 2020. The proposed systems aim to provide access
to the Internet with a quality comparable to that of terrestrial
systems. The satellite segment comprises many satellites and
several terrestrial GateWays (GWs) that are interconnected to
the Internet. A dedicated terrestrial network is also used to
interconnect the GWs. In some cases, there are inter-satellite
links to allow the direct exchange of data among neighbor
satellites and to perform routing in the sky. The frequencies
currently adopted are in Ku and Ka bands. Satellite systems
will also exploit higher frequency bands, such as Q/V/W.
We can consider the following examples of mega-LEO
satellite constellations:
LeoSat [12] foresees a constellation (2022) of 78-108 high-
throughput Ka-band satellites in LEO polar circular orbits at
an altitude of approximately 1,400 km. These satellites form
a high-throughput mesh network interconnected through laser
inter-satellite links. A ground-based Virtual Private Network
(VPN) interconnects the GWs with a public data network. One
terminal can use a bandwidth of up to 500 MHz on both uplink
and downlink.
Moreover, the OneWeb [13] system consists of a constel-
lation of 720 LEO satellites in near-polar circular orbits at
an altitude of 1,200 km. OneWeb will provide the users with
high speed up to 50 Mbit/s and low latency lower than 50 ms
and plans to interoperate with terrestrial mobile operators. It
is expected that approximately 50 or more GW earth station
sites will be deployed over the time.
The SpaceX satellite system, called Starlink [14], consists
of two sub-constellations of satellites. A ﬁrst LEO constella-
tion is composed of 4,425 satellites and operates in Ku and
Ka bands at altitudes around 1,110 km to provide a wide
range of broadband communication services for residential,
commercial, institutional, governmental, and professional users
worldwide. The second component of Starlink will be based on
another LEO constellation operating in the V band, comprising
7,518 satellites at altitudes around 340 km.
B. UAVs
UAVs are considered here as autonomous communicating
nodes. UAVs can be classiﬁed into two categories: ﬁxed-wing
versus rotary wing. For example, Fixed-Wing UAVs (FW-
UAVs) usually have high speed and heavy payload, but they
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

must maintain a continuous forward motion to remain aloft,
thus are not suitable for stationary applications like close
inspection. To minimize the Doppler shift and the associated
system design challenges, FW-UAVs need to cruise at the
slowest possible speed. In contrast, Rotary-Wing UAVs (RW-
UAVs), such as quadcopters, though having limited mobility
and payload, can move in any direction as well as to stay
stationary in the air. Thus, the choice of UAVs critically
depends on the applications. UAVs must use dedicated wire-
less links (mmWaves, free-space optical channels, sub-6 GHz
technologies such as LTE) to connect to the core network.
UAVs can also be categorized, based on their altitudes as
HAPs and Low Altitude Platform (LAPs) [15] as follows:
1)
HAPs can be balloons, which are quasi-stationary
and operate in the stratosphere at an altitude of
approximately 20 km above the earth’s surface. HAP-
based communications have several advantages over
the LAP ones, such as wider coverage and longer
endurance. Thus, HAPs are in general preferred for
providing reliable wireless coverage for a large geo-
graphic area; on the other hand, HAPs are costly.
2)
LAPs can ﬂy at altitudes of tens of meters up to a
few km and can quickly move. LAPs have several
important advantages. First, on-demand UAVs are
more cost-effective and can be much more swiftly
deployed by means of LAPs that are especially
suitable for unexpected or limited-duration missions.
LAPs can establish short-range Line-of-Sight (LoS)
communication links in most scenarios. LAPs can
be used for data collection from ground sensors for
monitoring purposes.
A balloon-UAV (HAP category) may be the most suitable
aircraft for carrying a heavy 5G base station and hovering
over the sky for the longest duration. Considering the signif-
icant height and coverage it can achieve, an energy-effective
balloon-UAV can serve as a 5G terrestrial macrocell base sta-
tion (gNB). UAV-assisted 5G communications have numerous
use cases, including terrestrial base station ofﬂoading, swift
service recovery after natural disasters, emergency response,
rescue and search, and information dissemination.
From an industry perspective, an example of a re-
cent project employing HAPs for wireless connectivity is
the Google’s Loon project [16]. Moreover, the Facebook’s
Internet-delivery project via drones has been stopped recently.
Finally, Qualcomm and AT&T are planning to deploy UAVs
for enabling wide-scale wireless communications in 5G sys-
tems.
IV.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
While Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) aims to sepa-
rate the control plane from the data plane, Network Functions
Virtualization (NFV) allows the abstraction of the physical
network in terms of a logical network, thus implementing
network functions in software. The 5G physical infrastructure
consists of the aerial component (the satellite RAN belongs
to it), a Terrestrial RAN, and the interconnecting transport
network. The logical level (network virtualization) consists of
logical nodes such as logical GWs for the Satellite RAN and
logical gNBs for the Terrestrial RAN. A controller supports
the control plane of physical nodes and an NFV manager
coordinates the virtualized functions. Virtualizing some func-
tions of the satellite GWs would improve the ﬂexibility and
the reconﬁgurability in the provision of satellite services.
Several virtualization alternatives are possible depending on
the distinction between the functions that would remain located
in the satellite GW and those that would be moved to the
centralized and/or virtualized infrastructure. For transparent
satellites, the GW can support the gNB, the Radio Network
Controller (RNC), and the virtualized Evolved Packet Core
(vEPC) interface. For regenerative satellites, the satellite al-
ways involves the gNB while the GW always provides the
vEPC interface. The RNC can be either located in the satellite
or in the GW [17].
In the NFV context, the adoption of network slicing could
facilitate the deﬁnition of networks customized for certain
trafﬁc types and services. For example, there can be different
requirements on functionality (e.g., priority, charging, security,
and mobility), differences in performance requirements (e.g.,
latency, mobility, availability, reliability, and data rates), or
distinctions in terms of the users to be served (e.g., public
safety users, corporate customers, etc.).
Figure 1 below shows the aerial RAN of an integrated
mMTC scenario with interconnections among the different
elements as follows: we have interconnections between sensors
and UAVs, among UAVs, and between UAVs and the satellite.
In this system, we consider that UAVs ﬂy periodically over a
certain rural area to be monitored, collect the data provided by
sensors spread in the area, and send these data via satellite. An
alternative to this approach, not considered in this paper, would
be that sensors transmit data to local sinks in ﬁxed positions
on the ﬁeld that act as GWs to the network.
Figure 1. Network architecture for mMTC, aerial RAN.
V.
SENSOR TECHNOLOGIES
ZigBee [18] is the most popular industry wireless mesh
networking standard for connecting sensors, instrumentation
and control systems. ZigBee is the classical Internet of Things
(IoT) technology. ZigBee is an open, global, packet-based
protocol designed to provide an easy-to-use architecture for
secure, reliable, low-power wireless networks. ZigBee is a low
data rate wireless system based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard.
IEEE 802.15.4 speciﬁes a total of 27 half-duplex channels
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

across the three frequency bands (868 MHz, 915 MHz, and
2.4 GHz). Channel data rate ranges from 20 kbit/s to 250
kbit/s. The transmission range depending on the frequency
band can be from 200 m to 1 km. For instance, the free-space
transmission range is around 300 m at 900 MHz (assuming
transmission power Pt = +5 dBm, antenna gains Gt = Gr
= 1.2 dBi, and received power level of Pr = −105 dBm).
Analogously, the maximum transmission range at 2400 MHz
is 64 m with similar numerical assumptions as those used for
900 MHz, except for Pt = 0 dBm.
To save the batteries, each node can alternate between
awake and sleeping phases. In the awake phase, nodes are
active and can communicate messages to neighbors. In the
sleeping phase, nodes turn their radios off until the next
scheduled wake-up time. The duration of sleeping and active
cycles are application-dependent and are set the same for all
the nodes. A common duty cycle value is of 10% with wake
up time of 10 s.
LoRa (the acronym of Long Range) [19] is a wireless
technology speciﬁcally designed for long-range, low-power
Machine-to-Machine (M2M) and IoT applications. The LoRa
range is 5 km for urban and 20 km for rural areas. LoRa is
based on the IEEE 802.15.4g standard and operates in the
Industrial, Scientiﬁc and Medical (ISM) frequency band at
868/915 MHz. A spread spectrum modulation is adopted. LoRa
bit-rates depend on the spreading factor; the maximum bit-
rate is 50 kbit/s. There is a payload size of 243 bytes for each
message. Each LoRa GW can manage up to millions of nodes.
The LoRa software is open and its use is free for those who
comply with protocol speciﬁcations.
Sigfox is a French global network operator that builds wire-
less networks to connect low-power objects such as electricity
meters and smartwatches, which need to send small amounts
of data. With Sigfox, a device can transmit up to 140 messages
per day. The maximum range is 10 km for urban and 40 km
for rural areas. Hence, long distances can be achieved while
being very robust against the noise. Messages have a payload
size of 12 bytes. Sigfox operates in the ISM band and uses a
ultra narrow-band modulation; the maximum bit-rate is from
100 to 600 bit/s, depending on the region.
NB-IoT is a narrow-band technology standardized by the
3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) starting with Re-
lease 13. For instance, an LTE operator can deploy NB-IoT
inside an LTE carrier. NB-IoT numerology is inherited from
LTE. In both downlink and uplink, the channel is divided into
12 subcarriers of 15 kHz. The time domain is divided into
time slots, each lasting 0.5 ms and consisting of 7 symbols.
Time slots are grouped as follows: two time slots form one
subframe (1 ms), 10 subframes form one frame (10 ms). To
further improve the coverage, a second numerology with 48
subcarriers of 3.75 kHz is introduced. This numerology is used
for the preamble transmission of the random access procedure
and optionally for uplink transmissions. In this case, the time
slot lasts 2 ms and, for the sake of compatibility, one frame is
composed of 5 time slots. The maximum payload size for each
message is 1600 bytes. One uplink single-tone (subcarrier) data
transmission at 15 kHz provides a physical layer data rate
of approximately 20 bit/s when conﬁgured with the highest
repetition factor (i.e., 128) and the most robust modulation and
coding scheme. On the other hand, downlink data transmission
achieves a physical layer data rate of 35 bit/s when conﬁgured
with repetition factor 512 and the most robust modulation and
coding scheme. The max data rate is limited to 200 kbit/s for
downlink and 20 kbit/s for uplink. NB-IoT can allow a nominal
maximum range of 35 km.
Table 1 in the next page provides a comparison among the
different sensors technologies.
We can differentiate the sensor-based applications accord-
ing to the type of data that must be gathered from the ﬁeld. In
particular, we can consider two categories as Event Detection
(ED) and Spatial Process Estimation (SPE).
•
In the ﬁrst case, sensors are used to detect an event,
for example, a ﬁre in a forest or an earthquake. Every
remote device has to measure a quantity, compare
with a given threshold and send the binary alarm
information. The density of nodes must ensure that the
event is promptly detected with a suitable probability
of success, while maintaining a low probability of
false alarm. In case of a concentrator of alarms (i.e.,
a local sink collecting data from multiple sensors),
the sensors, together with the concentrator, could
cooperatively carry out the task of alarm detection.
•
In the second case, the sensors aim at estimating
a given physical phenomenon (e.g., the atmospheric
pressure in a wide area). The main problem is to
obtain an estimation of the entire behavior of the
spatial process based on the samples taken by sensors
placed at random positions. The measurements will
be then processed in a distributed way by the nodes
or centrally at the supervisor. The estimation error
is strictly related to nodes density and the spatial
variability of the process.
VI.
CASE STUDY: ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF
LARGE AREAS FOR AGRICULTURE
Every year in Tuscany, a region of Italy, the emergencies
for forest ﬁres are repeated regularly, with an almost constant
risk during the year and an increase in summer, destroying
hundreds of hectares of forest. In Tuscany, more than 800
ﬁre events occur every year with an increasing trend. It is
impossible to carry out a direct control by operators in the
ﬁeld given its vastness and the need for continuous monitoring
during the day. An automatic radio system is therefore needed
to collect a variety of data from the territory to be sent via
the Internet to a remote control unit. In the ﬁght against forest
ﬁres, the rapid and careful delimitation of the perimeter of
the burned areas is fundamental. Therefore, the use of low-
cost distributed IoT radio sensors makes it possible to monitor
and promptly detect ﬁres, which have to be controlled and
resolved in a short time. This technological approach can also
be used in other contexts, such as monitoring of landslides,
levels of air pollutants in wooded areas, hydrogeological risk,
smart agriculture, etc.
The issue is that the sensors must be placed in remote areas
where there is no Internet access for several kilometers so that
there are problems to convey the data on the ﬁeld to a remote
control center. It is, therefore, necessary to make available a
backhaul interconnection that can provide adequate capacity
even in remote areas. The most suitable sensor technologies
today such as LoRa, Sigfox, and NB-IoT do not allow to cover
such remote areas. LoRa has a range of up to 20 km with bit
rates up to 50 kbit/s. Sigfox has a range of 40 km with bit
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

TABLE I. COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES.
IoT/M2M
Technol-
ogy
Local Range/
Uplink
and
Downlink
Bit-rate
Licensed/
Unlicensed Fre-
quency Band
GW:
Availability
(Y/N)
GW: Supported
Interconnection options
(wireless,
cable,
satel-
lite, etc.) with covered
ranges
GW:
Trafﬁc
capacity (Uplink
and Downlink)
LoRa
5 km (urban), 15
km
(suburban),
20 km (rural).
Data
rates
up
to 50 kbit/s.
Unlicensed spec-
trum
GW needed
Support
Ethernet,
3G,
wireless,
wired
and
satellite backhaul
Around
150000
to
1500000
packets per day
depending
on
payload
size,
symbol
rate,
coding rate . . .
Sigfox
40 km in rural
areas and 10 km
for urban areas.
Data
rates
up
to 600 bit/s
Cellular-like,
unlicensed
spec-
trum, ISM
GW needed
Support of Ethernet, 3G,
wireless, wired and satel-
lite backhaul
Sigfox
GW
capacity is three
times
bigger
than
LoRa
GW
capacity
ZigBee
(IEEE
802.15.4)
Indoor 10 m;
Outdoor
100
m (LoS).
Data
rate
up
to 250 kbit/s
Unlicensed spec-
trum
GW needed
Support of Ethernet, 3G,
wireless, wired and satel-
lite backhaul
-
Narrow
Band-
IoT
Up to 35 km.
Data
rate
up
to 200 kbit/s for
downlink and 20
kbit/s for uplink
Licensed
frequency bands
An
LTE
cellular
system (4G) is used
to interconnect with
base stations
-
-
rates up to 600 bit/s. NB-IoT has a range of 35 km with an
uplink bit-rate up to 20 kbit/s. Therefore, these sensor solutions
based on terrestrial infrastructures are not suitable for covering
large and remote areas and for supporting high capacity for
the transmission (if needed) of images or real-time videos.
Therefore, the interest of this paper is to show the possibility
to collect sensors data by means of drones with interconnection
to the Internet via satellite.
A. Agriculture Monitoring Model
In this section, an application for agricultural monitoring
is described that is suitable for large rural areas. The idea is
to provide the farmer with periodic and precise monitoring of
physical parameters (e.g., temperature, air pressure, humidity,
plant illness conditions, etc.) for the real-time control of the
plant area as well as for ﬁre alarm. On the basis of the
monitoring information, it is possible to increase the quality
and amount of production, cut costs, and reduce the pollution
caused by weed-killers.
Our system is divided into large areas of D ×D size, each
of them being controlled by a drone. In each area, there are
many sensors to collect data from the ﬁeld. A Point Poisson
Process is the model typically adopted to characterize the
distribution of the sensors on the ﬁeld for a certain area.
This means that the sensors are uniformly distributed in the
area considered. The data collected by a drone from multiple
sensors can also be aggregated before sending to the satellite.
The sensors can designed with an extremely low duty cycle
that is also related to theirs density. During the active mode,
each sensor collects measurements and transmits these data to
the system via drones that are connected to the Internet via a
satellite link [18]. The sensor-to-root data trafﬁc (multipoint-
to-point) is predominant. Each drone of the FW-UAV type acts
as a mobile GW that has to manage different trafﬁc classes
with a scheduler able to share the satellite link capacity taking
the Quality of Service (QoS) requirements of the different
classes into account.
As shown in Figure 2, we consider that each drone operates
over a certain area, collecting sensor data at each pass to be
delivered via satellite to a control center. Each drone will use
a satellite link not only for ﬂight control but also for sensor
data delivery. There can be different types of sensors in the
ﬁeld, such as micro-weather stations, infra-red temperature
sensors, sensors to monitor plant diseases, hygrometers, etc.
We can consider that the link between drones and satellite
has to manage multiple trafﬁc classes, including ﬂight control,
remote sensors data, video and/or photo trafﬁc. The sensors
trafﬁc can be modeled in a simple way [20][21]. For instance,
a sensor for alarms could have an ON-OFF duty cycle, sending
an alarm in the ON phase only when a certain measurement
threshold is overcome. Otherwise, we could have sensors
reporting temperature measurements at regular intervals, from
a few seconds to hours depending on the application. Each
sensor could send a small measurement packet of max 120
bytes.
B. Delay and Area Size Analysis
We have to design the drone ﬂeet to be able to deliver
alarms within a certain predetermined maximum delay. Let
d denote the maximum range for the transmission between
sensors and drones. Let H denote the drone altitude. Let vd
denote the drone speed assumed to be constant. We consider
that a drone can receive the signal from a square area of side
W (drone visibility area) that can be characterized as follows:
W = 2
p
d2 − H2.
(1)
For the sake of simplicity, we assume that D/W has an integer
value equal to N: D/W = N. Of course, D ≥ W.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

IPv6 network
Terrestrial wireless
link
Management and 
control center
GEO satellite or LEO satellite constellation
One block of sensors
Satellite earth 
station and
gateway
Base
Station
Drone with connection 
via satellite
Smartphones with App 
for user remote control 
and notifications
GW with
multipath 
connectivity
LTE/5G eNB
One block of sensors
Drone with connection 
via satellite
One block of sensors
and actuators
D
D
Figure 2. 5G integrated network scenario belonging to the mMTC case that
is well suited to represent our sensor-based service.
For the communication between sensors and drones the link
budget of the uplink is more critical than that of the downlink.
Then, the maximum range d refers to the transmissions from
sensors to drones (the transmission power is the one of sensors
and the receiver sensitivity refers to the drone). The link budget
can be expressed in terms of Allowed Propagation Loss (APL)
as:
APL = Pt + Ga − S − M,
(2)
where Pt is the transmission power in dBm of the sensor, Ga
denotes the antenna gain in dBi of the receiver (we consider
sensors with omnidirectional antennas), S is the sensitivity in
dBm of the receiver on the drone, and M represents a margin
due to shadowing and interference in dB. Possible values for
our scenario are: Pt = 15 dBm, S = −137 dBm, M ≈ 10
dB, Ga = 0 dBi so that the APL becomes equal to 153 dB
[22]. The APL term can be converted in terms of distance d
(range) using a path loss formula as follows:
APL (d) = 10γ log10
 d
d0

+ APL (d0)
[dB],
(3)
being γ the path loss exponent and d0 a reference distance
(equal to 1 km). According to [23], the following settings can
be adopted for frequencies around 868 MHz (ISM): γ = 2.65
and APL (d0) = 132.25 dB so that d can be up to 6 km;
however, this distance value can be further reduced for lower
Pt values and considering noise ﬁgures and additional losses
in the link budget.
The drone visibility interval td can be determined as:
tdvd = W → td = W
vd
.
(4)
The drone can reveal an alarm if it receives the signal
during its pass over an active sensor. Each sensor node has
an ON/OFF activity to increase the lifetime of its batteries:
a sensor can send an alarm only if the alarm conditions are
fulﬁlled during its ON phase. Let TON (TOF F ) denote the
mean ON (OFF) phase duration. The drone alarm detection
probability due to a sensor Pd can be expressed as follows
assuming that td < TOF F :
Pd =
TON + td
TON + TOF F
.
(5)
Let us consider that n independent sensor nodes are present
in the alarm area. This parameter n can be related to the density
of sensors in the area. Then, the total drone alarm detection
probability Pd,tot can be expressed as:
Pd,tot = 1 − (1 − Pd)n.
(6)
A drone travels a certain distance P to cover its D × D
service area. The drone cycle time is P/vd. Since the alarm can
occur at any point along this distance, the time that the drone
takes to reach the alarm area ta can be expressed as:
ta = u P
vd
,
(7)
where u denotes a random variable with uniform distribution
between 0 and 1.
Because of the ON-OFF cycle of the sensors, there could
be the need for multiple passes over the alarm area to detect the
event. The number of passes to detect the alarm is according to
a random variable X ∈ [1, 2, .... ) with geometric distribution
and parameter Pd,tot. The ﬁrst pass needs a time ta, while the
following ones occur after a time P/vd. Then, the total time
to detect the alarm Talarm is a random variable that can be
expressed as follows:
Talarm = u P
vd
+ (X − 1) P
vd
+ tsat = (u + X − 1) P
vd
+ tsat,
(8)
where tsat denotes the propagation time from the drones via
satellite to the terrestrial control station.
The expected alarm notiﬁcation delay is:
E [Talarm] =

1
Pd,tot
− 1
2
 P
vd
+ tsat.
(9)
We consider that there is a relation between the controlled
area size D and the length P of the path of the drone covering
that area. The relation between D and P depends on the path
selected. We consider the situation depicted in Figure 3.
Drone path with length P
N areas per side with length D
Figure 3. Path of a drone in covering a certain area of size D × D, formed
of N × N squares with side W.
The relation between D and W can be obtained as follows,
where we distinguish the sum of horizontal segments and
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

vertical segments to form the path shown in Figure 3:
P = W (N − 1) N + 2W (N − 1) =
= W (N − 1) (N + 2) =
= D2
W + D − 2W.
(10)
By substituting all the previous formulas, we obtain the
following expression of the mean delay to detect an alarm:
E [Talarm] =

1
Pd,tot
− 1
2
 D2
W + D − 2W
vd
+ tsat.
(11)
The system can be designed to guarantee that the alarm is
detected in the 95% of cases within a time limit Tmax delay
that is imposed as a design parameter.
Prob {Talarm < Tmax delay} = 0.95.
(12)
Since Talarm in (8) depends on two random variables,
u ∈ (0, 1) and X ∈ {1, 2, 3, ...}, we can use the following
approximation:
Talarm ≈ X P
vd
+ tsat,
(13)
so that the 95-th percentile of Talarm can be expressed by
means of the percentile of the geometric distribution of X as:
Tmax delay ≈ ln (1 − 0.95)
ln (1 − Pd,tot)
P
vd
+ tsat.
(14)
Hence, given the Tmax delay value (requirement) the sys-
tem can be designed by selecting the most suitable D, d, vd,
n, H, TON, and TOF F values.
C. Performance Results
Figure 4 shows the behavior of the mean notiﬁcation delay
E [Talarm] as a function of both sensor range d and number
N of service areas per D side for n = 2 and 4 alarmed
sensors/area. The numerical settings are: vd = 160 km/h, H
= 150 m, TON = 60 s, TOF F = 600 s, tsat = 250 ms. We can
see that the mean notiﬁcation delay increases with both the
sensor range d and the number of service areas N per side.
Figure 5 shows the level curves for constant Tmax delay
values depending on the number of sensors n and the duty
cycle [PON = TON/(TON + TOF F )]. We can see that if we
need to reduce PON to increase the battery life, there is the
need of a smaller d and then a smaller service area for a drone
to keep the same 95-th percentile of the alarm delay.
We can conclude that there is the need of a multi-parameter
optimization to select the many system parameters to optimize
system costs under requirements in terms of Tmax delay.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS
Many HTS and mega-LEO satellite constellations will
deliver Terabits of capacity across the world by 2020-2025.
These systems will provide the Satellite RAN of the whole 5G
system conceived to be an umbrella system, enabling different
technologies to operate together, including UAVs and satellites.
In this paper, our major emphasis is on the mMTC scenario for
rural areas where sensors on the ﬁeld are used to monitor ﬁre
and pollution events. We have considered a future 5G scenario
where drones are used in the territory to collect sensor data
1
2
3
4
5
Number of service areas N per block D/W=N
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
mean notification delay [h]
sensor range of 600 m
n=4
n=2
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
sensor range d [m]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
mean notification delay [h]
N = 3 service areas per block
n=4
n=2
Figure 4. Impact of sensor range d and number N of service areas per block
on the mean delay E [Talarm] in hours.
N = 3 service area per block and n = 2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
PON duty cycle
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
sensor range d
Figure 5. Impact of sensor range d and the duty cycle PON on the 95-th
percentile of the delay, Tmax delay in hours.
that are delivered via a satellite link to a control center. An
analytical model has been developed to characterize the time
needed to detect an alarm in terms of mean value and 95-th
percentile. The model developed in this study can be suitable
for a further study to optimize the ﬂeet of drones required to
cover the entire rural area under consideration.
REFERENCES
[1]
Report on “World Internet Users Statistics and 2018 World Popula-
tion Stats”, available at the following URL [retrieved: March, 2019]:
https://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm
[2]
G. Giambene, S. Kota, and P. Pillai, “Satellite - 5G Integration: A Net-
work Perspective”, IEEE Network, pp. 25-31, No. 5, September/October
2018.
[3]
A. Gupta and R. K. Jha, “A Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and
Emerging Technologies”, IEEE Access, Vol. 3, pp. 1206-1232, 2015.
[4]
3GPP, “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Speciﬁcation
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Group Radio Access Network; Study on New Radio (NR) to support
non-terrestrial networks”, TR 38.811V0.2.1 (2017-11) - Release 15.
[5]
IEEE
5G
and
Beyond
Technology
Roadmap
White
Paper,
available
at
the
following
URL
[retrieved:
February,
2019]
:
https://futurenetworks.ieee.org/images/ﬁles/pdf/ieee-5g-roadmap-white-
paper.pdf
[6]
B. Li, Z. Fei, and Y. Zhang, “UAV Communications for 5G and Beyond:
Recent Advances and Future Trends,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
early view available since December 2018.
[7]
Y. Shi, J. Liu, Z. Md. Fadlullah, and N. Kato, “Cross-layer Data
Delivery in Satellite-Aerial-Terrestrial Communication”, IEEE Wireless
Communications Magazine, Vol. 25, No. 3, pp. 138-143, 2018.
[8]
Y. Huo, X. Dong, T. Lu, W. Xu, and M. Yuen, “Distributed and Multi-
layer UAV Network for the Next-generation Wireless Communication”,
Available on arXiv:1805.01534 [eess.SP], 2018.
[9]
ETSI, “Integration of Satellite and/or HAPS (High Altitude Platform
Station) Systems into 5G and Related Architecture Options”, SCN TC-
SES DTR/SES-00405 ETSI TR 103 611, December 2018.
[10]
A. Guidotti and A. Vanelli-Coralli, “Clustering Strategies for Mul-
ticast
Precoding
in
Multi-Beam
Satellite
Systems”,
available
on
arXiv:1804.03891v1 [cs.IT] 11 Apr 2018.
[11]
ViaSat-2 system Web site with URL [retrieved: March, 2019]:
https://www.viasat.com/viasat-2-service-infographic
[12]
LeoSat
system
Web
site
with
URL
[retrieved:
March,
2019]:
http://leosat.com/technology/
[13]
OneWeb system Web site with URL [retrieved: March, 2019]:
https://www.oneweb.world/
[14]
J. Foust, “SpaceX’s Space-Internet Woes”, IEEE Spectrum, Vol. 56, No.
1, pp. 50-51, 2019
[15]
M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, Y.-H. Nam, and M. Debbah, “A
Tutorial on UAVs for Wireless Networks: Applications, Challenges, and
Open Problems”, available on arXiv:1803.00680v1, March 2018.
[16]
K. Kamnani and C. Suratkar, “A Review Paper on Google Loon
Technique”, International Journal of Research In Science & Engineering,
Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 167-171, 2015.
[17]
5GCHAMPION EU Project Web site with URL [retrieved: February,
2019]: http://www.5g-champion.eu/
[18]
C. Buratti, A. Conti, D. Dardari, and R. Verdone, “An Overview on
Wireless Sensor Networks Technology and Evolution”, Sensors (Basel),
Vol. 9, No. 9, pp. 6869-6896, 2009.
[19]
A. Lavric and V. Popa, “Internet of Things and LoRa Low-Power Wide-
Area Networks: A Survey”, International Symposium on Signals, Circuits
and Systems (ISSCS) 2017, July 13-14, 2017, Iasi, Romania.
[20]
3GPP,
“Study
on
RAN
Improvement
for
Machine-Type-
Communications”, TR 37.868 V11.0.0, September 2012.
[21]
A. Sivanathan et al., “Characterizing and Classifying IoT Trafﬁc in
Smart Cities and Campuses,” IEEE Conference on Computer Commu-
nications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Atlanta, GA, pp. 559-564,
2017.
[22]
G. A. Akpakwu, B. J. Silva, G. P. Hancke, and A. M. Abu-Mahfouz,
“A Survey on 5G Networks for the Internet of Things: Communication
Technologies and Challenges,” IEEE Access, Vol. 6, pp. 3619-3647,
2018.
[23]
H. Linka, M. Rademacher, O. G. Aliuy, and K. Jonas, “Path Loss
Models for Low-Power Wide-Area Networks: Experimental Results
using LoRa”, ITG Fachtagung Mobilkommunikation, May 16, 2018.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

