Ka-Band VSAT System Models under Measured DUSA Attenuation
Kamal Harb, Abdulaziz Al-Yami, Samir Abdul-Jauwad, Muhammad Muzammal Naseer
Electrical Engineering Department
KFUPM University, Saudi Arabia
Email: 1- kharb@kfupm.edu.sa; 2- abdulaziz.yami.1@aramco.com
Abstract—The satellite industry’s need for Ka-band is increasing
due to capacity abundance and cost efﬁciency. The commonly
used C-band and Ku-band satellites have a limited number of
geosynchronous orbital slots for given frequency bands. Thus,
industries are turning to Ka-band satellites. Operating at high
frequencies making them vulnerable to atmospheric conditions
like rain, scintillation, dust, humidity, etc. Performance analysis
of Ka-band Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) system under
Dust and Sand (DUSA) storms induced impairments in Dhahran
city, Saudi Arabia, is presented in this paper. In this area,
DUSA storms are usually observed due to desertiﬁcation. Satellite
communications and microwave networks are among the most
commonly utilized means of communication, scattered all over
the country. These networks observe radio wave degradations
due to the frequently occurring DUSA storms. This study
precisely quantiﬁes attenuation due to DUSA based on real
time measurements, being observed in the Eastern region of
Saudi Arabia. Simulation results of real time measurements
based on the level of visibility during DUSA storms are being
proposed to counter the impairments in an optimized manner.
These results are then analyzed in a digital video broadcasting -
satellite - second generation (DVB-S2) VSAT system environment.
The mentioned analysis of received signal strength during such
anomalous weather conditions can aid in performance optimiza-
tion by monitoring the received signal and maintaining it within
acceptable level.
Keywords−Broadband
services;
Digital
video
broadcasting-
satellite-second generation; Ka-band Very Small Aperture Termi-
nal; Signal to Noise Ratio.
I. INTRODUCTION
Satellite service suppliers are targeting the consumer market
for the provision of broadband access, knowledge of informa-
tion and communication technologies and other multimedia
applications [1]–[3]. The availability of alternative services,
such as Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) or cable, is not common
in rural and sub-urban areas. Thus, making the delivery of
broadband services to customers via Ka-band satellites is more
suitable [2]. Ka-band systems do not use the concept of single
service area, rather they employ spot beams. Utilization of Ka-
band satellites is an immediate consequence of the industry’s
need to give more satellite services, which would have resulted
in higher cost if provided by legacy bands.
Previously, the Very Small Aperture Terminals (VSAT)
market has depended upon C and Ku bands [4]–[7]. Therefore,
there is a tight number of geosynchronous orbital slots that
could be utilized for a given frequency band, and nearly all
orbital openings are represented with current and arranged C-
band and Ku-band. So, the Ka-band seems to be a deﬁni-
tive answer for any new satellite correspondence framework.
Nevertheless, Ka-band has an immense disadvantage in com-
parison with C-band and Ku-band due to higher frequency
range allotment [8]–[14]. Working at high frequencies makes it
more prone to indicator quality issue due to climatic conditions
incorporating rain blur, Dust and Sand (DUSA) storms, etc.
Dissection of such climate induced weakening impairments in
the Eastern district of Saudi Arabia is the essential contribution
of this paper.
In this research, climatic information for DUSA storms
has been gathered from Saudi Arabian sources and used
in physical estimations to get precise gauges in the region
of interest. In parallel to the focus of this analysis, many
researchers have shown great interest in estimating the high
frequency wave attenuation due to DUSA particles [2][3][15]–
[18]. Very few studies are conducted at the Ka-band. The
impacts are analyzed in a digital video broadcasting - satellite
- second generation (DVB-S2) VSAT broadband framework,
as depicted in Figure 1, with an adaptive scheme to gauge
atmospheric attenuation, due to change in DUSA density at
any given area with certain propagation angle and operational
frequency. In the wake of quantifying such impairments at
diverse and remote locations, improved back propagation-
learning calculation − by iteratively computing operational
frequencies, elevation angles, modulation and coding − is
done to improve the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR).
This paper is described in ﬁve sections. Section II describes
the DVB-S2 for supporting forward and receive channels in
a ﬂexible way. Section III presents the methodology and
simulation of DUSA storm. It also describes different research
methods for dust storm. Section IV presents analysis and mod-
eling for DUSA attenuation variations with other propagation
factors. Consequently, SNR under DUSA storm conditions
were calculated. Finally, we conclude this study in Section V.
II. DVB-S2 VSAT SYSTEM
DVB-S2 VSAT system is used to control record readings
for weather attenuation. The remote terminal presented in
Figure 1 sends data packets to a satellite and receives back
an acknowledgement through Indoor Unit (IDU).
In the initial phase, several modern techniques to estimate
the effects of DUSA storms on satellite communications were
simulated in MATLAB environment for Ka-band frequencies.
Later the parameters of DUSA storms relevant to Saudi Arabia
were extracted and incorporated in the simulations to estimate
their effects on Ka-band VSAT systems.
Furthermore, the estimates of DUSA density existing in air
are gathered from various nearby weather stations and incor-
porated into simulations to quantify their effects in retarding
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Satellite Private
Host Network
Satellite 
Domain
Hosts LAN 
(Private or
Public IP)
IDU
Gateway
Backbone
Interface
Network
Private IP/
Public IP
Private IP
Hosts
Private IP
Figure 1. Example of DVB-S2 VSAT Complete Network.
the SNR, as well as Quality of Service (QoS) and therefore
effective throughput of VSAT system.
DVB-S2 VSAT system has been modeled in MATLAB to
analyze DUSA storms effects related to the concerned region.
This system has been simulated in a ﬂexible way such that the
primary parameters of VSAT system can be adjusted by chang-
ing modulation, coding, transmit power, operating frequency,
elevation angle, etc., based on the estimates of DUSA storms,
to provide uninterrupted service while optimally managing the
radio resources.
The system model is based on DVB-S2 for the forward
channel and digital video broadcasting - return channel via
satellite (DVB-RCS) for the return channels. DVB-S2 is
currently the latest satellite communications standard in pro-
duction and is commonly used for video based applications.
It has the feature of low encoding complexity and also has
variable and adaptive coding and modulation modes, which
can be used for ﬂuctuating noise conditions. In the forward
direction, the system uses DVB-S2 in accordance with the
DVB-RCS speciﬁcation EN 301 790. It offers both QPSK
and 8PSK modulation schemes. Figure 2 depicts the Es/N0
versus spectral efﬁciency for the various modulation schemes.
While these signal-to-noise ratios are readily achievable for
trunking applications between large earth stations, they are
not generally available for VSAT networks. On the other hand,
DVB-RCS utilized in this study uses the most advanced mod-
ulation and coding on the return (remote to gateway) satellite
links available in the DVB-RCS speciﬁcation where Table I
TABLE I. SPECTRAL EFFICIENCY DVB-RCS RETURN
LINK.
Channel Spacing Factor = 1.25.
Turbo Coding
Spectral Efﬁciency
(Rate)
(Bits/sec/Hz)
1/3
0.53
2/5
0.64
1/2
0.80
2/3
1.07
3/4
1.20
4/5
1.28
6/7
1.37
the performance of the return link. In the return direction,
the system uses QPSK modulation with Turbo coding as per
EN 301 790 exclusively. The system offers a variety of Turbo
coding rates depending on the nature of encapsulation chosen
for the return trafﬁc.
Data trafﬁc in all cases terminates/originates to/from the
backbone routers and telephone switches located at the gate-
way location. This system model supports data communication
between a remote in one sub-network and the corporate net-
work, between two remotes in one sub-network and between
two remotes in a different sub-network (one remote in sub-
network 1 and one remote in sub-network 2). The space
segment of the VSAT network consists of two transponders
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 2. Spectral efﬁciency of DVB-S2 modulation schemes.
on Intelsat 1002.
The test setup mainly consists of a VSAT remote terminal
and a visibility sensor both located in Dhahran. The SNR of
the transmitted data is physically measured to quantify the
effects of such factors on the composite attenuation. Also, the
visibility was observed at the same time.
III. METHODOLOGY
This section covers a brief review of different mathematical
expressions used in the estimation of DUSA impairments.
General formulas for electromagnetic (EM) wave passing
through DUSA particles have been implemented in [3] using
Rayleigh approximation attenuation and phase shift factors
for a VSAT environment where DUSA particles are estimated
considering two major components namely visibility and fre-
quency.
A. Rayleigh Approximation
In [3], generic models for DUSA storms affected wave
propagation constant based on Rayleigh approximation were
developed. The satellite medium parameters experiencing
DUSA storms impairment were derived considering location,
visibility, frequency, and other factors. These formulas are
correlated with the principles by Goldhirshs estimation [19].
By following the analysis for different particles model, the
propagation will be:
KV, H( ϕ ) = k0 + 2π
k0
∞
Z
0
f V, H ( ϕ, r ) N( r )dr
(1)
where:
k0: the free-space propagation constant,
ϕ: the incident radiation propagation angle,
N(r)
=
N0 P(r): DUSA distribution per (cm3) having
 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Visibility (km)
Attenuation (dB/km)
Visiblity vs Attenuation
 
 
Theoretical
Practical Data
Figure 3. Comparison Uncompensated for Attenuation with
Visibility.
radius in the region of r → r + dr.
fV,H(ϕ, r): the forward scattering amplitude for vertical (V )
and horizontal (H) polarizations.
B. Goldhirsh’s Formula
Contingent on the Rayleigh approximation, the attenuation
model for satellite signal propagation in DUSA storms derived
by Goldhirsh is [19]:
α =
2.317 × 10−3 × ε
′′
[(ε
′ + 2) + ε
′′2] × λ ·
 1
V γ
b

[dB/Km]
(2)
λ: the wavelength in m,
ε
′ and ε
′′: the dielectric constant of the DUSA particles,
γ = 1.07, and Vb visibility in Km is a key component
for evaluating of dust induced impairments. Equation (3)
presented in [20] shows dependence of visibility and height
(h).
V = V0
 h
h0
0.26
,
(3)
where V0 and h0 are the reference visibility and height,
respectively.
C. Ahmed Derivation
Ahmed et al. derived a DUSA storms attenuation model
for millimeter-wave based on measured probability density
function and Mie theory. The model is expressed by [21]:
α = 5.670 × 104 ·
 1
Vb

·
re
λ

·
ε
′′
[(ε
′ + 2) + ε
′′2]
(4)
Here, re is the effective particle radius in µm.
Similarly, a generic model suitable for different particle sizes
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
Figure 4. Comparison Compensated for Attenuation with
Visibility.
distributions developed in [21] for microwave propagation in
DUSA storms is shown as:
α = 0.629 × 103 ·
F · re
Vb

·
 
ε
′′
[(ε
′ + 2) + ε
′′2]
!
(5)
F: the frequency in GHz.
D. Al-Haider derivation
Considering 10 years visibility data and the Rayleigh ap-
proximation, Al-Haider developed another attenuation model
for microwave propagation in DUSA storms [5] as:
α = 0.189
Vb
·
 r
λ

·
 
3 ε
′′
[(ε
′ + 2) + ε
′′2]
!
(6)
r: the particle radius in m.
The above model is applied to our region of interest in Saudi
Arabia. The data pertaining to visibility has been extracted
from literature [4]–[12] and is physically measured to quantify
the effects of such factors on composite attenuation.
IV. ANALYSIS
The measured data presented in Figure 3 and Figure 4 are
used for analyzing DUSA attenuation variations with different
values of collected visibility. The uncompensated data for
theoretical and practical scenarios presented in Figure 3 show
that the theoretical line marginally models the practical data
with a higher degree of variations up to approximately 1.25
Km of visibility. This discrepancy at low visibility is due to
the lack of appropriate model that match real measurements.
It presents a big challenge for researchers and providers as
signal could be totally blocked by DUSA storm.
The theoretical line follows a decaying exponential trend,
but the recorded data (blue dots) resembles a linear relation-
ship due to outcome discrepancy. It shows that the theoretical
 
Figure 5. Comparison between different Models.
line (red) closely models the practical data only around 1.75
Km of visibility and missed it for the rest of data.
The proposed analysis for the compensated data was
implemented to get better matching results especially at
low visibility by tuning variables presented in (7). This
improvement result for attenuation with different visibility
is clearly shown in Figure 4. This outcome will lead to an
appropriate value for SNR, as well as the overall system’s
throughput. The practical data (blue dots) follow the trend
of recorded data though it is scrambled. However, we see
roughly that at a visibility higher than 1.3 Km, the attenuation
becomes constant.
DUSA attenuation model for real time measured data com-
pared to other developed models is presented in Figure 4.
Note that, the DUSA storms level above the ground, according
to Saudi Arabia region, ranges between 4 Km to 6 Km for
maximum.
According to numerical methods used for estimations pre-
sented in Figure 4, we present a model for DUSA point
attenuation (Ap) as follows:
Ap = 2.2909 × 10−16 +
n
567
V r 2eλ × · · ·
· · · ×
ε
′′
(ε′+9.9595×108)
2+ε′′2 ×
nP
i
pir3
i

dB/Km
(7)
where P
i pi r3
i represents the summation of different proba-
bilities of particle sizes multiplied by the dust particle size.
V is the visibility. Whereas, the parameters λ, re, ε
′ and
ε
′′ are constant values at various frequencies as deﬁned in
Table II. The outcome of (7) represents the compensated
expression of DUSA model. The constant value is extracted
by inspection using MATLAB tests. This value can be in-
tegrated back into the original expression with changing of
(ϵ
′ + 2)2 to (ϵ
′ + 9.9595 × 108)2.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

TABLE II. LISTING OF DIELECTRIC CONSTANTS AT
VARIOUS FREQUENCIES MEASURED BY [5][6][19].
Dielectric Constants Values
Frequency
Soil Type
ε′
ε′′
GHz
1 - 3
loam
3.5
0.14
3 - 10.5
clay, silt
5.73
0.474
10.5 - 14
sand
3.9
0.62
14 - 24
sad
3.8
0.65
24 - 37
loam
2.88
0.3529
A comparison between the observed attenuation model and
others presented in this paper which resulted in deviation
between the empirical values and the theoretical models is
shown in Figure 5. There are many possible reasons for the
deviation. One of the main reasons is that attenuations were
simulated at different regions with different DUSA properties.
Thus, the proposed point attenuation along the radio wave
path resulted in Figure 6 as a function of frequency and
propagation angle with different particular sizes.
A. SNR Calculation
The improvement in SNR, as well as system’s throughput
based on estimation speciﬁc to the region is analyzed in
[22][23]. The ratio between signal and noise are presented
as:
SNR = Pt + Gt − At + Gr − T − K − Rs
dB, (8)
At (total attenuation) = ADS + A0,
where the free space loss A0 = (4.π.d/λ)2,
d the distance in Km between the transmitter (ground station)
and the receiver (satellite),
ADS represents DUSA attenuation.
Pt and Pr represent the transmitter and receiver powers
respectively.
Gt and Gr are antenna gains at the transmitter and receiver
respectively. Rs is the transmission rate, K represents the
Boltzman constant, and T represents the effective noise tem-
perature.
A receive bandwidth (Br) is considered. Thus, the noise
power (N) will be:
N = N0 · Br = K · T · Br
(9)
System preformance of a digital system can be determined
using the SNR or vice versa. Thermal noise power spectral
density is given by N0
=
K . T, where, K =
1.38 ×
10−23 Ws/K
=
− 228.6 dB Ws/K, T
=
Ta + Tr,
with Ta represents the noise temperature of the antenna, and
the noise temperature of the receiver is:
Tr =
 
10
Nr/10

− 1
!
· 290
(10)
Nr ≈ 0.7 → 2 dB: represents noise ﬁgure of low-noise
ampliﬁer, and Rs: represents the symbol rate.
 
 
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
3
4
5
6
7
8
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
frequency ( GHz )
Point Attenuation vs Particle Dust Size and Frequency
Dust Particle Size (m)
AP ( dB/Km )
Figure 6. Point Attenuation with Visibility and Frequency
under Dusty Weather in Dhahran, Saudi.
Therefore, satellite system performance is improved by
providing enhanced estimates for attenuation due to DUSA
storms leading to adjustment of SNR output in lieu of a
wide range of frequencies, transmitted power, for any speciﬁc
propagation angle, transmission rate, gain, and location as
shown in Figure 7.
After having quantiﬁed the effects of DUSA storms in a
generic satellite system, the main wave propagation parameters
can be mitigated according to these impairments to eventually
enhance the SNR and data-rates. Based on achieved analogy
for different signal attenuation and SNR, designers are able
to build a clear estimation for signal propagation in dusty
and sandy weather conditions. Different results for geometries
and locations of this technique are investigated. Resulting
prototype products can be hardware controllers, which take
the values of DUSA storm estimated as explained above,
and would give optimal values of output transmit power,
modulation, coding, operating frequency, and elevation angle.
Uplink Power Control (UPC) is a technique of adjusting
the output power of the uplink with the aim to maintain a
constant SNR ratio at a remote terminal, which can be used in
our system’s model. Adaptive Coding and Modulation (ACM)
is used to keep the received signal quality above designers’
threshold level in varying SNR levels. The modulation scheme
is altered between a high capacity modulation at high SNR to
a low capacity robust modulation at low SNR levels. After
measuring DUSA storm attenuation, UPC and ACM can be
used in the case of rain fade in satellite links.
V. CONCLUSION
Analysis of DUSA storm effects on a generic satellite link
was the starting point of the proposed work. A relationship
that estimates the DUSA storm effects has been derived for
real time data. In this paper, different means for enhancing
the throughput of a Ka-band broadband VSAT system were
studied. Such systems are much susceptible to weather
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
3
4
5
6
7
8
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
Frequency ( Ghz )
SNR vs Frequency and Dust Particle Size
Dust Particle Size ( m )
SNR ( dB )
Figure 7. SNR Values vs Frequency and Dust Particle size in
Dhahran, Saudi.
effects, in which DUSA storms impact transmitted signal
and corresponding data rates are below the desired threshold
levels. Hence, the performance of high throughput applications
− like transmission of multimedia, interactive voice, etc. −
is affected. The quantiﬁcation of DUSA effects at different
geographical locations, with the view to eventually upgrading
the system parameters by virtue of an intelligent controller
at the hub station. This system can ensure high throughput
and reliable data transmission at all times. Estimating
the attenuation due to DUSA storm is based on the latest
techniques available in literature through incorporated weather
data mainly about DUSA storms concentrations. In addition,
the data is measured from different VSAT remote sites to
achieve more speciﬁc physical results. Up to date techniques
mitigate these effects and improve data-rates and QoS. The
effects are analyzed in a DVB-S2 VSAT broadband system in
which an adaptive scheme was used to estimate atmospheric
attenuation due to DUSA density changes at any given
location, with certain propagation angle and operational
frequency.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the management of Saudi Aramco
and King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals (KFUPM)
and Hafr Al-Batin University, Electrical Engineering depart-
ment for supporting this project and for facilitating the logis-
tics needed for installing the satellite system and collecting
data. This work is supported by Aramco and the Deanship
of Scientiﬁc Research (DSR) at KFUPM through project No.
FT121013.
REFERENCES
[1] Electronic Communications Committee (ECC), The use of the frequency
bands 27.5-30.0 GHz AND 17.3-20.2 GHz by satellite networks, Report
152, within the European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications
Administrations (CEPT), Sept. 2010.
[2] G. Maral, VSAT Networks. West Sussex, England: Wiley, 1995.
[3] Q. Dong, Y. Li, J. Xu, H. Zhang, and M. Wang, “Effect of sand and
dust storms on microwave propagation,” IEEE Transactions Antennas
Propagation, Feb. 2013, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 910–916.
[4] K. Harb, O. Butt, A. Al-Yami, and S. H. Abdul-Jauwad, “Probabilistic
dust storm layers impacting satellite communications,” in Proc. of the
IEEE International Conference on Space Science and Communication
(IconSpace), July 2013, pp. 407–411.
[5] A. Ali, M. A. Alhaider, and A. S. Ahmed, “Airborne dust size analysis
for tropospheric propagation of millimetric waves into dust storms,”
IEEE Transactions on Geosclencf and Remote Sensing, Sept. 1987,
vol. 5, pp. 599–693.
[6] H. Y. Chen, Y. Ze, and C. C. Ku, “Calculation of wave attenuation
in sand and dust storms by the fdtd and turning bands methods at 10-
100 GHz,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, June 2012,
vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 2951–2960.
[7] O. Butt, K. Harb, and S. H. Abdul-Jauwad, “Intelligent decision system
for measured dust distributions impairing satellite communications,”
in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Computational In-
telligence and Virtual Environments for Measurement Systems and
Applications (SIVEMSA), Ottawa, Ont., Canada, May 2014, pp. 106–
111.
[8] K. Harb, B. Omair, S. Abdul-Jauwad, A. Al-Yami, and A. Al-Yami,
“A proposed method for dust and sand storms effect on satellite
communication networks,” in Innovations on Communication Theory
(INCT), Oct. 2012, pp. 33–37.
[9] E. Saleh and I. Abuhdima, “Effect of sand and dust storms on microwave
propagation signals in southern Libya,” in 15th IEEE Mediterranean
Electrotechnical Conference, Tripoli, Libya, April 2010, pp. 695–698.
[10] P. Estabrook, J. Huang, W. Rafferty, and M. Sue, “A 20/30 GHz personal
access satellite system design,” in IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Boston, MA, June 1989, pp. 216–222.
[11] F. Davarian, “Earth-satellite propagation research,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, April 1994, vol. 32, pp. 74–79.
[12] L. J. Ippolito and T. A. Russell, “Propagation considerations for emerg-
ing satellite communications applications,” Proc. of the IEEE, June 1993,
vol. 81, no. 6, pp. 923–929.
[13] L. C. Palmer, E. Laborde, and A. S. amd P. Y. Sohn, “A personal
communication network using a Ka-band satellite,” IEEE J. Select. Areas
Communication, Feb. 1992, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 401–417.
[14] M. J. Willis and B. G. Evans, “Fade countermeasures at ka band for
olympus,” Int. Journal Satellite Communications, July 1994, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 301–311.
[15] E. Vilar and M. Filip, “Adaptive modulations as a fade countermeasure:
An olympus experiment,” Int. J. Satell. Communication, Feb. 1990,
vol. 8, pp. 31–41.
[16] J. Horle, “Up-link power control of satellite earth-stations as a fade
countermeasure of 20/30 ghz communications systems,” International
Journal of Satellite Communications (ISSN 0737-2884), Sept. 1988,
vol. 6, pp. 323–330.
[17] E. R. Berlekamp, R. E. Peile, and S. P. Pope, “The application of
error control to communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Jan.
1987, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 44–57.
[18] D. W. Blood and R. K. Crane, Handbook for the estimation of microwave
propagation effects-Links calculations for earth-space paths (path loss
and noise estimation): NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 1979.
[19] J. Goldhirsh, “Attenuation and backscatter from a derived two-
dimensional duststorm model,” IEEE Transactions Antennas Propaga-
tion, Dec. 2001, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 1703–1711.
[20] E. A. Elsheikh, M. R. Islam, K. Al-Khateeb, A. Z. Alam, and
Z. Elshaikh, “A proposed vertical path adjustment factor for dust storm
attenuation prediction,” in 4th International Conference on Mechatronics
(ICOM), May 2011, pp. 1–3.
[21] A. Ahmed, A. Ali, and M. Alhaider, “Measurement of atmospheric
particle size distribution during sand/duststorm in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,”
Atmospheric Environment, 1987, vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 193–196.
[22] E. Lutz, M. Werner, and A. Jahn, Satellite Systems for Personal and
Broadband Communications. Springer, New York, 2000.
[23] K. Harb, F. R. Yu, P. Dakhal, and A. Srinivasan, “Performance improve-
ment in satellite networks based on markovian weather prediction,” in
Proc. IEEE GlobCom, Miami, Florida, USA, Dec. 2010, pp. 1–5.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

