Narrowband Uplink Transmission in LTE-based Satellite Radio Interface  
Hee Wook Kim, Kunseok Kang, and Bon-Jun Ku 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
305-350 Gajeong-dong Yuseong-gu Daejeion, Korea 
{prince304, kskang, and bjkoo}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we introduce narrowband uplink 
transmission scheme to adapt orthogonal frequency division 
multiple access scheme to satellite environments. Maximizing 
the commonalities with the terrestrial system is one the most 
important factors for cost-effective service delivery, which will 
finally bring successful deployment of the system. For this 
purpose, 
we 
adopt 
an 
orthogonal 
frequency 
division 
multiplexing based radio interface. At the same time, the 
interface should be tailored in order to be operable in a power 
limited uplink scenario of satellite systems. In this paper, we 
present a narrowband uplink transmission, which was 
developed for this purpose, in long term evolution based 
satellite radio interface. Simulation results show that the 
proposed scheme can increase an uplink spectral efficiency at 
power-limited handheld terminal. 
Keywords-narrowband transmission; handheld terminal; 
mobile satellite communications.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Considering cost-effective, in a future Mobile Satellite 
Service (MSS) system, a satellite radio interface needs to be 
compatible with a maximum degree of commonality with 
emerging terrestrial standards. Therefore, the techniques 
adopted for the satellite system have to be similar to or even 
the same as those of the terrestrial system. The adaptation of 
a compatible radio interface with maximum commonality 
will bring possibility to reuse terrestrial part technology to 
minimize the modification of User Equipment (UE) chipset 
and network equipment for low cost and fast development. 
As emerging terrestrial radio interfaces, the Third 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Long Term Evolution 
(LTE) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) mobile Worldwide Interoperability for 
Microwave Access (WiMAX) radio interfaces are being 
considered [1]. Both two radio interfaces adopted 
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) 
scheme, which is intrinsically able to handle the most 
common radio frequency distortion without the need for 
complex equalization techniques and scales easily to fit 
different bandwidth [2]. 
Not much attention has been paid to the study on OFDM 
based satellite radio interfaces due to serious Peak to 
Average Power Ratio (PAPR) problems, especially for a 
high cost power amplifier in satellite systems. Nevertheless, 
recent study results reported the adaption of OFDM 
technique in the satellite systems to give benefits such as 
capability of high speed transmission and commonalities 
with the terrestrial systems [3]-[5]. For example, DVB-SH 
adopted OFDM technique [3], which is the same signal 
format defined in DVB-H for terrestrial systems. The main 
reason for adopting OFDM stems from the fact the satellite 
terrestrial transmitters form a Signal Frequency Network 
(SFN). 
Furthermore, 
European 
Telecommunications 
Standardization Institute (ETSI) has started feasibility study 
on OFDM based satellite radio interface, and reported that 
OFDM based scheme might provide better performance that 
the conventional Wideband Code Division Multiple Access 
(WCDMA) based scheme [4]. Recently, a new satellite radio 
interface is being developing based on the 3GPP LTE 
standard to maximize the commonalities with the terrestrial 
system using OFDM [6]. Some satellite specific technologies 
were proposed including frequency reuse techniques, uplink 
synchronization techniques, random access techniques, and 
interleaving technique combined with adaptive modulation 
and coding.  
In this paper, we consider physical layer modifications to 
terrestrial LTE to make it operable over a satellite channel, 
which characteristically is power constrained. Following 
introduction, in Section II, we propose a narrowband uplink 
transmission in LTE based satellite radio interface. In 
Section III, we show a few simulation results and then, draw 
conclusion in Section IV. 
II. 
NARROWBAND UPLINK TRANSMISSION IN LTE BASED 
SATELLITE RADIO INTERFACE 
Mobile satellite system would be power-limited system 
as well as hand-held terminal has a limited maximum 
transmitted power. Considering that total transmitted power 
would be distributed over whole subcarriers in one Resource 
Block (RB), the large RB size of 180 kHz in terrestrial LTE 
makes sufficient power not be allocated on one subcarrier at 
handheld terminals. In this case, high modulation and coding 
rate scheme may not be supported. Therefore, in this paper, a 
narrowband RB transmission is defined in order to solve this 
problem. For high layer commonality, the size of transport 
block in the RB is same as in terrestrial LTE. 
Figure 1 shows Uplink Physical Uplink Shared Channel 
(PUSCH) structure in order to support narrowband 
transmission.  The PUSCH carries data from the uplink 
shared channel transport channel [7]. In satellite systems the 
available bandwidth is constrained due to power limited 
environments, particularly in uplink. This means that the 
bandwidth that can be dedicated to one transport block also 
should be constrained. The constraint can be in the form of 
fewer subcarriers. Because the size of the transport block for 
narrowband transmission should be maintained for no 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 1. Uplink PUSCH channel structure for narrowband transmission. 
modification on terrestrial LTE MAC layer, the data in the 
transport block is better inserted in such a way that it 
occupies a larger number of symbols compared to the 
terrestrial LTE system. For this, LTE physical layer should 
be modified in order to reduce the size of RB and  increase 
of the length of Transmission Time Interval (TTI) of 
terrestrial LTE. In terrestrial LTE, 1 ms of TTI is considered 
in order to reduce latency of service delivery and make fast 
resource adaptations. However, considering that a satellite 
system has already a few hundred miliseconds of very long 
round trip delay and mainly suffers from slow channel fading 
effects, the 1ms of short TTI doesn’t give any advantages in 
the satellite systems and prevents to get a time diversity gain 
to compensate slow channel fading effects. Therefore, the 
increase of the length of TTI in the satellite system will be 
under a reasonable adaptation of terrestrial LTE to satellite 
environment.  
Figure 1(a) shows the conventional PUSCH structure 
with the large RB size of 180 kHz, which has 12 subcarriers 
and 2 slots. The information bits are first channel-coded with 
a turbo code of mother code rate with 1/3, which is adapted 
to a suitable final code rate by a rate-matching process. This 
is followed by symbol-level channel interleaving, which 
follows a simple ‘time-first’ mapping – in order words, 
adjacent data symbols end up being mapped first to adjacent 
Single Carrier-Frequency Division Multiple Access (SC-
FDMA) symbols in the time domain, and then across the 
subcarriers. The coded and interleaved bits are then 
scrambled by a length-31 Gold code prior to modulation 
mapping, DFT-spreading, subcarrier mapping and OFDM 
modulation. For channel estimation and data demodulation, a 
Reference Signals (RSs) 1 and 2 are transmitted in each 
even-numbered and odd-numbered slots of a TTI, 
respectively. 
Figure 1(b) shows the proposed narrowband PUSCH 
structure with the RB size of 90 kHz, which has 6 subcarriers 
and 4 slots. Its channel bandwidth is decreased to the half 
and TTI is increased to twice, compared to those of the 
conventional PUSCH. A simple ‘time-first’ mapping is also 
made for efficient transmission in power-limited satellite 
uplink. Within one TTI, adjacent data symbols end up being 
mapped first to adjacent SC-FDMA symbols in the time 
domain, and then across the subcarriers. On the other hand, 
in order to reuse the conventional RSs 1 and 2 in narrowband 
PUSCH as well as get a time diversity gain, the first half of 
RSs 1 and 2 are transmitted in the first and second slots, 
respectively, and then the rest half of RSs 1 and 2 are 
mapping in the third and fourth slots, respectively.  
In a same way to Fig. 1(b), Fig. 1(c) and 1(d) also show 
the proposed narrowband PUSCH structure with the RB 
sizes of 45 and 30 kHz, respectively. As we can see, the 
number of subcarriers in the narrowband PUSCHs is limited 
to products of 2, 3 and 5 for commonality with terrestrial 
LTE because DFT size in terrestrial LTE is limited to those 
for low complexity of DFT implementation. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 2. Uplink PUSCH channel structure for narrowband 
transmission. 
 
Figure 3. Uplink PUSCH channel structure for narrowband 
transmission. 
 
Figure 4. System level simulation results 
Figure 2 illustrates a method to support the narrowband 
PUSCH transmission in conventional terrestrial LTE frame 
structure. We assume that one TTI corresponds to one frame 
duration in a satellite radio interface. Because the terrestrial 
LTE is operated with 180 kHz size of RB, narrowband 
PUSCHs should be grouped with 180 kHz bandwidth size 
within one TTI in order to be compatible with terrestrial LTE. 
For example, Formats 1 and 4 are transmitted in the above 
180 kHz bandwidth and formats 1, 2 and 3 are mapped in the 
below 180 kHz in Fig. 2. 
In the same principle, Physical Uplink Control Channel 
(PUCCH) structure will be shown in Fig. 3. PUCCH is used 
by a UE to transmit any necessary control signaling only in 
subframes, in which the UE has not been allocated any RBs 
for PUSCH transmission. The control signaling on the 
PUCCH is transmitted in a frequency region on the edges of 
the system bandwidth.  In order to minimize the resource 
needed for transmission of control signaling in one subframe 
is a single slot at or near one edge of the system bandwidth, 
followed by a second RB at or near the opposite edge of the 
system bandwidth, as shown in Fig. 3. Similarly to PUCCH 
structure, Figures 3(a) and 3(b) represent the conventional 
PUCCH formats 1 and 2 and their narrowband transmissions 
version for adaptation to satellite uplink. Fig. 3(b) shows the 
narrowband PUCCH structure with the RB size of 90 kHz, 
which has 6 subcarriers and 4 slots. Other narrowband 
PUCCH structures can be applied in a same way to Fig. 2(c) 
and 2(d) for narrowband PUSCH structures. 
III. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
For system-level simulation, we exploit the evaluation 
configuration parameters in the Table 1. Evaluation is 
performed in open environment defined in ITU-R Report 
M.2176, which identifies visions and requirements for the 
satellite component of IMT-Advanced [8]. We assumed that 
UEs are randomly distributed over whole coverage and are 
located outdoor with the mobility of 3km/h. For assessment 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

of beam spectral efficiency, beam spectral efficiency is 
defined as the aggregate throughput of all users (the number 
of correctly received bits, i.e. the number of bits contained in 
the Service Data Units (SDUs) delivered to Layer 3) divided 
by the channel bandwidth by the number of beams. Also, full 
buffer best effort service profile is considered. VoIP capacity 
is derived assuming a 12.2 kbps codec with a 50% activity 
factor such that percentage of users in outage is less than 2%, 
where a user is defined to have experienced a voice outage if 
less than 98% of the VoIP packets have been delivered 
successfully to the user within a one-way radio access delay 
bout of 400 ms, considering maximum transfer delay of one 
way for the real-time services in the satellite component. 
TABLE I.  
EVALUATION CONFIGURAITON PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
Values used for evaluation 
Deployment scenario 
Open environment, GEO satellite 
Duplex method and 
bandwidths 
FDD:  5(Up) + 5(Down) MHz, 2.1 GHz 
carrier frequency 
Frequency reuse plan 
Reuse factor 6 
Number of beams 
20 (3dB of beam edge loss) 
Transmission scheme 
SISO 
Scheduler 
Channel dependent 
Power control 
None  (allocate full power) 
Link adaptation 
Non-ideal based on delayed SRS-based 
measurements: MCS based on LTE transport 
formats and SRS period and bandwidths 
according to LTE Rel-8 
HARQ scheme 
Incremental redundancy or Chase combining 
None for VoIP traffic 
Receiver type 
MMSE 
Satellite antenna 
ITU-R Recommendation S.672,  50dBi gain 
UE antenna 
Omnidirectional, 0dBi gain 
UE transmit power 
250 mW 
Channel estimation 
Non-ideal  
Feedback and control 
channel errors 
None 
HARQ/ARQ 
interaction  
HARQ/ARQ interaction scheme for full 
buffer traffic. 
MAC/RLC header 
overhead 
Assume minimum size of specification 
Layout 
Hexagonal grid 
Inter-site distance 
180 km 
Satellite system noise 
temperature 
450 K 
G/T 
23.47 dB/K 
Target 
packet 
error 
rate 
1 % 
Path loss 
189.5 (LoS) + 2.5 (fading margin) dB 
 
Based on these assumptions, we compare performance of 
a narrowband PUSCH (format 2 in Fig. 1) with the 
conventional PUSCH (format 1 in Fig. 1). Figure 4 shows 
system level simulation results with respect to average beam 
spectral efficiency and VoIP capacity. As seen in the figure, 
the use of narrowband PUSCH format 2 can get the increase 
of total system throughput more than three times of that in 
the use of the conventional PUSCH channel. Furthermore, an 
UE using the narrowband PUSCH format 2 can support 
slightly higher data rate than an UE using the conventional 
PUSCH even if the narrowband PUSCH format 2 has the 
half of the conventional PUSCH bandwidth. 
From the performance analysis of a narrowband PUSCH 
format 2, we expect that the use of narrowband PUSCH 
format 3 and 4 could make total throughput increase more 
than that of the narrowband PUSCH format 2 as well as 
conventional PUSCH format. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The proposed narrowband transmission scheme is more 
granular than in terrestrial LTE and allows allocation of 
reduced bandwidth resources to an UE, consistent with the 
power constrained nature of the satellite channel. In the 
proposed scheme, higher power allocation on each subcarrier 
in RB can make higher modulation and channel coding rate 
be used, thus we can achieve the increase of total system 
throughput. On the other hand, modification of physical layer 
and no change of the transport block size from terrestrial 
LTE in the proposed scheme can make us design fully 
compatible satellite LTE radio interface over MAC layer.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the KCC (Korea 
Communication Commission), Korea under the R&D 
program supervised by the KCA (Korea Communications 
Agency (KCA-2012-12-911-01-201). 
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of 
KCC/KCA, [KI001794, Development of satellite radio 
interface technology for IMT-Advanced]. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Soo Yun Hwang, et al., “Design and implementation of a 
latency efficient encoder for LTE systems,” ETRI Journal, vol. 
32, no.4, Aug. 2010, pp.493-502. 
[2] Ziad A. Shamsan, et al., “Coexistence of OFDM-based IMT-
Advanced and FM brodcasting systems,” ETRI Journal, 
vol.33, no.2, Apr. 2011, pp. 279-282. 
[3] ETSI EN 302 583, “DVB; Framing structure, channel coding 
and modulation for DVB-SH below 3 GHz,” March 2008. 
[4] ETSI TR 102 443, “SES; Satellite component of UMTS/IMT-
2000; Evaluation of the OFDM as a satellite radio interface,” 
Aug. 2008. 
[5] Arif Ansari, et al., “S-WiMAX: Adaptation of IEEE 802.16e 
for 
mobile 
satellite 
services,” 
IEEE 
Communication 
Magazine, vol. 47, no.6, June 2009, pp.150-155. 
[6] Hee Wook Ki, et al., “Applicability of orthogonal frequency 
division multiple access in satellite communication,” IEEE 
VTC2011Spring Conference, May 2011, pp.1-6. 
[7] 3GPP TS 36.211, “3GPP; Technical specificaiton group radio 
access network; E-UTRA; Physical channel and modulation 
(Release 8,” May 2008. 
[8] ITU-R Report M.2176, “Visions and requirements for the 
satellite 
component 
of 
IMT-Advanced,” 
Jan. 
2011.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-194-6
SPACOMM 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

