Very High Resolution SAR Speckle and CCD 
 
Daniel Andre and Keith Morrison 
Centre for Electronic Warfare, CDS, 
The Defence Academy of the United Kingdom, 
Cranfield University, 
Shrivenham, UK 
e-mail: d.andre@cranfield.ac.uk 
David Blacknell, Darren Muff, Matthew Nottingham 
and Claire Stevenson 
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,  
Porton Down, Salisbury, UK 
 
 
Abstract—Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) Coherent Change 
Detection (CCD) has been found to be of great utility in detecting 
changes that occur on the ground. Detectable changes of interest 
include vehicle tracks, water flow, and small scale subsidence. 
The CCD procedure involves performing repeat pass radar 
collections to form a coherence product, where ground 
disturbances can induce detectable incoherence. Currently, SAR 
imagery of between 10cm and 30cm resolution is considered to be 
a high resolution, allowing the detection of subtle changes on the 
ground, however it is of interest to examine SAR image speckle 
characteristics and corresponding CCD images resulting from 
very high resolution SAR down to 1cm resolution, which in 
principle could be collected through airborne or spaceborne 
radar platforms. To perform this study, laboratory data was 
generated with a ground-based SAR system. 
Keywords — Radar; SAR; speckle; CCD; coherent change 
detection; UWB 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) Coherent Change 
Detection (CCD) has been found to be of great utility in 
detecting changes that occur on the ground. Detectable changes 
of interest include vehicle tracks, water flow, and small scale 
subsidence. The CCD procedure involves performing repeat 
pass radar collections to form a coherence product, where 
ground disturbances can induce detectable incoherence [1]-[5]. 
Currently, SAR imagery of between 10cm and 30cm 
resolution is considered to be a high resolution, allowing the 
detection of subtle changes on the ground, however it is of 
interest to examine CCD images resulting from very high 
resolution SAR down to 1cm resolution, which in principle 
could be collected through airborne or spaceborne radar 
platforms [6]. To perform this study, laboratory data was 
generated with the Cranfield University Ground-Based SAR 
system (GB-SAR) [7][8]. 
The laboratory SAR system is first described, and the 
requirements for SAR imagery of different resolution are 
presented. Pyramidal antenna horns, nominally calibrated for 
X-band 8-12GHz were employed in this study, and first results 
within this band are presented. However for the 15GHz 
bandwidth collection, calibration proved difficult, so a filtering 
process was employed instead, resulting in the very high 
resolution SAR and CCD images presented. 
II. 
GB-SAR MEASUREMENTS 
The GB-SAR system is a portable stepped frequency CW 
imaging radar which has been employed both indoors and 
outdoors [7][8]. For the experiments reported here, the system 
was deployed indoors at a laboratory within Cranfield 
University, UK, as seen in Fig.1. The antenna horn was 
mounted on a SAR rail 1.60m above the floor and 
incrementally stepped across different imaging apertures, up to 
3.50m wide, with a predefined step size interval. A band 
between 5GHz and 20GHz was employed, thus providing up to 
15GHz bandwidth. The slant range to scene center was 
approximately 3.75m, so that the 2.4m x 3.6m rectangular 
gravel scene was effectively imaged in the SAR near-field. 
Monostatic SAR measurements were conducted by attaching 
the receiver horn to the moving rail, however bistatic and 
multistatic SAR and CCD measurements can also be conducted 
with the system [4]. A calibration was conducted for the X-
band pyramidal horns between 8GHz and 12GHz, providing 
initial results of resolution down to 4cm. Metal spheres of 
diameter 3cm and 5cm were arranged to either side of the 
gravel scene to allow for image alignment and resolution 
estimation. The changes made to the gravel to evaluate the 
level of CCD were implemented by gently moving a stick over 
the gravel. The gravel stones were nominally 1cm in diameter. 
 
Figure 1. The GB-SAR system set up indoors with a gravel scene to be 
imaged. The X-band antenna horns are mounted on a SAR rail, which is 
mounted on the Green “Niftylift120” trailer. Metal spheres, with both 3cm 
and 5cm diameter are setup on either side (left and right) to aid in image 
alignment and resolution estimation. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Throughout, image formation was performed with the SAR 
back-projection algorithm, which is suitable for the SAR near-
field scenario [1]. 
III. 
RESOLUTION 
Because the scene center is only 3.75m from the SAR rail, 
and the aperture length can be as much as 3.5m wide, the scene 
is in the SAR near-field. This has the effect that different points 
within the scene can have different radar azimuth angle 
apertures as well as radar grazing / elevation angles, which in 
its turn implies that the SAR image resolution is spatially 
variant. Additionally, the point spread function will be irregular 
and will also vary in form from place to place. The resolution 
quoted in the following however, is always that estimated at 
the scene centre. It is noted that in principle the back-projection 
imaging algorithm can be modified to compensate for the 
spatial variation in resolution [4][5], however this was not 
implemented for this study. It would be difficult to compensate 
for the variation in the form of the point spread function 
however. 
The ground range resolution is given by [1] 
2 cos( )
e
B
c
rr 
  
 
(1) 
Where c is the speed of light, B is the frequency bandwidth 
employed, and e is the radar grazing angle, evaluated as 27.3°. 
The cross range resolution is given by [1] 
 
e
f
c
r
c
cr
2sin( /2)cos
2


 
 
(2) 
Where fc is the centre frequency transmitted, and θ is the 
azimuth angle aperture, given by 







R
L
atan 2
2
ap

 
 
         (3) 
Where Lap is the azimuth SAR aperture length and R is the 
closest range to scene center. 
With a minimum frequency of 5GHz and maximum 
aperture length of 3.5m, for a given bandwidth B, the centre 
frequency is given by 


2
5
5



B
fc
 
 
        (4) 
Hence one may plot SAR resolution as a function of 
frequency bandwidth, as shown in Fig.2, where the solid curve 
is the range resolution and the dashed curve is the cross-range 
resolution. In the figure it can be seen that as the bandwidth 
increases, the range and cross-range resolution curves improve, 
coming closer together and eventually crossing in the 
bandwidth region between 12GHz and 15GHz where a 
resolution just over 1cm is achieved. 
 
Figure 2. Graph showing range and cross-range SAR resolution as a function 
of frequency bandwidth, with minimum frequency set at 5GHz. Range 
resolution is given by the solid black curve and cross-range resolution, for the 
3.5m aperture length is given by the dashed curve. The finest resolution 
achievable is just over 1cm. 
IV. 
HIGH RESOLUTION SAR SPECKLE AND CCD 
Initial high resolution SAR images were formed within the 
calibration range of the pyramidal horns. The X-band 
calibration frequency range was from 8GHz to 12GHz, 
allowing a maximal bandwidth of 4GHz. 
Generally, SAR resolutions within the range of 30cm to 
10cm are already considered to be of high resolution [1]. 
However a bandwidth of 4GHz allows resolutions down to 
4.2cm. For comparison with later very high resolution images, 
in this section SAR image and speckle characteristics results 
are presented for 10cm resolution in Fig.3 and 4.2cm resolution 
in Fig.4. In both cases, SAR aperture length is set so that the 
cross-range resolution matches the range resolution. 
Verifying that the SAR images satisfy theoretical 
predictions for speckle would indicate that the SAR system and 
near-field geometry employed allow a well-controlled CCD 
experiment to be undertaken. The theoretical intensity 
probability distribution for speckle is given by 
 





 

I
I
I
P I
1 exp
 
 
(5) 
where I is the intensity and <I> is the mean intensity [1]. 
In order to measure the SAR intensity distribution at a 
given nominal resolution, a central portion of the various SAR 
images was extracted. This is necessary because SAR 
resolution is spatially variant in the SAR near-field geometry. 
Then for easier cross comparison of results across the SAR 
image extracts, pixel intensity was normalized by division by 
the mean intensity. The resulting intensity histograms were 
also 
normalized 
for 
easier cross 
comparison 
– the 
normalization was by total pixel number, and the bin widths 
were normalized due to varying maximum pixel intensity. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

For 10cm SAR resolution, the full SAR images, the SAR 
image extracts and the corresponding normalized intensity 
histogram plots are shown in Fig.3(a), (b) and (c) respectively. 
The theoretical speckle distribution is shown as the red curve 
overlaid on the histogram plot. The corresponding plots for 
4.2cm SAR resolution are shown in Fig.4(a), (b) and (c) 
respectively.  
 
 
(a) SAR image, 10cm resolution 
 
(b) SAR image extract 
 
(c) 10cm SAR resolution intensity histogram 
Figure 3. SAR image (a), approximately 10cm resolution, of gravel scene 
with metal spheres arranged on left and right. The frequency bandwidth is 
1.7GHz (10GHz centre frequency); (b) extract from center of SAR image 
for speckle analysis, (c) normalised intensity histogram overlaid by the 
theoretical speckle intensity probability distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) SAR image, 4.2cm resolution 
 
(b) SAR image extract 
 
(c) 4.2cm SAR resolution intensity histogram 
Figure 4. SAR image (a), approximately 4.2cm resolution, of gravel scene 
scene with metal spheres arranged on left and right. The frequency bandwidth 
is 4GHz (8-12GHz); (b) extract from center of SAR image for speckle 
analysis, (c) normalized intensity histogram overlaid by the theoretical speckle 
intensity probability distribution. 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

For both resolutions, it can be seen that the histogram bar 
charts follow the theoretical curves very closely, indicating that 
the SAR images have well developed speckle characteristics, 
which will allow for a controlled CCD experiment. 
Light disturbances were made to the gravel scene by gently 
scraping a stick over the gravel, allowing the formation of 
CCD products. The 10cm and 4.2cm SAR image resolution 
CCD products are shown in Fig.5(a) and (b) respectively. 
The disturbances were neither evident directly to the eye, 
nor evident in the corresponding individual SAR images, but 
they are evident in the CCD images of Fig.5. However, the 
exact nature of the disturbances is difficult to determine at 
these resolutions (they should spell out some words).  
 
 
(a) 10cm resolution SAR image CCD 
 
(b) 4.2cm resolution SAR image CCD 
Figure 5. CCD images showing some disturbance to the gravel. One of the 
10cm resolution SAR images used to form CCD a) can be seen in Fig.3(a). 
One of the 4.2cm resolution SAR images used to form CCD b) can be seen in 
Fig.4(a). 
V. 
VERY HIGH RESOLUTION SAR AND CCD 
 
In section IV, SAR and CCD images formed within the 
calibrated range of the antenna horns were presented. There, a 
bandwidth of 4GHz was employed, achieving a resolution 
down to 4.2cm. The system however, is capable of larger 
bandwidths up to 15GHz, potentially achieving very high range 
resolution down to 1cm, as can be predicted in Fig.2. 
Additionally the full aperture length of 3.5m can be employed, 
which will also potentially achieve very high cross-range 
resolution down to 1cm at these frequencies, as predicted in 
Fig.2. 
For the purposes of the evaluation of SAR and CCD quality 
at very high resolutions and given the stable behavior of 
pyramidal horns over wide bandwidths, it was determined that 
it would likely be sufficient to employ signal processing filters, 
instead of a full calibration, which proved difficult over the full 
15GHz bandwidth range. 
The raw pulse amplitudes in the frequency domain are 
presented in Fig.6(a). It can be seen that there is a very large 
variation in amplitude in the recorded signal, which cannot be 
due to the scene. Hence for the purposes of SAR image 
formation, two successive filters were employed, resulting in a 
cleaner and more uniform amplitude signal in the frequency 
domain, where some underlying scene structure is made 
visible, as seen in Fig.6(b). 
 
 
(a) Frequency domain, raw scan data 
 
(b) Frequency domain, filtered scan data 
Figure 6. raw frequency domain scan data (a) (frequency VS scan position on 
rail), showing large variation in recorded intensity; (b) filtered frequency 
domain scan data. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

The two successive filters are as follows: 
1. The first is the subtraction of system noise: The 
average complex pulse signal is determined over all of 
the pulses and is then subtracted from the raw dataset; 
2. The second filter to be employed is a normalization 
filter: The mean absolute pulse is determined and 
divided through all of the pulses, thus normalizing the 
overall amplitude, whilst leaving the underlying 
structure in the data 
After having filtered the raw data (from the state in Fig.6(a) 
to that in Fig.6(b), image formation is performed, providing 
SAR images such as that seen in Fig.7(a). A close inspection of 
features within the image confirms that a resolution of 
approximately 1cm has been obtained: Examination of the 
metal sphere signatures supports this, as well as examination of 
the speckle structure over the gravel scene in the SAR image 
extract in Fig.7(b), which should be of the same size as the 
image resolution [1]. 
The normalized intensity histogram for the SAR image 
extract, shown in Fig.7(c), shows very close agreement with 
the theoretical intensity distribution for speckle shown as the 
overlaid red curve. 
The corresponding CCD image shown in Fig.8 can be seen 
to be of high quality, and now at the very high SAR resolution 
the nature of the disturbance is clearly evident, and can be seen 
to spell out “Cranfield University CDS”. 
The additional disturbance evident on the bottom left of the 
CCD image is mostly outside of the gravel area, and was found 
to be due to a change in the articulation of a window at the far 
end of the laboratory. The window was open during the 
reference image collection, producing some sidelobes in that 
region, but it had been closed during the second SAR scan, so 
that the sidelobes were absent. The result thus became apparent 
in the CCD product. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This work has examined very high resolution SAR images 
down to 1cm resolution, and corresponding CCD images, 
collected in a laboratory environment by a ground-based SAR 
system. The SAR image intensity distributions closely matched 
theoretical intensity probability distributions for speckle. 
The resulting CCD images showed subtle change detections 
to a scale that was not possible with conventional high 
resolution SAR images of resolution down to 10cm. 
In principle, these techniques can be applied to remote 
sensing at these very fine resolutions if desired. 
 
 
(a) SAR, 1cm resolution 
 
(b) CCD image 
 
(c) 1cm resolution intensity histogram 
Figure 7. SAR image, approximately 1cm resolution, of gravel scene with 
metal spheres arranged on left and right (a). The frequency bandwidth is 
15GHz (5-20GHz), and the SAR rail aperture is 3.5m; (b) extract from center 
of SAR image for speckle analysis, (c) normalised intensity histogram 
overlaid by the theoretical speckle intensity probability distribution. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 8. CCD image showing the disturbance to the gravel, spelling out 
“Cranfield University CDS”. One of the 1cm resolution SAR images used to 
form this CCD can be seen in Fig.7(a). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by the Defence Science and 
Technology Laboratory, UK. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. V. Jakowatz Jr., D. E. Wahl, P. H. Eichel, D. C. Ghiglia, P. A. 
Thompson, “Spotlight-Mode Synthetic Aperture Radar: A Signal 
Processing Approach”, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999. 
[2] M. Preiss and N. J. S. Stacy, “Coherent Change Detection: Theoretical 
Description and Experimental Results”, Technical Report, Defence 
Science and Technology Office, Australia, DSTO-TR-1851, August 
2006.  
[3] D. Blacknell, D. B. Andre and C. M. Finch, “SAR coherent change 
detection (CCD) over mountainous regions”, International conference on 
synthetic aperture sonar and synthetic aperture radar (SAS/SAR), 13th-
14th September 2010. 
[4] D. B. André, D. Blacknell and K. Morrison, “Spatially variant 
incoherence trimming for improved SAR CCD”, SPIE DSS 2013, April 
2013. 
[5] D. B. André, D. Blacknell. and K. Morrison, “Spatially variant 
incoherence trimming for improved bistatic SAR CCD”, IEEE Radar 
Conference 2013, 1st -5th April 2013. 
[6] D. G. Muff, D. Blacknell and M. R. Nottingham, “Pharos – a SAR 
concept to accelerate advanced exploitation”, IET International 
Conference on Radar Systems, October 2012. 
[7] K. Morrison, J. C. Bennett, G. Cookmartin, A. J. McDonald, A. Race 
and S. Quegan “Three-dimensional X-band SAR imaging of a small 
conifer tree”, Int. J. Remote Sens., 22, p705 (2001). 
[8] S. C. M. Brown, S. Quegan, K. Morrison, J. C. Bennett and G. 
Cookmartin, “High resolution measurements of scattering in wheat 
canopies – implications for crop retrieval.” IEEE Transactions of 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 41, p1602-1610 (2003). 
 
 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

