Terrestrial to Satellite Communications Using
Multi-antenna Relays Nodes
Styliani Fassoi∗, Dimitrios Christopoulos†, Symeon Chatzinotas†,
Emmanouel T. Michailidis∗, Athanasios G. Kanatas∗ and Bjorn Ottersten†
∗ Department of Digital Systems, Telecommunication Systems Laboratory,University of Piraeus, Piraeus, Greece
Email: {sfassoi, emichail, kanatas}@unipi.gr
† Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT), University of Luxemburg, Luxemburg
Email: {dimitrios.christopoulos, Symeon.Chatzinotas, bjorn.ottersten}@uni.lu
Abstract—Satellite communications and relaying techniques have
been receiving the attention of the research community over the
last years. This paper proposes a terrestrial to satellite commu-
nication system aided by terrestrial relay nodes to facilitate a
robust, reliable, and efﬁcient communication link and improve
the spectral efﬁciency. In particular, this paper concentrates
on evaluating the spectral efﬁciency and bit error rate (BER)
performance of terrestrial to satellite multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) amplify and forward (AF) relay links. Zero
Forcing (ZF) and Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE) multi-
antenna decoding techniques are employed, which have been
well established in terrestrial wireless communications. Numerical
results are provided to quantify the performance gain of the
proposed communication system.
Keywords–Amplify and forward (AF) relaying; Loo distribution;
minimum mean square error (MMSE; multiple-input multiple
output (MIMO) techniques; satellite communications; Zero Forcing
(ZF).
I.
INTRODUCTION
The satellite communications play a crucial role in wire-
less and mobile communications [1] [2]. There are many
practical cases where the terrestrial communications are not
able to provide a link between the communicated parties
due to troublesome propagation conditions or extremely high
link distance. Satellite communications are able to overcome
these constraints and provide a reliable wireless link to the
communicated parties. In order to improve system capacity
and link reliability, Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO)
technology is the dominant candidate for both terrestrial [3]–
[8] and satellite [9]–[11] use. However, multiple antenna
systems are not directly applicable to the satellites due to
some special features of such communication systems. The
key concept of MIMO technology is to take the advantage
of multipath components of the propagation channel which
produce multiple uncorrelated channels at the destination. So,
in order to achieve uncorrelated channels there is a constraint
regarding the inter-element distance at both the transmitter
and receiver antennas. The propagation channel between the
satellite and the earth station is characterized by its high
propagation loss and the small number of existing scatterers.
Therefore, so as to achieve uncorrelated channels, the desired
inter-element distance is increased. Satellites refrain thousands
of kilometers from the earth and there is no power supply
apart from the solar power and the stored batteries energy
and therefore, the multiple Radio-Frequency (RF) chains could
reduce the life of a satellite.
Since there is not enough space to place many antenna
elements in the satellites, additional techniques were investi-
gated to maximize the capacity and reliability gain. Initially,
polarization techniques were proposed in order to maximize
the available MIMO channels using co-located antennas. How-
ever, the terrestrial to satellite communications may beneﬁt
from some new emerging technologies. Wireless relay systems
[12] [13] are widely adopted in the new wireless standards
of 4G and beyond. The role of a relay varies from scenario
to scenario, depending on the needs and the speciﬁcations
of the communication. The use of relay nodes may assist
to the coverage extension, link reliability and/or capacity
improvement. The most usual and well-deﬁned types of relay
modes are the Amplify and Forward (AF) and the Decode
and Forward (DF) modes. In the ﬁrst case the relay is a
conventional repeater which just ampliﬁes the received signal
and forwards it to the destination. In the second mode, the relay
has an active role being able to decode the received signal,
perform baseband signal processing and retransmit the signal
to the ﬁnal destination. Despite the fact that relay systems
are able to offer more degrees of freedom, their adoption in
satellite communications is not duly considered.
In this paper, we present a novel system model for ter-
restrial to satellite communications with the combination of
terrestrial relay systems and MIMO technology [14]–[17]. The
performance evaluation and the beneﬁts of such a system are
analytically described. The main purpose of this paper is to
determine the advantages of the aforementioned technologies
in as more realistic scenarios as possible. For that reason, we
modeled the terrestrial to satellite wireless channel using the
Loo distribution [18] which describes in the most effective way
the space conditions. In addition, we used the widely adopted
Rician or Rayleigh distribution in order to model the terrestrial
channel and some practical detection schemes to the receiver.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we
present the system model, while in Section III, we analyze all
the detected schemes applied in the model. The main results
of the paper are presented in Section IV, where the advantages
of such a system are analytically discussed. Finally, in Section
V, we conclude the paper.
II.
SYSTEM MODEL
We consider an AF, single user MIMO system with multi-
ple full-duplex relays. A system model is given in Figure 1.
The system comprises R intermediate relay nodes which
lie between source and destination nodes that have Nt and Nr
antennas respectively. Each relay node has Mr transmit/receive
antennas (assuming that Mr = Mt). The source node transmits
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 1. System Model
to the relay nodes and the relay nodes amplify and forward
their received signals to the destination. In the described model,
we focus in the uplink communication where the connection
between source and relay nodes illustrate the terrestrial link,
while the communication link between relay nodes and des-
tination represents the satellite link. The destination node is
represented by a satellite. The (MrR) × 1 received signal at
the relays is given by
yRi = HS,Rix + nRi.
(1)
The matrix HS,Ri is the (MrR) × Nt source-relays channel
matrix which is presented analytically in Section IV-A. The
quantity nRi is a vector of zero mean additive white Gaussian
noise with the same dimensions as the corresponding received
signal. x is the Nt × 1 input data vector.
The Nr × 1 received signal at the destination from the
relays is given by
yD = aHRi,DyRi + nD,
(2)
where a is the ampliﬁcation factor with constant values, the
matrix HRi,D is the Nr × (MrR) channel matrix which is
analytically described in Section IV-B, yS,Ri is the received
signal at the relays and nD is a vector of zero mean additive
white Gaussian noise with the same dimensions as the
corresponding received signal.
Using (1) in (2):
yD = aHRi,DyRi + nD
= aHRi,D (HS,Rix + nRi) + nD
= aHRi,DHS,Rix + HRi,DanRi + nD.
(3)
So, the received signal at the destination will be:
yD = Hx + n
(4)
where H = aHRi,DHS,Ri and n = aHRi,DanRi + nD.
The overall end-to-end received signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR)
at each destination receiver antenna element γ is given by [19]–
[22]
γ =
γ1γ2
γ1 + γ2 + 1
(5)
,
where γj = |Hj|2.
N0 , j = 1, 2 represents the per-hop
received SNR.
III.
SIGNAL DETECTION SCHEMES
In the following, we are going to use linear detection
schemes. To detect the signals from each antenna element,
the estimated symbols derive by applying a weight matrix W
to the channel matrix in order to invert its effect [23] :
˜x = [˜x1 ˜x2 . . . ˜xNt]T = WyD.
(6)
The standard linear detection methods include the well-deﬁned
techniques of the Zero-Forcing (ZF) and the Minimum Mean
Square Error (MMSE) techniques. The weight matrix of the
zero-forcing technique for Nr ≥ Nt is given by:
WZF =

Likewise for the SIC-MMSE technique will be:
˜xSIC−MMSE = WMMSE˜yi,
(12)
where ˜yi = yD − hi˜xMMSE for the ith stream estimation.
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
This Section is based on the system model which is
described in Section II. More speciﬁcally, we focus in the next
two scenarios. In the ﬁrst scenario, as illustrated in Figure 2,
we use a single relay MIMO system with two transmit, receive
and relay antennas.
Figure 2. First Scenario
The second scenario, presented in Figure 3, demonstrates
the case with two synchronized relay nodes equipped with a
single antenna each one, in contrast to the ﬁrst one that there
is only one relay with two antenna elements.
Figure 3. Second Scenario
We will demonstrate the performance of the proposed
MIMO architecture in terms of bit error rate (BER) and
systems capacity. In order to retrieve more realistic results, a lot
of attention was paid on the appropriate wireless propagation
channel model selection due to the particular properties of
satellite communications.
A. Terrestrial Wireless Channel
The adopted scenarios, previously described, consist of
terrestrial and satellite transceivers which consequently lead
to two different propagation channel environments. The terres-
trial wireless channel is mostly characterized by the existing
scatterers which produce multiple signal components. This
environment within a simulation study could be emulated using
the Rician distribution as [26]:
HS,Ri =
r
K
K + 1
¯HS,Ri +
r
1
K + 1
˜HS,Ri,
(13)
where K is the Rician factor, ¯H is a deterministic unit
rank matrix which represent the direct component and ˜H
is the channel matrix of the multipath components. Most of
work done so far in MIMO performance evaluation is based
on the assumption that the involved parties communicate in
a rich scattering environment. This means that there is no
Line-of-sight (LOS) component and so the gain of MIMO is
maximized due to the uncorrelated channel in the input of
the multiple antenna elements. This ideal environment for the
MIMO performance is totally described using the Rayleigh
distribution, resulting from the Rician distribution by applying
a zero K factor due to the no existence of a LOS component.
B. Satellite Wireless Channel
For the link between the land mobile and the satellite we
have to use a statistical model being able to take into account
all the propagation channels characteristics. A well-deﬁned
model developed for that case is the Loo distribution [18]. The
channel matrix H of the satellite link using the Loo distribution
for the envelope hij is then given by [18]
HRi,D = [hij] = [¯hij] + [˜hij] = ¯HRi,D + ˜HRi,D,
(14)
where
hij = |hij| exp (jϕi,j)
=
¯hij
 exp (j ¯ϕi,j) +
˜hij
 exp (j ˜ϕi,j) ,
(15)
and φij, eφij are uniformly distributed over [0, 2π].
The ﬁrst factor represents the Lognormal fading while the
second one describes the Rayleigh fading. Therefore, the Loo
distribution as extracted from the previous equation is the
superposition of the lognormal distribution to model the large-
scale fading and Rayleigh distribution for the modeling of
small-scale fading. So, the Loo probability density function
is given by
p (|hij|) =
|hij|
b0
√
2πσ2 ×
∞
Z
0
1
¯hij
exp
"
−

Figure 4. Comparison of terrestrial channel with Rician and Rayleigh
distribution (γ2 = 2γ1)
C. BER Results
The main scope within this work is to deﬁne the perfor-
mance of land to satellite communication using relay nodes.
As previously analyzed, in order to model the terrestrial link
between the transmitter and the relay station, Rician distribu-
tion is applied with different K factors in order to achieve a
realistic simulation environment. The only difference between
the two scenarios described in Section II is the number of
antenna elements in the relay stations. In our ﬁrst scenario as
illustrated in Figure 2, transmitter, receiver and one relay sta-
tion are equipped with two antennas each one and Rician factor
K = 10dB, while in the second scenario depicted in Figure 3,
two relays are used with one antenna each one and Rician
factor 8dB and 10dB, respectively. In any case, the signal
reaches the destination through the relay/relays station/stations.
In Figure 5, we present the end-to-end BER performance for
quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK) modulation which is
crucial for all the wireless systems and especially the satellite
communications which are sensitive to data loss due to the
limited resources.
As expected the best signal detection is achieved with the
SIC-MMSE while the worst with the ZF for both scenarios.
In addition, when the case with more single-antenna relays
outperforms the case where a single relay is adopted with
more antenna elements. Whereas, one would expect the same
bit error rate results for both scenarios, there is a difference
around 1-1.5 dB, due to different Rician factor in the channel
distribution when more than one relay are used.
D. Capacity Results
The ergodic capacity (bits/sec/Hz) of the AF MIMO dual-
hop system described above can be written [28]:
C (γ) = E{log2 det(INt + γHHHR−1
n )},
(17)
where Rn matrix is also given by :
Figure 5. End-to-end BER performance(γ2 = 2γ1)
Rn = INr + aHRi,DHH
Ri,D,
(18)
where a is the constant value of ampliﬁcation factor. In our
system model, we consider an M-ary Phase Shift Keying (M-
PSK) , AF, multirelay MIMO system with full-duplex relays.
Whereas, in a more realistic scenario, the capacity of a channel
in a MIMO system using Linear Detector (LD) can be written
as:
CLD =
k
X
i=1
log2 (1 + SINRk) ,
(19)
where SINRk for each receiver is different. The SINR for
the MMSE receiver in MIMO wireless communications on
the k − th spatial stream can be expressed as [29]–[34]:
SINRMMSE
k
=
1

INt + SNRHH(Rn)−1H
−1
kk
− 1,
(20)
where I is a Nt ×Nt identity matrix and HH is the Hermitian
transpose of H. The SINR for the ZF receiver, denoted by
SINRZF
k
, which conditional on H , can be expressed as
[32] [35]:
SINRZF
k
=
SNR

HH(Rn)−1H
−1
kk
.
(21)
So, Figure 6, illustrates the system capacity the case of MMSE
and ZF receiver for the two different scenarios, as well as the
ideal MIMO capacity.
Similarly to Figure 5, we observe that the best signal
detection scheme is the MMSE scheme, while ZF is the
one with the poorest performance. Moreover, the achievable
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 6. System capacity (γ2 = 2γ1)
capacity in all detection schemes of the second scenario is
slightly better than in the cases of ﬁrst scenario.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated the beneﬁts of MIMO
terrestrial to satellite communication using relay nodes. Mul-
tiple simulations have been performed in order to evaluate
the system in different scenarios by adopting and applying
well-known techniques already applied in terrestrial commu-
nications. The results show the gain in the bit error rate
performance as well as the gain in the achievable capacity by
applying different detection schemes in different environment
conditions. So, such a communication seems quite promising
for the future wireless networks in order to establish a reliable
communication even in difﬁcult terrains and/or high distances.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been co-ﬁnanced by the European Union
(European Social Fund - ESF) and Greek national funds
through the Operational Program Education and Lifelong
Learning of the National Strategic Reference Framework
(NSRF) - Research Funding Program THALES MIMOSA
(MIS: 380041). Investing in knowledge society through the
European Social Fund. This work was also supported by
the National Research Fund, Luxembourg under the project
”CO2SAT: Cooperative & Cognitive Architectures for Satellite
Networks”.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Arapoglou, K. Liolis, M. Bertinelli, A. Panagopoulos, P. Cottis, and
R. De Gaudenzi, “Mimo over satellite: A review,” Communications
Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 13, no. 1, 2011, pp. 27–51.
[2]
D. Bem, T. Wieckowski, and R. Zielinski, “Broadband satellite sys-
tems,” Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 3, no. 1, 2000,
pp. 2–15.
[3]
A. Paulraj, D. Gore, R. Nabar, and H. Bolcskei, “An overview of mimo
communications - a key to gigabit wireless,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 92, no. 2, 2004, pp. 198–218.
[4]
A. Paulraj, R. Nabar, and D. Gore, Introduction to Space-Time Wireless
Communications, 1st ed.
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street,
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[5]
E. Biglieri, R. Calderbank, A. Constantinides, A. Goldsmith, A. Paulraj,
and H. V. Poor, MIMO Wireless Communications, 1st ed.
The Pitt
Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press, 2007.
[6]
D. Gesbert, M. Shaﬁ, D. shan Shiu, P. Smith, and A. Naguib, “From
theory to practice: an overview of mimo space-time coded wireless
systems,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 21,
no. 3, 2003, pp. 281–302.
[7]
D. Gesbert, M. Kountouris, R. Heath, C.-B. Chae, and T. Salzer,
“Shifting the mimo paradigm,” Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE,
vol. 24, no. 5, 2007, pp. 36–46.
[8]
J. Mietzner, R. Schober, L. Lampe, W. Gerstacker, and P. Hoeher,
“Multiple-antenna techniques for wireless communications - a compre-
hensive literature survey,” Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE,
vol. 11, no. 2, 2009, pp. 87–105.
[9]
ESA Contract No. 18070/04/NL/US, “Novel intra-system interference
mitigation techniques and technologies for next generations broadband
satellite systems,” 2005.
[10]
ESA Contract No. AO/1-5146/06/NL/JD, “Mimo applicability to satel-
lite networks,” 2007.
[11]
ESA Contract No. 21591/08/NL/AT, “Mimo technology in satellite
communications for interference exploitation and capacity enhance-
ment,” 2008.
[12]
X. Tao, X. Xu, and Q. Cui, “An overview of cooperative communi-
cations,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 50, no. 6, 2012, pp.
65–71.
[13]
C.-X. Wang, X. Hong, X. Ge, X. Cheng, G. Zhang, and J. Thomp-
son, “Cooperative mimo channel models: A survey,” Communications
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 48, no. 2, 2010, pp. 80–87.
[14]
A. Vanelli-Coralli et al., “Satellite communications: Research trends and
open issues,” in Satellite and Space Communications, 2007. IWSSC ’07.
International Workshop on, 2007, pp. 71–75.
[15]
B. Paillassa, B. Escrig, M.-L. Dhaou, R.and Boucheret, and C. Bes,
“Improving satellite services with cooperative communications,” Inter-
national Journal of Satellite Communications and Networking, vol. 29,
no. 6, 2011, pp. 479–500.
[16]
Y. Labrador, M. Karimi, D. Pan, and J. Miller, “An approach to
cooperative satellite communications in 4g mobile systems,” Journal
Communications, vol. 4, no. 10, 2009, pp. 815–826.
[17]
Y. Dhungana, N. Rajatheva, and C. Tellambura, “Performance analysis
of antenna correlation on lms-based dual-hop af mimo systems,” Ve-
hicular Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 61, no. 8, 2012, pp.
3590–3602.
[18]
C. Loo, “A statistical model for a land mobile satellite link,” Vehicular
Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 34, no. 3, 1985, pp. 122–127.
[19]
D. Zogas, G. Karagiannidis, N. Sagias, T. Tsiftsis, P. Mathiopoulos,
and S. Kotsopoulos, “Dual hop wireless communications over nakagami
fading,” in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2004. VTC 2004-Spring.
2004 IEEE 59th, vol. 4, 2004, pp. 2200–2204 Vol.4.
[20]
S. Soliman and N. Beaulieu, “Exact analysis of dual-hop af maximum
end-to-end snr relay selection,” Communications, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 60, no. 8, 2012, pp. 2135–2145.
[21]
H. Suraweera, G. Karagiannidis, Y. Li, H. Garg, A. Nallanathan,
and B. Vucetic, “Amplify-and-forward relay transmission with end-to-
end antenna selection,” in Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), 2010 IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–6.
[22]
T. Tsiftsis, G. Karagiannidis, and S. Kotsopoulos, “Dual-hop wireless
communications with combined gain relays,” Communications, IEE
Proceedings-, vol. 152, no. 5, 2005, pp. 528–532.
[23]
Y. S. Cho, J. Kim, W. Y. Yang, and C. G. Kang, MIMO-OFDM Wireless
Communications with Matlab.
Wiley, 2010.
[24]
G. Golden, C. J. Foschini, R. Valenzuela, and P. Wolniansky, “Detection
algorithm and initial laboratory results using v-blast space-time com-
munication architecture,” Electronics Letters, vol. 35, no. 1, 1999, pp.
14–16.
[25]
P. Wolniansky, G. Foschini, G. Golden, and R. Valenzuela, “V-blast: an
architecture for realizing very high data rates over the rich-scattering
wireless channel,” in Signals, Systems, and Electronics, 1998. ISSSE
98. 1998 URSI International Symposium on, 1998, pp. 295–300.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

[26]
D. Christopoulos, S. Chatzinotas, M. Matthaiou, and B. Ottersten,
“Capacity analysis of multibeam joint decoding over composite satellite
channels,” in Signals, Systems and Computers (ASILOMAR), 2011
Conference Record of the Forty Fifth Asilomar Conference on, 2011,
pp. 1795–1799.
[27]
R. Xu and F. Lau, “Performance analysis for mimo systems using zero
forcing detector over rice fading channel,” in Circuits and Systems,
2005. ISCAS 2005. IEEE International Symposium on, 2005, pp. 4955–
4958 Vol. 5.
[28]
S. Jin, M. McKay, C. Zhong, and K.-K. Wong, “Ergodic capacity anal-
ysis of amplify-and-forward mimo dual-hop systems,” in Information
Theory, 2008. ISIT 2008. IEEE International Symposium on, 2008, pp.
1903–1907.
[29]
A. Moustakas, “Sinr distribution of mimo mmse receiver,” in Informa-
tion Theory Proceedings (ISIT), 2011 IEEE International Symposium
on, 2011, pp. 938–942.
[30]
N. Kim, Y. Lee, and H. Park, “Performance analysis of mimo system
with linear mmse receiver,” Wireless Communications, IEEE Transac-
tions on, vol. 7, no. 11, 2008, pp. 4474–4478.
[31]
P. Li, D. Paul, R. Narasimhan, and J. Ciofﬁ, “On the distribution of sinr
for the mmse mimo receiver and performance analysis,” Information
Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52, no. 1, 2006, pp. 271–286.
[32]
J. Ma, Y. Zhang, X. Su, and Y. Yao, “On capacity of wireless ad hoc
networks with mimo mmse receivers,” Wireless Communications, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 7, no. 12, 2008, pp. 5493–5503.
[33]
H. Poor and S. Verdu, “Probability of error in mmse multiuser detec-
tion,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 43, no. 3, 1997,
pp. 858–871.
[34]
W. Zhang and K. Ben Letaief, “Opportunistic relaying for dual-hop
wireless mimo channels,” in Global Telecommunications Conference,
2008. IEEE GLOBECOM 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–5.
[35]
R. Xu and F. Lau, “Performance analysis for mimo systems using
zero forcing detector over fading channels,” Communications, IEE
Proceedings, vol. 153, no. 1, 2006, pp. 74–80.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

