Study on CFDP and DTN Architectures for ESA 
Space Missions 
Felix Flentge 
Ground Systems Engineering Department 
ESA / ESOC 
Darmstadt, Germany 
felix.flentge@esa.int 
 
 
Abstract—Upcoming file-based operations concepts and more 
complex communication topologies for space missions require 
modifications and extensions to the ‘traditional’ space and 
ground communication architectures. This paper reports on a 
study initiated by the European Space Agency (ESA) to 
analyse the suitability of the CCSDS File Delivery Protocol 
(CFDP) and Delay Tolerant Networking (DTN) architectures 
for future ESA missions. Starting from an analysis of potential 
future missions, generic mission scenarios involving complex 
communication 
topologies 
have 
been 
studied 
and 
corresponding 
communication 
requirements 
have 
been 
defined. Based on these generic mission scenarios and the 
communication requirements two reference architectures have 
been designed: one using CFDP on top of already deployed 
protocols and one combined CFDP/DTN architecture. A 
simulation environment to evaluate the reference architectures 
has been created and various communication scenarios have 
been evaluated. The paper introduces both reference 
architectures and presents some results of the simulation 
activities. These results and further analysis of the reference 
architectures lead to the conclusion that both architectures are 
quite similar in terms of performance and can satisfy most 
requirements. However, in the short to medium-term time 
frame CFDP without DTN seems to provide the easier way to 
adoption since it is conceptually simpler and more mature 
while the additional features of DTN may only be required in 
the long-term. 
Keywords - Bundle Protocol (BP); CCSDS File Delivery 
Protocol (CFDP); Delay Tolerant Networking (DTN); Licklider 
Transmission Protocol (LTP) 
I. 
 INTRODUTION 
The trends towards more file-based operation concepts 
for space missions and increased complexity of space and 
ground communication topologies (e.g., data relays in space) 
has lead ESOC (the European Space Operations Centre) to 
initiate a study analysing how CFDP and DTN could be 
utilised in future ESA missions. Currently, support for file 
transfers and data relaying is mainly implemented by 
‘private’ means for each mission. In conjunction with 
ongoing work on file-based operations at ESOC [1], generic 
communication requirements to support file-based operations 
and complex communication topologies have been defined. 
The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems 
(CCSDS) has standardised a CCSDS File Delivery Protocol 
(CFDP) [2] and is in the process of standardising protocols 
for Delay Tolerant Networking (DTN) in space [3]. CFDP is 
a file delivery protocol allowing file transfers over multiple 
hops and taking the specific space environment (like line-of-
sight disruptions, long delays, etc) into account. DTN is an 
architecture for internetworking of networks that may be 
separated by disruption or delays. For space, it is typically 
implemented by using the Bundle Protocol (BP) [4] and 
underlying convergence layer protocols, like the Licklider 
Transmission Protocol (LTP) [5] or Proximity-1 [6]. Based 
on the generic communication requirements and the mission 
scenarios 
two 
reference 
communication 
architectures 
involving ground and space segment have been designed: 
one using CFDP on top of already deployed protocols and 
one combined CFDP/DTN architecture. In the former 
architecture store-and-forward features and retransmission 
capabilities of CFDP are utilised to provide multi-hop file 
transfer and reliability. In the latter architecture these 
functionalities are provided by BP and LTP, and CFDP just 
provides file transfer. Both reference architectures have been 
analysed and simulated using the ESOC Ground System Test 
and Validation Infrastructure (GSTVi) [7].  
The paper starts with introducing the mission scenarios, 
communication requirements and the relevant standards. The 
reference architectures are presented and results from the 
simulation activities are reported. The paper finishes with 
some conclusions concerning the use of CFDP and DTN for 
future ESA missions and points to areas for future work. 
II. 
MISSION SCENARIOS & COMMUNICATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
In order to define generic communication requirements 
ongoing and planned ESA missions have been analysed in 
terms of communication architectures and topologies. 
Astronomy, Earth observation and planetary missions 
involving planetary landers have been taken into account. A 
‘Complex Mission Topology’ has been derived from this 
analysis and includes all elements of the relevant missions: 
 
A complex space segment containing spacecrafts 
potentially owned by different space agencies that 
may be used as data relays as well as a landed asset 
on a planetary surface. 
75
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
An interoperating ground segment with ground 
stations 
owned 
by 
different 
agencies, 
(interoperating) Mission Control Centres (MCC), 
Lander Control Centres (LCC) and User Support and 
Operations Control Centres (USOC). 
 
Bi-directional 
asymmetric 
and 
uni-directional 
potentially disrupted and delayed communication 
links between the various elements. 
 The Complex Mission Scenario has formed the basis for 
the definition of the CFDP and the CFDP/DTN reference 
architectures. Detailed communication requirements have 
been defined based on the analysed missions and in 
conjunction with a working group on file-based operations at 
ESOC [1]. These requirements are related to different topics: 
 
Communication 
Environment: The reference 
architecture has to take the special characteristics of 
space communication into account. This includes 
long communication delays, low signal-to-noise 
ratios, high bandwidth/delay products as well as 
predictable 
(orbits, 
planetary 
rotation) 
and 
unpredictable disruptions (e.g. solar environment).  
 
Communication Services: Two types of co-existing 
communication services should be supported: 
o 
File Services: The transport of large data 
structures that are self-contained and 
persisted at source and target destination in 
file systems. 
o 
Message Services: Usually smaller data 
structures that are atomic and immediate in 
nature from operations point of view.  
 
Quality of Service aspects including completeness, 
error-free and in-sequence delivery may have to be 
regarded. Priority and pre-emption of certain data 
should be ensured, notification of end-to-end 
delivery and session control have to be provided. 
 
Data Management (of data in transfer): Information 
related to data transfer has to be available to the 
operators and data management operations (deletion 
of data in transfer, queue re-ordering, changing 
priorities, etc) should be possible to give the 
operators full control of all data transfer. 
 
Security and Safety including authentication, 
integrity and confidentiality services has to be taken 
into account. Of particular interest are also mission 
safety concerns. The Mission Control Centre (MCC) 
should have full visibility and control over the data 
uploaded to a spacecraft.  
 
Routing is expected to be static and planned based 
on link availability. Recovery from failure is likely 
to take the form of using pre-configured backup 
routes rather than dynamic route discovery. 
 
Interoperability at protocol level and cross-support 
between different agencies must be possible at 
various points, e.g., between MCC and ground 
station networks, ground stations and data relays in 
space or data relays and landed assets. 
III. 
STANDARDS AND PROTOCOLS 
The reference architectures take available and upcoming 
communication standards into account to facilitate future 
deployments and cross-support between different agencies. 
The following standards are used: 
 
CFDP: CFDP is used for bi-directional file transfer 
between various elements in the architecture [2]. 
CFDP includes different classes for reliable (Class 
1) and unreliable (Class 2) file transfer as well as 
special features for relaying file transfers through 
intermediate 
waypoints 
(Store-and-Forward 
Overlay; CFDP Class 3 for unreliable and CFDP 
Class 4 for reliable multi-hop transfer). CFDP also 
contains a set of file manipulation primitives for 
managing remote file stores by operations such as 
file or directory creation, deletion and copying. 
 
DTN: DTN (Delay or Disruption Tolerant 
Networking) is an architecture for internetworking 
between separated (e.g., by delays or disruption) 
networks [3]. This is implemented by the use of the 
Bundle Protocol (BP) for the necessary store-and-
forward capabilities and Convergence Layer 
Protocols for providing data transport [4]. For 
terrestrial networks this may be provided by UDP 
or TCP while for space links LTP (Licklider 
Transmission Protocol) may be chosen [5]. LTP is 
based on a negative acknowledgment scheme 
similar to the one used by CFDP and allows 
marking parts of the data for reliable (red mode) 
and for unreliable (green mode) data transport.  
 
CCSDS Data Link Layer Protocols: For the space 
links the usual CCSDS Data Link Layer Protocols 
are used. These include Packet Telemetry (TM) and 
Telecommand (TC), Advanced Orbiting Systems 
(AOS) Space Data Link and Proximity-1 for the 
link between a landed asset and an orbiter [6]. 
 
Encapsulation Packet: The CCSDS Encapsulation 
Packet provides the means to multiplex packets 
from different user protocols (like space packets or 
CFDP) into the space link [6].  
 
SLE: CCSDS Space Link Extensions services are 
used to extend the services offered by the Data Link 
Layer Protocols from the ground station to the 
service user at the mission control centre [6]. 
IV. 
COMMUNICATION REFERENCE ARCHITECTURES 
Based on the communication requirements and the 
available 
standards 
and 
protocols 
two 
reference 
architectures, one applying CFDP on top of ‘traditional’ 
protocols and one applying CFDP on top of DTN protocols, 
have been designed. Both reference architectures include the 
same key elements: 
 
A Lander on a planetary surface. 
 
An Orbiter orbiting this planet and used as a data 
relay for the lander. 
 
A Ground Station (Network) (GS) on Earth for 
communication with the orbiter and the lander. 
76
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
A Mission Control Centre (MCC) for monitoring 
and control of the orbiter. 
 
A Lander Control Centre (LCC) to monitor and 
control the lander. Data transfer using the orbiter is 
through the MCC. 
 
A User Support and Operations Centre (USOC) 
to monitor and control payloads onboard the 
lander. This is done by utilising the ESA Packet 
Utilisation Standard (PUS) [8] and a (not-yet 
existing) File Utilisation Standard (FUS). Data 
transfer is always through the LCC. 
A. CFDP Reference Architecture 
The CFDP Reference Architecture is shown in Figure 1. 
The main features of the reference architecture are: 
 
Use of a conventional file transfer protocol (like 
FTP) between USOC and LCC potentially enhanced 
by a File Forward/Return Service. A conventional 
file transfer protocol is chosen instead of CFDP as 
certain functions would have to be performed by the 
LCC taking mission-wide factors into account : 
o 
A mission safety firewall function at the 
file or packet utilisation level, which can 
check semantics of the file uplink/forward 
data against, for instance, permissions, 
resource allocation, etc.  
o 
A pro-active fragmentation function that, 
in the event of the use of multiple orbiter 
relays, breaks files into fragments that 
allow management of the transfer of each 
fragment in earth-orbiter and orbiter- 
lander contact periods.  
o 
A remote file management client, which 
exists to satisfy requirements for remote 
file fragmentation, queue reordering, status 
reporting and file transfer pre-emption. 
 
Use of CFDP Class 1/Class 2 and Store-and-
Forward Overlay (or CFDP Class 3/Class 4) 
between LCC, MCC, orbiter and lander. 
 
Use of SLE between MCC and Ground Station 
(Network). As the MCC – Ground Station Links can 
be assumed to be continuously available there seems 
to be no need to place CFDP inside the Ground 
Station as fragmentation and scheduling could be 
performed more easily from the MCC, in particular 
in the case multiple ground stations are used and 
files would have to be distributed to different ground 
stations. However, especially with the downlink of 
scientific data there are cases where it makes sense 
to terminate the CFDP traffic in the ground station. 
These cases have not been studied in detail, yet. 
 
Use of CFDP or direct TC between orbiter and 
lander on top of Proximity-1. The orbiter should 
provide the option to function as a CFDP 
intermediate waypoint (store-and-forward overlay or 
extended procedures) and the option to extract TC 
from a file and send them directly to the lander (e.g., 
for emergency commanding).  
Please note that message services can be provided in 
parallel to the file transfer using the PUS standard. 
B. DTN Reference Architecture 
For the CFDP/DTN architecture ‘pure’ file transfer 
functionalities are still provided by CFDP while store-and-
forward and reliability are provided by BP and LTP or 
Proximity-1 as underlying protocols. The CFDP/DTN 
Reference Architecture is shown in Figure 2. The main 
features are: 
 
Use of CFDP Class 1 (unreliable transfer) 
between LCC and orbiter (direct TC) or lander. 
Reliability will be provided by the underlying 
protocols and store-and-forward is realised by BP. 
Figure 1.  CFDP Reference Architecture. 
77
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

As BP is a transport layer protocol additional means 
for end-to-end acknowledgement for a complete file 
transfer may be needed. This could be provided by 
using bundle status reports, using CFDP class 2 
(without really needing retransmission) or a yet-to-
be-defined CFDP Class 1a without retransmissions 
but with end-to-end confirmation. 
 
Use of SLE between MCC and Ground Station 
(Network). As the MCC – Ground Station Links can 
be assumed to be continuously available there seems 
to be no need to apply the store-and-forward of BP 
in the ground station. However, under some 
circumstances (downlink with routing of bundles to 
different users, low link capacity between GS and 
MCC) supporting BP and providing bundle storage 
in the ground station is desirable.  
 
Use of BP over LTP and CCSDS Encapsulation 
Packets between MCC and Orbiter with LTP 
providing 
(selective) 
reliability 
and 
the 
encapsulation packet providing multiplexing of 
different protocols if necessary. 
 
Use of BP or direct TC on top of proximity-1 
between orbiter and lander. Again, a direct TC 
capability should be provided by the orbiter by either 
extracting TC packets from bundles or from files. 
In this case message services can be provided by PUS or 
the upcoming Asynchronous Message Service [6]. 
V. 
ARCHITECTURE SIMULATION 
In order to validate the proposed reference architectures a 
simulator based on ESOC’s GSTVi [7] and the SIMSAT 
simulation framework has been created. For initial tests 
SCOS 2000 has been connected as Mission Control System 
to initiate file transactions, send TC and receive TM packets. 
For more systematic and automated tests a traffic load 
generator component has been used. ESOC’s CFDP Entity 
implementation for the ground segment [9], the DTN2 
implementation of the BP from the Delay Tolerant Network 
Research Group and the LTPlib from Trinity College Dublin 
for LTP have been used to simulate the necessary protocols. 
As no Proximity-1 implementation has been available, only a 
basic Proximity-1 emulation based on UDP has been created.  
A. A. Mission Test Scenarios 
Many simulations with different mission configurations 
have been performed. In this paper we concentrate on: 
 
‘Relay Mission with CFDP Only’ including the 
MCC, a single ground station, an orbiter and a 
lander. 
 
‘Relay Mission with CFDP over DTN’ including 
the same elements as the ‘Relay Mission with CFDP 
Only’ mission configuration but using CFDP on top 
of BP and LTP. 
Acknowledged and unacknowledged file transfers 
putting files to the simulated lander and getting files from the 
lander (using CFDP proxy put requests) have been evaluated. 
Getting a file involves both - sending a request to the lander 
and the actual transmission of the file to Earth. Two ‘error 
conditions’ have been tested: 
 
Best Case: Continuous end-to-end link without 
QoS errors, i.e., no retransmissions occur. 
 
Dropped packets: The 4th TM packet and the 4th 
TC packet that are send from/to ground are 
dropped. In acknowledged modes, this will lead to 
retransmissions. 
Typical bandwidths have been selected: 10 kbps  for the 
earth-orbiter link and 500 kbps for the orbiter to lander link. 
A large latency between Earth and orbiter (1200 sec) and a 
small latency between orbiter and lander (1 sec) have been 
used. CFDP PDU sizes have been chosen to be completely 
carried in a PDU of the most restrictive underlying protocol 
(220 byte / 1024 byte for ‘CFDP only’ uplink / downlink on 
 
Figure 2.  CFDP/DTN Reference Architecture. 
78
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Put Operation - Unacknowledged Transfer - Best Case
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1K
10K
100K
Transferred File Size (bytes)
Orbiter -> Lander Traffic 
Relative to File Size (%)
CFDP C3
CFDP C1/SFO
C1/BP/LTP green
Figure 3.  Comparison of protocol overhead on the orbiter to lander 
link by different communication architectures to an unacknowledged 
file transfer to a lander in best case error conditions. 
earth-orbiter link; 10240 byte for ‘CFDP/DTN’ for uplink 
and downlink on earth-orbiter link). The experiments have 
been performed with different file sizes (1k, 10k, 100k).  
B. Simulation Results 
During the simulations it has been detected that getting 
files from the lander using a CFDP proxy put request could 
not be executed for the relay missions with CFDP Store-and-
Forward Overlay (SFO). The reason is that SFO currently 
cannot carry a proxy request to the destination waypoint. 
This has been reported to the CCSDS Working Group. 
Furthermore, 100k file transfers with CFDP/DTN have 
not been possible with the UDP-emulated Proximity-1 link 
since files have been put in a single bundle and bundles 
exceeding the maximum size of UDP datagrams cannot be 
send over the UDP convergence layer. 
1) Unacknowledged File Transfers 
For unacknowledged file transfers CFDP Class 3 was 
compared with CFDP Class 1 SFO and CFDP Class 1/BP/ 
LTP green mode. 
a) Putting files to the spacecraft – Best Case 
The time needed for sending a file from ground to the 
lander is only slightly above the One Way Light Time 
(OWLT) for all protocol configurations with very little 
differences. As shown in Figure 3, the protocol overhead on 
the orbiter to lander link is quite high for small files (around 
15%) but drops significantly for larger file sizes. For large 
file sizes there is a considerable overhead for CFDP class 3 
compared to the other protocol configurations. This can be 
attributed to the fact that CFDP Class 3 because of the CFDP 
PDU forwarding mechanism uses a smaller CFDP PDU size 
on this link (220 bytes) compared to the other protocol 
configurations. For example, in the 10k file size case 49 
packets are send, compared to respectively 8 and 6 packets 
for Class 1 SFO and Class 1/BP/LTP green. 
b) Getting files from the spacecraft – Best Case 
As explained above, the CFDP SFO does currently not 
allow initiating a proxy get operation over hops, so just 
CFDP Class 3 and CFDP Class 1/BP/LTP green have been 
compared. Transaction durations are for both configuration 
about 2 x OWLT (1 OWLT to initiate the put request to 
downlink the file + 1 OWLT to downlink the file).For the 1k 
file there is about 15% protocol overhead for CFDP Class 3 
and about 23% protocol overhead for CFDP Class 1/BP/LTP 
green on the lander to orbiter link. For 10k files, the protocol 
overhead is only about 2.5% for both configurations. 
2) Acknowledged File Transfers 
For acknowledged file transfers CFDP Class 2 SFO and 
CFDP Class 4 were compared with CFDP Class 1/BP/LTP 
red and CFDP Class 2/BP/LTP green (to see whether 
reliability should be provided by CFDP or LTP). Dropping 
of packets has only been investigated with 10k files. 
a) Putting files to the spacecraft – Best Case 
Transaction durations are about 3 OWLT for all protocol 
configurations but Class 2 SFO, which needs about 4 
OWLT. Three OWLT are needed for sending the file to the 
lander, sending a notification that the file transfer has 
finished back to ground and getting an acknowledgment for 
this notification. Class 2 SFO needs more time because the 
file transaction between ground and the orbiter has to be 
completed (3 OWLT) before the file is sent to the lander and 
a SFO Report is sent back from the lander to the ground (1 
OWLT). As usual, protocol overheads are quite high for 1k 
files (15% to 24 % with CFDP Class 2/BP/LTP green having 
the highest overhead) but are small for larger files (5% for 
CFDP Class 4 and around 2.5% for the rest). 
b) Putting files to the spacecraft – Dropped Packet 
The whole picture changes as soon as TC/TM packets are 
dropped (see Figure 4). CFDP Class 4 has the shortest 
duration (4 OWLT), with CFDP Class 1/BP/LTP red and 
CFDP Class 2 SFO taking 50% longer. CFDP Class 
2/BP/LTP green takes twice as long as CFDP Class 4. The 
good performance for CFDP Class 4 is due to the fact that 
the retransmission request for the lost TM is send back to 
Earth immediately and is not affected by the dropped TC 
packet (as only the 4th packet is dropped). For CFDP Class 2 
SFO and CFDP Class 1/BP/LTP red, the completion of the 
file transfer is affected by the dropped TM and the dropped 
TC and taking 2 OWLT more. CFDP Class 2/BP/LTP green 
detects the missing TM packet only at the lander and is 
affected by the dropped TC. This leads to a retransmission of 
the whole bundle and a very long duration (8 OWLT). 
The protocol overheads for the 10k file are similar to the 
results without dropped packages with the exception of 
CFDP Class 2/BP/LTP green that has an overhead of 100% 
that reflects the resending of the whole bundle. 
Put Operation - Acknowledged Transfer - Dropped Packets
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10K
Transfered File Size (bytes)
Transaction Duration 
(secs)
CFDP C4
CFDP C1/SFO
C1/BP/LTP red
C2/BP/LTP green
Figure 4.  Comparison of transaction durations by different 
communication architectures to an acknowledged file transfer to a 
lander in dropped packets error conditions. 
79
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

c) Getting files from the spacecraft – Best Case 
The transaction durations for getting a file from the 
spacecraft (i.e., proxy put request + acknowledged downlink 
of the file) takes for all protocol configurations about 4 
OWLT (1 OWLT to initiate the downlink + 3 OWLT for the 
downlink; SFO is not possible in this case). Protocol 
overhead is high to very high for 1k files (23% CFDP Class 
1/BP/LTP red, 32% CFDP Class 2/BP/LTP green, 50% 
CFDP Class 4) but comparable to the overhead in other 
scenarios for bigger file sizes (2.3% to 3.5%) with a larger 
overhead for CFDP Class 4 (5.4%), which can again be 
attributed to the smaller PDU size as explained for CFDP 
Class 3 in the unacknowledged case. 
d) Getting files from the spacecraft – Dropped Packet 
For acknowledged transfer with dropped packets CFDP 
Class 4 and CFDP Class 1/ BP/LTP red need about 8 
OWLT. This is because a TC and a TM packet are dropped, 
causes retransmissions due to negative acknowledgements 
and inactivity timeouts. In this scenario, CFDP Class 
2/BP/LTP green could not deliver the complete file because 
LTP is used in unreliable mode and one TC packet 
containing an LTP segment is dropped. At the receiving end 
the bundle is reassembled but part of the data is missing, 
leads to an incomplete file when the bundle is passed to 
CFDP.  As CRC has not been used for CFDP PDUs in this 
case, the PDU is accepted but a file checksum error is raised. 
Looking at protocol overhead with 10k files reveals again a 
larger overhead for CFDP Class 4 (8%) compared to CFDP 
Class 1/BP/LTP green (2%) caused by the smaller CFDP 
PDU on the lander to orbiter link for CFDP Class 4. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Both, the CFDP only and the CFDP/DTN reference 
architectures, provide solutions to the provision of message 
and file services over noisy, long-delay, disrupted channels 
as found in typical ESA missions. The preliminary 
conclusion is that, once the timeouts were tuned to those 
appropriate for the mission scenario, there is little to choose 
between any of the communication architectures in terms of 
transaction 
duration 
and 
protocol 
overheads. 
For 
retransmission of lost packages hop-by-hop retransmission 
(CFDP Class 4, SFO, LTP Red Mode) is generally preferable 
over end-to-end retransmissions (CFDP Class 2 over BP). 
SFO has a slight disadvantage in terms of transaction 
duration as all of the file must be transferred to and stored on 
the relay before it can be forwarded. Furthermore, CFDP 
SFO has currently some conceptual problems with proxy put 
requests over multiple waypoints. 
However, for specific missions, further simulation with 
more realistic link characteristics and an optimisation of the 
protocol configurations as well as formal analysis is needed 
to compare potential architectures more realistically and to 
understand potential trade-offs. For example, on the one 
hand CFDP lacks security primitives, and arguably includes 
too many “layers” in a single specification while DTN is 
architecturally cleaner and is not limited to file transfers. On 
the other hand, some aspects of DTN are still subject to 
active research (network management, routing, security 
aspects for BP) and there are a number of operational 
uncertainties that need to be studied before one would 
mandate its use in future ESA missions. In particular, the 
network management aspects of DTN are not yet well-
developed and may require significant additions to the BP 
before DTN can meet the current operational requirements.  
Apart from these operational aspects, for the missions 
and scenarios analysed in the study, the bulk of the 
requirements can be satisfied by adoption of existing CCSDS 
recommendations including CFDP or by a CFDP/DTN 
architecture. However, some of the additional features that 
DTN supports are not yet required for upcoming and planned 
ESA missions. From the operational point of view there may 
be difficulties in accepting the new model of control that is 
implied with a DTN based architecture and further research 
and development into DTN may be necessary to establish 
that DTN can meet these operational requirements. In 
addition, CFDP has been already standardised by CCSDS 
and ESA implementations for the ground and space exist 
while DTN-related protocols are still in the CCSDS 
standardisation process. So, in the short to medium-term 
time frame CFDP without DTN seems to provide the easier 
way to adoption since it is conceptually simpler and more 
mature while the additional features of DTN like dynamic 
routing or reactive fragmentation may only be required in the 
long-term. DTN does appear to provide a solution in the 
long-term when more complex networks of interoperating 
assets in space and on ground (Earth and other planets) exist. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The CFDP/DTN Study has been performed by SciSys, 
UK in cooperation with Trinity College Dublin, Ireland and 
Keltik Ltd., UK. Without their excellent work and expertise 
it would not have been possible to achieve the high quality 
results reported in this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Pecchioli, E. Montagnon, G.P. Calzolari, F. Flentge, and A. 
Kowalczyk, “Towards File Based Operations”, AIAA 2010-2190, 
Electronic Proceedings for SpaceOps 2010. 
[2] 
CCSDS 727.0-B-4. CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP), 
Recommended Standard, Blue Book, January 2007. 
[3] 
V. Cerf, S. Burleigh, A. Hooke,  L. Torgerson, R. Durst, K. Scott, K. 
Fall, and H. Weiss, “Delay-Tolerant Networking Architecture”, 
Network Working Group, RFC 4838, April 2007. 
[4] 
K. Scott and S. Burleigh, “Bundle Protocol Specification”, Network 
Working Group, RFC 5050, November 2007. 
[5] 
M. Ramadas, S. Burleigh, and S. Farrell, “Licklider Transmission 
Protocol – Specification”, Network Working Group, RFC 5326, 
September 2008. 
[6] 
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS), 
http://public.ccsds.org, access date: 31 January 2011. 
[7] 
M. Goetzelmann, N. Lindmann, P. Ellsiepen, C. Laroque, M. 
Niezette, and A. Walsh, “Ground Systems Test and Validation 
Infrastructure – from Concept to Implementation”, AIAA 2006-5540, 
Electronic Proceedings for SpaceOps 2006. 
[8] 
ECSS-E-70-41A. Ground Systems and Operations – Telemetry and 
Telecommand Packet Utilization, January 2003. 
[9] 
F. Flentge and M. Jordan, “Design and Implementation of CCSDS 
File Delivery Protocol for ESA Ground Segment”, ESA SP-669 (CD-
ROM), Proceedings of DASIA 2009. 
80
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

