Performance of HAPs Communication Systems in DUSA Storm: Analysis and
Modeling
Kamal Harb
Electrical Engineering Department
KFUPM University, Saudi Arabia
Email: kharb@kfupm.edu.sa
Abstract − High Altitude Platform Station (HAPS) systems are
currently under improvement and development. Technology
is advancing towards the reliability and creative performance
under reasonable fee for service providers and customers.
HAPS technology represents one of the most revolutionary
way of communication that appears to be convincing and
effective under different weather conditions for any location in
the world. For desert areas, such as Saudi Arabia, the main
impact factor of HAPS is Dust and Sand (DUSA) storms. This
attenuation varies with the operational satellite parameters such
as frequency, location and other factors. This paper proposes
some modiﬁcations to an existing DUSA storms model presented
by a 3-D mesh model having different visibilities. This model for
visibility depends on horizontal and vertical layers with reference
to variations in altitude and space along with probabilistic
dust particle size distributions in each layer. Such strategies
help in conducting reasonable impairment estimates and in
providing an optimal design for the HAPS system. As a result, an
appropriate enhanced attenuation mitigation model is suggested.
Keywords−High Altitude Platform Stations; Permittivity indices;
Quality of Service; Dust and Sand; Signal to Noise Ratio.
I. INTRODUCTION
Satellite communications are going toward High Altitude
Platform (HAP) technology to cover speciﬁc locations such as
crowded areas. This system uses an emerging wireless access
technology represented by balloons or aircrafts for altitudes
ranging between 15 and 25 Km above sea level. This system
provides wireless communication networks for different users
with the help of aircraft controlled or uncontrolled systems
[1][2].
Some advantages of HAPS systems are represented by
replacement of terrestrial mobile networks that is quite expen-
sive, has potential health hazards and associated environmental
impacts. On the other hand, besides the advantages of satel-
lite systems, unequivocal disadvantages include building and
launching them being reasonably expensive, the time interval
efﬁciency associated with geostationary (GEO) satellites and
movement requirements for other satellite systems [3]–[8].
Terrestrial systems, on the contrary, have also some difﬁ-
culties, such as tower implementation for wireless networks,
which is quite expensive, and safety problems. Therefore,
implementing HAPS technology has became superior.
HAPS is the technology for providing wireless narrow
band, broadband telecommunication and broadcasting ser-
vices, particularly in remote rural areas where the deployment
HAPS
HAPS
HAPS Coverage
HAPS
Dust Storms
Formation
Figure 1. Effects of DUSA storms on HAPs communications.
of terrestrial network infrastructure is not only difﬁcult, but
costly as well. The HAPS technology attempts to present
a new concepts and has several advantages in comparison
to the implemented systems such as satellite and terrestrial.
The maintenance of HAPS is also easy and can be relocated
as needed. Besides that, HAPS maintenance is easy, not
expensive, and can be reallocated as needed. Note that, a
round-trip delay is less than 0.5 ms and satisﬁes human safety
[1][2][9]–[12]. Moreover, HAPS can be easily integrated with
the existing satellite and terrestrial systems, as depicted in
Figure 1.
For arid and semi-arid areas such as Saudi Arabia and its
surrounding countries, which are affected with extreme DUSA
storms for almost six months per year, the microwave signals
are impaired by different weather parameters including dust
particle size distributions, visibility and humidity level within
DUSA storms [13]. Since DUSA particles from different
regions have different characteristics, such as relative permit-
tivity and average sizes, it has hitherto remained a challenge in
creating a generic storm model. This paper proposes visibility
variations inside DUSA storm represented by four layers or
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Layering DUSA with Elevation
Horizontal Distributions of DUSA Storm
Satellite Signal Passing DUSA Storms
Figure 2. Visibility distribution model within DUSA storm according to different heights.
zones A, B, C, and D, as shown in Figure 2. Also, it presents
wireless signal penetrations through multiple layers along the
storm that contained different visibilities and particle sizes,
etc. According to DUSA storm behavior such as location,
intensity, and height, designers have the ability to select the
number starting at two up to ten layers. Note that, increasing
the number of layers in some cases might not be necessary,
especially at high visibility form, as it may not lead to a better
system performance and improvement.
This paper is presented in six sections. Section II describes
the modeling of DUSA storm in the presence of layering.
Section III presents the methodology of DUSA storm variation
with visibility level. Section IV discusses different research
methods for HAPS systems. Also, it presents analysis and
modeling for DUSA storm, propagation effects and link budget
calculation. Section V presents SNR results and discussion
for HAPS behavior under heavy storm conditions. Finally, we
conclude this study in Section VI.
II. DUSA STORM MODELING
The visibility, in desert areas, is usually regarded as a
measure for the severity of DUSA storms, and is considered
to be severe storm if visibility is below 500 m [14]. A low
value of visibility implies that the wireless signal has to pass
through a heavy concentration of DUSA particles, which have
a particular size distribution depending upon the region of
study. DUSA mechanics terms the particles below 60 µm as
dust particles otherwise it is sand [15]. Accurate quantiﬁcation
of DUSA attenuation highly depends upon particle sizes,
permittivity indices and maximum attenuation that occurs
when the particles are of the order of the wavelength of
transmitted signal. Most of the DUSA storm prediction models
assumed uniform distribution and then neglected the different
particle size distributions within DUSA storm [16], which is
a most likely reason for slight inaccuracy between real and
expected impairments.
In most cases, DUSA storms extend up to 5 Km above
the satellite ground station [9], making it almost impossible
to recover or immunize the satellite signals against its im-
pairments. Reasonable information of expected impairments
due to several factors leads to better satellite link utilization
and effective radio resource management. The overall systems’
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR), which is also referred to in terms
of Quality of Service (QoS) can be increased by weather adap-
tive variations in modulation, power, antenna beam shape, site
diversity, etc. [7][17]–[21]. From engineering’s perspective,
the goal is to optimally utilize all radio resources including
channel bandwidth, computational complexity, etc. Further-
more, parameters of such communications must also abide by
the imposed limitations concerning to human health.
Chu’s model for DUSA prediction was implemented based
on Rayleigh approximation in [22]. This model presents an
enhanced method for the measurement of dust attenuation, by
introducing vertical path adjustment factor (rv). This factor is
dependent upon earth station’s reference height (h0), overall
DUSA storm elevation (hl), propagation angle (θ), and the
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
Height (Km)
DUSA Storm Performance at Ground Level (Km)
 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Visibility (Km)
Height
Visibility
Figure 3. DUSA storm mirrored model for HAPS with visibility and height
variations.
slant path (L) where the radio wave traverses in dust ﬁlled
regions.
Weather predictions can be used to dynamically reconﬁgure
the radio resources for better link performance as well to keep
the required level of QoS for the most important network
components. A generalization of this concept is to utilize
minimal resources during clear weather conditions whereas
optimally manage resources based on weather predictions.
Weather attenuation estimates have been presented by account-
ing for the variations in the probability distribution of DUSA
particles.
III. METHODOLOGY
Visibility level keeps on increasing in a monotonic fashion
while moving in a vertical direction as shown in Figure 2.
This model is developed in an attempt to improve the existing
one considering uniform duststorm distribution. Also, the sim-
ulation outcomes of this model is presented in Figure 3. The
horizontal axis of this ﬁgure showed the DUSA performance at
ground level with both vertical axes presented by height in blue
color from the left side and visibility in red color on the right
side. The results depict almost 100 m visibility at the ground
station, i.e., the base layer which keeps on increasing to reach
5 Km elevation, at which transmitted signal gets out of the
dust inﬂuenced region. Based on this fact, this paper presents
a strategy to divide the whole DUSA storm into several layers
according to visibility level.
hi = hi−1
 Vi
Vi−1
3.85
(1)
Equation (1) is being recursively used to obtain DUSA storm
height layering or partition in accordance to visibility varia-
tions at several altitudes.
 
Figure 4. Variation of wind speed with altitude at Spokane, Washington [2].
IV. RESEARCH METHODS
A. HAPS System Geometry
HAP is intended to provide different wireless communi-
cations of services such as mobile, TV, and internet, which
are located in a ﬁxed point according to earth station and
belong to the stratosphere ranges of around 15 − 25 Km of
altitude [1][12]. The footprint, and hence the coverage area of
the HAPS communication system is uniquely deﬁned by the
accepted minimum elevation angle and its height.
In this paper, the height of the platforms were deﬁned to
be 22 Km taking into account the ITU-R recommendations
and the wind behavior. From the mathematical calculation of
the coverage areas either urban, suburban, or rural areas were
determined by the subscriber, the corresponding slant path is
64.324 Km and the coverage radius is 60.445 Km [12].
B. HAP Location and Wind Behavior
The wireless channel between satellite hub and transponder
consists of several layers starting with the troposphere above
10 Km in altitude. Within this layer, air temperature and
pressure decrease with elevation. Going forward, the strato-
sphere is the next layer, up to 50 Km in altitude. Much
research has been done to conclude that this layer is stable,
i.e. slightly windy, and temperature increase with elevation.
Also, there is no effect for clouds that help using the solar
energy in an efﬁcient manner [1][2]. Therefore, Figure 4
presents useful data for designers to select the ultimate location
for HAPS transponder in the space at different areas with
relatively low wind, minimum demanding power, high stability
which located between 15 and 25 Km. Note that, wind speed
variations with height at different location is presented by
different researchers [23][24].
C. Propagation Effects
The propagation losses along the fuzzy path connected
between ground station and HAPS can be attributed to rain,
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Visibility (Km)
Req (m)
DUSA Particle Variations with Visibility
Figure 5. Visibility and DUSA size variations.
DUSA, gases, free space and other attenuations. The existing
free space loss is calculated in (2). Our main concern in this
paper; related to desert area, is DUSA attenuation as calculated
in (4).
1) Free-Space Loss: The free space path loss (Lf) is:
Lf = 10 · log(4πd/λ)2,
(2)
where λ(wavelength) = c/f,
d is the distance between the satellite ground station and the
HAP transponder with propagation angle (θ) is:
d = h/sinθ,
(3)
where h represents the HAPS height above sea level.
2) DUSA Attenuation: DUSA storms can potentially result
in serious impairments by increasing losses and destroying
transmit signal especially at higher frequency of operation.
Mostly, DUSA storms are considerable meteorological phe-
nomenon characterized by strong winds and dust-ﬁlled air and
water vapor over a wide area such as Saudi Arabia, Nevada,
USA, etc. [9][16][25].
There is a number of different models that have been
proposed for dust attenuation estimation, taking into account
the variation of visibility, particle size, and concentration of
the dust particles. An attractive model for the attenuation was
proposed by [9][11][16] and is updated in this paper as:
AP l=
 5.67 · 102
Vl · rel · λ
 "
ε
′′
(ε
′ + 2)2 + ε
′′2
# XN
i pil·r3
il dB/Km,
(4)
where point attenuation for each layer Apl, ε′ and ε′′ are real
and imaginary dielectric constant, rel is the equivalent particle
size corresponding to each layer, and Vl is the visibility of
different layers along the signal path is given by:
Vl = V0l
 hl
h0
0.26
,
(5)
where V0l is the visibility at the reference height h0 that is
dependent on the selected point within the storm. hl is the
TABLE I. LINK SPECIFICATIONS AND INPUT PARAMETERS FOR
HAPS.
Downlink Operating Frequency [GHz]
32
Transmitted Power [W]
0.5
Transmitting Antenna Gain [dBi]
5 (Minimum available)
Diameter of the Parabolic Antenna
1.3m
(Ground station)
Aperture efﬁciency of Parabolic Reﬂector
0.55 (Minimum available)
Distance between Satellite and Ground
22
Station (Km)
Ground Station Receiver Noise [K]
∼ 119
Ground Station Antenna Noise [K]
∼ 35
Ground Station Ampliﬁer Noise [K]
∼ 60
Bit Rate of the data (Mbps)
1
Bit Error Rate (BER)
10−6
Modulation
QPSK
height of one layer where each layer has different values.
Usually, this height should be small while facing low visibility
at low level and increase exponentially with elevation. There-
fore, the variations of the visibility (Vl) inside DUSA storm
according to travel distance (h) and radius particle size (Req)
are illustrated in Figure 5. This ﬁgure shows the variation of
visibility with dust particle radius, i.e., particle size decreases,
visibility increases.
Therefore, the updated total attenuation based on DUSA
layering, ADUSA, can be obtained from the following expres-
sion:
ADUSA = rv × d × Apl,
(6)
where rv is the vertical path adjustment factor and all other
symbols carry their usual meanings. The vertical path adjust-
ment is estimated using the following relation [16] as:
rv =
h0.26
0
× h0.74
l
0.74 × d × (sin θ)1.74
(7)
It is clear from the expression that, rv is a function of
the inclination angle (θ), height of the storm (hl), reference
height (h0) and the slant path (d). Then, the values for
DUSA attenuation were obtained, using the proposed model,
by going through (2) to (7) for existing model, and for varying
dust particle sizes with different heights (hl), is presented in
Figure 6.
D. Algorithmic for SNR Calculation
In satellite communications related to desert area, the most
prominent contributors to noise, beside rain, is the DUSA
storm. Start SNR calculation by the thermal noise power
spectral density as: N0 = K · T, where Boltzmann constant
K = 1.38 · 10−23 Ws/K = −228.6 dBWs/K and effective
noise temperature T
= Ta + Tr, Ta is noise temperature
of the antenna, and Tr is noise temperature for the receiver
represented as Tr = (10Nr/10 − 1) · 290, with noise ﬁgure
of low-noise ampliﬁer, Nr ≈ 0.7 ∼ 2 dB. Thus, the ratio
between signal and noise power spectral density is:
C
N0
=
C
K · T
=
Pr
K · T
= Pt · Gt
AT
·
Gr
K · T ,
(8)
where total attenuation AT is:
AT = ADUSA + Lf
(9)
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

TABLE II. ASSUME MAXIMUM VALUES FOR HAPS LOSSES.
Atmospheric Loss (dB)
1
Rain Attenuation (dB)
1.3
Fog Attenuation (dB)
0.03
Atmospheric Reﬂection (dB)
0.2
Ionospheric Loss (dB)
0.6
Polarization Loss (dB)
0.3
Miscellaneous Attenuation (dB)
0.27
DUSA Attenuation (dB)
0.92
Total Atmospheric Losses (dB)
5.12
Therefore, SNR is presented as:
SNR(AT , f) = Pt + Gt − AT + Gr − Rs − T − K dB,
(10)
where Pt and Pr are transmitter and receiver power, and Gt
and Gr are antenna gain at transmitter and receiver sides
respectively. It should be noted that the SNR estimation of (9)
will be optimized by the virtue of having better estimation of
AT through (10), SNR result is presented in Figure 7.
E. Fading Mitigation Techniques
Some researchers including [9][11] proposed the use of
intelligent mitigation schemes for SNR improvement. The
mitigation techniques that were applied to compensate the
attenuation impairment during heavy attenuation period, in-
cluding Skillful Atmospheric Aware Model (SAAM) for satel-
lite systems, and space diversity such that whenever a heavy
DUSA storm condition is experienced, the trafﬁc can be re-
routed via the second back haul link. The latter is ineffective as
far as mobile HAPS communication system is concerned [11].
SAAM algorithm does not only serve as mitigation technique
during a heavy storm, but it provides cost effectiveness as
well. The system will be transmitting power according to
the demand. By knowing the required performance such as
weather prediction, the system will maintain appropriate SNR
level by changing the transmitted power according to the
demand. The automatic power control mechanism is used
whereby the transmit power changes as the dust attenuation
changes and it transmits the minimum power during the clear
air conditions. However, once weather attenuation increases
and power factor reaches its limits, other parameters should
be updated to maintain SNR values above minimum signal
level that is needed for costumer’s satisfaction and acceptable
communication performance.
F. An Effective Downlink Budget
This section will introduce a unique calculation for the
HAPS downlink operated at 32 GHz. Other parameters are
deﬁned from Table I and are used as input parameters to the
simulation. Several other losses have been considered with
their maximum values at HAPS to ensure an efﬁcacious link
margin. In this paper, we introduce DUSA attenuation in the
downlink budget speciﬁcations. The value was extracted from
the simulations in the previous section. A maximum estimated
value of 0.92 dB is shown in Table II along with all other
losses.
Finally, the link budget is re-estimated with DUSA attenua-
tion considered. The output parameters are shown in Table
 
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Dust Particle Size ( m )
ADUSA ( dB )
DUSA Attenuation for Different Particle Sizes
Figure 6. DUSA attenuation for variety of particle sizes at frequency = 30
Ghz and propagation angle = 45 degree.
TABLE III. SUMMARY OF DOWNLINK OUTPUT PARAMETERS FOR
HAPS.
Effective Isotropic Radiated Power (dBW)
1.99
Free Space Path Loss (dB)
149.4
Atmospheric losses
5.12
Total Losses (dB)
151.39
Received Power (dB)
-132.23
Noise Density (dB)
-207.14
Received Power to Noise Ratio (dB)
57.01
Energy to Noise Ration (Available) (dB)
14.37
Energy to Noise Ration (Required) (dB)
10.29
Link Margin (dB)
2.07
III. The link margin is an important parameter in satellite
links and represents the difference between the available and
the required values of the energy-to-noise ratio. It can be
viewed as the amount by which the received power exceeds the
receiver sensitivity. According to the ITU-R recommendations,
practical satellite-earth links must maintain a healthy link
margin above 2 dB in order to have effective communication
links with acceptable QoS. As can be inferred from the
output parameters, the presented satellite link margin is found
to be 2.07 dB, which is sufﬁcient for a reliable satellite
communication link.
V. RESULTS DISCUSSION
From the output result, the performance of the system was
promising under dusty conditions. In case of clear weather, the
only degrading component was the path loss. The available
SNR ratios were ranging between (−14.0
and −4.0 dB).
However, during the DUSA storm, the SNR were drastically
reduced to be between (−12.0 and −23.0 dB), keeping other
parameters constant, as shown in Figure 7. With the increasing
of transmit power, during the heavy storm conditions, the
system can provide the required services with relatively rea-
sonable QoS. In this paper, the transmitted power was assumed
to be 0 dBm and the results were satisfactory. Thus, a much
better result is expected if the transmit power can be raised.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
30
40
50
60
70
80
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
Dust Particle Size (m)
SNR vs Frequency and Dust Particle Size
Frequency (GHz)
SNR ( dB )
Figure 7. SNR for different DUSA particle size and frequency.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper investigated the link reliability during the DUSA
storm scenario. By implementing DUSA layering in order to
estimate DUSA attenuation, it was found that the link margin
dropped due to the fading effect of the DUSA storm that
might destroy the signal at certain levels. Though, the system
at this level can be considered operational, only an extra
attenuation of around 2.1 dB is enough to make the system
unreliable. Therefore, with the application of automatic power
transmission and adaptive coding and modulation, the required
QoS can be maintained.
Future work is in progress to consider real DUSA
measurements at different locations, and to compare it with
our simulation. Also, the study of hurricanes and other
atmospheric phenomena, as well as proposing enhanced
strategies to better present satellite systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank King Fahd University of Petroleum
& Minerals (KFUPM) and Hafr Al-Batin University, Electrical
Engineering department. This work is supported by the Dean-
ship of Scientiﬁc Research (DSR) at KFUPM through project
No. FT121013.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Vzquez-Castro, F. Prez-Fontn, and B. Arbesser-Rastburg, “Channel
modeling for satellite and haps system design,” Wireless Communica-
tions and mobile computing, 2002, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 285–300.
[2] A. Arago’n-Zavala, J. L. Cuevas-Ru’z, and J. A. Delgado-Pen’n, High-
Altitude Platforms for Wireless Communications.
First edition, John
Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[3] R. E. Hushcke, Ed., Glossary of Meteorology.
Boston, MA: Amer.
Meteorological Soc., 1995.
[4] F. Haidara, A. Dissanayake, and J. Allnutt, “A prediction model that
combines rain attenuation and other propagation impairments along
Earth-satellite paths,” IEEE Trans. on Antennas & Propagation, Oct.
1997, vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1546–1558.
[5] K. Harb, F. R. Yu, and S. H. Abdul-Jauwad, “Performance evolution
in satellite communication networks along with markovian channel
prediction,” Journal of Wireless Networking and Communications, 2012,
vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 143–157.
[6] K. Harb, B. Omair, S. H. Abdul-Jauwad, A. Al-Yami, and A. Al-
Yami, “A proposed method for dust and sand storms effect on satellite
communication networks,” in Innovations on Communication Theory
(INCT), Oct. 2012, pp. 33–37.
[7] K. Harb, F. R. Yu, P. Dakhal, and A. Srinivasan, “An intelligent QoS
control system for satellite networks based on markovian weather,” in
Proc. IEEE VTC, Sept. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[8] ITU-R, “Speciﬁc attenuation model for rain for use in prediction
methods,” Radio wave propagation, International Telecommunication
Union Recommendation ITU-R P.838-3, 2003.
[9] Z. Elabdin and M. R. Islam, “Duststorm measurements for the prediction
of attenuation on microwave signals in Sudan,” in International Con-
ference on Computer and Communication Engineering (ICCCE), May
2008, pp. 1181–1185.
[10] K. Harb, O. Butt, A. Al-Yami, and S. H. Abdul-Jauwad, “Probabilistic
dust storm layers impacting satellite communications,” in Proc. of the
IEEE International Conference on Space Science and Communication
(IconSpace), July 2013, pp. 407–411.
[11] K. Harb, B. Omair, S. H. Abdul-Jauwad, and A. Al-Yami, “Systems
adaptation for satellite signal under dust, sand and gaseous attenuations,”
Journal of Wireless Networking and Communications, Nov. 2013, vol. 3,
no. 3, pp. 39–49.
[12] K. Harb, A. Talib, M. Mohamed, and S. H. Abdul-Jauwad, “Haps
communication in Saudi Arabia under dusty weather conditions,” in
International Conference 11th Malaysia International Conference on
Communication (MICC), Nov. 2013, pp. 379–384.
[13] K. Afzaal, T. K. Bandopadhyaya, and S. Poonam, “Effect of soil
textural class and relative humidity of regions in accurate prediction of
attenuation of millimeter waves during sand and dust storms,” in Physics
and Engineering of Millimeter and Sub-Millimeter Waves. The Fourth
International Kharkov Symposium on, June 2001, vol. 1, pp. 393–395.
[14] J. Goldhirsh, “Attenuation and backscatter from a derived two-
dimensional duststorm model,” IEEE Transactions Antennas Propaga-
tion, Dec. 2001, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 1703–1711.
[15] S. I. Ghobrial and J. A. Jervase, “Microwave propagation in dust storms
at 10.5 GHz-A case study in Khartoum, Sudan,” IEICE Trans. Commun.,
Nov. 1997, vol. E80-B, no. 11, pp. 1722–1727.
[16] E. A. Elsheikh, M. R. Islam, K. Al-Khateeb, A. Z. Alam, and
Z. Elshaikh, “A proposed vertical path adjustment factor for dust storm
attenuation prediction,” in 4th International Conference on Mechatronics
(ICOM), May 2011, pp. 1–3.
[17] W. J. Vogel and J. Goldhirsh, “Multipath fading at L band for low
elevation angle, land mobile satellite scenarios,” IEEE J. on Selected
Areas in Communications, Feb. 1995, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 197–204.
[18] A. Safaai-Jazi, H. Ajaz, and W. L. Stutzman, “Empirical models for rain
fade time on Ku and Ka-band satellite links,” IEEE Trans. on Antennas
& Propagation, Dec. 1995, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 1411–1415.
[19] ITU-R, Characteristics of precipitation for propagation modeling. Radio
wave propagation, International Telecommunication Union. Rec. P.837-
4, ITU-R, Fascicle,Geneva, 2001.
[20] T. P. Mao, D. F. Zhou, and Z. X. Niu, “The calculation model of the
attenuation due to clouds or fog and the analysis of its characteristic,”
Proc. of Asia-Paciﬁc, Aug. 2004, pp. 332–334.
[21] Telesat Canada, “ISS (Intelligent Satellite Service)
Research and
Development.” website: http://www.telesat.ca, last accessed date March
2015.
[22] T. S. Chu, “Effects of sandstorms on microwave propagation,” Bell
System Technology Journal, Feb. 1979, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 549–555.
[23] R. Struzak, “Mobile telecommunications via stratosphere.” website:
http://www.intercomms.net/AUG03/content/struzak1.php, last accessed
date March 2015.
[24] T. King and E. Bell and James R. Thieman, “Space physics archive
search and extract (spase).” website: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/space/,
last accessed date Feb. 2015.
[25] A. Arun and T. Sreeja, “An effective downlink budget for 2.24 GHz
s-band LEO satellites,” in IEEE Conference on Information & Commu-
nication Technologies (ICT), 2013, pp. 342–345.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

