Design of an UWB Meter-wave Oblique Polarized Array Antenna
Jia Fang, Hao Qin, Yongdong Zang
ECRIEE
East China Research Institute of Electronic Engineering
Hefei, China
fjftt@mail.ustc.edu.cn,qinhao@163.com,zyd123@163.com
Abstract—According to the airborne meter-wave electronic
reconnaissance and interference need, an 150-350MHz 45deg
oblique polarized array antenna is designed. The size of the
log-periodic antenna is reduced by make fractal to the
ordinary log-periodic antenna dipoles and load to the top,
which is like a tree. The height of the antenna is also reduced,
and the feed parallel lines are wrapped around by dielectric
materials. The array is simulated and optimized, and the
results show the array can achieve airborne meter-wave
broadband wide-angle scan work.
Keywords- ultral-wideband; log-periodic antenna;
fractal;
45deg oblique polarized.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, because of the advantages of finding anti-
stealth targets and counterwork anti-radiation missiles, the
meter-wave radar has been developed greatly. So, the need
of meter-wave radar counter equipment is also growing [1].
Being a popular ultra-broadband antenna, the log-
periodic antenna has a lot of advantages like technology
maturation, good acclimatization, high power capacitance
[2][3],
which
are
suitable
for
the
electronic
warfare
equipment use. However, the ordinary log-periodic antenna
has a large size, which is bigger than the element spacing of
a broadband wide-angle scan array, and also, it is not suitable
for the airborne platform use. There is a need to miniaturize
the design.
According to the airborne meter-wave broadband wide-
angle scan antenna array need, the transverse size and
longitudinal size of the antenna are reduced by make fractal
to the ordinary log-periodic antenna dipoles, load the top and
wrap around the feed parallel lines with dielectric materials.
A 150-350MHz 45deg oblique polarized antenna array is
designed.
II.
ANTENNA ELEMENT
Figure 1.
Structure of the ordinary log-periodic antenna.
The ordinary log-periodic antenna is composed of a pair
feed parallel lines and some pair radiation dipoles, as shown
in Figure 1 [4]. According to the design formula, the size of
the ordinary log-periodic antenna is determined by the ratio
factor τ, the interval factor σ, and the minimum work 
frequency [5]. For 150-350MHz work, the high of the
parallel lines is not less than 0.8m, and the length of the
longest dipole is about 1m. But for the 350MHz scan 45deg
work, the element spacing of the antenna array must be less
than 0.45m. When the ordinary log-periodic antenna is used
for the array, there is too much overlap of the dipoles, which
will seriously deteriorate the cross-polarization, the coupling,
the sideline level, the gain and other indicators of the
antenna. The 0.8m height of the antenna can not meet the
installation requirements of the airborne platform.
Figure 2.
Structure of the tree antenna.
The tree antenna is composed of feed parallel lines,
fractal dipoles, and metal sticks, which are loaded to the top
of dipoles, as shown in Figure 2. Two metal sticks are added
to the dipole in the two thirds of the normal dipole, and the
length of each one is 1/3 of the normal dipole, as 19-22 metal
sticks shown in Figure 3, which is called the first order
fractal dipole. In the same way, we do the fractal again to
each section of the first order fractal dipole, which is called
the second order fractal dipole, as shown in Figure 3. The
length of the dipoles are reduced by the fractal structure, and
the lowest work frequency is further reduced by load metal
sticks to the top of dipoles, which make the transverse size of
the antenna drop to half of ordinary log-periodic antenna.
So, the antenna could be the element of an antenna array
with scan ±45deg. The length of the feed parallel lines,
which is also the height of the antenna, is also reduced to be
53% of the ordinary log-periodic antenna, which is suitable
for the airborne platform use.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 3.
Structure of the first order and second order fractal dipole.
Figure 4.
Simulation model of the tree antenna.
The antenna element is simulated and optimized by
FEKO software, as shown in Figure 4. The feed parallel lines
are wrapped around by dielectric materials, to reduce the
antenna port impedance to be easy match, which serve also
to support weight. After being optimized, the height of the
antenna is 400mm, and the size is 700mm300mm. Figure 5
shows the Voltage Standing Wace Ratio (VSWR) results of
the antenna, and its blow 2 at whole work band. Figure 6 is
the normal gain of the antenna.
Figure 5.
VSWR of the antenna element.
Figure 6.
Normal gain of the antenna element.
III.
ARRAY ANTENNA
The antenna array is simulated by FEKO software, as
shown in Figure 7. The size of the array is 26. For 350MHz
scan 45deg work with no grating lobe, the horizontal element
spacing chooses 400mm. There is no scan in vertical
direction, so the vertical spacing could be bigger and is
700mm.
In order to improve the low frequency performance of the
antenna array, some parasitic dipoles are added between each
antenna elements, and the height is lower than the lowest
dipole of the antenna, as shown in Figure 7. The length and
height of the parasitic dipole are 270mm and 120mm.
Figure 7.
Simulation model of the array antenna.
The antennas are re-optimized. Figure 8 shows the
VSWR results of the array, and all are blow 2.4 at whole
work band. Figure 9 is the normal gain of the array, and it is
bigger than 11.5dBi. Figure 10 shows the lobe pattern of the
array at horizontal direction at 150MHz, 250MHz and
350MHz without scan, and Figure 11 shows scan 45deg.
Figure 8.
VSWR of the array.
Figure 9.
Normal gain of the array.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 10. Lobe pattern of the array at horizontal direction without scan.
IV.
CONCLUSION
By make fractal to the ordinary log-periodic antenna
dipoles, load to the top and wrap around the feed parallel
lines with dielectric materials, the transverse size and height
of the antenna are half 53% of the ordinary log-periodic
antenna, which could achieve the needed size for the
airborne meter-wave broadband wide-angle scan antenna.
The antenna array is simulated and optimized by FEKO
software, and the results showed it meet the needs of the
system work.
Figure 11. Lobe pattern of the array at horizontal direction with scan 45deg
REFERENCES
[1]
R. A. Poisel, "Antenna Systems and Electronic Warfare Applications",
published by Artech House, INC, 2012
[2]
D. E. Anagnostou, "A Small Planar Log- periodic Koch- pipole
Antenna,"
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International
Symposium 2006, Albuquerque, 2006.
[3]
A. A. Gheethan, "Log- periodic Dipole Arrays,"
International
Symposium 2008, San Diego, CA, USA, July 5- 12,2008.
[4]
X. J. Kang, "Antenna Theory and Design", Beijing, National Defense
Industry Press, 1995.
[5]
C. L. Yuan, "Ultra-broadband Antenna Theory and Technology",
Haerbin, Haerbin Industry University Press, 2006.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

