Preliminary Design of S-AIS Payload for KOMPSAT-6
Yong-Min Lee, Jin-Ho Jo, Byoung-Sun Lee
Aerospace ICT Research Department
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
ymlee01@etri.re.kr, jhjo@etri.re.kr, lbs@etri.re.kr
Abstract— Space-based Automatic Identification System
(AIS) payload was preliminarily designed for KOMPSAT-6
satellite. The AIS payload is to be a secondary payload of the
KOMPSAT-6 satellite. The AIS payload receives and provides
the AIS signal data for ship collision avoidance and traffic
management by means of on-board processing (OBP) and on-
ground
processing
(OGP).
This
paper
focuses
on
the
preliminary design of AIS payload for KOMPSAT-6 satellite
from the point of view of electrical and mechanical interfaces.
Keywords
-
S-AIS;
on-board
processing;
on-ground
processing; KOMPSAT-6.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Automatic Identification System (AIS) is basically a
short range coastal traffic system used for Ship-to-Ship and
Ship-to-Shore (4S) communications. AIS is required to be
fitted on every seagoing vessel of 300 gross tons or more. Its
purpose is to help ship crews avoid collision with other
vessels as well as to allow maritime authorities to track and
monitor ship movements [1]. Today's AIS allows ships to
communicate with other ships and land based base stations
through Very High Frequency (VHF) signals. This means
that it is not possible to communicate outside the field of
vision.
An AIS receiver in a satellite will extend the range
considerably and make it easier to monitor ship traffic and
fishing. The altitude of the satellite gives the AIS receiver a
long range and the satellite can therefore make observations
over large sea areas. The signals are strong enough to be
received by a satellite in low Earth orbit by performing the
analysis described in [2].
Korea Multi-Purpose Satellite-6 (KOMPSAT-6) is going
to be launched for two main missions and one of them is to
handle the expected volume of AIS messages around Korean
peninsula. A preliminary design of AIS payload has been
proposed with emphasis on the interfaces between Integrated
Bus Management Unit (IBMU) and AIS receiver, including
deployable AIS antennas.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present the S-AIS system overview. In Section III, we
introduce the preliminary design and we discuss it from the
point of view of electrical and mechanical interfaces. Section
IV concludes the paper.
II.
S-AIS SYSTEM FOR KOMPSAT-6
The main mission objectives of KOMPSAT-6 system are
to expedite the provision of the space-borne Synthetic
Aperture Radar (SAR) standard images with sub-meter
resolution required for the national demand in Geographical
Information Systems (GIS), Ocean & Land management,
Disaster monitoring, and Environment monitoring.
The mission applications (“GOLDEN”) are described as
follows:
 GIS:
Acquisition
of
independent
high
resolution
images
 Ocean & Land
Management: Survey of natural
resources
 Disaster & Environment Monitoring: Surveillance of
large scale disasters and its countermeasure
The KOMPSAT-6 satellite will be delivered to low Earth
orbit in 2020 not only for all-weather day-night monitoring
of Korean peninsula, but also for monitoring the ships
around Korean peninsula. After achieving mission orbit and
implementing In-Orbit Test (IOT), repetitive SAR and S-AIS
observations for Earth’s land and ocean will be conducted by
Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) for 5 years.
The overall operational concept of the S-AIS system is
shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Operational Concept of S-AIS System for KOMPSAT-6
The AIS payload is to be placed in KOMPSAT-6
platform and the mission objectives of AIS payload are as
follows:
 AIS signal collection from vessels on sea
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 Raw data sampling for OGP (On Ground Processing)
mode
 Demodulation of AIS burst signals for OBP (On Board
Processing) mode
III.
PRELIMINARY DESIGN
Space-based AIS payload has its own challenges due to
the fact that AIS is primarily intended for sea-level reception
and therefore leads to performance degradation when
observed over large areas from space.
Another issue is the message collision and the message
loss. All exchanged messages which are transmitted from
ships on the sea should be synchronized and guaranteed the
functions of the system without any message loss. On the
other hand, all AIS messages received by the satellite from
lots of vessels at the same time with the same frequency
cause a message collision and lead to message loss [3].
In order to resolve the expected concerns above, S-AIS
was designed as a reconfigurable AIS payload which
operates in both on-board processing mode and on-ground
processing
mode,
depending
on
the
shipping
traffic
conditions of the field-of-view. Furthermore, the enhanced
de-collision algorithms have been applied to successfully
decode the collided signals during preliminary design phase.
A.
Electrical Interface Design
The IBMU primary (RCL, PPS and COM) is connected
to the AIS receiver primary (hot), and the IBMU redundant
is connected to the AIS receiver redundant (cold), as shown
in Figure 2. The AIS payload has the following electrical
interface characteristics.
 RS-422/RS-485: 115.2 kbps, 230.4 kbps, 460.8 kbps
and 921.6 kbps (Baud rate is selectable)
 PPS input: RS-422/RS-485
 Redundancy control: RS-422/RS-485
 Connectors: Antennas: SMA 50 Ohm female,
 Power: High performance micro D-subminiature
 Serial: High performance micro D-subminiature
This configuration offers complete redundancy on all
parts and quadruple redundancy on the decoder boards and
most of interface board.
Figure 2.
Electrical Interfaces between AIS Receiver between
PCDU/IBMU
The Interface Board contains an RF front-end filter, one
Low Noise Amplifiers (LNAs) for each antenna, external
interface connectors, board connectors, power supply, and
communication transceivers.
The RF front-end consists of a lumped RF filter followed
by an LNA and switch. The redundancy control switch is
used to route the output signal to the active Decoder Board.
The 28VDC input supply is to be regulated to +5.0VDC
(Volts of Direct Current) using two (one hot and one cold
redundant) non-isolated DC/DC (Direct Current to Direct
Current)
converters.
The
DC/DC
converters
are
enabled/disabled by the redundancy control signal, thus
choosing which of the two Decoder Boards to be active. The
regulators powering the RF front-end electronics are fed
from the Decoder Board while the interface electronics are
powered by regulators fed by the +5.0VDC. All transceiver
circuits for the communication interfaces are also contained
in the Interface Board and the interface transceivers are
duplicated for redundancy purposes and the output enable
pin is controlled by the redundancy control signal.
The Decoder Board contains the rest of the analogue
receiver chains, analogue-to-digital converters and the digital
platform for on-board processing and sample recording as
shown in Figure 2. The digital hardware is based on a Field
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) and an anti-fuse FPGA is
used to mitigate Single Event Upsets (SEUs) on the SRAM
FPGA
configuration
data.
A
well
proven
watchdog
functionality is implemented in the Anti-fuse FPGA as well.
The
overall
reliability
value
for
AIS
receiver
is
dependent on many factors. Primarily, it is the average
lifetime ambient temperature and the average thermal cycles
per orbit integrated over the lifetime that set the reliability
figures. The temperature cycles per orbit integrated over
lifetime is based on Coffin-Manson relationships, and is
often not part of traditional reliability calculations. It is
expected that the temperature cycles will only affect the
board level soldering reliability. Table I shows the results of
reliability calculations for the AIS receiver based on
operating temperatures.
TABLE I.
RELIABILTY CALCURATION FOR AIS RECEIVER BASED ON
OPERATING TEMPERATURES
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

B.
Mechanical Interface Design
The mechanical interfaces design has been carried out for
the AIS receiver and the AIS antennas mounting on the
spacecraft. The unit accommodation design for KOMPSAT-
6 is in a preliminary design phase so far. Mounting
configurations of AIS receiver [4] and locations of antennas
on the spacecraft are shown in Figure 3 for AIS receiver and
Figure 4 for AIS antennas, respectively.
Figure 3.
AIS Receiver Mechanical Configuration for Accommodation
Figure 4.
AIS Antennas Accommodation Design on Spacecraft
The AIS receiver consists of three inter-connected boards
in a housing with all external connectors mounted at a
recessed top front. The mounting points to the satellite
structure are placed on a single plane at the bottom of the
receiver. The enclosure is made as a non-magnetic metallic
case which forms an all-enclosing electromagnetic and
radiation shield. The mechanical design assumes a spacecraft
manufacturing tolerance of +/-0.1mm.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
ETRI is now aiming to design and develop the S-AIS
system for KOMPSAT-6 using the experiences and well
trained engineers from previous project, development of
Communication,
Ocean
and
Meteorological
Satellite
(COMS). S-AIS is a system for AIS signal collection, down
conversion, and demodulation of the AIS burst signals from
vessels on the sea operating at VHF band.
In
this
paper,
we
have
looked
at
electrical
and
mechanical interfaces of S-AIS system as a part of the
preliminary design of AIS payload for KOMPSAT-6 satellite.
It is expected that the critical design and analysis will be
performed in order to fix the S-AIS payload design as part of
short term activities and future work.
REFERENCES
[1]
Guidelines for the Onboard Operational Use of Shipborne
Automatic Identification Systems (AIS), IMO Resolution
A.917(22).
[2]
Y. M. Lee and B. S. Lee, “Preliminary Performance Analysis
of Space-based AIS Payload for KOMPSAT-6”, SPACOMM
2015, April 19 - 24, 2015.
[3]
R. Goldsmith, “Preparatory Action for Assessment of the
Capacity of Spaceborne Automatic Identification System
Receivers to Support EU Maritime Policy : The PASTA
MARE Project”, Maritime forum, October 2010.
[4]
Design Definition File Summary Report, Issue 1A, ASRx50-
KSX-DDF-014, Kongsberg Seatex AS, 2015.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

