Multi-Pool Based Resource Allocation Scheme in Broadband SATCOM System
Luoyu Qin∗, Ying Tao†,Houtian Wang‡
China Academy of Space Technology, Beijing, China
Email: qinluoyu@icloud.com∗,tao.ying@126.com†,1357953688@qq.com‡
Abstract—A Multi-Satellite Broadband Network (MSBN) appears
to be a promising network for providing efﬁcient and seam-
less multimedia services. To maximize the resource utility and
optimize the Quality of Service (QoS) in MSBN, reasonable
bandwidth allocation method is, indeed, important. State-of-
the-art bandwidth algorithms, which are mostly based on the
allocation of a single satellite-ground link, ignore limited trafﬁc
capacities in other links, such as inter-satellite links. In this
paper, a Multi-Pool based Bandwidth Allocation (MPBA) scheme
is proposed to solve this problem. Firstly, a typical multi-
pool framework is built to manage bandwidth resources of all
communication links instead of the traditional single satellite-
ground link, and the corresponding resource allocation process
is analyzed. Secondly, inspired by the non-cooperative game
theory, the MPBA algorithm with a low computation complexity
is designed to ensure different QoS demands of multimedia
services. Extensive experiments are carried out, and results
obtained demonstrate that our multi-pool framework can achieve
improvement on the end-to-end delay and the network resource
utility over existing bandwidth allocation methods in MSBN.
Keywords–Resource Allocation; Satellite Communication; Mul-
timedia services; Quality of Service.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Future broadband satellite communication (SATCOM) sys-
tems will be composed of multiple satellites and orbits to
provide efﬁcient multimedia services [1] [2], which is called
multi-satellite broadband network. Notwithstanding the bene-
ﬁts stemming from this design approach, owing to the diversity
of communication links, the system must be capable of man-
aging all of the bandwidth resources in every communication
link ﬂexibly, with satellite-ground links and inter-satellite links
included. There are three key points that must be considered
in the bandwidth allocation scheme of MSBN:
•
Guarantee different QoS demands for multimedia ser-
vices.
•
Maximize the network resource utility.
•
Balance trafﬁc loads of different links.
State-of-the-art broadband SATCOM system based band-
width allocation algorithms have made great contributions on
the ﬁrst two points. A game-theoretic framework based on
Nash bargaining solution from cooperative game theory for the
bandwidth allocation of elastic services in high-speed networks
is proposed in [3], which is the ﬁrst to focus on different QoS
requirements of multimedia services in bandwidth allocation.
It provides the rate setting of users that are Pareto optimal
from the point of view of the whole system. Based on the
water-ﬁlling algorithm, a cross-layer framework for optimizing
the dynamic bandwidth allocation of Digital Video Broad-
casting - Return Channel via Satellite (DVB-RCS) system is
proposed in [4]–[8], which takes the Media Access Control
(MAC) layer into consideration and provides QoS requirement
for multimedia services in dynamic satellite channels. Rain-
fade attenuation is taken into consideration on the bandwidth
allocation scheme in [9], which makes contribution on the real-
time slot assignment. The resource allocation is modeled as a
non-cooperative game in [10], and a fair equilibrium point is
converged to improve the fairness.
However, [3]–[10] are based on the resource allocation of
a single satellite-ground link, which means that they ignore
the limited trafﬁc capacity of other links in MSBN, such as
inter-satellite links. Traditional bandwidth allocation schemes
[3]–[10], without taken the third point into consideration, are
actually local optimization methods, which could not achieve
system optimization in MSBN.
In a typical scenario of MSBN, as is shown in Figure 1, for
satellite node Si with B spot beams, the resource pools can be
divided into three types: Sk
i (k = 1, ..., B), Si → Sj, Sj → Si.
Sk
i refers to the resource pool of k-th satellite-ground link in
satellite Si, Si → Sj is the resource pool of inter-satellite link
from satellite Si to Sj, and Sj → Si is from Sj to Si.
It can be observed from Figure 1, that user1, accessing B1-
th spot beam of satellite S1, initiates a communication request
with user2, with user2 accessing B2-th spot beam of S4.
Supposing the optimal route path of the communication from
user1 to user2 is S1 → S2 → S4, then bandwidth resources
of resource pools SB1
1 , S1 → S2,S2 → S4, and SB2
4
will be
occupied by this communication.
Figure 1. The resource framework in MSBN
Traditional researches [3]–[10] just take the bandwidth
capacity of access link SB1
1
into consideration, as much service
as SB1
1
can afford will be admitted to achieve higher local
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

resource utilization. However, with the lack of considering
the limited capacity of inter-satellite links, there will be
plenty of packets congestions in inter-satellite links, which will
deteriorate the end-to-end delay and will increase the packet
loss, especially when the system throughput rate is high. And
lossless protocols, such as TCP, require retransmission of lost
packets, which substantially increases transmission time and
deteriorates congestion in inter-satellite links.
In this paper, we propose a multi-pool based bandwidth
allocation scheme, which manages all links dynamically and
minimizes network congestions in MSBN, to make up for the
drawbacks of traditional methods above. By taking diversity
QoS demands of multimedia services into account, our method
can keep the resource utilization to maximum, while satisfying
QoS demands of different multimedia services at the same
time. By adopting the gradient descent and the non-cooperative
game theories, a priority based bandwidth allocation algorithm
is proposed to achieve network utility maximum (NUM) in
our MPBA method, which features a low computational com-
plexity and guarantees different QoS demands of multimedia
services in MSBN.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Sec-
tion II, the multi-pool bandwidth optimization framework
is constructed and the corresponding optimization problem
is presented, which means to afford assurance of different
QoS demands for multimedia services. In Section III, a non-
cooperative theory based algorithm is proposed to solve the
optimization problem and the complexity of this algorithm is
analyzed. In Section IV, a simulation scenario is built based
on OPNET, and comparison results of the MPBA and the
traditional algorithm on the network end-to-end delay and the
system resource utility are analyzed. The conclusion of this
paper is given in Section V.
II.
PROPOSED SYSTEM MODEL
A. A Multi-pool based Resource Allocation Framework
As is shown in Figure 1, the trafﬁc would occupy band-
width resource of links within its route path. As a result, the
trafﬁc carrying capability of all these related links, not just
access link, should be taken into consideration in the decision
of whether a trafﬁc could be accepted. Giving this situation,
a MPBA framework is proposed in this paper. The process of
the MPBA framework can be divided into four steps:
1. A bandwidth request is initiated by useri to the system
Radio Resource Manager (RRM), with the destination node,
the user type, the service type, the minimum bandwidth re-
quirement aibps, and the current bandwidth requirement bibps
included.
2. The RRM asks for the optimal route path information
of useri from the network route manager.
3. The RRM obtains remaining bandwidth informations of
all relevant satellite-ground and inter-satellite links within the
optimal route path of useri.
4. The RRM checks if all related links can meet the band-
width demand of useri. The bandwidth request of useri will
be successful only when all links can meet the requirement.
Otherwise, a bandwidth allocation failure signaling would be
sent to useri.
Different from traditional model [3]–[10], the trafﬁc capac-
ities of every link in system, rather than only the access link,
are considered in the MPBA scheme, which is the key that
global optimism could be achieved in MSBN.
There are different types of multimedia services in MSBN.
The key of bandwidth allocation is to meet different QoS
demands of multimedia services while maximizing the system
resource utility. The MSBN based optimization problem is
analyzed below.
B. Problem Formulation
Deﬁne a link vector L = (l1, l2, ..., lM), where li is
the i-th link in MSBN and M is the number of links in
MSBN. Let the link resource vector C = (C1, C2, ..., CM)
be the current remaining bandwidth of links in L, set Q =
{user1, user2, ..., userK} consists of users to be allocated
bandwidth resources. For multimedia useri(i = 1, 2, ..., K),
let ai be the minimum bandwidth demand and bi be the current
requested bandwidth.
The utility function is a tool of measuring the cost and the
beneﬁt in the bandwidth allocation. The user utility function
ui(xi) of useri is a classical model [11] [12], which meets
ui(xi) = Pi ∗ ln(xi + 1)
(1)
where xi denotes the allocated bandwidth resource, Pi is the
trafﬁc priority, the system utility function U = PK
i=1 u(xi) is
the sum of all user utility values.
Then, we model the optimization problem of the bandwidth
allocation in MSBN as follows:
P :
max
K
X
i=1
ui(xi)
(2)
s.t.
Ax≤ C
(3)
(a ≤ x ≤ b)∪((x = 0) ∩ (x ∈ N))
(4)
Equation (4) constraints that the allocated resource for
the useri(useri ∈ Q) should meet the minimum bandwidth
request ai(ai ∈ a) and less than the maximum demand
bi(bi ∈ b), and, at the same time, the allocated resource
xi(xi ∈ x) should be an integer. if it cannot meet the minimum
demand, the system would not allocate resources for the user,
which means that xi = 0. Matrix A represents the connection
between lj(lj ∈ L) and useri(useri ∈ Q), which meets
A =
 Aji = 1,
the route path of useri through lj
Aji = 0,
otherwise
(5)
where A ∈ ℜM×K and the route path of useri is computed
by Dijkstra algorithm [13].
As is shown in (3), the link bandwidth constraint condi-
tion is multi-dimensional, which is different from the one-
dimensional constraint condition in the traditional model [3]–
[10]. Notwithstanding the beneﬁts stemming from this design,
owing to the multi-dimensional of link capacity constraint in
(3) and discontinuous constraint in (4), this optimization prob-
lem can not be solved with the traditional method. Inspired by
non-cooperative game theory, a multi-pool resource allocation
algorithm is proposed to solve this optimization problem.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

III.
THE MULTI-POOL RESOURCE ALLOCATION
ALGORITHM
Considering that the constraints of the original optimization
in (2) is complex, we separate the optimization into two sub-
problems to iteratively obtain the global optimization of the
original problem.
A. Obtain Lagrange Approximate Solution
Given the optimization problem in (2) is a strictly in-
creasing and convex function, if just the continuity constraint
condition in (3) is considered, according to the Lagrangian
duality theory [14] and the convex programming theory [15],
this problem can be solved with Lagrangian multiplication.
The Lagrange expression of optimization problem in (2) is
L(x, λ) =
K
X
i=1
Pi × ln(xi + 1) − λT(Ax − C)
s.t.
λ ≥ 0, λ ∈ ℜM×1
(6)
The derivative of (6) is as follows:
dL
dxi
=
Pi
xi + 1 −
M
X
j=1
λjAji = 0
(i = 1, 2, ..., K)
(7)
dL
dλ = Ax − C = 0
(8)
Then we have:
xi =
Pi
PM
j=1 λjAji
− 1
(i = 1, 2, ..., K)
(9)
K
X
i=1
Ajixi = Cj
(j = 1, 2, ..., M)
(10)
Inspired by the gradient descent method [16], we set the
iterative equation as follows:
xn+1
i
= max(0, min(
Pi
PM
j=1 λn
j Aji
− 1, min(AjiCj, Cj ∈ C)))
(i = 1, 2, ..., K)
(11)
λn+1 = max(0, λn − rn dL
dλn )
(12)
where
dL
dλn = Axn − 1, and min(AjiCj, Cj ∈ C) in (11)
denotes the minimum remaining bandwidth resources in re-
lated links, which guarantees the convergence of the iter-
ation. The initial step value of the iteration step is r0,
rn+1 = rn ∗ T(n = 0, 1, ...), where T is the attenuation fac-
tor, which determines the iterative rate.
The initial iteration value

x0
λ0

, which is the key
of convergence rate, is analyzed in this paper. Let Ni be
the number of links occupied by useri, which obeys Ni ∼
U(1, M). According to the probability density function the-
ory, the average number of links is
M+1
2
, thus we can set
x0
i =
2∗PM
j=1 Cj
(M+1)K (I = 1, 2, ..., K). Since the trafﬁc priority
Pi can be normalized to Pi
∼
U(0, 1), we get λ0
j
=
K
(M+1)K+2∗PM
j=1 Cj)(j = 1, 2, ..., M) from (9).
Let the iterative error factor be ∆ = ∥λi+1 − λi∥2 and
the iterative precision be IM, the iterative process ends until
∆ ≤ IM. After that, the Lagrangian approximation solution
˜x = (˜x1, ˜x2, ..., ˜xK)T is obtained, and according to the strong
duality theory in the convex optimization, the approximate
optimal solution is unique.
B. Remove Maximum and Minimum Bandwidth Constraint
Considering the discontinuous constraint condition in (4),
a non-cooperative theory based method is used to achieve the
global optimal solution in this paper.
Firstly, assume that the set of users who meet xi = 0 is
G1, the set of game users is G2, the set of users who game
success is G3, and initialize G1 = ∅, G2 = Q, G3 = ∅.
Deﬁnition 1. (Remove Maximum Bandwidth Constraint)
Obtain the Lagrangian approximate solution of all users in
G2 is ˜x = (˜x1, ˜x2, ..., ˜xN)T, for every useri(useri ∈ G2),
if ˜xi > bi, then remove useri from G2 to G3, and set the
allocated bandwidth for useri be xi = bi, and update the
remaining bandwidth of every resource pool Cj(Cj ∈ C) be
Cj = (Cj − Aijbi).
We deﬁne the process of removing all game success users
from G2 to G3 above as a subroutine. Continue iteratively
through this subroutine, until the Lagrangian approximate
solution of every user in set G2 meets ˜xi ≤ bi( ˜xi ∈ ˜x).
Deﬁnition 2. (Remove Minimum Bandwidth Constraint)
Execute the process of Remove Maximum Bandwidth Con-
straint in Deﬁnition 1, then obtain the Lagrangian approximate
solution of all users in G2 is ˜x = (˜x1, ˜x2, ..., ˜xN)T. Deﬁne
a set G4 = ∅, for every useri(useri ∈ G2), if ˜xi < ai,
then copy useri from G2 to G4. Deﬁne the utility rate
Ri = u(ai)−u(˜xi)
ai−˜xi
, and the userm(userm ∈ G4) whose utility
rate Rm is minimum is removed from G2 to G1, then set the
allocated bandwidth for userm be xm = 0.
We deﬁne the process of removing the user with minimum
utility rate from G2 to G1 above as a subroutine. Continue it-
eratively through this subroutine, until the Lagrangian approx-
imate solution of every user in set G2 meets ˜xi ≥ ai(˜xi ∈ ˜x).
Theorem 1. The process of Remove Maximum Bandwidth
Constraint in Deﬁnition 1 is the optimal solution for users in
G3.
Proof. According to the reduction to absurdity, we take a
hypothesis as follows:
After the process of Remove Maximum Bandwidth Con-
straint, there are useri ∈ G3 and userj ∈ G2, which meet
ui(bi − 1) + uj(˜xj + 1) > ui(bi) + uj(˜xj)
(13)
The hypothesis in (13) could be reduced to
ui(bi) − ui(bi − 1)
bi − (bi − 1)
< uj(˜xj + 1) − uj(˜xj)
(˜xj + 1) − ˜xj
(14)
Since the utility function ui(xi) = Pi ∗ ln(xi + 1) is
logarithmic, its derivative function is strictly monotonically
decreasing. According to the Lagrange Mean Value Theorem,
∃ bi > ξi > (bi − 1), (˜xj + 1 > ξj > ˜xj), which meets:
u′
i(ξi) = ui(bi) − ui(bi − 1)
bi − (bi − 1)
(15)
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

u′
j(ξj) = uj(˜xj + 1) − uj(˜xj)
(˜xj + 1) − ˜xj
(16)
From inequality (14), we get
u′
i(ξi) < u′
j(ξj)
(17)
However, with the process of Remove Maximum Band-
width Constraint in Deﬁnition 1, the optimal solution obtained
by the Lagrangian multiplication method in set G2 meets
dL
d˜xi
= u′
i(˜xi) −
M
X
l=1
λlAli = 0
(18)
We get
u′
i(xi) =
M
X
l=1
λlAli =
M
X
l=1
λlAlj = u′
j(xj)
(19)
Thus, due to the decreasing property of u′
i(x) and u′
i(x),
then
u′
i(xi) > u′
i(bi) ≥ u′
i(xi) = u′
j(xj) ≥ u′
j(xj)
(20)
Since the contradiction of (17) and (20), the hypothesis in
(13) is false. Thus, we verify the validity of Theron 1.
Theorem 2. The process of Remove Minimum Bandwidth
Constraint in Deﬁnition 2 is the optimal solution for users
in G1 and G3.
Proof. Because the subroutine which ﬁnds the user with
minimum utility rate Ri is a greedy algorithm [3], the optimal
solution could be achieved for users in G2 with the execution
of subroutine.
We deﬁne the system utility of i-th subroutine in Deﬁnition
2 as U i
opt and the iterative time as n.
When n = 1, the system utility U 1
opt could achieve
maximum after the execution of the ﬁrst subroutine. And we
have U 1
opt > U 0
opt.
When n = k, the optimal solution could be achieved for
users in G3 with the process of Remove Maximum Bandwidth
Constraint, and for users in G2 with the process of ﬁnding the
minimum utility rate Ri. Thus, the maximum value of the
system utility U k
opt could be achieved with the process of k-th
subroutine, and we have U k
opt > U k−1
opt .
The iteration of this subroutine is completed until all users
in G2 satisfy ai ≤ ˜xi ≤ bi. The iterative time is denoted as
N, and the system utility is U N
opt, which meets
U N
opt > U N−1
opt
> ... > U k
opt > ...U 1
opt > U 0
opt
(21)
Since the iteration of the subroutine is completed, with the
conclusion in (21), thus, we verify the validity of Theorem 2.
With the theoretical analysis above, the algorithm of solv-
ing the optimization problem in (2) could be expressed in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 The Multi-Pool based Resource Allocation algo-
rithm
Input: The parameter of set Q for users; the maximum
iterative time I in Deﬁnition 2.
Output: The allocated bandwidth x for users in set Q.
1: Set G1 = G3 = ∅, G2 = Q;
2: fmin = 0;
3: for i = 1 → I do
4:
if fmin = 0 then
5:
Execute the process of Removing Maximum Band-
width Constraint in Deﬁnition 1.
6:
Obtain the Lagrangian approximate solution in set
G2.
7:
Set G4 = ∅, and copy all users who meet ˜xi < ai
from G2 to G4.
8:
if G4 ̸= ∅ then
9:
Find the userm with the minimum value of the
utility rate Rm in G4, and remove userm from G2
to G1, set the allocated bandwidth for userm be
xm = 0 .
10:
else
11:
fmin = 1;
12:
end if
13:
else
14:
break;
15:
end if
16: end for
17: Set the allocated bandwidth for users in G2 as xi = ⌊˜xi⌋,
where ⌊˜xi⌋ is the rounded down value of ˜xi.
C. Complexity Analysis
Let K be the maximum number of iterations in the gradient
descent process, so the complexity in solving the Lagrangian
multiplication is O(K). The complexity of the process of
Remove Maximum Bandwidth Constraint in Deﬁnition 1 is
O(KNQ log2 NQ). As the subroutine of Remove Minimum
Bandwidth Constraint in Deﬁnition 2 contains the process
of Remove Maximum Bandwidth Constraint in Deﬁnition
1, the complexity of Remove Minimum Bandwidth Con-
straint in Deﬁnition 2 is O(KNQ log2 NQ × NQ log2 NQ) =
O(K(NQ log2 NQ)2).
In summary, the complexity of the proposed MPBA al-
gorithm is O(K(NQ log2 NQ)2 + NQNL), which satisﬁes the
requirement of the low computational complexity and the real-
time bandwidth allocation.
IV.
SIMULATION ANALYSIS
A. Simulation Scenarios and Parameter Settings
As is shown in Figure 2, an OPNET based simulation
scenario of MSBN is built to verify the MPBA scheme in
this paper.
The constellation of this scenario is composed of six MEO
satellites, with the height of 12,800km and 0◦ inclination,
which means that the propagation delay of satellite-ground link
is 56ms and inter-satellite link is 64ms. For each satellite, they
contain 4 satellite-ground links and 2 inter-satellite links. For
every satellite-ground link, there are 20 users to be allocated
bandwidth resources. Trafﬁc parameters of these users are
shown in Table I. The conversation and streaming service
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 2. The Simulation Scenario of MSBN
are based on IP protocol, while interactive and background
service are based on TCP protocol. We set that the number of
inter-satellite route hops for every user is 3, so the inherent
propagation delay for every user is 56 × 2 + 64 × 3 = 304ms.
In the process of solving the Lagrangian relaxation solu-
tion, the initial iteration step of the projection gradient descent
method r0 = 0.5, the attenuation factor T = 0.75.
TABLE I. THE TRAFFIC PARAMETERS OF USERS
User ID
Trafﬁc Type
Priority
Requests(bps)
Minimums(bps)
1-5
Conversation
4
25,600
25,600
6-10
Streaming
3
25,600
12,800
11-15
Interactive
2
19,200
9,600
15-20
Background
1
6,400
3,200
B. Simulation Results
The performance of the end-to-end delay and the system
utility in the traditional single resource pool framework based
bandwidth allocation algorithm [4] and our MPBA algorithm
are analyzed in this section.
Let Cs−g and Cs−s be the bandwidth capacity of the
satellite-ground link and the inter-satellite link for every satel-
lite.
For Cs−g = 307, 200bps, which means that bandwidth
resources of satellite-ground links are adequate for bandwidth
requests of 20 multimedia users. Take the bandwidth capacity
of inter-satellite Cs−s as a variable, which changes from
7 × Cs−g to 13 × Cs−g, the performance of the end-to-end
delay is shown in Figure 3. When Cs−s ≥ 12 × Cs−g,
the resource capacity of inter-satellite links are sufﬁcient
to meet maximum bandwidth requests of 20 users, so the
end-to-end delay is equal to the inherent propagation delay
(304ms) for both the traditional algorithm and the MPBA
algorithm. However, when Cs−s < 12×Cs−g, it shows that the
MPBA improves signiﬁcantly on the end-to-end delay over the
traditional algorithm since limited resource capacities of inter-
satellite links are taken into consideration in the process of the
bandwidth allocation. Moreover, the more scarce the resource
of the inter-satellite link is, the most signiﬁcant the end-to-end
delay improvement could be in the MPBA scheme.
The performance of the end-to-end delay for Cs−g =
204, 800bps, in which the resource capacity of every satellite-
ground link meets minimum bandwidth requests of 20 users,
is shown in Figure 4. And Cs−g = 153, 600bps, in which
resource capacities of satellite-ground links could not meet the
minimum bandwidth request of every user, is shown in Figure
Figure 3. The End-to-End Delay for Cs−g = 307, 200bps
5. Both Figure 4 and Figure 5 verify that the MPBA scheme
outperforms over the traditional algorithm on the end-to-end
delay for MSBN system.
Figure 4. The End-to-End Delay for Cs−g = 204, 800bps
Figure 5. The End-to-End Delay for Cs−g = 153, 600bps
The system utility, which is computed in (1), for Cs−g =
307, 200bps is shown in Figure 6. Thanks to the consideration
of the limited resource capacity in every link, the resource
manager would not accept too much network trafﬁcs in the
MPBA scheme. However, the traditional algorithm would
accept as much trafﬁcs as the satellite-ground link could afford,
with the ignorance of trafﬁc carrying capacities on inter-
satellite links, which could cause congestion in the system.
For lossless protocol based trafﬁcs, there would be much
retransmission in the traditional algorithm, which results in the
repeated occupancy of system resources and the aggravation
of congestion. As a result, the system utility of the traditional
algorithm would be lower than our MPBA scheme. As is
shown in Figure 6, the less resource capacities of inter-satellite
links, the more improvement on the system utility of the
MPBA algorithm than the traditional one.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 6. The System Utility for Cs−g = 307, 200bps
V.
CONCLUSION
The contributions of this paper are a multi-pool framework
for MSBN system along with the game theory based band-
width allocation algorithm that takes different QoS bandwidth
demands of multimedia services into account.
Unlike traditional single satellite-ground link based ap-
proaches, the dynamic bandwidth capacities of whole links are
taken into consideration in the MPBA scheme, with satellite-
ground links and inter-satellite links included. This results in
the effective improvement in the end-to-end delay, increased
the robustness to the dynamic change of bandwidth resources
in different links. Then, depending on the proposed multi-pool
framework, the game theory based bandwidth allocation al-
gorithm takes the different bandwidth demands of multimedia
services into consideration, which meets the requirement of
the low computational complexity of the on-board process.
Comparing with the traditional algorithm, simulation re-
sults show that a good usage of the system resource and
a signiﬁcant improvement of the end-to-end delay could be
achieved. Moreover, the more unbalanced the resources of
inter-satellite links and satellite-ground links are, the most
signiﬁcant the improvement could be in the MPBA scheme.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No.91438205, No.61271281).
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Radhakrishnan, W. Edmonson, F. Afghah, R. Rodriguez-Osorio,
and F. Pinto, “Survey of inter-satellite communication for small satel-
lite systems: Physical layer to network layer view,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08583, 2016.
[2]
Y. Yan, Y. Qian, H. Sharif, and D. Tipper, “A survey on smart grid com-
munication infrastructures: Motivations, requirements and challenges,”
IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, vol. 15, no. 1, 2013, pp.
5–20.
[3]
H. Ya¨ıche, R. R. Mazumdar, and C. Rosenberg, “A game theoretic
framework for bandwidth allocation and pricing in broadband net-
works,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON), vol. 8, no. 5,
2000, pp. 667–678.
[4]
A. Morell, G. Seco-Granados, and M. ´A. V´azquez-Castro, “Cross-layer
design of dynamic bandwidth allocation in dvb-rcs,” IEEE Systems
Journal, vol. 2, no. 1, 2008, pp. 62–73.
[5]
X. Sun, Q. Zhang, X. Xin, and C. Yu, “Cross-layer dynamic bandwidth
allocation based on fairness and system utility,” in Instrumentation,
Measurement, Computer, Communication and Control (IMCCC), 2012
Second International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1322–1325.
[6]
A. Morell, G. Seco-Granados, and M. A. Vazquez-Castro, “Compu-
tationally efﬁcient cross-layer algorithm for fair dynamic bandwidth
allocation,” in Computer Communications and Networks, 2007. ICCCN
2007. Proceedings of 16th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2007,
pp. 13–18.
[7]
B. de la Cuesta, L. Albiol, J. M. Aguiar, C. Baladr´on, and B. Carro,
“Innovative dama algorithm for multimedia dvb-rcs system,” EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2013, no. 1,
2013, pp. 1–14.
[8]
H. Feng, Y. Liu, H. Hu, D. Yuan, and J. Ran, “A hierarchical resource al-
location algorithm for satellite networks based on mf-tdma,” in Mecha-
tronics, Materials, Chemistry and Computer Engineering (ICMMCCE),
2015 4th International Conference on.
Atlantis Press, 2015, pp. 2819–
2824.
[9]
I. Bisio, S. Delucchi, F. Lavagetto, and M. Marchese, “Comparison
among resource allocation methods with packet loss and power metrics
in geostationary satellite scenarios,” in 2013 IEEE International Con-
ference on Communications (ICC).
IEEE, 2013, pp. 4271–4275.
[10]
S. Vassaki, A. D. Panagopoulos, and P. Constantinou, “Game-theoretic
approach of fair bandwidth allocation in dvb-rcs networks,” in Satellite
and Space Communications, 2009. IWSSC 2009. International Work-
shop on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 321–325.
[11]
I. Bisio and M. Marchese, “The concept of fairness: deﬁnitions and
use in bandwidth allocation applied to satellite environment,” IEEE
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, vol. 29, no. 3, 2014, pp.
8–14.
[12]
J. E. Xu, R. Torres, J. Border, and Y. Li, “Load balancing for return
satellite channels with multiple trafﬁc classes,” in MILCOM 2013-2013
IEEE Military Communications Conference.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1069–
1074.
[13]
S. Skiena, “Dijkstras algorithm,” Implementing Discrete Mathematics:
Combinatorics and Graph Theory with Mathematica, Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1990, pp. 225–227.
[14]
Y. Yi and S. Shakkottai, “Hop-by-hop congestion control over a wireless
multi-hop network,” IEEE/ACM Transactions On Networking, vol. 15,
no. 1, 2007, pp. 133–144.
[15]
S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex optimization.
Cambridge
university press, 2004.
[16]
S. H. Low and D. E. Lapsley, “Optimization ﬂow controli: basic
algorithm and convergence,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking
(TON), vol. 7, no. 6, 1999, pp. 861–874.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-545-6
SPACOMM 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

