 
 
 
 
Identification of Abnormal System Noise Temperature Patterns in Deep Space 
Network Antennas Using Neural Network Trained Fuzzy Logic 
 
Thomas Lu, Timothy Pham and Jason Liao    
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
4800 Oak Grove Dr. 
Pasadena, CA 91109, USA 
E-mails: Thomas.Lu@jpl.nasa.gov, Timothy.Pham@jpl.nasa.gov, Jason.Liao@ jpl.nasa.gov 
 
 
Abstract – This paper presents the development of a fuzzy 
logic function trained by an artificial neural network to 
classify the system noise temperature (SNT) of antennas in 
the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN).  The SNT data were 
classified into normal, marginal, and abnormal classes.  The 
irregular SNT pattern was further correlated with link 
margin and weather data.   A reasonably good correlation is 
detected among high SNT, low link margin and the effect of 
bad weather; however we also saw some unexpected non-
correlations which merit further study in the future.   
  
   Keywords - Deep Space Network; Neural network training; 
Fuzzy logic; Pattern identification; System noise temperature; 
Link margin. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
The communication between NASA space mission 
operations teams and their respective spacecrafts in outer 
space is accomplished via the Deep Space Network 
(DSN). To ensure proper operations in returning telemetry 
data to mission operations, sending commands to 
spacecraft and providing radiometric data for navigation 
purposes, the DSN equipment generates a large set of self-
monitor data.  These include key metrics of system 
performance such as antenna pointing, operating system 
noise temperature, receiver and decoder lock indications, 
received telemetry symbol signal-to-noise ratio, telemetry 
frame quality, etc.  These data statistics are generated 
periodically, in the order of a few seconds, throughout the 
spacecraft tracking passes. With roughly 1500 tracking 
passes a month, there is a lot of monitored data to be 
evaluated.    
 
The DSN recently developed the capability to 
automatically quantify key metrics through a set of 
automated performance dashboards, as reported in [1]. 
These dashboards enable a quick detection of passes with 
anomalous performance – compared to those that are 
nominal.  One of the tools used to classify the performance 
of the passes is the fuzzy logic function described in this 
paper.  This function is trained by an artificial neural 
network to classify the system noise temperature (SNT).  
 
The SNT reflects the amount of noise that existed in 
the communications system. Given that the signal comes 
from a far-away spacecraft at planetary distance, the 
received power is very weak.  The ability to detect the 
signal is affected by the system noise temperature; the 
lower the noise, the better chance the system can detect the 
signal. Thus, there is a strong interest in monitoring and 
classifying the SNT.  
 
The next section describes key features that are used to 
distinguish various classes of SNT profiles.  Structure of 
the neural network model employed in the data 
classification and the recognition training process are 
presented in Section III.  Section IV provides the results of 
the SNT classification, in terms of the impact to the link 
conditions (e.g., good, bad, marginal).  Further correlation 
between SNT categories and the link margin of the 
communications channel with spacecraft is shown in 
Section V.  Section VI further extends the correlation 
between the SNT and weather – one of the key factors 
impacting the link margin.  The final section summarizes 
and discusses future direction of this effort. 
 
II.  SYSTEM NOISE TEMPERATURE FEATURES 
 
Figure 1 shows a typical sample of SNT measurement 
for a given pass, in this case with Voyager spacecraft on 
day-of-year (DOY) 320/2007. Within the figure are plots 
of predicted SNT (labeled as 810-5, per reference of a 
JPL-internal document number that reflects such a model), 
observed SNT, and antenna pointing elevation.  The 
antenna elevation is one of the parameters that affect the 
SNT.  At low elevation, there are more atmospheric layers 
in the signal path; resulting in a higher noise temperature. 
The effect of elevation is built into the modeling of the 
predicted SNT.  In this particular pass, the measured SNTs 
(Blue line) closely follow the predicted curve (Gray line, 
810-5).  
 
35
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, sometimes the measured SNT curve would 
deviate from the predicted performance slightly, as shown 
in Figure 2(a).  At times, there could be very dramatic 
deviation, as shown in Figures 2(b) and (c).  Some of these 
are known, such as the variation in Figure  2(b) was likely 
caused by weather conditions. Other variations such as the 
periodic structure in Figure 2(c) are not fully understood.  
Our goal is to use the pattern recognition tool described in 
this paper to find those irregular patterns and then study 
the causes in details.   
 
 
 (a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 2: Irregular SNT measurement data from various passes. 
 
A simple threshold method may not be able to 
sufficiently characterize the SNT data since there could be 
sudden perturbations as shown in the right side of Figure 
2(b).   The SNT measurement follows the predicted model 
nicely between 15:00-20:00 GMT, but there are two big 
peaks around 21:00 and 22:00 GMT, likely caused by bad 
weather.   A simple threshold or mean/standard-deviation 
method could have missed this event. A more intelligent 
signal processing method, such as neural network, may be 
able to detect the abnormal patterns of SNT.  
 
In order to capture various irregular patterns of SNT 
data, we have designed a set of features of the SNT curves:  
mean values, standard deviations, peak numbers, peak-to-
valley variations, and slope of the peaks.   The SNT data 
for various passes are processed to extract the SNT curve 
feature vectors; each pass is represented by a feature 
vector.   Each feature vector consists of six elements:  
 
1) Average SNT Difference (from model):  
n
SNT
SNT
SNT
n
p
m
ave
∑
−
=
∆
)
(
 
 
 
where  SNTm is the measured SNT sequence of 
pass m with length n.  SNTp is the corresponding 
predicted values for that m pass.  
 
2) Standard Deviation:  
 
(
)
n
SNT
SNT
SNT
STD
n
ave
p
m
∑
− ∆
=
2
)
–
(
  
(2)  
3) Estimated 1-sigma higher bound of variation: 
 
∆SNTh = ∆SNTave + STD;  
 
(3)  
 
4) Estimated 1-sigma lower bound of variation:  
 
∆SNTl = ∆SNTave -  STD;  
 
(4)  
 
 5) SNT Peak Number:  
 
K = Number of peak and valley pairs;   
(5)  
 
where Peak-to-Valley Difference > STD;  
 
 6) SNT Peak Slope:  
 
Slope = Max(
K
Peakk −Valleyk); 
 
(6)  
 
We need to define the criteria for the SNT 
irregularities.  Since there is no known set rule, we choose 
the following definition based on observation and 
experience.  
 
1) Averaged SNT is more than 10 K above the 
performance model, i.e., Averaged SNT Difference, 
∆SNTave
 > 10K; 
2) Averaged SNT is more than 10 K below the 
performance model, i.e., Averaged SNT Difference, 
∆SNTave
  < - 10K; 
3)   Peak to valley variation > 20 K; 
4)   Slope >  5 K/minute or Slope < -5K/minute. 
 
Since the criteria are not simple Boolean operations 
and that there may be a need for adding non-threshold 
criteria in later analysis, we were concerned that a simple 
threshold approach may not be suitable for classifying the 
SNT patterns.  Therefore we decided to design a Fuzzy 
logic to classify the SNT patterns.   A neural network is 
then used to train the fuzzy logic.  
 
Figure 1:  SNT observed and predicted measurement, DOY 320/2007.  
 
(1) 
36
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
 
 
 
III. NEURAL NETWORK TRAINING 
 
An 
artificial 
neural 
network 
is 
an 
adaptive 
computational model inspired by the study of biological 
neural networks [2]. It mimics human biological neural 
functions that learn by example.  The neural net used in 
this system is a feed-forward back-propagation model, as 
illustrated in Figure 3. It is composed of separate layers of 
connected units called neurons. Every neuron of one layer 
is connected to every neuron of the next layer and each 
connection has an assigned weight value w. The output of 
a neuron y in the (k+1)th layer is calculated by a weighted 
sum of the inputs, x, in the kth layer into that neuron [3]:  
 
 
(7) 
 
 
where f is a Sigmoid transfer function which maps the 
input-output relationship into a range [0, 1].  
 
The feature vector serves as the initial input into the 
neurons of the first hidden layer. The output of neurons 
from one layer then feeds into the neurons of the next layer 
until the output layer returns a confidence value between 
[0, 1]. This architecture is known as feed-forward neural 
net.  
 
Input Feature vectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Multi-layer feed-forward neural network architecture. 
 
The neural network classifies an input data to an output 
class, giving a confidence value between the probability 
from 0 – 100%.   Thus a Fuzzy logic is formed between 
the input data and the output classes [4].  
 
Figure 4 illustrates the neural network training process.  
A person with domain knowledge first picks a set of 
training SNT data.  The expert must assign the SNT data 
(training inputs) into correct classes (target outputs).   The 
feature vector is extracted from a set of SNT data, 
presented to the input neurons of the neural network; the 
neural network feed-forwards the signal and makes an 
attempt to classify the input to an output class; the output 
result is compared to the target output; the output error is 
used to back-propagate through the network to tune the 
weights.  The learning process is repeated many times 
until the output error of the neural network is less than a 
set value [5-7].   
Figure 4: Illustration of neural network training process. 
 
We used a set of SNT data from DOY 001-065 in 2007 
as the training and testing data.  There were a total of 1950 
SNT data in the test set.  Among them, there were 1329 
(68.2%) valid SNT data to classify.   The SNT data are 
classified into six categories based on observation of the 
patterns, as shown in Table I. Category 1 represents large 
SNT deviation with large peaks and slopes; Category 2 has 
large but smooth positive deviations; Category 3 has small 
deviations and small perturbations; Category 4 follows the 
predicted SNT consistently; Category 5 has small and 
smooth deviations; Category 6 has large and smooth 
negative deviations.  
 
TABLE I.  
DEFINITION OF SNT CATEGORIES 
SNT 
Category 
Features 
1 
∆SNTave
  > 10K or 
∆SNTave
  < -10K or Slope > 
5K/min or Peak No > 5 
2 
∆SNTave
  > 10K, Slope < 5K/min, Peak No < 5 
3 
∆SNTave
<    +/-10K, STD  <= 3K, Slope < 5K/min, 
Peak No < 5 
4 
∆SNTave
 <= +/-5K, STD  <= 3K, Slope < 5K/min, 
Peak No < 0 
5 
∆SNTave
 <= +/- 5K, STD  <= 3K, ∆SNTh and ∆SNTl 
< +/-5K,  Slope < 5K/min, Peak No < 2   
6 
∆SNTave
 < -10K, STD  <= 3K, , Slope < 5K/min, 
Peak No < 5 
 
To form the training data, we randomly picked 39 
samples for Category 1; 33 samples for Category 2; 61 
samples for Category 3; 69 samples for Category 4; 35 
samples for Category 5; and 26 samples for Category 6. 
The training samples are hand picked to represent varieties 
of feature differences in all six categories.  We constructed 
a three-layer feed-forward neural network, each layer 
consists of six neurons: six input neurons for the six input 
)
(
1
1
k
j
k
i
N
i
k
ij
k
j
b
w x
f
y
+
=
∑
=
+
Output Classification 
 
     SNT 
Data 
 Expert 
Neural 
Network 
 
Y or N 
  
Feature 
Vector 
Training 
Compare 
37
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
 
 
 
features; six output neurons for the six categories, and six 
hidden layer neurons are chosen to accommodate non-
linear boundaries.  The training data is fed into the neural 
net in the Matlab program.  The neural net converged 
rather quickly; it took less than two minutes on a 
Windows-based computer with Intel dual-core running at 
2GHz.  After the training, the tool is ready for use to 
classify the SNT data.  
IV. CLASSIFICATION OF SNT DATA 
 
Table II shows the initial classification of the SNT 
data.  The features were extracted based on eqs. 1-6.  The 
six feature elements were fed into the neural network.   
When one or more of the six output neurons exceeded a 
preset threshold (nominally, 50%), the neural net would 
classify the input SNT as belonging to the output 
categories.  An input could be classified in more than one 
category, as long as all possible likelihoods were detected.  
This is reflected in Table II where there is an overlap in 
the percentage of each category, relative to the input 
samples.    
 
It is often difficult to have a clear cut set of the 
boundaries between categories; for example, it is hard to 
define a priori of the number of peaks or the peak slope 
value in each category.  A Boolean classification approach 
would require such parameters be defined ahead of time.  
With neural net approach, it is not necessary to do so.  We 
can pick the training samples that we believe are 
representative to each category, use them to train the fuzzy 
logic, and let the neural net feedback do the detection.  
 
TABLE II.  
INITIAL CLASSIFICATION OF SNT DATA 
SNT Category 
No. of SNT Data 
Percentage 
1 
170 
12.9% 
2 
1158 
87.1% 
3 
1030 
77.5% 
4 
1017 
76.5% 
5 
1004 
75.5% 
6 
851 
64.0% 
 
In Table III, we further reduce the classes into three 
major classes: “Good”, “Marginal” and “Bad”. The neural 
network is constructed as six inputs, six hidden, and three 
output neurons.  In this case, for each input data, we only 
pick the highest output neuron that is greater than 50% as 
the category.  For the dates between DOY 1-65/2007, the 
neural network classified 67.7% of data as “good”, 19.9%  
“Marginal”, and 12.3% “Bad” data.  This is a qualitative 
classification.  Not all “Bad” SNT data result in severely 
impacted link performance.  Further investigation is 
warranted to further study the behavior of the SNT pattern 
related to the DSN data quality.  
 
The neural net/fuzzy logic provides an effective tool 
for the SNT quality assessment.  Figure 5 shows the 
performance of various antennas (designated as DSS) 
based on the SNT classification.  Good SNT varies from 
an average of 43% (DSS-63) to 96% (DSS-14).   
 
 
TABLE III.  
USING FUZZY LOGIC TO CLASSIFY SNT DATA INTO 
THREE CATEGORIES 
Category Classification 
Feature Extraction  
No. of 
SNT Data 
Percentage 
1 
Good:  
SNT matches 
performance 
model 
∆SNTave
 < +/- 5K, 
∆SNTh and ∆SNTl < +/-
5K, Slope <= 5K/min, 
Peak No <= 2 
853 
67.7% 
2 
Marginal: 
SNT has minor 
deviation from 
performance 
model 
∆SNTave
  <= +/- 10K, 
∆SNTh and ∆SNTl <=+/-
10,  Slope <= 5K/min, 
Peak No <= 5 
251 
19.9% 
3 
Bad: 
SNT has major 
deviation from 
performance 
model 
∆SNTave
  > +/- 10, 
∆SNTh and ∆SNTl > +/-
10, Slope > 5K/min, 
Peak No > 5 
155 
12.3% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Classification of SNT data for various DSN antennas (DSS), 
DOY 1 – 65, 2007. 
 
V. CORRELATION BETWEEN SNT AND LINK 
MARGIN 
 
The Link Margin (LM) is one of the major indicators 
of the data communication quality. It is defined as the 
difference between the received symbol SNR (signal-to-
noise ratio) and the decoder threshold required for 
SNT Feature Classification vs. DSS
DSN Wide Average Good SNT= 68%, Maringal = 20%, Bad = 12%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
14
15
24
25
26
34
43
45
54
55
63
65
DSS 
Percentage
Bad SNT
Marginal SNT
Good SNT
38
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
 
 
 
successfully decoded data. A positive link margin implies 
a good communications channel condition; the higher the 
margin, the less likely the link encounters data corruption.  
A negative margin, on the other hand, indicates likelihood 
with data demodulation and decoding; thus, would 
negatively affect the data return to missions.  There is an 
inverse relationship between the SNT and link margin.  An 
increase in noise temperature would reduce the received 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and subsequent link margin, 
and vice versa.  The correlation coefficient is defined as:  
 
             CorrCoef =
∆SNTave(i)LM( j)
∑
∆SNTave(i)2
∑LM( j)2
∑
 
(8) 
 
where LM is the average link margin of a given pass 
and where both the 
∆SNTave
and LM data are normalized 
to be within (-1, 1).   
 
The correlation coefficient shows the relationship 
between the SNT and LM:  
 
• 
If the ∆SNT and LM are positively correlated, 
then Corr Coef > 0; 
• 
If the ∆SNT and LM are negatively correlated, 
then Corr Coef < 0; 
• 
If the SNT and LM are uncorrelated, then Corr 
Coef = 0; 
 
Figure 6 shows the ∆SNT-LM correlation at DSS-45 
antenna for Voyager (VGR2) passes.  From the graph, we 
can see the ∆SNT and LM data from VGR2 data are 
strongly negatively correlated, with Corr Coef = -0.64.  It 
means that if the average SNT difference from the 
performance model increases, it will cause the link margin 
to drop, as expected.  
 
       
 
Figure 6: Correlation between SNT and Link Margin (LM) of VGR2 on 
DSS45 shows strong negative correlation (Corr Coef = -0.64). 
We further analyze the relationship between the ∆SNT 
and LM in the three spikes (#1, #2, and #3) in Figure 6 
 
In Figure 7, we can see an increased slope of the SNT 
between 7:47 and 9:08 GMT caused a drop in the link 
margin.  In both Figures 8 and 9 for VGR2 passes on DOY 
54 and DOY 117, we also see an increased slope of the 
SNT matched with a drop in link margin.   
 
               
 
 
Figure 7: Negative correlation between SNT and Link Margin seen in 
VGR2 data on DOY18/2007 pass at DSS45.   
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Negative correlation between SNT and Link Margin seen in 
VGR2 data on DOY 54/2007 pass at DSS45. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Negative correlation between SNT and Link Margin seen in 
VGR2 data on DOY 117/2007 pass at DSS45. 
 
However, not all data have expressed a strong negative 
correlation between SNT and LM.  We have observed that 
some other spacecraft data are either weakly negatively 
correlated (Corr Coef = -0.2 - -0.3), or uncorrelated (Corr 
Coef = -0.2 - +0.2).  More validation effort is needed to 
understand these instances.  
1 
2 
3 
39
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
 
 
 
VI. CORRELATION OF SNT CLASSIFICATION 
WITH WEATHER 
 
In this section, we extend the correlation to include the 
weather effect.  Atmospheric effects in the line of sight 
between the ground tracking antenna and spacecraft are 
reflected in the observed system noise temperature 
measurements. Increased precipitation from rain and 
increased humidity would cause a higher SNT.  Figure 
10(a) shows the weather data during the pass. The 
cumulative precipitation for the day, reflecting the rain, is 
seen occurring at 15:00 – 18:00 GMT.  The SNT starts to 
depart from a modeled curve and steady increases over the 
same period, per Figure 10(b).  The received symbol signal 
to noise ratio, in Figure 10(c), drops as much as six (6) dB 
over the same period.   
 
 
(a) 
 
 (b) 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 10: Correlation between (a) high SNT peaks, (b) low Link 
Margin, and (c) bad weather.   
 
There is a general positive correlation among the 
changes in SNT, link margin and weather precipitation in 
this case.  Note that there was similar increased SNT and 
decreased symbol SNR near 8:00 GMT, but surprisingly 
there was no indication of rain from the cumulative 
precipitation measurements. This is an example of possible 
inconsistency among the observables.  Such obstacle 
would be hard to overcome for a detection scheme using 
Boolean logic.   The neural network approach, given 
proper training data, may offer a way to overcome these 
difficulties.  
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTION 
 
We have presented the development of a neural 
network trained Fuzzy logic for system noise temperature 
classification.  With the inherent advantage of neural 
network training using examples without setting concrete 
rules, we have trained the neural network to evaluate the 
characteristics of measured SNT and to classify its impact 
to the communications link.  We have observed, as 
expected, some correlations between “Bad” SNT category 
and low link margin conditions, which would affect the 
mission data return. In the future, adding link margin 
information to the training of the SNT classification 
should help to improve the results.  Further analysis of 
other observed signatures of SNT deviation beyond the 
standard six categories discussed in this paper would 
further the understanding on the operating behavior and 
performance of DSN antennas; thus, pointing the way to 
possible improvement. Certainly, the potential application 
of this pattern recognition algorithm to other areas of DSN 
performance analysis should be considered.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology under a 
contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA).  
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Pham, T. and Liao, J., “DSN Performance Dashboards”, SpaceOps 
2008, Heidelberg, May 2008. 
[2] Jain, A. K., Mao, J., and Mohiuddin, K. M., “Artificial Neural 
Networks: A Tutorial,” Computer, vol. 29, no. 3, 1996, pp. 31-44. 
[3] Hagan, H. T., Demuth, H. B., and Beale, M.H., Neural Network 
Design, Martin Hagan, 2002.  
[4] Yager, R. et al. ed., Fuzzy Sets and Applications: Selected Papers 
by L.A. Zadeh, John Wiley, New York, 1987.  
[5] Ye, D., Edens, W., Lu, T., and Chao, T., “Neural Network target 
identification system for false alarm reduction,” Optical Pattern 
Recognition XX, Proceedings of the SPIE, Volume 7340, 2009.  
[6] Lu, T. and Mintzer, D., “Hybrid neural networks for nonlinear 
pattern recognition, ” Optical Pattern Recognition, ed. by F. T. S. 
Yu and S. Jutamulia, Cambridge University Press, 1998.  
[7] Lu, T. and Lerner, J., “Spectroscopy and hybrid neural network 
analysis,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume 84, Issue 6, 1996, pp 
895 – 905.  
 
40
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

