 
Leveraging Commercial Software-Defined Radio for Low Cost Deep Space Testing 
Timothy Pham, Leslie White  
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, California, USA 
 
e-mails: {Timothy.Pham, Leslie.White}@jpl.nasa.gov 
 
 
Abstract – In a typical space mission development life cycle, 
there is a stage where the spacecraft needs to test against the 
ground station for interface compatibility to ensure that the 
spacecraft will be properly tracked after launch.  This testing 
normally requires the spacecraft team to bring their flight 
equipment to the ground station facility.  While recognizing that 
testing with actual flight or engineering module is the most 
preferred option because of maximum fidelity, there are 
occasions when the use of actual flight hardware is a logistical 
challenge because of constraints in spacecraft development 
schedule. Having another test tool that can emulate the 
spacecraft signal – by recording the signal transmitted by the 
spacecraft and later regenerating a radio frequency (RF) signal 
for ground system testing - would be very useful.  It is even more 
beneficial if such spacecraft emulator is inexpensive and highly 
portable.  In this paper, we describe a new approach that 
enables ground station testing in support of deep space missions.  
This is very different from the traditional approach used in the 
Deep Space Network (DSN) where test equipment is custom 
designed and built, with much more capability in generating 
signal of different characteristics, but also at a much greater 
cost.  The new approach, which can be used in complement with 
the traditional DSN test signal generator or with spacecraft 
flight radio equipment.  The new test capability involves a very 
low-cost and light-weight recorder/playback assembly (RPA).  
This equipment leverages on the commercially available 
Software-defined Radio (SDR) and public-domain software. 
The RPA, thus far, has been used to support two missions under 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).  
One effort is to validate that the Uchinoura 34-m tracking 
station of the Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) 
can track the upcoming NASA Exploration Mission 1 (EM-1) 
spacecraft, scheduled for launch in 2019.  The RPA helps the 
EM-1 
team 
keeps 
their 
flight 
system 
for 
other 
development/testing needs.  The second effort is to help with the 
testing certification of the 21-m antenna ground station at the 
Morehead State University (MSU) in Kentucky, United States, 
prior to the time when the NASA Lunar IceCube spacecraft is 
ready for actual compatibility testing.  The RPA also enables 
MSU student/staff training on the operations of the new ground 
station.  This low-cost test signal generator allows the MSU team 
to save money and effort by not having to develop a full-scale 
self-generated telemetry test signal source. 
 
Keywords - SDR; RF Test Capability; Uchinoura; Morehead State 
University Ground Station. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In a typical life cycle of deep space mission development, 
there is a period prior to spacecraft launch when the flight 
communications system needs to be tested for interface 
compatibility against the ground station that will be later 
tracking the spacecraft.  The compatibility testing normally 
requires the spacecraft team to bring their flight radio to the 
ground station test facility.  The tests would exercise various 
modes of spacecraft operation, e.g., different data rates, 
coding schemes, signal levels, to ensure that the signal can be 
properly processed by the ground station. Under the 
philosophy of “test as you fly”, this is a good practice to 
ensure the compatibility between flight and ground system; 
however, there are occasions when such a test poses logistic 
problem to the flight team, e.g., their equipment may be tied 
up with other development effort.  Having a test instrument 
that can serve as a substitute for flight equipment – a tool that 
records the signal transmitted by spacecraft and recreates an 
RF signal for injection into the ground station under test - 
would offer more flexibility.  The benefits are even greater if 
such a spacecraft emulator is very affordable and highly 
portable, as in this case, because it reduces the financial 
burden on the mission and simplifies the shipping logistics 
when conducting tests.   
Section II of this paper discusses a design and capability 
of the Recorder/Playback Assembly (RPA), developed at the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory in support of NASA missions.  The 
benefits of the equipment are captured in Section III.  Some 
possible future improvements to the equipment operations, 
gained from our testing experiences, are offered in Section 
IV.  Support to the EM-1 mission testing is described in 
Section V, followed by a similar discussion on test support at 
the Morehead State University in Section VI.   
II. 
DESIGN ARCHITECTURE 
The Recorder/Playback Assembly offers a complementary 
capability to the test equipment typically developed in the 
NASA Deep Space Network.  Up to now, the test equipment 
is custom designed and built to the specifications so it can 
generate test signals that emulate various characteristics of 
spacecraft that require DSN support.  Such development 
requires significant effort, both in terms of financial resource 
and time.  The new SDR-based equipment described in this 
paper leverages on commercial products; thus, enables a 
quick development at low cost.  The RPA can be used in 
complement with the DSN test signal generator by recording 
its signal and replicating at another facility; thus, enables the 
test capability at the new site without much cost and effort. 
The RPA, as seen in Figure 1, comprises of three key 
components: (1) a laptop computer with a very fast 
input/output (via USB3 connections) to enable data transfer 
23
Copyright (c) The Government of NASA, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
from the transceiver to a disk storage, (2) a high capacity data 
storage (~3 Terabytes or greater), and (3) a commercial SDR 
RF transceiver.  The computer provides the graphical user 
interface for user to control the signal generation or signal 
recording.  It configures and controls the setting of the 
transceiver. In the recording mode, the computer transfers a 
10-MHz digitized samples from the transceiver to the disk 
storage.  In the playback mode, it reverses the digital sample 
flow, from the disk storage to the transceiver. In addition, the 
laptop also generates a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) 
spectrum of the recorded or playback signal, using the 
digitized samples.  The second component – the disk storage 
- archives the samples. Both the computer and disk storage 
use a high speed USB3 interface for data transfer.  For a 10 
MHz I/Q sampling, the data throughput can be as much as 80 
MB/s. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Components of the Recorder Playback Assembly 
 
The most crucial element of the RPA is the RF transceiver 
[1].  On the recording, it is equivalent to a heterodyne receiver 
where the RF signal is first down-converted to an IF 
frequency and then digitized.  On the playback, the functions 
are reversed.  The particular commercial unit we employed in 
the RPA can digitize an RF signal input up to a rate of 20 
Msps, I/Q sampling.  To enable the recorded data possibly 
used by other SDRs (e.g., for future upgrade), we chose to 
have the digitized samples written in the standard 32-bit 
format.  This prompts a high I/O rate (80 MB/s) and a large 
data storage capacity.  Our particular chosen SDR supports 
an input/output RF frequency range of 1 MHz - 6 GHz.   This 
allows the signal recording, or playback, directly at S-band 
frequency (~2.3 GHz) that the ground station expects to be 
receiving from the EM-1 spacecraft.  For the Morehead State 
University testing with the Lunar IceCube spacecraft, since 
the spacecraft RF transmitted signal will be at X-band (8.4 
GHz) which is beyond the capability of the transceiver, the 
recorded and playback signal are done at an intermediate 
frequency (IF) around 300 MHz.   In the ground system under 
test, this signal injection point is after the first RF/IF 
downconversion and prior to the carrier and symbol 
demodulation.  
The SDR transceiver can operate with an internal clock or 
be synchronized to an external 10 MHz reference.  Since the 
SDR expects a Low Voltage Transistor Transistor Logic 
(LVTTL) input level for the frequency reference, we needed 
to build an adapter to convert a typical sinusoidal reference 
(+13 dBm) to that of LVTTL.   This adapter essentially is a 
resistor-capacitor-diode network to level shift and it clamps 
the signal level to the 0-volt minimum and 3.3-volt 
maximum, as required for LVTTL compatibility.  The use of 
an external frequency reference from a highly stable clock, 
such as those produced by a Hydrogen maser at both ground 
stations of JAXA and MSU, produces a significantly more 
stable signal, which is critically important to our test 
objectives. Performance of the signal stability with and 
without the external reference is later discussed in section VI. 
 The transceiver control software is leveraged on public-
domain software available from the gnu library.  This is 
another benefit for using the commercial SDR.  We 
developed two modes of operation, either recording or 
playback.  Figure 2 shows a sample of the graphical control 
interface for data recording.  By specifying the local 
oscillator frequency, typically a few MHz off from the actual 
carrier frequency, we can position the signal to be sampled 
away from the dc component.  Figure 3 shows a similar 
control window for the playback where one can specify the 
selection of the data file and output frequency, along with 
other detailed configuration parameters such as the setting of 
RF, IF and baseband gain. In both recording and play back 
modes, an FFT spectrum, as seen in Figure 4, is provided to 
aid with signal monitoring. 
 
 
Figure 2. Control Interface for Recording 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Control Interface for Playback 
 
24
Copyright (c) The Government of NASA, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
Figure 4. Spectral monitor of recorded/playback signal 
 
These control interface windows make it easy to operate 
the system.  Typically, only a few parameters such as the 
input/output filename and the signal frequency need to be 
changed when running different tests. 
III. 
 BENEFITS 
From our experience, below are some key benefits of the 
RPA. 
(1) Low Cost - In application where one needs to replicate 
a test signal source that is only available from other high-end 
equipment, this low-cost recorder/playback capability is an 
attractive option.  The hardware cost, purchased in 2016, is 
around $2K.  About 1 month of effort is required to assemble 
and test the monitor & control software, leveraging on the 
programming codes available to the public.  
(2) Portability - Another feature we highly value is the 
equipment portability.  The whole RPA weighs just a bit 
heavier than a common laptop, less than 7 lbs., making it very 
easy to hand carry to a distant test site. 
 (3) Upgradability - Since the SDRs are commercial 
products and supported by a large user community who also 
provide many standard interfaces and functionality, as more 
powerful products become available, the system could be 
easily upgraded without much effort. 
 (4) Flexibility - The wide range of frequency supported by 
the transceiver provides much flexibility with testing.  It 
allows us to inject the test signal directly into the front-end of 
ground system at S-band frequency (the same signal path 
traveled by spacecraft signal during operational phase), or at 
some intermediate frequency in mid-stream of the system.  
The ease of setting the carrier frequency makes it easy to 
simulate different spacecraft signals under test.   
(5) Efficiency - The RPA can generate test signal with the 
data-repeat option.  It can continually regenerate the signal 
with only a small set of recorded data; thus, reduces the need 
for a large data storage or a long recording session. 
IV. 
FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS   
Although the RPA sufficiently supports our testing needs, 
there are certain features we could pursue in the future that 
would improve its operability: 
 (1) Gain setting - The gnu library allows for the gain 
setting of three stages: baseband, IF and RF.  By setting these 
gains in midrange, we are able to capture and regenerate the 
signal at nominal power level and with good quality (i.e., 
without distortion).  Having a better understanding on how 
various combinations of gain setting work would help toward 
creating a signal of different power levels that is best suited 
for various operating conditions.   
 (2) Trimming of recorded data – Some of our recorded 
data files started earlier than the actual data segment of 
interest.  Under the current capability, the entire data file is 
replayed, resulted in some wait time before reaching the 
segment of interest.  Having utility to trim the data file to just 
segments of interest would increase the efficiency of testing.     
(3) Higher frequency – As more commercial products 
become available with greater capability, we would consider 
upgrade the SDR to those operating at X-band (8.4 GHz) and 
beyond.  This would further enhance testing capability for X-
band, as well as Ka-band (26-32 GHz), missions. 
V. 
EM-1 MISSION SUPPORT 
One objective of the RPA development is to provide test 
support to the Exploration Mission 1, currently scheduled to 
be launched in late 2019 [2]. The EM-1 spacecraft will be on 
a three-week trajectory that takes it to the Moon, stays in the 
parking orbit for a few days, and then returns to Earth.  EM-
1 is intended to demonstrate the operation of a new spacecraft 
system, along with the new Space Launch System, prior to 
the Exploration Mission 2 that will be carrying the astronaut 
crew.  In support of future crewed mission, precise navigation 
and spacecraft orbit determination, especially for the Earth 
return segment, are important.  For EM-1, most of the 
tracking during the mission three-week operations will be 
provided by the NASA Deep Space Network; however, in the 
interest of getting supplement tracking data during the critical 
phase of the mission, e.g., Earth return, additional 3-way 
Doppler data from the JAXA antenna is deemed beneficial to 
mission navigation. 
The focus of JAXA support is mainly on tracking EM-  1 
carrier signal and providing 3-way Doppler data to the 
mission navigation.  3-way refers to a mode of operation 
where the receiving antenna tracks the spacecraft signal is 
coherent to the uplink of another transmitting antenna.   In 
our case, the DSN antenna would provide an uplink to the 
spacecraft and JAXA antenna will track the spacecraft 
downlink, in concurrent with the DSN tracking.  No telemetry 
data processing is needed from JAXA Uchinoura station.   
Normally, we could leverage a spacecraft currently in 
flight that has the same signal format to test the ground 
system compatibility with future spacecraft.  However, EM-
1 signal format is different from other lunar missions 
currently in operation, such as the Lunar Reconnaissance 
Orbiter (LRO).  EM-1 telemetry data is directly modulated 
onto the carrier.  In contrast, the LRO telemetry data is first 
modulated on a subcarrier, prior to the carrier modulation.  To 
ensure that Uchinoura system can track the EM-1 signal, it 
was decided that a replica of EM-1 signal – being recorded 
and played back by the RPA – should be used to check out 
the compatibility of the flight and ground interface.  The main 
objective is to demonstrate that the receiver at the Uchinoura 
station can track the carrier in the presence of telemetry 
modulation, and to provide good, stable Doppler data.    
25
Copyright (c) The Government of NASA, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
A preliminary test was recently conducted using the RPA 
to characterize the Doppler data tracked by Uchinoura station 
[3].  The RPA previously recorded the EM-1 RF test signal 
during its compatibility testing with the Deep Space 
Network. The recorded data were then used to generate a 
duplicated EM-1 signal at 2.3 GHz (S-band).  The RPA 
output was injected into the front end of the Uchinoura 
station, in front of the low noise amplifier.  The Uchinoura 
receiver successfully locked to the RPA signal and produced 
Doppler data (measured carrier frequency) as shown in 
Figure 5.  Testing was done for several EM-1 configurations 
of different telemetry data rate ranging from 72 ksps to 2 
Msps.  The test also demonstrated that it could track EM-1 
signal with both the Costa loop (relying on telemetry symbols 
only, not carrier) and the standard phase lock loop (relying on 
the residual carrier buried underneath the telemetry 
spectrum). 
 
 
Figure 5. Uchinoura test with EM-1 signal, 2017-12-01 
 
One may observe that there is a cyclic pattern within each 
data rate configuration. This is caused by the data repeat 
feature in the play back mode discussed earlier in Section III.  
VI. 
MSU SUPPORT 
The 21-m antenna system at the Morehead State 
University is being upgraded to support the Lunar IceCube 
mission, and likely also for other CubeSats launched on the 
EM-1 mission along with the Lunar IceCube [4][5].   This 
system will be capable of deep space tracking at X-band (8.4 
GHz).  The system has some DSN-replica digital equipment 
that are specialized in telemetry, tracking and command in 
deep space environment.  Due to limited budget and time 
constraint, the 21-m system does not have a full-scale test 
equipment that can simulate the Lunar Ice Cube signal.  The 
RPA helps to fill this gap.  It first recorded a test signal of 
Lunar IceCube characteristics that was generated by a more 
capable DSN Test Signal Generator.  The signal was then 
recreated and injected into the MSU ground station.  Through 
this effort, the RPA helps verifying the ground system 
components and building up the confidence that the MSU 
ground system would be ready to support further interface 
testing with the actual Lunar IceCube flight system when it 
becomes available. 
The recorded Lunar IceCube test signal comprises of a 
suppressed carrier modulated by telemetry data which are 
encoded with Turbo code, rate 1/6.  The preliminary test 
results demonstrated that the MSU equipment can 
successfully demodulate and decode the Lunar IceCube 
telemetry data at 64 ksps.  Further testing is needed to 
demonstrate similar performance at 384 ksps where Lunar Ice 
Cube is expected to operate.   
During the MSU testing, we were also able to characterize 
the performance of the RPA with and without the 10 MHz 
reference obtained from the on-site hydrogen maser clock.  
Figure 6 shows the measured frequency stability of the test 
signal, as detected by the receiver.  With the 10 MHz 
reference input, the carrier signal was very stable.  The 
frequency variation was within 20 mHz over short term and 
70 mHz over a period of 2.5 hrs.    
 
 
Figure 6. Stability of the test signal, with external reference.  
 
 
Figure 7. Stability of the test signal, with internal clock.  
 
When generated with the transceiver internal clock, the 
carrier frequency drifted as much as 60 Hz just over 14 
minutes, as shown in Figure 7.  With such variation, while it 
is possible to track the carrier with a wider bandwidth, it 
would be difficult to maintain symbol demodulation with the 
26
Copyright (c) The Government of NASA, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
maximum bandwidth allowed by the receiver.  Our 
assessment is that in order for the RPA to support telemetry 
data testing, it needs to be synchronized to a stable external 
frequency reference. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we discussed the use of a commercial 
software-defined radio in our testing effort at the JAXA 
Uchinoura and the Morehead State University ground 
stations.  This test tool allows us to record, and later play 
back, the EM-1 signal generated by the spacecraft under 
development, and the emulated Lunar IceCube generated by 
the DSN Test Equipment. The test capability is of low cost, 
both in term of hardware procurement and software 
development, thanks to the available commercial products 
and public domain SDR software.  One most valuable feature 
is the portability of the system.  Its light weight makes it very 
easy to transport and conduct test at other distant ground 
station, without a need for transportation shipment or on-site 
installation.  
Both preliminary testing at Uchinoura and MSU have been 
successful.  At Uchinoura, the ground station demonstrated it 
could track the recorded EM-1 signal. At the Morehead State 
University, the RPA enabled demonstration of functionality 
of the ground station, where telemetry data emulating the 
Lunar IceCube mission was successfully demodulated and 
decoded.  From our testing, we learned that it is critical to 
have the RPA using an external atomic frequency reference 
– instead of relying on the internal clock - in order to achieve 
the necessary frequency stability needed for Doppler and 
telemetry processing.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in this paper was carried out by the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 
under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration.  We would like to thank Hiroshi Takeuchi and 
Atsushi Tomiki at JAXA for their indispensable assistance 
with the Uchinoura testing.  Support in conducting additional 
tests at the Morehead State University by Sarah Wilczewski 
and data extraction by Jason Liao are much appreciated. 
REFERENCES 
[1] HackRF One, https://greatscottgadgets.com/hackrf/, retrieved: 
Mar. 2018. 
[2] EO Sharing Earth Observation Resources, eoPortal Directory, 
Orion/EM-1(Exploration 
Mission 
1), 
https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-
missions/o/orion-em-1, retrieved: Mar. 2018. 
[3] Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Uchinoura Space 
Center, 
http://global.jaxa.jp/about/centers/usc/index.html, 
retrieved: Mar.  2018. 
[4] P.E. Clark et al., Lunar Ice Cube Mission: Determining Lunar 
Water Dynamics with a First Generation Deep Space Cubesat, 
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016), 
https://www.hou.usra.edu/meetings/lpsc2016/pdf/1043.pdf, 
retrieved: Mar. 2018. 
[5] J. Kruth, B. Malphrus, J. Wyatt, and T. Pham, “Enabling 
University-Operated Ground Support for Deep Space Small 
Spacecraft Missions – A Pilot Development with the Morehead 
State University 21-m Ground Station”, 2017 Interplanetary 
Small Satellite Conference, San Jose, CA, May 1-2, 2017, 
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/g9ran9t1itphckk/AADVVbRW
Hhw8XOOGEZsQvpYwa/C2-
J.%20Wyatt?dl=0&preview=Enabling+University-
Operated+DSN+Station+v.4.28.2017.pptx, retrieved: Mar. 
2018. 
 
27
Copyright (c) The Government of NASA, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

