Web-based Geographical Information System for Real-Time Flood Monitoring of
the River Arachthos in Epirus Region, Greece
Stavros Kolios1,2
1Department of Computer Engineering, Technological and
Educational Institute of Epirus
Arta, Greece
2Department of Geography, University of the Aegean,
Mytilene, Greece
e-mail: stavroko@gmail.com
Petros Karvelis1
1Department of Computer Engineering, Technological and
Educational Institute of Epirus
Arta, Greece
e-mail: pkarvelis@teiep.gr
Chrysostomos Stylios1
1Department of Computer Engineering, Technological and
Educational Institute of Epirus
Arta, Greece
e-mail: stylios@teiep.gr
Abstract— The scope of this work is to present the design and
the developmental stages of a Web–based GIS (Geographic
Information System) for flood monitoring of the Arachthos
river in the Region of Epirus. The system is designed to cover
the specific river characteristics as well as the potential flood
affection in the greater area along
the riversides.
The
development of the WebGIS is based on the client–server
model and uses Google Maps API (Application Programming
Interface)
services
for
data
plotting.
Specific
scientific
instrumentation for monitoring the height of the river water
and
the
current
meteorological
conditions
is
connected
automatically to the system, providing relative measurements
in real-time basis. Modern methodologies are used so that to
provide valuable information and to create a trustful and
accurate system for real-time monitoring of river flow and the
early warning of possible floods.
Keywords- river floods; early-warning; monitoring; WebGIS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Natural hazard of floods, as well as its risk assessment
is
a
major
topic
of
interest
among
many
scientific
communities and the local/national governance, worldwide
[1]. The main reason behind this global interest is the
increase of storms in terms of frequency, magnitude and
impact, which is partly owed to the climate change [2].
Therefore, it is important to analyze where these hazard
events can occur, with what frequency, and which is the
vulnerability of an area in cases of possible flooding and/or
the river flow expansion beyond its riversides. The real-time
monitoring, as well as the risk management and assessment
includes
suitable
instrumentation,
and
automated
methodologies for the estimation of the level of risk,
followed by an evaluation of this risk level [3][4].
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are already
playing a major role in the flood risk assessment [5][6].
Nowadays,
there
are
many
technological
advances,
expanded Internet, GIS and relevant spatial information
technologies along with great availability of open-source
data and software. New methodologies and algorithms are
able to process huge datasets and different types of
information.
The modern GIS technologies allow instantaneous
exchange of spatial information through Web-GIS platforms
providing access to various research communities, experts,
professionals and the wide public. GIS are able to present
risk related information on various spatial and temporal
scales. Such an integrated platform includes Decision
Support System (DSS) to assist decision makers through
interactive tools to better understand and handle risk
management issues and at the same time to be the
informative channels for local and regional agencies, as well
as the wide public [7]-[13].
This study presents the design of a fully automated
Web-based GIS platform, which is developed for river flood
monitoring and risk prediction along the riversides of
Arachthos (Figure 1). The short paper is organized as
follows. Section II describes the study area and the main
categories of data included in Web-based Geographical
Information System for real-time flood monitoring. Section
III presents the basic characteristics of the system and the
expected final outcomes. We conclude the paper in Section
IV.
II.
DATA AND STUDY AREA
The Arachthos river is located in the northwestern
Greece and it has the source in the mountain ridge of Pindus.
This river is about 100-kilometers long and is the 8th biggest
river in Greece. The river basin covers an area of 2.000 km2.
The climate of the greater area is characterized as typical
Mediterranean with relatively mild and humid winter and
very warm summer period. Arachthos delta is an area of
great ecological interest and is protected by national /
international legislation about ecosystems. Because of the
geomorphology and the great water resources of Arachthos
basin, two hydroelectric water dams have been constructed
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

and used since 1981. The dams are located a few kilometers
above the city of Arta, in the southern part of the river flow,
which leads to the river delta in the Amvrakikos sea gulf.
Although water dams could control the river flow, there are
several flooding events. The analysis of river flow and
estimation of flood risk is a complex process and highly
dependent on the local topography. Thus, a careful collection
of data with high-accuracy is needed along with a thorough
pre-processing analysis. Table 1 presents the main datasets
used to record the profile of the area and are covering all the
needs for flood risk analysis.
Figure 1.
Τhe Epirus region (on the left). In its southeastern part, the 
Arachthos river is located. The river flows out in the Amvrakikos gulf (on
the right).
The data is obtained from official national databases,
governmental agencies and organizations and have been
evaluated by our science team members. The datasets are
either in vector or raster format. These datasets have been
already checked regarding their quality and they have been
used to produce additional layers of information so as to
enrich their quality, through spatial editing procedures.
Additionally, specific instrumentation to measure the river
height and the meteorological conditions along the river will
be installed and will operate in real-time basis in order to
monitor in real time the potential risk levels regarding the
possibility of flood events.
TABLE I.
PARAMETERS USED TO DEVELOP THE MAIN GUI AS WELL
AS FOR THE MULTICRITERIAL ANALYSIS OF RISK LEVELS PREDICTION.
a/a
Parameter
a/a
Parameter
1.
Road network
6.
Precipitation
2.
Urban fabric
7.
Topography (height, slope)
3.
Hydrological
network
8.
Census data ( population)
4.
Drainage basins
9.
Land use/land cover
5.
Geological
information
10.
river sides
III.
SYSTEM DESIGN
The Web-based Geographical Information System (Web-
GIS) is composed of the main parts displayed in Figure 2. It
is consisted of the following basic components: the client,
the Web server, the functions and the database. The client
allows the interaction of the Web-GIS users with the Web
server and provides spatial information display. It comprises
an Internet browsing software, which provides the service
requesting and result visualization platform to the users on
the client side. The server consists of a Web server and a
database server.
Figure 2.
System architecture of the Web-GIS.
The Web server handles all the service requests and is
responsible for transmitting the information back to the
client. The Web server parses the HTTP requests from the
clients and forwards them to the dedicated Web Service. The
Web service query for the specific geospatial data from the
database server and displays the data on the map. We use the
Apache Web server, one of the most popular server
development package and independent of the operating
system (Apache, 2017). The scripting languages are PHP and
Javascript. PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor) is a server-side
scripting language designed for Web development and
Javascript is a client-side scripting language, which creates
interactive Webpages.
The database server is My-SQL (Structured Query
Language), which is designed for high volume environments
and it runs on all major operating systems. MySQL can
contain both spatial and non-spatial data. It is able to handle
high activity operations and provides support for geographic
objects allowing location queries to be run in SQL [14].
The map display is based on Google Maps, which
provides a geographically enabled base. In addition, the
Google Map API [15] includes many built-in functionalities,
which are used to create our own applications using the
stored data. The viewer is composed of various data layer
(functionalities), which will be included in the top frame, as
well as in the side bar.
The flood risk layers of information will be provided at
the advanced system through an automated multicriterial
DSS, where real-time measurements will be integrated with
the relative informational layer of Table 1, producing the
final estimates. These flood risk layers will be automatically
updated (dynamic layer of information) and will provide
early-warning and decision support.
A few screenshots from the preliminary version of the
Web-GIS platform are displayed below, Figures 3-5.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 3.
Display of Rainfall parameters of a metereological station based at Kampi, Arta.
Figure 4.
Display the River side of the river Arachtos, Arta.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 5.
Display the River Arachtos, Arta.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
This study presents a Web-based GIS platform under
development
for
monitoring
the river flood
and
risk
prediction
along the riversides of Arachthos. Modern
Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) are used
to provide real-time information as well as early-warning
risk levels regarding flood events.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This
study
is
co-funded
by
project
“Integrated
information
system
for
flood
events
monitoring,
management and early warning in the wider area of
Arachthos” Epirus Operational Program 2014-2020, PA2
“Environmental Protection & Sustainable Growth”, Co-
financed by European Regional Development Fund (ERDF)
and co-funded by project: “Enhancing research activities of
Laboratory of Knowledge and Intelligent Computing” by
Research Committee of TEI of Epirus.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Smith and R. Ward, “Floods: Physical Processes and Human
Impacts”, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1998.
[2]
EU, “Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council
2007/60/EC, establishing a framework for the assessment and
management of flood risks”, Official Journal 2007 L 288/27,
European Commission, Brussels, 2007.
[3]
J. Sunkpho and C. Ootamakon. “Real-time flood monitoring and
warning system”. Journal of Science & Technology, vol. 33, no. 2,
227-235, 2011.
[4]
L. E. Colmenares-Guillen, O. N. Prieto and A. A. Jurado. “An
Approach of Real-Time System for River Monitoring and Flood-
Warning System in Puebla,” Mexico. World Applied Programming,
Vol. 3, Is. 8, August 2013, pp 328-340, 2013.
[5]
S. Alaghmand, R. Abdullah, I. Abustan and B. Vosoogh. “GIS-based
River Flood Hazard Mapping in Urban Area (A Case Study in Kayu
Ara River Basin, Malaysia)”.
International Journal of Engineering
and Technology vol. 2, no.6, pp 488-500, 2010.
[6]
M. Abdeyazdan and A. Z. Jodaki. “Geographic Information System
(GIS) Application in Flood Crisis Management”. 2nd International
conference on Innovative Engineering Technologies (ICIET'2015)
August 7-8, 2015 Bangkok (Thailand), 2015.
[7]
A. V. Frolov, V. V Asmus., S. V. Borshch, R. M. Vil’fand, I. I.
Zhabina, V. V. Zatyagalova, V. A. Krovotyntsev, O. I. Kudryavtseva,
E. A. Leont’eva, Y. A. Simonov and A. A. Stepanov. “GIS-Amur
system of flood monitoring, forecasting, and early warning”, vol. 41,
Iss. 3, pp 157-169, 2016.
[8]
Y. Xiao Y., S. Shanzhen and T. Zhongqian “GIS-based multi-criteria
analysis method for flood risk assessment under urbanization,” IEEE,
24th
International
Conference
on
GeoInformatics,
10.1109/
GeoInformatics.2016.7578963, 2016.
[9]
P. Fernandez, S. Mourato and M. Moreira, “Social vulnerability
assessment of flood risk using GIS-based multicriteria decision
analysis. A case study of Vila Nova de Gaia (Portugal),” Geomatics,
Natural Hazards and Risk, vol. 7, no. 4, 1367-1389, 2016.
[10] A.
Trono
and
L. Russo, Natural Disasters and
sustainable
development, Forecasts and use of new technologies to estimate
natural disasters Authors: Edizioni Grifo.
[11] C. Stylios and P. Groumpos, Integrated Information System for
Natural Disaster Management: Methodologies, Approaches, Good
Practices. Patras Science Park, ISBN 978-960-85817-4-6, 2009.
[12] G. Georgoulas, P. Karvelis, S. Kolios and C. D. Stylios, Examining
nominal and ordinal classifiers for forecasting wind speed. In:
Proceedings of 8th IEEE Int. Conference on Intelligent Systems
(IS'16), 3-5 September 2016, Sofia, Bulgaria. pp. 504-509, 2016.
[13] P. Karvelis, S. Kolios, G. Georgoulas and C. D. Stylios, Ensemble
Learning
for
Forecasting
Main
Meteorological
Parameters
In:
Proceedings of 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man
and Cybernetics (SMC)), 5-8 October 2017, Banff Center, Banff,
Canada, pp. 3711-3714, 2017.
[14] MySql, https://www.mysql.com/ [retrieved April 2017]
[15] Google MAP API, https://developers.google.com/maps/ [retrieved
April 2017]
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

