Interference-Free Store-and-Forward Communication
in Low Earth Orbit Satellite Systems
Andreas Freimann∗, Timon Petermann† and Klaus Schilling‡
University of W¨urzburg, Germany
Email: ∗freimann@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de
†timon.petermann@stud-mail.uni-wuerzburg.de
‡schi@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de
Abstract—Multi-satellite systems in low Earth orbits based on
nanosatellites can be used for Earth observation and global store-
and-forward communication. The intersatellite links in these
systems need to be coordinated in a way that avoids interfer-
ence, and optimises throughput, delays and energy consumption.
Existing contact plan design approaches do not prevent packet
loss due to interference of nodes, and the use of additional
Medium Access Control (MAC) schemes such as Carrier-sense
multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) is inefﬁcient
in networks with high propagation time and dynamic topology. In
this paper, a contact plan based design approach is presented that
solves the MAC problem by predicting additive interference and
scheduling interference-free inter-satellite links in advance. The
presented approach is part of a Delay Tolerant Network (DTN)
routing protocol for space-terrestrial networks. An improvement
of the algorithm is also presented to reduce computational effort.
Performance was evaluated for different orbit conﬁgurations
using a satellite network simulation framework based on the
Objective Modular Network Testbed in C++ (OMNeT++).
Keywords–Satellite Communication; Delay Tolerant Network;
Medium Access Control; Satellite Formations.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The most promising application scenarios for multi-satellite
systems based on nanosatellites are Earth Observation (EO)
and Machine-to-Machine (M2M) communication. Nanosatel-
lite based systems for Earth observation are already in use,
such as the constellation of Planet [1] with its Dove satellites.
In the future, satellite formations will be launched that capture
3D information, such as CloudCT [2], a formation of ten
satellites build by the Center for Telematics (ZfT) W¨urzburg.
In this mission, 3D information of clouds will be acquired by
a satellite formation ﬂying in a dense orbit conﬁguration. For
satellite based communication systems, spatially distributed
orbit conﬁgurations are used due to their high spatial and tem-
poral coverage of the Earth’s surface. Accordingly, a globally
distributed satellite system and a dense satellite formation have
been used for evaluation of the presented approach.
Both M2M and EO satellite systems could take advantage
of the development of efﬁcient communication protocols by
increasing throughput, faster availability of data and more
efﬁcient use of resources. The goal of the presented approach is
to take advantage of the predictability of the dynamic topology
of satellite networks for the design of routing algorithms. In the
next section, the basic principle of the presented approach will
be described, before, in Section III, a contact plan design ap-
proach, called Interference-Free Contact Plan Design (IFCPD)
is presented. The performance of this approach is evaluated in
Section IV, followed by a conclusion in Section V.
II.
DTN ROUTING
Communication in low Earth orbit satellite systems can
beneﬁt from Delay/Disruption Tolerant Network (DTN) pro-
tocols to cope with intermittent and unreliable links. Routing
in such a network can be difﬁcult, but routing algorithms can
make use of the knowledge about a system. The motion of
satellites is highly predictable. Instead of a topology discovery
mechanism, contact plan based routing utilises predeﬁned con-
tact plans of the network. Therefore nodes can make routing
decisions based on future contacts within the network. So far
no Multiple Access Control (MAC) scheme is available that
makes use of the available contact plans. Therefore standard
MAC schemes need to be used to prevent packet loss, such as
CSMA/CA, which is inefﬁcient in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) net-
works as shown in [3]. As a basis for the presented approach,
a simpliﬁed general perturbations (SGP4) propagator [4] was
integrated into an OMNeT++ based simulation framework to
predict satellite positions. By propagating satellite positions,
the network topology and the node distances can be calculated
with sufﬁcient accuracy for days in advance. The predicted
topology is stored in a contact plan that consists of multiple
contact entries. A contact is deﬁned by its start time, end time,
source node, sink node and a data rate. The contact plan is
converted to a space time graph for routing purposes. The
vertices of a space time graph are network nodes. Edges are
either the contacts from the contact plan or edges between
copies of the same network nodes representing storage of data
on these nodes. In this graph, the shortest routes for all pairs
of nodes are computed and stored in routing tables. For more
details on this approach please refer to [3]. The presented
contact plan design approach is compatible with Contact Graph
Routing (CGR) [5], a contact plan based routing approach for
the Bundle Protocol [6].
III.
INTERFERENCE-FREE CONTACT PLAN DESIGN
The satellites are assumed to be equipped with isotropic
antennas and typical Ultra High Frequency (UHF) transceivers
with a transmit power of 0.5W. Transmissions are assumed to
be successful if the received signal-to-interference-plus-noise
ratio (SINR) is at least 5.82dB.
To create a contact plan for a speciﬁc orbit conﬁguration,
a check for all pairs of nodes is performed, on whether these
pairs are able to communicate with each other. For each
of these contacts, potential interfering nodes are identiﬁed
by iterating over all transmitters that exist in the simulation
scenario. In a system with n nodes, there are n − 2 nodes that
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

could generally cause interference on a link, so n − 2 inter-
ference checks have to be performed to identify which nodes
would cause interference on a link at a speciﬁc point in time.
Furthermore constructive interference of signals produced by
two or more nodes could cause packet loss, which is also
called additive interference. To identify all sets of interfering
links, 2(n−2) − 1 checks need to be performed in the worst
case. In scenarios with a high number of network nodes and
long prediction intervals additive interference checks require a
very high computational effort. However, the number of checks
can be reduced by more than half for each node that can
be excluded from the list of potential interfering nodes. To
improve performance, all nodes are stored in a spatial data
structure (k-d tree) so that a radius search can be applied with
the radius equal to the line-of-sight distance. Thereby all nodes
that are not separated by Earth can be picked for interference
evaluations. The radius search is also applied during contact
plan creation by using the communication range as radius.
Using a contact and an interference plan, maximal sets of non-
interfering contacts can be calculated. These independent sets
can be determined by the following algorithm:
Initialization: Create a bin for each contact within a contact
plan time interval and a list of the succeeding contacts.
1)
For all bins generated in the previous iteration, iterate
through the contacts of the corresponding list, create
a copy of the bin, add the selected contact and a list
of the succeeding contacts.
2)
For all bins generated in the previous step, check if
the last contact in the bin interferes with any subset
of the contacts in the bin. Delete the corresponding
bin if interference was detected.
3)
If all lists are empty stop here, otherwise continue
with step 1.
Finally, check for redundant bins and remove them.
IV.
EVALUATION
Evaluations have been performed in two mission scenarios
and compared by runtime and packet delivery ratios.
A. Runtime comparison
To evaluate the performance improvement of the radius
search, a 40 minute contact and interference plan with additive
interference checks for a 45◦ : 18 : 6 : 0 walker constellation
at an altitude of 698km has been created on a standard PC.
The calculations have been performed for a period of 40
minutes. The runtime with radius search was 0.56s, compared
to 342.86s without radius search. If just a contact plan was
generated for one day the runtime could be reduced from 4.47s
to 1.16s. This proves that using a spatial data structure with an
efﬁcient radius search increases the performance of contact and
interference plan calculations signiﬁcantly. This improvement
is mainly important to be able to consider additive interference
in larger satellite systems.
B. Packet loss
To evaluate the packet delivery ratio of the IFCPD algo-
rithm, a 10 satellite string-of-pearls formation comparable to
the CloudCT mission was analysed. The simulated altitude is
600km and the node separation is 100km. In the simulated
scenario, each satellite tries to transmit data to its successor
TABLE I. PACKET DELIVERY RATIOS OF THE EVALUATED ALGORITHMS
Algorithm
Packet Delivery Ratio
FCP
0%
IACPD
97.6%
IFCPD
100%
during a 10,000s simulation period. The satellites transmit one
packet every 10s simultaneously to focus on the analysis of
situations where packet loss would occur due to interference.
The IFCPD approach was compared to the previous ver-
sion, called Interference-Aware Contact Plan Design (IACPD),
presented in [3] and to the basic CGR [5] approach with a Full
Contact Plan (FCP) that includes all possible communication
opportunities. IACPD does only consider interference caused
by single satellites, while the use of a FCP does not avoid
interference at all.
Table I shows the summarised evaluation results. In case a
full contact plan is used, 100% of the transmitted packets are
lost due to interference. IFCPD is able to deliver all packets,
while IACPD produces a packet loss of 2.4%.
V.
CONCLUSION
The presented contact plan design approach IFCPD was
able to prevent packet loss in simulated wireless satellite
networks and seems to be a suitable and efﬁcient approach for
LEO networks. The presented improvement of IFCPD based
on radius search signiﬁcantly reduces the computational effort.
Nevertheless, performance of the algorithm for the calculation
of independent sets has to be improved to enable calculation
of plans for scenarios with a higher number of nodes and
longer prediction intervals. Furthermore, since system models
are used to predict future states of a system, the performance
of the presented approach will depend on the quality of these
models. Therefore, we will further investigate the robustness
of the approach in case of model errors.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the German Research Foun-
dation (DFG) under grand number SCHI 327/29-1.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Boshuizen, J. Mason, P. Klupar, and S. Spanhake, “Results from the
Planet Labs Flock Constellation,” in 28th Annual AIAA/USUConference
on Small Satellites, 2014.
[2]
ERC
Synergy
Grant
”CloudCT”
awarded.
Last
accessed
18
March
2019.
[Online].
Available:
http://www7.informatik.uni-
wuerzburg.de/news/single-news/news/erc-synergy-grant-cloudct-awarded
[3]
T. Thiel, A. Freimann, and K. Schilling, “Contact plan based routing
in distributed nanosatellite systems,” in 69th International Astronautical
Congress (IAC), 2018.
[4]
D. A. Vallado and P. Crawford, “SGP4 orbit determination,” in Pro-
ceedings of AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference and Exhibit,
2008, pp. 18–21.
[5]
G. Araniti et al., “Contact graph routing in DTN space networks:
overview, enhancements and performance,” Communications Magazine,
IEEE, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 38–46, 2015.
[6]
S. Burleigh and K. Scott. (2007) Bundle protocol speciﬁcation.
Last
accessed
10
December
2018.
[Online].
Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5050
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

