Optical Multicast Protocol for LEO Satellite
Networks
Maha Sliti, Walid Abdallah, Noureddine Boudriga
Communication Networks and Security Research Lab, University of Carthage
Ariana, Tunisia
e-mail: maha.sliti@supcom.tn, wabdallah_tn@yahoo.fr, nab@supcom.rnu.tn
Abstract—Satellite networks provide global coverage and sup-
port a wide range of services. Since Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
satellites provide short round-trip delays, they are becoming
increasingly important for real-time applications, such as voice,
teleconferencing and video trafﬁc. Many applications require a
mechanism to deliver information to multiple recipients. In this
context, we propose two all optical multicasting approaches based
on codewords designed for LEO satellites: the ﬁrst approach
is based on the shortest paths and the second approach is
based on the concept of virtual multicast trees. The proposed
multicast approaches consider free space optical communication
links between satellites, which provides high data rate for real
time applications.
Index Terms—LEO satellite, all optical multicast, optical code-
words, tunable optical decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
Satellite networks provide global coverage and support a
wide range of services. Since Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites
provide short round-trip delays, they are becoming increas-
ingly important for real-time applications, such as voice,
teleconferencing and video trafﬁc. Many applications require a
mechanism to deliver information to multiple recipients. In the
literature, several multicast routing protocols were proposed
for satellite networks [1]–[4]. However, the majority of the
proposed approaches are not developed primarily for LEO
satellite constellations. In fact, they are mainly proposed in
the context of IP and mobile networks and then adapted
to support multicasting in LEO networks. Furthermore, the
proposed approaches have not consider free space optical
communication links between satellites, which are ideal for
high data rate real-time applications, such as voice and video
trafﬁc.
In this paper, we propose two all optical multicasting
approaches based on codewords designed for LEO satellites:
the ﬁrst approach is based on the shortest paths and the second
approach is based on the concept of virtual multicast trees.
Furthermore, we study the mobility management aspect for
the two proposed approaches. The key contributions of the
proposed multicast approaches with respect to the previously
published research are:
1) The proposed multicast process is performed at the
optical layer based on an optical switching concept,
which allows the multicast packets to be processed
at very high bit rates (gigabits per second) without
conversion to the electronic domain. During the optical
multicast process, the received packets are delayed in
an optical buffer proposed in [5], in order to provide a
tunable delay for real time trafﬁc.
2) The optical switching concept is based on the optical
codewords, which are represented by a sequence of
pulses. Indeed, a codeword is assigned to each satellite
in the network and serves as an optical identiﬁer of the
satellite. Based on the received codeword and the struc-
ture we build in, the trafﬁc will be multicasted to one
or several directions allowing to reach the destination
satellites.
3) The proposed multicast approach is scalable since its
performance is not affected by the multicast group size
and the member combination in the multicast group.
Therefore, the optical multicast module implemented in
each intermediate satellite is at most composed of three
tunable decoders.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
2 presents the proposed multicast approaches for the Leo
constellation networks in the literature. The use of optical
codewords for the multicast in LEO networks is described
in Section 3. The all optical multicast approach based on
the shortest paths is described in Section 4. The all optical
multicast approach based on the virtual multicast trees is
explained in Section 5. The mobility management in the two
all optical multicasting approaches is discussed in Section 6.
Simulations and experimental results are given in Section 7.
Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper.
II. MULTICAST IN LEO CONSTELLATION NETWORKS
Satellite-based optical communication systems have become
a most promising technology for high-speed inter-satellite and
satellite-to-ground communication links due to their various
advantages. A free space optical communication system in-
cludes optical transmitter and receiver satellites. The transfer
of information between the two satellites is performed with
optical rather than microwave radiation, which allows high
data rate transfer and transparency to Radio Frequency (RF)
interference. The advantages of an optical communication
system compared with a microwave communication system
in free space are: 1) high data rate, 2) less transmitter power
consumption, 3) terminal design with reduced size and weight,
and 4) transparency to RF interference.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

In this paper, we are particularly interested in LEO satellite
mobile systems. LEO satellites are orbiting at low earth orbits
with an altitude generally between 500 km and 2000 km.
Compared to communication satellites in geostationary orbit,
the communication links to LEO satellites are characterized by
lower propagation delay and lower link attenuation because
of the shorter distance, resulting in the need for reduced
transmission power.
In the literature, several multicast routing protocols were
proposed for satellite networks. In [1], a new core-based
shared tree algorithm, viz Core-Cluster combination-based
Shared Tree (CCST) algorithm and the weighted version
(i.e., w-CCST algorithm) are proposed in order to resolve
the channel resources waste problem in typical source-based
multicast routing algorithms in LEO satellite IP networks. The
Rectilinear Steiner Trees (RST) [2] algorithm uses one of
integer linear programming method for solving the minimum
RST tree, so that the bandwidth of multicast routing using the
least suitable non-real-time multicast applications, but more
complicated calculation process. In [3], a fast iterative dis-
tributed multicast routing algorithm was developed based on
the inherent characteristics of satellite networks, that consider
distributed computing model and signiﬁcantly reducing the
algorithm computational complexity. In [4], a QoS-Guaranteed
Secure Multicast Routing Protocol (QGSMRP) is proposed
for satellite IP networks using the logical location concept to
isolate the mobility of LEO and HEO satellites. a novel triple-
layered satellite network architecture including Geostationary
Earth Orbit (GEO), Highly Elliptical Orbit (HEO), and Low
Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite layers is introduced. However,
the majority of the proposed approaches are not developed
primarily for LEO satellite constellations. In fact, they are
mainly proposed in the context of IP and mobile networks
and then adapted to support multicasting in LEO networks.
Furthermore, the proposed approaches have not consider free
space optical communication links between satellites, which
are ideal for high data rate real-time applications, such as voice
and video trafﬁc.
III. CODEWORD BASED MULTICAST
An optical codeword is composed of a sequence of pulses
that represent the positions of the information bit "1". The
transmitter does not produce any optical pulse when the
information bit "0" is transmitted.
An optical codeword is assigned to each satellite in the LEO
constellation network. Therefore, each satellite is uniquely
identiﬁed by its assigned codeword which is similar to an
address in our case. The total number of associated codewords
is equal to N ∗ M with N is the number of orbits (planes) in
the constellation, and M is the number of satellites in each
orbit. We notice that the number of codewords used for a LEO
constellation network (e.g., Global Positioning System (GPS))
is very reduced compared to current terrestrial networks (e.g.,
24 codewords are required in the GPS network). We suppose
that the codewords are generated, assigned and managed by a
central entity implemented in a terrestrial station which is the
ground station in our case.
To allow the application of our physical routing approach
and discriminating data transmitted to different satellites, the
optical codes should be orthogonal. In our case a codeword
can be represented as an integer vector where each element
identiﬁes the position of a pulse ( bit "1"). Thus, we adopted
a generation process based on lattice point theory to satisfy
this requirement. The code generation process is realized as
follows: Consider a m×k integer lattice L = Zm×Zk, which
elements are labeled by points from the set V = 1, 2, ..., mk.
Using a simple linear mapping function deﬁned as:
l : L → V, l(x, y) = mx + y + 1
(1)
where 0 =< x <= k − 1 and 0 =< y <= m − 1.
The codewords are represented as lines connecting points of
the rectangular integer lattice. The subset of points are referred
to as lines, and the code spaces are deﬁned as the sets of lines
of different slopes. A line with a slope s, where 0 ≤ s ≤ m−1,
starting at the point (i, j), contains the following set of points:
(i; j + (s.imod(m)) : 0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1; 0 ≤ j ≤ m − 1
(2)
Thus,
for
every
slope
s,
the
m
codewords
that
can
be
obtained
are
ν
=
ν1, ..., νm,
where
νj
=
mi + j + (s.imod(m)) + 1; 0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1 for every 0 ≤ j ≤
m − 1. It can be shown in [6] that this method generates
codewords with length equal to mk and weight k. The weight
witch represents the number of bits "1" in the codeword.
This is a very important parameter because it identiﬁes the
maximum value of the autocorrelation between codes and
hence reﬂects the capability of the routing approach to separate
trafﬁcs intended for speciﬁc destinations. It is noteworthy
that, for every slope, the codewords obtained through the
aforementioned process are orthogonal. According to this
reasoning, every codeword νj can be represented as an integer
vector νj = ν0
j , ν1
j ..., νk−1
j
where j ∈ 1, 2, ..., mk and νi
j is
the ith bit in the optical code νj.
Since LEO satellites provide short round-trip delays, they
are becoming increasingly important for real-time applications,
such as voice and video trafﬁc. Many applications require a
mechanism to deliver information to multiple recipients, as
illustrated by Figure 1.
Since each group of destination users has a geographic
location, each group is covered by a different distribution
satellite that we call also a destination satellite. At t0, a source
user is attached to a source satellite and a group of destination
users is served by a destination satellite via a wireless link.
On the contrary, the links between satellites, which are free
space optical communication links. During the communication
period, the group of destination satellites are changed due to
the mobility of the source and destination satellites. Thus, the
management of the multicast process between the source and
the destination satellites must be done during communication
periods that may last for hours.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 1.
Multicasting in LEO satellite constellation.
In this work, we propose an optical multicasting process
based on codewords. Also, we provide a function so that each
satellite can optically switch a multicasting trafﬁc based on
codewords properly structured. Thus, each satellite implements
an optical switching module based mainly on two optical
operations, which are the optical codeword matching and the
deviation of the trafﬁc to the adequate direction. The received
codeword is split to a set of decoders; if a codeword is matched
by a decoder, an optical switching gate will be activated by
a pulse to forward the multicast trafﬁc to the direction that
allows reaching the destination satellite.
The physical implementation of the reconﬁgurable encoding
is achieved by delaying pulses in a set of Optical Delay Line
(ODL) loops. The positions of the pulses in the codeword
deﬁne the number of rounds that must be performed by every
pulse in each ODL-loop [7]. The optical sequence of code
is then created by combining different delayed pulses at the
output of ODLs.
A codeword decoder, which is the main component of the
proposed optical multicasting module, allows the matching
of a codeword optically without the O/E/O conversion. The
design of a tunable decoder was proposed in [7] in order
to implement an optical ﬁltering technique based on code-
words. In each loop, we inject the optical pulse, which will
be conﬁned in the ﬁber until it performs the number of
rounds needed to place it in the positions of a ’1’ bit in
the optical code. It is obvious that the number of ones in
the code sequence determines the number of optical loops
needed. Consequently, we could easily control and modify
the codeword by controlling the number of rounds performed
by the optical signal in every optical loop. Unlike classical
techniques, such as ﬁxed length Optical Delay Lines and Fiber
Bragg Gratings, in which modifying optical codes needs a
physical intervention, our approach allows soft based control-
ling of the optical codewords by considering a control unit,
even if it uses Fiber Bragg Gratings. A codeword is considered
as an integer vector of k elements that presents the positions of
ones in the codeword. Thus, an optical codeword is composed
of optical pulses transmitted in speciﬁc bit intervals that
Figure 2.
Tunable optical decoder architecture.
correspond to positions of ones in the code sequence. This
can be achieved by considering an on-off keying technique and
modulating the label by a Gaussian optical pulse signal and
a Mach-Zehender modulator. The tunable decoder, illustrated
by Figure 2, generates an optical pulse on the receipt of a
valid codeword that matches the conﬁgured code-word. The
decoding operation is performed by delaying optical pulses
that compose the received codeword until they superpose in
the last bit interval.
IV. ALL OPTICAL MULTICAST BASED ON THE SHORTEST
PATHS
In this section, we present an optical multicast approach
based on the shortest paths. In this approach, each interme-
diate satellite considers three codewords indicating its direct
neighbors: two in the same orbit, and one in the following
orbit. A shortest path is deﬁned in term of number of hops and
is established by favoring the inter-orbit on the intra-orbit hop.
In order to establish the shortest paths to a list of destination
satellites, the route discovery process is initiated by the source
satellite. The source satellite duplicates a Route REQuest
message (RREQ) in order to send it to d destination satellites.
The considered RREQ message format is composed of: the
message identiﬁer, the codewords associated to destination
satellites, the satellite source address, the satellite destination
address, and the communication time between the source user
and the destination users.
At the reception of a RREQ message, the intermediate satel-
lite adds its codeword to the Multicast list address and sends
it to the nearest neighbor based on the Destination address in
the RREQ message. A destination satellite that receives the
RREQ message, sends a Route RESponse (RREP) message,
which contains the shortest path to the source satellite. A path
is formed by a list of codewords that denote the intermediate
nodes in the shortest path.
After the route discovery process, a source satellite sends
the multicast trafﬁc to the d destination satellites. Each mul-
ticast packet is duplicated on the shortest paths established
to destination satellites. The paths are composed of a list of
codewords that characterize the list of intermediate nodes on
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

the shortest path. Thus, a header that contains the path to a
destination satellite is associated to each packet.
The design of the multicast module implemented in each
satellite is illustrated by Figure 3. Therefore, an intermediate
node that receives a multicast packet examines the received
header optically by considering the following steps:
• the ﬁrst codeword in the header, which indicates the
current satellite, is extracted from the received list of
codewords that compose the header and dropped;
• the packet and the new header are delayed in a Virtual
Optical Memory (VOM) based on optical delay lines, that
we have developed in [5];
• during the buffering delay, the second codeword in the
received header is extracted from the received list of
codewords and split to three tunable decoders. Each
decoder allows to match a codeword that characterize one
neighbor of the current satellite;
• If the second codeword matches a conﬁgured codeword,
then the delayed packet and its corresponding header will
be sent to the adequate next neighbor that allows to reach
the destination satellite.
V. ALL OPTICAL MULTICAST BASED ON MULTICAST TREES
In this section, we present an optical multicast approach
based on the concept of virtual multicast trees. The virtual
multicast paradigm is used in order to underline that the
multicast tree is not physically established but only built on
the codewords structure used to switch trafﬁc contrary to the
ﬁrst proposed approach that requires a route discovery process
preceding the routing of a multicast trafﬁc. In this approach,
the virtual tree establishment consists on the management of
codewords structure. Thus, an optical codeword is structured
in two parts as follows: the ﬁrst part identiﬁes the orbit
and the direction (left or right) in this orbit, and the second
part identiﬁes uniquely a satellite in the LEO constellation
network. Therefore, the destination satellite can be either on
the left or on the right of an intermediate satellite or it
can be localized in another orbit. The source satellite sends
a multicast packet composed of the payload and a list of
codewords that corresponds to the list of destination satellites.
At the reception of a multicast trafﬁc, an intermediate satellite
can forward the trafﬁc to the right or left if the destination
satellite is in its orbit or it switches the trafﬁc to the following
orbit.
In the following example, we consider the virtual tree
structure illustrated by Figure 4. Therefore, from a source
satellite, the header to be sent, which is composed of a
set of codewords, has the following structure: CdOrbit2
r
CdD1| CdOrbit2
l CdD2| CdOrbit2
l CdD3 | CdOrbit3
l CdD4
| CdOrbit3
r CdD5, where CdOrbiti
r is the codeword that
identiﬁes the right direction in the Orbiti, CdOrbiti
l is the
codeword that identiﬁes the left direction in the Orbiti, and
CdDj is the codeword that identiﬁes the destination satellite
Dj in the LEO constellation network.
Each intermediate satellite integrates a multicast module,
which design is described by Figure 5. The optical multicast
Figure 4.
Virtual tree structure.
process is performed as follows:
• The received payload is extracted and delayed in the
optical buffer called Virtual Optical Memory (VOM),
proposed in [5];
• The list of received codewords are extracted and sepa-
rately treated by the multicast module. If the intermediate
satellite is not a destination satellite, it split the received
codewords to three tunable decoders. Each decoder allows
to match a received codeword in the header. The matching
operation is performed in serial by treating each time one
codeword until treating all the codewords that compose
the received header. And, the matching is performed
only on the ﬁrst part of the codeword that indicates the
switching direction: left or right if the destination satellite
is in the same orbit as the intermediate satellite, or down
if the destination satellite is in the following orbits. If
the intermediate satellite is a destination satellite, based
on the received codewords, it performs the matching
operation based on the other received codewords in the
header and does not consider its codeword. Indeed, a
satellite needs to perform a matching operation on the
second parts of the received codewords that uniquely
identify a satellite in the LEO constellation network
before performing the optical switching operation based
on the matching of the ﬁrst parts of codewords that
identify the forwarding direction.
• If a codeword is matched then an SOA gate (Semiconduc-
tor Optical Ampliﬁer gate) is activated in order to pass
the delayed payload to the new header generation module.
This module generates a new header for the payload
by considering only the codewords of the satellites that
are reachable by the forwarding output port. Indeed,
the group of destination satellites is divided in each
intermediate satellite based on the fact that the trafﬁc that
is forwarded to a direction (left, right, down) must only
contain in its header the codewords corresponding to the
destinations located in this direction.
VI. MULTICAST COPING WITH LONG PERIOD SERVICES
Satellite movement results in challenging mobility man-
agement problems in LEO satellite networks. Due to the
movements of the satellites and according to the movements
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 3.
All optical multicast based on the shortest paths.
Figure 5.
All optical multicast based on the Virtual multicast tree.
of their coverage area and footprints, a group of destination
users are served by several groups of satellites during a
communication period that may lasts for hours. In this section,
we present the mobility management for the two proposed
optical multicasting approaches. For the two approaches, three
types of handovers can occur during a multicast session period
T. The ﬁrst type of handover occurs when the source satellite
moves and will not serve the users source of the trafﬁc any-
more. The second type of handover occurs when a destination
satellite will not serve any destination user therefore it will be
deleted from the group of the destination satellites. The third
type of handover occurs when a destination satellite is added
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

to the group of the destination users in order to serve one or
several destination users.
A. Shortest paths management
The optical multicasting based on the Shortest paths requires
the initiation of a novel Route request discovery process to
the destination satellites when a source satellite is not in the
coverage of source users anymore. The ground station must
send the current list of codewords, that indicate the current
list of destination satellites, to the new source satellite. In the
case where a destination satellite will not serve any destination
user, it will be deleted from the group of destination satellites.
This type of mobility does not require any treatment in
the intermediate satellites. In fact, the multicast trafﬁc to
be switched by the intermediate satellites will no longer be
switched in the direction of the deleted satellite since it is
not in the coverage of the destination users. An updated list
of codewords, that corresponds to the new list of destination
satellites, will be sent to the source satellite from the ground
station. In the case where a destination satellite is added to
the group of destination users in order to serve one or several
destination users, the shortest path from the source to the new
destination satellite must be established. An updated list of
codewords will be sent to the source satellite from the ground
station.
B. Virtual tree management
When a source satellite is not in the coverage of source
users anymore, the optical multicasting based on the virtual
tree concept does not require any route reestablishment process
initiation to discover the routes to the destination satellites as
it is the case in the optical multicasting based on the Shortest
paths. Indeed, the multicast tree will be implicitly established
by sending a multicast trafﬁc that requires at each intermediate
satellite to be optically switched. The ground station must
send the current list of codewords, that indicate the current
list of destination satellites, to the new source satellite. In the
case where a destination satellite will not serve any destination
user, it will be deleted from the group of destination satellites.
The ground station must send the current list of codewords
to the new source satellite. And, the source replaces the
codeword corresponding to the deleted destination satellite by
the codeword associated to the new destination satellite and
adds to the codeword, a special codeword that identiﬁes the
destination orbit and the direction (left or right) in the orbit.
The new codeword will be added to the header of the multicast
trafﬁc. In the case where a destination satellite is added to the
group of the destination users in order to serve one or several
destination users, its corresponding codeword will be added to
the header of the multicast trafﬁc.
C. Comparison
First, the two proposed optical multicasting approaches are
compared in term of the number of used segments. The
segments used by the approach based on virtual trees are
those in the tree axis and in the left and right of the axis.
And, the segments used by the approach based on the shortest
paths are the total segments that compose the shortest paths
to the destination satellites. Thus, the number of segments
used in the ﬁrst approach avoids the segments redundancy and
consequently it is smaller than the number of segments used
in the second approach.
Second, the virtual tree construction favors the inter-orbit
over the intra-orbit hop, which allows to have only one
possible path to the destination satellite. This method is also
considered in order to establish the shortest paths in the second
approach. Indeed, the association of all established shortest
paths gives the constructed virtual tree in the ﬁrst approach.
Third, in the approach based on the shortest paths, when
a satellite leaf handover occurs in the direction of satellites
movement, a segment is removed of the path and the codeword
of the removed destination satellite is removed of the list of
destination satellites. In the contrary case, a segment will be
added to the path and the codeword of the new destination
satellite is added to the list of destination satellites. Thus,
the handover in this approach consists on the increase or the
narrowing of paths. When we consider the approach based
on virtual trees, the destination satellites can be either a leaf
or an intermediate satellite, which minimizes the increase or
the narrowing of paths due to handovers compared to the ﬁrst
approach.
VII. SIMULATIONS AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we assess the performance of the two pro-
posed optical multicasting approaches in terms of trafﬁc load
(in erlang) and number of decoding functions. As simulation
environment, we have considered Matlab tool. For simulation
purpose, we consider: the Global Positioning System (GPS)
constellation topology, which forms a LEO network (6 orbits,
each orbit has 4 satellites), a trafﬁc load matrix. The trafﬁc load
matrix is a matrix that considers a trafﬁc load only between
each satellite and its four neighbors (up and down, left and
right). For each simulation, a source satellite number and
destination satellite numbers are randomly generated.
In order to compare the efﬁciency of the two multicasting
approaches in terms of the trafﬁc load criteria, we calculate
the trafﬁc load for each approach by considering the maximal
path length/multicast tree depth and the mean on all shortest
paths/segments of the tree. As illustrated by Figure 6, we
can notice the similarity between the trafﬁc load curves
computed on the maximal path length and the depth of the
multicast tree and considered for several multicast group sizes
(4,8,12,16,20,24). This similarity can be justiﬁed by the fact
that the maximum path length corresponds to the depth of the
multicast tree. We notice also that the mean trafﬁc load on the
total segments of the multicast tree is the half for a multicast
group size equals to 24 satellites, which is optimized compared
to the mean trafﬁc load on the total path lengths. Therefore,
we can deduce that the all optical multicasting approach based
on the virtual multicast tree has the advantage to eliminate the
redundant segments in the shortest paths established in the all
optical multicasting approach based on the shortest paths.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Figure 6.
Trafﬁc load in terms of multicast group size.
The efﬁciency of the two multicasting approaches in terms
of the number of used decoding functions is also assessed. We
have considered a communication period of one hour between
a source and destination users. During this period and due
to the mobility of satellites, four source satellites and four
multicast groups are considered. We calculate the number of
used decoding functions for: 1) different multicast group sizes
(4,5,6,7,8,9,10), 2) three path lengths less or equal to 1,2,3
hops. As illustrated by Figure 7, we notice that the number
of used decoding functions for optical multicasting approach
based on the shortest paths is ﬁve times greater than the
number of used decoding functions for optical multicasting
approach based on the virtual multicast tree for a multicast
group size equals to 10 satellites. This can be justiﬁed by the
fact that the virtual multicast tree eliminates segments redun-
dancy observed in the shortest paths approach. Consequently,
the optical multicasting approach based on the virtual tree
decreases the trafﬁc load observed in the network segments
and uses less decoding functions for the optical multicasting.
Thus, this approach is more efﬁcient than the approach based
on the shortest paths.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed two all optical multicasting
approaches based on codewords designed for LEO satellites:
the ﬁrst approach is based on the shortest paths and the second
approach is based on the concept of virtual multicast trees.
For the two approaches, we identify each satellite in the LEO
constellation network by an optical codeword. The proposed
multicast process is performed at the optical layer based on an
optical switching concept, which allows the multicast packets
to be processed at very hight bit rates by considering optical
codewords. Indeed, a codeword is assigned to each satellite in
Figure 7.
Decoding function number in terms of multicast group size.
the network and serves as an optical identiﬁer of the satellite.
Based on the received codeword, the trafﬁc will be multicast
to one or several directions allowing to reach the destination
satellites. Furthermore, the proposed multicast approach is
scalable since its performance are not affected by the multicast
group size and the member combination in the multicast group.
Therefore, the optical multicast module implemented in each
intermediate satellite is at most composed of three tunable
decoders.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Chen, J. Zhang, and K. Liu, "Core-Based Shared Tree Multi-
cast Routing Algorithms for LEO Satellite IP Networks," Chinese
Journal of Aeronautics, vol. 20, no. 4, August, 2007, pp. 353-361.
[2] D. Yang, and W. Liao, "On multicast routing using rectilinear
Steiner trees for LEO satellite networks," IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 57, no. 4, July, 2008, pp.2560-2569.
[3] T. Mao, "A Multicast Routing Algorithm for LEO Satellite
Networks," International Conference on Future Computer and
Communication, June, 2009, pp.94-96.
[4] Z. Yin, L. Zhang, X. Zhou, P. Xu, and Y. Deng, "QoS-Guaranteed
Secure Multicast Routing Protocol for Satellite IP Networks
Using Hierarchical Architecture," International Journal of Com-
munications Network and System Sciences, vol. 3, no. 4, 2010,
pp. 355-363.
[5] S. Batti, M. Zghal, and N. Boudriga, "A New All-Optical
Switching Node Including Virtual Memory and Synchronizer,"
JNW, vol. 5, no. 2, 2010, pp. 165-179.
[6] I. B. Djordjevic, and B. Vasic, "Novel combinatorial construc-
tions of optical orthogonal codes for incoherent optical CDMA
systems," Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 21, 2003, pp.
1869-1875.
[7] N. Boudriga, M. Sliti, and W. Abdallah, "Optical code-based
ﬁltering architecture for providing access control to all-optical
networks (Invited)," International Conference on Transparent
Optical Networks (ICTON), July, 2012, pp. 1-5.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

