Simulation of SAR Jammer Techniques and  
Hardware  Implementation for Point Scatterer Modelling  
Emrah Ener 
Rehis 
Aselsan Inc.  
Ankara, Turkey 
e-mail: eener@aselsan.com.tr 
 
Abstract— In this paper, the effectiveness of different jamming 
techniques against synthetic aperture radar (SAR) systems is 
provided. Some derivations regarding the noise jamming 
immunity of SAR systems are made and the results obtained 
are compared with the simulation results. Noise jamming 
techniques based on playback of pre-recorded noise sequence 
and repeater techniques based on random false targets are 
proposed. Simulations are used to show the effectiveness of 
those techniques for different jamming to signal ratios. A 
hardware structure for SAR jammer is proposed together with 
possible simplifications.  
Keywords- SAR; Electronic Counter Measure (ECM) ; Noise 
Jamming. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
SAR is an imaging radar which transmits phase or 
frequency coded pulses to target region and forms 2D 
reflectivity image by coherently processing collected pulse 
returns. The final image is the Radar Cross Section (RCS) 
Distributions of point scatters on the surface. Different from 
their optical counterparts, SAR radars can form high 
resolution images of target regions in all weather conditions. 
Jamming against SAR systems can be thought as 
protecting strategic regions from monitoring and this makes 
it an important problem in Electronic Warfare (EW). 
Jamming a SAR system is an easier problem compared to 
conventional radar jamming in some ways. SAR systems 
usually work with a fixed Pulse Repetition Interval (PRI) and 
frequency which makes them unprotected against jammer 
tracking. They also have large bandwidth and can easily be 
located in frequency by Electronic Intelligence (ELINT) 
systems.  
It is also hard to generate an effective ECM signal 
against SAR systems. First of all, SAR radars are always 
highly coherent radars with both fast time and slow time 
operations in their receivers and this makes them immune to 
noise jamming. SAR images have high correlation, so low 
pass filtering or reconstruction algorithms using this 
correlation can be used to correct jammed images.  
SAR Jamming has been studied for a long time but it is 
still a current research area. Several studies on the simplest 
jamming technique, noise jamming effectiveness have been 
published [1], [2]. Deceptive techniques using Digital Radio 
Frequency Memory (DRFM) which create spurious images 
in SAR scene is also a popular research area [3], [4]. 
Electronic Counter Counter Measure (ECCM) techniques for 
countering SAR jammers have been studied deeply due to 
their similarity to conventional radar ECCM [5][6][7]. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, an introductory information on SAR performance 
parameters and image construction is provided.  Section III 
gives a classification of SAR ECM techniques in literature 
together with a comparison of their effectiveness. In Section 
IV, simulation results regarding the effectiveness of different 
jamming techniques will be provided. In Section V, a 
hardware structure for implementing SAR jammer will be 
proposed. Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
SAR BASICS 
One of the most important performance criteria for 
imaging radars is the final image resolution. Since SAR is a 
2D imaging system, resolution is defined in both range and 
azimuth. Resolution in range can be improved by using pulse 
compression techniques. Resolution in azimuth can be 
approximated using 3dB pattern width times the range (R). 
The cross range resolution ΔCR can be approximated 
using (1) where λ is the wavelength and Laz is the antenna 
size in azimuth direction [9].For a low resolution at long 
range, the antenna size requirement becomes unrealizable.       
                               
R Laz
CR



                                       (1) 
 
 
In SAR systems, a synthetic antenna array is formed by 
using the assumption of limited change in imaging region 
and a uniform motion of the radar platform during the 
imaging period. By using the size of this synthetic array, a 
large azimuth size Laz and high azimuth resolution is 
obtained for imaging. During the motion of the platform, a 
sequence of pulses is transmitted in the direction 
perpendicular to the platform motion. The pulses are 
transmitted at a rate defined by pulse repetition interval 
(PRI). If the platform speed is given by v and the duration of 
pulse integration is TINT, then the aperture length will be the 
platform speed times the pulse integration time. The resultant 
azimuth resolution of the constructed image can be 
calculated using (2). [9] 
 
               
R vTA
CRSAR
2



                                 
(2) 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

There is a large number of algorithms related to image 
formation for SAR.  Since these are not related to the subject 
of this paper, only a brief summary of the simplest algorithm 
(Doppler Beam Sharpening) going back to 1965 (Carl 
Wiley) will be described here. 
The position of a point scatterer on a target region can be 
defined by using the axis parallel to platform motion (X axis) 
and the range axis (R) perpendicular to the motion. Let u 
define the position of the platform on synthetic aperture. If 
the distance to the imaging region is much larger than the 
diameter of the target region, then the distance to the point 
scatterer can be approximated using (3) where x is the 
position on X axis. 
 
R
x
R
u x
R
R
x
u
R u
2
)
(
)
(
2
2
2






                  (3) 
 
Assuming the output of fast time match filter is 
approximated by δD(t-R(u)) in baseband, the phase lag Θ(u) 
of pulse return from a point scatterer at coordinates (x,R) can 
be calculated using (4). 
 

2 ) 4
(
)
(
2
R
x
R
u x
R
u




 
                       (4) 
 
COLLECT SAMPLES IN 
SLOW TIME
PULSE COMPRESSION 
(MATCHFILTER)
IN FAST TIME
FFT IN SLOW TIME
COORDINATE 
CORRECTION
 Figure 1. Doppler Beam Sharpening Algorithm 
When we differentiate this phase lag with respect to u, we 
obtain a linear relation with x given by (5). The position of 
scatterer in azimuth corresponds to a complex sinusoid in 
slow time and by using the frequency of this sinusoid, we 
can obtain the azimuth position. By using all the assumptions 
stated above the simplest image formation algorithm 
“Doppler Beam Sharpening” can be summarized as stated in 
Figure 1. 
 
R
x
du
u
d

4
( )


                                     (5) 
III. 
DEFINITION AND TYPES OF SAR ECM 
 
SAR ECM can be defined as techniques which prevent a 
target from imaging, classification and identification of 
objects on a region by creating distortion or false targets in 
the resultant image.  Possible techniques against SAR are 
classified as Passive, Non-Coherent, Semi Coherent and 
Coherent in [11].  
Passive techniques include usage of reflectors and surface 
materials absorbing radar pulses. As stated in [10], by using 
special materials, a decrease of up to 15 dB in radar cross 
section (RCS) can be obtained. 
In non-coherent techniques, the jam signal does include 
radar center frequency but does not have any other 
correlations with the radar pulse. The jam signal is filtered 
in both fast time and slow time processing. Noise techniques 
are included in this group. 
In semi coherent techniques jam signal is constructed by 
using target pulses recorded on Digital Radio Frequency 
Memory (DRFM) but the phase relation from pulse to pulse 
is not considered. Fast time match filtering does not 
decrease jam signal power but the power of the jam signal is 
decreased during slow time processing. 
 In coherent techniques, pulse to pulse phase relation is 
controlled such that the jam signal can pass both fast time 
and slow time operations with minimum loss. The most 
important gain in such techniques is that, a false target 
defined in both azimuth and range direction can be formed, 
resulting in a deception effect. 
All SAR systems have a slow time processing which 
makes them highly resistive against noise jamming 
techniques. First, some calculations related to signal to noise 
ratio (SNR) in SAR receiver are provided. In these 
calculations, the noise source can be the thermal noise, 
jammer noise or sum of them. 
Assume the azimuth resolution of the system is wa. The 
required aperture length for this resolution can be calculated 
using (6). As shown in [9] two point scatters ∆x separated 
from each other will have a Doppler difference given by (7). 
The maximum Doppler difference that can occur along the 
aperture length will correspond to Δx = DSAR and this will 
require a sampling rate of 1/ ΔFD. The aperture length is 
also limited by Θaz*R. By using (1), (6) and (7) we obtain a 
minimum pulse repetition frequency (PRF) for a system 
given by (8). The number of pulse returns along aperture 
can be calculated using (9). 
wa
R
D
2
SAR
 
                                       (6) 
R
v x




2
Fd
                                       (7) 
az
L
v
PRF
2
min 
                                     
(8) 
az
a
c
L
w
R
v
PRF
D
n



min
SAR
                         
 (9) 
PCF  PW *BW
                               (10) 
 
The SNR gain obtained by pulse compression on range 
axis can be calculated using the Pulse Compression Factor 
(PCF) given by (10) where PW is the pulse width and BW is 
the band width of the SAR pulse. 
The SNR gain in slow time processing is equal to the 
number of pulses processed in slow time nc. In order to 
avoid Doppler ambiguities, an over sampling factor Ka is 
used. This factor is known as “Azimuth oversampling 
Factor” and has an effect in SNR gain. By combining all 
factors, SNR gain in SAR receiver is calculated using (11). 
 
az
a
a
L
w
K
R
BW
PW
*
*
*
*
*
GAINSNR


                 (11) 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 
GAINSNR only correspond to SNR gain in receiver. There 
are other factors effecting the amount of jamming noise 
power on the receiver system such as the attenuation due to 
distance between jammer and SAR, positioning of the 
jammer outside the main lobe of the SAR, mismatch 
between jammer and SAR frequency bands . 
The immunity of SAR receiver against noise jamming is 
due to the fact that the noise samples sum up non-coherently 
in SAR receiver. An alternative technique to barrage, spot, 
pulsed noise techniques is the usage of the same prerecorded 
noise signal for each pulse. In this technique, a pre-
calculated noise sequence is recorded to a memory and used 
repetitively.  This will result in a filtering in fast time 
however due to pulse to pulse coherency, there will be lines 
in the resultant SAR image.  The effectiveness of this 
technique will be shown in the simulations section.  
In semi coherent techniques, recorded radar pulses are 
used to generate jamming signal, however the motion 
characteristics of the platform is not used for transmission 
timing or modulation of jammer signal. As a result, in semi 
coherent techniques phase coherency in slow time (azimuth) 
is not possible. Due to this fact, jamming signal power does 
not decrease during fast time match filtering but decreases 
during slow time operations. 
  Assume a technique similar to false target generation 
against conventional radar is used. A copy of the radar pulse 
is transmitted back after a fixed period of time. Since the 
timing of the jamming pulse is independent of radar position, 
there will be a scattering in the resultant SAR image. When 
the delay between pulse arrival to jammer and jam signal 
transmission is zero, there would be no scattering in 
resultant image and a single point scatterer in jammer 
location will appear in resultant image. When the delay 
between SAR pulse arrival and jam signal transmission is 
increased, the scattering in resultant SAR image will 
increase. In other words, if we want to create a single point 
scatterer with coordinates (RFT ,XFT), then the delay at 
different platform positions must be ΔTFT .(12)  
 
2
2
)
(
)
(
2
FT
J
FT
FT
R
R
x
u
c
T





             (12) 
 
Parameters u and Rj (Jammer distance in range direction) 
are unknown parameters for semi coherent techniques, so 
they cannot be used while calculating the timing of jammer 
pulse transmission. An interesting example to semi coherent 
techniques is described in [12] where a random phase 
modulation is combined with noise jamming. Another 
example to semi coherent techniques, named in this paper as 
random range false target technique, is transmission of a 
radar pulse copy at random range or ranges. For each PRI, 
the delay between pulse arrival and transmission varies in an 
interval [T1 T2]. By this technique, a region in radar image 
corresponding to delays [T1 T2] can be filled.  
Coherent techniques, similar to semi coherent ones use 
radar pulse as a source for jamming signal generation. 
Different from the semi coherent case, the platform position 
is used for jam signal timing, so a coherency in slow time is 
also possible. 
IV. 
SIMULATIONS 
In this section, simulation results regarding effectiveness 
for different ECM techniques will be provided. The effect of 
Jamming to Signal ratio J/S is also simulated. The results 
validate the derivation provided in (11). In these simulations, 
the SAR system is assumed to be using the “2D Match 
Filtering and Frequency Interpolation” image formation 
method provided in [13]. The jammer is assumed to be 
protecting a region which is defined by a set of point 
scatterers shown in Figure 2. Each point scatterer is shown 
with a white dot and assumed to have the same RCS. The 
jammer location is the center of that region. Some of the 
SAR parameters chosen may differ from typical SAR 
systems. The reason for these selections is minimizing 
simulation run times. The SAR system parameters used in 
simulations are listed in Table-1. Using these parameters, 
the SNR gain or noise jamming attenuation in the receiver 
will be nearly 61 dB. 
 
 
Figure 2. Set of Point Scatterers in target region 
TABLE I.  
TABLE 1 SIMULATION SAR PARAMETERS 
Center Frequency 
1 GHz 
Range 
4 km 
Aperture Length 
1300 m 
Number of Pulses processed 
2470 
Azimuth resolution 
1.5m 
Range resolution 
1.25m 
Bandwidth 
100 MHz 
Target Region Width (Azimuth) 
200 m 
Target Region Width (Range) 
800 m 
 
In Figures 3,4,5,6 2D and 3D plots of resultant SAR image 
magnitudes reconstructed under J/S ratios of 30 dB, 40 dB, 
50 dB, 60 dB are provided. Up to the J/S ratio of 50 dB, 
point scatterers can clearly be selected. For the J/S of 60 dB, 
point scatterers are not distinguishable and lost in noise, 
which is an expected result since J/S improvement on 
receiver was calculated as 61 dB. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 
Figure 3. Barage Noise J/S :20 dB 
 
Figure 4. Barage Noise J/S :40 dB 
 
Figure 5. Barage Noise J/S :50 dB 
 
 
Figure 6. Barage Noise J/S :60 dB 
As described in Section IV, a non-coherent noise 
jamming technique where a prerecorded noise sequence is 
repetitively transmitted in each PRI is also simulated. Such 
a technique would require tracking of SAR pulse timing and 
a sufficient memory for noise sequence recording. The 
expected result is a filtering in fast time and obtaining a 
coherency in slow time. The simulation results provided in 
Figures 7 and 8 show lines in the resultant SAR image 
which shows that a coherency in slow time is obtained. 
Figure 7 shows the resultant image for J/S ratio of 50 dB 
and Figure 8 shows the resultant image for J/S ratio of 60 
dB. 
 
Figure 7. Repeater Noise J/S:50dB 
Figure 8. Repeater Noise J/S:60dB 
 
As an example to semi coherent techniques, radar pulses 
are retransmitted with 16 different delays and the resultant 
SAR image is shown in Figure 9. As expected, a simple 
repeater with zero delay will result in a strong point 
scatterer in jammer coordinate. With an increase in pulse 
delay, the scattering in azimuth axis increases and the 
jamming effectiveness decreases due to blurring. 
For simulating random delay pulse repetition technique, 
each radar pulse is delayed and retransmitted with 16 
different delays in each PRI. The obtained results are shown 
for different J/S ratios. Figures 10, 11 and 12 show results 
for J/S ratios of 20 dB, 30 dB and 40 dB cases. 40 dB J/S 
case seem to be more effective on SAR system compared to 
barrage noise jamming case with the same J/S due to 
coherency in fast time.  
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 
Figure 9. 16 Multiple False Target 
 
Figure 10. Random Range Multiple False Target J/S:20 dB 
 
Figure 11. Random Range Multiple False Target J/S:30 dB 
 
Figure 12. Random Range Multiple False Target J/S:40 dB 
V. 
HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
In this section, a hardware structure for implementing 
SAR jammer will be proposed. The proposed HW structure 
is shown in Figure 13.  
 
LNA
RF/BB
CONVERSION
A/D
A/D
I
Q
DRFM
P
S
U
1
P
S
U
2
P
S
U
3
P
S
U
N
SYNTHETIC
IMAGE
GENERATOR
NOISE
GENERATOR
PULSE SHAPER
ECM
PROCESSOR
+
A/D
A/D
I
Q
BB/RF
CONVERSION
POWER
AMP
 
Figure 13. SAR Jammer HW Realization 
The jamming techniques described above include 
generation of noise type and repeater type jamming 
techniques. Noise type jamming includes generation of 
pulsed or continuous wave type noise generation in radar 
band. Deceptive techniques aim to create false images. For 
this purpose assuming a baseband processing in jammer, the 
false objects are modeled using a point scatterer array as 
shown in (13) where p(t) is the radar pulse, gi  is the gain 
coefficient corresponding to RCS of the scatterer and fd is 
the frequency shift corresponding to the coordinate of the 
point scatterer in azimuth axis. 
 
fd t
j
i
i
i
td g e
p t

2
PS
)
(
J

 
  
             (13) 
 
The proposed HW structure realizes signal processing on 
a sampled baseband signal. First, the SAR pulse is recorded 
on DRFM and the main delay corresponding to the 
difference of delays between SAR to jammer and SAR to 
false image coordinates is realized on this memory. The 
false target is separated into point scatterers with different 
gain 
corresponding 
to 
their 
RCS, 
frequency 
shift 
corresponding to their azimuth positions and different delay 
lines corresponding to differences between point scatterer 
delays. The Point Scatterer Unit (PSU) array in Figure 13 
realizes this using multiple PSU units. The outputs of the 
PSU are summed up and transmitted back to target. A 
synthetic image generator block continuously updates PSU 
parameters by using the coordinate estimation of the SAR 
platform. The number of PSU units is an important 
performance parameter for the effectiveness of the jammer. 
In order to have sufficient PSU units, the resource 
consumption of those units is an important consideration.  If 
the frequency shift is implemented using complex I/Q (In 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

Phase and Quadrature Phase) data, a complex multiplication 
with 4 multipliers will be necessary. Similarly, the gain 
corresponding to RCS of the point scatterer would require 2 
multipliers on and Q channels. Figure.14 proposes a 
structure for PSU realization, which does not have any 
multipliers. 
 
Figure 14. Point Scatterer Unit Realization 
 The sampled baseband signal is first converted into 
phase using COordinate Rotation DIgital Computer 
(CORDIC) algorithm or a low latency Look Up Table based 
algorithm described in [14] before the PSU array. Each PSU 
unit has its own minor delay line for compensating delay 
differences among modelled point scatterers. A frequency 
shifter, which is realized with an adder and accumulator, 
adds frequency modulation information coming from the 
synthetic image generator (SIG) block. The control of noise 
generator and SIG is done by an ECM processor. The signal 
in phase format is converted to Baseband I/Q signal using 
the look up table (LUT). The usage of LUT for phase to I/Q 
conversion is the main disadvantage in this structure. 
Assuming a 6 dB gain resolution would be sufficient, the 
RCS differences between point scatters are realized using 
shift registers which are controlled by SIG. Another 
advantage of this structure is the independence of the ECM 
signal from the SAR signal power due to I/Q to phase, phase 
to I/Q conversion where the amplitude information is 
completely lost. For realizing repetitive noise jamming 
technique, DRFM has a write port from ECM processor so 
that a pre-calculated noise pattern can be written to and 
repetitively read out of DRFM. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, effectiveness of non-coherent, semi 
coherent and coherent techniques against SAR radars are 
compared and some simulations results for those techniques 
are shown. The advantage of using semi-coherent 
techniques over non-coherent techniques are shown. A non-
coherent technique based on repetitive transmission of pre-
calculated noise signal is proposed and the effect obtained 
with this technique is shown using simulations. The effect 
of random delay repeater techniques is also simulated for 
different J/S cases and its area covering effect is shown. A 
possible HW realization of the SAR ECM generator system 
is proposed. A structure for false image generator which 
uses multiple point scatterers modelling is proposed. For 
realizing several PSU in the same HW, a simple structure 
for PSU without any multipliers is proposed and its 
advantages and disadvantages compared to straightforward 
implementation are stated. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Dumper, P.S. Cooper; A.F. Wons, C.J. Condley, and P. 
Tully, "Spaceborne synthetic aperture radar and noise 
jamming," 
Radar 
97 
Oct 
1997 
, 
pp.411-414 
doi: 
10.1049/cp:19971707 
[2] R.S. Harness and M.C. Budge, "A study on SAR noise 
jamming and false target insertion" SOUTHEASTCON 2014, 
March 2014 pp.1-8 doi: 10.1109/SECON.2014.6950729 
[3] X.He, J. Zhu, J.Wang, D. Du and B. Tang, "False Target 
Deceptive Jamming for Countering Missile-Borne SAR" 
IEEE 17th International Conference on Computational 
Science and Engineering (CSE), Dec 2014, pp.1974-1978, 
doi: 10.1109/CSE.2014.364 
[4] Q. Sun, T. Shu, S. Zhou, B. Tang and W. Yu, "A novel 
jamming signal generation method for deceptive SAR 
jammer" IEEE Radar Conference, May 2014 , pp.1174-1178, 
doi: 10.1109/RADAR.2014.6875774 
[5] M. Soumekh  "SAR-ECCM using phase-perturbed LFM chirp 
signals and DRFM repeat jammer penalization" IEEE 
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Jan. 
2006, pp.191-205, doi: 10.1109/TAES.2006.1603414  
[6] Y. Chunrui, M. Xile, Z. Yongsheng, D. Zhen and L. 
Diannong, "Multichannel SAR ECCM based on Fast-time 
STAP and Pulse diversity" IEEE International Geoscience 
and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), July 2011, 
pp.921-924, doi: 10.1109/IGARSS.2011.6049282 
[7] L. Wei, W. Xingliangand and W. Xian-ming, "Anti-jamming 
techniques for synthetic aperture radar" IEEE International 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, July 2009, , 
pp.IV-605-IV-608, doi: 10.1109/IGARSS.2009.5417449 
[8] W.W.Goj “Synthetic Aperture Radar and Electronic Warfare” 
UK Artech House 1993. 
[9] M. A. Richards, “Fundamentals of Radar Signal Processing”, 
USA: McGraw-Hill, 2005. 
[10] L. Nan and Q. Changwen, "Research on jamming synthetic 
aperture radar technologies" Asian and Pacific Conference on 
Synthetic Aperture Radar, Nov. 2007, pp.563-566, doi: 
10.1109/APSAR.2007.4418674  
[11] Q. Liu, S. Xing, X. Wang, J. Dong, and D. Dai “A Strip-Map 
SAR 
Coherent 
Jammer 
Structure 
Utilizing 
Periodic 
Modulation Technology” Progress In Electromagnetics 
Research 
B, 
Vol.28, 
111-128, 
2011,doi:10.2528/PIERB10120901  
[12] W.Ye, H. Ruan, S. Zhang and L. Yan, "Study of noise 
jamming based on convolution modulation to SAR" 
International Conference on Computer, Mechatronics, Control 
and Electronic Engineering (CMCE), Aug. 2010, pp.169-172, 
doi: 10.1109/CMCE.2010.5609875 
[13] M.Soumekh “Synthetic Aperture Radar Signal Processing 
with MATLAB Algorithms.” New York: J. Wiley, 1999. 
[14] R. Gutierrez, V. Torres and J. Valls “FPGA-implementation 
of atan (Y/X) based on logarithmic transformation and LUT-
based techniques”,Journal of Systems Architecture 2010, pp 
588–596  
 
  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

