LEO Satellite Constellations: An Opportunity to Improve Terrestrial 
Communications in the Canadian Arctic 
 
Paul Labbé 
National Defence 
Defence Research and Development Canada (DRDC) 
Ottawa, Canada 
email: Paul.Labbe@drdc-rddc.gc.ca / Paul.Labbe@forces.gc.ca 
 
 
Abstract—This study examines communications options (data, 
video and voice) for operations in the Canadian Arctic 
accounting for adverse conditions, such as atmospheric 
disturbances (both natural and man-made) or adversarial 
attacks on satellites and terrestrial infrastructure. Potential 
users include Canadian Armed Forces (CAF), North American 
Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD), off-grid communities 
and Public Safety, including their respective systems requiring 
machine-to-machine 
low 
latency 
data 
sharing. 
The 
technologies considered include satellites, microwave relays, 
fiber optic links, radios like cellular phones operating in the 
700 Mhz band, transceivers in the high frequency bands 
(20-30 Mhz), and Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) gateways. 
Keywords-communications; satellite; Arctic; latency. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This Defence Research and Development Canada 
(DRDC) study was initiated to address Canadian Arctic 
communication challenges expressed in the new Canada's 
Defense Policy, Strong, Secure, Engaged (SSE) [1], which 
reaffirmed Canada’s commitment to effective operation in 
the Arctic. SSE defines an extended Canadian Air Defense 
Identification Zone (CADIZ) that includes the entire 
Canada’s Arctic Archipelago (see Figure 1) as part of the 
overall North American Aerospace Defense Command 
(NORAD) modernization with an improved North Warning 
System (NWS) requiring high-throughput low-latency 
communications.  
In addition this study covers some aspects of current 
Northern Canada communication systems of the Canadian 
Armed Forces (CAF), off-grid communities, Search And 
Rescue (SAR), and Public Safety (PS). Also, the rise in 
commercial interest, research and tourism in this zone brings 
increased safety and security demands related to SAR and 
natural or man-made disasters to which Canada must be 
ready to respond. 
The purpose of this paper is to examine communications 
options for operations in Northern Canada accounting for 
adverse conditions such as atmospheric disturbances (both 
natural and man-made) or adversarial attacks on satellites 
and terrestrial infrastructures. Users include CAF, NORAD, 
off-grid communities and PS. 
Section II of this paper describes the geographic context, 
climate, topography and size of the area requiring assured 
communication in all weather and atmospheric conditions. 
Section III summarizes some of the communications systems 
envisaged, deployed and used over the last decades in this 
area, such as Tropospheric Scatter, Geostationary Earth Orbit 
(GEO) at approximately 37000 km above the equator and 
Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) between 2000 to 35786 km 
altitudes. Section IV brings in perspective of novel options 
offered by several Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite 
constellations at altitudes below 2000 km. Section V 
introduces another option using a specific Highly Elliptical 
Orbit (HEO), the Three APogee (TAP with an apogee 
around 43000 km) [2]. Section VI proposes a possible 
terrestrial architecture with the addition of base stations 
using towers and Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs) as 
gateways. Section VII compares latencies among the 
different 
satellite 
orbits 
and 
other 
communication 
technologies. Section VIII examines the pros and cons of 
some of these options. Section IX concludes with a short 
summary of findings and a final recommendation. 
 
Figure 1.  North America Canadian operational areas, new Canadian Air 
Defense Identification Zone (CADIZ), distance vectors and population 
densities for Canada, Northern Canada, Canadian Arctic Archipelago and 
Toronto. 
19
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

II. 
CONTEXT 
Northern Canada, aka the North, is the vast northernmost 
region of Canada variously defined by geography and 
politics. Politically, the term refers to three territories of 
Canada: Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut. This 
area includes the Arctic Archipelago and covers about 39% 
of Canada's total land area, but has less than 1% of Canada's 
population.  
More specifically, the Arctic Archipelago, aka the 
Canadian Arctic Archipelago, groups together all islands 
lying to the north of the Canadian continental mainland 
excluding Greenland (an autonomous territory of Denmark). 
Situated in the northern extremity of North America and 
covering about 1424500 km2 (550000 sq mi), this group of 
36563 islands in the Arctic Sea comprises much of the 
territory of Northern Canada—most of Nunavut and part of 
the Northwest Territories. This is about 15% of Canada’s 
geography that homes only about 0.04% of Canada's 
population. 
The 
Canadian 
Arctic 
Archipelago 
is 
experiencing some effects of global warming, with some 
computer models estimating that ice melting will contribute 
3.5 cm to the rise in sea levels by 2100. 
CAF’s preparedness training and exercises involve 
several thousand participants and some observers, which 
temporally substantially increase the population density in 
Northern Canada. For example, Operation Nanook series is 
an annual military CAF exercise in the Arctic. It is intended 
to train different CAF elements (Canadian Army, Royal 
Canadian Air Force and the Royal Canadian Navy) along 
with other government organizations, such as the Canadian 
Coast Guard and Royal Canadian Mounted Police in disaster 
training and sovereignty patrols in Northern Canada. 
Another series conducted south of Northern Canada near 
CAF Base Cold Lake is MAPLE FLAG, which brings about 
5000 participants. In both cases, these exercises represent 
significant demand of information interoperability exchange, 
including voice, data and video, with some requiring low 
latency in order to fulfill machine-to-machine requirements. 
A poignant factor in deploying communication systems 
in Northern Canada is the low population density. With 
reference to Figure 1, population densities of Europe and 
India are respectively about 2.3 and 11.6 thousand times that 
of Northern Canada. It is worth noting that some aspects of 
evolving 5G technologies are tuned to improve network 
capacity in high-user density areas like cities. 
A. Environmental and Logistical Considerations [3] 
The North has extreme weather conditions, with 
temperatures ranging from -50 to +20 degrees Celsius and 
wind gusts of up to 150 km/h. There is very little 
precipitation in the Arctic, with an average total of 100 to 
200 mm of rain and snow per year. The amount of daylight 
varies with time of year and with latitude. In Resolute Bay, 
for example, the sun does not rise above the horizon from 
early November to early February and does not set from 
early May to late July. 
Permafrost (perpetually frozen ground) is present in most 
of the Arctic and although typically roughly 10 m thick, it 
can extend down 1 km below the surface. Construction of 
stable platforms required for large satellite ground stations or 
microwave towers is costly because support pillars must be 
driven below the permafrost; otherwise the platform will 
shift as the permafrost partially melts during the short 
Arctic’s summers. This requires careful site selection to 
ensure placement where the permafrost is thin enough to 
enable installation. Furthermore, this type of environment is 
challenging for underground fibre installation. 
Year-round access to all communities in the high Arctic 
is by plane only, increasing the overall cost of travel and 
accommodation 
when 
planning 
and 
installing 
communications 
equipment. 
Communities 
also 
have 
seasonal sealifts, which transport non-perishable dry cargo 
(e.g., construction material, household goods, vehicles, etc.) 
and bulk fuel to them once or twice per year. Items that are 
too large or costly to transport via air cargo, for example, 
large aperture satellite dishes or microwave towers and 
associated construction materials must be shipped by sea. 
This increases the logistic phase of any communication 
equipment deployment. 
III. 
PRACTICAL ARCTIC COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS 
This section includes the following communications 
systems: Tropospheric Scatter, High Frequency Ground 
Wave (HFGW), Point-to-Point (P2P) backhaul radio links, 
Fiber Optic Cable (FOC) and GEO systems. Skywave 
propagation modes are excluded due to their susceptibilities 
to radiation and atmospheric changes. 
Tropospheric scatter, or Troposcatter, is a beyond-the-
horizon communications solution in which microwave 
signals are scattered as they propagate through the 
troposphere. This phenomenon allows signals to be 
successfully received without line-of-sight between the 
transmitter and receiver at vast distances, even up to 500 km. 
Troposcatter systems have been in use for several decades 
and the technology has seen many advances in recent years, 
including improvements in throughput to 20 Mbps. 
However, for applications in the North it was found to be too 
expensive due to its power demand and infrastructure. 
HFGW was documented for an alternate communications 
network for “nuclear-survivable means of communication 
for land-mobile missile systems in Europe” [4]. So, HFGW 
appears to be a potential communication means in case of 
satellite communications disruption due to solar activities or 
other manmade disturbances. According to International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) [5] there are different uses 
of the terminology and the surface wave is often called the 
ground wave, or sometimes the Norton ground wave or 
Norton surface wave, after Norton who developed tractable 
methods for its calculation. The ground wave is the sum of 
direct wave, reflected wave, and surface wave. When the 
transmitting and receiving antennas are close to the ground, 
the ground reflection coefficient is -1, so the direct and 
ground-reflected waves act to cancel each other out, leaving 
the surface wave as the only important component. In such 
conditions, the ground wave is essentially equal to the 
surface wave. Empirical results [4] using broadband discone 
antennas with a cut-off frequency of 19 MHz operating over 
20 to 30 MHz near Norway Arctic Circle and Germany 
20
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

showed good link connectivity for voice and data using 
narrowband channels for paths over irregular terrain over 
distances ranging between 19 and 115 km. Based on the 
empirical results reported, a communication system with its 
signal spread over 10 MHz with code division multiplexing 
and sufficient coding gain would offer throughput and fading 
resilience for a high-reliability medium-data-rate channel. 
Microwave links have been extensively used in the North 
providing reliable connectivity to smaller communities in the 
Yukon and Northwest Territories that do not have direct 
access to FOC backhaul. Microwave links provide high 
throughput with low latency, a significant advantage over 
GEO systems. Since microwave frequencies require line-of-
sight propagation, towers and topographic features are 
exploited to extend the range of links beyond the limitations 
imposed by the curvature of Earth and terrain features. 
An example of microwave technologies used in remote 
Arctic locations is the High Arctic Data Communication 
System (HADCS) of Ellesmere Island, which links Canadian 
Forces Station Alert (CFS Alert) to Eureka over a distance of 
roughly 500 km. Then the data are sent via GEO satellite 
from Eureka to Ottawa (4147 km). HADCS was retrofitted 
in 2003 to run entirely using solar power, despite prolonged 
darkness during winter months. Each HADCS station is 
powered by eight 120 W photo-voltaic (solar) panels 
arranged in an octagon (eight vertical panels distributed at 
45° angular intervals to cover all azimuths). During the 
summer, with 24 hours of day light, the sun does not dip 
below the horizon, and all of the solar panels contribute to 
charging the battery banks [3]. This network comprises 
seven individual links ranging from 18 to 121 km in length 
each. The current system operates in bands near 1800 and 
2100 MHz, and provides 6.3 Mbps of throughput. Helicopter 
is the only means of access to these repeater sites [3].  
The main challenges in providing microwave backhaul 
throughout in the North using towers are the overall lack of 
infrastructure, the inaccessibility of the locations where 
towers would be built and powering these sites. In the North, 
costs of construction per kilometre for FOC and microwave 
links are about equal (approximately $65K/km), when 
serving a population of roughly 300 people. Above this 
number of users, fibre is less expensive [3]. These networks 
have at least one point of service via a satellite terrestrial 
terminal; the trend is two or more to increase dependability. 
UAS gateways (either aerostats and high-altitude high-
endurance autonomous drones) [3] provide possible 
communication solutions that merit some discussion. The 
Internet.org consortium has conducted some research into 
the feasibility of using UAS as communications platforms 
for remote and underserved locations [15]. These UAS 
would be deployed at an altitude of approximately 20 km. By 
using solar power, UAS systems would be capable of 
remaining above one geographic location on earth, thereby 
reducing complexity and cost of the ground infrastructure 
when compared to microwave links, or will not require 
tracking as for MEO and LEO satellites. As the UAS would 
be relatively close to Earth, cheaper low-power transmitters 
could be used, while still enabling high-throughput 
communications with low latency. A previous study [3] 
assessed that this type of range extenders might have an 
availability no greater than 80%, but with technology 
advances this is different today, such UAS might be 
sufficiently reliable for commercial broadband. 
GEO satellites are well suited to some applications in the 
North, given that they remain at the same point in the sky 
when viewed from a particular location on Earth, and 
therefore, do not require tracking antennas on the ground as 
for MEO and LEO systems. This enables the use of lower-
cost stationary antennas at ground stations, which is 
particularly advantageous in harsh environments where 
moving parts are undesirable. GEO satellites provide much 
of the broadband Internet coverage for communities in the 
North; the coverage in Nunavut is currently provided by two 
GEO satellites, Anik F2 and Anik F3, both using C-band [3]. 
However, the use of GEO satellites in the North has some 
drawbacks. Due to geometry and the curvature of Earth, 
there is no line-of-sight between equatorial GEO satellites 
and North locations above roughly 80 degrees latitude. 
Furthermore, communities at latitudes higher than about 70 
degrees have elevation-look angles below ten degrees to the 
satellite. This leads to increased absorption and scattering of 
radio frequency signals by the atmosphere (known as 
absorption) and at higher frequencies from precipitation 
(rain, snow and ice, known as rain fade). The five 
northernmost communities in Nunavut are above 70 degrees 
latitude. Another disadvantage of GEO satellite use for 
broadband applications is signal latency; due to the distance 
to and from the satellite, the minimum delay for a round trip 
is 480 ms with a median latency of 600 ms. This is an order 
of magnitude higher than for fibre and microwave links [3]. 
Tests of Mobile Satellite (MSAT) and Iridium 
capabilities for emergency communications in Northern 
Quebec showed their insufficiencies. The Canadian MSAT 
system uses GEO satellites, which requires, at such latitude, 
a high-gain antenna and higher antenna siting (implying 
larger installations, location constraints and thus greater 
costs). These conditions make emergency operations difficult 
and cost-ineffective. The US commercial Iridium system 
with its current handheld, vehicle-mounted and fixed-remote 
equipment demonstrated different logistic problems, such as 
the high cost and poor performance of the handheld 
telephone, which usually cannot be used inside buildings [6]. 
For a Canadian Arctic Underwater Sentinel Experimentation 
(CAUSE) project, transmission of data over a period of 7 
months showed that the Iridium Pilot system (antenna about 
six meter above ground) did not fulfill the requirement [7]. 
“The Pilot data transfer rate for polar transceivers is far less 
than the advertised rate” [7]. 
The Iridium system was designed to be accessed by small 
handheld phones, the size of a cell phone. The 
omnidirectional antennas, which are small enough to be 
mounted on such a phone, and the low battery power, are 
insufficient to allow the set's radio waves to reach a GEO 
satellite. In order for a handheld phone to communicate with 
them, the Iridium satellites are at LEOs closer to Earth, at 
about 780 km above the surface. With an orbital period of 
about 100 minutes a satellite can only be in view of a handset 
for about 7 minutes, while the call being automatically 
21
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

"handed off" to another satellite when the previous one 
passes beyond the local horizon. This requires a large 
number of satellites, carefully spaced out in polar orbits, to 
ensure that at least one satellite is continually in view from 
every point on Earth's surface. For seamless coverage at least 
66 satellites are required, in 6 polar orbits containing 11 
satellites each.  
IV. 
PERSPECTIVE OF NEW LEO CONSTELLATIONS  
Out of the 11 LEO satellite communications service 
proposals registered within the US Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), the following three will be considered 
based on their maturity [8]: OneWeb, SpaceX and Telesat on 
Ku (12-18 GHz) and Ka (27-40 GHz) bands.  
To ensure access to affordable high-speed Internet 
connectivity across rural and Northern Canada, the 
Government of Canada has invested $85 million and is 
committed to buy up to $600 million in some services over 
10 years following launch in 2022 of Telesat’s LEO Satellite 
Constellation, which is leveraging Telesat’s worldwide rights 
to ≈4 GHz of Ka-band spectrum. 
The conclusion of the main analysis of [8] was 
summarized as follows: 
• The maximum total system throughput (sellable 
capacity) 
for 
OneWeb's, 
Telesat's 
and 
SpaceX's 
constellations are 1.56 Tbps, 2.66 Tbps and 23.7 Tbps 
respectively. 
• A ground segment comprising of 42 ground stations 
will suffice to handle all of Telesat's capacity, whereas 
OneWeb will need at least 71 ground stations, and SpaceX 
more than 123. 
• In terms of satellite efficiency (ratio between the 
achieved average data-rate per satellite and its maximum 
data-rate), Telesat's system performs significantly better 
(∼59% vs. SpaceX's 25% and OneWeb's 22%). This is due 
to the use of dual active antennas on each satellite, and the 
lower minimum elevation angle required in their user links. 
• OneWeb's system has a lower throughput than Telesat's, 
even though the number of satellites in the former is 
significantly larger. The main reasons for this are the lower 
data-rate per satellite that results from OneWeb's low-
complexity satellite design, spectrum utilization strategy, 
orbital configuration, and payload design, as well as the lack 
of use of Inter Satellite Links (ISLs). 
• If ISLs were to be used in OneWeb's constellation, 
(even with modest data-rates of 5 Gbps), the number of 
ground stations required could be reduced by more than half 
to 27 ground stations. 
“To conclude, our analysis revealed different technical 
strategies among the three proposals. OneWeb's strategy 
focuses on being first-to-market, minimizing risk and 
employing a low-complexity space segment, thus delivering 
lower throughputs. In contrast, Telesat's strategy revolves 
around high-capable satellites and system flexibility (in 
diverse areas, such as deployment, targeted capacity 
allocation, data routing, etc.), which results in increased 
design complexity. Finally, SpaceX's system is distinctive in 
its size; although individually each satellite is not 
significantly more complex than Telesat's, the massive 
number of satellites and ground stations increases the risks 
and complexities of the overall system considerably” [8]. 
However, this offers a high level of redundancy. 
V. 
ENVISAGED HEO/TAP CONSTELLATIONS  
HEO/TAP [2], which could be considered under the 
Enhanced Satellite Communications Project – Polar (ESCP-
P) program to provide dedicated, secure and reliable Beyond 
Line-Of-Sight (BLOS) communications for domestic and 
continental CAF operations in the Arctic. Current GEO 
communication satellites leave the poles uncovered; 
consequently, Department of National Defence (DND) is 
exploring options of building the capability or acquiring 
services from commercial providers who have future plans to 
cover this area. The initial operational capability is 
tentatively scheduled for 2029.  
Quasi-geostationary coverage of Polar Regions can be 
achieved from HEO satellites. In accordance with Kepler’s 
second law HEO spends most of the time in the vicinity of 
apogee (i.e., the farthest point from the Earth’s surface). The 
orbit could be oriented in such a way that the apogee is over 
one of the two Polar Regions, so that only two HEO 
satellites can maintain a continuous view of an entire polar 
zone [9]. When satellite A leaves the optimal viewing zone 
and heads toward the perigee (i.e., the closest point to the 
Earth’s surface), satellite B rises over the region to maintain 
the complete circumpolar region in sight. Interestingly, there 
are periods of several hours per day of coincident (i.e., 
stereo-like) imaging from the two satellites over most of a 
circumpolar 
area. 
Such 
a 
system 
could 
provide 
meteorological imaging and communication capacity, similar 
to GEO, focused on the polar region. The first HEO satellite 
system with a period of rotation equal to 12 h was called 
Molniya was implemented for communication purposes in 
1965. It is established that a two-satellite Molniya HEO 
constellation can achieve continuous coverage of the polar 
region 58°–90°N with a Viewing Zenith Angle (VZA) less 
than 70°. Another HEO system—with a 24-h period—called 
Tundra is currently used by the satellite Sirius XM Radio 
service operating in North America. Both orbits, 12-h 
Molniya and 24-h Tundra, are launched with an orbit 
inclination equal to 63.4°. This value called the critical 
inclination, corresponds to a zero rate of apogee drift due to 
the second zonal harmonic of the Earth gravitational field, 
and insures a stable position of apogee over the polar zone. If 
the HEO orbit inclination differs from the critical value, then 
the apogee gradually drifts toward the equator. Orbital 
maneuvers are then required to maintain the intended orbit 
position. The farther the orbit inclination is from the critical 
value, the more resources are required to maintain the orbit. 
A drawback associated with the 12-h Molniya orbit is the 
risk linked to hazardous levels of ionizing radiation due to 
passing through the Van Allen belts. The highest danger 
originates from high-energy protons. The Molniya orbit 
crosses the proton radiation belts at the region of maximum 
concentration of energetic protons with energies up to 
several hundred MeV. As an alternative, the 16-h TAP HEO 
orbit was proposed, providing similar polar coverage as the 
Molniya HEO system while minimizing the proton ionizing 
22
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

hazards by extending the apogee to 43000 km [2]. The TAP 
orbit has a ground track with three apogee points repeatable 
over two days. Such a constellation of two satellites in TAP 
orbit still revisits ground tracks every 24 h.  
VI. 
TERRESTRIAL ARCHITECTURES 
Architecture options offered by new LEO satellite 
constellations and terrestrial communications, such as UAS, 
FOC and HFGW given advances in signal processing, multi-
beam antennas, spatial diversity and low cost software-
defined radios could substantially improve communications 
availability and reliability in the North. Figure 2 illustrates 
such a multi-technology architecture where ISLs and Inter 
UAS Links (IUASLs) play important roles. Potential 
services 
provided 
with 
appropriate 
parameters 
and 
technologies should allow anticipating improvement in 
coverage, resilience, redundancy, dependability, data rate 
and low latency for services, such as:  
 
fixed installations like CFS Alert, NWS radar 
networks, and Forward Operating Bases (FOBs); 
 
mobiles near fix installations, air or tower gateways 
or their communication relays; and 
 
deployed personnel and platforms for military 
exercises and operations, emergency operations or 
off-grid communities of Northern Canada. 
  
Figure 2.  Simplified Northern Communications Architecture. 
VII. LATENCY  
Latency is the delay, usually measured in milliseconds 
(ms), that occurs in a round-trip data transmission. The 
latency of a message is the amount of time it takes to reach 
its destination from its source. Results for FOC in large 
networks based on Round-Trip Times (RTTs) [10] using 
Content Delivery Network (CDN) show useful latency 
information, such as 18 ms for a distance of 1418 km. 
HADCS and HFGW offer low latency in this order of 
magnitude but with lower data rates. High latency typical of 
GEO satellite links can be very disruptive for some 
applications, such as video conferencing, and could increase 
risk in remote health applications including remote surgery. 
Satellite link latencies can also cause low data throughput, 
caused by the default behaviour of communication protocols, 
which are optimized for shorter distances. A GEO satellite 
one-way propagation delay is approximately 240 ms due to 
the distance between Earth and satellite. Therefore, round-
trip delivery of a data packet with acknowledgement is 
approximately 480 ms. This does not include the network 
delay, which can generally add 50 to 200 ms, depending on 
where the server is located. GEO satellite systems have a 
median latency of nearly 600 ms, which includes a median 
delay of 120 ms due to processing speed and networks in 
both directions. This makes GEO systems an unsuitable 
replacement for cable or fiber systems for applications 
requiring 
low 
latency, 
such 
as 
machine-to-machine 
interoperation. The lower orbits of LEO satellites, however, 
should result in latencies that are much closer to landline 
quality. The average orbit of the proposed constellations is 
around 1200 km, that is a round trip of 2400 km or delay of 
31 ms. This is 93.5% improvement over a GEO round trip of 
480 ms. If the processing speed of LEOs equaled that of 
GEOs then their total median latency time would be 151 ms. 
However, OneWeb tune-up, recorded an average latency of 
32 ms in July 2019. As new LEO satellites are designed for 
high throughput, their overall processing time and network 
delay must be lower than those used in legacy GEO systems 
in order to obtain such small latency score. 
For LEO latency, in this article, since no large sets of 
empirical results are available, a conservative approach is to 
use some of the simulation results from [11] for optimal 
Expected Latency Minimization (ELM) algorithm using 
Software-Defined 
Networking 
(SDN) 
context, 
which 
addresses more completely the entire network aspect 
including 
fading 
dependence 
on 
atmospherics. 
An 
interpretation of [11] for its ELM-SND hypotheses is that 
LEO’s average latency be around 40 ms while the maximum 
average latency be around 90 ms. 
For HEO TAP with an apogee of 43000 km this means 
that the round-trip time is increased by16% from GEO, i.e., 
558 ms or a median latency of 778 ms. Assuming a MEO 
median orbit of 18893 km, that is 51% of GEO, then MEO 
median latency could be in the order of 306 ms.  
VIII. ANALYSIS 
Considering the advantages of LEOs in extending 
communications coverage and throughput in the North in 
conjunction with terrestrial network communications with 
appropriate gateways, this study must be extended to include 
experimentation. Also, there is a need to investigate how 
Canada could protect space and terrestrial network 
installation assets. 
Satellites are more susceptible to radiation, jamming and 
atmospheric disturbances than FOC and over-the-horizon 
HFGW propagation. HFGW at 20 to 30 MHz is expected to 
provide 
reliable 
medium 
throughput 
terrestrial 
communications [4]. FOC offers high throughput and low 
latency, commonly deployed around the world and 
expanding in Northern Canada [12][13]. FOC and HFGW do 
not offer the area coverage of LEO satellites.  
Two challenges of LEO constellations are the frequent 
handover and terrestrial base station antenna tracking. These 
seem achievable under low energy and cost regimes by the 
availability of lower-cost components, such as high-speed 
low-power chip sets and Active Electronically Scanned 
Array (AESA) integrated boards for microwave systems in 
Ka and Ku bands. However, Figure 3 shows the 
disadvantage of transmitting at higher frequencies, but such 
higher frequencies offer higher throughput. 
23
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 3.  Path loss distance ratio d2/d1 as a function of the carrier 
frequency ratio fc1/fc2 for five base heights and mobile at one meter [6]. 
Figure 3 allows estimating the increase in radio coverage 
when stepping down from 1500 MHz to 150 MHz. Reducing 
the mobile operating frequency by a factor of 10 extends the 
communication range by a factor of about 5 for a base station 
whose effective antenna height is 30 m. If the cell size were 
5 km for normal service, it might extend to 25 km for the 
emergency temporary service, reducing the logistic burden 
of covering an area affected by a disaster. Currently, the 
frequency of 700 MHz is allocated for emergency in Canada. 
Colman et al. [3], present an example with microwave 
link systems. One is operating at 1.8 GHz and the other at 
11 GHz, both with similar radiating power. The system at 
lower frequency offers a free space maximum range of 
333 km while the other, at six times the frequency, qualifies 
for a free space maximum range of 30 km. That is 11 times 
shorter. However, the maximum effective throughput rises 
from 65.4 Mbps to 232 Mbps, which is 3.5 times faster.  
Other considerations include the challenge of powering 
terrestrial systems in the North. Sources like solar and wind 
mill could be combined with sodium-ion batteries, which 
could operate at low temperature. Long endurance UAS 
could be using solar with hydrogen fuel-cells. However, 
sources requiring refueling every six months would be ideal. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
This article addressed some of difficult challenges that 
remain after many years of research and development for 
communications systems in the North. Findings address 
DND/CAF challenges to improving capabilities required by 
future demands from expected developments in the Arctic 
and for NORAD operations. 
Selected options to improve communications in off-grid 
areas, more specifically in the North, are expected to provide 
timely improved shared situational awareness in support of 
operations where it is currently not well provided, or not 
available. Such solutions would be revolutionary for our 
Defense and Security (D&S) capabilities and would 
progressively provide significant advantages to coalition 
forces and when CAF operates in collaboration with other 
Canadian departments including PS and local police in the 
most demanding emergency and disaster situations. 
In the North, if low latency communications are critical 
for applications or operation objectives, GEO, MEO and 
HEO satellite systems are not recommended. The least 
expensive communications systems with low latency in the 
North should include UAS and LEO systems to ensure fast 
deployment and access to all participants. UAS offers rapid 
deployment capability on demand in response to PS and 
CAF situations. LEO/UAS hybrid systems could definitely 
extend capabilities of available legacy infrastructures. 
The most significant finding is that the advent of low-
cost high-performance LEO satellite systems will definitely 
improve communications in the North. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Canada: Department of National Defence and Canadian 
Armed Forces. (2017). Strong, Secure, Engaged. Canada's 
Defense Policy. 
[2] A. P. Trishchenko, L. Garand and' L. D. Trichtchenko, 
“Three-apogee 16-h highly elliptical orbit as optimal choice 
for continuous meteorological imaging of polar regions,” 
Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, vol. 28, no. 
11, pp. 1407-1422, 2011. 
[3] G. Colman 'et al.', “Communications in the North,” 
Communications Research Centre (CRC), Ottawa, 2014. 
[4] J. R. Champion, “An Empirical Investigation of High-
Frequency Ground Wave Propagation,” Johns Hopkins APL 
Technical Digest, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 515-525, 1992. 
[5] ITU, “Handbook on Ground Wave Propagation,” in 
"International 
Telecommunication 
Union; 
Radiocommunication Bureau," R-HDB-59, 2014. 
[6] P. Labbé, “GPS and GIS Integration in Mobile Equipment for 
Improved Mobile Emergency Operations,” in Proceedings of 
the 12th International Technical Meeting of the Satellite 
Division of the Institute of Navigation (ION GPS-99); Session 
A2 - Land Systems & Public Safety, Nashville Convention 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee, 1999, pp. 545-555, 1999. 
[7] G. J. Heard, “Initial report of CAUSE investigated 
technologies for remote system deployment,” Defence 
Research and Development Canada (DRDC) – Atlantic 
Research Centre, August 2019. 
[8] I. del Portillo, B. G. Cameron and' E. F. Crawley, “A technical 
comparison of three low earth orbit satellite constellation 
systems to provide global broadband,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 
159, pp. 123-135, 2019. 
[9] A. P. Trishchenko, L. Garand, L. D. Trichtchenko and' L. V. 
Nikitina, “Multiple-apogee highly elliptical orbits for 
continuous 
meteorological 
imaging 
of 
polar 
regions: 
challenging the classical 12-h Molniya orbit concept,” Bulletin 
of the American Meteorological Society, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 19-
24, 2016. 
[10] I. N. Bozkurt 'et al.', “Dissecting Latency in the Internet's 
Fiber Infrastructure,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.10737, 2018. 
[11] W. Cho and' J. P. Choi, “Cross layer optimization of wireless 
control links in the software-defined LEO satellite network,” 
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 113534-113547, 2019. 
[12] A. Fiser, “Mapping the long-term options for Canada's north: 
Telecommunications and broadband connectivity,” 2013: 
Conference Board of Canada, 2013. 
[13] M. Levitt, “Nation-building at home, vigilance beyond: 
Preparing for the coming decades in the arctic,” Speaker of 
the House of Commons, Ottawa, 2019.   
24
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2020. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-769-6
SPACOMM 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

