Realizing Challenging Internet of Things Applications Via Aerospace 
Infrastructures 
 
Emmanouel T. Michailidis1,2, Stelios M. Potirakis2, and Athanasios G. Kanatas1 
1Department of Digital Systems, University of Piraeus, Piraeus, Greece 
e-mail: {emichail, kanatas}@unipi.gr 
2Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, University of West Attica, Campus 2, Aigaleo, Athens, Greece 
email: spoti@puas.gr 
 
 
Abstract—This paper intends to justify why the aerospace 
communications is a key technology that will bring the Internet 
of Things (IoT) vision closer to reality. Both satellites and 
aerial platforms, such as High-Altitude Platforms (HAPs) and 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), are considered. Their 
advantages are highlighted mainly in terms of the radio 
coverage and the link reliability, and their potential 
applications in several sectors are described. Emphasis is also 
given on the advanced wireless technologies that can further 
enhance the capabilities of aerospace communications. 
Keywords-High-Altitude Platforms (HAPs); Internet of 
Things (IoT); satellite networks; Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAVs). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Fifth-Generation (5G) vision does not only represent 
a significant upgrade of mobile broadband communications, 
but it will bring new unique network and service capabilities 
towards the evolution of Internet of Things (IoT) [1]. The 
IoT is an information network that encompasses a large 
family of smart and critical applications and supports a 
massive number of small, low-cost and low-power 
interconnected physical objects, generally referred to as 
Machine-Type Devices (MTDs), which interact and 
cooperate without human intervention, in order to reach 
common goals. More specifically, the IoT comprises sensors 
and actuators interacting with data processing, wired and 
short- and long-range wireless communication technologies, 
ground-based processing, and humans.  
The successful operation of IoT-based networks 
envisages the seamless and synergetic integration of 
heterogeneous terrestrial and aerospace networks with 
different capabilities, which give rise to new services, 
architectures, 
and 
challenges 
[2]-[4]. 
From 
a 
communications engineering standpoint, the heterogeneity of 
the aforementioned technologies translates into highly 
different service requirements in terms of data traffic, end-to-
end communication delay, reliability, etc. Cloud and fog 
computing and networking can facilitate the seamless 
integration of different heterogeneous networks, whereas 
Software-Defined Radios (SDR) and Software-Defined 
Networking (SDN) could bring flexibility and support the 
cost-efficient deployment and runtime of customized 
networks [5]. Motivated by these observations, this paper 
tries to shed light on the aerospace-based IoT and describe its 
special characteristics and the benefits provided by the 
aerospace infrastructures.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes 
the 
types 
of 
aerospace 
communication 
technologies. Section III underlines the advantages of 
satellites and aerial platforms, while Section IV presents the 
advanced wireless technologies that intend to enrich their 
capabilities. Section V outlines the potential applications of 
aerospace-based IoT. Finally, conclusions are drawn in 
Section VI. 
II. 
TYPES OF AEROSPACE COMMUNICATIONS 
Hybrid satellite-terrestrial networks are a typical example 
of cooperation between different architectures [2]. As the 
demand 
for 
comprehensive 
broadband 
and 
broadcast/multicast high-speed wireless communication 
services (e.g., voice, data, and multimedia services), global 
coverage, and ubiquitous access has grown, satellite 
networks can strongly support terrestrial backhaul networks 
and provide extensive as well as uninterrupted radio 
coverage to stationary, portable, and mobile receivers at 
frequencies ranging from 100 MHz to 100 GHz, as well as at 
optical frequencies, using different orbital architectures. 
Satellite are spaceborne vehicles capable of bringing 
communications to sparsely populated or underdeveloped 
areas, and still maintaining exclusive status in traditional 
maritime and aeronautical markets from the wide area 
perspective due to their unique coverage features.  
In recent years, the use of mobile airborne services via 
aerial High-Altitude Platforms (HAPs), i.e., airships powered 
by solar cells or aircrafts powered by fuel engine propulsion, 
flying in the stratosphere, and Low-Altitude Platforms 
(LAPs) or Low- and Medium-Altitude Platforms (LMAPs) 
flying at various altitudes in the troposphere to supplement 
wireless terrestrial infrastructure has been also suggested [6]. 
The latter includes the Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), 
i.e., Remotely Piloted Vehicles (RPVs), drones, robot planes, 
and pilotless aircrafts [7]. These platforms are capable of 
providing ubiquitous wireless access over large coverage 
areas at low cost, while they attain network flexibility and 
adaptability due to their rapid deployment and movement on 
demand. Project Loon initiated by Google has intended to 
leverage high-altitude balloons for broadband services in 
remote locations [8], whereas Facebook [9] has attempted to 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

deploy solar-powered drones to provide Internet access to 
underdeveloped areas. Moreover, Microsoft has deployed 
balloons in the stratosphere loaded with sensors and cameras, 
which are connected to the Azure IoT platform and send the 
telemetry to the field gateway through the Constrained 
Application Protocol (CoAP). Figure 1 demonstrates a 
hybrid communication network consisting of terrestrial and 
aerospace infrastructures for IoT applications. 
III. 
ADVANTAGES OF AEROSPACE COMMUNICATIONS 
By leveraging the aerospace platforms, the IoT 
connectivity can be enhanced based on the additional 
communication choice. High-speed geostationary and/or 
non-geostationary 
satellites 
can 
provide 
efficient 
backhauling of aggregated IoT traffic from multiple sites and 
transfer data from Low-Power Wide Area Network 
(LPWAN) devices to applications on cloud platforms. They 
can also enable multicast/broadcast and trucking of video, 
IoT and other data across a large coverage area or a central 
site, with further terrestrial distribution to local cell sites. The 
aerospace communications have the potential to promote the 
Internet of Remote Things (IoRT) [10] in locations with 
terrestrial network constraints, i.e., remote, highly mobile, 
highly dispersed of wide geographical areas (rural, maritime, 
aero, railway, vehicular), and support massive Machine-to-
Machine 
(M2M) 
communications. 
The 
aerospace 
infrastructure is not only capable of interconnecting remoted 
or dispersed smart objects, but also ensuring effectual 
management of data-intensive applications, redundant 
connections at critical sites, reliability, low latency, and 
enhanced capacity. A typical example of IoRT is the Global 
Sensor Network (GSN) for remote environment observation, 
where massively connected IoT sensor networks are 
connected via Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites. 
Satellites have a major role in assisting 5G networks to 
meet sub-1ms latency requirements by delivering commonly 
accessed content to mobile base stations and multi-casting 
content to caches located at individual cells, even in places 
without fiber. Although Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) 
satellites latency of 250 ms (500 ms round-trip) is acceptable 
for many 5G and IoT applications and is comparable with 
the RTT of a long terrestrial link (100-200 ms), Medium 
Earth Orbit (MEO) and LEO satellite constellations allow for 
meeting more stringent latency requirements in case of voice 
and video transmission.  
The aerospace platforms are not only an important 
supplement for big data acquisition methods for IoT, but also 
can improve the network performance. Since the links of 
terrestrial systems are often blocked, the aerial platforms, 
especially HAPs and drones, have great potential to attain a 
higher chance of Line-of-Sight (LoS) communication with 
the ground users and thus enhance the coverage and 
connectivity. The UAVs can also easily move, have a 
flexible deployment, and can provide rapid, on-demand 
communications. The realization of IoRT and M2M 
communications can be further reinforced due to the 
investments in new ground segment technologies, such as 
small, electronically steerable, electronically steerable, 
and/or phased-array satellite transceivers, as well as the cost-
effective CubeSat platforms [11] based on micro, nano- and 
pico- satellites, operating as access points. 
IV. 
ADVANCED WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES 
Although the local connectivity in IoT is provided by 
means of a short-range radio access technology, i.e., 
Bluetooth Smart, ZigBee, IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless 
Personal Area Networks (6LoWPAN), and Z-Wave, long-
range wireless connectivity can be achieved using 
conventional, i.e., cellular and satellite networks, or LPWAN 
technologies, e.g., Longe Range (LoRa), Sigfox, Ingenu, and 
Narrowband-IoT (NB-IoT) [12]. In the context of satellite-
based IoT applications, Inmarsat was the first to join the 
LoRa Alliance as its first satellite member and combine a 
LoRa Wide Area Network (LoRaWAN) on the ground with 
a satellite mesh in the sky. Inmarsat and other service 
providers predominantly use the lower data rate L-band (1-2 
GHz). While L-band systems will continue to support 
extremely low data-rate IoT applications, higher frequencies, 
e.g., the Ka- and Ku-bands, are positioned for future 
applications, as network traffic increases. With Ku-band, 
service providers can leverage the large number of open Ku-
band satellites, which traditionally offer lower spectrum cost 
than L-band. Although using Ka- and Ku-bands may be 
beneficial, rain effects severely affect signal propagation in 
mm-wave frequencies and a strong, dominant LoS signal is 
required for sufficient coverage due to the severe attenuation 
of the Non-Line-of-Sight (NLoS) links. 
The capabilities of aerospace networks in terms of the 
latency are in part due to the use of Adaptive Coding and 
Modulation (ACM) techniques as foreseen in the Digital 
Video Broadcasting – Satellite – Second Generation (DVB-
S2) standard, which retains outbound throughput even during 
heavy weather conditions. To further improve the 
performance of aerospace systems, algorithms based on 
cognitive radio principles can be applied that enable dynamic 
spectrum access and agile waveform adaptation (from carrier 
aggregation to unlicensed spectrum sharing). 
 
Gateway
Rural
Sensor Nodes
Application 
Server
Urban
 
Figure 1.  A simple representation of an hybrid terrestrial-aerospace 
communication network for IoT applications.  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

To successfully fulfill the growing demands for high data 
throughputs and enhanced link reliability with greater 
mobility support and extended network range, cooperative 
diversity preserves the end-to-end communication between a 
source and a destination via intermediate relays [13]. Since 
new requirements for enhanced spectral efficiency, greater 
bandwidth and higher data rates emerge, the Multiple-Input 
Multiple-Output (MIMO) [14] [15] and massive MIMO [16] 
technology can revolutionize satellite networks, exploit 
spatial diversity, and serve multiple users (i.e., multi-user 
MIMO). This has gained great interest due to the 
standardization activities on the finalized DVB - Satellite to 
Handheld (DVB-SH) standard [17], and the prospective 
DVB – Next Generation Handheld (DVB-NGH) [18] 
standard. As the performance of radar systems is limited by 
target scintillations, the application of MIMO techniques to 
Synthetic Aperture Radars (SARs) can greatly improves 
resolution and sensitivity, as well as detection and estimation 
performance of aerospace applications for the IoT by 
exploiting the diversity of target scattering [19].  
Data rates in the multigigabit regime can be achieved 
using Free-Space Optical (FSO) inter-satellite, inter-
platform, 
satellite-to-ground, 
and 
platform-to-ground 
connections [20]. Compared to Radio-Frequency (RF) 
systems, FSO systems are capable of providing intrinsic 
narrow beamwidth and high-speed LoS connectivity using 
the wavelength division multiplexing scheme with very 
small and compact equipment and low power consumption. 
In addition, FSO systems ensure privacy with low 
probability of interception, immunity to electromagnetic 
interference, and exemption from spectrum regulatory 
restrictions. 
V. 
POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS 
It is important to note that the notion of IoT comprises a 
wide variety of applications. The challenging ones that will 
be benefited by the aerospace infrastructures refer to the 
critical IoT and require very high reliability and availability 
in terms of wireless connectivity. Although the average 
volume of data transported to and from devices may not be 
large, wide instantaneous bandwidths are useful in being able 
to meet capacity and latency requirements. On the other 
hand, the low cost of the devices and the energy 
consumption is not as important as for other IoT 
applications. Typical paradigms of critical IoT applications 
are the following: 
 
Transport 
Applications: 
The 
aerospace 
communications can improve the safety and 
management of transportation infrastructure and 
realize the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) [21]. 
Specifically, an expanded adoption of networking 
vehicles, sensors and controls can be achieved that 
will enable the smarter use of road and rail 
transportation by effectively supporting applications 
such as, signage, signaling and routing, alerts for 
road and weather conditions, level crossing 
protection, and train control systems. Satellite-based 
Global Positioning System (GPS) can determine the 
positioning of each vehicle, whereas HAPs represent 
a feasible solution for data acquisition in IoV, 
especially in rural areas. Besides, monitoring of 
vehicular traffics through drones with embedded 
cameras or sensors is also viable. By taking 
advantage of the aerospace infrastructure, the 
operation of commercial autonomous shipping can 
be enabled along with future commercial marine 
vessels, cargo logistics, and smart ports [22]. 
 
Industrial Applications: The aerospace networks 
can also play a key role in a sub-segment of the IoT, 
referred to as the Industrial IoT (IIoT) [23], since 
they can deliver connectivity to remote locations and 
challenging 
environments. 
Although 
satellite 
networks are extensively deployed to support critical 
Supervisory 
Control 
And 
Data 
Acquisition 
(SCADA) applications, IIoT can be seen as an 
expansion of SCADA networks and other global 
asset 
tracking 
applications, 
remote 
control, 
automated fabrication, collaborative robots, etc. 
Applications tend to be those involving remote 
locations or extending over large land or sea areas, 
such as water level monitoring, oil and gas pipeline 
integrity, and tracking of mining trucks. Overall, the 
IIoT market seems a significant opportunity for 
satellite service providers. 
 
Medical Applications: The satellites and the aerial 
platforms combined with information and cloud 
technology are playing an increasing role in the 
support of welfare and Healthcare IIoT (HealthIIoT) 
applications [24] and can be used for providing low-
cost and timely healthcare in remote and inaccessible 
areas. These technologies have a profound effect on 
the quality, safety, and efficiency of healthcare. The 
patients and the aging society can be served by 
satellite based telemonitoring, medical diagnosis and 
care from their homes, whereas interaction though 
videoconferencing between medical personnel and 
patients at home can be obtained. Moreover, using 
biomedical sensors, collection and transmission of 
medical data is feasible. Aerospace communications 
can also be used for monitoring endemics/epidemics 
at any area, while high bandwidth links can 
accommodate real-time medical imaging and remote 
robotic surgery [25].  
 
Disaster and Crisis Management Applications: 
As the natural disaster or large-scale unexpected 
events easily make the terrestrial network overloaded 
or totally destroyed, hybrid satellite-aerial-terrestrial 
networks have the ability to provide more effective 
services compared to traditional infrastructures 
during 
the 
emergency 
situations. 
Aerospace 
networks can offer rapid deployment and wide 
coverage and successfully support applications, such 
as video surveillance, structural monitoring and 
protection of critical infrastructure [26]. These 
include dams, bridges and other important structures, 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

as well as security and access controls related to 
border control, flood warning, earthquake detection, 
weather and environmental monitoring, coastline 
and pipeline surveillance, trafficability of maritime 
routes, e.g., icebergs, and synthetic aperture radar 
applications. The emergence of LAPs indicates a 
stable and reliable direction for the development of 
emergency network via circular flight tracks and 
continuous observation of regional hotspots and 
hazard areas.  
 
Smart 
Energy 
Applications: 
The aerospace 
infrastructure can efficiently handle a variety of 
electric grid automation and metering applications 
and support the integration and efficient use of all 
the energy resources and the grid infrastructure, 
using smart sensors, smart meters and smart control 
[27]. Moreover, there exists a wide range of 
applications in oil and gas that the aerospace 
infrastructure can effectively enable. These include 
monitoring and transmitting sensor data concerning 
drilling control, wellhead production, pipeline 
monitoring, distribution logistics and asset security.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the role of aerospace communication 
technologies in the future IoT ecosystem has been described. 
Since ubiquitous connectivity and long-range radio coverage 
are required in many critical IoT applications, satellites and 
aerial platforms along with advanced 5G wireless 
technologies can drastically change the landscape of various 
industries and strongly support the evolution of IoT. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is implemented through State Scholarships 
Foundation (IKY) and co-financed by the European Union 
(European Social Fund – ESF) and Greek national funds 
through the action entitled “Reinforcement of Postdoctoral 
Researchers” in the framework of the Operational 
Programme “Human Resources Development Program, 
Education and Lifelong Learning”, with priority axis 6, 8, 9, 
of the National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) 
2014-2020. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. R. Palattella et al., “Internet of Things in the 5G Era: 
Enablers, Architecture, and Business Models,” IEEE J. on 
Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 510-527, Mar. 
2016. 
[2] B. Evans et al., “Integration of satellite and terrestrial systems 
in future multimedia communications,” IEEE Wireless 
Commun., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 72–80, Oct. 2005. 
[3] B. Paillassa, B. Escrig, R. Dhaou, M.-L. Boucheret, and C. 
Bes, 
“Improving 
satellite 
services 
with 
cooperative 
communications,” Int. J. Satellite Commun. Netw., vol. 29, 
no. 6, pp. 479–500, Nov./Dec. 2011. 
[4] B. G. Evans, “The role of satellites in 5G,” in Proc. 7th 
Advanced Satellite Multimedia Systems Conference and the 
13th Signal Processing for Space Communications Workshop 
(ASMS/SPSC), Livorno, Italy, pp. 197-202, 2014. 
[5] N. Zhang et al., “Software Defined Space-Air-Ground 
Integrated Vehicular Networks: Challenges and Solutions,” 
IEEE Commun. Magaz., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 101-109, 2017. 
[6] A. Mohammed, A. Mehmood, F. Pavlidou, and M. Mohorcic, 
“The role of high-altitude platforms (HAPs) in the global 
wireless connectivity,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 99, no. 11, pp. 1939-
1953, Nov. 2011. 
[7] J. M. Sullivan, “Evolution or revolution? the rise of UAVs,” 
IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 
43-49, Fall 2006. 
[8] B. Moision et al. “Demonstration of free-space optical 
communication for long-range data links between balloons on 
Project Loon,” in Proc. SPIE 10096, Free-Space Laser 
Communication 
and 
Atmospheric 
Propagation 
XXIX, 
100960Z, Feb. 2017.  
[9] Flying Aquila: Early lessons from the first full-scale test flight 
and the path ahead, 2016. [Online]. Available from: 
https://code.facebook.com/posts/268598690180189 
[retrieved: March, 2018]. 
[10] M. De Sanctis, E. Cianca, G. Araniti, I. Bisio, and R. Prasad, 
“Satellite Communications Supporting Internet of Remote 
Things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 
113-123, Feb. 2016. 
[11] V. Almonacid and L. Franck, “Extending the coverage of the 
internet of things with low-cost nanosatellite networks”, Acta 
Astronautica, Vol. 138, pp. 95-101, 2017. 
[12] D. G. Kogias, E. T. Michailidis, G. Tuna, and V. C. Gungor, 
Realizing the Wireless Technology in Internet of Things (IoT), 
in 
Emerging 
Wireless 
Communication 
& 
Network 
Technologies: 
Principle, 
Paradigm 
and 
Performance, 
Springer, in press. 
[13] J. Jiao, H. Gao, S. Wu, and Q. Zhang, “Performance Analysis 
of Space Information Networks with Backbone Satellite 
Relaying for Vehicular Networks,” Wireless Communications 
and Mobile Computing, vol. 2017, Article ID 4859835, 13 
pages, 2017.  doi:10.1155/2017/4859835 
[14] P.-D. Arapoglou et al., “MIMO over Satellite: A Review,” 
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 13, no. 1, 
pp. 27-51, First Quarter 2011. 
[15] P.-D. Arapoglou, E. T. Michailidis, A. D. Panagopoulos, A. 
G. Kanatas, and R. Prieto-Cerdeira, “The Land Mobile Earth- 
Space Channel: SISO to MIMO Modeling from L- to Ka- 
Bands,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, 6, 2, June 
2011, pp. 44-53. 
[16] E. G. Larsson, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and T. L. Marzetta, 
“Massive MIMO for next generation wireless systems,” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 186-195, Feb. 
2014. 
[17] A. B. Alamanac et al., “In-Depth Analysis of the Satellite 
Component of DVB-SH: Scenarios, System Dimensioning, 
Simulations and Field Trial Results,” International Journal of 
Satellite Communications and Networking, 27, 4-5, Jul.-
Oct.2009, pp. 215-240. 
[18] M. Sangchul et al., “Enhanced spatial multi plexing for rate-2 
MIMO of DVB-NGH system,” in Proc. 19th International 
Conference on Telecommunications (ICT) 2012, Jounieh, 
Lebanon, 23-25 April 2012, pp. 1-5. 
[19] W. Wang, “Applications of MIMO Technique for Aerospace 
Remote Sensing,” in Proc. IEEE Aerospace Conference 2007, 
Big Sky, MT, pp. 1-10, 2007. 
[20] H. Kaushal and G. Kaddoum, “Optical Communication in 
Space: Challenges and Mitigation Techniques,” IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 57-
96, Firstquarter 2017. 
[21] W. Xu et al., “Internet of vehicles in big data era,” IEEE/CAA 
Journal of Automat. Sinica, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 19-35, Jan. 2018. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

[22] M. Höyhtyä, T. Ojanperä, J. Mäkelä, S. Ruponen, and P. 
Järvensivu, “Integrated 5G Satellite-Terrestrial Systems: Use 
Cases for Road Safety and Autonomous Ships,” in Proc. 23rd 
Ka and Broadband Communications Conference 2017, 
Trieste, Italy, Oct. 2017. 
[23] L. D. Xu, W. He, and S. Li, “Internet of Things in Industries: 
A Survey,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 
10, no. 4, pp. 2233-2243, Nov. 2014. 
[24] M. S. Hossain and G. Muhammad, “Cloud-assisted Industrial 
Internet of Things (IIoT) – Enabled framework for health 
monitoring,” Computer Networks, vol. 101, pp. 192-202, Jun. 
2016. 
[25] S. Srivastava, M. Pant, A. Abraham, and N. Agrawal, “The 
Technological Growth in eHealth Services,” Computational 
and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, vol. 2015, Article ID 
894171, 2015. doi:10.1155/2015/894171 
[26] Y. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, and P. Zhang, “Hybrid satellite-
aerial-terrestrial networks in emergency scenarios: a survey,” 
China Communications, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1-13, July 2017. 
[27] K. Sohraby, D. Minoli, B. Occhiogrosso, and W. Wang, “A 
Review of Wireless and Satellite-Based M2M/IoT Services in 
Support of Smart Grids,” Mobile Netw Appl, 2017. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11036-017-0955-1 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

