Concepts and Technologies for a Terabit/s Satellite 
Supporting future broadband services via satellite 
Paul Thompson, Barry Evans 
CCSR, University of Surrey 
 Surrey, England 
e-mail: p.thompson@surrey.ac.uk 
Laurent Castenet 
ONERA 
Toulouse, France 
e-mail: Laurent.castenet@onera.fr  
 
 
Michel Bousquet 
TeSA 
Toulouse, France 
e-mail: Michel.bousquet@isae.fr 
Takis Mathiopoulos 
ISARS 
Athens, Greece 
e-mail: mathio@space.noa.gr 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper we investigate the next but one 
generation of fixed satellite systems and the technological 
challenges that face this generation which we define as 
operational by 2020. Various technologies and architectural 
concepts are presented with a view to identifying the most 
promising to pursue. The dimensioning of the system has 
demonstrated that several new technologies are appropriate for 
development before such a satellite system is feasible. Work is 
continuing to investigate these in more detail but we feel there 
to be no technology show stopper for a Terabit/s satellite by 
2020. 
Keywords-satellite communications; broadband, advance 
systems Internet over satellite. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In this paper we investigate the next but one generation of 
fixed satellite systems and the technological challenges that 
face this generation which we define as operational by 2020. 
The current generation of large geostationary satellites are 
characterized by a capacity of up to 10Gb/s and are about 6 
Tonnes in weight. They have historically predominately 
operated in C and Ku bands but with Ka band now coming 
into use and in general are multi beam with less that 100 
beams per satellite. Just on the horizon is the next 
generation which will take the capacity up to 100Gb/s but 
with similar sized satellites making use of a larger number 
of beams and more complex payloads. These will take us 
through to 2015 or beyond; but what comes next? Here we 
look at this following generation of satellites and set 
ourselves the challenge of a further order of magnitude 
increase in capacity to a Terabit/s satellite [1]. The paper 
will concentrate on a single geostationary satellite but we 
recognise that there could be other solutions; for example 
constellations or multiple smaller co-located (clusters) 
satellites. We see the drive for higher capacities in three 
areas; Data Relay, Broadcasting and Broadband Access. 
Each has its own and different specialised requirements for 
the satellite. Herein we will concentrate on the third of 
these; the Broadband Access satellite for the 2020’s. 
Broadband access to the internet is a growing service area 
and satellite is ideally placed to deliver such services to 
areas that are uneconomic for terrestrial systems. Recently 
Cisco have predicted internet demands of 104 Peta bytes per 
second for Europe by 2012 which is 10 times the internet 
traffic in 2007 with such growth to continue for the rest of 
the decade. By 2013 an average European household 
bandwidth will be 500GB/month. On average this would 
require in excess of 30Mb/s for domestic users wherever 
they are. This represents a considerable increase on the 
Digital Plans adopted for European countries currently 
which aim at 2Mb/s for all. Terrestrial systems will not be 
able to economically cover the whole population base at 
these rates, even with LTE-A becoming the endemic mobile 
standard by this timescale, and thus broadband by satellite 
on a Europe wide basis will be a key provider of the future 
internet architecture in order to avoid the so called Digital 
Divide. It is also forecast that following the migration of 
speech services from fixed to mobile, Broadband is likely to 
follow suite in the latter part of the decade increasing the 
importance of satellite delivery to ensure full coverage. 
 
Until recently, Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) satellites 
have so far been developed such that they can flexibly meet 
a wide range of service roles thereby covering diverse 
market places. Such systems are not optimum for broadband 
services and tended to be power limited but are increasingly 
also becoming bandwidth limited. Their ability to provide 
services at comparable cost/bit to terrestrial systems has 
been technology limited due to this lack of optimisation. 
However they have the advantage of wide coverage and this 
will persist for broadcast and multicast services but can also 
be used to good affect for low density user services for 
example in rural areas. The cost/bit comparator still exists 
and whilst rural users might expect to pay a small premium 
it cannot be too far out of line with terrestrial costs. In the 
12
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

short term the challenge is to reduce the cost/bit by an order 
of magnitude and in the longer term (2020) by two orders of 
magnitude. This paper concerns the technology advances 
needed to bring this about and leads us to a Terabit/s 
satellite by 2020 by adopting a bespoke broadband 
optimised design. 
 
There are some issues which are immediately apparent. 
As the demand for satellite capacity has steadily increased 
the limits of traditional Ku band satellites due to congestion 
of orbital slots is evident as well as the limitations in the 
spectrum available to cope with predicted demands. In 
addition these satellites are built to cover wide geographical 
areas and hence have limitations to support flexible 
distribution of bandwidth that will be needed for a European 
Broadband satellite application. These limitations force us 
to look at higher frequency bands of Ka and above where it 
becomes easier to realise a larger number of spot beams on 
board the satellite and hence via frequency reuse achieve the 
capacity requirements. 
 
Broadband demand is being met terrestrially by local loop 
systems such as ADSL 2 but as the requirements exceed 
10Mb/s only around 40% of households in the UK will be 
able to be serviced. Fibre to the Home (FFTH) across 
Europe is patchy and unlikely to be the answer for 20 to 30 
years if ever in some areas. Wireless terrestrial is also at the 
mercy of spectrum allocation which is non uniform and 
LTE-A systems to deliver in excess of 30 Mb/s across cells 
is still a long way off and may never reach the rural areas. 
Thus the market in Europe indicates that there is demand for 
satellite services of this type. A study by IDATE in 2009 [2] 
considered the households that were not covered by 
broadband considered as the unserved market as follows; 
• 
Western Europe      5.2 million 
• 
Baltic countries       0.6 million 
• 
Eastern Europe        6.6 million 
• 
North Africa          18.0 million 
In addition, there have been three studies of market 
demand conducted recently (2009); 
 
1) Northern Sky research [3]  
A ten year forecast which indicates that by 2018 
satellite broadband will reach 1.2 million subscribers in 
Europe. 
2) SES ASTRA study [4]  
A detailed country by country study which includes the 
increased take up of terrestrial broadband and indicates 
addressable satellite markets not being served by 
terrestrial in low/median and high by 2020 as 
0.44/0.85/1.25 million. 
3) Eutelsat study [5] 
Indicates that the addressable market for satellite 
broadband will reach 3.5 million by 2018. 
The above studies all indicate a significant market for 
European satellite broadband in terms of households that 
will not be served by terrestrial means even given the 
increase in terrestrial provision. If we include North Africa 
in the coverage the market becomes very large. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows, 
 
− 
Spectrum availability – assessment & 
implications; 
− 
System architecture and satellite beams; 
− 
Gateway/UT & beam parameters; 
− 
Power and bandwidth requirements; 
− 
Satellite Power Assumptions; 
− 
Adoption of the Smart Gateway Concept; 
− 
Achievable Performance; 
− 
Other studies; 
− 
Making the Terabit/s satellite a reality; 
− 
Conclusions. 
 
II. 
SPECTRUM AVAILABILITY 
As we have already mentioned it can be demonstrated that 
Ku band does not possess sufficient spectrum for a Terabit/s 
satellite and so we will concentrate on both the Ka and the 
Q/V bands which have FSS allocations. 
 
a) Ka Band 
Exclusive bands for satellite are –19.7-20.2 and 29.5-30 
GHz that is 2x 500 MHz across the European Union (EU) 
and this is proposed for use by both HYLAS and Eutelsat 
Ka-SAT. Under European Electronic Communications 
Committee (ECC) decisions [6], [7] these bands are exempt 
from individual licensing for low eirp terminals (<50dBW 
(recently updated in the UK to 55dBW) and in some 
countries 60dBW). All other parts of Ka band have shared 
primary frequency allocations and thus would be subject to 
coordination at particular earth station sites. The band 20.2 
to 21.2 GHz is a dual military use band with the possibility 
of reuse but this would be difficult to coordinate across 
Europe and hasn’t been considered herein. 
Up Link 
27.5-29.5 GHz shared with Fixed Services (FS); some 
portions auctioned in UK requiring coordination. 
24.75 -25.25 GHz in ITU Regions 2/3 but not Region 1. 
Hence 2.5 GHz is available but with restrictions. 
Down Link 
17.3-19.7 GHz shared with Broadcasting Satellite Service 
(BSS) feeder links and also FS with many terrestrial links 
operating across EU needing coordination and maybe 
restricted to rural areas. 
21.4-22 GHz in ITU Regions 1/3 shared FS/Mobile/BSS. 
Hence 3 GHz is available but with restrictions. 
 
The current EU interest regarding the use of Ka-Band are 
currently under review and a draft report indicates the 
various interests in the European Conference of Postal and 
Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT) [8]. 
13
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
b) 
 Q/V Band 
There are no exclusive bands for satellite (FSS) here and 
thus all this spectrum is subject to coordination with other 
users, even the User Terminals (UT’s). This is not a show 
stopper but complicates the business model. 
Up Link (V) 
42.5-43.5 GHz is shared with FS/Mobile/RA. Portions 
auctioned in UK (3 operators paired with above); 
47.2-50.2 GHz is shared with FS/Mobile but with military 
and Outside Broadcast restrictions; 
50.4-51.4 GHz is shared with FS/Mobile but military 
restrictions in some countries. 
 
Down Link(Q) 
37.5-39.5 GHz is shared with FS/Mobile/Space research. 
This band is extensively used by FS. 
40.5-42.5 GHz is shared with FS/Broadcasting/BSS/Mobile. 
Portions of this band have been auctioned in UK (3 
operators) and in some other countries, requiring 
coordination. 
Hence 5 GHz available for the uplink and 4 GHz for the 
downlink but with restrictions and coordination is needed. 
CEPT ERC/DEC has provisions in some parts of the 
spectrum and in some countries priority is given to military 
use. 
c) Spectrum Summary 
The spectrum for an EU wide satellite system is very 
complex with country to country variations and only 2 x 
500MHz exclusive in Ka band. It may be that satellite 
operators have failed to lobby adequately for these bands 
and now some action is needed especially in Q/V bands 
with both the regulators and in WRC to restore sufficient 
spectrum for future systems. 
 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND SATELLITE BEAMS 
In order to achieve the Terabit/s satellite capacity we will 
need to use advanced air interfaces and frequency reuse 
beams from the satellite. We will assume basing the air 
interface on the current DVB-S2 standard and suggest later 
any modifications that might be required. 
The DVB-S2 Standard [9] and its associated Guidelines 
document [10] give parameters for the air interface. 
We have chosen to adopt a filter roll-off factor of 0.2 to 
represent modern equipment performance. 
For system architecture analysis purposes the parameters 
given in Table 1 have been selected as a starting point 
recognising that Adaptive Coding and Modulation (ACM) 
and Fade Mitigation Techniques (FMT) using other mod 
codes may be useful in combating rain fades. 
 
 
 
TABLE 1 WAVEFORM PARAMETERS CONSIDERED 
Modulation 
Eb/No 
(dB) 
C/N in 
BW 
spectral 
efficiency 
(b/s-Hz in 
BW) 
FEC 
16 APSK 
6.4 
10.8 
2.75 
5/6 
32 APSK 
8.1 
13.5 
3.43 
5/6 
 
Frequency reuse in the multi-spotbeam satellite antenna is 
commonly taken as either 3 or 4 colour with higher values 
(beyond 4) having diminishing returns. Current generation 
satellites at Ka band produce of the order of 80-100 beams 
to cover Europe. 
In order to obtain an initial and preliminary estimate of 
the numbers of beams we have assumed either 16 or 32 
APSK being in common use by 2020, with 3 and 4 colour 
reuse in the user beams occupying approximately 3 GHz of 
bandwidth at Ka band and take advantage of the fact that the 
gateway beams are significantly geographically separated 
permitting the use of the entire 4 GHz of bandwidth at Q/V 
band in each beam. 
a) Limitations of beam number analysis 
It is important to note that such an initial estimate is based 
upon bandwidth, spectral efficiency, frequency reuse and 
polarization reuse only and factors such as spacecraft 
payload, EIRP, C/N and C/I have been neglected in this 
initial assessment, as it is aimed at scoping the number of 
beams rather than determining a definitive solution. Thus, 
we have performed an initial set of calculations using a 
range of frequency reuse colours and polarizations with the 
stated spectral efficiency in order to assess various 
architectures. Furthermore the initial analysis considers 
uniform traffic loading in each beam and a practical system 
may require a higher number of beams than those suggested 
to account for non-uniform traffic whilst achieving a 
Terabit/s throughput. 
IV. 
GATEWAY/UT & BEAM PARAMETERS 
For an internet access service a star configuration into a 
gateway is to be preferred and so we now look at system 
architectures which have separate beams to User Terminals 
(UTs) and to Gateway Earth Station. We consider that the 
Gateway Earth Station will cover several UT beams and 
thus there will be fewer of them but they will carry greater 
capacity and hence need to be allocated more bandwidth. 
 
a) Mixed Ka and Q/V solution 
We have found that an initial architecture that employs 
the use of Q/V bands on the feeder links and Ka band for the 
UT links [11] appears to offer the best throughput. It should 
be noted that at Ka-band under existing regulation only 500 
MHz would be in the exclusive satellite band and thus some 
of the UT’s would need to coordinate. This is not seen as a 
major hurdle but regulators would need to adopt an on-line 
fast-track scheme. 
14
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
b) UT beams 
The bandwidth available is 2.5 GHz on the uplink (all 
bandwidth allocated to the user link as the feeder link is at 
Q/V band) and potentially 3 GHz on the down. For 2.5 
GHz, three frequency reuse colours and 32 APSK the initial 
numbers of beams is found to be around 175 (or 88 with 
dual polarization) recognizing the limitations of our analysis 
as given in III a) above. 
 
c) Gateway beams 
The bandwidth available is 4 GHz on the up link and 5 
GHz on the down link. For 4 GHz and the conditions above 
and using one frequency colour (possible because of large 
geographical gateway beam separation) the number of 
beams is 38 (or 19 with dual polarization) recognizing the 
limitations of our analysis as given in III a) above. 
 
As already mentioned there are shared services in this 
spectrum and thus the siteing of the Gateway Earth Stations 
would need to be considered on a country by country basis.  
 
Use of 16APSK would increase the number of beams 
substantially. Figure 1 to Figure 3 depict initial beams 
configured 
for 
European 
coverage 
recognizing 
the 
limitations of our analysis as given in III a) above. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Representative 175 single polarised user beams over Europe 
 
Figure 2. Representative 88 dual polarised user beams over Europe 
 
Figure 3. Representative dual polarised 19 beam Gateway configuration 
over Europe 
V. 
POWER AND BANDWIDTH REQUIREMENTS 
Here we look at power/bandwidth requirements for the 
Q/V-Ka band architecture in order to get some initial 
assessment of its feasibility. We will make some initial 
assumptions. 
Pending further study of the relationship between beams 
and antenna size we assume that we have a 5m foldable 
reflector antenna for the UT side and a 2.5m reflector 
antenna on the Gateway Earth Station side of the satellite.  
Assuming 65% efficiency on both we have; 
 
        Gateway Earth Station Band: 
 
Gain Sat Rx (50 GHz) =60.5 dBi 
 
Gain Sat Tx (40 GHz) =58.5 dBi 
For a payload temp of 400K the G/T=34.4 dB/K 
15
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

For a 15 W transponder output power the downlink eirp 
=70.3 dBW or 67.3 dBW at Edge of Coverage (eoc). 
          UT Band: 
 
Gain Sat Rx (30GHz) =62 dBi 
 
Gain Sat Tx (20GHz) =58.5 dBi 
For a payload temp of 400K the G/T=36 dB/K 
For a 50W HPA output power the transponder downlink 
eirp =75.5 dBW or 72.5 dBW at eoc. 
 
For the forward link we assume a bandwidth of one GHz 
and in the reverse link we assume that 40Mb/s users with 32 
APSK would need a bandwidth of 10 MHz. 
 
Ka band UT: 
Baseline UT is taken as a 0.75m dish with a noise 
temperature of 150 K and G/T of 20.3 dB/K. 
The transmit EIRP will be taken as 55 dBW representing 
the current allowable non coordinated value agreed in many 
EU countries. Thus the SSPA would be 8.8 W. 
 
Q/V GATEWAY EARTH STATION: 
The baseline Gateway Earth Station is taken as a 5m dish 
which has a transmit gain of 66.5 dBi at 50 GHz and a 
receive gain of 64.5 dBi at 40 GHz. On the transmit side 
with a 2 dB feeder loss and 16W transmit power the eirp is 
76.5dBW. 
It should be noted that moving to a larger diameter 
Gateway Earth Station antenna would increase the Gateway 
Earth Station costs significantly (50 GHz operation) and the 
extra performance is not necessarily needed as the system is 
self-interference limited and not thermal noise limited. 
We assume a G/T of 38 dB/K which represents an overall 
earth station noise temp of 450 K which seems reasonable in 
this band. 
Total rain fading across Europe has been evaluated using 
the ITU-R model assuming an availability of 99.9% for the 
Gateway Earth Station and 99.7% for the UT’s thus for 
single site worst case conditions the potential margins 
required are given in Table 2 along with typical Free Space 
Loss figures. 
TABLE 2  POTENTIAL FADING ACROSS EUROPE 
 
Frequency 
(GHz) 
99.7 % 
(dB) 
99.9 % 
(dB) 
FSL ( dB) 
20 
3 
6 
210 
30 
11 
15 
214 
40 
15 
20 
216 
50 
23 
27 
218 
 
Of course not all Gateway Earth Stations and UT’s will be 
faded at the same time and to get a better idea of the overall 
degradations we include the spatial variations of the rain and 
to determine the average system reductions in capacity. 
For the purposes of this feasibility analysis we have 
chosen to examine the system capabilities under clear sky 
conditions and have assumed that rain faded conditions can 
then be addressed by appropriate application of FMT such 
as ACM. This initial working assumption will be studied 
further to assess its validity. 
VI. 
SATELLITE POWER ASSUMPTIONS 
The trend is to larger satellites with upwards of 10 tonnes 
being possible in 2020. However the longer term power 
limits of the payload are constrained by the volume 
available under the launcher fairing. With current series of 
launchers this is estimated to constrain the payload power to 
circa 20KW EOL [12]. Thus it is important to ensure that 
the number of beams dimensioned in the previous section 
can be suitably fed by HPA power within the satellite 
payload power limits for the forward and return downlinks. 
 
VII. ADOPTION OF THE SMART GATEWAY CONCEPT 
The Smart Gateway architecture employs a number of 
Gateway Earth Stations which are inter-connected with 
terrestrial deeds to form an agile routing of feeder link data 
that can be used in a diversity manner to combat fades on 
the gateway to satellite links [13]. The approach is depicted 
in Figure 4. 
 
 
RAIN
BEAM 3
BEAM 2 
BEAM 1
BEAM 4
GW 1 
GW   2   
  
GW 4 
  
GW 3 
 
Figure 4. Smart Gateway Concept 
 
According to this concept: 
− 
Existing gateways are inter-connected to form a 
terrestrial network. 
− 
Each user is serviced by a number of gateway feeder 
links. 
− 
In the event of a gateway experiencing outage or 
reduced capacity, some or all user traffic can be re-
directed terrestrially to any one of the remaining 
gateways, in any spot beam. 
 
 
 
16
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Advantages: 
− 
Reduced cost → no additional gateways/antennas. 
− 
Diversity gain → many more gateways, greater 
inter-site distance. 
− 
Efficient 
gateway 
usage 
→ 
all 
gateways 
simultaneously operational. 
− 
Efficient resource usage → can utilise capacity 
wherever it exists. 
− 
Implicit fault tolerance, opportunity to load balance 
and improve throughput. 
 
Disadvantages: 
− 
The allocation of gateway feeder link capacity to 
users is a critical function. 
− 
Control/Switching algorithms required to detect 
capacity fluctuations and make traffic allocation 
decisions to achieve aims. 
− 
A high degree of synchronisation in the gateway 
network is required. 
− 
Some level of ‘intelligence’ is required in the 
Network and terminals. 
 
Smart Gateways can potentially be used to avoid 
interference and to minimize the propagation effects for 
each gateway. Initial studies have shown this concept can be 
useful and simulations performed using traffic / weather 
statistics assumptions have demonstrated the advantages of 
the concept. The concept is attractive but as yet still 
immature and needs further consideration, especially at the 
payload level. This initial work will be followed up with 
improved assumptions to investigate load balancing as well 
as switching issues. 
 
VIII. ACHIEVABLE PERFORMANCE 
Based 
upon 
the 
parameters 
detailed 
above 
the 
performance was assessed under clear sky link conditions 
for the forward and return links.  
   The combined C/(N+I) for the forward link was 14.6 dB 
for a co-channel C/I of 20 dB. This represented a margin of 
1.1 dB over the required value of 13.5 dB. 
A key limiting factor here is the C/I of the satellite 
antenna beams. This needs to be investigated in more detail. 
 
In the forward link it may be appropriate to adopt beam 
hopping as this has the potential to improve the downlink 
C/I (adjacent channel) to around 25dB but again this 
requires further studies. 
The combined C/(N+I) for the return link was 15.0 dB for 
a co-channel C/I of 20 dB. This represented a margin of 1.5 
dB over the required value of 13.5 dB. 
 
The EoC eirp has been estimated assuming 100 x 10 MHz 
simultaneous carriers and sharing the power between them. 
As for the forward link the C/I of the satellite antenna 
dominates the performance. Use of beam hopping on the 
return link would be more complicated as the UT’s would 
need to synchronise with the on board system. Hence it 
would be more useful to study in detail the aggregate effect 
of the sporadic transmissions on the return link to see if the 
C/I is in fact improved. This requires figures on beam 
loading and activity ratios. On the Gateway Earth Station 
side the situation is improved due to beams at the same 
frequency being spaced further apart. 
Here again we see a need for further consideration on how 
to improve the co-channel C/I on the satellite antenna. 
 
IX. 
OTHER STUDIES 
Other studies have been undertaken and include:- 
 
o 
Forward Link: to assess the ACM operation in Ka-
band and investigate the potential for new 
MODCODs for rainy regions, using simulated 
precipitation field models (see  figure 5); 
o 
Return Link: to investigate ACM on the return link 
(DVB-RCS NG like) at Ka-band; 
o 
Evaluation of the beam displacement due to 
satellite movements & resulting C/I degradation 
with the potential to exploit terrestrial mobile hand 
over concepts to combat the effect of beam 
movement; 
o 
Evaluation of C/I in the return link with 
appropriate traffic patterns and utilisation figures; 
o 
The potential of higher order modulation and 
coding; 
o 
Further evaluation of the feasibility of the Smart 
Gateway approach and its impact on the payload 
and system architectures; 
o 
Accurate assessment of the system availability 
using a space time-channel model which facilitates 
− 
Test of routing strategies for smart gateways 
− 
Evaluation of the effectiveness of ACM on 
the users links 
− 
Possible minimization of the required 
payload flexibility. 
17
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Figure 5. Typical simulated precipitation field 
 
X. 
MAKING THE TERABIT/S SATELLITE A REALITY 
As indicated above the straight application of current 
technology will not allow the proposed Terabit/s satellite to 
provide adequate QoS and thus we need to look towards 
innovations to solve this problem. Some possible areas are 
discussed below. 
 
a) Improved C/I antenna performance 
In order to achieve the capacity a large number of beams 
with a large overall frequency reuse factor is required. The 
downside of this is the increased interference components 
which sum up to contribute to the overall C/I. Current 
simulations of systems with a high number of spot beams 
demonstrate that the C/I is a significant challenge as the 
system is could be interference limited. Thus, in both the 
forward and return directions the satellite antenna C/I 
performance is an important factor in minimizing the 
number of beams required.  
 
Some consideration has been given to the use of beam 
hopping on the forward link that may help to achieve 
flexibility with an acceptable number of RF chains and also 
to provide dual polarization in very hot spots with 
acceptable payload complexity but may not provide any 
improved C/I performance. For the reverse direction with 
many more beams and UT’s the adoption of beam hopping 
is is much more difficult as in each beam the UT’s would 
have to synchronized to the on board hopping which would 
complicate the terminals. However the return link is 
composed of bursts and there will be an activity factor 
associated with the transmissions across the beams and thus 
the aggregated interference considered so far is not a true 
reflection of reality. A more detailed investigation of the 
interference performance in general is thus needed. 
 
 
b) Power requirements on the satellite 
As already indicated payload power is likely to be a major 
constraint in achieving the Terabit/s. The HPAs already 
consume most of the payload power budget considered 
feasible (20 kW) and any special routing features (such as 
may be appropriate to match the Smart Gateway concept) 
will increase these demands.  
 
c) Operation of ACM at Ka band and above 
Conventional modulation and coding advances in the air 
interface have taken us close to the Shannon bound and 
therefore straight advances in this area will produce 
diminishing returns. Other means of increasing diversity 
that are applied in terrestrial systems suffer from the 
constraints of the satellite link apart from adaptive coding 
and modulation (ACM). ACM is being used effectively in 
DVB-S2 and partially in DVB-RCS at Ku band to combat 
rain fades by selecting one of twenty eight MOD/COD pairs 
available within DVB-S2. Such systems are constrained by 
the return link delay between the Gateway Earth Station and 
the UT compared with the time variation of the channel 
itself. As rain fading is a relatively slow mechanism it is 
possible to compensate fades across the MOD/COD range 
of 18dB, although in practice it will be slightly less than 
this. It is believed that at Ka band the current ACM could 
cope with the fading range for 99.7% availability on the UT 
links (but not higher) but for the Gateway Earth Station and 
Q/V bands the fades may exceed the current range. We have 
assumed that fades would not occur on both links 
simultaneously. 
If we were to operate the UT’s on Q/V bands we would 
need to examine a wider fading range and to extend the 
MOD/COD combinations. At the bottom end the system 
works down to an Es/No =-2.4dB and extending further is 
possible but will incur difficulties SNR estimation and 
synchronization. At the top end the issue is more power 
from the satellite but this could be preferable as schemes 
higher than 32 APSK, such as 64 APSK or 64 QAM, should 
be possible by 2020. However, the co-channel C/I may 
constrain any benefits from such an approach. 
 
d) Achieving the availability on the Gateways 
As indicated above in the system dimensioning rain on 
the Gateway Earth Station uplinks is a major problem at 
Q/V bands. We could employ up path power control but the 
range of fading is so large that this would bring with it other 
major problems. Site diversity could be used but finding an 
uncorrelated rain site with acceptable ground connections is 
expensive and may be impossible. Thus, as indicated earlier, 
we consider smart site diversity systems in which the 
Gateway Earth Station’s are interconnected to a Network 
Control Centre (NCC) which connects UT beams to one of 
the Gateway Earth Station’s from the pool. Thus when a 
Gateway Earth Station is indicated to go into a deep fade the 
NCC performs a handover to another unfaded Gateway 
18
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Earth Station and switches all the UT forward and return 
links to that Gateway Earth Station. Since the Gateway 
Earth Station’s are widely spaced a much better 
decorrelation of fading is available than for short distance 
diversity and the availability is increased. Including even a 
small number of Gateway Earth Stations in this 
configuration provides much improved availabilities at 
reduced fade margins.  The handover process is crucial if no 
traffic is to be lost and at the same time we minimize 
signaling load in the system. Having established such a 
system it is also possible to include load balancing between 
the Gateway Earth Station’s so as to ensure that outage 
switching doesn’t cause an unexpected overload and to 
more balance the overall system. 
As a more distant and challenging gateway architecture 
some studies are being initiated into the possibility of 
employing a network of gateways employing optical 
communications to the satellite. These studies will consider 
the maturity of the technology and the number of such 
gateways in the network. 
XI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has addressed concepts and issues relating to a 
Terabit/s satellite for 2020 that will be capable of reducing 
the cost/bit for broadband delivery and thus allowing satellite 
services to reach rural areas not feasible for terrestrial 
systems. The dimensioning of the system has demonstrated 
that 
several 
new 
technologies 
are 
appropriate 
for 
development before such a satellite system is feasible. Key 
amongst these are improved C/I techniques for the satellite 
antennas, smart Gateway Earth Station networks and 
improved ACM. Work is continuing to investigate all these 
in more detail but we feel there to be no technology show 
stopper for a Terabit/s satellite by 2020. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution of 
ESA towards this work and for their part funding the 
SatNEx-III Network of Excellence under which the work 
was conducted. Acknowledgement is also given to DLR, 
Germany who manage SatNEx-III on behalf of its partners. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Jean-Didier Gayrard, ‘Terabit Satellite: Myth or Reality?’, 
SPACOMM 2009, The First International Conference on Advances in 
Satellite and Space Communications. July 20-25, 2009. Colmar, 
France 
[2] 
IDATE consulting and research report ‘Broadband satellite in Europe 
and North Africa, residential market outlook’ March 2009 
[3] 
Northern Sky Research-Broadband satellite market study 2009  
[4] 
SES ASTRA compilation of external sources 2009. 
[5] 
Eutelsat internal study; Broadband satellite addressable markets 2009 
[6] 
ECC/DEC/(06)02:Exemption from Individual Licensing of LEST 
operating within 10.70–12.75 GHz or 19.70–20.20 GHz space-to-
Earth and 14.00–14.25 GHz or 29.50–30.00 GHz 
[7] 
ECC/DEC/(06)03: Exemption from Individual Licensing of HEST 
with e.i.r.p. above 34 dBW 
[8] 
Draft Report on the ‘Use of the frequency bands 27.5-30.0 GHz and 
17.3-20.2 GHz by satellite networks’, CEPT working group FM, May 
2010, adopted for public consultation. 
[9] 
ETSI EN 302 307: Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second 
generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems 
for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other 
broadband satellite applications (DVB-S2) 
[10] ETSI TR 102 376: Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) User 
guidelines for the second generation system for Broadcasting, 
Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite 
applications (DVB-S2) 
[11]  B G Evans and P T Thompson, “Key issues and technologies for a 
Terabit/s satellite”, 28th AIAA International Communications 
Satellite Systems Conference (ICSSC-2010),  Anaheim USA, paper 
number AIAA-2010-8713 
[12] T Hollingsworth, W. Gelon, A. Szeto, A. Applewhite and E..Yee, 
‘25-kW Bus Platform for Communications Satellites’ 28th AIAA 
International Communications Satellite Systems Conference (ICSSC-
2010),  Anaheim USA, paper number AIAA-2010-8687 
[13] H. Skinnemoen, ‘Gateway diversity in Ka-band systems’, Fourth Ka 
Band Utilization Conference, Venice, Italy, 2–4 Nov1998. 
 
 
 
19
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

