Researching a Robust Communication Link for Cubesats:  
OPTOS, a new Approach 
 
Víctor Miguel Aragón, Álvaro García, Ricardo Amaro, César Martínez, Fany Sarmiento 
Space Programmes and Space Sciences Department 
INTA (National Institute of Aerospace Technology) 
Ctra. Ajalvir Km.4 
28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain  
victor.miguel.aragon@insa.es, agarcia@ttinorte.es, amarocr@inta.es, 
 martinefc@inta.es, sarmientoae@inta.es 
 
 
 
Abstract—OPTOS is a Cubesat-based picosatellite that is been 
developed by INTA. The aim of this project is to provide an 
easy and low-cost access to space for those institutions and 
companies that can not afford the use of usual platforms. This 
is a new alternative way from the previous bigger and more 
expensive options to deal with small space missions. The fact 
that these little platforms are available in the future will 
promote that nowadays unfeasible projects will be able to come 
true, such as small microgravity experiments, observatories, 
material testing, etc. The advance in electronic miniaturization 
is expanding the possible applications that can be part of the 
Cubesat philosophy, which perhaps did not initially consider 
that complex mission could be implemented with limited 
resources, such as available power and volume. These payloads 
require reliable communication systems. From this point of 
view, an evolution is needed from the current technology used. 
OPTOS communication system tries to find a balance between 
limited available resources in Cubesat platform, i. e., inner 
dimensions and power, and having a reliable communication 
link. To achieve this goal OPTOS uses custom-made 
space-qualified equipment, deeply tested during an extensive 
trial campaign. To improve even more the communication link 
quality, OPTOS uses a non-amateur frequency band, reserved 
to space operations. This paper provides a general description 
of the OPTOS satellite and a detailed description of its 
communication link. 
Keywords - Cubesats; communication system; transceiver; 
ground station; antennas. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
INTA is a Public Research Organization, located in 
Madrid, Spain, that has an extensive experience in space 
projects, and in all those technologies which can be applied 
to the aerospace field. It has the know-how and the facilities 
for almost every possible test related to space programs: 
antennas, environmental, electronics, solar, etc...  
INTA has a new line of satellite pico-platforms that 
include state of the art technologies integrated in its 
subsystems, enabling high efficiency and low cost 
multipurpose satellite, which allows research applications at 
reasonable budgets. Its technological demonstrator, OPTOS, 
will be launched in 2011. 
OPTOS is based on a Cubesat [1] 3U structure (10cm x 
10cm x 30cm, and 3 kg) with improved payload capacity, 
system reliability and mission life time [2]. Figure 1. shows a 
1:1 model of OPTOS with deployed antennas. The 
management and engineering processes follow the ECSS 
(European Cooperation for Space Standardization) standards, 
in order to assure good practices that improve the long term 
results. The standards were tailored to the project necessities.  
 
 
Figure 1.  OPTOS 1:1 Model 
 
About the mission, OPTOS will be in a LEO (Low Earth 
Orbit), with a lifetime of 1 year. In this time, INTA hopes to 
qualify the platform and experiment with the 4 payloads in 
space. These payloads are: 
 
• 
GMR (Giant Magneto-Resistance): Earth magnetic 
field measurements based on COTS (Commercial 
Off-The-Shelf) magnetic sensors, 
45
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

• 
ODM (OPTOS Dose Monitoring): dosimeters with 
commercial RadFETs, to monitor the total ionizing 
dose, 
• 
FIBOS (Fiber Bragg Gratings for Optical Sensing): 
evaluate the feasibility of optical fiber sensors in 
space environment for temperature measurement, 
and 
• 
APIS 
(Athermalized 
Panchromatic 
Imaging 
System): space qualification of specific glasses, the 
degradation 
under 
gamma 
rays 
and 
Earth 
observation. 
 
The platform subsystems are: 
 
• 
OBDH (On Board Data Handling): several units 
working together forming a distributed system, with 
different complexity degree and placed through the 
satellite, 
• 
OBSW (On Board Software): control architecture of 
OPTOS satellite is distributed, following the 
hardware architecture,  
• 
OBCOM (On Board Communication): each unit of 
the OBDH has an associated OBCOM module, small 
bidirectional 
terminals 
for 
optical 
wireless 
intrasatellite communication through a CAN bus, 
• 
TCS (Thermal Control Subsystem): it is a passive 
subsystem, which uses paints and conductive 
materials on specific areas of the satellite for 
assuring operational temperatures, 
• 
S&M (Structure and Mechanism): the external 
structure is mechanized to lodge the solar panels and 
one of the ADCS solar sensors, to give access to the 
satellite once the integration is finished and to keep 
free FOV for the camera and some solar sensors, 
• 
EPS (Electrical Power Subsystem): supplies all the 
payloads and the platform subsystems,  
• 
ADCS 
(Attitude 
Determination 
and 
Control 
Subsystem): with 2 sun sensors, 1 solar presence 
detector, 1 triple axis magnetometer, magneto-
torques on three axes and 1 reaction wheel, and 
• 
CS (Communication Subsystem): described in the 
next chapter. 
 
Communications are essential for the success of the 
mission: the on-board transceiver and the ground station are 
both critical parts of the system. One of the main causes of 
unsuccessful 
Cubesats 
missions 
is 
related 
to 
the 
communication system, due to the use of non space-qualified 
electronic in the transceiver.  
Section II deals with the detailed explanation of the 
different parts involved in the OPTOS communication 
subsystem. Section III describes the factors involved in the 
link budget and the limitations associated to each one. 
Section IV details both downlink and uplink link budget 
estimations. Finally, Section V deals with the conclusion and 
the future work lines derived from this project. 
II. 
OPTOS COMMUNICATION SUBSYSTEM 
CS is the most exigent subsystem in terms of budgets. On 
it lays the responsibility of the satellite to ground 
communications, the only way to know that the satellite is 
alive. The system has been designed with the aim of 
achieving at least a 3 dB margin in the final link budget 
result. The link budget is an estimation that considers all the 
gains and losses that the signal suffers along the complete 
path between the transmitter and the receiver, and the added 
noise effect that degrades the signal quality. This margin, 
between the estimated Eb/N0 (bit energy over noise spectral 
density) at the demodulator output and the theoretical 
required value, allows to accomplish a certain BER (Bit 
Error Rate), in downlink and uplink as well. BER is a quality 
factor that also depends on the modulation scheme used [3]. 
To strengthen the communications INTA has chosen a 
professional on-board transceiver made by Thales Alenia 
Space, with an RF (Radio-Frequency) ASIC (Application 
Specific Integrated Circuit) designed for space [4]. The 
transceiver works half-duplex at 402 MHz and provides a 
maximum transmitted power of 25.5 dBm. A phase 
modulation is used, direct with Manchester data for 
downlink at variable rate, 5 kbps nominal, and with a BPSK 
(Binary Phase-Shift Keying)  16 kHz subcarrier with NRZ 
(Non Return to Zero) data for uplink at 4 kbps. This scheme 
is recommended by ESA (European Space Agency) ECSS-
E-ST-50-05C standard, as well as other subsystems of 
OPTOS project follows the ESA recommendations. The 
transceiver provides housekeeping signaling that offers better 
control over the signal acquisition process and the 
transceiver health status. 
 Two transceiver models have been manufactured, an 
electrical model and a flight model. One will serve as a test 
model for ground working and the other will be launched. 
Both models are tested with the corresponding models of the 
rest of the communication equipment: onboard antennas, 
onboard computer, onboard software, ground antenna, 
ground equipment and ground software. Figure 2. shows the 
uncovered RF side of the transceiver EM, where a 4:1 
splitter, Tx/Rx switch, Tx and Rx RF chains and a PLL can 
be appreciated. The ASIC and the current regulators are in 
the other side of the transceiver. 
OPTOS Ground Station is located at INTA facilities. The 
functions of the ground station are to receive/transmit 
information from/to the satellite, manage the platform and 
the scientific payloads and distribute the data to the scientific 
partners. A LDRM (Low Data Rate Modem), an ELTA 
transceiver, has been chosen, which provides automatic 
signal search and lock functionality, ASB, fading, noise and 
Doppler effect simulation [5]. 
Besides, in order to improve the quality of the link, a 
LNA (Low Noise Amplifier) and a HPA (High Power 
Amplifier) are used in the downlink and uplink chain, 
respectively. For the data processing stage, an ELTA FS 
(Frame Synchronizer) has been chosen, capable of using 
synchronization word, Reed-Solomon encoding/decoding 
and uplink randomization. 
 
46
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

 
Figure 2.  Uncovered on-board transceiver EM 
 
Regarding the antennas, the on-board antenna consists of 
four λ/4 monopoles with circular polarization, placed in each 
of the four lateral sides, with a deployment system [6]. The 
Ground Station antenna, located at INTA facilities, is formed 
by an array of four Yagi antennas with circular polarization 
and an elevation over azimuth positioner [7]. Figure 3. shows 
the ground antenna lying on the elevation over azimuth 
positioner on top of a 3 m mast, placed on the flat roof of the 
Space Programmes and Space Sciences Department building. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Ground station antenna 
 
INTA has developed the software to control, operate and 
distribute data to the scientific users. Also has made a 
custom Communication Protocol, with FEC (Forward Error 
Correction) Reed-Solomon, and ARQ (Automatic Repeat 
Request) scheme. 
III. 
FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED  IN THE LINK BUDGET 
Link Budget [8] determines the feasibility of a possible 
bidirectional communication link between OPTOS and the 
ground station considered with the link margin adequate to 
transmit and receive the required data volume with the 
established bit rate attending to mission and orbital 
characteristics (orbital height, shape, eccentricity and 
contacts number, time duration and satellite-ground station 
relative configuration), and the communication architecture. 
Due to the limited communication capacity because of 
the limited electrical power (therefore limited RF power) that 
the small effective surface of solar cells could supply, it’s a 
challenge to attempt to communicate with such a small and 
light satellite. 
The possibility to establish the link and the available link 
margin depends on: 
 
• 
Orbit: range and duration of each contact satellite-
ground station 
• 
Frequency band 
• 
RF Power available  
• 
Bandwidth occupied and Bit Rate 
• 
Ground Station and satellite performance: EIRP and 
G/T 
 
The main objective of the link budget is to evaluate the 
possibility of communication fixing these parameters 
according to technical possibilities and the constraints 
imposed by the rest of subsystems and the mission.  
A. Orbit 
OPTOS shall describe a LEO helio-synchronous polar 
orbit. Different orbital heights have been considered to 
analyze which one gives the best conditions to carry out 
OPTOS and its payloads mission. Two different orbital 
heights have been simulated for the link budget: 670 km and 
817 km. The launch has been established on 2011. The final 
orbit depends on the launcher, that is still to be confirmed. 
The Ground Segment has been installed at INTA 
(40.4ºN, 3.46ºW). The frequency band considered is UHF 
(402MHz). At this frequency the ground station is an easier 
and cheaper solution than higher frequencies.  
The contact time and the communication capacity 
establish the maximum data rate that OPTOS system is able 
to communicate in downlink and uplink. 
The orbit shall be a circular one, so the orbital 
eccentricity is practically negligible and it will not be 
considered differences in range and contact time between 
apogee and perigee, and so, the bit rate shall be fixed for all 
the contacts. 
Contact times have been simulated using STK software 
developed by AGI. OPTOS will have at least three contacts 
daily according to the considered elevations to each case 
(obviously considering contact with lower elevations the 
number of contacts per day increases but the communication 
47
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

is more difficult due to other effects like multipath signals). 
The total contact time per day should be at least 28.95 
minutes. 
The transceiver bit rates have been set to 5 kbps for 
downlink and 4 kbps for uplink. There is an option to change 
the downlink bit rate via TC (Telecommand), but in order to 
simplify the subsystem testing phase, this option will not be 
used till the satellite mission ending. The data budget 
estimation, removing protocol headers and taking into 
account a TM (Telemetry) /TC ratio of 90/10, is: 725.37 
kB/day for TM and 98.12 kB/day for TC. The total data 
estimation is 823.49 kB/day. 
B. Frequency  
The frequency band selection has been based in several 
factors: 
 
• 
Link budget results: UHF band (402 MHz) have 
better results than higher frequencies 
• 
Complexity and physical characteristics of on-board 
antennas and transceiver design  
• 
ITU Frequency Coordination requirement with other 
countries and type of service available for the 
satellite related with its mission 
 
From the antennas point of view, UHF band is more 
preferred than VHF because the former is compounded of 
shorter monopoles than the latter, and therefore more 
suitable for OPTOS requirements. From the design 
complexity point of view, transceiver and antenna are similar 
in both frequency bands. The double band UHF/VHF has 
been rejected based in the transceiver first feasibility studies. 
These determine that the double band requires a design that 
doesn’t fulfil with power consumption, volume and mass 
requirements. 
 
C. Power available 
The low power available in the satellite is a strong 
handicap to fulfil OPTOS communication requirement, 
above all to complete the downlink with the required link 
margin to assure the communication.  
The maximum power that the EPS could supply to the 
platform and payloads is estimated in 6 W. So, calculations 
of Link Budget must consider that the whole transceiver unit 
is supplied with 2.73 W to be shared between both electrical 
and RF components. Considering the subsystem design, 0.5 
W are available at HPA output as RF Output Power. 
 
D. Bandwidth occupied and Bit Rate 
The bandwidth occupied and the bit rate are related each 
other by means of the spectral efficiency of the modulation 
used. Spectral efficiency refers to the information rate that 
can be transmitted over a given bandwidth, measured in 
(bit/s)/Hz. The spectral efficiency is 0.7 (bit/s)/Hz in the 
uplink (BPSK) and 0.5 (bit/s)/Hz in the downlink 
(Manchester).  
The Bit Rate is fixed at 4 kbps in the uplink, and it is 
variable in the downlink, but during the mission it will be 
fixed at 5 kbps. At the mission conclusion, the Bit Rate can 
be modified to test the Link Budget margin. The rest of 
downlink parameters: orbit, output power, antenna gain, et 
al. can not be modified after the launch.  
 
E. Ground Station and satellite performance 
TABLE I. summarizes the main parameters of both the 
ground station and satellite communications. 
Antenna gain, cable losses, amplifier maximum power 
and receiver noise figure have been measured at INTA RF 
laboratories. The GS (Ground Station) amplifier maximum 
power is 100 W, but, as the link budget shows, there is not 
need to use it at its maximum. Besides this, and in order to 
reduce the electromagnetic radiation in the GS surroundings, 
a value of 5 W is used, high enough to get the expected link 
budget margin.  
The values of antenna noise temperature considered have 
been simulated through numerical integration at the worst 
case following ITU-R P.372-8 radio noise recommendation 
(Fsky[artificial] = 11 dB at 400 MHz). Preliminary GS 
antenna noise measures have been done in situ and the 
results indicate that the antenna noise temperature is 
significantly lower than the previously estimated, but until 
more precise measures are taken, worst case antenna 
temperature value has been considered to the link budget 
calculations.  
TABLE I.  
COMMUNICATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Ground Station 
Satellite 
Antenna Gain 
18.0 dBi 
-3.0 dBi 
Transceiver Output Power 
37.0 dBm 
25.6 dBm 
LTx
0.89 dB 
0.30 dB 
LRx
0.37 dB 
0.30 dB 
FRX
7 dB 
1.6 dB 
System Noise Temperature 
34.1 dBK 
26.2 dBK 
EIRP 
24.1 dBW 
-7.8 dBW 
G/T 
-16.5 dB/K 
-29.5 dB/K 
 
The system let to improve the ground station 
performance, if subsequent phases require it, adding 
antennas and obtaining a more complex configuration with 
an Antennas Array System. And so, improving the gain of 
the Antenna System in 2-3dB duplicating the number of 
antenna elements. 
The antennas configuration on-board the satellite 
depends on the working frequency band selected and the 
surface available in the satellite to fix the antennas before the 
launch and during the mission. A four quarter-wave 
monopole configuration has been chosen due to OPTOS 
structure. The antenna has a quasi-omnidirectional radiation 
pattern to assure the link independently of the relative 
orientation of the satellite. 
48
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

IV. 
LINK BUDGET ESTIMATIONS 
The link budget estimations have been done with two 
different orbital heights: 670 km and 817 km. From now on, 
the results correspond to the worst case height, 817 km, 
which provides the tightest link margin. 
In the next subsections, the downlink and uplink link 
budget estimations are presented in TABLE II. and TABLE 
III. respectively. The more significant parameters used are 
explained below:  
 
• 
LFS: Free space losses between satellite and ground 
station antennas, following ITU-R P.525-2. 
• 
LP: Worst case polarization losses, depending on 
satellite attitude. 
• 
PRX: Signal power received at the LNA input. 
• 
PNOISE: Noise power received at the LNA input. 
• 
C/N0: Carrier over noise spectral density at the LNA 
input. 
• 
C’’/N0: Signal power over noise spectral density at 
the demodulator input. 
• 
Eb/N0 available: Bit energy over noise spectral 
density at the demodulator input, before Coding 
Gain. 
• 
Required BER: Link quality factor from the OPTOS 
requirement specification.  
• 
Required Eb/N0: Bit energy over noise spectral 
density necessary to achieve the required BER, 
depending on the modulation used. 
• 
Coding Gain: Digital gain related to the coding 
scheme used, which improves the resulting BER. 
• 
Link Margin: Difference between the available Eb/N0 
and the required Eb/N0, considering the increase due 
to Coding Gain. 
 
Attenuation by atmospheric gases is not applicable at this 
low frequency in accordance with ITU-R P.676-8. For the 
same reason, attenuation by rain, clouds and fog has not been 
considered according to ITU-R P.838-3 and ITU-R P.840-4. 
Ionospheric scintillation exceptionally occurs in the middle 
latitudes, in line with ITU-R P.531-10, so it also has not been 
taken into account.   
The minimum elevation for the link budget estimations is 
10°, with a maximum distance of 2402 km.
The ground antenna includes a device that allows the 
polarization to be changed according to the satellite attitude. 
Making use of the received power marker at ground station, 
the system will automatically switch the circular polarization 
in the opposite direction when the maximum power drops off 
more than 3 dB. Therefore, the losses associated with this 
lack of polarization alignment between satellite and ground 
station could be 3 dB at worst case. 
Both PRX and PNOISE permit to calculate the C/N0 at the 
LNA input. In order to estimate the Eb/N0 available at the 
demodulator input and compare it with the required one for 
the specified BER, it is necessary to calculate the carrier 
drop when modulating the signal and see the real signal level 
over noise density, C’’/N0. To do this, the residual carrier 
power C’/N0 has to be subtracted from the C/N0 in order to 
get the C’’/N0. Then, the Eb/N0 results from taking away the 
binary rate Rb and the demodulator losses (around 2 dB in 
both cases).    
A. Downlink 
In TABLE II. the more relevant downlink budget 
parameters are listed, together with its estimated values. 
The margin is so tight because of the limited power 
available in the on-board transceiver and the high ground 
station antenna noise temperature estimated through 
numerical integration. 
This value of 3.1 dB is calculated in worst case situation 
at the beginning of the pass. After that moment, as the time 
passes and the distance decreases, the free space losses are 
lower, reaching the minimum at the middle of the 
communication window. So, the margin increases and there 
is the possibility to increase the transmission bit rate to 
improve the throughput of the link.  
TABLE II.  
DOWNLINK LINK BUDGET 
Parameter 
Estimated value 
LFS
152.1 dB 
LP
3 dB 
PRX
-145.3 dBW 
PNOISE
-194.5 dBW/Hz 
Modulation 
PM (Manchester SP-L) 
Bit Rate  
5 kbps (nominal) 
C/N0
49.3 dBHz 
C’’/ N0
48.6 dBHz 
Eb/N0 available 
9.7 dB 
Required BER  
10-5
Required Eb/N0  
9.6 dB 
Coding Gain 
3 dB 
Link Margin 
3.1 dB 
 
B. Uplink 
In TABLE III. the more relevant uplink budget 
parameters and its estimated values are listed. 
The 18.8 dB margin is higher than in the downlink case, 
mainly due to the greater transmission power and the lower 
system noise temperature caused by the reduced noise that 
the antenna receives in the space. As the uplink bit rate is 
fixed by the transceiver, there is no possibility to improve the 
uplink throughput increasing the bit rate. So, the only choice 
is to reduce the transmitted power in the ground station, 
reducing in this way the electromagnetic radiation in the 
surroundings.    
 
TABLE III.  
UPLINK LINK BUDGET 
Parameter 
Estimated value 
49
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

Parameter 
Estimated value 
LFS
152.1 dB 
LP
3 dB 
PRX
-134.3 dBW 
PNOISE
-202.4 dBW/Hz 
Modulation 
PM/BPSK (NRZ) 
Bit Rate 
4 kbps (fixed) 
C/N0
68.1 dBHz 
C’’/ N0
67.9 dBHz 
Eb/N0 available 
25.4 dB 
Required BER 
10-5
Required Eb/N0  
9.6 dB 
Coding Gain 
3 dB 
Link Margin 
18.8 dB 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has presented the OPTOS CubeSat, with 
particular stress upon its communications subsystem. 
OPTOS communication subsystem uses non amateur space 
reserved frequency band. The subsystem is composed of 
custom elements purpose-made: on-board transceiver unit, 
ground segment equipment, and both on board and ground 
antennas.  
The link quality depends on certain factors, which have 
been analyzed in order to reach a balance between limited 
available resources on board in such a small satellite and 
having a robust communication link. The critical point is the 
downlink received power at the ground station antenna, 
because of the limited transceiver output power and the 
antenna omnidirectional radiation pattern on board. Even 
with these limitations, an acceptable link budget margin has 
been achieved. 
The values of Eb/No margin obtained are always above 3 
dB for worst orbital case. This positive margin, together with 
the ARQ protocol, result in a robust communication link. 
It would be interesting to fully characterize the 
electromagnetic noise in the place that hosts the ground 
station. This possibility will be considered as an activity in 
next phase. 
In future developments, in order to enhance the signal 
level at the ground station input (PRx at the downlink), some 
communication parameters are feasible to be changed:  
• 
PTX: On-board transceiver transmission power could 
be improved, despite the picosatellite limitations due 
to the restricted available power. 
• 
GRx: The ground station gain could be improved 
using an antenna with better gain or an antenna 
system disposing them in array to enhance its 
behaviour. 
• 
FRx: The ground station system noise figure (or its 
system noise temperature) would be better using a 
receiver with lower noise figure, decreasing the 
transmission line losses and optimizing the devices 
set up. 
• 
LTx: Using shorter and better cables in the ground 
segment configuration to reduce the cable losses.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to acknowledge the job of all OPTOS 
team for the good development of the project, and also to the 
different companies that have collaborated with INTA: 
Thales Alenia Space-España, TTI Norte, SENER, ELTA and 
Sistemas Radiantes Moyano. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
H. Heidt, J. Puig-suari, A. S. Moore, S. Nakasuka, and R. J. Twiggs. 
Cubesat: A new generation of picosatellite for education and industry 
low-cost space experimentation, AIAA/USU Annual Conference on 
Small Satellites, 2000. 
[2] 
F. Sarmiento, C. Arza, C. Martinez, R. Amaro, C. Campuzano, V. M. 
Aragón, and Á. García, “OPTOS Project: New Generation Of 
Innovative Satellites,”  Small Satellites Systems and Services - The 
4S Symposium, Madeira, Portugal, 2010 
[3] 
G. Maral, M. Bousquet, and Z. Sun. Satellite Communications 
Systems: Systems, Techniques and Technology, John Wiley and 
Sons, 2010  
[4] 
E. Gonzalez, “Diseño del S/S TTC del picosatélite OPTOS,” 
OPT/51820/TNO/001/TASE, 2008 
[5] 
R. 
Amaro, 
“Ground 
segment 
technical 
note,” 
OPT/60000/TNO/002/INTA, 2009 
[6] 
M. 
Carbonell, 
“Antennas 
Design 
Technical 
Note,” 
OPT/51810/TNO/002/INTA, 2008 
[7] 
R. Amaro, “Especificación sistema de antenas estación de tierra 
OPTOS,” OPT/60000/SPE/003/INTA, 2008  
[8] 
V. M. Aragón, “Link Budget,” OPT/29200/TNO/002/INTA, 2010 
 
50
SPACOMM 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-128-1

