 
Performance Analysis of Operational Ka-band Link with Kepler  
Timothy Pham, Jason Liao  
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, California, USA 
e-mails: Timothy.Pham@jpl.nasa.gov Jason.Liao@jpl.nasa.gov 
 
 
Abstract - This paper presents some observations on the signal 
behavior from an analysis of Kepler Ka-band link.  The goal is 
to characterize the link performance with operational data 
obtained from the Deep Space Network (DSN) tracking of 
Kepler spacecraft.  Kepler is the first mission supported by the 
DSN that uses Ka-band as a primary means to return science 
data. We examine how operational data may differ from the 
expectation. Operational data often show many surprises 
where data variations occur without an apparent cause.  We 
try to quantify the signal power fluctuation so that future 
missions can adequately plan for the link design, especially for 
missions that operate with lower margin.  We also attempt to 
quantify the effect of rains/heavy clouds and high winds.   
 
Keywords - DSN; performance analysis; weather statistics; 
Kepler; Ka-band operations 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) Deep Space Network (DSN) serves as a 
communications infrastructure to enable mission controllers 
communicate with their spacecraft exploring the outer 
space.  The DSN currently comprises of 13 antennas 
operating at multi-frequency of 2 GHz S-band, 8 GHz X-
band and 26 GHz & 32 GHz Ka-band.  The majority of 30-
plus missions supported by the DSN use X-band.  A few 
still use the narrower S-band while some are moving to the 
new broader Ka-band. Compared to X-band operation, Ka-
band offers missions greater bandwidth that better supports 
higher data rates.  The International Telecommunications 
Union allocates about 500 MHz for deep space Ka-band (32 
GHz) and 1.5 GHz for the near Earth Ka-band (26 GHz), 
compared to 45 MHz each for deep space and near Earth X-
band.  Ka-band operation also offers roughly 5.5 dB 
advantage in the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) performance, 
compared to the X-band operation, assuming the same 
transmitting power [1].   The 5.5 dB advantage is a result of 
a higher antenna gain at Ka-band due to greater operating 
frequency, 
mitigated 
by 
the 
higher 
system 
noise 
temperature.  
Kepler mission is the first deep space mission that uses 
the 32-GHz deep space Ka-band as an operational link for 
telemetry return.  The higher link performance, afforded by 
a higher SNR compared to the X-band link, allows for faster 
data downlink and enables spacecraft to devote more time 
on the collection of science data.  Although Ka-band 
downlink was also conducted on some earlier missions, 
such as the Mars Global Surveillance (MGS) and Mars 
Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), it was only for the purpose 
of technology demonstration - X-band was still the primary 
link for telemetry return.  Two other ongoing missions - 
Cassini and Juno – has Ka-band signal, but it is a carrier 
only (without modulated telemetry) for the purpose of 
conducting radio science investigations.  The received 
carrier’s power, frequency and phase are used to infer the 
characteristics of planetary medium that the signal traverses.   
Kepler mission has the advantage of operating at high 
SNR.  Its healthy designed link margin, in the range of 4-5 
dB, provides greater buffer to the impact of inclement 
weather.  Other Ka-band missions to be launched in the near 
future, such as the Solar Probe Plus, will be operating at a 
much lower link margin.  Thus, there is a strong interest in 
characterizing the link performance and signal fluctuation 
for better link design for future missions.   
In this paper, we examine the data collected from Ka-
band tracking of Kepler over yearlong period and try to 
provide the answer to these questions: 
(1) What is the typical variation in the signal SNR from 
one tracking pass to the next?  
(2) How often does rain negatively affect the link and 
cause data outage?  How does the link behave in the 
presence of rains or heavy clouds?  
(3) How often does high wind affect the antenna pointing 
and thus the link performance?  How much degradation 
does the signal experience? 
(4) What is the cumulative probability distribution of the 
signal fluctuation? 
In Section II, we briefly describe the Ka-band operations 
of Kepler mission.  General observations of the received 
signal characteristics, especially their variation from pass to 
pass, are discussed in Section III.  Passes affected by the 
rain or cloud and high wind are discussed in Section IV and 
Section V, respectively.  Section VI examines the statistics 
of signal power fluctuation. Conclusions are captured in 
Section VII. 
II. 
KA-BAND OPERATIONS 
The DSN has three tracking complexes spread evenly 
across the Earth longitudes in order to maintain a constant 
visibility with spacecraft in deep space.  The three 
complexes are named the Goldstone, Canberra and Madrid 
Deep Space Communications Complexes, based on its 
location in the United States, Australia and Spain. The 
majority of the antennas are 34-m, with one 70-m at each 
site.  Goldstone Complex currently has five operating 
antennas devoted to spacecraft tracking. Madrid and 
Canberra Complex each has four antennas.  Within each 
30
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 
complex, two 34-m antennas are equipped with 32-GHz Ka-
band reception that can be used to support Kepler and other 
missions, such as Cassini and Juno. For a complete 
description, the DSN also supports the 26-GHz near-Earth 
Ka-band with one 34-m antenna at each complex.  The near-
Earth Ka-band is relevant to some near future missions, 
such as the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) in 
2017 and the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) in 
2018.   The analysis of this paper is done with the 32 GHz 
Kepler data; however, the findings should be applicable to 
the operations at 26-GHz near-Earth Ka-band due to 
spectral proximity. 
The Kepler spacecraft uses two different frequencies, X- 
and Ka-band, for return telemetry data. The spacecraft relies 
on X-band for the return of low-rate spacecraft engineering 
data (up to 16 kbps) and for radiometric measurement (e.g., 
Doppler and ranging).  X-band tracking occurs every three 
or four days, more often than Ka-band tracking.  Once a 
month, when the science data buffer onboard spacecraft is 
nearly full, Kepler spacecraft would turn its Ka-band high 
gain antenna to Earth and downlink the high-rate science 
data (up to 4.3 Mbps) that are collected over the month-long 
observations.  The Ka-band downlink sessions last several 
hours and typically take place over two DSN complexes.  X-
band data are also received concurrently with Ka-band.  The 
dual-frequency links offer an opportunity to validate the 
observed signal fluctuation.  If it is caused by common 
source of errors, such as bad weather or pointing problem on 
the ground or flight antenna, the effect would show up in 
both links, with a smaller effect expected on the lower X-
band frequency link. 
III. 
SIGNAL VARIATIONS 
In this section, we look at the performance characteristics 
of Kepler Ka-band passes.  Figure 1 shows the link 
characteristics of all Ka-band passes in 2012.  For each pass, 
the average telemetry symbol SNR (SSNR) and associated 
standard deviation, the observed SSNR minima and maxima 
are plotted.  The label “DOYxx/DSS-xx” indicates the day 
of year (DOY) the pass took place and the antenna – Deep 
Space Station (DSS) – used for tracking (Goldstone: DSS-
25 and -26; Canberra: DSS-34 and -35; Madrid: DSS-54 
and -55). 
 
 
 
Figure 1. SNR characteristics of Kepler Ka-band passes 
 
 
The data reflect the following observations: 
1. The average SSNR varied quite significantly among 
the passes, as much as 4.8 dB (2.3 dB - 7.1 dB).  Some 
factors affecting the variation are:  
(a) There is some performance difference among the 
DSN antennas used for the tracks.  
(b) Tracking passes are done at different elevation, as 
dictated by the selected antenna and the time of 
actual downlink within the pass.  This results in 
different system noise temperature level.  
(c) Different data rates are used in the downlink, which 
affects the signal energy and thus, the symbol SNR.  
(d)  Change in the spacecraft range from Earth.  
(e)  Potential degradation from the rains/clouds or 
winds.  
One could theoretically normalize these geometric and 
link variations among the data of different passes to remove 
the effect of factors (b), (c) and (d).  That would have 
resulted in a smaller variation, leaving just the effect of 
factors (a) and (e) remained.  As a note, we estimate that the 
variation due to the ground and spacecraft antenna pointing 
error was small (less than 0.2 dB) because of the active 
conical scanning tracking used in the ground antenna 
pointing and because of spacecraft pointing precision driven 
by stringent science objectives.  
On the link robustness, we note that the average SSNR 
of all Ka-band passes is about 5.5 dB.  That level provides a 
healthy 6.2 dB link margin relative to the -0.7 dB threshold 
required for successful decoding of the concatenated 
convolutional (7, ½) and Reed Solomon (255, 232) codes 
that is employed in Kepler link. With such a large margin, it 
is expected that Kepler link be well protected against 
potential outages.  
2. The standard deviations also varied among the 
passes.  Some passes had standard deviation as small as 0.25 
dB while others had deviation up to 1.4 dB.  The passes 
with small standard deviation demonstrate that the SSNR 
measurements are stable down to 0.25 dB level.  The passes 
with large standard deviation prompt a greater interest 
because they reflect atypical conditions that can negatively 
affect the link design. Two of these passes - DOY121/DSS-
26 & DOY243/DSS-34 – were exposed to high wind, up to 
45 kph.  One pass  - DOY32/DSS-55 - experienced rain.  
Other passes, such as DOY211/DSS-25, had a large SSNR 
fluctuation but the cause was not well understood.  More 
specific detailed analysis of these atypical passes is 
discussed later in Section VI.  
3. The SSNR minima generally lie further away from 
the average SSNR.  Some of them were in the 3-sigma 
range, such as the passes on DOY121, DOY247 and 
DOY311. This large difference indicates that the signal 
likely experienced some large SNR drops caused by short 
bursts of impact.   
4. The SSNR maxima generally lie close to the average 
values, not too far from the upper 1-sigma point.  This is 
due to a non-Gaussian distribution of the measurements, as 
later seen in Section VI, where most of the points are close 
31
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 
to the maximum SNR level.  They are not separated from 
the average values by 2 - 3 sigma.  
There are a few observations about the data processing: 
(1) Kepler occasionally changes the data rate in mid 
pass. So, the computation of representative metrics for the 
link performance – SSNR average, standard deviation, 
minima and maxima - need proper filtering to single data 
rate.  Without such filter, the computed link metrics, 
especially the standard deviation, would be larger than what 
they actually are. 
(2) Data on Ka-band link need to be separated from the 
X-band link.  However, the positive benefit of having 
concurrent X-band data is that we can use it to validate the 
common impacts caused by environmental factors, such as 
winds and rains.  
(3) Some of the passes were configured with dual 
receivers on Ka-band, for redundant processing.   We expect 
that the measurements from both receivers would be within 
the 0.25 dB measurement noise indicated earlier. Such 
consistency can be seen in the upper plot of Figure 2 for 
DOY032/DSS-55 pass, where the difference between the 
two receivers was within 0.1 dB. Yet, there are passes where 
we observed a greater difference, as shown in the lower plot 
of Figure 2 for DOY342/DSS-25 pass.  Here, the SSNR 
measurements reported by the two receivers differed on the 
average by 0.7 dB.   
  
 
Figure 2. Variation of SSNR measurements from the two receivers on the 
same antenna in DOY32/DSS-55 and DOY342/DSS-25 passes 
 
Fortunately, in this study, since we are less concerned 
with the absolute SSNR level between passes and more 
interested in the signal fluctuation within the pass, this 
measurement difference does not negatively affect the 
analysis.    If our analysis objective were to evaluate the loss 
in the ground system, this difference would have some 
impact.   
IV. 
IMPACT OF RAINS/CLOUDS 
In 2012, there was one Ka-band passes affected by rain or 
heavy clouds.  The water content in the air column reduced 
the SSNR by as much as 3 dB.  Figure 3 shows the SSNR 
variation in DOY32/DSS-55 pass over Madrid.  The Ka-
band SSNR measured by both receivers reflected a 3 dB, 2.5 
dB and 3 dB drop near the time15:00 hr, 19:00 hr and 21:00 
hr, respectively.  The X-band SSNR showed a similar 
degradation but with smaller impact, in the order of 1 dB, as 
expected.   The drops in SSNR matched with the increases 
in the system noise temperature (SNT) around the same 
time.  This correlation implies an impact from the external 
environment. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Variation of symbol SNR and system noise temperature at Ka- 
and X-band on DOY32/DSS-55 
 
Each DSN Complex has a weather station that measures 
the wind speed/direction, humidity and precipitation. The 
precipitation data reflects the rainfall as measured by a rain 
gauge. The weather station however does not provide 
measurement on cloudiness where the water content in the 
air column would affect the system noise temperature and 
causing signal degradation. For the DOY32/DSS-55 data 
set, despite the presence of the SSNR variation, there was 
no indication of rainfall from the precipitation measurement. 
The absence of rain would make it hard to pinpoint the link 
between the SSNR degradation and weather. The only 
available collaborating evidence is the increase in the 
measured system noise temperature.  Fortunately, we are 
able to independently confirm the system noise temperature 
measurement with the data from special research equipment 
called the Advanced Water Vapor Radiometer (AWVR) that 
independently measures the water content in the air.  The 
AWVR is available at Goldstone and Madrid complex, but 
not Canberra, and has been in operations for over two 
decades. The AWVR measures the sky brightness 
temperature at 31.4 GHz [2]. The water vapor radiometer 
32
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 
data are collected continuously throughout the day, one 
sample every 10 minutes. The measurements are done at 
zenith but the data can be translated to any elevation of 
interest so that they can be compared with the measured 
system noise temperature of the pass (which is done by a 
different set of equipment, using the Y-factor method with a 
small injected noise-diode) [3]. This AWVR elevation 
translation however produces a uniform estimated noise 
temperature in all azimuth directions.  In contrast, the SNT 
measurement is azimuth specific because the measurement 
is done along the line of sight of antenna tracking 
spacecraft.   So, there may be some difference in the 
absolute measurements between the two data sets.  
Nevertheless, 
we 
found 
the 
data 
with 
reasonable 
consistency.  Figure 4 shows the AWVR-derived noise 
temperature on DOY32 at 40-deg elevation, approximately 
the same elevation of Kepler tracking at 21:00 hr [4].  
 
 
 
Figure 4. AWVR system noise temperature for DOY32/DSS-55 
 
The temperature is observed to vary significantly at 
18:00 hr, with big bursts of 30 K or more near 21:00 hr, 
which is consistent with the variation seen in the SNT 
measurement in Figure 3.   
V. 
IMPACT OF WINDS 
There are two tracking passes - DOY121/DSS-26 at 
Goldstone and DOY243/DSS-34 at Canberra - with high 
wind condition, up to 45 km/hr.  The impact of wind on the 
SNR degradation is quite apparent on DOY243 while it is 
more ambiguous on DOY121.   
We first look at the DOY243 data. Figure 5 shows the 
measurements of symbol SNR and carrier SNR (Pc/No), as 
well as the system noise temperature and wind speed on 
DOY243.  Both the SSNR and Pc/No showed high level of 
fluctuation during the first hour of the pass. Several big 
drops in SNR occurred at the same time for both 
measurements, indicating the phenomenon was real rather 
than just a measurement error.  The relatively constant 
system noise temperature implied that the variation in the 
SNR was in the signal power reduction rather than in the 
increased noise (as caused by rains or clouds).  There were 
high winds, up to 45 kph, in the earlier part of the track.  
Some of the highest peaks of wind speed aligned with the 
drops in the SSNR and Pc/No, as much as 4 dB.   These 
sudden SNR drops are what cause the SNR minima of the 
pass to be much lower than the one-sigma point below the 
average SSNR, as mentioned earlier in Section III.  
 
 
 
 Figure 5. Variation of SNR, system noise temperature and wind speed on 
DOY243/DSS-34 
 
Figure 6 shows a correlation between the SNR 
degradation and the wind speed.  Here, the SNR degradation 
is defined as the difference between the SSNR maxima of a 
given pass (which is considered as the best possible SSNR 
without degradation) and the measured SSNR within the 
pass. A second order polynomial curve fit, with a forcing 
constraint of having zero degradation at zero wind speed, is 
also included.  At 45-kph winds, the fitted degradation can 
be as much as 2 dB; however, we should note that the r-
squared value is low at 0.29, indicating a large uncertainty 
with the fitting. 
 
  
 
Figure 6. Correlation of SSNR degradation and wind speed on 
DOY243/DSS-34 
33
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 
Next we examine the other data set with high winds on 
DOY121/DSS-26.  Figure 7 plots the SSNR, Pc/No, system 
noise temperature and wind speed for that pass.  Both SSNR 
and Pc/No showed a drop around the time of 23.8 hr.  The 
characteristics are however different.  While the SSNR drop 
was prominent and abrupt, as much as an 8 dB in less than 6 
minutes, the Pc/No drop was more gradual, just about 1 dB 
over 20 minutes. This raises an uncertainty on the SSNR 
measurement over this period of impact. Although the 
symbol tracking was reported to be in lock, we suspect it 
might be in error and thus, affected the reported SSNR. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Variation of SNR, system noise temperature and wind speed on 
DOY121/DSS-26 
 
Figure 8 reflects a possible correlation between the SNR 
degradation and the wind speed.  The polynomial fit 
indicates a degradation of 3.1 dB at 40 kph; however, it is a 
relatively low-confidence fit, with an r-squared value of 
0.19.  One reason for the poor fit is the presence of some 
data points that are out of normal expectation.  For example, 
the first two data points where the wind is below 10 kph 
seem to be erroneous.  These are the same measurements 
right after successful signal acquisition, as indicated in the 
previous Figure 7 around the time 22.8 hr.  There are also 
other data points with anomalous large degradation.  
Because the receiver reported the signal was in lock and 
there was no other indication that invalidate the 
measurements, we decide to keep these out-of-the-norm 
data points in the analysis, rather than rejecting them. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Correlation of SSNR and wind speed on DOY121 
The above example reflects some of the challenges with 
data processing, e.g., what to include vs. exclude in the data 
analysis in order to arrive at the right model. Some 
operational measurements are not as consistent as we like 
them to be.  
VI. SIGNAL FLUCTUATION STATISTICS 
We are interested in characterizing the probability 
distribution of the signal variations to aid with the link 
design in future missions.  In an ideal case, if there were 
accurate prediction on the signal SNR, any operational 
degradation would be reflected as a deviation of the 
measurement from the prediction since the prediction are 
model-based and have no knowledge of real-time weather 
impact.  Unfortunately, predictions are not available with 
Kepler Ka-band passes.  
To compensate for the lack of SNR prediction, we 
calculate the fluctuation by a degradation against the 
maximum SSNR of the pass, as discussed in Section V. 
Additional adjustment is also needed since both the antenna 
gain and system noise temperature change as a function of 
antenna elevation [5]. The antenna gain is affected by the 
gravity distortion of the antenna structure.  The system noise 
temperature varies due to different path length through the 
Earth atmosphere that the signal traverses at different 
elevation.  Lower elevation results in a higher noise 
temperature because of the longer atmospheric path.   
For each pass, the measured SSNR’s are subtracted from 
the SSNR maxima of the pass. Fluctuation data of all Ka-
band passes in 2012 are then combined to generate the 
cumulative distribution function of SNR variation, as shown 
in Figure 9.   
 
 
 
Figure 9. Cumulative distribution of SNR fluctuation 
 
The distribution shows that 50% of the fluctuations are 
less than 0.6 dB, 90% are within 1.6 dB, and 95% being less 
than 2.2 dB. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In summary, this paper examines the variation of Kepler 
Ka-band signal observed from the DSN tracking. In a 
benign condition, the SSNR measurements within a pass are 
stable within 0.25 dB.  In adverse weather of heavy clouds 
or winds, the SSNR within the pass can vary as much as 1.5 
34
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

 
dB (1-sigma). Out of 22 Ka-band passes in 2012, only one 
pass was affected by the heavy clouds (no rains) and two 
passes impacted by high winds. Both of these effects could 
result in an instantaneous change of SNR by up to 3 dB.  
Kepler mission, however, has a robust link with an average 
6.2 dB margin, which helps minimizing the telemetry data 
outage. The cumulative distribution of the SSNR variation 
shows that 50% of the variation are within 0.6 dB of the 
maximum SSNR within the tracking pass, 90% are within 
1.6 dB and 95% within 2.2 dB. 
Through this analysis, we learned that one has to be 
careful with the data selection.  Since a track could involve 
multiple receivers at multiple frequency (X- and Ka-band) 
and multiple data rates (spacecraft can change data rate 
within the pass to preserve link margin), proper filtering of 
data is essential for valid data compilation and analysis.  
Compensation for the changing elevations in the signal SNR 
is required to normalize the data to the same conditions.  We 
also learned that while measurements from two different 
receivers of the same received Ka-band signal are generally 
the same to within 0.25 dB, at times they could differ by as 
much as 0.75 dB.  This difference would have greater 
impact on future studies, such as system loss, that are 
dependent on the absolute, rather than relative, accuracy of 
the SSNR measurements. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in this paper was carried out by the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 
under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Shambayati, “A Comparison of the Ka-band Deep-Space 
Link with the X-band Link Through Emulation,” The 
Interplanetary 
Network 
Progress 
Report 
42-178, 
Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, August 15, 
2009, p. 48. 
[2] A. Tanner and A. Riley, “Design and Performance of a High 
Stability Water Vapor Radiometer,” Radio Science, vol. 38, 
no. 3, March 2003, pp.15.1–15.12. 
[3] C. T. Stelzried, R. C. Clauss, and S. M. Petty, “Deep Space 
Network Receiving Systems’ Operating Noise Temperature 
Measurements,” The Interplanetary Network Progress Report 
42-154, April–June 2003, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
Pasadena, California, August 15, 2003, pp. 1–7. 
[4] S. 
Slobin, 
personal 
communications, 
Jet 
Propulsion 
Laboratory, Pasadena, California, October 15, 2015. 
[5] DSN Telecommunications Link Design Handbook (810-005), 
Module 104, 34-m BWG Antennas Telecommunications 
Interfaces,  Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, 
April 1, 2015, pp. A-1–A-12. 
 
 
35
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

