Development of Wideband Dual Polarized of Microstrip Antennas for Microwave 
Remote Sensing 
 
Akbar Eslami, James Lee Jr, Henry Mishoe, Jamiiru 
Luttamaguzi, Ehsan Sheybani  
Department of Technology, Elizabeth City State University 
Elizabeth City, NC, U.S.A. 
aeslami@mail.ecsu.edu 
Manohar Deshpande  
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
Greenbelt, MD, U.S.A. 
Manohar.D. Deshpande@nasa.gov 
 
 
Abstract— A novel wideband dual polarized L-band antenna 
for NASA’s microwave remote sensing applications has been 
designed, fabricated, and validated.  The novel antenna 
structure consists of a rectangular microstrip antenna excited 
by capacitive coupled four probes.  One of the linear 
polarizations is obtained by feeding two diagonally opposite 
probes with equal but out of phase signals.  Other orthogonal 
polarization is obtained by feeding other remaining probes 
with equal but out of phase signals.  The novel structure 
provides the band width in excess of 500 MHz (with the center 
frequency of 1.3 GHz) and the cross polarization below -40 dB. 
For validation purpose, two prototype antennas were 
fabricated and tested. The test results collected show relatively 
good agreement with simulation results. For achieving wider 
band width, it is required to use, in our design, the probes with 
diameter larger than conventional coaxial connector.   A novel 
feed structure using larger size cylindrical via is designed.  The 
new feed structure design is fabricated and validated before its 
integration with the antenna. 
Keywords- microstrip; L-band antenna; microwave; NASA. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
     Microwave radars/radiometers are often used by NASA 
and other agencies for remote sensing of the Earth science 
parameters.  The spatial and temporal resolutions obtainable 
with the microwave radars/radiometer observation depend 
upon their frequency bandwidth.  It is always desirable for 
high spatial resolution to have radar operating at much 
higher bandwidth.   The current antenna technology offers 
antenna with 20-50 MHz bandwidth.   We proposed to 
develop a wideband (40%, 500MHz), dual polarized L-band 
array antenna for the next generation of microwave remote 
sensing radars and radiometers.  The novel wideband 
antenna configuration will enable the scientists to observe 
the Earth science parameters with less than meter spatial 
resolution.  In addition, the dual polarization capability with 
very low cross-polarization coupling (< -50 dB) will allow 
to 
measure 
the 
Stokes 
parameters 
with 
enhanced 
accuracy/sensitivity (-50 dB).  Accurate measurement of the 
Stokes parameters will yield better estimates of permafrost 
and biomass which are critical parameters for development 
of Earth’s carbon cycle model. It has been reported that dual 
polarization capability will provide biomass estimation with   
RMSE error of ~ 120 Mg/ha. 500 MHz bandwidth will 
allow achieving resolution in the range of 50 x 50 cm.  
     Researchers use different techniques and technology to 
design and fabricate an antenna. Microstrip has been one of 
the most popular microwave transmission lines in antenna. 
However, coplanar waveguide transmission lines have also 
been used in microwave transmission line as well. They are 
often selected over high frequency transmission line option 
such as stripline. John Coonrod has reported differences 
between microstrip and coplanar waveguide transmission 
lines to find the best performance applications [1]. Also, 
antenna size is always something that must be related to the 
wavelength and thus the frequency. Higher frequencies can 
utilize smaller antennas. However, the size of the antenna 
depends to the radiation resistance, the antenna feeding 
impedance, and radiation pattern [2]. Neil Chamberlain [3] 
has reported a method to fabricate a single-layer antenna 
that 
has 
application 
in 
military 
and 
commercial 
environments. He used a large-diameter center post as its 
supporting structure that allows for fabrication of a 
sufficiently rigid antenna element that can survive launch 
loads.  
     In this work, we present a procedure to design wideband 
dual polarized L-band antenna element and its microstrip 
feed line structure.  We also describe a procedure used to 
fabricate and test these microwave components using the 
laboratory facility available at Microwave Instrument 
Technology Branch of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
(NASA-GSFC) in Maryland.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The computer model of L-band antenna 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
Figure 2. Transition for standard coaxial connector 
to large size coaxial line 
 
II. 
DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
     Two tasks need to be fulfilled to design and build 
microstrip antenna. Fist task starts with design of microstrip 
feed line using large size coaxial line. Fig. 1 shows the 
wideband dual polarized L-band antenna structure to be 
modeled.  Our electromagnetic simulation of this antenna 
showed that for wideband operation, the four probes need to 
be of diameter much larger than the diameters of central 
conductor of a standard coaxial connector. Hence, a perfectly 
matched transition (as shown in Fig. 2) is required to connect 
conventional small size coaxial connector to a large size 
coaxial line. The desired transition has to transfer 100 % of 
power between the standard coaxial inputs to the larger size 
coaxial output.   However, to test such a transition we would 
require unconventional large size coaxial connectors. To 
overcome this difficulty, we used back-to-back transitions 
(shown in Fig. 2), which results in a structure shown in Fig. 
3, and which only require standard coaxial connectors to test 
the power transfer through a large size coaxial line section. 
The transition shown in Fig. 3 consists of metal plate of size 
43.18 x 17.78 x1.27 cm (17 x 7 x 0.5 inches).  On each side 
of the metal plate a dielectric substrate with dielectric 
constant of 2.94 and thickness 0.1mm were glued to the 
metal plate.  On the top and bottom surface of these 
composite layers, a microstrip line having characteristic 
impedance of 50 Ohms was etched out to form 50 Ohms 
microstrip lines.    
 
Figure 4. Cross section of coaxial line section 
 
 
Figure 3. Microstrip feed line using larger size coaxial section 
 
 
The width of the microstrip lines were calculated using [4] 
 
 
                (1) 
 
 
In (1), Z0 = 50Ω is the characteristic impedance, εr= 2.94 is 
dielectric constant of the insulator, h= 0.8 mm is thickness 
of the dielectric insulator, and t= 0.08 mm is thickness of 
the copper strip. The width, w, of the microstrip using (1) is 
found to be 1.7 mm which was rounded to 2.00 mm. The 
coaxial line section used in the proposed transition has a 
cross section as shown in Fig 4.  
     In order to design the larger size coaxial line with 
characteristic impedance of 50 Ohms, (2) for a coaxial line 
was used to estimate inner and outer diameter of coaxial line 
section [5]. 
 
  
                                   (2) 
 
 
In (2), the D represents the diameter of the hole in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Photo of fabricated transition 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. CAD model of different components of a L-band antenna 
 
the aluminum plate, and the d represents the diameter of the 
center conductor pin located at the center of the hole. The 
ratio of D/d can be calculated with assuming the value of Z0 
is 50 ohms and εr= 1 for value of air dielectric. 
     Using the dimensions obtained by these two equations, 
the transition was fabricated using fabrication facilities 
available at Microwave Instrument Technology Branch of 
NASA-GSFC.  A photo of fabricated transition is shown in 
Fig. 5. 
     The second task starts with design of wideband dual 
polarized L-band antenna. The simulation model of the 
proposed L-band antenna is shown in Fig. 1.  The critical 
parameters that control the antenna performance are (1) 
diameter of probe, (2) rectangular patch size, (3) height of 
patch from the ground, (4) separation of probes from center.  
Using 
the 
CST 
Microwave 
Studio 
electromagnetic 
simulation model, the antenna performance was optimized 
with respect to above parameters [6].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                      
 
Commercial SolidWorks Computer Aided Design (CAD) 
software is utilized to draw and design antenna components 
for fabrication purpose. The geometry of the desired model is 
given in Fig. 6. 
     The two different types of L-band antennas were 
fabricated and tested. The first antenna had a thick substrate, 
while second antenna had a thin substrate. The L-band 
antenna consisted of four layers including an aluminum plate 
at the base, substrate with copper strip in the middle, 
aluminum ground plate attached to top of the middle 
substrate, and substrate with copper radiation patch at top. 
Four radiation poles are connected through ground plate and 
substrate to four copper transmitting strip lines. The 
commercial CST Microwave Studio software was used to 
obtain the desired specifications of the dimensions of the L-
band antenna. The antenna was fabricated to the specified 
dimensions and it is shown in Fig. 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Components of fabricated antenna 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
Figure 8. Microstrip test results 
 
 
 
 
The second antenna has same specifications except using 
different substrate to compare the results. 
III. 
RESULTS 
      The microstrip and two L-band antennas were tested and 
reported as following. The fabricated microstrip model 
shown in Fig. 5 was tested with the PNA analyzer to validate 
the design specification. The graphs in the results section 
indicate that the microstrip met the desired design. The 
results shown in Fig. 8 confirm that there was very low 
return loss (low S11 and S22) at both ports. The top two 
smith charts within the graph both represent return loss in 
ports one and two. The S11 and S22 curves are very minimal 
and tight to the center as expected. The bottom charts both 
represent transfer of power through the design structure from 
one port to the other. The results show about -0.13db of loss 
of power between the ports one and two. Note that these 
transitions were fabricated and tested for frequency range of 
0.3-0.6 GHz as shown in Fig. 8.  An identical approach was 
used to design a transition for the L-band. 
Two samples of antenna shown in Fig. 7 were fabricated 
and measured.   It was found that both samples gave identical 
performance within the experimental tolerances.    
      First the L-band dual polarized antenna with thick 
substrate was tested for its input Voltage Standing Wave 
Ratio (VSWR) and its impedance matching performance 
outside the anechoic chamber.  It was also tested for its 
radiation performance inside the electro- magnetic anechoic 
chamber room.   Anechoic means no echoes which imply the 
room is free of reflections which gives accurate 
measurements. The antenna has four ports and to perform 
measurements two ports were terminated into matched load 
and other two were excited through a 3dB hybrid coupler.  
Fig. 9 shows input VSWR   when two of four ports were 
excited through a 3dB hybrid coupler and other two ports 
were terminated into matched loads.  Fig. 9 shows both 
measured and simulated results obtained using CST 
Microwave Studio software.  A good agreement between 
calculated and measured VSWR is observed.  Desired results 
are lower than -10 db’s for entire desired band showing a 
good impedance match for the antenna. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. L-band antenna (First model Port1) 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
Figure 10. L-band antenna (Second model ports 1, 2) 
 
 
     The next step was to test L-band dual polarized antenna 
with thin substrate. To configure the four port antenna into a 
dual polarized two port antenna, pair of two diagonally 
opposite probes is fed through hybrid couplers.  This feeding 
arrangement converts the four port antenna into two port 
antenna. S-parameters (S11, S21, S12, and S22) of the dual 
polarized antenna were measured and shown in Fig. 10.  The 
curves for S11 and S22 show that the antenna is impedance 
matched over the frequency band covering 1.0 – 1.7 GHz 
band.  The curves for S12 and S21 show that the cross 
coupling between the two linear polarization is below   -30 
dB.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
     In this project, the performance of fabricated microstrip 
antenna has been evaluated. Both measured and calculated 
results are presented and found to be in a good agreement.     
The SolidWorks CAD commercial software is utilized to 
visualize components for fabrication process. The model has 
been fabricated in a traditional machine shop and tested 
several times to collect data from the PNA Analyzer. Despite 
working with traditional method for fabricating microstrip 
and antenna, good agreement was achieved between the 
simulated and measured results. This project was involved 
extensive research, design, fabrication, constant testing, and 
troubleshooting.  The wideband L-band designed and tested 
in this work is planned to be used in a large L-band array 
antenna for NASA’s remote sensing. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by NASA-NSTI grant. 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Coonrod and B. Rautio, “Comparing Microstrip and CPW 
Performance,” Microwave Journal, July. 2012, pp. 74-86. 
[2] C. Stoij, “Antennas the mm Wave Advantage,” Microwave 
Journal, August. 2012, pp. 84-96. 
[3] N. F. Chamberlain, “Single-Layer, All-Metal Patch Antenna 
Element With Wide Bandwidth,” NASA Tech Briefs, June. 
2012, pp. 50. 
[4] D. Brooks, “Embedded Microstrip,” Printed Circuit Design, a 
Miller Freeman publication, February. 2000. 
[5] Wikipedia “Coaxial cable,” 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coaxial_cable 
[6] “CST Microwave Studio brochure,” 
http://www.cst.com/Content/Documents/Products/cst-studio-
suite-2012-brochure-low.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-264-6
SPACOMM 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

