Free Space Optical Communication Networks  
Peng Deng*1, Tim Kane1, Xiuhua Yuan2, Minghao Wang1,2, Wentao Xia1  
1Department of Electrical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, USA 
2School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 
e-mail: *pxd18@psu.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Effective integration of high speed, power efficient, 
compact and reliable free space optical communication 
terminals with small satellite platforms can pave the way to 
satellite constellations telecommunication networks. This paper 
will discuss the current architecture limitations that prevent 
the integration, and the critical technologies to be addressed 
for the realization of these systems, including compact wide 
field of view optical antenna, Micro-Electromechanical System 
(MEMS) gimbal-less fast acquisition and tracking mechanism, 
spatial diversity and beam shaping techniques for atmospheric 
channel. This development would explore the landscape of 
miniaturized 
high capacity rugged free space optical 
communication systems for future space networks. 
Keywords-free space optical communication; small satellties, 
CubeSats; optical antenna; MEMS; beam steering; acquisition, 
tracking and pointing; spatial diversity; beam shaping. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The rapid growth of satellite constellations, enabled by 
the increasing availability of small-sized and low-cost 
satellites such as Low Earth Orbit (LEO) Cubesats, can 
provide global real-time remote sensing and communication 
network [1]. Data-intensive satellite sensors produce a large 
amount of information to be transmitted to the ground in a 
short time, which requires high-capacity communications. 
Information security is also becoming an urgent issue in 
satellite constellations, because the amount of critical and 
valuable data to be communicated is increasing. Tiny 
satellites such as nanosats and small microsats may lack the 
power supply or mass for large conventional radio 
transponders. Small satellite applications are constrained by 
their ability to provide high bandwidth secured data 
communications for highly capable payloads [2]. 
Free Space Optical Communications (FSO) have evolved 
as a promising alternative for high-capacity data links from 
space, due to the high gain of a narrow beam, ultralow inter-
channel interference and featuring smaller and lighter 
terminals [3]. Moreover, FSO communications integrated 
with a quantum receiver, provide a requisite platform for 
intrinsically hack-proof secure communication, known as 
Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) [4]. Free Space Optical 
Communications can enable high speed multi-access space 
networks [5] to spread across previously inaccessible 
platforms including satellite-to-satellite crosslinks, up-and-
down links between space platforms and aircraft, ships, 
among mobile and stationary terminals, and other ground 
platforms. 
Figure 
1 
shows 
Free 
Space 
Optical 
Communication Network [6]. 
 
Figure 1.  Free Space Optical Communication Network. 
 
Figure 2.  Atmospheric effects on Free Space Optical Communications. 
However, traditional FSO system using large size 
telescope with narrow Field of View (FOV), and power 
consuming gimbal based Acquisition, Tracking and Pointing 
(ATP) mechanism [7], cannot meet the requirements of cost 
and Size, Weight, and Power (SWaP) in nanosatellite 
applications. Furthermore, atmospheric turbulence induced 
effects such as scintillations, beam wander and beam jittering 
can degrade free space optical communication link 
performance [8][9]. Figure 2 shows atmospheric effects on 
Free Space Optical Communications [6].  
The effective integration of high speed, power efficient, 
compact and reliable free space optical communication 
terminals with small satellite platforms can pave the way to 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

satellite constellations telecommunication networks. This 
paper will discuss the current architecture limitations that 
prevent the integration of laser communication terminals 
onboard small space platforms, and explore the critical 
technologies to be addressed for the realization of these 
systems.  We will discuss compact wide field of view optical 
antenna [10] in Section II, and MEMS gimbal-less 
retroreflective acquisition and tracking mechanism [11] in 
Section III. Section IV presents spatial diversity and beam 
shaping 
techniques 
[12] 
for 
atmospheric 
channel. 
Fundamental 
limits 
of 
performance 
and 
design 
methodologies 
for 
promising 
future 
research 
and 
development will be given. These technologies would help 
explore the landscape of miniaturized high capacity rugged 
free space optical communication systems for the 
development of future satellites networks. 
II. 
WIDE FIELD OF VIEW OPTICAL ANTENNA  
In traditional FSO communication systems, several types 
of telescopes have been utilized at the front-end of optical 
antenna, such as Galileo telescopes and Cassegrain 
telescopes. Schmidt-Cassegrain telescopes are the most 
popular types of telescopes that eliminate the spherical 
aberration and compensate for high-order aberration such as 
coma and astigmatism. It has a slight light loss due to the 
secondary mirror obstruction compared to refractors. A 
compact optical antenna using off-axis free form surface 
triple mirrors [13] was developed to eliminate the obstruction 
for a high speed laser communication system.  
However, the narrow FOV of optical antenna is the 
inherent characteristic that makes it difficult to maintain the 
Line-Of-Sight (LOS) links for FSO communications. A 
compact bidirectional adaptive optical receiver with a wide- 
angle tracking and adaptive compensation can improve the 
concentration of laser beam energy and reduce signal fading. 
Design of a compact adaptive optical receiver utilized fiber-
tip positioning systems and piezoelectric bimorph adaptive 
mirrors for beam steering and low-order wavefront control 
[14]. In order to observe a large FOV and acquire a wide 
spatial acquisition range, a correction procedure can be 
developed [7] from a wide FOV lens imaging model to a 
pinhole imaging model and used a fisheye lens in a coarse 
pointing system [15]. In addition, multiple-aperture imaging 
systems, beam divergence changing mechanisms and an 
optical phased array receiver can be investigated to improve 
the 
optical 
antenna 
[16] 
field-of-view 
for 
FSO  
communications. 
Figure 3 shows wide field of view optical antennas for 
free space optical communications [17]. A wide FOV 
antenna can be achieved by using a single-element fisheye 
lens group to collect the wide field beam, and a steering 
mirror to couple the beam into a multi-mode fiber [10]. The 
inherent motion environment demands on the accuracy of a 
tracking mechanical coupling system. Another method to 
improve the FOV and eliminate the tracking mechanism is to 
use angle diversity receiver, where an array of narrow-FOV 
non-imaging receiver elements are oriented along different 
directions to cover a wide FOV. Diversity schemes such as 
select-best, equal gain combining [18], and maximal-ratio 
combining [19] can be employed to improve the received 
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) 
performance. 
However, 
implementation of angle diversity using a separate optical 
receiver for each directional element is excessively bulky 
and costly. A fly-eye imaging diversity receiver [20], which 
consists of a single imaging optical concentrator that forms 
an image of the received light from different directions on a 
separating element of detector array. Imaging receivers and 
multi-beam transmitters [21] can reduce the required 
transmitter power. Moreover, when the multiple beams from 
multiple receiver elements are spatially separated and 
independently combined, the effects of intensity fluctuation 
average out to reduce the probability of signal fades.  
An off-axis catadioptric fisheye wide FOV optical 
antenna for FSO communications [10] is shown in Figure 4. 
The optical antenna consists of a fisheye lens group and a 
catadioptric telescope with off-axis aspheric surface mirrors. 
The optical device elements are numerically analyzed and 
optimally designed so that the receiver structure can make a 
positive contribution in enlarging the FOV and reducing 
optical aberrations. In order to correct the incident beam 
translation and compensate the beam wandering or beam 
jittering effects, a double-level tracking mechanism is 
incorporated into the optical antenna. The purpose of this 
optical antenna is to provide a 60-degree wide field of view 
to expand the tracking range, and mitigate optical aberrations 
to improve the tracking accuracy for FSO systems [10]. 
 
 
FOV
Fish-eye lens
Fiber coupling system 
Negative 
front group
Positive 
rear group
Stop
Steering mirror
Collimator
Optical 
fiber
(a) Wide Field-of-View
 Fish-eye optical receiver
 
Optical Fibers Detectors
Selector or
Combiner
CPC
Concentrators 
FOV
Couplers
Optical signal Electrical signal
(b) Angle diversity 
optical receiver
 
to demodulator
FOV
FOV
(c) Imaging angle diversity
 Fly-eye optical receiver
Focal Plane
Fiber bundle 
array
Ball lenses
Selector or 
combiner
Imaging 
concentrator
Objective lenses
 
Figure 3.  Wide field-of-view optical antennas for free space optical communications [17]. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

III. 
MEMS GIMBALESS ACQUISITION AND TRACKING  
Free space optical communication system usually 
employs an ATP mechanism to point the receiver’s narrow 
field of view at the small divergence beam [7]. ATP system, 
consisting of a coarse pointing system, a fine pointing 
system, and a point-ahead system, has already been 
incorporated into a satellite terminal to compensate for the 
LOS error and dynamic disturbance [5]. However, traditional 
ATP systems have large size, high power consumption and 
high cost. The complex coarse pointing system increases 
weight and volume of optical antenna and reduces tracking 
efficiency. This approach is impractical for small satellite 
applications requiring small size and low weight. Thus, a 
compact and power efficient gimbal-less acquisition and 
tracking mechanism should be developed for small satellite 
platforms. 
 
Figure 4.  Off-axis Catadioptric Wide field-of-view optical antenna  
For acquisition and tracking mechanism, beam steering 
can be accomplished by changing the refractive index of the 
medium through which the beam is transmitted or by the use 
of mirrors, prisms, lenses, or rotating diffraction gratings 
[22]. Optical beam steering approaches include mechanical 
mirror-based gimbals, GM mechanisms that rotate mirrors, 
Risley prisms, phased-array diffraction optics, and Micro-
Electromechanical System (MEMS) using micro-mirrors 
[23]. Conventional mechanical Fast Steering Mirrors (FSMs) 
using voice coils have large mirrors (25mm) with large 
moving masses and high power (10W) consumption, which 
make them more susceptible to shock and vibration. 
Piezoelectric mirrors offer sufficient steering range (50 mrad) 
and resolution (5 urad), but piezoelectric actuation exhibits 
strong nonlinearity and hysteresis which require the use of a 
complex 
and 
large 
size 
controller. 
Galvanometer 
Mechanisms (GM) have the small size, low cost and large 
steerable angle (~40 degree), but at the cost of low steering 
speed (~60 Hz) and high-power consumption (~W). MEMS-
based beam steering  are much speedier (~kHz), more 
precise and reliable, and requires a lower power (~mW). 
Though MEMS beam steering are restricted to small mirrors 
(1-8mm) or a smaller coverage cone (~10 degree) [23]. We 
can use a beam expander to adjust beam size or a wide angle 
field fisheye lens to magnify the optical scan-angles  [10]. As 
a promising beam steering approach within the SWaP 
constraints, gimbal-less MEMS-based beam acquisition and 
tracking mechanism can be developed for flexible FSO 
satellite network. 
 
Figure 5.  Experiment Setup of 2D MEMS beam steering mechanism to 
switch Free Space Optical Communication links [11] 
For reconfigurable FSO links, we need a beam 
acquisition and tracking mechanism that can automatically 
search for the target receiver position quickly, point the beam 
from transmitter to receiver aperture, and track the center of 
aperture precisely. Traditional acquisition and tracking using 
mechanical mirror-based gimbals and electrical feedback 
signals from the receiver would be lengthy. In addition, a 
single FSO device assembly, including beam steering and 
alignment machinery, should have high efficiency in terms 
of size, cost and power consumption [22]. For this reason, 
we proposed a separate visible laser beacon based tracking 
system that integrated a 2D gimbal-less MEMS mirror with 
retroreflective optics [22]. This system uses a high sensitive 
photodetector at the transmitter to detect the reflective light 
from retroreflective tags placed around the receiver apertures. 
This concept  [22] was recently demonstrated for a MEMS 
beam steerable FSO link working at a data rate above 10 
Gb/s  [24] with a field-of-view (FOV) of ±4.2◦. Experiment 
setup of gimbal-less MEMS beam acquisition and tracking 
mechanism to switch Free Space Optical Communication 
links for a flexible wireless data center inter-rack network is 
shown in Figure 5. 
With the initial target location, MEMS beam acquisition 
mechanism auto-search for the target around the initial 
location within the beam steering angle range. According to 
various distance and angular directions of retroreflective 
receiver aperture, we develop intelligent MEMS scanning 
patterns for beam acquisition and tracking mechanism [11]. 
The adaptive beam acquisition patterns and tracking 
algorithm parameters are optimized in term of the acquisition 
time, searching efficiency and tracking accuracy.  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 6.  Beam acquisition and tracking position accuracy of MEMS 
switchable FSO system as function of scan angle [22]. 
 
Figure 7.  BER performance as function of tracking angle for the fixed 
FSO link and the MEMS tracking FSO at 10Gbps [22]. 
An adaptive scan pattern is performed for intelligent 
acquisition and tracking system, to search and identify the 
retro-reflective receiver aperture at arbitrary positions within 
the scanning range of the MEMS mirror [22]. As hitting a 
retro-reflector, a strong signal peak is detected and 
associated to the MEMS mirror position. The estimated 
positions of the retro-reflectors are used as initial values of 
the reference positions for the line of sight alignment of 
tracking system [11]. For this experiment, we enhance the 
distance from MEMS transmitter to retroreflective receiver 
by using adaptive threshold detection and intelligent 
acquisition tracking patterns, and improving optical power 
coupling efficiency. When the retroreflective receiver 
aperture is moved along a linear transition direction at 
various distance, beam acquisition and tracking positions and 
response times are recorded in order to characterize MEMS 
tracking system with respect to acquisition accuracy and 
tracking latency. Figure 6 and Figure 7 show tracking 
position accuracy and BER performance of MEMS beam 
switchable FSO at 10 Gbps, respectively. 
Design and implement of an agile reconfigurable 
bidirectional 10Gbps FSO system incorporated with 
intelligent beam acquisition and tracking mechanism is built 
based on gimbal-less two-axis MEMS micro-mirror and 
retro-reflective optics [22]. The gimbal-less MEMS 
reconfigurable 
FSO 
links 
with 
intelligent 
adaptive 
acquisition and tracking are evaluated over various distances 
and directions to improve the acquisition latency and 
tracking accuracy [11]. Optical power loss and bit error rate 
of reconfigurable 10Gbps FSO links with mobility are 
evaluated over a short distance. The long distance FSO 
system can be achieved by using high power lasers such a s 
MOPA and EDFA, high sensitive photodetectors of APD 
single photon detectors and high gain wide field-of-view 
optical antennas. Further research work will focus on long 
distance bidirectional reconfigurable free space optical 
communication links using advanced MEMS adaptive 
acquisition and tracking to address environment effects such 
as LOS blockages, vibrations and intensity fluctuations.  
IV. 
SPATIAL DIVERSITY AND BEAM SHAPING   
Intensity fluctuations or scintillation of laser beam 
propagation through atmospheric turbulence will degrade the 
BER performance and channel capacity of free space optical 
communications between satellites and ground platforms. In 
order to improve communication performance, scintillations 
can be mitigated by means of spatial diversity using multiple 
transmitted beams and multiple receivers [25], reducing 
spatial coherence of the transmitted beam [26] and advance 
beam shaping techniques. 
A. Spatial diversity and Spatial coherence 
Spatial diversity using multiple transmitted beams and 
multiple receivers can also be employed to reduce 
scintillation and ultimately improve FSO channel capacity. It 
has been shown that the scintillation of a beam array can be 
reduced by carefully adjusting the spatial separation of 
beamlets [25][27]. However, scintillation of a beam array 
will increase significantly if the spatial separation of 
beamlets is smaller than the correlated length. In addition, 
the received energy from the beam arrays is low unless the 
constituent beamlets are inclined to overlap at the receiver 
aperture, which is difficult to achieve over long propagation 
distances. The use of multiple transmitters and receivers has 
also been suggested for use in Multiple-Input–Multiple-
Output (MIMO) configurations [27]. 
Partially coherent beams with reduced spatial coherence 
show lower scintillation at the cost of larger divergence 
angle and lower average received power. Partially coherent 
beams have a lower scintillation than fully coherent beams. 
However, a partially coherent beam has a larger beam 
spreading and forms a large spot in the receiver aperture, 
which leads to a loss of the transmitted energy being 
received by the detector. By optimizing the spatial coherence 
length, the improvement in scintillation reduction can 
overcome the penalty of power reduction and significant 
signal-to-noise ratio gains can be obtained in weak 
atmospheric turbulence [28]. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
Figure 8.  BER performance of MIMO free space optical communications 
in atmospheric turbulence [17]. 
 
Figure 9.  Channel capacity of MIMO free space optical communications 
using multiple partially coherent beams [12]. 
However, MIMO FSO links studied so far employ the 
fully coherent beams whose spatial correlated length is large 
and the induced scintillation is strong. The mutually 
independent MIMO branches require a relatively larger 
separation between the transmitter and receiver apertures 
than the correlated length. Partially coherent beams with 
shorter spatial coherence lengths can help reduce the 
scintillation and correlation length in strong turbulence, and 
eventually reduce the required separation space between 
independent apertures [12]. Thus, we proposed to develop 
MIMO FSO links whose spatially separated beamlets can 
have lower spatial coherence lengths that lead to reduced 
scintillation and smaller separation between transmitter and 
receiver apertures [12]. BER performance of MIMO FSO 
links in non-Kolmogorov moderate to strong turbulence was 
evaluated in Figure 8, and the effect of spatial coherence 
length of partially coherent beams on capacity of MIMO 
FSO links  [12] was analyzed in Figure 9. The approach that 
incorporates partially coherent beams into the MIMO FSO 
links could reduce scintillations and correlation length and to 
improve 
average 
channel 
capacity 
in 
weak-media 
atmospheric turbulence. In strong turbulence, large scale size 
of turbulent eddy will become shorter than the spatial 
coherence length, which lead to the increasing large-scale 
log-irradiance variance and the decreasing average capacity. 
B. Beam shaping and Airy beams 
Beam shaping is the process of redistributing the 
irradiance and phase of a beam of optical radiation. The 
beam shapes is defined by the irradiance distribution and the 
phase of the shaped beam is a major factor in determining 
the unique propagation properties of the specific beam 
profiles, such as Bessel beams, Laguerre beams, Vortex 
beams and Airy breams. Airy beams exhibit non-diffraction 
property that can propagate over many Rayleigh lengths 
without any appreciable change in intensity profiles [29]. 
Moreover, Airy beams resist diffraction while their main 
intensity maxima or lobes tend to transversely accelerate 
during propagation along parabolic trajectories in free space. 
The self-bending behavior persists over long distances, 
although the center of gravity of these wave packets remains 
constant and diffraction eventually takes over. It is also 
shown that Airy beams have the self-healing properties and 
can self-reconstruct after propagating through obstacles and 
retain their intensity profiles under turbulent conditions [30]. 
Therefore, the non-spreading, self-bending and self-healing 
properties of Airy beams can make them serve as robust 
propagation beams resilient against atmospheric turbulence.  
 
Figure 10.  Self-healing of Airy beam propagation through obstructions. 
The irradiance and phase distribution of Airy beam are 
controlled and generated by using a Spatial Light Modulator 
(SLM) or a hologram phase screen. The SLM is displayed by 
the Airy beam hologram that consists of the superposition of 
a 2D phase mask and a diffraction grating. The first order of 
diffraction is then Fourier transformed using a lens to 
generate Airy beams. The generated amplitude and phase 
distribution of Airy beam determine the self-bending and 
self-healing propagation properties through free space, 
scattering media and turbulent media as shown in Figure 10. 
The performance optimization as a function of beam 
parameters such as coherence length, characteristic length, 
aperture coefficient and deflection coefficient can be 
explored to mitigate intensity fluctuation and improve free 
space optical communication performance. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The effective integration of high speed, power efficient, 
compact and reliable free space optical communication 
terminals with small satellite platforms can pave the way to 
satellite constellations telecommunication networks. This 
paper discussed the current architecture limitations and 
explore the critical technologies, such as compact wide field 
of view optical antenna, MEMS gimbal-less retroreflective 
acquisition and tracking mechanism, spatial diversity and 
beam shaping techniques for atmospheric channel. Further 
research will focus on long distance MEMS reconfigurable 
free space optical communication to address environment 
effects such as LOS blockages and intensity fluctuations. 
These technologies would help explore the landscape of 
miniaturized high capacity rugged free space optical 
communication systems for future satellites networks. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank professors M. Kavehrad, Z. Liu, H. Gupta, J. 
Longtin, for sharing their expertise, and financial support by 
National Science Foundation (NSF) Award # 1513764. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
O. L. De Weck, R. D. Neufville, and M. Chaize, "Staged Deployment 
of Communications Satellite Constellations in Low Earth Orbit," 
Journal of Aerospace Computing, Information, and Communication, 
vol. 1, pp. 119-136, 2004. 
[2] 
K. Woellert, P. Ehrenfreund, A. J. Ricco, and H. Hertzfeld, 
"Cubesats: Cost-effective science and technology platforms for 
emerging and developing nations," Advances in Space Research, vol. 
47, pp. 663-684, Feb. 2011. 
[3] 
V. W. S. Chan, "Free-Space Optical Communications," Journal of 
Lightwave Technology, vol. 24, pp. 4750-4762, 2006. 
[4] 
J. Yin et al., "Satellite-based entanglement distribution over 1200 
kilometers," Science, vol. 356, pp. 1-5, 2017. 
[5] 
V. W. S. Chan, "Optical satellite networks," Journal of Lightwave 
Technology, vol. 21, pp. 2811-2827, 2003. 
[6] 
P. Deng, "Studies of Novel Partially Coherent Beams propagation 
through Turbulent Atmosphere," Doctoral Dissertation, Huazhong 
University of Science & Technology, 2013. 
[7] 
T.-H. Ho, S. D. Milner, and C. C. Davis, "Pointing, acquisition, and 
tracking 
system 
with 
omnivision," 
Free-Space 
Laser 
Communications V, SPIE,  2005, pp. 589219-12. 
[8] 
P. Deng, X. H. Yuan, and D. Huang, "Scintillation of a laser beam 
propagation through non-Kolmogorov strong turbulence," Optics 
Communications, vol. 285, pp. 880-887, 2012. 
[9] 
P. Deng, X. Yuan, Y. Zeng, M. Zhao, and H. Luo, "Influence of wind 
speed on free space optical communication performance for Gaussian 
beam propagation through non Kolmogorov strong turbulence," 
Journal of Physics: Conference Series,  2011, pp. 012056. 
[10] P. Deng, X. Yuan, M. Kavehrad, M. Zhao, and Y. Zeng, "Off-axis 
catadioptric fisheye wide field-of-view optical receiver for free space 
optical communications," Optical Engineering, vol. 51, pp. 063002-
11, 2012. 
[11] P. Deng, T. Kane, and O. Alharbi, "Reconfigurable free space optical 
data center network using gimbal-less MEMS retroreflective 
acquisition and tracking," Free-Space Laser Communication and 
Atmospheric Propagation XXX, SPIE, Feb 2018, pp. 1052403-9. 
[12] P. Deng, M. Kavehrad, Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, and X. Yuan, "Capacity of 
MIMO Free Space Optical communications for multiple partially 
coherent beams propagation through non-Kolmogorov strong 
turbulence," Optics Express, vol. 21, pp. 15213-15229, Jun 2013. 
[13] K. Takahashi and Y. Arimoto, "Compact optical antennas using free-
form surface optics for ultrahigh-speed laser communication 
systems," Optical Engineering, vol. 47, pp. 1-9, Jan. 22 2008. 
[14] T. Weyrauch, M. A. Vorontsov, G. W. Carhart, G. V. Simonova, L. 
A. Beresnev, and E. E. Polnau, "Adaptive optical antennas: design 
and evaluation," Atmospheric Optics: Models, Measurements, and 
Target-in-the-Loop Propagation, SPIE,  2007, pp. 1-12. 
[15] G. Druart et al., "Compact infrared pinhole fisheye for wide field 
applications," Applied Optics, vol. 48, pp. 1104-1113, 2009. 
[16] P. Deng, X. Yuan, Y. Zeng, and M. Zhao, "Design and evaluation of 
wide field-of-view optical antenna," Proc. of SPIE, vol. 8129, pp. 1-
10, 2011. 
[17] P. Deng, M. Kavehrad, and X. Yuan, "Comparing wide field-of-view 
optical receivers for free space optical communications,"  Photonics 
Society Summer Topical Meeting Series, IEEE, July 2012, pp. 84-85. 
[18] S. M. Navidpour, M. Uysal, and M. Kavehrad, "BER performance of 
free-space optical transmission with spatial diversity," IEEE 
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 6, pp. 2813-2819, 
Aug 2007. 
[19] P. Deng and M. Kavehrad, "Adaptive Real-Time Software Defined 
MIMO Visible Light Communications using Spatial Multiplexing and 
Spatial Diversity," Wireless for Space and Extreme Environments 
(WiSEE), 2016 IEEE International Conference on, 26-29 Sep. 2016. 
[20] G. Yun and M. Kavehrad, "Spot-diffusing and fly-eye receivers for 
indoor infrared wireless communications," IEEE International 
Conference on Selected Topics in Wireless Communications, 25-26 
Jun 1992, pp. 262-265. 
[21] J. M. Kahn, R. You, P. Djahani, A. G. Weisbin, B. K. Teik, and A. 
Tang, "Imaging diversity receivers for high-speed infrared wireless 
communication," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 36, pp. 88-
94, Dec 1998. 
[22] P. Deng, M. Kavehrad, and Y. Lou, "MEMS-based beam steerable 
free space optical communication link for reconfigurable wireless 
data center," Broadband Access Communication Technologies Xi, 
Proc. SPIE, Feb 2017, pp. 1012805-9. 
[23] V. Milanovic, G. A. Matus, and D. T. McCormick, "Gimbal-less 
monolithic 
silicon 
actuators 
for 
tip-tilt-piston 
micromirror 
applications," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum 
Electronics, vol. 10, pp. 462-471, 2004. 
[24] M. I. S. Chowdhury, M. Kavehrad, W. Z. Zhang, and P. Deng, 
"Combined CATV and very high speed data transmission over a 
1550-nm wavelength indoor optical wireless link," Proc. of SPIE, Feb 
2014, pp. 901009-9. 
[25] E. Bayaki, R. Schober, and R. K. Mallik, "Performance Analysis of 
MIMO Free-Space Optical Systems in Gamma-Gamma Fading," 
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 57, pp. 3415-3424, Nov 
2009. 
[26] J. C. Ricklin and F. M. Davidson, "Atmospheric turbulence effects on 
a partially coherent Gaussian beam: implications for free-space laser 
communication," J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, vol. 19, pp. 1794-1802, 2002. 
[27] A. García-Zambrana, C. Castillo-Vázquez, and B. Castillo-Vázquez, 
"Outage performance of MIMO FSO links over strong turbulence and 
misalignment fading channels," Optics Express, vol. 19, pp. 13480-
13496, 2011. 
[28] D. K. Borah and D. G. Voelz, "Spatially partially coherent beam 
parameter optimization for free space optical communications," 
Optics Express, vol. 18, pp. 20746-20758, 2010. 
[29] G. A. Siviloglou, J. Broky, A. Dogariu, and D. N. Christodoulides, 
"Observation of accelerating airy beams," Physical Review Letters, 
vol. 99, Nov 23 2007. 
[30] J. Broky, G. A. Siviloglou, A. Dogariu, and D. N. Christodoulides, 
"Self-healing properties of optical Airy beams," Optics Express, vol. 
16, pp. 12880-12891, 2008. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-624-8
SPACOMM 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

