Estimation of Vertical Ionosphere From The Oblique Sounding Measurement Using 
HF Radar System 
Jin-Ho Jo, Moon-Hee You, Yong-Min Lee, Cheol-Oh Jeong 
Satellite & Wireless Convergence Research Department, 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), 
Daejeon City, Rep. of Korea 
E-mail: jhjo@etri.re.kr, moon@etri.re.kr, ymlee01@etri.re.kr, cojeong@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Many of radio wave applications require real-time 
determination 
of 
the 
2-dimensional 
structure 
of 
the 
ionospheric electron density along the path, or at least of the 
mid-path electron density profile. Since it is often impractical 
to deploy a vertical ionosonde at the point of interest, such as 
across oceans, the idea of reconstructing an average mid-path 
profile from oblique incidence measurements is very appealing. 
In this paper, we present methods for estimate vertical 
ionosphere profile without vertical ionospheric measurement. 
This can be achieved by ionogram conversion from the oblique 
to 
equivalent 
vertical 
at 
the 
midpoint 
between 
the 
measurement stations. To get vertical ionogram from the 
measured oblique ionogram, two steps processing are 
necessary. The first step is a trace extraction from the 
ionogram and vector tracking algorithm is used in this phase. 
Second step is an ionogram conversion from the oblique to 
equivalent vertical. In order to verify ionogram conversion 
algorithm, converted vertical ionograms are compared with 
the measured ionograms. The comparison results show that 
ionogram conversion methods can be used for the midpoint 
vertical ionogram estimation without vertical ionospheric 
measurements. 
Keywords-Ionosphere; 
Ionogram; 
Ionosonde; 
Vertical 
sounding; Oblique sounding; Trace extraction; Ionobgram 
conversion; Vector tracking. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ionosphere can be the largest source of error in GPS 
positioning and navigation. Furthermore, under certain 
condition, amplitude fading and phase scintillation effects 
can cause loss of carrier lock and intermittent GPS receiver 
operation. The ionosphere effects radio propagation 
especially HF radio communication. The presence of the free 
electrons in the ionosphere effects radio signals across 
several bands of radio frequency. 
For the ionospheric research, Korean Space Weather 
Center (KSWC) installed ionosphere measurement radar 
system, called ionosonde [1], in the place of Jeju and Icheon. 
Both stations measure vertical ionospheric condition of each 
sky respectively. The vertical ionosphere measurement can 
provide the important ionospheric parameters such as critical 
frequency, virtual height and electron density, for 
ionoshperic 
research. 
Meanwhile 
oblique 
ionosphere 
measurement has the ability to detect the ionosphere over sea 
and other terrain where it is not practical to deploy vertical 
ionosonde and provide more information with less 
transmitting and receiving devices. In a network for 
ionospheric monitoring, N vertical incident ionosondes can 
provide the ionospheric information of N locations overhead, 
but N transmitters and M receives of the oblique incident 
ionosondes, which are separated from each other, have the 
potential of characterizing the ionosphere in the vicinity of 
NM reflecting points. Therefore, the oblique incident 
ionosondes still have kept developing by now [2]. 
This paper describes methods for estimate vertical 
ionospheric condition without ionosphere measurement. This 
can be achieved by ionogram conversion from oblique 
measurement to equivalent vertical at the midpoint between 
the stations [5], [6]. The conversion algorithm presented in 
this paper provides not only vertical profile of F layer but 
also provide information for sporadic E layer occurrence of 
ionosphere. 
In this paper, ionosphere is reviewed first at Section 2. 
The ionosphere measurement radar system called ionosonde 
is reviewed at Section 3. Ionosphere measurement status in 
Korea is reviewed at Section 4. Method for estimate vertical 
ionospheric condition at midpoint from the oblique sounding 
measurements at both stations is presented at Section 5. 
Validation results for estimated vertical ionospheric 
condition at midpoint is reviewed Section 6. Finally research 
activities are summarized in Section 7. 
II. 
IONOSPHERE 
The ionosphere is a region of the upper atmosphere, from 
about 85km to 600km altitude. It plays an important part in 
atmospheric electricity and forms the inner edge of the 
magnetosphere. It has practical importance because, among 
other functions, it influences radio propagation to distant 
places on the Earth. 
The ionosphere effects radio propagation from the 
extremely low frequencies to super high frequencies. Below 
30MHz the ionosphere is an essential part of the propagation, 
whereas above 30MHz the ionosphere is a source of band 
pollution particularly at night in the LF and MF bands 
(30kHz to 3MHz) and system disruption for Earth-space 
communications, such as navigation systems [3]. 
The D layer is the innermost layer, 60 km to 90 km above 
the surface of the Earth. The E layer is the middle layer, 90 
km to 120 km above the surface of the Earth. The F layer or 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

region, also known as the Appleton layer, extends from 
about 200 km to more than 500 km above the surface of 
Earth. The Figure 1 shows the structure of ionosphere. At 
night, the F layer is the only layer of significant ionization 
present, while the ionization in the E and D layers is 
extremely low. During the day, the D and E layers become 
much more heavily ionized, as does the F layer, which 
develops an additional, weaker region of ionization known as 
the F1 layer. The F2 layer persists by day and night and is 
the region mainly responsible for the refraction of radio 
waves. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Struectre of ionosphere at day and night 
III. 
IONOSONDES 
An ionosonde is a special radar system for the 
examination of the ionosphere. The changing state of the 
ionosphere is generally monitored by networks of vertical 
ionosondes. The transmitter of ionosonde sweeps all or part 
of the HF frequency range, transmitting short pulses. These 
pulses are reflected at various layers of the ionosphere, at 
heights of 100-400 km, and their echo are received by the 
receiver and analysed by the control system. The result is 
displayed in the form of an ionogram, a graph of reflection 
height (actually time between transmission and reception of 
pulse) versus carrier frequency. An ionosonde consists of; 
 A high frequency (HF) transmitter, automatically 
tuneable over a wide range. Typically the frequency 
coverage is 0.5-23MHz or 1-40MHz, though 
normally sweeps are confined to approximately 1.6-
12MHz. 
 A tracking HF receiver, which can automatically 
track the frequency of the transmitter. 
 An antenna with a suitable radiation pattern, which 
transmits well vertically upwards and is efficient 
over the whole frequency range used. 
 Digital control and data analysis circuits. 
 
In Korea, model DPS-4D ionosonde are used for 
ionosphere layer measurements. Figure 2 shows the DPS-
4D ionosonde and receive antenna installed in Korea. Table-
1 shows the characteristics of DPS-4D ionosonde [1]. The 
DPS-4D is the latest digital ionosonde that the University of 
Massachusetts Lowell Centres for Atmospheric Research 
developed during 2004-2008. The DPS-4D ionosonde uses 
one simple crossed delta or rhombic antenna for 
transmission, and an array of four small crossed loops for 
reception. The DPS-4D system compensates for a low 
power transmitter (300 W vs. 10 kW for previous systems) 
by employing intra-pulse phase coding, digital pulse 
compression and Doppler integration. 
   
 
Figure 2.  DPS-4 ionosonde and receive antenna 
TABLE I.  
MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF DPS-4D 
Parameters 
Characteristics 
Frequency scan 
0.5 ~ 30MHz 
Frequency synthesis 
Fully digital 
Pulse width 
533us (16 chips of 33us) 
Peak pulse power 
2 channels @150W each 
Doppler range 
3Hz ~ 50Hz 
Doppler resolution 
0.0125 ~ 12.5Hz 
TX antenna type 
Turnstile Delta or Rhombic 
RX antenna type 
Active crossed loop 
 
IV. 
IONOSPHERE MEASUREMENTS IN KOREA 
In the past, the vertical incidence ionosonde has been the 
mainstream for ionospheric detection, due to its ability to 
accurate measure the echo group range as a function of 
frequency and to estimate the ionospheric critical frequency, 
virtual height, and electron density profile so on. However, 
oblique incidence ionosonde has not been widely applied. 
The oblique incidence ionosonde can monitor the ionosphere 
over ocean, marsh, desert and so on, where it is not practical 
to deploy vertical incidence sounder. Oblique sounding may 
be used to obtain information about the ionosphere near the 
mid-point between two ionosonde sites. This makes it useful 
for recovering ionospheric data at a point where vertical 
sounding cannot be conducted. 
There are two ionosonde stations in Korea, named Jeju 
station located in 33.4°N, 126.3°E and Icheon station located 
in 37.1°N, 127.5°E. The ionosondes are operation in the 
frequency sweep mode, transmitting the phase coded pulse 
train by the transmit antenna. The GPS receivers are applied 
in the ionosondes for the time and frequency synchronization 
between the transmitter and receiver. The output of 
ionosonde measurements are ionograms. An ionogram is a 
graph of the virtual height of the ionosphere plotted against 
frequency. Ionogram is often converted into electron density 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

profiles. Data from ionograms may be used to measure 
changes in the Earth's ionosphere due to space weather 
events. 
In the ionosonde stations Jeju and Icheon, oblique 
ionograms 1 to 16MHz operating frequencies with a 25 kHz 
frequency step are recorded every 30 minutes each. The 
height bin of vertical ionogram is from 80 to 1280km with 
2.5km step. The Figure 3 shows the oblique sounding 
configuration of two ionosonde stations to get midpoint 
ionogram information. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Oblique sounding configuration for the midpoint ionogram 
measurement 
The ground range between Jeju and Icheon stations have 
is about 430km. The one hop ionospheric reflecting point of 
oblique propagating path from Jeju to Icheon stations is near 
the Gochang in Korea. If ionosonde in Jeju station receive 
pulse signal transmitted from the ionosonde in Icheon station, 
the strongest receiving signal is a one hop reflected signal at 
the ionosphere near the Gochang. So oblique sounding 
ionogram measured at receiving station has information of 
ionospheric condition at the midpoint between the stations. 
The Figure 4 is a map showing the location of Digisonde 
station Jeju and Icheon and one hop ionospheric reflecting 
point of oblique propagating path between two stations 
(midpoint).  
Figure 5 shows the oblique ionogram measured at Jeju 
station. The x axis of ionogram is a frequency with MHz 
scale and y axis of ionogram is a height with km scale. The 
color of ionogram shows a direction of signal arrival. When 
Jeju station receives signal from the Icheon station, arrival 
azimuth angle is 330 degree and this direction is displayed as 
a sky blue color in the ionogram. The sweep frequency of 
ionosonde is from 1 to 16MHz and measurement hight range 
is from 8 to 1280km. There are two sky blue color signal 
clusters in the lower part of figure. The left one of the two 
signal clusters is an Ordinary signal path and right one is an 
extraordinary signal path. Extraordinary signal is same as 
Ordinary except polarization was rotated by the geomagnetic 
field during the ionospheric propagation. The upper signal 
cluster is a double hop signals. 
 
Figure 4.  Location of ionosinde stations and midpoint in Korea 
 
Figure 5.  Oblique ionogram measured at Jeju 
V. 
VERTICAL IONOGRAM AT MIDPOINT 
As mentioned in section 4, vertical ionogram is more 
useful than oblique ionogram for the ionospheric research 
due to its ability to accurate measure the echo group range as 
a function of frequency and to estimate the ionospheric 
critical frequency, virtual height, and electron density profile, 
so on. In this section the idea getting vertical ionogram of the 
Icheon
midpoint 
Jeju 
MHz 
km 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

midpoint from the measured oblique ionogram at two 
ionosonde stations are described. To get vertical ionogram 
from the measured oblique ionogram, two processing steps 
are necessary. First step processing is trace extraction from 
the ionogram and second step processing is ionogram 
conversion from oblique to vertical. 
A. Trace extraction from the ionogram 
Before ionogram conversion from oblique to vertical, it 
needs to extract trace from the oblique ionogram. The trace 
extraction reduces data size of oblique ionogram and make 
easy to handle conversion calculation. The problem of 
reliable trace extraction is a difficult one. Typically only 
vertical incidence ionograms have been collected regularly 
because techniques for trace extraction from such have been 
developed. The variety of trace shapes in oblique sounding 
due to different ionospheric conditions, bease-lines and 
ionospheric gradients, adds an order of difficulty to the 
problem and there seems to be as yet little work published in 
the open literature on the problem [4]. 
We developed new algorithm called ‘vector tracking’ for 
the trace extraction from the oblique ionogram data. This 
algorithm can extract ionogram trace well even in week echo 
signal and noisy environments. The starting point of trace 
extraction is maximum amplitude point in scattered data of 
the oblique ionogram. In vector tracking algorithm, 
amplitude value of eight directions from the maximum 
amplitude point are compared and maximum amplitude 
direction is selected as a next trace point. The eight 
directions are angles of 0, 45, 90, 135, 180, 225, 270, and 
315 degree from the selected trace points.  Figure 6 shows a 
trace extraction method in vector tracking algorithm. Four 
amplitude value of echo signal in eight directions in the 
ionogram are added and compared each other and direction 
of maximum amplitude value is selected as a next trace point. 
Figure 7 shows example of trace extraction from the 
ionogram using ‘vector tracking’ algorithm. Red line in the 
figure is an extracted trace of ionogram from the starting 
point in right hand. Blue line in the figure is an extracted 
trace of ionogram from the starting point in left hand. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Trace extraction method in vector traking algorithm 
 
Figure 7.  Ionogram trace extraction by vector tracking algorithm 
B. Ionogeam conversion from oblique to vertical 
The distance between Jeju and Icheon stations is less than 
500km. Therefore, it is acceptable to assume ionosphere 
layers are flat and there are no electron confliction and no 
geomagnetic disturbance between the stations. In this case, 
conversion algorithm can be expressed by secant law theory 
of Berit and Tuve [5] and theory of Martyn’s equivalent path 
[6]. The vertical frequency (fv) and virtual height (h’v) can be 
derived from the oblique frequency (fob) and virtual path 
(P’ob). The detailed conversion algorithms can be described 
in following steps. 
 
 
 
MHz 
km 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

From the above steps, we can get equivalent vertical 
frequency (fv) and vertical virtual height (h’v) from the 
oblique frequency (fob) and the virtual oblique path (P’ob) 
between the stations. The equations are as following. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Figure 8 shows a measured oblique ionogram at both 
station and converted equivalent vertical ionogram of the 
midpoint according to the (1) and (2) in above. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Measured oblique ionogram and converted vertical ionogram 
VI. 
VALIDATION OF ALGORITHM 
It needs to validate equivalent vertical ionogram of 
midpoint between two stations converted from the measured 
oblique ionogram. The best way is compare converted 
equivalent vertical ionogram with a measured vertical 
ionogram at the midpoint. But this method is not practical 
because it needs new ionosonde installation at the midpoint.  
The alternative way is compare measured vertical ionogram 
at both stations. This method seems to be reasonable because 
distance between the stations is just 430km and measurement 
interval of each station is short as 8 minutes. So if ionosphere 
condition is calm, alternative method can be a good choice 
for the validation. 
Figure 9 shows a measured vertical ionograms at Jeju, 
Icheon stations and equivalent vertical ionogram of midpoint. 
Equivalent vertical ionogram in the figure is located between 
the two station ionograms and shape is similar with both 
ones. This means that ionogram conversion equations (1) and 
(2) in previous chapter are validated and this conversion can 
be used for the vertical ionogram estimation without 
measurement at the midpoint. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Ionograms of Jeju, Icheon and midpoint 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTHER WORKS 
In this paper, we present methods for estimate 
ionospheric condition without ionosphere measurement. This 
can be achieved by ionogram conversion from the oblique to 
equivalent vertical at the midpoint between the measurement 
stations. First step is a trace extraction from the measured 
oblique ionogram of the receiving station. The vector 
tracking algorithm was used in this phase. Second step is an 
ionogram trace conversion from the oblique to vertical. The 
equivalent vertical conversion algorithm was used in this 
phase. In order to verify the conversion algorithm, converted 
vertical ionogram of midpoint was compared to the 
measured vertical ionograms of both receiving stations. The 
result shows that conversion algorithm can be used for the 
vertical ionogram estimation at the midpoint. 
In Korea, we have plans to install new ionosondes in the 
most east and west points for the full mesh ionosphere 
measurement network. Then we can get not only 4 stations 
vertical ionograms, but also midpoints vertical ionogram 
from the 4 stations measurements using these algorithms. 
Also we will extend this study to over country sea area. We 
have plans to cooperate with Japan and China for this 
research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. W. Reinisch, Digisonde 4D Technical Manual (Version 
1.0), Lowell Digisonde International, 2009. 
[2] Chen Gang, “Application of the oblique ionogram as vertical 
ionogram,” Science China Technical Sciences, vol. 55, no. 5, 
pp. 1240-1244, 2012. 
[3] R. Bamford, The Oblique Ionospheric Sounder (Project Final 
Report), Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, 2000. 
[4] Matthew 
Roughan, 
“Trace 
Extraction 
From 
Oblique 
Ionograms,” Applied MAchine Vision, ’96, Cincinnati, Ohio, 
USA, 1996. 
[5] G. Breit and M. A. Tuve, “A Test of the Existence of the 
Conducting Layer,” Physical Review, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 554-
575, 1926. 
[6] D. P. Martyn, “The Propagation of Medium Radio Waves in 
the Ionosphere,” Proceedings of the Physical Society, vol. 47, 
no. 2, pp. 323-339, 1935. 
(1) 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
MHz 
km 
km 
MHz 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-317-9
SPACOMM 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

