 
Preliminary Performance Analysis of Space-based AIS Payload for KOMPSAT-6 
Yong-Min Lee, Byoung-Sun Lee 
Satellite & Wireless Convergence Research Dept.  
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
ymlee01@etri.re.kr,  
 
 
Abstract—Space-based automatic identification system (AIS) 
payload has been designed conceptually to provide a platform 
for AIS signal collection, down conversion, and demodulation 
of the AIS burst signals operating at VHF band. AIS receiver 
uses a reconfigurable Software Defined Radio (SDR) 
technology, which has digital filtering and cross-correlation 
functions within field programmable gate array (FPGA)  
device and demodulation of Gaussian minimum-shift keying 
(GMSK) waveform by a general purpose processor. AIS 
receiver is able to operate in either or both on-board 
processing (OBP) mode and on-ground-processing (OGP) 
mode depending on the availability of communications links, 
on-board resources and the user preference. In this paper, the 
link budget analysis and detection probability have carried out 
as a basic performance analysis of AIS payload for 
KOMPSAT-6. 
Keywords-space-based AIS; software defined radio; GMSK; 
on-board processing; on-ground processing; KOMPSAT-6. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With greater emphasis being placed on global situational 
awareness, 
global 
asset 
monitoring, 
environmental 
monitoring, maritime and terrestrial sensor, and data 
acquisition systems are critical enabling capabilities that are 
becoming more ubiquitous [1]. 
A space-based AIS payload makes use of AIS system 
beyond the intended 4S (Ship-to-Ship and Ship-to-Shore) 
communications. A satellite even microsatellite equipped 
with an AIS receiver can provide reliable services in widely 
trafficked area. 
The Korean government had started to develop a multi-
purpose low earth orbit satellite named KOMPSAT-6. 
KOMPSAT-6 satellite will accommodate Synthetic Aperture 
Radar (SAR) as a primary payload and Automatic 
Identification System (AIS) as a secondary payload. 
The focus on this paper is to develop a conceptual design 
for a space-based AIS payload for KOMPSAT-6 with special 
emphasis on the performance analysis of ship-to-satellite link 
budget and detection probability versus the number of ships. 
II. 
SDR BASED AIS RECEIVER 
AIS payload for KOMPSAT-6 was designed to collect, 
down-convert, detect and demodulate the AIS burst signals 
from vessels. AIS receiver processes two groups of AIS 
messages in terms of dynamic messages every 2~10 seconds 
and static messages every 6 minutes. 
Software defined radio architecture for AIS receiver 
includes the digital filtering and cross-correlation function 
within a field programmable gate array (FPGA) device and 
demodulation of Gaussian minimum-shift keying (GMSK) 
waveform within a general purpose microprocessor. Store 
and forward architecture is also allowed for autonomous data 
collection and archiving from vessels. Figure 1 shows the 
operational concept of AIS payload for KOMPSAT-6.  
 
Figure 1.  Operational Concept of AIS Payload for KOMPSAT-6 
III. 
OPERATION MODES 
The in-flight reconfigurable AIS payload is going to 
operate in either/both on-board processing mode or/and on-
ground processing mode depending on the shipping traffic 
conditions of the field-of-view.  
A. On-Board Procesing (OBP) Mode 
The OBP mode leads to a reduced downlink bandwidth 
requirement 
but 
requires 
more powerful 
processing 
capability on-board AIS receiver. In areas with very high 
traffic density, it is not possible to successfully decode all 
AIS signals using this mode due to the high number of signal 
collisions. The OBP mode must not be confused with de-
collision which is the process of applying de-collision 
algorithms to detangle the collided signals. Signal de-
collision is only available with OGP. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
0
800
1600
2400
3200
4000
4800
5600
6400
7200
8000
8800
9600
10400
11200
12000
12800
13600
14400
Probability of Detection (p)
Totla Number of Ships (N)
Tobs=200 sec
Tobs=300 sec
Tobs=400 sec
 
B. On-Ground Processing (OGP) Mode 
In OGP mode, the receivers take snapshot information of 
the RF environment and downlink the raw data to ground for 
processing by the very powerful ground processing 
equipment to apply the de-collision algorithms. This mode 
requires a lot of data handling and a larger downlink 
bandwidth to ground due to the amount of raw data 
generated (~20MB/s). 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
The detection of AIS transmissions was recently 
improved by the introduction of satellite sensors, which 
enables the collection of AIS over wide areas in the open 
ocean. However, space-based AIS payload has its own 
challenges due to the fact that AIS is primarily intended for 
sea-level reception and therefore leads to performance 
degradation when observed over large areas from space. It is 
therefore critical to understand how the performance of these 
new sensors, and to identify the condition under which the 
performance is acceptable for operational use.  
Another issue is the message collision and the message 
loss. All exchanged messages transmitted from ships on the 
sea are synchronized and guaranteed the functions of the 
system without any message loss. On the other hand, AIS 
messages received at satellite from lots of vessels at the same 
time with the same frequency cause a message collision and 
lead to message loss [2]. 
In this paper, the link budget and detection probability 
analysis have carried out as the main factors impacting the 
performance. 
A. Link Budget Anlysis 
A substantial part of the AIS payload design is to 
evaluate the received power from the ships compared to the 
noise power in term of carrier-to-noise (C/N) ratio. 
Table I shows a rough link budget calculated for ships 
near the edge of the satellite swath. The received power at 
satellite is -107.1 dBm and the link margin is about 4.8 dB.  
If we take into account some potential losses due to Doppler 
shift and ionosphere effects, the margin may go down a few 
but more sensitive receiver will help to increase the margin. 
B. Dectection Probability 
Basically AIS is designed as a ship collision avoidance 
system for terrestrial use and used a multiple access scheme 
called 
self-organized 
time 
domain 
multiple 
access 
(SOTDMA) that assigns approximately 2,000 time slots, 
automatically and dynamically, to ships in local “cells”, that 
is, ships within VHF range of each other [3]. This 
communication protocols make sure that interferences 
cannot occur with normal traffic density.  
However, a space-based AIS payload receives signals 
from a number of cells over the antenna footprint and a time 
slot is not coordinated properly. It means that signal 
collisions occur from other ships outside its self-organizing 
cell.  
 
 
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF AIS LINK BUDGET ANLAYSIS 
AIS Transmission Parameter 
Value 
AIS-1 Frequency (MHz) 
161.975 
AIS-2 Frequency (MHz) 
162.025 
Data Rate (bits/sec) 
9600 
Line code 
NRZI 
Modulation 
GMSK 
Number of Training Bits 
24 
Transmit Bandwidth Time Product 
0.4 
Receive Bandwidth Time Product 
0.5 
Class A Transmit Power (W) 
12.5 
Channel Bandwidth (kHz) 
25 
Geometry 
Range (km) 
530 
MinTransmit Elevation Angle (Deg) 
0 
Satellite Antenna Off-axis Angle (Deg)  
67.5 
Maximum Slant Range (km) 
2183 
Maximum Surface Range (km) 
2018 
Power 
AIS Transmit Power (dBm) 
41.0 
Ship Antenna Gain (dBi) 
2.0 
Transmit Cable & Other Loss (dB) 
3.0 
Free Space Loss at Max Range (dB) 
143.2 
Polarization Mismatch Loss (dB) 
3.0 
Satellite Antenna Gain at Horizon (dBi) 
1.6 
Satellite RF Cable & Filter Loss (dB) 
2.4 
Satellite Received Power (dBm) 
-107.1 
Receiver Sensitivity (dBm) @ 20% PER 
-112.0 
Link Margin (dB) 
4.8 
The probability of detection of an uncorrupted ship’s AIS 
message for KOMPSAT-6 has calculated with the different 
observation time shown in Figure 2 [4].  
 
Figure 2.  Probability of detection vursus total number of ships 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have looked at general considerations 
around AIS payload and evaluated the feasibility for a space-
based AIS receiver for KOMPSAT-6 conceptual design with 
respect to a basic link budget and detection probability. It 
can be concluded that there is sufficient margin about 4.8 dB 
to receive messages from ships and interferences between 
AIS messages will depend upon the number of vessels in the 
field-of-view. In order to improve the performances of AIS 
payload, there are ways to implement the interference 
cancellation schemes by using antenna diversity methods and 
de-collision algorithms on the ground.  
REFERENCES  
[1]  Marion “Rick” Earles and CANEUS Shared Small Satellites 
CSSP Workshop Committee, “International Space-Based AIS 
and Data Extraction Backbone - High Level Requirements”,  
CANEUS International, 2010. 
[2] Rob Goldsmith, “Preparatory Action for Assessment of the 
Capacity of Spaceborne Automatic Identification System 
Receivers to Support EU Maritime Policy : The PASTA 
MARE Project”, Maritime forum, October 2010. 
[3] James K.E. Tunaley, “Space-Based AIS Performance”, LRDC, 
May 2011. 
[4] Yong-Min Lee and Byoung-Sun Lee, “Conceptual Design of 
Space-Based AIS System”, KSAS fall conference, November 
2014. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

