Experimental X-Band Automotive SAR System  
for Land Observation Application 
 
Chul H. Jung, Jung-Hwan Song 
Wireless Technology Laboratory 
SOLiD Systems 
Seoul, Korea 
email: chjung@solid.co.kr, jhsong@solid.co.kr 
Hyeon-Cheol Lee 
Payload Electronics Team 
Korea Aerospace Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
email: hlee@kari.re.kr
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, an experimental X-band automotive- 
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) system for land observation 
application is proposed with the obtained SAR images. In 
order to develop and validate simply, Commercial Off-The-
Shelf (COTS) technology is partially employed especially for 
standard horn antenna, arbitrary waveform generator, and 
digital signal processor. In order to validate the system 
performance, SAR image quality is evaluated by using corner 
reflector. In this paper, the feasibility of the automotive-SAR 
system for land application is demonstrated by presenting the 
SAR images of several kinds of ground areas. 
Keywords-Synthetic aperture radar (SAR); Ground-based 
SAR system; land application; system development. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recently, ground-based Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) 
systems have been proposed as observation and monitoring 
tool for land application such as landslides monitoring, 
terrain elevation mapping, and environmental study of 
vegetation cover. Because a ground-based SAR system has 
great advantage of stable motion effect, SAR formation 
processing can be very simple. Therefore many researchers 
employ the ground-based SAR system for its research 
purpose [1]-[7]. Pieraccini et al. [2][3] suggest simple 
interferometric system based on ground rail system for 
topographic mapping application. And Luzi et al. [4] 
demonstrate the potential of ground-based SAR system for 
landslides monitoring. Recently, Lingua el al. [5] employ the 
Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) technique to improve the 
ground-based interferometric SAR system for remote 
sensing of landslide monitoring. Recently, Zhou, et al. [6] 
and Sato et al. [7] suggest ground-based SAR systems for 
ground-truth validation in polarimetric SAR remote sensing 
of vegetation cover. Most of a ground-based SAR system is 
based on rail system, so its observation area is very limited. 
We have developed a high resolution experimental 
automotive-SAR system for land application. Unlike rail-
based SAR systems, an automotive-SAR system provides 
large observation area of ground cover and can be used in 
various kinds of land applications. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the 
automotive-SAR system is described.  Section III describes 
the development and the evaluation of the system. Section 
IV addresses the SAR image results which are conducted 
during SAR data acquisition campaign to show the 
feasibility for land application. 
II. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
The system described in Figure 1 consists of arbitrary 
waveform generator (AWG) module, amplifier (AMP) 
module, receiver (RCV) module, signal processor (PRC) 
module, antenna module, and power module.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Block diagram of automotive-SAR system. 
We employ an arbitrary waveform generator (N8241A) 
for the generation of baseband I/Q signal and the baseband 
signal is up-converted by vector signal generator (E8267D). 
Utilizing commercial off-the-shelf technology, operating 
frequency can be easily varied for other applications. The 
signal waveform of this system is Linear Frequency 
Modulation (LFM) chirp pulse with wide bandwidth. 
Therefore, very high resolution SAR image of sub-meter in 
range direction can be obtained. AWG also provides stable 
trigger signal for ON/OFF control of AMP and RCV module 
and for sampling timing of PRC. Because of low power level 
of AWG module, we develop an AMP module with the high 
power level to extend the maximum detection range. As 
mentioned earlier, the AMP module is controlled by 
ON/OFF trigger signal to avoid amplification of noise level 
during the receiving window time. 
In order to avoid I/Q imbalance problem, we adapt 
Intermediate Frequency (IF) sampling, and Digital Down 
Conversion (DDC) scheme is used to obtain I/Q signals. The 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

sampling rate is more than gigahertz with high bit resolution, 
and as a result, the recorded data rate is also gigahertz. 
Figure 2 shows the overall SAR system. In order to avoid 
internal leakage, bi-static type is considered. Due to the short 
period of time for development and validation, we need to 
make use of standard horn type antenna with the high gain 
and the feed and adaptor type provides linear polarization.  
 
 
 
    
 
Figure 2.  Automotive-SAR system. 
By change of feed direction, dual or quad polarization 
can be supported. The receiving channel can be expanded up 
to 4 channels by additional ADC board in PRC module. 
Therefore, this system can be used for interferometric SAR 
(InSAR) and/or polarimetric SAR (PolSAR) application. 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION OF  
AUTOMOTIVE-SAR SYSTEM 
The SAR system, as shown in Figure 3, is installed in 
vehicle which provides power supply utilizing vehicle 
battery and invertor. Antenna module is mounted on top of 
vehicle. The elevation of antenna can be easily controlled by 
using tripod. The system is controlled by laptop notebook 
which means that the system could be operated in the 
moving vehicle. 
 
    
 
Figure 3.  Installation of automotive-SAR system. 
The system operation frequency in the experiment is 10 
GHz. The bandwidth of LFM chirp is 500 MHz, so the ideal 
range resolution of 0.3 meter can be expected. The velocity 
of vehicle is about 80 km/h, and the antenna beam width is 
approximately 4 deg. Therefore, Doppler bandwidth can be 
obtained about 104 Hz and the expected resolution is 0.2 m 
in azimuth. The PRF is set to 1 KHz so that the processing 
gain in azimuth direction can be very high after aperture 
synthesizing. 
In order to validate the system performance, some of 
experiment results are presented. The height of the road is 
normally more than 20 m. Also, the road condition is very 
important. The road should be flat and straight. The SAR 
image from first field work is described in Figure 4. The 
system has no squint angle and beam width is narrow. 
Therefore, Doppler centroid is close to zero and Doppler 
estimation can be very simple. Because the road condition is 
very flat and straight, the motion factor of automotive-SAR 
system is very stable. Therefore, a motion compensation 
process can be relatively simple compared to airborne SAR 
case. Contrast-based autofocusing is used for velocity 
estimation. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  First SAR image. 
In order to verify the system performance, we do 
calibration field work using passive calibrator as shown in 
Figure 5 and Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 5.  SAR image of calibration field. 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

 
 
Figure 6.  Response of passive calibrator. 
Several corner reflectors with diameter of 1 m and 0.5 m 
are used as passive calibrator. These are located in rice field 
with very low backscattering. Figure 7 shows the profile of 
the corner reflector response in range and azimuth direction. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  IRF Profile in range and azimuth direction. 
Because of wide bandwidth LFM chirp waveform, slant 
range resolution can be 0.3 m in theory. Actual resolution of 
0.4 m can be obtained. Azimuth resolution of 0.2 m, 
depending on Doppler bandwidth, can be also obtained. 
TABLE I.  
IRF PERFORMANCE 
Range Profile 
Resolution 
0.4 
[m] 
PSLR 
-22.1 
[dB] 
ISLR 
-20.2 
[dB] 
Azimuth Profile 
Resolution 
0.2 
[m] 
PSLR 
-22.3 
[dB] 
ISLR 
.17.1 
[dB] 
 
For evaluation of SAR systems, Impulse Response 
Function (IRF) is recognized as the basic and most 
representative performance parameter in SAR community. 
The experiment result of IRF performance, consisting of 
resolution, peak to sidelobe ratio (PSLR), and integrated 
sidelobe ratio (ISLR), is shown in Table 1.  
IV. 
SAR IMAGES FOR LAND APPLICATION 
For land observation application, several SAR images 
were obtained during SAR data acquisition campaign. The 
first SAR image obtained by the automotive-SAR system is 
depicted in Figure 8. By changing the horn antenna, we can 
get the full polarization SAR images. The image scene area 
is nearby seawall area. There are various kinds of scatterer 
scene such as water area, rice field, wet land and reed grass. 
Scene size is 4 km x 1.5 km. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Polarization SAR image. 
For land observation, another SAR image of rice field is 
presented in Figure 9. Image scene size is 1 km x 400 m and 
polarization is VV. The vehicle is moving up on the left of 
image scene. As shown in Figure 9, some of rice field is 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

already under cultivation and the cultivated direction is well 
described in SAR image. In this image, radar shadow is 
visible because the data is acquired with low altitude. In right 
middle of image, there is very bright object nearby dark 
scene because of man-made object and water bank for fish 
hatchery. 
 
 
Figure 9.  SAR image – rice field. 
For another image, Figure 10 shows the rice field and 
image scene size is 500 m x 1 km. In this image, radar 
shadow is visible because of rice terrace. In this case, the test 
site is middle of mountain and the vehicle is moving right on 
the top of the image scene. The ground based SAR system is 
near range system so there is no offset from imaging vehicle. 
 
 
Figure 10.  SAR image – rice terrace area. 
The last SAR image is acquired from mudflats area, as 
shown in Figure 11. This image can be used for biomass 
study. 
 
 
Figure 11.  SAR Image - mudflats. 
As mentioned in the introduction, almost all ground-
based systems are based on rail system. Therefore, the 
observation area, such as Swath width and detection range, is 
very limited. In rail system, the synthetic aperture is realized 
by moving the antenna system along a linear rail. So, image 
size in azimuth is limited by physical length of rail. Tarchi et 
al. [1] suggest the ground-based InSAR system for landslide 
monitoring. But, its resolution is 4 x 4 meter and observation 
length is 2.8 meter in azimuth. Sato et al. [7] propose a 
ground-based SAR system with resolution of 1 x 5 meter. 
But, its observation area is still limited in 500 x 500 meter. 
We developed an automotive-SAR system which is installed 
on the top of vehicle, so we could take the image of wide 
area by moving the long distance up to 4 km. The resolution 
performance is also better than the previous ground-based 
SAR systems. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, an automotive-SAR system for land 
observation was proposed with various scenes of SAR image. 
The system is equipped in a vehicle, so motion effect is very 
stable compared to airborne SAR system. Unlike most of the 
other ground-based SAR systems, the proposed automotive-
SAR system takes advantage of large observation coverage. 
In order to validate the system performance, calibration field 
work is performed using passive corner reflector. Finally, 
various kinds of scenes are presented to verify the possibility 
for land applications.  
Because receiving channel can be easily expanded up to 
4 channels, this system could be used for along-track and 
across-track interferometry SAR applications. Furthermore, 
PolSAR and PolInSAR applications can be also possible 
with a minor modification of antenna module. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Tarchi, D. Leval, and A. J. Sieber, "SAR interferometric 
techniques from ground based system for the monitoring of 
landslides", IEEE Proceedings of International Geoscience 
and Remote Sensing Symposium, IGARSS 2000, vol. 6, 2000, 
pp. 2756-2758. 
[2] M. Pieraccini, G. Luzi, and C. Atzeni, "Ground-based 
interferometric SAR for terrain elevation mapping", IET 
Electronics Letters, vol. 36, no. 16, 2000, pp. 1416-1417. 
[3] M. Pieraccini, G. Luzi, and C. Atzeni. "Terrain mapping by 
ground-based interferometric radar", IEEE Transactions on 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 39, no. 10, 2001, pp. 
2176-2181. 
[4] G. Luzi, et al., "Ground-based radar interferometry for 
landslides 
monitoring: 
atmospheric 
and 
instrumental 
decorrelation 
sources 
on 
experimental 
data", 
IEEE 
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 42, no. 
11, 2004, pp. 2454-2466. 
[5] A. Lingua, D. Piatti, and F. Rinaudo, "Remote monitoring of 
a landslide using an integration of GB-INSAR and LIDAR 
techniques", 
The 
International 
Archives 
of 
the 
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information 
Sciences, vol. 37, 2008, pp. 133-139. 
[6] Z. S. Zhou, W. M. Boerner, and M. Sato, "Development of a 
ground-based polarimetric broadband SAR system for 
noninvasive ground-truth validation in vegetation monitoring", 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 
42, no. 9, 2004, pp. 1803-1810. 
[7] M. Sato, Z. S. Zhou, T. Hamasaki, and W. M. Boerner, 
"Development of a ground-based synthetic aperture radar 
(GB-SAR) system and its applications to environment 
monitoring and disaster prevention", POLINSAR 2005 
Workshop, 
European 
Space 
Agency 
(ESA) 
Special 
Publication, vol. 586, 2005. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-397-1
SPACOMM 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

