Fast and Efficient Satellite Imagery Fusion Using DT-CWT and WZP 
 
Yonghyun Kim 
Dept. of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering 
Seoul National University 
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
email: yhkeen@gmail.com 
Jaehong Oh 
Dept. of Civil Engineering 
Chonnam National University 
Gwangju, Republic of Korea 
email: ojh@chonnam.ac.kr 
Yongil Kim 
Dept. of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering 
Seoul National University 
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
email: yik@snu.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract—Among the various image fusion methods, wavelet-
based method provides superior radiometric quality. However, 
fusion processing is not simple or flexible because many low- 
and high-frequency subbands are often produced in the 
wavelet domain. To address this issue, a novel dual-tree 
complex wavelet fusion method that uses wavelet domain zero-
padding (WZP) is proposed. Experiments conducted using 
high-resolution satellite images demonstrated promising 
results in terms of computation cost. 
Keywords-image fusion; dual-tree complex wavelet; wavelet 
domain zero-padding. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Satellite imaging sensors typically supply a low-
resolution multispectral (LRM) image and a high-resolution 
panchromatic (HRP) image separately because of physical 
and technological constraints [1]. Among the many image 
fusion methods that are currently available, discrete wavelet 
transform (DWT) methods provide superior fused images 
that maintain the radiometric information of the LRM image. 
Although the DWT-based methods are spectrally consistent, 
there are two problems. First, DWT is shift-variant and 
exhibits artifacts because of aliasing in the fused image [2]. 
Second, these fusion methods have a high computation cost 
and complexity. The first problem can be overcome by the 
dual-tree complex wavelet transform (DT-CWT), which is 
nearly shift-invariant and directionally selective in two or 
more dimensions [3]. Additionally, if fused data from 
specific fusion method are nearly identical with other fused 
data from a more computationally efficient method, the latter 
method is ideal for a large quantity of remote sensing data. 
This paper proposes a fast and efficient DT-CWT fusion 
method to address the second problem. In Section 2, the 
proposed DT-CWT fusion method is presented and result 
and conclusion are drawn in Section 3. 
II. 
DT-CWT AND IMAGE FUSION 
A. DT-CWT 
Kingsbury [4] introduced a new type of wavelet 
transform known as the DT-CWT, which exhibits a shift-
invariant property and improves directional resolution 
compared with the DWT. The DT-CWT with the complex 
wavelet function and complex scaling function decomposes 
an image into one complex scaling subband and six complex 
wavelet subbands at each decomposition level. 
B. Perfect Reconstruction with WZP 
An image can be decomposed into a series of low- and 
high-frequency subbands using the specific wavelet 
transform. Perfect reconstruction (PR) means that the final 
image is the same as the original image. WZP was used to 
produce super-resolved imagery by filling the unknown 
high-frequency subbands with zeros and applying the inverse 
wavelet transform [5]. The WZP method can be conversely 
applied in image fusion. That is, the known low-frequency 
subbands can be filled with zeros. Then, by performing the 
inverse wavelet transform, only a single high-frequency 
image in the spatial domain is produced. This approach can 
be applied to the DT-CWT. That is, the low frequency of the 
original image can be easily discarded. The PR condition and 
WZP method of the DT-CWT are shown in Figure 1. This 
approach can be simply implemented as an additive wavelet 
method. 
C. Proposed DT-CWT Fusion Method 
The procedure of the proposed DT-CWT with additive-
wavelet (AW) fusion method can be summarized as follows: 
1) Perform histogram matching between the HRP image 
and intensity image. 
2) Decompose only the histogram-matched HRP image. 
3) The low-frequency subbands of the decomposed HRP 
image are filled with zeros. 
4) An inverse DT-CWT (IDT-CWT) is conducted to 
produce the wavelet plane (WP). The WP is the sum of the 
high frequencies and contains the detailed geometric 
information of the HRP image. 
5) The WP is added to the resized LRM image, and 
finally, the fused HRM image is generated. 
This fusion method can produce the same type of fused 
imagery produced by the conventional AW methods. 
However, the proposed method is simpler and more flexible 
in that this method fused in the spatial domain. The method 
is illustrated in Figure 2. 
III. 
RESULT AND CONCLUSION 
In this study, we used WorldView-2 satellite images. In 
our experiments, the LRM image size was 512 × 512 pixels, 
and the HRP image size was 2048 × 2048 pixels. We 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

compare our fusion method with DT-CWT with the 
substitute-wavelet (SW) method [3]. We compared the 
fusion processing time based on the computation cost. The 
reported times were measured in the Matlab 2014b 
environment and on a quad-core 2.5 GHz personal computer 
platform using the average elapsed time of 20 trials. Table I 
demonstrates the elapsed time. The DT-CWT with the SW 
method was very slow because of the decomposition of the 
LRM image and the substitution process in the wavelet 
domain. On the other hands, the proposed method is nearly 
five times faster than the DT-CWT with the SW method. If 
the histogram matching were performed with each LRM 
image rather than the intensity image, the elapsed time would 
be increased in proportion to the total number of bands. Most 
significantly, 
the proposed 
fusion 
method increases 
flexibility because the wavelet domain fusion is simplified to 
the spatial domain by adopting the WZP method. Also, Table 
II shows the performance comparisons of the fused images. 
The results indicated that the proposed fusion method 
provides a less distorted fused image compared with DT-
CWT with SW method. Thus, the proposed approach 
facilitates the general and less computationally intensive 
fusion method using the DT-CWT.  
 
TABLE I.  
ELAPSED TIME COMPARISON 
Fusion Methods 
Elapsed Time (Sec) 
DT-CWT with SW [3] 
17.2759 
Proposed method 
3.2554 
TABLE II.  
QUALITY INDICES 
Fusion Methods 
Dλ 
DS 
QNR 
DT-CWT with SW [3] 
0.0269 
0.0172 
0.9564 
Proposed method 
0.0249 
0.0165 
0.9590 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported by NRF (National Research 
Foundation) grant funded by the South Korea Government 
(NRF-2015M1A3A3A02014673, 
and 
NRF-
2014R1A1A1001995). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. Wang, D. Ziou, C. Armenakis, D. Li, and Q. Li, “A 
comparative analysis of image fusion methods,” IEEE Trans. 
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 6, Jun. 2005, pp. 1391-
1402. 
[2] C. Thomas, T. Ranchin, L. Wald, and J. Chanussot, 
“Synthesis of multispectral images to high spatial resolution: 
a critical review of fusion methods based on remote sensing 
physics,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 46, no. 5, 
May 2008, pp. 1301-1312. 
[3] S. Ioannidou and V. Karathanassi, “Investigation of the dual-
tree complex and shift-invariant discrete wavelet transforms 
on quickbird image fusion,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., 
vol. 4, no. 1, Jan. 2007, pp. 166-170. 
[4] N. Kingsbury, “Complex wavelets for shift invariant analysis 
and filtering of signals,” Appl. Comput. Harmonic Anal., vol. 
10, no. 3, May 2001, pp. 234-253. 
[5] A. Temizel and T. Vlachos, “Wavelet domain image 
resolution enhancement using cycle-spinning,” Electron. Lett., 
vol. 41, no. 3, Feb. 2005, pp. 119-121. 
 
Figure 1. PR condition and WZP of the DT-CWT. 
 
Figure 2. Proposed DT-CWT fusion method with the AW method. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-453-4
SPACOMM 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (includes RESENS 2016)

