System Development and Spacecraft Testing of the Morehead State University 
Ground Station 
Timothy Pham, Jason Liao. E.J.Wyatt 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, California, USA 
e-mail: {Tim.Pham, Jason.Liao, E.J.Wyatt}@jpl.nasa.gov 
Benjamin Malphrus, Jeffrey Kruth, Robert Kroll, 
Michael.Combs, Tobias Gedenk, Sarah Wilczewski, 
Jacob Lewis, Alex Roberts, Emily Mattle, Chloe Hart 
Space Science Center, Morehead State University 
Morehead, Kentucky, USA 
e-mail: {b.malphrus, j.kruth, r.kroll, m.combs, tgedenk, 
sewilczewski, fjlewis, ajroberts3, ejmattle, 
cmhart}@moreheadstate.edu
 
 
Abstract— In support of the Lunar IceCube mission, as well as 
other CubeSats to be launched on the upcoming NASA 
Exploration Mission 1, the 21-m ground antenna at the 
Morehead State University in Kentucky, United States is under 
development to augment its telemetry, tracking and command 
capability at X-band (previous capability is limited to S-band). 
The new system is expected to be operational in 2020.  This is 
the first collaboration between National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration’s Deep Space Network (DSN) and university in 
ground system development.  It will result in a university’s 
tracking station fully compatible with the DSN and thus 
increase DSN support to mission users with more antenna 
assets.   The new hybrid system architecture combines 
commercially available RF components, custom-designed 
microwave feed for Morehead antenna, and specialized DSN 
digital equipment.  Such an approach minimizes the 
implementation cost, offers learning opportunity for the 
students 
to 
gain 
experience 
in 
system 
design 
and 
implementation, 
and maximizes 
system capability 
and 
compatibility with the DSN.  The ground station at the 
Morehead State University will handle signal transmission to 
and reception from spacecraft, and other signal processing 
functions such as modulation/demodulation, decoding, etc.  
The backend equipment at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in 
Pasadena, California will be responsible for data interface to 
the mission users.  This architecture makes the Morehead 
antenna appears as one of the DSN antennas.  Since early 2018, 
the 21-m ground system at Morehead has been upgraded with 
capability to receive spacecraft signal at X-band and process 
its telemetry and Doppler data.  In mid 2019, the Morehead 
system will be further enhanced with a transmit capability for 
spacecraft command and ranging.   Testing with spacecraft 
currently in operation such as Osiris Rex, MAVEN and 
Hayabusa2 is ongoing in an effort to validate system capability 
and characterize system performance.  Preliminary results 
indicate that the downlink system is functional.  They also 
enable assessment of the Gain-to-System Noise Temperature 
ratio (G/T) of the Morehead 21-m antenna. 
Keywords - Morehead State antenna; ground system; Lunar 
IceCube. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
CubeSats and other small satellites are increasingly used 
for Earth remote sensing, for science research, and for 
unique communications activities, all of which have 
increasing data throughput requirements.  In addition, 
CubeSats are being planned for interplanetary research, with 
13 CubeSats slated to fly on the NASA's Exploration 
Mission-1 (EM-1) in 2020, opening the door for CubeSat 
and smallsat exploration of the solar system.  As these 
CubeSat missions venture to the distance of the moon and 
beyond to other bodies within the Solar System, they require 
a ground tracking system with greater capabilities than 
previously required for low Earth orbiters.  Performance 
attributes in the ground system such as large antenna, high 
gain efficiency, operation at higher performing X-band 
frequency, low noise and low-loss equipment, most efficient 
forward error correction coding, high transmitting power, 
etc. become critical to the communications with deep space 
spacecraft.  
Given the expected significant increase in CubeSat 
missions, beyond what is currently supported by the NASA 
Deep Space Network (DSN), the NASA Advanced 
Exploration Systems (AES) Program has been funding an 
implementation at the Morehead State University to enable 
its 21-m antenna to support the Lunar IceCube mission, as 
well as other EM-1 CubeSats.  Leveraging on the expertise 
in deep space communications of the Deep Space Network, 
a partnership between the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 
in California, United States and the Morehead State 
University (MSU) in Kentucky, U.S., was established to aid 
the development of ground station at Morehead, and to 
develop a strategy that would enhance DSN capabilities by 
utilizing existing non-NASA assets (i.e., university and non-
profit radio astronomy observatories).  Our goal is to build a 
ground station that is capable of deep space communications 
and tracking, with maximum compatibility with the DSN, 
and within limited budget.  The approach we took is to 
optimally combine specialized DSN equipment with those 
available commercially. This hybrid system minimizes 
1
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

development cost; saving the non-recurring engineering cost 
on signal processing equipment already exist in the DSN.  
The rest of the system is designed by the Morehead State 
technical staff and students, from commercially available 
products; thus, offers a learning opportunity to the students 
and, at the same time, meeting the low-cost objective. 
In Section 2 of this paper, we describe the Morehead 
ground system architecture that strives for maximum 
capability with a minimum cost, using the hybrid approach 
mentioned above.   Such an architecture allows the MSU 
ground system to serve as a node on the Deep Space 
Network, which could help to offset the tracking load on the 
DSN for certain class of missions such as CubeSats.  In 
Section 3, we present a nominal operational concept on how 
the system is expected to operate.  Telemetry, tracking and 
command data flows will be described, along with service 
management aspects such as the antenna scheduling and 
generation of predicted Doppler frequencies, antenna 
pointing, and signal conditions.   We highlight key system 
performance metrics in Section 4.  Finally, Section 5 
captures some preliminary test results with a few spacecraft 
currently in operation, such as Osiris Rex, MAVEN and 
Hayabusa2.   
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
Prior to this implementation effort, which started in 2016, 
the Morehead State University 21-m antenna has been used 
to support several educational research picosatellites and 
nanosatellites such as KySat-1, KySat-2, and the Cosmic X-
band Background Nanosat series (CXBN and CXBN-2).  
The system was also used for short-term capability 
demonstrations with NASA flight mission such as the Lunar 
Reconnaissance Orbiter and the Thermosphere, Ionosphere, 
Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED) [1].  Most 
recently, the system served as the primary ground station for 
the Arcsecond Space Telescope Enabling Research in 
Astrophysics (ASTERIA) mission [2], funded by the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in collaboration with the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).  The 21-m 
antenna, prior to this upgrade, was equipped with a 
replaceable feed that can support operations at various 
frequencies in the Radio Frequency (RF), specifically the 
UHF-band (400- 470 MHz), L-band (1.4 – 1.7 GHz), S-
band (2.2 – 2.5 GHz), C-band (4.8 - 5 GHz), X-band (7.0 – 
7.8 GHz), and Ku-band (11.2 – 12.7 GHz).   Signal 
reception is available at all these frequency bands and 
transmission is available at UHF and S-band. 
For the EM-1 CubeSat missions, communications 
between flight and ground systems will be done at X-band 
to maximize the link performance.  The X-band capability 
will be supported by new equipment (antenna feed, 
transmitter, receiver, network connections, frequency 
reference, etc.) and new operational processes (antenna 
scheduling, spacecraft pointing and doppler prediction, data 
delivery, etc.) described in this paper.  The only thing that is 
common with the previous S-band and UHF systems is the 
common infrastructure such as antenna and electrical power.  
The ground system will have new equipment to transmit 
signal at 7.1-7.2 GHz and to receive spacecraft signal at 8.4-
8.5 GHz.  A new X-band antenna feed will need to be 
developed.  On the uplink, a 2-kW transmitter will be 
deployed, along with the exciter electronics for generation 
of command and ranging signals.  On the downlink, a 
cryogenic low noise amplifier operating at a very low noise 
temperature of 11 Kelvins will help to maximize the signal 
detection.  A low-loss DSN-based receiver with its 
associated telemetry decoding and ranging processors that 
are optimized for low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) 
condition normally seen in deep space communications will 
also be deployed.  These enhancements, relative to 
capability in previous missions, extend the communications 
to spacecraft that travel to the Moon and beyond – a 1000 
times further than the low Earth orbits.    
For past mission support, the MSU ground station could 
transmit telecommand to spacecraft and receive telemetry 
data; however, there was no ranging measurement required 
for the navigation of these nanosatellites.  For future 
missions like the Lunar IceCube, ranging capability is 
essential in navigating the spacecraft to the moon.  Another 
new challenge is the use of highly efficient error correcting 
codes, such as Turbo codes, which perform very close to the 
Shannon limit of the information channel capacity.  
Unfortunately, there was difficulty in finding commercial 
products that could support these two functions within 
available budget.  As a result, a hybrid architecture that 
merges the university-developed hardware with some DSN-
developed signal processing components was selected.  The 
university focuses on RF analog components, using 
commercial parts available from other projects, as well as 
some newly procured components.  The digital portion of 
the system that process command, telemetry and radiometric 
(Doppler and ranging) are replica of DSN equipment.  This 
architecture enables the MSU ground station to act as a 
DSN node of operations since it has the same data interfaces 
to mission users as other DSN antennas.  Since the DSN-
provided equipment supports the data interfaces in 
compliance with the Consultative Committee for Space Data 
Systems (CCSDS) specifications, the MSU system has an 
inherent benefit of interoperability with other ground 
stations worldwide that are CCSDS compliant. 
Figure 1 shows the new architecture of the Morehead 
ground station that is being developed.  The Mission 
Operation Center (MOC) interfaces with the Morehead 
Station ground station via the DSN Deep Space Operation 
Center (DSOC).  Command data could be sent from the 
MOC directly to the Uplink (UPL) equipment at MSU.  
Telemetry processing at MSU produces the received 
telemetry frames, which are then relayed to the Telemetry 
Tracking Delivery (TTD) at JPL before being delivered to 
the MOC.  The same delivery occurs with radiometric data 
of Doppler and ranging measurements.   The network 
connection between Morehead State University and the 
Deep Space Operation Center at JPL is via the NASA 
2
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Mission Backbone Network.  This network connection has 
high redundancy and reliability, making it best suited for 
mission operations.  The selected bandwidth of this 
connection is based on considerations of expected data rate 
needed for mission support and the annual rental cost.  The 
Lunar IceCube and other EM-1 CubeSats have a maximum 
data rate under 1 Mbps.  A decision was made to set the 
leased bandwidth at 5 Mbps to provide some flexibility for 
expanded operational needs. 
 
 
Figure 1.  System architecture for the new X-band capability 
There is also other ancillary equipment needed for ground 
station testing, calibration and operation monitoring, besides 
those used for telecommand and telemetry.  The Test 
Translator with a standard CCSDS transponder ratio of 
880/749 is used to convert the uplink signal from a 
transmitted frequency of ~7.2 GHz to a received signal at 
~8.4 GHz.  With the Translator loopback, the ranging delay 
within the ground system can be precisely measured.  This 
station delay is then removed from the ranging 
measurements observed during spacecraft tracking in order 
to properly determine the spacecraft range.  The loop back 
capability also enables a partial verification of the uplink 
and downlink equipment.  By configuring the uplink 
equipment to generate a command data stream, feeding that 
signal to the downlink equipment, and being able to extract 
telemetry data, proper operation of uplink signal generation 
and downlink telemetry processing can be verified. 
Another component that also aids with the monitoring of 
system performance is the Noise Diode Assembly (NDA).  
This equipment injects a known noise power into the system 
at a periodic frequency.  By looking at the difference in 
power levels with and without the added noise, one can 
determine the noise temperature of the ground system.  At 
MSU, such calibration is expected to be undertaken at the 
start of the pass, rather than continually through the pass as it 
is done in the DSN antennas.  This is a trade-off for a simpler 
design in the noise calibration. 
III. 
OPERATIONAL CONCEPT 
In this section, we first describe the data interfaces with 
mission users and their spacecraft.  Then, we’ll focus on 
service management aspects of the operations, which 
include preparation for the tracking pass, as well as 
equipment monitoring during the pass. 
For telemetry processing, as indicated in Figure 1, the 
signal received at the 21-m antenna is amplified by the 
cryogenic low noise amplifier and down-converted to an IF 
frequency around 300 MHz.  The signal is then routed from 
the antenna to the mission control room, about 1 km away, 
via the fiberoptic link.  The IF signal is then fed into an 
FPGA-based receiver that will digitize, demodulate and 
decode the signal.  The extracted telemetry frames are sent to 
JPL by the Data Capture and Delivery (DCD) assembly.  As 
the name implies, the DCD also captures and archives the 
data in short term, giving the option to retransmit the data 
should the network connection to JPL be temporarily down.  
At JPL, the telemetry frames are delivered to the mission 
operation system via an interface compliant with the CCSDS 
3
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

Space Link Extension (SLE) of Return All Frames or Return 
Channel Frames.  Telemetry frames can also be further 
processed at JPL into packets or file products under the 
CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP), for missions that 
require this type of product to make it easier for mission 
operations.  However, for Lunar IceCube and other EM-1 
CubeSats, the mission interface is at the frame level, under 
the Return All Frames or Return Channel Frames service.  
For radiometric data, the carrier phase and ranging phase 
measurements of both uplink and downlink are relayed to 
JPL via the DCD.  The information is packed into JPL-
specific data format and delivered in real time to mission 
operation system.  The same information can also be 
packaged in the CCSDS Track Data Message (TDM) format, 
for maximum interoperability with users who use TDM 
format.  From these data products, the mission navigation 
team can compute the observed Doppler and ranging, which 
then helps them with orbit determination for spacecraft 
navigation 
For command data, mission operation system will 
directly connect to the Uplink equipment at Morehead, using 
the CCSDS Space Link Extension Forward Command Link 
Transmission Unit (CLTU) interface specification.  This 
SLE interface also enables user authentication and allows the 
mission operation team to control the radiation of commands 
to their spacecraft.  
 
To enable data delivery between mission users and their 
respective spacecraft, many aspects of service management 
need to be considered. Service management refers to the 
antenna scheduling, generation of spacecraft prediction data, 
equipment monitoring and configuration management.   
Several service management interfaces are reflected in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Service management data flow. 
(1) Antenna Scheduling – The MSU antenna is schedulable 
by the DSN Scheduling.  This allows for integrated 
support on missions, especially those that use both 
Morehead and DSN antennas.  Information on any 
planned antenna maintenance, or science-related 
activities such as radio astronomy observations, will be 
inputted by the MSU team into the DSN schedule to 
indicate the time when the antenna is not available.  
The remaining time is open for spacecraft tracking, 
freely assigned by the DSN Scheduling.  Through a 
web browser or application program interfaces, the 
operation team at Morehead would be aware of 
upcoming tracks and make necessary preparation for 
them. 
(2) Signal Predictions – Once a track is scheduled, 
predictions on the expected Doppler frequency, antenna 
pointing and signal conditions (e.g., data rates, signal 
power, coding and modulation scheme, times of signal 
arrival and exit) are generated by the Service 
Preparation Subsystem (SPS) at JPL.  The required 
inputs for this processing are spacecraft ephemeris and 
expected spacecraft communications configuration 
(e.g., planned data rate, coding/modulation scheme, 
start and stop time of signal acquisition).  They are 
submitted by the mission operation team for their 
respective spacecraft.  These prediction data products 
are automatically pulled by the Monitor/Control (M&C) 
processing at Morehead via a REST (Representative 
State Transfer) query based on the tracking schedule.  
The data are then distributed to appropriate equipment 
at Morehead - predicted pointing go to the antenna 
controller; 
expected 
downlink 
frequencies 
with 
imbedded Doppler and the expected signal conditions 
are given to the receiver; coding configuration is given 
to the decoder; uplink frequencies are given to the 
uplink controller, along with other configuration 
information necessary for command and ranging signal 
generation.    The sequence of events for a given pass, 
generated by the SPS, would also indicate the start and 
stop time of the track, as well as any configuration 
changes (e.g., date rate) in mid track.  With this 
information, the Monitor & Control at the MSU can 
automatically configure the equipment for the track and 
reconfigure the link to accommodate any subsequent 
changes in mid pass.   
(3) Monitor data – Monitor data from all equipment is 
collected by the MSU M&C and presented to the MSU 
operators – either an operating staff member or 
students.  Monitor data from the DSN-provided 
equipment, because of the way it was built to work with 
the DSN monitor control infrastructure, which is not 
deployed 
at 
Morehead 
due 
to 
implementation 
constraints, requires a special application program 
interface to be built to route the data to the MSU M&C.  
At this point, monitor data is locally stored at the MSU, 
rather than being routed to the DSOC and subsequently 
provided to MOC.  In the case of anomalous event, 
monitor data can be extracted and delivered to the 
mission operation team for post-pass diagnostics.    
 
Voice communications link – The MSU team will be 
able to exchange information with the DSN operations and 
mission operation teams via the standard DSN operational 
voice networks.  The voice equipment supplied at MSU is 
4
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

the same as those used in the DSN operations center.  Voice-
over-internet-protocol data are flown over the same 
communications link that supports telemetry, command and 
radiometric data delivery. 
 
IV. 
SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 
Table 1 shows the improvement in the system capability 
at X-band, before and after this upgrade. By employing a 
cryogenic low noise amplifier, the system noise temperature 
is expected to drop by a factor of two, from 215 K to under 
100K, yielding a higher signal to noise ratio and making 
signal detection much easier.  Coupled with the use of more 
complex but highly efficient forward error coding such as 
Turbo or Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, the 
system can operate at a much lower signal power threshold, 
within 1 dB of the Shannon limit of information channel 
capacity.     
TABLE I.  
PRE AND POST UPGRADE PERFORMANCE 
 
The use of the Hydrogen MASER significantly improves 
the timing accuracy, by an order of magnitude compared to 
the previous reference to the Global Position System.  This 
in turn improves the accuracy of radiometric data (i.e., 
reducing the noise in Doppler and ranging measurements), 
as well as telemetry data time tag.   
Two significant features being added to the system with 
this upgrade are the ability to uplink at X-band and to 
conduct ranging.  For ranging measurements, both DSN-
specific sequential ranging [3] and pseudo-noise ranging [4] 
are supported.  A full CCSDS-compliant pseudo-noise 
ranging is expected to be available in 2019.  
V. 
SPACECRAFT TESTING 
Because the collecting aperture of the 21-m antenna at 
Morehead is about 40% that of the 34-m antennas in the 
DSN, and the system noise temperature is about 4 times 
higher, there is about 10 dB difference in the received G/T.  
Thus, only a subset of X-band missions currently supported 
by the DSN that have sufficiently large link margin, above 
10 dB, can be tracked by the Morehead antenna on a non-
interfering basis, i.e., without requiring spacecraft to make 
any change in its downlink data rate.   MAVEN, a Mars 
orbiter currently at low data rate of 23 symbols/s, provides a 
perfect opportunity for Morehead antenna to track it and be 
able to decode telemetry data.  Osiris-Rex and Hayabusa2 
signals, due to the use of higher data rate, leave little link 
margin to allow decoder lock up.  Thus, Morehead tracking 
of Osiris Rex and Hayabusa2 can achieve carrier 
demodulation and symbol synchronization, but would not be 
able to decode the telemetry data.   
Figure 3 shows the received carrier SNR (Pc/No) and 
symbol SNR (SSNR) from Hayabusa2 at both Morehead 
21-m (designated as Deep Space Station DSS-17) and DSN 
34-m antenna (DSS-25 at Goldstone, California).  Both 
measurements indicate a G/T difference of 11.3 dB. 
For Osiris Rex, Figure 4 shows a difference of 10.3 dB 
between the two sites (Morehead DSS-17 and Goldstone 
DSS-24), based on PcNo measurements.   
  
 
 
Figure 3.  Hayabusa-2 Carrier and symbol SNR  
 
Figure 4.  Osiris Carrier SNR  
Similarly, Figure 5 shows measurement with MAVEN 
spacecraft.   The PcNo difference was about 11.0 dB; 
however, due to unknown cause, we were not able to 
achieve subcarrier lock at Morehead station.  As a result, the 
symbol synchronization suffered excessive degradation, 
 
Performance Measure 
 
Pre-Upgrade  
Post-Upgrade 
X-Band Frequency Range 
7.0 – 7.8 GHz 
7.0 – 8.5 GHz 
LNA Temperature 
70 K 
< 20 K 
System Noise Temperature  
215 K 
<100 K 
Antenna Gain 
62 dBi (@7.7 GHz) 
62.7 dBi (@8.4 GHz) 
System Noise Spectral Density 
-175 dBm/Hz 
<-178 dBm/Hz 
G/T at 5° Elevation 
37.5 dB/K 
40.4 dB/K 
Time Standard 
GPS (40 ns) 
Hydrogen maser (1 ns/day) 
EIRP 
N/A 
93.7 dBW 
HPBW 
0.124 deg 
0.115 deg 
SLE Compliance 
N/A 
Yes 
CCSDS Compliance 
N/A 
Yes 
Forward Error Coding 
Reed Solomon/Convolutional 
Reed Solomon/Convolutional, 
Turbo, Low Density Parity Check 
Radiometric 
Angle, Doppler 
Angle, Doppler, Ranging 
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
15.00
16.00
17.00
18.00
19.00
20.00
21.00
22.00
23.00
24.00
PcNo, dB
Time, Hr
Hayabusa2, DOY277, Carrier SNR
DSS-17, Avg=27.2
DSS25, Avg=38.5
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
15.00
16.00
17.00
18.00
19.00
20.00
21.00
22.00
23.00
24.00
SSNR, dB
Time, Hr
Hayabusa2, DOY277, Symbol SNR
DSS-17, Avg=-5.7
DSS25, Avg=5.7
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
21.00
21.50
22.00
22.50
23.00
23.50
24.00
PcNo, dB
Time, Hr
Osiris-Rex, DOY277, Carrier SNR
DSS-17, Avg=23.9
DSS24, Avg=34.2
5
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

resulted in a 17 dB difference between Morehead and DSN 
antennas.   
 
 
 
Figure 5.  MAVEN Carrier and symbol SNR  
Given the difficulty with achieving subcarrier lock and 
symbol synchronization with Osiris-Rex and MAVEN, we 
plan to repeat these tests in the near future to collect more 
data on the performance and to demonstrate a complete data 
processing all the way to telemetry frame decoding.  We 
also plan to conduct testing with MarCO spacecraft [5], with 
support from the mission to reduce the data rate down to the 
level appropriate for the Morehead antenna for a full 
decoding. 
One may notice that in all three tests, the data segment of 
Morehead was much shorter than the DSN track.  This is 
due to limited test time available, because of ongoing 
support to the Asteria mission.     
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In summary, this paper describes a tracking ground 
station being developed at the Morehead State University 
that 
optimally 
combines 
commercial 
products 
and 
specialized equipment developed for the Deep Space 
Network.  The hybrid architecture will result in a low-cost 
implementation, with maximum interoperability with DSN 
antennas and compliance with the CCSDS specifications. 
Upon completion of the upgrade, the Morehead 21-m 
antenna system will have full operational telemetry, tracking 
and command capability at X-band.  The system can help to 
offset some of DSN tracking load in time of heavy demand 
and is particularly applicable to future CubeSat missions 
due to the university’s strong involvement with CubeSat 
communities.  The system is undergoing testing with 
spacecraft currently in operation.  Preliminary results show 
the 
system 
is 
functional 
with 
successful 
carrier 
demodulation and symbol synchronization for spacecraft 
under test.  The G/T measurement indicated Morehead 
antenna is 10.3 – 11.3 dB lower than that of the DSN 34-m 
antenna; however more tests will be required to establish 
more accurate performance and to ensure that we can 
successful decode telemetry frame from Maven as expected 
from the link analysis. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a 
contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration.  Special thanks to J. Yang at JPL for 
technical assistance with signal acquisition, and to W. Chen 
and G. Hewitt at Peraton Corporation for assistance with 
antenna scheduling. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Malphrus, “University SmallSat Programs and Technical Issues”, 
Keck Institute for Space Studies Workshop on New Approaches to 
Lunar 
Ice 
Detection 
and 
Mapping, 
July 
2013, 
http://kiss.caltech.edu/workshops/lunar_ice/presentations1/malphrus2
.pdf, retrieved February, 2019. 
[2] 
M. Smith, et al., “On-Orbit Results and Lessons Learned from the 
ASTERIA Space Telescope Mission”, 32th Annual AIAA/USU 
Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, UT, August 2018, 
https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4067&co
ntext=smallsat, retrieved February, 2019. 
[3] 
P. 
Kinman, 
Sequential 
Ranging, 
810-005, 
Rev. 
E, 
Telecommunications 
Link 
Design 
Handbook, 
https://deepspace.jpl.nasa.gov/files/810-005/203/203C.pdf, retrieved 
February, 2019. 
[4] 
P. Kinman, Pseudo-noise and Regenerative Ranging, 810-005, Rev. 
E, 
Telecommunications 
Link 
Design 
Handbook, 
https://deepspace.jpl.nasa.gov/files/810-005/214/214A.pdf, retrieved 
February, 2019. 
[5] 
Mars 
CubeSat 
One, 
Jet 
Propulsion 
Laboratory 
CubeSat, 
https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/cubesat/missions/marco.php, 
retrieved 
February, 2019.  
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1.50
1.60
1.70
1.80
1.90
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.30
2.40
2.50
Pc/No, dB-Hz 
Time, Hr
MAVEN, DOY278/2018, Carrier SNR
DSS17, Avg=20.7
DSS25, Avg=31.7
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
1.50
1.60
1.70
1.80
1.90
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.30
2.40
2.50
SSNR, dB
Time, Hr
MAVEN, DOY278/2018, Symbol SNR
DSS-17, Avg=1.7
DSS-25, Avg=18.7
6
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-694-1
SPACOMM 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications

