Touchscreen Thimbles: Enabling Intuitive Interaction
Gerard Briscoe
Digital Cultures
Institute of Design Innovation
School of Design
Glasgow School of Art
Email: g.briscoe@gsa.ac.uk
Jeroen Blom
Experience Labs
Institute of Design Innovation
School of Design
Glasgow School of Art
Email: j.blom@gsa.ac.uk
Abstract—We are interested in the challenge that the ever-
increasing use of capacitive touchscreens represent. This is
because they rely on the electrical properties of the human
skin, which changes over time, often becoming less conductive
with age. So, we consider the potentially increasing problem this
would represent, with a layered model of skin interactions, as a
frame from which to conceptualise different classes of approaches
and better understand the design requirements. Conscious of
the need to retain a sense of touch, rather than a stylus with
a conductive tip or gloves with conductive ﬁnger tips, we then
propose suitable thimbles for touchscreens. We conceptualised a
touchscreen thimble to be worn on the body that would maintain
a sense of touch. So it would be a pros-palliare, rather than a
prosthesis. Developing a proof of concept prototype consisting
of a rigid base combined with a conductive fabric for the
ﬁnger tip, to address the limitations we observed with existing
approaches. We conclude by considering the wider potential of
our idea in designing a preferable future for touchscreen use.
Including, the potential for multiple touchscreen thimbles to be
worn simultaneously to support multi-touch gestures, and for
them to be worn as an enhancement for able-bodied users.
Keywords–Electrodermal; Conductivity; Skin; Age.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The ever-growing availability of capacitive touchscreen
displays is largely attributed to the intuitive interaction they
afford [1][2]. They rely on the electrical properties of the
human body to detect when and where on a display the user
touches [3]. So, they can be controlled with light touches of
ﬁngers [4], which is contributing to their dominance for device
interaction [5]. The touchscreen enables the user to interact
directly with what is displayed, rather than via a mouse,
touchpad, or other intermediate device [3].
In Digital Cultures, the practices and socio-cultural mean-
ings of emerging digital technologies, the popularity of smart-
phones and tablets is driving the acceptance of capacitive
touchscreens for many types of information appliances [6].
This is because the usability of capacitive touchscreens is
considered preferable to other forms of device interaction [7].
Often where computer keyboards and mice do not allow a
suitably intuitive, rapid, or accurate interaction [3]. So, there
is a growing trend towards capacitive touchscreens for user
interfaces, shown by their increasing integration into the design
of different products. So much so, that they are starting to
become unavoidable given their ever-increasing availability in
devices [5]. However, for those with limited electrodermal
conductivity of the skin, they can be difﬁcult to use [8]. This
can be acute as electrodermal conductivity of the skin is known
to decrease with age [9].
In Section II we will introduce the Seven Skins conceptual
framework to consider a preferable solution to skin with
limited electrodermal conductivity. In Section III we deﬁne,
explore and prototype our touchscreen thimbles. In Section IV
we conclude by consider the beneﬁts and limitations of our
approach, as well as potential future work.
II.
SEVEN SKINS
In considering a preferable solution to skin with limited
electrodermal conductivity, we explore assistive sensor devices
(ASDs) with reference to Professor Irene McAra-McWilliam’s
‘Seven Skins’ concept.
1)
Worn separate device:
-ﬁtness tracker, phone or watch as sensor
2)
Sensors integrated in clothes or wearable layers:
-smart textiles
3)
Passive and attached to the body:
-biostamp temporary sensor tattoo
4)
Interactive sensors on the body:
-myoelectric prosthetic hand
5)
Interactive sensors integrated with the body:
-targeted muscle reinnervation prosthetic
6)
Passive and embedded in the body:
-sensor pill monitoring vital body signs
7)
Active and embedded in the body:
-pace-maker
The ﬁrst, outermost, layer considers ASDs worn on the body.
These can generally be grouped into devices that have come
to include sensors, such as smart phones and watches; and
those with sensors dedicated to monitoring physiology, such
as ﬁtness trackers. The next, the second, layer considers ASDs
integrated into clothes or wearable layers, such as smart sports
shirts [10]. The third, emerging, layer considers ASDs ﬁxed
on the body, such as the recent temporary bio-stamp sensor
tattoo [11]. We consider these to be passive because they only
monitor and are not interactive.
The middle, fourth, layer considers ASDs on the body, such
as myoelectric sensors for gesture control of a prosthetic hand.
While the sensors of the prosthetic hand can be considered to
be within the second layer, they are part of a system which
is perceived to have a deeper attachment to the body at the
fourth layer. This is because the prosthetic hand is perceived
to be an extension of the body [12].
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

The ﬁfth layer considers Interactive ASDs integrated with
the body, such as those that enable targeted muscle reinner-
vation for real-time control of multifunction artiﬁcial arms
[13]. The next, sixth, layer considers passive ASDs that are
embedded in the body, such as tiny pill monitors that can
measure vital signs from deep inside the body [14]. The
innermost, seventh, layer considers ASDs embedded in the
body, such as pace-makers.
III.
TOUCHSCREEN THIMBLES
Considering a potential ASD for limited electrodermal
conductivity of the skin, it would preferably be at the ﬁrst layer
in the seven layer skins explored in the previous section. So, a
worn device that would compensate for limited electrodermal
conductivity. Furthermore, it would preferably maintain a sense
of touch to ensure intuitiveness.
A stylus with a conductive tip would work, such as the
Jot Mini or Apple Pen. However, it would be far less intuitive,
because it would lack a sense of touch. Gloves with conductive
ﬁnger tips would also work, such as the iGlove or Totes
SmartTouch. However, they would not be well suited for indoor
use. Other approaches provide ﬁnger nail like extensions,
intended to help provide accurate interaction for individuals
with larger ﬁngers, such as the Tech Tips. However, such
approaches also lack a sense of touch.
We conceptualised a touchscreen thimble to be worn on the
body that would maintain a sense of touch, while being suitable
for indoor as well as outdoor use. So it would be a pros-
palliare, instead of a prosthesis, as it is an addition that covers
rather than replaces. We explored our concept as shown in the
sketch of Figure 1(a), being in the ﬁrst layer of the seven skins.
A thimble consisting of two essential parts, a rigid cylindrical
base, and a thin conductive fabric for the ﬁnger tip. With the
conductive fabric ensuring an intuitive sense of touch would be
maintained, while compensating for insufﬁcient electrothermal
conductivity by being highly conductive. We then explored
suitable materials, developing a number of prototypes, as
shown in Figure 1(b). Including a proof of concept, which
consists of a rigid base made from antler, combined with a grey
conductive fabric for the ﬁnger tip. While any rigid material
(e.g. ABS plastic) would have been suitable for our proof of
concept, antler was chosen because of experiences of exploring
its aesthetic qualities in addition to being suitably rigid.
IV.
CONCLUSION
For those with skin that has limited electrodermal conduc-
tivity [8][9], the ever-increasing availability [5] of capacitive
touchscreen displays could become challenging. However, our
touchscreen thimbles would ensure that the intuitive usability
of capacitive touchscreen displays would be maintained for
them. Also, multiple touchscreen thimbles could be worn to
support multi-touch gestures. Future development should test
a prototype with potential users, especially non-technical users,
to provide experimental evidence of the effectiveness of our
proposed solution. Speciﬁcally, experimental conﬁrmation of
the increase of efﬁciency in interaction compared to bare
ﬁngers, and the increase of intuitiveness compared to alter-
native solutions (e.g. conductive stylus). Given that the use of
touchscreen thimbles could indicate that users have problems
in using touchscreens, some users may be self-conscious about
their use. So, consideration should be given to the aesthetic,
Figure 1. Sketch (a)bove showing the design of the thimble consisting of
two essential parts, a rigid cylindrical base, and a thin conductive fabric for
the ﬁnger tip. Photo (b)elow showing a number of thimbles resulting from
exploring suitable materials, with the front thimble showing a rigid base
made from antler combined with a grey conductive fabric tip.
as well as functional, design. For example, considering the
potential for personalised touchscreen thimbles, not just for
accurate sizing, but also for custom styling. An innovation
through tradition design approach, which enables connecting
new technology with familiar traditions (e.g. textiles) could be
helpful in determining desirable aesthetics for the adoption of
touchscreen thimbles.
Where capacitive touchscreens are used for control in
critical situations, touchscreen thimbles could be worn as an
enhancement for able-bodied users, ensuring intended interac-
tions when under duress. Similar to how the able-bodied can
beneﬁt from directional hearing aids, because they improve the
signal-to-noise-ratio of speech occurring in noisy backgrounds,
irrespective of hearing disability.
The seven layer skins of ASDs provided a framework
from which to conceptualise different classes of approaches
in the development of our touchscreen thimbles. So, future
work should consider further development of the framework,
as well as its applicability to spaces of a similar nature in
designing preferable futures. While the touchscreen thimble
prototype worked anecdotally as a proof of concept, future
work would be required to conﬁrm their effectiveness more
broadly. Furthermore, future work regarding the conceptuali-
sation of touchscreen thimbles should consider that while they
would be worn on the body as ASDs, they interface beyond
the body to a networked device. So, potentially interfacing to
a meta-level beyond the touchscreen through the Internet.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Professor Irene McAra-McWilliam
for describing her ‘Seven Skins’ concept to us.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Duranton, D. Black-Schaffer, K. De Bosschere, and J. Maebe, “The
hipeac vision for advanced computing in horizon 2020,” FP7 HiPEAC
Network of Excellence, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[2]
D. Lee, “The state of the touch-screen panel market in 2011,” in
Information Display, vol. 27, 2011, pp. 12–16.
[3]
L. Gray, How Does a Touch Screen Work?
Rosen Publishing, 2013.
[4]
G. Barrett and R. Omote, “Projected-capacitive touch technology,”
Information Display, vol. 26, no. 3, 2010, pp. 16–21.
[5]
L. Goasduff and C. Pettey, “Gartner says worldwide smartphone sales
soared in fourth quarter of 2011 with 47 percent growth,” Gartner, 2012.
[6]
M. R. Bhalla and A. V. Bhalla, “Comparative study of various touch-
screen technologies,” Int. J. of Comp. App., vol. 6, no. 8, 2010, pp.
12–18.
[7]
H. Umemuro, “Lowering elderly japanese users resistance towards
computers by using touchscreen technology,” Universal Access in the
Information Society, vol. 3, no. 3-4, 2004, pp. 276–288.
[8]
S. Favilla and S. Pedell, “Touch screen ensemble music: collaborative
interaction for older people with dementia,” in OzCHI, 2013, pp. 481–
484.
[9]
C. Eisdorfer, H. O. Doerr, and W. Follette, “Electrodermal reactivity:
an analysis by age and sex,” J. of human stress, vol. 6, no. 4, 1980, pp.
39–42.
[10]
M. Gokey. Why smart clothes, not watches, are the future of wearables.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.digitaltrends.com/wearables/smart-
clothing-is-the-future-of-wearables/ (2016)
[11]
T. Perry, “A temporary tattoo that senses through your skin,” IEEE
Spectrum, 2015.
[12]
T. Kuiken et al., “Targeted muscle reinnervation for real-time myoelec-
tric control of multifunction artiﬁcial arms,” Jama, vol. 301, 2009, pp.
619–628.
[13]
J. Blom, “Sensible sense: designing a tactile sense for upper extremity
amputees,” Masters thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology, 2013.
[14]
A.
Trafton.
A
new
way
to
monitor
vital
signs.
[Online].
Available:
http://news.mit.edu/2015/ingestible-sensor-measures-heart-
breathing-rates-1118 (2015)
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

