Smart Shirt with Embedded Vital Sign and Moisture Sensing 
João Lage, André Catarino, Hélder Carvalho, Ana Rocha 
School of Engineering 
University of Minho 
Guimarães, Portugal 
e-mail: helder@det.uminho.pt 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the development of a smart shirt 
with embedded electrodes in two-lead configuration for heart 
rate measurement and a knitted moisture sensor for sweat 
detection. Signal conditioning for heart rate measurement is 
based on the Analog Devices AD8232 heart rate monitor front-
end. The shirt is part of a fireman interactive Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE), which monitors information on 
heart rate and sweat detection, among other variables. Sweat 
detection is used to avoid skin burns that may occur due to the 
combination of excessive moisture and heat. Tests have 
demonstrated that the measurement of heart rate using the 
shirt is as efficient as conventional solutions, such as heart-rate 
monitoring straps. Sweat detection through textile moisture 
sensors has also shown to be effective.  
Keywords-ECG; 
biosignal; 
moisture; 
e-textile; 
textile 
sensors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Textiles are excellent interfaces for bio-signal sensing, as 
they are flexible, stretchable and conform to the body. 
People use textiles daily and at all times, rendering them an 
interesting solution for ubiquitous, continuous health 
monitoring [1][2]. With the remarkable emergence of 
embedded textile sensors, the proposal of e-textile solutions 
has grown significantly, empowering the development of 
new designs to provide a better user-experience. This 
growing area values comfort and mobility of health 
monitoring devices. Nowadays, it is possible to seamlessly 
integrate sensors and electrodes into the fabric’s structure of 
a clothing piece to monitor elderly people, sports or 
hazardous occupations. The complete integration of these 
sensing elements and connections into the garment structure 
represents a great advantage to the physical and 
psychological comfort of the user. 
Several works proposed breathing rate and movement 
monitoring using extension sensors based on knitted fabrics 
produced with textile compatible conductive yarns [3]-[7], as 
well as, with specially made rubber coatings doped with 
carbon 
fibers 
and/or 
conductive 
polymers 
[8]-[11]. 
Electrodes for physiological signal sensing, such as 
Electrocardiography (ECG), Electromyography (EMG) or 
skin impedance have been developed and demonstrated [12]-
[18]. Moisture sensing using textiles has been proposed in 
[19]. 
Textile-based sensors integrated into a shirt for PPE have 
been developed in the Proetex project [20] to measure heart 
and breathing rates in firefighting situations. Breathing rate 
was measured using two techniques: piezoresistive textile 
extension sensors and thoracic impedance measurement. 
In this paper, the behavior of ECG electrodes and 
moisture sensors based on conductive yarn knitted in a shirt 
of an interactive PPE is evaluated and analyzed. The analysis 
focuses on two different components: the heart rate 
measurement with two leads and the moisture sensing with 
two conductive pads. The combination of temperature and 
moisture sensing is implemented for the detection of 
situations in which danger of skin burn exists. The shirt is 
one of the components of an integrated system in which 
temperature, movement, position and alarm signals are 
transmitted from/ to the firefighter interactive PPE. 
After the introduction and review of the state-of-the art 
given in Section I, Section II focuses on the development of 
the shirt, describing materials used, the shirt’s design and 
production. Section III gives an overview of the signal 
conditioning hardware developed for the measurement of the 
heart rate and moisture sensor. In Section IV, results of the 
measurements are presented and discussed, and some 
conclusions are drawn in Section V. 
 
II. 
SHIRT DESIGN 
A. Materials and Design 
When considering wearable devices, strict requirements 
on volume, weight and energy use exist for optimal 
effectiveness. Therefore, the decision for a two-electrode 
configuration for the heart rate measurement was 
straightforward, considering that the goal was not the 
acquisition of the full ECG complex. In terms of shirt 
design, this also meant a reduction of the number of 
connection paths, and the possibility of placing the front-end 
hardware closer to the heart, making the system more robust 
and less vulnerable to common-mode interference. 
The electrodes are knitted into the base-fabric using a 
silver coated textured polyamide elastic yarn from Elitex, 
produced by TITV, with low electrical resistance (in the 
order of tens of Ω/m).  
The moisture sensor consists of two conductive parallel 
bars, knitted in the shirt using the Elitex yarn. The change of 
moisture absorbed/dispersed by the non-conductive textile 
substrate between the two bars produces a resistance change 
that is detected by appropriate hardware. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

B. Production 
The shirt is knitted in a seamless MERZ MBS knitting 
machine. This machine allows knitting patterned structures 
through local variations of the structure, which were used to 
knit the electrodes for heart rate measurement, the 
conductive bars, for moisture detection, as well as, 
conductive leads to connect these elements to the 
conditioning hardware. For the electrode area, a particularly 
voluminous structure was developed that makes the 
electrode area stand out of the rest of the fabric and thus 
improves skin to electrode contact [21]. 
To assure the correct positioning of sensors and signal 
acquisition hardware, the optimal electrode and sensor 
arrangements were studied. 
 Regarding the electrodes for the heart rate acquisition, 
measurements with the electrodes at different positions in 
the chest area were carried out and compared. The main 
goal of the tests was to obtain the clearest acquisition of the 
QRS complex present on the ECG wave with the purpose of 
amplifying and filtering the peak and more accurately 
calculate the user’s heart rate. It was concluded that the best 
position was below the pectoral muscles, where the 
electrodes are closer to the ribs, avoiding electromyography 
interference (Figure 1a). 
Regarding the moisture sensor, as shown in Figure 1b, 
the best solution for the placement of the conductive bars is 
on the lower back, near the lumbar curvature. This is the 
preferred location for human’s eccrine sweat accumulation, 
making the design less vulnerable to false positives or 
negatives.  
Conductive leads and conductive paths were also knitted 
in the shirt structure to avoid electrical wires. Snap 
fasteners, applied to the leads allow the easy attachment of 
the hardware, taking advantage of the electrical conductivity 
of the snaps and its mechanical stability. 
          
 
Figure 1.  Smart Shirt Sensor Positioning: (a) front view (b) rear view. 
III. 
SIGNAL CONDITIONING HARDWARE 
A. Heart Rate Signal 
To implement the heart rate measurement conditioning 
hardware, the AD8232 by Analog Devices was used. The 
AD8232, is a single-lead, heart rate monitor front end 
designed to measure small biopotencial signals in the 
presence of noisy conditions. This front-end can be used in 
several configurations, being the two-electrode measurement 
one of them. An evaluation board was used for the tests and 
set for two-electrode measurement combined with low and 
high-pass filtering, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  AD8232-EVALZ conditioning signal diagram. 
 
In the tested configuration, the Instrumentation Amplifier 
has a fixed gain of 100 whilst the two-pole low pass filter 
adds another 11 of gain, resulting in an overall gain of 1100 
V/V. Regarding the cutoff frequencies, Figure 3, the 
implemented block of the two-pole high-pass filter 
eliminates motion artifacts and drift caused by varying 
electrode-skin polarization and contact noise whilst the 
additional 
two-pole 
low-pass, 
using 
a 
Sallen-Key 
configuration, 
attenuates 
the 
line 
noise 
and 
other 
interference. Also, in this two-electrode configuration, the 
Right Led Drive (RLD) is used to drive the bias current 
resistors on the two electrode inputs, eliminating the third 
electrode needed. 
In addition, the AD8232 also offers two outputs called 
Leads Off Detection (LOD) + and -, one for each electrode, 
detecting when an electrode is disconnected by sourcing a 
small 100 kHz current into them. When an electrode has lost 
its connection the accordingly LOD pin goes to a high state. 
To 
compute 
the 
heart 
rate 
value, 
a 
CC2530 
microcontroller, manufactured by Texas Instruments is 
used. This 2.4-Ghz IEEE 802.15.4 and ZigBee applications 
System-on-Chip solution is used in the project to implement 
the nodes of the Body Area Network in the firefighter PPE. 
The analysis and discussion of the wireless communication 
network structure will be presented elsewhere. 
Using its ultralow-power internal analog comparator, 
with a supply current of 230 nA, it is possible to compare 
the filtered ECG wave with an external voltage level, as 
depicted in Figure 4, where the Input/Output (I/O) pins 
P0_5 and P0_4 correspond, accordingly, to the positive 
input and negative input of the comparator.  
 
a) 
b) 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

 
Figure 3.  Overall frequency response of the heart rate signal measurement 
circuit. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  TI CC2530 – Analog Comparator block diagram and external 
components. 
 
The voltage reference is set by a fixed voltage given by 
an external voltage divider and the output is internally 
connected to the I/O controller interrupt detector and can be 
treated by the Microcontroller Unit (MCU) as a regular I/O 
pin interrupt, being possible to configure the edge detection 
of the interrupt as rising or falling edge. This whole analog 
comparator solution compares the voltage reference with the 
ECG signal and when the ECG signal drops below the 
voltage divider value, set to 300 mV, the comparator output 
gives a logical one, triggering the masked Interrupt Service 
Routine (ISR) for port 0. 
To calculate the user’s heart rate value, a timer of the 
CC2530 is used to measure the time between two heart rate 
pulses. After fifteen triggers the average of these values is 
used to compute the heart rate. 
 
B. Moisture Sensor 
The physical principle of the textile moisture sensor is 
based on the variation of the electrical resistance of a non-
conductive textile material when moisture, promoted by 
sweating, is absorbed or dispersed. The moisture sensor 
consists of two pads of conductive knitted fabric, which are 
used as terminals for measurement of the electrical 
resistance, separated by a non-conductive knit base-fabric.  
For the signal conditioning of the moisture sensor, the 
approach represented in Figure 5 was adopted. 
With this signal conditioning technique, it is possible to 
adjust the sensitivity of the moisture measurement by 
adjusting the input voltage E. Furthermore, a linear 
relationship between output voltage and sensor resistance is 
obtained [19]. 
Measurements are taken using the microcontroller’s 
internal Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC). 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Shirt prototype 
Using the knitting machine’s structure design software, 
the leads and the moisture sensing area pads were designed 
and integrated in the shirt as described above.  Figures 6 and 
Figure 7 show the front and rear view of the finished 
prototype. 
 
 
  
 
Figure 5.  Inverting operational amplifier approach. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Shirt rear view with moisture sensor. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

 
Figure 7.  Shirt front view with ECG electrodes. 
B. Heart Rate signals 
Heart rate signals were acquired in different user’s 
posture and movement conditions using a National 
Instruments (NI) NI-USB-6211 data acquisition device and 
NI Labview Signal Express software. 
The signals depicted in Figure 8 were obtained with the 
user standing still. The waveforms represented are the 
output of the high-pass filtered AD8232’s Instrumentation 
Amplifier (blue) and the amplified and low-pass filtered 
output signal. A clear and constant excursion of the signal 
from the 1.6 V dc level of the signal to nearly 0 V is 
observed. Analog comparison with the 300 mV threshold 
used at the microcontroller’s analog comparator delivers the 
heart rate pulses very robustly. In the conditions and 
location of the experiment – the research lab in which the 
project is being developed – line and other noise are very 
small when compared to the relevant signal’s amplitude. In 
future experiments, noise interference will be studied in 
more detail. 
 
 
Figure 8.  IA output (blue) and ECG filtered and amplified wave (red). 
As soon as movement is added, the signal presents 
increasing motion artifacts, as well as missed heart beat 
pulses due to momentary loss of contact of the electrodes 
with the skin. The signal presented in Figure 9 was acquired 
with the user swinging and flexing the arms vigorously, 
whilst the signal depicted in Figure 10 results from an 
intense whole-body movement, with the user jumping and 
moving the arms. In both situations, some heart rate pulses 
are missing and in the second situation the motion artifacts 
produce the detection of false positives. It can also be 
observed that no problem due to dc level drift is present. 
To compare these results with established, commercial 
products, a Polar model T-34 heart rate chest strap and 
receiver was also used in the experiments. Figure 11 shows 
the signal obtained with the user moving the arms 
vigorously.  
 
As can be observed, the Polar heart rate monitor also misses 
heart beats. With intense full-body movement, false 
positives have also been observed. From the experiments it 
was clear that the two systems behave similarly in terms of 
heart rate measurement, failing information under extreme 
activity measurement conditions. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Arms moving vigorously while acquiring heart rate signal. 
 
Figure 10.  Intense movement of the body while acquiring heart rate signal. 
 
Figure 11.  Polar T-34 heart rate response while vigorously moving the 
arms. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

 
However, it has to be stressed that in normal running 
movement, measurement errors are insignificant with both 
systems. 
 
C. Moisture sensor 
The moisture sensor integrated in the shirt, shown in 
Figure 6, was previously studied using test samples such as 
the one represented in Figure 12. These preliminary tests 
were carried out to assess the behavior of knitted moisture 
sensors with moisture content and were performed in a 
chamber with controlled temperature. The samples were 
kept at a constant extension, to simulate wearing conditions, 
and a graduated syringe connected to a spray dispenser 
allowed to apply controlled quantities of artificial acid and 
basic sweat solutions. Resistance was logged with a 
precision multimeter throughout the experiment. 
 
The sample represented in Figure 12 was produced with 
100% cotton yarn, 30 Ne, in the non-conductive part of the 
knitted fabric, and Elitex multifilament polyamide silver 
coated yarn, 235 dtex, in the conductive part. 
 The results obtained in resistance change with the 
samples containing different amounts of acid and basic 
sweat solutions are represented in Figure 13 and Figure 14. 
The graphs show that resistance is an order of magnitude 
higher with the acid sweat solution. On the other hand, with 
the basic sweat solution, resistance values tend to saturation 
with smaller quantities of sweat. In both cases the quick 
change of resistance makes it clear to distinguish between a 
dry and a wetted state of the sensor. 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  Sample for preliminary moisture sensor test. 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  Resistance change with sweat quantity, acid sweat solution. 
 
Figure 14.  Resistance change with sweat quantity, basic sweat solution. 
Based on these preliminary results, it is apparent that 
further testing is required. The influence of the sensor’s 
geometrical parameters and non-conductive yarn material on 
the sensor’s saturation behavior will be studied. A field trial 
will also be performed, to determine how the saturation point 
of the sensor matches the detection of the moisture content 
that may produce danger to the user if exposed to high 
temperatures. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents an overview of a smart shirt, where 
the dependence on non-textile materials to achieve 
interactivity is minimized. The performance of the textile 
sensors for heart rate measurement has been found to be 
comparable to the one of commercial products. Further 
experimentation is needed to define the final configuration 
of the moisture sensor. 
The final design of the smart shirt will take into account 
other factors such as aesthetics, comfort, connection and 
support of hardware, electrical isolation in at some key 
points. Two battery-powered hardware modules, one for 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

each sensor, inside a custom 3D-printed case will be 
attached to snap fasteners applied to the conductive leads. 
The snaps will assure both mechanical retention, as well as 
electrical connection. The modules will be integrated in a 
Body Area Network (BAN), to which other nodes will be 
connected to monitor other variables or provide information 
to the user of the firefighter PPE.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by Portuguese National Funding, 
through FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, in 
the framework of project UID/CTM/00264/2013.project 
PROTACTICAL - Co-Promoção Nº Projecto: 23267, 
sponsored by ADI 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Tang., “Recent developments in flexible wearable 
electronics for monitoring applications, Transactions of the 
Institute of Measurement and Control,” vol. 29 no. 3-4, pp. 
288-300, 2007. 
[2] S. Patel, H. Park, P. Bonato, L. Chan, and M. Rodgers, “A 
review of wearable sensors and systems with application in 
rehabilitation,” 
Journal 
of 
Neuro 
Engineering 
and 
Rehabilitation, 9:21, 2012. 
[3] M. Catrysse, R. Puers, C. Hertleer, L. van Langenhove, H. 
van Egmond, and D .Matthys: “Towards the integration of 
textile sensors in a wireless monitoring suit,” Sensors and 
Actuators A 114, pp. 302–311, 2004. 
[4] C. Cochrane, V. Koncar, M. Lewandowski, C. Dufour, 
“Design and Development of a Flexible Strain Sensor for 
Textile Structures Based on a Conductive Polymer 
Composite,” Sensors, No. 7, pp. 473-492, 2007. 
[5] H. Zhang, “Electromechanical Properties of Intrinsically 
Conductive Fiber Assembles, Its Textile Structure and 
Applications as Strain and Pressure Sensors,” Dong Hua 
University, PhD thesis, 2006. 
[6] M. J. Abreu, H. Carvalho, A. Catarino, and A. Rocha, 
“Integration And Embedding of Vital Signs Sensors and 
Other Devices into Textiles,” in Medical and Healthcare 
Textiles, J.F. Kennedy, S.C. Anand, M. Miraftab and S. 
Rajendran, Eds. Woodhead Publishing Textile Series Nr.75, 
ISBN 1-84569-224-1, pp. 381-389, 2010. 
[7] M. Silva, A. Catarino, H. Carvalho, A. Rocha, J. Monteiro, 
and G. Montagna, “Textile Sensors for ECG and 
Respiratory Frequency on Swimsuits,” Proceedings of the 
Conference 
on 
Intelligent 
Textiles 
and 
 
Mass 
Customisation, Casablanca, Morocco, 12-14th November 
2009, p.77, ISBN 978-9954-8878-1-4. 
[8] H. Zhang, X. Tao, S. Wang, and T. Yu, “Electro-
Mechanical Properties of Knitted Fabric Made From 
Conductive Multi-Filament Yarn Under Unidirectional 
Extension,” Textile Research Journal 75, pp. 598-606, 
2005. 
[9] Y. Li, X. Y. Cheng, M. Y. Leung, J. Tsang, X. M. Tao, and 
M. C. W. Yuen, “A flexible strain sensor from polypyrrole-
coated fabrics,” Synthetic Metals, Vol. 155, Issue 1, pp. 89-
94, 2005. 
[10] A. Tjahyono, K. Aw, J. Travas-Sejdic, “A novel 
polypyrrole and natural rubber based flexible large strain 
sensor,” Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, Vol 166–167, 
pp. 426-437, 2012. 
[11] R. Zhang, H. Deng, R. Valenca, J. Jin, Q. Fu, E. Bilotti, and 
T. Peijs, “Carbon nanotube polymer coatings for textile 
yarns with good strain sensing capability,” Sensors and 
Actuators A: Physical, Vol. 179, pp. 83-91, 2012. 
[12] P. J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. M. Tao, “Textile-structured 
electrodes for electrocardiogram,” Textile Progress, 40:4, 
pp. 183-213, 2008. 
[13] A. Catarino, H. Carvalho, M. J. Dias, T. Pereira, O. 
Postolache, and P. S. Girão, “Continuous Health Monitoring 
Using E-Textile Integrated Biosensors,” 2012 International 
Conference and Exposition on Electrical and Power 
Engineering (EPE, IEEE), Iasi, Romania, pp. 25-27, 2012. 
[14] T. Pereira, H. Carvalho, A. Catarino, M. J. Dias, O. 
Postolache, and P. S. Girão, “Wearable biopotential 
measurement using the TI ADS1198 analog front-end and 
textile electrodes,” 2013 IEEE International Symposium on 
Medical 
Measurements 
and 
Applications 
(MeMeA), 
Ottawa, Canada, pp. 4-5, 2013. 
[15] J. Mühlsteff, O. Such, “Dry electrodes for monitoring of 
vital signs in functional textiles,” Proceedings of the 26th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE EMBS, San 
Francisco, USA, pp. 2212-2215, 2004. 
[16] R. Paradiso, G. Loriga, and N. Taccini, “AWearable Health 
Care System Based on Knitted Integrated Sensors,” IEEE 
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 
Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 337-344, 2005. 
[17] M. Silva, A. Catarino, H. Carvalho, A. Rocha, J. Monteiro, 
and G. Montagna, “Study Of Vital Sign Monitoring With 
Textile 
Sensors 
In 
Swimming 
Pool 
Environment,” 
Proceedings of the IECON 2009, The 35th Annual 
Conference of The IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 
Porto, Portugal, pp. 4426-4431, 2009. 
[18] O. Postolache, P.S. Girão, M. Ribeiro, H. Carvalho, A. 
Catarino, and G. Postolache, “Treat Me Well: Affective and 
Physiological Feedback for Wheelchair Users,” Proceedings 
of the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Medical 
Measurements and Applications (MeMeA), Budapest, 
Hungary, pp. 1-7, 2012. 
[19] T. Pereira, P. Silva, H. Carvalho, and M. Carvalho, “Textile 
moisture sensor matrix for monitoring of disabled and bed-
rest patients,” Proceedings of the IEEE Eurocon 2011 
conference, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 1-4, 2011. 
[20] Project Proetex FP6-2004-IST-4-026987, Advanced e-
textiles for firefighters and civilian victims, retrieved 23-02-
2015 from http://www.proetex.org/p1_inner_garment.htm 
[21] A. P. Catarino, A. M. Rocha, H. Carvalho, and M. J. Dias, 
“Electrodes based on textile substrates,” Portuguese Patent 
P105517, Europen Patent  EP 2671506. 
 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

