Analysis of Public Vehicle Use with Long-term GPS Data 
 and The Possibility of Use Optimization 
—Through Working Car Project— 
 
Mitsuaki Obara 
Faculty of Engineering 
University of Tokyo 
Tokyo, Japan 
Email: polyelo2plumo@gmail.com 
Takehiro Kashiyama, Yoshihide Sekimoto, Hiroshi Omata  
Institute of Industrial Science 
University of Tokyo 
Tokyo, Japan 
Email: {ksym, sekimoto, homata}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— Public vehicles are considered a valuable 
resource, as increasing attention has been paid to the 
effective use of government owned resources. In addition, 
the development of on-board road surface condition 
detector and car sharing are also considered valuable 
activities. Though the utility potential of public vehicles 
is likely high, no full-scale data analysis at municipality 
level exists. In this study, we analyzed the extensive data 
collected by the “working car project” that was 
established in 2014 by the National Institute of 
Information and Communications Technology (NICT). 
The goal of this study is to thoroughly explore the 
optimum utilization of public vehicles, and discuss the 
potential vehicle usage patterns. Specifically, based on 
vehicle operation record of Kakogawa City and 
Fujisawa City, we analyzed the link coverage rate, 
assuming that the role of daily inspecting the public 
roads would be given to the public vehicles, and 
examined the vehicle use optimization and centralized 
dispatching system in Kakogawa City Office. The study 
findings indicate the potential for car sharing. 
Keywords-Data analysis; link coverage; probe car; 
optimization; shared car. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the movement toward the effective use of 
government-owned resources has increased. For example, 
Request for Public Facility Management Plan [1] discussed 
the promotion of comprehensive and planned management of 
government-owned resources, such as public facilities. This 
trend is seen in vehicle ownership as well, while the Ministry 
of Internal Affairs and Communications Government 
Efficiency Plan developed concrete measures that aim to 
reduce the human and physical cost on using public vehicles 
within the Ministry. In addition, car sharing of vehicles is 
also discussed in the current literature. Taguchi et al. 
discussed the potential of introducing car sharing in regional 
cities [2], Yasumochi et al. examined the implementation of 
car sharing in public rental housing [3], and Hara et al. 
discussed quasi-auction type reservation system for car 
sharing [4]. Accordingly, the movement toward the effective 
use of public vehicles is increasing. 
Meanwhile, the technological advancement in vehicle use 
is improving. Smart IoT (Internet of Things) promotion 
strategy [5] published by the Ministry of Internal Affairs 
and Communications considered developing autonomous 
car to mitigate traffic congestion. In the USA, the 
emergence of car sharing services, such as Uber, has been 
widely welcomed by users [6], which is an evidence of the 
potential 
progress 
toward 
vehicle 
use 
technology 
development. Within this context, the National Institute of 
Information and Communications Technology (NICT) 
established “working car project” in June 2014. The project 
aimed at the thorough utilization of public vehicles. GPS 
and sensors were installed in vehicles, allowing for 
extensive data analysis of public vehicles. 
However, no data conversion and analysis has been 
previously conducted for all public vehicles that belong to 
each city. Thus, the effective use of public vehicles 
belonging to municipalities is still unknown. 
Therefore, in this study, we used the vast vehicle usage 
data collected by the working car project for Kakogawa City, 
Hyogo Prefecture and Fujisawa City, Kanagawa Prefecture 
to perform multifaceted analysis of public vehicle usage. 
Specifically, we calculated the operation rate and link 
coverage rate of public vehicles. This would be very 
beneficial for measuring pavement conditions during the 
routine operation of public vehicles. The inspection can be 
carried out when the public vehicles are equipped with the 
on-board road surface condition detector developed by 
Yamada et al. [7], the road surface inspection method 
developed by Toyama et al. [8] that considers pavement 
conditions of local municipalities, or the detection method 
of pavement wear and tear signs of Kawasaki et al. [9] that 
uses a general-purpose camera in public vehicles, etc. 
We also analyzed the vehicle usage data from Kakogawa 
City to determine the least number of vehicles required for 
the optimum operation without interfering with work. Based 
on the results, we discussed the possibility of the centralized 
vehicle reservation system at the city office. In this manner, 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

by optimizing the vehicle operation, the practical utilization 
of surplus vehicles such as car sharing could be discussed. 
II. 
SUMMARY OF COLLECTED DATA 
The data used in this study is summarized in Table 1. We 
analyzed the data that was uploaded in real time by installing 
smartphones in public vehicles owned by municipalities 
through the “working car project” established by NICT 
(National Institute of Information and Communications 
Technology) in June 2014. Because smartphones are 
installed in vehicles, when the engine is running, the location 
information is obtained at 1-s interval. In addition, we used 
the vehicle ledger from each municipality to obtain 
information about the vehicle type, usage, number of 
passengers, load capacity, and storage location. Details on 
vehicle types are provided later. In summary, there were 14 
types of vehicles in Kakogawa City (4.1(4)) and five in 
Fujisawa City (see Table 2). 
 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF THE COLLECTED DATA 
Target period 
1/1/2016 to 12/31/2016 12/31 inclusive 
Target time period 
9:00–17:00 
Target vehicle 
number 
Kakogawa City (171)/Fujisawa City (99) 
Data items 
Longitude and latitude of vehicles at each time 
Vehicle ID/Vehicle type 
Storage location (33 locations) 
Notes  
Data between 12/3–12/11 is missing 
 
III. 
MEASUREMENT OF INDEX WITH LONG-TERM DATA 
A. Visualization of usage 
For visualization of usage, Figure 1 shows the 
superimposed image of route information of patrol cars over 
the target period of one year. Though the distance traveled 
in one day is not high, once multiple periods are 
superimposed, the overall covered area becomes visible. 
Figure 1 shows that the patrol cars cover a wide area. Figure 
2 shows the route information of each type of vehicles 
obtained from the records over the target period. A school 
bus that belongs to Shikata Kindergarten, located in the 
northwest corner of the city, mostly commutes in Shikata 
Town. This is because Kakogawa City divides the school 
districts by area. Garbage trucks mostly travel the main 
roads that connect the new clean center (garbage processing 
facility for the City) and recycling center. Kakogawa City 
government collects garbage across the whole city; however, 
the present data shows that garbage trucks do not travel the 
whole City. This is simply due to a fact that there were 
garbage trucks without sensors when the present data was 
recorded. Doctor-patient transportation vehicles also mostly 
travel around Kakogawa Chuo Hospital, and there is no 
record of travelling across the City. In addition to the reason 
mentioned above for garbage trucks, Kakogawa Chuo 
Hospital and nearby hospitals are designated for emergency 
patients. 
 
Figure 1.  Kakogawa City patrol car route information. Pink shows roads 
that patrol cars have travelled, while ocher shows roads not travelled by 
patrol cars. 
 
Figure 2.  Kakogawa City vehicle travel information. Red: cleaning 
vehicles, blue: doctor-patient transportation vehicles, green: garbage trucks, 
yellow: school buses 
Circles in Figure 2 show associated facilities. Specifically, 
orange: Shikata Kindergarten, blue: Kakogawa Chuo 
Hospital, green: the new cleaning center (combustible 
garbage disposal facility), and pink: the recycling center 
(incombustible materials and large garbage disposal facility). 
 
B. Operation rate 
In order to evaluate the role of transportation function 
each vehicle plays, we calculated the operation rate. 
Specifically, we analyzed the travel information of each 
vehicle at 10-min interval. When a vehicle was moving 
continuously at 5 km/h or more, we considered it as in 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

“operation” and calculated the number of times the vehicles 
“operated.” 
The operation rate was obtained by dividing operation 
times by number of business days during the target period 
(245 weekdays). Table 2 shows the analytical results of 
operation rate per usage. Though there are some differences 
in vehicle type classification, the mean operation rate is 
higher for Fujisawa City than in Kakogawa City. The 
analysis by vehicle type indicates that medical, patrol, and 
public relations vehicles are most used in Kakogawa City. 
The operation rate of garbage trucks is notably low in 
Fujisawa City. However, this is most likely because the 
garbage collection days and time are predetermined. 
 
C. Link coverage rate 
In order to evaluate the role of transportation function 
each vehicle plays, we calculated the operation rate. 
Specifically, we analyzed the travel information of each 
vehicle at 10-min interval. When a vehicle was moving 
continuously at 5 km/h or more, we considered it as in 
“operation” and calculated the number of times the vehicles 
“operated.” Link coverage rate shows the value of probe car 
in detecting the detailed road conditions in municipalities. 
When we applied digital road map (DRM) data of Japan 
Digital Road Map Association to Kakogawa City and 
Fujisawa City, the obtained link rates between 25,000 and 
30,000, were mostly similar. We show non-time zone link 
coverage rate for specific time period from the beginning of 
measurement (January 1, 2016). If a vehicle passes even 
once from the beginning of measurement, we consider that 
the link has been covered. Results are shown in Figure 3. 
Both cities showed 95% or higher link coverage rate within 
the one year of measurement. Operation of public vehicles 
can cover most of the links within one year. Therefore, it is 
possible to install the on-board road surface condition 
detector described earlier on public vehicles, thus these 
vehicles can routinely inspect facilities and public roads. 
Especially, because Figure 1 shows that the patrol cars 
cover a wide area, it would be appropriate to install sensors 
in patrol cars. 
Next, we divided the business hours from 9:00 to 17:00 
into eight time zones (by each hour), and considered the link 
for each hour as a separate unit to obtain link coverage rate. 
Because the traffic conditions differ depending on the time 
zone, obtaining the link coverage rate per time zone is 
valuable for traffic simulation. The results of this study are 
shown in Figure 4. Compared to the non-time zone link 
coverage shown in Figure 4, the time-zone links cannot be 
covered in short terms, such as a month or so. It takes a year 
to cover the equivalent of one month for non-time zone link 
coverage. 
In addition, the obtained non-time zone link coverage rate 
for Kakogawa City and Fujisawa City is increasing in 
mostly the same rate. 
 
 
TABLE II.  
OPERATION RATE ANALYSIS PER USAGE (TOP: KAKOGAWA CITY AND BOTTOM: FUJISAWA CITY) 
Kakogawa City 
Number 
of cars 
Operation 
rate 
Kakogawa City 
Number of 
cars 
Operation 
rate 
School bus (Yamate Kindergarten) 
2 
0.0 
Garbage transport 
1 
0.4 
School bus (Shikata Kindergarten) 
2 
44.7 
Cleaning vehicles 
1 
3.7 
Doctor-patient transportation 
1 
95.1 
Specialized vehicles 
1 
33.9 
Vans 
1 
0.0 
Collection vehicles 
3 
0.0 
Patrol cars 
2 
22.7 
Survey vehicles 
3 
0.4 
Kakogawa public hall 
1 
5.3 
Higashikakogawa Public Hall 
1 
20.4 
Kakogawanishi public hall 
1 
9.0 
Road patrol vehicles 
1 
97.1 
Cargo 
18 
42.2 
Nikkosan Cemetery  
1 
0.0 
Shared vehicles 
19 
52.0 
Health service vehicles 
1 
37.1 
Small cargo 
17 
35.1 
Crime prevention and traffic patrol vehicles 
1 
77.1 
For on-site supervisors 
1 
0.4 
Mankien day service transport 
2 
21.2 
For field managers 
1 
0.0 
Ryoso Public Hall 
1 
0.0 
Public emergency vehicles 
1 
35.5 
Courtesy vehicles  
15 
41.2 
Rescue operation vehicles 
1 
34.7 
Public vehicles (multi-purpose) 
17 
17.6 
Public relations vehicles 
1 
78.0 
Public vehicles (disaster prevention center) 
1 
31.0 
Material transportation vehicles 
1 
14.3 
Public vehicles (stadiums) 
1 
3.3 
Vehicles for office business 
6 
3.5 
Public vehicles (Greenery Association) 
1 
0.0 
Mini cargo 
1 
22.0 
Public vehicles for other uses 
1 
0.0 
Passenger vehicles 
10 
25.1 
Unknown 
27 
33.6 
Garbage trucks 
3 
31.2 
Total 
91 
24.5 
Garbage collection vehicles 
1 
9.8 
 
 
 
Fujisawa City 
Number of cars 
Operation rate 
Garbage collection vehicles 
75 
5.2 
Patrol vehicles 
13 
34.8 
Cargo 
11 
43.7 
Passenger vehicles 
28 
34.6 
Road patrol vehicles 
1 
28.6 
Total 
128 
29.4 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

 
 
Figure 3.  Non-time zone link coverage rate (Number of links: 28,917 for 
Kakogawa City, and 25,072 for Fujisawa City) 
 
 
Figure 4.  Time zone link coverage rate 
 
IV. 
POTENTIAL DATA OPTIMIZATION 
A. Vehicle operation analysis and application of 
optimization method for Kakogawa City 
In this section, we analyze the actual travel use 
information of public vehicles. Without adding assumptions 
to usage history, we determined the least number of vehicles 
needed to perform the work. Furthermore, we discussed 
introducing a vehicle reservation system that incorporates 
vehicle inclusion relationship and possible usage time. We 
examined the potential applications of the system by 
applying the previously collected data to this system. 
1) Data analysis  
The vehicles usage data record comprises the longitude 
and latitude coordinates and are measured continuously. 
In other words, continuous tracking data precisely 
measured at 1-s interval is discretely stored. The storage 
locations and types of each vehicle are also recorded. On 
the basis of the obtained information, we determined 
whether each vehicle was at its storage location or not 
based on its longitude and latitude coordinate. 
 
2) Operation optimization  
We analyzed the minimum number of vehicles needed 
to perform the vehicle operations for each type of vehicles. 
Specifically, we allocated the usage history to the existing 
vehicles. The maximum potential usage is allocated to 
vehicles based on usage history (= usage is established). A 
new vehicle was assigned only when overlap cannot be 
avoided with existing vehicles. This was applied to all 
usage history data, in order to obtain the minimum 
possible number of vehicles required in operation during 
the target period. A schematic diagram that illustrates the 
operations optimization is shown in Figure 5. 
Figure 5 (a) shows the usage history for vehicles A to G, 
with the vehicles use is divided into 5-min intervals from 
the beginning of the measurement for simplicity. Usage 
pattern during the target time is shown in shaded squares. 
The shading patterns show the different vehicle models, as 
three types of vehicles are analyzed. For operation 
optimization, the number of vehicles in operation is 
minimized by sliding the usage history, as shown in the 
Figure 5 (b). Vehicles C and G have overlapping use 
between 9:25 and 9:30, thus, this vehicle model requires 
two vehicles in operation. 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 5.  Conceptual diagram of operation optimization ( (a): before 
optimization, (b): after optimization) 
Translation of figures: Time, Vehicles A–G 
 
3) Preparation of dispatch system 
First, we developed a “vehicle inclusive relationship.” 
This is not just a dispatch table for each vehicle type, but it 
also includes the load capacity and the maximum 
passenger numbers reported in the vehicle ledger. In 
addition, a cross-sectional dispatch table between specific 
vehicles is created. Specifically, we grouped seven vehicle 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

types (underlined) that can be substituted based on the 
reported usage of 14 vehicle types in Kakogawa City 
(mini cargo, standard cargo, small cargo, passenger 
vehicles, mini passenger vehicles, mini vehicles, light 
passenger vehicles, specialized vehicles, buses, garbage 
trucks (standard), garbage trucks, standard specialized 
vehicles, mini special purpose vehicles, and standard 
special purpose vehicles). In order to satisfy the usage 
demand for vehicles within this group, we added a 
condition in which vehicles that have more load and 
passenger capacity can be dispatched regardless of the 
vehicle type. 
Next, we introduced the concept of “possible usage 
time.” It implies the total usage demand for n-hour per a 
certain time zone. For example, a request is filed as “I’d 
like to use (XX vehicle) during 1 h between 14:00 to 
17:00 on April 1.” Usage requests collected in this manner 
can be shifted within the requested range so that the 
number of vehicles in operation is minimized. Figure 6 
shows a schematic diagram of the developed dispatch 
system. 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 6.  Schematic diagram of dispatch system ((a): shifting the 
reservation using the requested time, (b): vehicle dispatch table) 
Translation of figures: Time, Vehicles A–G 
 
Figure 6 shows the operation optimization system 
assuming that the initial usage history shown in Figure 5 
(a) can be shifted within 5 min of usage history. Figure 5 
(b) reveals that despite that vehicles C and G are 
overlapping, however, the overlap can be shifted (Figure 6 
(a)). 
The use between 9:25 and 9:35 has been shifted to 9:30-
9:40. As a result, only three vehicles are needed to operate 
during this time period (Figure 6 (b)). 
In this section, after the initial solution was obtained by 
the first fit method, the tabu search technique was used to 
find 
solution 
heuristically 
by 
shifting 
tentative 
reservations. In other words, we extract usage history in a 
random order, and assign appropriate vehicles. However, 
if the existing vehicles cannot respond, new vehicles are 
assigned. In this manner, we use the tabu value of seven 
and maximum combinations of 1,000/step for the initially 
obtained solution. The calculation is completed when 
there is no new solution in 1,000 steps. This is how the 
tabu search method can be used to obtain the optimum 
solution. 
We applied the 2016 usage history to this reservation 
system based on the assumption that for processing all 
usage history, the usage request time is defined as 
plus/minus 1 h from the requested time. 
 
B. Results 
The results of data analysis in Section 4.1 (1) revealed 
that there were 117 vehicles that were used at least 5 min 
during the period. The highest frequency of usage was 
detected on December 28 (Wednesday) with 192 times. On 
this day, the mayor toured each facility, and paid the year-
end greetings. As shown in Figure 7, if the pattern of usage 
is analyzed per time interval, the use was most notable 
around 9:00–9:59 at the beginning of business hours, and 
around 13:00–13:59 when work restarted after lunch break. 
The analytical results of operation optimization in Section 
4.1 (2) indicate that 96 vehicles could be operated to cover 
2016 demand.  
The dispatch system analysis in Section 4.1(3) shows that 
by introducing the vehicle inclusive relationship system, the 
operation could be performed with 87 vehicles. When the 
vehicle inclusive relationship and possible usage time under 
the above conditions are applied to the analysis, the 
operations could be performed with 77 vehicles. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Frequency of usage per time zone in Kakogawa City 
Translation: 2016 Kakogawa City Office time-zone vehicle usage 
(times)(hour) 
C. Discussions 
1) Data analysis and operation optimization 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

The data analysis indicated that 44 vehicles were not 
used in 2016. When the operation optimization is applied, 
the operations, could be performed with 96 vehicles rather 
that 117 vehicles; thus, the number of vehicles in 
operation can be reduced by 31. Assuming that the annual 
maintenance cost per vehicle (including insurance and 
automobile inspection) is 60,000 yen, if the extra 75 
vehicles are removed from service, the maintenance cost 
can be reduced by 4,500,000 yen. If those vehicles are 
used for car sharing, assuming they typically charge 4,000 
yen/6 h, and if n% of reduced vehicles were used on each 
of 245 business days, the sales would be 4000 x 245 x 75 
x n/100 yen. For example, when n = 20, the sales would 
be 14,700,000 yen. 
 
2) Dispatch system 
When the vehicle inclusive relationship and possible 
usage time dispatch system with uniform 1 h lee way 
were applied, additional 19 vehicles could be reduced by 
this operation optimization. It proved the benefits of 
applying this dispatch system. 
 
3) Further reduction of the number of vehicles in 
operation 
Based on the above analysis, for example, if the 
appropriate measures were taken to reduce the vehicle 
usage on December 28 (Wednesday), the number of 
vehicles in operation might further be reduced. This could 
be achieved by reviewing the routes and time frame 
around facilities when the maximum usage was reported. 
Similarly, since there is increased vehicle use around 9:00 
and 13:00, measures can be taken by shifting heavy 
vehicle usage periods (time when vehicle use is allowed) 
for each department, thus, the number of vehicles in 
operation can be further reduced. 
Although the data between December 3 (Sunday) and 
December 11 (Monday) is missing, and the vehicles usage 
information is not recorded, the study findings regarding 
the optimization of vehicle operations, clearly showed the 
potential of practically reducing the public vehicles 
operations. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The above data analysis examined the actual usage of 
vehicles owned by Kakogawa City and Fujisawa City. The 
analysis showed that installing the previously described on-
board road surface condition detectors, can allow for the 
routine inspection of public facilities and roads to be carried 
out by the public vehicles. 
We were also able to show the potential of vehicle 
operations optimization. In the actual optimization, 
differences in vehicle usage patterns in each municipality 
were reported, and the method used in this study may be 
changed slightly in future applications. However, the study 
also presented a basic solution for reducing public vehicles 
operations.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was conducted as a part of the “working car 
project—development of an extensive data usage model via 
thorough use of public vehicles—“ in research and 
development of extensive social data usage application 
commissioned by the National Research and Development 
Agency, 
National 
Institute 
of 
Information 
and 
Communications Technology. We would like to especially 
thank Kakogawa City Office, Fujisawa City Office, and 
ZENRIN DataCom for all their support. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, Request for Public 
Facility Management Plan, 2014 
[2] H. Taguchi, K. Kimura, S. Hino, and A. Kinouchi, “Effective Factors 
for Promoting Car Sharing System and its Feasibility in Local City ‐ 
Case Study on Akita City ‐”, Papers on City Planning, No.44-3, 
pp.517-522, 2009 
[3] T. Yasumochi, Y. Kataoka, T. Kurachi, and N. Egawa, “Conversion 
of Parking Lots by Introduction of Car Sharing in Public Housing 
Complex”, Architectural Institute of Japan, vol. 80, pp.2861-2867, 
2015 
[4] Y. Hara and E. Hato, “Proposed Reservation System on Network in 
Shared Usage Traffic Service”, Proceedings of JSCE D3(Committee 
of Infrastructure Planning and Management) Vol. 67, No.5, pp.509-
519,  2011 
[5] Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, Information and 
Communications 
Council, 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology Subcommittee, Technology Strategy Committee, Smart 
IoT 
Promotion 
Strategy, 
http://www.soumu.go.jp/main_content/000424359.pdf (as of April 21, 
2017) 
[6] J. Cramer, A. B. Kruger, “Disruptive Change in the Taxi Business: 
The Case of Uber”, Working Papers (Princeton University. Industrial 
Relations Section); 595, 2015 
[7] M. Yamada, K. Ueda, I. Horiba, S. Tsugawa, and S. Yamamoto, “A 
Study of the Road Surface Condition Detection Technique based on 
the Image Information for Deployment on a Vehicle”, IEEJ Trans. 
EIS, Vol.124 No.3, pp.753-760, 2004 
[8] K. Tomiyama, A. Kawamura, S. Fujita, and T. Ishida, “An Effective 
Surface Inspection Method of Urban Roads According to the 
Pavement Management Situation of Local Governments”, Japan 
Society of Civil Engineers F3 (Civil and Information Engineering), 
Vol. 69 No.2, pp. I_54-I_62, 2013 
[9] T. Kawasaki, et al., “A Method to Detect Wear and Tear on Road 
Surface Signs using General Camera and General Vehicle”, IPSJ SIG 
Technical Report, Vol.2015-ITS-60 No.3, 2015 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

