Performance Evaluation of DSDV, DSR, AODV and TORA MANET Routing 
Protocols for Body Monitoring in Free Space Environments 
 
Majda Omer Elbasheer Ali 
 College of Computer Science and Information Technology 
Sudan University of Science and Technology 
 Khartoum, Sudan  
E-mail: majda.omer@gmail.com 
Jaime Lloret 
Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, 
Camino Vera s/n, 46022 
 Valencia, Spain 
E-mail: jlloret@dcom.upv.es
 
Abstract— A Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) is a 
constantly 
self-configuring 
and 
no-centralized 
stationary 
infrastructure network, in MANET, the mobile nodes connected 
via wireless channels. Routing protocols considered as important 
elements to forward data in such a dynamic network topology. 
They are needed when it is required to gather information from 
people like in health monitoring. This paper firstly introduces a 
concise overview about the MANET. Then, it shows the study of 
four routing protocols in terms of their capability scaling with the 
network growth and intensity of nodes, in addition to examine 
how they behave in two mobility models (regular cases of patients 
monitoring). It presents dissections and assessment of each 
protocol performance. 
Keywords— MANET; DSDV; DSR; AODV; TORA; Random 
mobility model; Grid mobility model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, there has been a continuous evolution in the 
technology of mobile devices, such as smart mobile phones, 
Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), mobile sensors, and 
vehicles. This technology comes with a huge advantage, such 
as flexibility of using the mobile device anytime and anywhere 
despite of time and location constraints. On the other hand, the 
mobility feature of these devises lead to limitations in their 
resources in terms of memories, hard drives and the volume of 
batteries [1]. Although of these limitations, there are new 
applications came up rapidly to take benefit of mobile devices. 
This technology is mainly being used in personal and business, 
for 
example 
games, 
maps 
navigation, 
entertainment, 
banking/finance, and shopping. The considerable revolution of 
these mobile devices is the capability of connecting to 
networks, nevertheless, because of their limitations they require 
and efficient routing protocols. These mobile devices or nodes 
connect with each other’s by a mobile ad-hoc network 
(MANET), which is a network of wireless stations without 
centralized or fixed infrastructure. These networks encounter 
periodically changes in its topologies. Each node in this 
network performs as peer router with other, all nodes 
represents routing stations and they collaborate to transfers 
data. Because of the absence of the base station and dynamic 
changing of topology, the process of forwarding data among 
these nodes depends on the efficient performance of routing 
protocols [2][3]. 
MANET routing protocols can classified as reactive, 
proactive or hybrid protocols. The reactive protocol does not 
preserve any routing information or state of the network until it 
get request of transmission, at that moment, lookup for a route 
and establish connection, for the reason that it called on-
demand protocol. On the other hand, the proactive calculate 
and maintain all routes previously, and make periodic update of 
its routing tables. Finally, the hybrid protocols came to take 
advantages of the proactive and reactive algorithms, initially it 
set up routing proactively, and when there are newly joining 
nodes it deal with them through reactive flooding [4]. 
MANET routing protocols used with several applications, 
such as house monitoring (smart home), habitat monitoring, 
which it help ecologists to gather environmental data that 
affecting people, animals, and  plants, in addition to healthcare 
applications, that provide healthcare anywhere and in any time. 
This work concentrates to study MANET routing protocols, for 
facilitating people monitoring, which is an important factor in 
healthcare applications. Ad hoc network routing protocols are 
required to send data to patients and receive information from 
them. People mobiles in different patterns and the density of 
them changed from location to another, for example, in 
healthcare monitoring, the number of monitored people 
increased in and near to the hospital and health centers, as a 
result, it is important to know the behavior of each MANET 
routing protocol to built the proper healthcare systems. 
This paper performs a performance evaluation of the 
following four mobile ad hoc network protocols, destination-
Sequenced 
Distance-Vector 
Routing 
Protocol 
(DSDV), 
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR), Ad-hoc On-demand Distance 
Vector routing (AODV) and Temporally Ordered Routing 
Algorithm (TORA), for body monitoring in free space. The 
approach of assessment includes two scenarios; the first one is 
used to examine the behavior of each protocol according to the 
density and scaling in numbers of nodes, the second one is used 
to study how these routing protocols will react in two different 
mobility models. 
Rest of this paper organized as follows. Section 2 gives a 
brief description about MANET routing protocols under study. 
Related work is addressed in Section 3. Section 4 shows the 
scenarios and simulations environment. While Section 5 
presents the results and discussions of them. Finally, Section 6 
concludes this paper and gives a glance about future work. 
II. 
MANET ROUTING PROTOCOLS UNDER STUDY 
A. Destination-Sequenced Distance-Vector Routing Protocol 
(DSDV) 
One of Ad-hoc proactive protocols, it is a table-driven 
routing scheme; all node of the network maintains a routing 
table contains of all destinations and the number of hops that a 
packet would need to reach to the destination. The DSDV 
solves the routing loop problem (loop paths), by providing a 
sequence number for each entry in routing table. This 
algorithm send a periodic updates of entire routing table, 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

between these periods it send smaller routing updates between 
nodes frequently [3][5]. 
B. Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) 
DSR one of reactive routing protocols. In this protocol, the 
source node overflows the entire network with a route 
discovery request, it identify each route request with the packet 
source and destination of this route. The target node 
(destination) respond to the route request, by scans its own 
cache for a route before sending route reply to the initiator of 
route request. If there no route found, the destination execute 
its own route discovery mechanism in order to reach to the 
source [6]. 
C. Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV) 
One of Ad-hoc On-demand a routing protocol, it builds 
routes between nodes only when it required by source nodes, 
and does not allow the nodes that not founded  in the active 
path to preserve information about this route. AODV develop 
trees to connect multicast group members. Moreover, it uses 
the sequence numbers to guarantee the free route loop problem. 
AODV builds routes using a route request and route reply 
query cycle, when a source node desires a route to a 
destination; it distribute a route request (RREQ) packet across 
the network. Nodes receiving this packet update their 
information for the source node and set up backwards pointers 
to the source node in the route tables [3] [5]. 
D. Temporally Ordered Routing Algorithm (TORA) 
TORA is hybrid routing protocol; the paths establish with 
proactive routes initially, and then servers request additional 
routes through reactive flooding. This protocol has high energy 
consumption in contrast with other protocols of its type [3]. 
The main objective of TORA is to limit control message 
propagation in the highly dynamic mobile computing 
environment. Each node explicitly initiates a query when it 
needs to send data to a particular destination [7]. 
III. 
RELATED WORKS 
R. Lacuesta et al. presented a comprehensive investigation 
in ad hoc networks routing protocols [3]. Their chapter 
deliberates the protocols in term of secure and non-secure 
routing protocols, addition to analyze protocols performance 
with different metrics. They use OPNET (Optimized Network 
Engineering Tool) simulator to emulate the DSR, OLSR 
(Optimized Link State Routing Protocol), and AODV 
protocols, the simulated topologies contain 50, 100, and 250 
nodes, moreover, there are two scenarios, one with movable 
nodes with failures and the other consists of fixed node. Their 
results present the OLSR and AODV as superior in 
performance than DSR; however, OLSR is worst protocol in 
the performance of data link layer. 
A comparative analysis of four MANET routing protocol in 
different mobility models of ad hoc network was introduced by 
N. S. Samshette and others [8]. They simulated three mobility 
models, Random Walk, Random waypoint, Random direction. 
The routing protocols under test are DSR, DSDV, AODV, and 
AOMDV (Ad-hoc On-Demand Multipath Distance Vector 
routing). Their results had shown that the AODV as best 
throughput in Random Walk mobility model, and DSR 
smallest throughput for all mobility models. However, they use 
only TCP traffic and 25 nodes. 
Rahman et al intend to evaluate the performance of three 
routing protocols by using The Network Simulator (NS2) [5]. 
Their study includes AODV, DSDV, and Improvement of 
DSDV (I-DSDV) protocols. The number of simulated nodes 
set in 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35 nodes. Their results 
demonstrate that the AODV has better performance than other, 
while I-DSDV reduces the number of dropped data packets 
compared DSDV, however it produces more computation 
overhead. 
In 2008, J. Lloret et al. try to take advantage by designing a 
group-based ad-hoc network in order to gain flexibly and 
efficiently. In addition, splitting the network in groups, it also 
improves the fault tolerance and gains more other benefits. 
They studied the DSR, OLSR, and AODV MANET routing 
protocols behavior when these protocols work in groups, 
compared to an individually-based network [9].  In this case, 
OPNET simulator was used to create the suggested topologies. 
The results show that grouping nodes in ad-hoc network lead to 
achieving better performance, in addition to decrease the extra 
and overhead traffic of network. OLSR appeared as the best 
protocol in group-based topologies [9]. In the same year, 
Garcia and others studied the three MANET protocols 
mentioned above. In this case, they examined the performance 
of protocols in Wireless Sensor and Actor Networks (WSAN). 
The experiment proves the possibility of implementing these 
protocols in WSAN. OLSR appeared as most suitable protocol 
for WSAN than AODV and DSR, however OLSR was the 
worst in terms of consumed throughput rate. 
N. Meghanathan investigated the performance of stability-
oriented MANET routing protocols [11]. His study included 
the Associativity-Based Routing (ABR) protocol, Flow-
Oriented Routing (FORP) Protocol and Route Assessment 
Based Routing (RABR) protocol. This findings show that 
FORP has the best routes stability than others, however, this 
demand 
higher 
end-to-end 
delay 
and 
higher 
energy 
consumption per packet. 
Moreover, M. Tarique et al suggested studying the 
MANETs network according to other performance metrics 
rather than network throughput [12]. They examined packet 
delay, overhead control packets, energy consumption, 
connectivity, and shadowing effects. Their study was 
performed under short-hop and long-hop routing by using DSR 
routing protocol, because, it is important for routing protocol is 
to decide whether a mobile node should use many short-hops 
or a few long-hops. The results show that the long-hop routing 
is better in term of reducing the delay per packet and packet 
loss, while short-hop routing is better in keeping network life 
as long as possible.  
In field of people monitoring, M. Garcia and others propose 
soccer team players’ remote monitoring system through using 
wireless sensor network [13].  Their procedure intended to use 
the Wireless Body Area Networks (WBANs) to know the 
physical state of players during matches. They studied the 
network topology and mobility models of the soccer players. 
ZigBee 
Routing 
Protocol 
(ZRP) 
was 
used 
for 
the 
communication between nodes. The routing protocol was 
AODV. The results clarify that the additional routing hops is 
required in case of high mobility to achieve lower network 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

load, however, the management traffic is low in their proposal. 
The same authors proposed a wireless body sensors network 
for soccer team in [14], which it is a continuous work of the 
previous study. The routing of information can be done via the 
nodes of the same team or through the nodes of the other team; 
therefore, they added a security system to let the information be 
decrypted only by players and coach of the same team. In 
addition, they narrow radio coverage area to be no longer than 
four meter to avoid eavesdropping from any place of the 
stands. Furthermore, they improved the mobility model and 
increased the number of simulations. Additionally, they 
proposed an energy harvesting system to provide enough 
energy for that very low transmission range. Simulations 
results show that the management traffic is low, which in all 
cases of high and low mobility is below than 250 Kbps.  
IV. 
SCENARIOS AND SIMULATIONS 
Studying routing protocols and identify their behavior, is 
important to forward data, and to gather information from 
people in health monitoring. This part gives brief descriptions 
about the methods followed to compare the four mentioned 
MANET protocols. The approach includes two fundamental 
scenarios. The first one is used to study the behavior of each 
protocol according to the density and scaling in numbers of 
nodes in three different cases. The initial case contains 50 
nodes, which it has six nodes send traffic by TCP and UDP 
transport layer protocols. While case two created by hundred 
nodes, besides, to raising the packet size and number of 
sending nodes, to send more flow in network. The last topology 
has two hundred nodes as well as increasing in packet size. All 
topologies have same set of some nodes moving around in 
different times, and some others are static for whole time of 
simulation. In each case study, the four protocols have been 
tested in the same environment and all the parameter is same 
except the type of protocols. The second one is used to 
examine how these routing protocols will react in different 
mobility models, this study analyses two models, Random 
Walk and Manhattans Grid Mobility (MGM). In random walk 
mobility model, nodes moves randomly by any speed or 
direction [8], such as movement of users in public parks and 
playgrounds or large hypermarkets. While the grid represents 
transitions of mobile nodes in streets, every node permitted to 
move horizontal or vertical. Further, the two topologies of the 
second scenario are set up with same parameters and size of 
network. Figures 1 and 2 show these topologies configured in 
the simulation. The connections inside the figures are just to 
demonstrate the intersections between nodes, addition to 
sources and destinations of network flow. 
In order to measure the performance of the routing 
protocols in each scenario, data are collected from the 
simulation. Then throughput and normalized routing overhead 
metrics are chosen for the performance assessment. The 
throughput in communication networks is the average of 
successful message delivery over a communication channel 
and it is measured by the number of bits delivered per second 
or data packets per time unit.  While normalized routing 
overhead (also called normalized routing load) is the total 
number of routing packet transmitted per data packet, it 
examines the cost of routing vs. success receiving of 
application data. 
 
Figure. 1. The Grid Mobility Model 
 
Figure. 2. The Random Mobility Model 
A. Simulation environment and flow parameters 
The experiments have been performed using NS2 
simulator, NS2 is a discrete event open source simulator [15]. 
It supports different types of wired and wireless network 
protocols. In addition it has been used in many networking 
researches. NS2 use TCL scripting language to set and draw 
the network topology, NS2 scenarios generator 2 (NSG2) is a 
Java based tool used to create TCL programs of examined 
scenarios. NSG2 reduces the time of writing TCL scripts by 
using an easy GUI interface [16].Table 1 shows the parameters 
applied in the simulation tests. Awk scripting language is used 
to calculate the throughput and routing load. The graphs of the 
data gathered have been created using Microsoft Excel.  
 
 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PRAMATERS 
Prompters 
Topology 
_50 
Topology 
_100 
Topology 
_200 
Random and 
Grid  
Number of nodes 
50 
100 
200 
200 
TCP 
packet 
size/bytes 
1500 
3000 
4000 
2000 
UDP 
packet 
size/bytes 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2000 
Application level 
data 
FTP 
and 
CBR 
FTP and 
CBR 
FTP 
and 
CBR 
FTP 
and 
CBR 
Simulation time 
/s 
0-15 s 
0-15 s 
0-15 s 
0-10s 
Others 
Others parameters such as channel type, MAC 
protocol, etc are same for all topologies  
V. 
RESULTS AND DISSECTION  
This section explains and discusses the results gathered 
from simulation in term of throughput and routing overhead for 
the two scenarios stated above.  
A. First Scenario Dissections 
Figure 30 shows the throughput of the protocols when the 
number of nodes is 50. In this graph the DSR protocol obtains 
very good throughput in comparison with other protocols. It 
has average throughput of 761.0 kbits/s. While DSDV takes a 
lot of time in control before it began to deliver applications 
data and get 130.3 kbits/s as average. As observed in Figure 3, 
AODV has an average throughput of 434.8 kbits/s, which 
places it between the others. In this case, TORA is the worst 
one because its throughput is zero; furthermore, during the 
simulation it is just sending information to discover neighbors. 
TORA behave as same with scaling number of nodes and the 
data traffic dropped in the intermediates nodes.  
 
Figure. 3. Throughput in 50th nodes topology.  
The throughput given when there are 100 nodes is 
illustrated in Figure 4. In this situation the flow of application 
data also increased. As shown in the figure, AODV has a good 
throughput with the expansion of the network than others 
protocols. It has 369.8 kbits/s of average throughput. In spite of 
the growth of the network, DSR is still well behaved which has 
an average throughput of 351.2 kbits/s. While DSDV witness 
some reduction in its average throughput and has 99.0 kbits/s. 
TORA has the worst average throughput. 
 
Figure. 4. Throughput in 100-nodes topology. 
As noticed in Figure 5, the throughput is degraded for all 
protocols with the network growth. In this case, TORA 
situation not changed at all. In contrast, DSDV had some 
improvements compared with previous results with an average 
throughput of 118.5 kbits/s, while DSR and AODV has similar 
result, their throughput is 355.2 and 235.0 kbits/s in average 
respectively. 
 
Figure. 5. Throughput in 200-nodes topology. 
Figure 6 shows the normalized routing load for the case of 
100 nodes. We can observe in this graph that TORA has higher 
routing load than the others when it starts forwarding routing 
packets and remains that the highest one until it finishes. 
Moreover, DSDV achieves high routing overhead in the 
beginning of the simulation time, after that, it acquires few 
overhead. DSR and AODV have similar moderate routing 
overhead.  
 
Figure. 6. Normalized Routing Overhead in 100-nodes topology. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

B. Random and Grid Mobility model Dissections: 
The next graphs explain the throughput according to the 
two mobility models. Figures 7 and 8, show that DSR protocol 
performs better than other protocols in both models, and it has 
an average throughput of 681.0 kbits/s in random model and 
615.5 kbits/s in Grid model. AODV’s throughput is better in 
Random (where average throughput is 668.3 kbits/s) than Grid, 
which has 598.4 kbits/s. DSDV and TORA are the worst 
protocols, DSDV is bad one with average throughput because 
the number of nodes is small. As shown earlier, it achieves 
better performance with the increase of nodes, but this does not 
guarantee it in case of massive intensity of nodes. TORA 
protocol gains better throughput in Grid than Random model. 
However, it very trivial to be represented in the graphs with 
other protocols, actually it works bad even with small number 
of nodes. It forwards negotiable bytes in contrast of others. It 
has from 0.00 to 0.28 kbits/s in Random, and 0 to 32.6 kbits/s 
in Grid. 
 
 
Figure. 7. Random Mobility model. 
 
Figure. 8. Grid Mobility model. 
Finally, Figure 9 shows the evaluation of normalized 
routing load for the four routing protocols in the grid topology. 
Routing overhead in random model is studied in the first 
scenario. The mobility model is the same although there is 
different number of nodes. The normalized routing load 
represented in Figure 9 confirmed what declared before: DSR 
and AODV have lowest and moderate load, while DSDV has 
very huge overhead when it starts, after that it preserves small 
load. Lastly, TORA has the vast normalized routing overhead. 
 
Figure. 9. Normalized Routing load in Grid Mobility model. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS  
The behavior of MANET routing protocols in different 
mobility models, and their scalability have been an issue of 
concern in many applications areas. This increases with the 
type of application area, such as people monitoring in 
healthcare systems. This paper studies DSDV, DSR, AODV, 
and TORA protocols, with different number of nodes and 
packets size. In addition, their performance in two mobility 
models is assessed. As summary, DSR obtains better 
throughput in comparison with others, while AODV achieves 
higher throughput with the growth and intensity of the network. 
TORA protocol is the worst one in terms of routing overhead 
and throughput. 
Finally, in our future work, these four MANET routing 
protocols will be analyzed by moving all nodes around in order 
to show which one has better performance. Furthermore, we 
will continue this work, by adding Optimized Link State 
Routing Protocol (OLSR) [17], as well as we will study other 
mobility models. . 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Swaroop, G. K. Gupta, and U. Shanker, “Issues In Mobile 
Distributed Real Time Databases: Performance And Review,” 
International Journal of Engineering Science and Technology, 
3(4),2011. 
[2] A. K. Gupta, H. Sadawarti, and A. K. Verma, “Performance 
analysis of MANET routing protocols in different mobility 
models,” International Journal of Information Technology and 
Computer Science (IJITCS) , vol. 5, pp. 73-82, 2013. 
[3] R. Lacuesta, M. García, J. Lloret, and G. Palacios, “Study and 
Performance of Mobile Ad Hoc Routing Protocols,” Mobile Ad 
Hoc Networks: Current Status and Future Trends, 2011, pp. 71. 
[4] B. M. Subramanya, and D. Shwetha, “A performance study of 
proactive, reactive and hybrid routing protocols using qualnet 
simulator,” International Journal of Computer Applications, 
28(5), 2011, pp. 10-17. 
[5] A. H. A. Rahman, and Z. A. Zukarnain, “Performance 
comparison of AODV, DSDV and I-DSDV routing protocols in 
mobile ad hoc networks,” European Journal of Scientific 
Research, 31(4), 2009, pp. 566-576. 
[6] D. B. Johnson, “The dynamic source routing protocol for mobile 
ad hoc networks,” draft-ietf-manet-dsr-09. txt, 2003. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

[7] V. D. Park, and M. S. Corson, “A highly adaptive distributed 
routing 
algorithm 
for 
mobile 
wireless 
networks,” 
In 
INFOCOM'97. Sixteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE 
Computer 
and 
Communications 
Societies. 
Driving 
the 
Information Revolution., Proceedings IEEE Vol. 3, 1997, pp. 
1405-1413).  
[8] N. S. Samshette, A. D. Bhoi, R. D. Kharadkar, “Analysis and 
Comparison of Mobility Models for Ad-hoc Network,” 
International Journal on Recent and Innovation Trends in 
Computing and Communication (IJRITCC), Vol.2 Issue.5, 
2014, pp: 1357 – 1362. 
[9] J. Lloret, M. García, F. Boronat, and J. Tomás, “MANET 
protocols performance in group-based networks,” Wireless and 
mobile networking,2008, pp. 161-172,  
[10] M. Garcia, H. Coll, D. Bri, and J. Lloret, “Using MANET 
protocols in wireless sensor and actor networks,” Second 
International 
Conference 
on 
Sensor 
Technologies 
and 
Applications, SENSORCOMM'08., August 2008, pp. 154-159.. 
[11] N. Meghanathan, “Exploring the Performance Tradeoffs among 
Stability-Oriented Routing Protocols for Mobile Ad hoc 
Networks,” Network Protocols and Algorithms, 2(3), 2010, pp. 
18-36,. 
[12] M. Tarique, A. Hossain, R. Islam, C. A. Hossain, “Issues of 
Long-hop And Short-hop Routing in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: 
A Comprehensive Study,” Network Protocols and Algorithms, 
Vol 2, No 2, 2010, pp. 107-131. 
[13] M. García, A. Catalá, J. Lloret, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “A 
Wireless Sensor Network for Soccer Team Monitoring,” 7th 
IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing in 
Sensor Systems (IEEE DCOSS '11), Barcelona (Spain), 2011, 
June ,pp. 27 – 29. 
[14] J. Lloret, M. Garcia, A. Catalá, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “A Group-
Based Wireless Body Sensors Network using Energy Harvesting 
for Soccer Team Monitoring,” International Journal of Sensor 
Networks, 2016, Vol. 21. Issue 4. 
[15] K. Fall, and K. Varadhan, “The network simulator–NS-2,” URL: 
http://www. isi. edu/nsnam/ns, March, 2016. 
[16]  P. 
J. 
Wu, 
S2 
Scenarios 
Generator 
2 
(NSG2), 
URL:https://sites.google.com/site/pengjungwu/nsg, 
March, 
2016.  
[17] Teerapat Sanguankotchakorn, Supattra Wiriyapant, Thanapol 
Saengsrichun, 
OLSR 
Control 
Overhead 
and 
Power 
Consumption Reduction using Game Theory, Network Protocols 
and Algorithms, Vol 7, No 2 (2015). Pp. 96-112 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

