WatChair: AI-Powered Real-time Monitoring of
Sitting Posture and Corrective Suggestions using
Wearable Motion Sensor System
Shayan Fazeli
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
shayan@cs.ucla.edu
Mohammad Kachuee
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
mkachuee@cs.ucla.edu
Majid Sarrafzadeh
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
majid@cs.ucla.edu
Afshin Aminian
Orthopaedic Institute
Children’s Hospital of Orange County
afshinaminian@hotmail.com
Abstract—The majority of the population around the globe
spend a considerable portion of their days seated. This fact can
be associated with several factors, such as the circumstances
of most of the current jobs and the prevalence of the use of
computer systems. One could argue that this knowledge indicates
that the impacts of maintaining proper posture while sitting can
be observed more than before. Therefore, it is critical to be able
to observe, correct, and control our sitting posture throughout
the day. Monitoring and correcting our short-term and long-
term sitting habits over time can lead to signiﬁcant improvement
in our physical well-being. In this work, we propose WatChair,
an AI-powered remote subject monitoring system that assists
in short-term sitting posture recognition, activity-level tracking,
long-term monitoring, and providing corrective suggestions. Our
platform consists of a small wearable component, an application,
and a cloud-based back-end. Our framework has been evaluated
in practice, and the results of empirical validation and the
user-friendliness questionnaire points to a simple, accurate,
and user-friendly system for remote sitting posture monitoring.
This framework also presents an adaptable solution for general
dynamic posture recognition and tracking using wearable systems
based on motion sensors.
Index Terms—mobile health, remote health monitoring, ma-
chine learning, ehealth
I. INTRODUCTION
The sedentary lifestyle has caused people to spend a con-
siderable portion of their lives seated. The act of sitting has
the potential to cause severe short-term and long-term health
problems if not done correctly. An example of such problems
is the feeling of pain and discomfort in the neck and back
area [1]–[3]. Most studies have indicated a strong connection
between the sitting posture in performing different activities
with outcomes including health status and eating, claiming that
controlling it and maintaining proper sitting posture can help
the subjects [4], [5]. As simple as sitting as an activity might
seem, it has also been known for its impacts on certain types
of decision-making, such as online grocery shopping [6].
Wearable Component
Fig. 1. The system architecture of WatChair platform
For the reasons mentioned above, remote monitoring of
sitting posture and attempting to correct it over time is an
exciting area of research. This stems from the fact that a
convenient and thorough solution for this problem is invaluable
as it has the potential to improve the quality of life for many
people.
In this work, we introduce WatChair, a platform for con-
tinuous monitoring of sitting posture that aids subjects with
corrective suggestions. This work attempts to bring a smooth
remote monitoring experience to the subjects while attempting
to keep the cost and intrusion associated with the data acqui-
sition system as low as possible. This is done by focusing
on providing more efﬁcient solutions to the software-related
aspects of the problem. Our system will monitor the sitting
posture, recognize different sitting posture patterns, and help
the subject with a thorough report of the statistics of their
sitting posture throughout the day. It also provides them with
their history of sitting information, assisting them with easy
progress tracking.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-809-9
SPWID 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

This article is structured as follows: In section II, a review of
the previous works that are related to sitting habit monitoring
is presented. Our system is introduced in section III, and it
is followed by the discussion of experiments and results in
section IV.
II. RELATED WORKS
Remote monitoring of the human body, postures, and ac-
tivities is an important area of mobile health research. Many
researchers and companies have been working on developing
utilities and analytical solutions to monitor, understand, track,
and leverage the information related to body posture. These
solutions assist subjects in improving physical activities, rang-
ing from general posture to particular therapeutic exercises [7],
[8].
There have been numerous research works focusing on
monitoring sitting as an important daily activity. These works
were mostly focused on analyzing the sitting posture to better
fathom its transitions and variations throughout the process
of sitting [9], [10]. The system in [11] is designed for sitting
behavior tracking and analysis. This work has utilized many
stretchable sensors and pressure sensors to prepare a thorough
sensor-driven system. Their main contribution is their sitting
behavior recognition using neural networks and dynamic time
warping.
The system proposed in [12] with the objective of helping
mitigate the impacts of poor sitting posture such as pain and
discomfort in the back and neck. Their system is based on
multiple motion sensors, and it is close to our approach in
terms of low cost and affordability. Their system differentiates
between sitting, lying, walking, and standing postures. Their
framework’s main components are cardboard, test pole, and
dynamic measure units (DMU) that include accelerometer,
gyroscope, and magnetometer.
The framework proposed in [13] follows a different objec-
tive of monitoring ﬂoor sitting postures. This work proposes
the use of a number of pressure sensors in a system to achieve
this objective.
A personalized transportable folding device is utilized in
[14] to assist with maintaining a better sitting posture while
eating. Their results led to the empirical validation of the
hypothesis that improving the sitting posture while eating can
help with the mitigation of the adverse effects of dysphagia.
The use of sensor-augmented and specialized chairs is also
investigated in the literature [15]. In [16], the authors have
proposed a system based on a chair embedded with pressure
sensors to differentiate between the three main sitting postures
of leaning forward, reclining backward or neutral sitting. In
terms of the sitting postures that this system attempts to
recognize, this work bears considerable similarity to ours.
Nevertheless, there is no need for any other circuitry besides
a single motion sensor in our approach. A similar grouping
of sitting postures can be found in [17] as well. Another
work in which a chair is augmented with a large number
of electrical sensors is [18]. In a different approach, [19]
uses a pressure mat for sitting posture recognition. A sensor-
augmented cushion is also used in [20] and [21] for sitting
posture detection, which serves as an approach similar to the
previously mentioned works.
The work in [22] uses feedback mechanisms for posture
correction. The system in [22] is composed of a Kinect
device for extracting body landmarks and helping the user by
providing feedback, urging them to maintain proper posture.
Several other Kinect-based approaches focused on ﬁnding
unhealthy sitting postures [23]–[26]. In [27], authors combine
the information obtained from Kinect with smartwatches to
improve the resulting detections. As the sitting posture recog-
nition is especially important for remote health monitoring
of elderly patients, a similar work focused on Kinect-based
posture recognition for the elderly is presented in [28].
Our contributions in this study and the main differences
compared to the mentioned works are as follows:
• The recognition scheme in this work focuses on linking
the sensory data to discrete classes corresponding to
essential proper and improper sitting postures. The mo-
bile application utilizes the machine learning algorithm
and interacts with a single wearable device to associate
every time window with the corresponding status and
stores the relevant information in the cloud database. It
provides the statistics on the short-term evaluation of the
subject’s posture and activity while seated and shows
corrective suggestions. In addition, it reads and visualizes
the historical data on the subject’s sitting habits, which
can help in tracking long-term progress.
• The proposed algorithm is compatible with small sam-
pling frequencies, which leads to a signiﬁcant reduction
in battery consumption on the wearable device and im-
proves the usability of the framework.
• The mobile application provides an easy to use interface
to interact with for users and developers. It allows custom
labeling for developers, enabling gathering data on cus-
tom postures, and storing the data in the cloud database
for further analyses.
• The analytical approaches are veriﬁed in a Python-based
research framework. Our current inference engine for
sitting posture recognition is composed of pre-processing
steps and linear support vector machine instances, which
are implemented in the mobile application as well.
• The experimental setup and the empirical results on our
cohort indicate the effectiveness of this system for posture
tracking and correction while the subject is seated. As
shown in the literature, this can lead to the prevention of
complications in short-term and long-term health condi-
tions.
III. PROPOSED SYSTEM
The overall architecture of WatChair is depicted in Figure 1.
The ﬁrst part of the system is a simple wearable component,
which includes the motion sensors that we are interested in
monitoring. This component would be located on the subjects’
back and between the arms and used for sampling data points
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-809-9
SPWID 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

Fig. 2. Three main postures for sitting habit monitoring [29]
Fig. 3. The main interface of our application is shown in this ﬁgure.
and transmission. The system obtains its electrical power from
a coin battery inside it, and given the frequency of reading,
here, there is no need for frequent battery replacement.
This wearable component interacts with an android device
using the WatChair app. Upon running the application, if
the device is in range, the connection is maintained, and the
process of data acquisition, recognition, and transmission to
our cloud back-end begins.
The application provides a user-friendly interface between
the board, the cloud back-end, and the subject. The user
can observe long-term and short-term information about their
pattern of sitting and score their seated behavior accordingly.
This framework renders it possible to ﬁne-tune the models
as more data is gathered in the cloud database. In this work,
we attempted to evaluate the performance of a general model
with no need for per person calibration. Nevertheless, this
framework can be used with ease to provide each user with
separate user-calibrated models as well.
In what follows, the details of our approach and the com-
ponents of this framework are elaborated upon.
A. Data
The main and only sensory part of this framework is
composed of affordable, portable, and widely available Meta-
Tracker boards [30]. These boards are widely used when
motion sensors are to be utilized for evaluating physical
readiness, an example being training pilots [31].
The single wearable component of this platform is placed
on the subject’s back and between the arms, which can be
easily done using a strap or cord. The main component for the
effective tracking of sitting habits is posture recognition. The
main three postures that our platform focuses on recognizing
are depicted in Figure 2 [32], and empirical results indicate
that the data acquired from this location is mostly sufﬁcient for
making such determination. In addition, the sensor alignment
can be automatically determined, and the system is ﬂexible in
terms of small displacements in using the wearable component.
The wearable component uses a Lithium battery, and in our
framework, there is no need for frequent battery replacement.
This is due to the fact that our framework is focused on seated
posture and is compatible with low-frequency sensor readings.
This property and being equipped with 2.4 GHz Bluetooth
Low Energy chips enables us to maintain a smooth connection
route between the wearable component and the app.
The mobile application then handles the data-related rou-
tines, including cloud storage, analytics, and transmission.
B. Application
Another essential component in our system is WatChair’s
mobile application. Upon launching the application, it writes
the conﬁguration necessary for the motion sensors, such as the
frequency of sampling, and issues the start command for the
wearable component. The information then can be monitored
continuously using the app’s interface, as depicted in Figure
3.
Afterward, the information is continuously retrieved, ﬁl-
tered, and pushed to our cloud database. For the back-end
database, we are using Google Cloud Firestore as a NoSQL
database composed of documents and collections. The ap-
plication builds a communication channel to the Firebase
instance in order to efﬁciently perform the transactions. These
transactions include pushing the gathered data to the cloud
database, an instance of Cloud Firestore, and reading the
historical information for updating the visualizations in the
app.
Please note that the related intervention information regard-
ing how to correct the posture is also presented in the applica-
tion, providing the subject with a more in-depth understanding
of how to proceed regarding the given personalized posture
correction information.
The quality of the application was surveyed through a
usability questionnaire developed according to the Usefulness,
Satisfaction, and Ease of use questionnaires in [33], [34].
This questionnaire was given to the subjects in our study,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-809-9
SPWID 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

with the idea of receiving feedback on the application as the
main component in this framework. It has scored 9.9/ 10.0,
indicating the easiness of using and getting familiar with it.
Machine Learning: The machine learning component of
WatChair is composed of an inference pipeline that directly
links sensor readings to different sitting postures and char-
acteristics. The trained model weights are used in the appli-
cation to enable efﬁcient use and effortless alterations in the
future. The relevant sensor readings that come from motion
sensors (mainly, the three-axis sensors of accelerometer and
gyroscope) are buffered and transmitted to the application.
In our experiments, we considered the time window of 60
seconds; therefore, the seated behavior of the subject for every
minute is represented and used by the model for evaluation.
The ﬁndings are then stored with the timestamps to help with
the progress review.
The recognition pipeline is designed using Support Vector
Classiﬁcation which enables differentiating between the labels
using one-vs-all classiﬁers. The training objective uses hinge
loss and is as follows:
min
θ,b
1
2θT θ + C
N
X
i=1
max(0, yi(θT φ(xi) + b))
In the above formula, θ and b are the single model pa-
rameters which are trained, and φ is the linear kernel. The
Support Vector classiﬁcation with a linear kernel is chosen
so the model complexity could ﬁt the problem well, and the
trained model could be easily implemented and used in the
mobile application as well.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
To obtain a dataset for our analyses, we have asked 6
subjects in the age range of 24-27 to participate in this study.
For gathering the training data regarding each type of sitting
behavior, a picture was shown to the subjects depicting such
behavior. They were then asked to perform as they usually
do in such a posture. While performing their normal activities
(e.g., working with their laptops, writing), a sufﬁcient amount
of data could be gathered along with the supervision signals.
Our analytical platform is implemented in Python3.6, and
using Google Cloud SDK, and Sci-Kit learn machine learning
library enables us to retrieve the information from our cloud
database and perform the corresponding analytical investiga-
tions. For evaluation purposes, several experiments were done,
and in each experiment, the data from one subject was used
as the test set while the model was trained on the rest.
The empirical results indicate that our model is able to
recognize and distinguish between our three main pre-deﬁned
sitting postures accurately. The micro and macro average F1-
Score for our current model over the three sitting postures are
72.12% and 75.09%, respectively.
The normalized confusion matrix for the predictions is
shown in Table I. These results suggest that the system ex-
hibits accurate performance, even though the ﬂexibility of the
system in terms of the positioning of the wearable component
TABLE I
MICRO-AVERAGED CONFUSION MATRIX FOR EVALUATING OUR MODEL
USING LEAVE-ONE-SUBJECT-OUT SCHEME - EACH ROW CORRESPONDS
THE PREDICTIONS FOR A GROUNDTRUTH LABEL
Upright
Leaning Back
Slouching
Upright
0.65
0.22
0.14
Leaning Back
0.05
0.64
0.31
Slouching
0.02
0.0
0.98
can potentially add to the error level. As another example,
”Slouching” data, which can be argued as the main posture of
interest, has been efﬁciently captured.
This work aimed to propose an accurate and efﬁcient
pipeline to perform monitoring without the need for per-person
calibration. However, it is understandable that in speciﬁc use-
cases (e.g., certain disabilities, the cohort of elderly), the
addition of per-person calibration to improve the performance
further might be necessary. In such cases, labeled data can be
easily obtained and analyzed using WatChair’s interface. This
will enable the data analysis and preparations for such cases
to take place with ease.
To use the model in the mobile application as well, this
inference engine was implemented in Java and is included in
the application to perform continuous recognition and update
the cloud database accordingly.
V. CONCLUSION
We presented WatChair, an AI-powered remote monitoring
framework for short-term and long-term tracking of sitting
habits and proposing corrective suggestions. The effectiveness
of this system in performing this task is then empirically
validated. Given the critical health impacts of improper sitting
habits, this low-cost and affordable system, combined with ac-
curate machine learning inference, can improve user behavior
while seated and therefore help prevent medical complications
that are associated with improper sitting.
REFERENCES
[1] C. F. Nooijen, L. V. Kallings, V. Blom, ¨O. Ekblom, Y. Forsell, and
M. M. Ekblom, “Common perceived barriers and facilitators for reducing
sedentary behaviour among ofﬁce workers,” International journal of
environmental research and public health, vol. 15, no. 4, p. 792, 2018.
[2] L. Smith, A. Sawyer, B. Gardner, K. Seppala, M. Ucci, A. Marmot,
P. Lally, and A. Fisher, “Occupational physical activity habits of uk
ofﬁce workers: cross-sectional data from the active buildings study,”
International journal of environmental research and public health,
vol. 15, no. 6, p. 1214, 2018.
[3] Y. Kwon, J.-W. Kim, J.-H. Heo, H.-M. Jeon, E.-B. Choi, and G.-M.
Eom, “The effect of sitting posture on the loads at cervico-thoracic and
lumbosacral joints,” Technology and Health Care, vol. 26, no. S1, pp.
409–418, 2018.
[4] I.-Y. Moon, C.-H. Yi, I.-W. Park, and J.-H. Yong, “Effects of sitting
posture and bolus volume on activation of swallowing-related muscles,”
Journal of Oral Rehabilitation, 2020.
[5] S. Tinitali, K.-A. Bowles, J. L. Keating, and T. Haines, “Sitting
posture during occupational driving causes low back pain; evidence-
based position or dogma? a systematic review,” Human factors, p.
0018720819871730, 2019.
[6] D. Krpan and B. Fasolo, “Revisiting embodied approach and avoidance
effects on behavior: The inﬂuence of sitting posture on purchases of
rewarding foods,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 85,
p. 103889, 2019.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-809-9
SPWID 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

[7] 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.uprightpose.com/
[8] M.
Gwak,
S.
Fazeli,
G.
Ershadi,
M.
Sarrafzadeh,
M.
Ghodsi,
A. Aminian, and J. A. Schlechter, “Extra: Exercise tracking and analysis
platform for remote-monitoring of knee rehabilitation,” in 2019 IEEE
16th International Conference on Wearable and Implantable Body
Sensor Networks (BSN).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[9] S. Ma, S. Hong, H.-m. Shim, J.-W. Kwon, and S. Lee, “A study on
sitting posture recognition using machine learning,” The Transactions of
the Korean Institute of Electrical Engineers, vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 1557–
1563, 2016.
[10] J. E. Estrada and L. A. Vea, “Real-time human sitting posture detection
using mobile devices,” in 2016 IEEE Region 10 Symposium (TENSYMP).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 140–144.
[11] Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, B. Lu, Y. Ma, J. Qiu, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Liu,
P. Liu, and Y. Zhang, “Real-time sitting behavior tracking and analysis
for rectiﬁcation of sitting habits by strain sensor-based ﬂexible data
bands,” Measurement Science and Technology, 2019.
[12] C.-C. Wu, C.-C. Chiu, and C.-Y. Yeh, “Development of wearable posture
monitoring system for dynamic assessment of sitting posture,” Physical
and Engineering Sciences in Medicine, pp. 1–17, 2019.
[13] I. A. Soenandi, M. Ginting, and B. Harsono, “Real time ﬂoor sitting
posture monitoring using k-means clustering,” in Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Software Engineering and Information
Management, 2019, pp. 194–198.
[14] V. Woisard, M. Costes, H. Colineaux, and B. Lepage, “How a per-
sonalised transportable folding device for seating impacts dysphagia,”
European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, vol. 277, no. 1, pp. 179–
188, 2020.
[15] A. Aminian, “Dynamic orthopaedic chair,” Jul. 31 2012, uS Patent
8,231,175.
[16] M. Sandybekov, C. Grabow, M. Gaiduk, and R. Seepold, “Posture track-
ing using a machine learning algorithm for a home aal,” in Intelligent
Decision Technologies 2019: Proceedings of the 11th KES International
Conference on Intelligent Decision Technologies (KES-IDT 2019), vol. 2.
Springer, 2019, p. 337.
[17] C. Lim, S. Basah, M. Ali, and C. Fook, “Wearable posture identiﬁca-
tion system for good sitting position,” Journal of Telecommunication,
Electronic and Computer Engineering (JTEC), vol. 10, no. 1-16, pp.
135–140, 2018.
[18] E. Fragkiadakis, K. V. Dalakleidi, and K. S. Nikita, “Design and
development of a sitting posture recognition system,” in 2019 41st
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 3364–3367.
[19] S. Suzuki, M. Kudo, and A. Nakamura, “Sitting posture diagnosis using
a pressure sensor mat,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Identity, Security and Behavior Analysis (ISBA).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[20] K. Ishac and K. Suzuki, “Lifechair: A conductive fabric sensor-based
smart cushion for actively shaping sitting posture,” Sensors, vol. 18,
no. 7, p. 2261, 2018.
[21] A. Hwang, “Arduino pressure sensor cushion for tracking and improving
sitting posture,” International Journal of Biomedical and Biological
Engineering, vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 454–460, 2019.
[22] R. Baptista, M. Antunes, A. E. R. Shabayek, D. Aouada, and B. Otter-
sten, “Flexible feedback system for posture monitoring and correction,”
in 2017 Fourth International Conference on Image Information Process-
ing (ICIIP).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[23] S. R. D. Maryam and S. Payandeh, “A novel human posture estimation
using single depth image from kinect v2 sensor,” in 2018 Annual IEEE
International Systems Conference (SysCon).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–7.
[24] Y. Xu, J. Chen, Q. Yang, and Q. Guo, “Human posture recognition
and fall detection using kinect v2 camera,” in 2019 Chinese Control
Conference (CCC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 8488–8493.
[25] S. He, “A sitting posture surveillance system based on kinect,” in Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1026, no. 1.
IOP Publishing, 2018,
p. 012022.
[26] L. Yao, W. Min, and H. Cui, “A new kinect approach to judge unhealthy
sitting posture based on neck angle and torso angle,” in International
Conference on Image and Graphics.
Springer, 2017, pp. 340–350.
[27] M. Tariq, H. Majeed, M. O. Beg, F. A. Khan, and A. Derhab, “Accurate
detection of sitting posture activities in a secure iot based assisted living
environment,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 92, pp. 745–
757, 2019.
[28] N. W.-H. Tsang, K.-Y. Lam, U. M. Qureshi, J. K.-Y. Ng, I. Papavasileiou,
and S. Han, “Indoor activity tracking for elderly using intelligent
sensors,” in Intelligent Data Sensing and Processing for Health and
Well-Being Applications.
Elsevier, 2018, pp. 197–222.
[29] [Online].
Available:
https://www.freepik.com/free-vector/illustration-
man-with-correct-incorrect-posture 1158025.htm
[30] “Metatracker,” Feb 2019. [Online]. Available: https://mbientlab.com/
metatracker/
[31] P. Kutilek, P. Volf, J. Hejda, P. Smrcka, J. Adolf, V. Krivanek, L. Lhotska,
K. Hana, R. Doskocil, J. Kacer et al., “Non-contact measurement
systems for physiological data monitoring of military pilots during
training on simulators: Review and application,” in 2019 International
Conference on Military Technologies (ICMT).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[32] [Online].
Available:
http://ctms0168.epizy.com/2017/12/20/an-all-
rounded-helper-to-help-you-improve-your-sitting-postures-2/?i=2
[33] J. R. Lewis, “Ibm computer usability satisfaction questionnaires: psy-
chometric evaluation and instructions for use,” International Journal of
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 57–78, 1995.
[34] A. M. Lund, “Measuring usability with the use questionnaire12,” Us-
ability interface, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 3–6, 2001.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-809-9
SPWID 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

