User Privacy in Health Monitoring Wearables 
Requirements stemming from current and proposed European Union legislation 
 
Kiril Kalev, Jernej Mavrič, Sophie Pijnenburg, Anouk de Ruijter 
Tilburg Institute of Law, Technology, and Society 
Tilburg University 
Tilburg, the Netherlands 
e-mail: {k.z.kalev, j.mavric, s.k.j.pijnenburg, a.deruijter}@tilburguniversity.edu
 
 
Abstract—Health monitoring wearables are a new type of 
mobile devices that are worn on the user’s body and are 
becoming a huge trend. These devices (and the respective 
software needed to run the services) can track data like 
heartbeat and blood oxygen level, which are rightfully 
considered as sensitive data. If these data fall into the wrong 
hands, this could have serious consequences. To what extent do 
the five selected wearables comply with current and proposed 
EU data protection legislation and (how) can the privacy 
policies be improved? The EU is currently negotiating a new 
data protection regulation that will replace the Data Protection 
Directive. Therefore, the focus will be on the new General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR).  It turns out that most market 
players in the field of health monitoring wearables are not 
ready for the coming into force of the GDPR. This paper 
proposes a number of improvements to better prepare data 
controllers for the upcoming regulation and strengthen the 
privacy rights of consumers.  
Keywords: health monitoring wearables; user privacy; EU 
legislation; compliance with legislation; data protection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wearable technology is getting more and more 
implemented in our daily lives. This innovation can alter the 
landscape of society and business as we know it [1]. For 
example, the use of wearable technology in employer-
sponsored health programs can lead to a healthier and more 
productive workforce. However, there is also a downside, 
using health monitoring wearables can lead to privacy risks 
because of the privacy-sensitive nature of the data that the 
applications track. When third parties, such as future 
employers or insurance companies have access to this 
sensitive data, they can adapt their agreements and policies 
to the specific person, not always in the advantage of the 
wearable user.  
A. Health monitoring wearables 
Health monitoring wearables track activity-related data 
such as steps taken, distance and calories burnt and are 
expected to help people achieve a (more) healthy lifestyle. 
The Misfit Shine [2], TomTom Runner Cardio [3], Samsung 
Gear Fit [4], Medisana ViFit Connect [5] and the Withings 
Pulse Ox [6] are analysed. The devices have been selected 
by the Tilburg Institute for Law, Technology, and Society to 
represent the diversity in the available wearables. The 
devices have their own smartphone and/or desktop app and 
some even share data with other weight loss or fitness apps.  
All apps track steps and distance travelled, calories burnt 
and sleeping time. The Withings Pulse Ox also measures the 
user’s heart rate, blood oxygen level and tracks sleeping 
cycles. Samsung Gear Fit can also measure the user’s heart 
rate and can show incoming notifications on its screen (see 
Figure 1). 
 
Steps 
Distance 
Calories  
Speed 
Elevation climbed 
GPS tracker 
Sleeping time 
Sleeping cycles 
Heart rate 
Blood oxygen level 
Messages & calls 
Agenda 
Misfit 
Shine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Samsung 
Gear Fit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Withings 
Pulse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TomTom 
Runner 
Cardio 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medisana 
ViFit 
Connect 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Functionalities of selected wearables. 
B. Legal perspective 
From a legal perspective, the predominant legal basis for 
processing personal data collected by the analysed 
wearables, is consent. Users are expected to agree with 
terms and conditions that they may not have read, let alone 
have understood, ultimately resulting in a lack of the 
elements of a valid consent. 
This paper discusses the obligations of controllers and 
processors of personal data and conducts an assessment for 
compliance with existing and proposed legislation in this 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

field, with an emphasis on the latter. The current EU 
legislation that applies to the processing of personal data, is 
the Data Protection Directive (DPD) [7] along with a few 
other legal acts, such as the E-Privacy Directive [8]. The EU 
is currently negotiating new data protection laws. It is 
foreseen to replace the DPD with a regulation, a legislative 
instrument directly binding upon all EU member states. 
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [9] will 
likely come into force in 2018 [10]. One of the novelties 
that the GDPR brings is a set of six graphical forms, each 
representing a different requirement that data processors 
must use to comply with information obligations laid down 
in the GDPR. Each of them should be accompanied by 
either a checkmark on green background, representing 
compliance, or a cross on red background, standing for non-
compliance. 
The analysis includes both the devices as such and the 
corresponding privacy policies of the services listed in [2] 
until and including [6]. For the sake of conciseness, the 
service providers are referred to with their popular 
commercial names (e.g., Samsung instead of Samsung 
Electronics (UK) Limited). Citations used as examples have 
been taken from the above listed privacy policies. 
C. Structure 
Section 2 of the paper will describe important definitions, 
the obligations lying on the controllers and will also focus 
on the differences between the current and proposed 
regulation. Section 3 will compare the privacy policies of 
the wearables with the current and new regulation to assess 
if they are compliant and proposes a number of 
improvements. A table containing the graphical forms will 
be presented in the same section as an example of a correct 
implementation of the standardised information policies in 
practice. The paper will end with a conclusion in Section 4. 
II. 
CONCEPTS OF DATA PROTECTION LEGISLATION AND 
THE CHANGES THE GDPR WILL BRING 
On January 25, 2012 a proposal for a data protection 
regulation was released. The GDPR will be directly 
applicable in all member states. The proposal aims at high 
data protection standards, which are better harmonised and 
fit for the internet age [11]. On March 12, 2014 the 
European Commission adopted the text with amendments 
(in 
first 
reading) 
[12]. 
The 
Parliament 
voted 
overwhelmingly in favour of the GDPR [13] and now it is 
up to the Council of Ministers to review the Regulation. 
This paragraph analyses the most important concepts of data 
protection regulation and the changes of the GDPR with 
regard to them. 
A. Users of personal data 
The users of personal data can either be controllers, 
processors, third parties or recipients. The distinction 
between these legal concepts is important because it 
determines who shall be responsible for compliance with the 
data protection rules, how data subjects can exercise their 
rights and what the applicable national law is. The 
definitions of users of personal data will likely remain the 
same under the GDPR. 
A controller is “a natural or legal person, public 
authority, agency or any other body which alone or jointly 
with others determines the purposes and means of the 
processing of personal data” (art. 4(5) GDPR). All of the 
researched service providers can be qualified as controllers. 
A processor is “a natural or legal person, public authority, 
agency or any other body which processes personal data on 
behalf of the controller” (art. 4(6) GDPR). A third party is 
someone who is legally different from the data subject, 
controller or processor. Recipient is a broader term, the 
definition of which is someone to whom data are disclosed 
(art. 4(7) and 7(a) GDPR).  
B. Personal data 
Personal data is defined in the DPD as “any information 
relating to an identified or identifiable natural person”. An 
identifiable person is “one who can be identified, directly or 
indirectly, in particular by reference to an identification 
number or to one or more factors specific to his physical, 
physiological, mental, economic, cultural or social identity” 
(art. 2(a) DPD). The GDPR broadens the definition of 
personal data by including more examples of identifiers. 
C. Sensitive (health) data 
Sensitive data, as a subcategory of personal data, includes 
health data. In contrary to the DPD, a definition of health 
data is given in the GDPR, namely “Data concerning health 
means any information which relates to the physical or 
mental health of an individual, or to the provision of health 
services to the individual” (art. 4(12) GDPR). 
D. Data processing 
Data processing is defined as “operation or set of 
operations which is performed upon personal data, whether 
or not by automated means”, under art. 2(b) DPD. Slight 
changes have been made in the GDPR that do not affect the 
scope of the notion that this term covers. 
E. Consent 
Data processing is only allowed on the basis of a legal 
ground, listed in art. 7 DPD. Because wearables can collect 
sensitive data, the only remaining legal basis for legitimate 
data processing is consent (art. 8 DPD). 
One of the major changes of the GDPR is the concept of 
consent. If no other legal ground is applicable, data subjects 
have to give their explicit consent for the processing and 
storing of personal data (art. 4(8) GDPR). Explicit consent 
is needed not only for sensitive personal data but for all 
personal data. The GDPR will require consent to be 
expressed by a statement or by a clear affirmative action. 
So, explicit consent will be given when data subjects sign a 
consent form that clearly outlines the purposes for which the 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

data is collected and processed. This could include ticking a 
box when visiting an internet website [14]. 
F. Quality principles 
There are five main groups of principles relating to data 
quality. The qualities are set forth in art. 6(1)(a-e) DPD: 
lawfulness 
and 
fairness, 
purpose 
limitation, 
data 
minimisation, accuracy and storage minimisation. Art. 5 
GDPR restates the five quality principles from the DPD 
with a few amendments. The principles of data 
minimisation, storage minimisation and purpose limitation 
are included in the standardised information policies as set 
out in art. 13a(1) GDPR. Each of these principles has its 
own corresponding pictogram which is part of the Annex to 
the Regulation named ‘Presentation of the particulars 
referred to in article 13a’. The Annex explicitly states that 
compliance with these three requirements is “required by 
EU law”. 
III. 
CONDUCTING AN ASSESSMENT OF CONTROLLERS’ 
PRIVACY POLICIES COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTORY 
OBLIGATIONS  
The compliance assessment proved to be difficult to 
conduct because the privacy policies of the analysed 
wearables use vague expressions, lack details and do not 
address all the statutory requirements specifically. This 
mainly holds for storage minimisation and purpose 
limitation. Moreover, most of the policies do not address 
data retention and encryption. 
This section points out the requirements the controllers 
do not comply with. Recommendations are made with 
regard to how these examples of non-compliance can be 
tackled. Emphasis is being put on the requirements as 
prescribed by the latest draft of the GDPR. 
A. Data minimisation 
All of the services have been estimated not to collect an 
excessive amount of personal data, thus being overall 
compliant with the data minimisation principle (see Figure 
1), as laid down in art. 6(1)(c) DPD and art. 5(1)(c) GDPR. 
None of the privacy policies provide an exhaustive list of all 
the types of data collected and retained. However, collection 
of data such as the exact date of birth of the user required by 
Withings and Samsung might be considered excessive. 
Firstly, because proving that the user is not a minor can 
be achieved through other means and secondly because just 
the year of birth would not unreasonably limit the 
functionalities of the services. Offering the option to use a 
non-identifying nickname instead of requiring the full name 
of the user, an approach used by Medisana, is another 
practical suggestion to promote the principle of data 
minimisation.  
The GDPR pays extra attention to the principle in 
question by adding the requirement that “[data] shall only be 
processed if, and as long as, the purposes could not be 
fulfilled by processing information that does not involve 
personal data”. 
B. Purpose limitation 
The service providers have given examples of the 
purposes for which data are collected, but the lists do not 
appear to be exhaustive so as to unambiguously comply 
with the purpose limitation requirement. This is laid down 
in art. 6(1)(b) DPD and art. 5(1)(b) GDPR and requires 
controllers to be specific and explicit with regard to data 
processing purposes.  
Concerning the element of the same requirement that 
prescribes that data shall not be further processed in a way 
incompatible with purposes rather than the ones for which 
they were initially collected, all of the assessed service 
providers’ privacy policies seem to be compliant (see Figure 
2). However, this conclusion has been made solely on the 
basis that none of the service providers has hinted such a 
scenario. To avoid any confusion and to demonstrate 
responsibility, the service providers need to list all of the 
purposes for which the personal data are collected. 
Furthermore, they also need to state explicitly and clearly 
that they will not further process the collected personal data 
in a way incompatible with the initial purposes without the 
acquisition of a separate consent. 
C. Access to data by third parties 
None of the privacy policies explicitly mention that the 
collected personal data might be sold or rented out. Out of 
the five assessed policies only the Samsung privacy policy 
gives a clear example of disseminating personal data to 
commercial third parties. Even though the latter might be 
considered to be overlapping to a certain extent with the 
former, both are separate requisites under the GDPR. 
Samsung’s privacy policy states that “[Samsung Electronics 
(UK) Limited] also may share your information with trusted 
business partners (…) [who] may provide you with 
promotional materials, advertisements and other materials”. 
While the service providers are not forbidden to share 
collected personal data with third parties in general, they 
still have to unambiguously indicate their conduct regarding 
the sharing of data. The approach undertaken by the 
controllers, with a single exception, namely not to explicitly 
address these requisites, leads to the lack of information for 
the users with regard to compliance with art. 13a(1)(d) and 
(e) GDPR (see Figure 2 for both requisites). A general 
recommendation to address this issue therefore is that all the 
controllers should clearly state if personal data are 
disseminated, whether or not by subcontractors, to 
commercial third parties. The same approach should also be 
applied to whether personal data are sold or rented out. 
D. Storage minimisation and data retention 
Art. 14(1)(c) of the GDPR introduces the requirement 
that either the period for which the personal data will be 
stored should be specified, or if this is not possible, at least 
the criteria used to determine this period should be 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

described. Only Samsung’s privacy policy addresses this 
requirement by stating that information about the data 
subjects will be kept “only for so long as is necessary for the 
purpose for which it was collected”. This wording is, 
however, too vague and not definite enough to fulfil the 
statutory requirement. Therefore, none of the controllers 
fully complies with this requirement (see Figure 2). 
Different types of data may be stored for different periods. 
A user-friendly approach to incorporate such a list in the 
privacy policy of a service would be to make use of multi-
layered notices, as suggested by the Article 29 Working 
Party [15]. Such an approach can be a useful solution also 
for the listing of the types of data collected and the purposes 
for which they are going to be used. 
After the purposes for which the user data were collected 
have been fulfilled these data should be erased. Otherwise, 
they should be anonymised or pseudonymised. These 
requirements are set out by art. 6(1)(e) DPD and art. 5(1)(e) 
GDPR. The process of anonymisation or pseudonymisation 
should, when possible, be already implemented in the stage 
of collecting data. This should only be the case when it will 
not lead to limitations of the functionality of the service. 
E. Encryption 
While encryption is voluntary under the GDPR, pursuant 
to art. 13a(1)(f) of this Regulation the service providers 
should still state whether personal data are retained in 
encrypted form. Only one of the assessed controllers 
complies with this requirement of the GDPR (see Figure 2). 
The requirement itself can be considered restrictive in 
naming a single amongst all possible technical measures to 
protect privacy. To fulfil this requirement the service 
providers should mention encryption explicitly. This does 
not mean that all other possible organisational and technical 
security measures should not be mentioned in the privacy 
policies, as the requirement for implementing such measures 
is prescribed by art. 17(1) DPD and art. 26(1) GDPR. 
F. Information about the controller and processor 
Pursuant to the requirements of art. 10(a) DPD and art. 
14(1)(a) GDPR the controller must provide the data subjects 
with information about itself and its representatives, if any. 
In other words, the service providers, along with 
information 
about 
themselves, 
should 
also 
provide 
information about subcontractors or processors of user data. 
In case they do, the privacy policies should include the 
identity and the location of the processors and a description 
of the processing activities. 
Samsung, for instance, in its privacy policy gives explicit 
examples of its affiliates and mentions that information may 
be passed on to sub-processors referred to as “service 
providers”, whereas Medisana provides in its privacy policy 
the most information about the legal entity that serves as a 
controller. However, none of the assessed controllers gives 
enough information to fulfil all aspects of this requirement 
to a sufficient extent. 
G. Data storage 
The service providers should list the locations of all the 
servers where users’ data are stored. The location should be 
specific enough, especially if the data are stored on a server 
located outside the European Economic Area (EEA). In the 
latter case, according to art. 26(1)(a) DPD and art. 44(1)(a) 
of the GDPR, the service providers should also point out 
which security and data protection standards does the server 
in question comply to. Out of the assessed service providers 
the best approach has been undertaken by TomTom by 
being clear and thorough enough in stating in its privacy 
policy 
that 
“TomTom 
and 
[their] 
partners 
and 
subcontractors have taken adequate security measures to 
protect [users’] information from unauthorized access. Some 
of these partners and subcontractors are located outside the 
EU. [They] have contractually bound them to provide a 
level of protection of [users’] data according to European 
data protection legislation and they take full responsibility 
and accountability for this”. Still, this description lacks a 
list, exhaustive or not, of countries where data may be 
stored. Misfit, for instance, in its privacy policy provides a 
single example by stating that data may be transferred 
“globally, including to the United States”.  
H. Right of access to data 
The users have the right to obtain from the service 
providers at any time, on request, confirmation as to 
whether or not personal data related to them are being 
processed, as well as detailed information on the processing 
activities. The description should be in clear and plain 
language pursuant to the requirement of art. 12(a) DPD and 
art. 15(1) GDPR. Furthermore, according to art. 12(b) DPD 
as well as art. 14(1)(d) and 17(1)(b) GDPR the users should 
also be provided with a procedure to rectify, erase or block 
their data on a number of grounds. 
Most of the assessed service providers comply with these 
requirements. However, Samsung’s privacy policy mentions 
that the service provider “may charge a reasonable fee for 
dealing with [access to data] request” and Withings requires 
in its privacy policy a “request by post to the address of 
Withings' 
registered 
office”. 
Both 
approaches 
are 
undesirable for an Internet-based service. Misfit’s privacy 
policy states that this service provider “currently [does] not 
have a way to let [the users] correct or update [their] 
personal information”, thus explicitly declaring non-
compliance with the rights in question. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper examines a number of requirements under 
existing and new data protection legislation that might pose 
privacy and data protection risks for users of health 
wearables. This list is, however, not exhaustive, i.e., it does 
not address all obligations lying on data controllers. 
To conclude, the selected controllers are not fully ready 
for the adoption of the GDPR and also do not fully comply 
with most of the current requirements under the DPD. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

Compliance with the new requirements under the GDPR is 
advisable as it will provide a smooth transition for both 
controllers and users of the wearables by the time the new 
regulation comes into force. Non-compliance with the 
current legislation is, however, a serious issue that needs to 
be taken care of without delay.  
To achieve this, every statutory requirement should be 
explicitly addressed in clear and plain language. The privacy 
policies are the only source of information for (prospective) 
users of the wearables. This is why compliance with a 
requirement in practice is not enough, stating it in writing is 
as important. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is the result of a law clinic, a project by the 
Tilburg Institute for Law, Technology, and Society in 
cooperation with Louwers IP|Technology Advocaten, 
funded by the Law Alumni Fund. This project has been set 
up to enable students to gain insight into a specific area of 
law 
and 
see 
the 
practical 
implications 
of 
it. 
Special acknowledgments go to Marianne Korpershoek, 
Tom de Wit and Colette Cuijpers for the guidance during 
the project, and everyone at the Tilburg Institute for Law, 
Technology, and Society for their valuable feedback. 
 
Figure 2. Compliance chart. 
 
EXPLANATION 
MISFIT 
SHINE 
TOMTOM 
RUNNER 
CARDIO 
SAMSUNG 
GEAR FIT 
WITHINGS 
PULSE OX 
MEDISANA 
VIFIT 
CONNECT 
 
No personal data are collected 
beyond 
the 
minimum 
necessary for each specific 
purpose of the processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No personal data are retained 
beyond 
the 
minimum 
necessary for each specific 
purpose of the processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No 
personal 
data 
are 
processed for purposes other 
than the purposes for which 
they were collected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No 
personal 
data 
are 
disseminated to commercial 
third parties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No personal data are sold or 
rented out 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No personal data are retained 
in unencrypted form 
 
 
 
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

REFERENCES 
[1] PricewaterhouseCoopers B.V. Consumer intelligence series - 
The 
wearable 
future. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.pwc.se/sv_SE/se/media/assets/consumer-
intelligence-series-the-wearable-future.pdf 2015.05.04 
[2] Misfit Wearables. Privacy policy. Effective date: 2012.04.23 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://misfit.com/legal/privacy_policy 2015.02.11 
[3] TomTom Mysports. Privacy. Effective date: 2013.06.01 
[Online] 
Available 
from:  
https://mysports.tomtom.com/content/privacy 2015.02.11 
[4] Samsung Electronics (UK) Limited. Local privacy policy. 
Effective 
date: 
2014.03.10 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.samsung.com/uk/info/privacy.html 2015.02.11 
[5] Vitadock+. 
Data 
privacy 
statement. 
Effective 
date: 
2012.06.15 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://cloud.vitadock.com/privacy.html?lang=nl 2015.02.11 
[6] Withings. Withings terms and conditions. [Online] Available 
from: 
http://www.withings.com/eu/terms-and-
conditions#privacyrules 2015.01.15 
[7] Directive 95/46/EC of 24 October 2014 on the protection of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and 
on the free movement of such data [1995] OJ L281/31 
[8] European Parliament. Fact sheets on the European Union. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/aboutparliament/en/displayFtu
.html?ftuId=FTU_5.12.8.html 2015.02.17 
[9] Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council COM(2012)0011 on the protection of individuals 
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation) 
[2012] OJ C7-0025/12 
[10] Allen & Overy. Radical changes to European data protection 
legislation. 
[Online] 
Available 
from:  
http://www.allenovery.com/publications/en-gb/data-
protection/Pages/Timetable.aspx 2015.02.11 
[11] P. de Hert and V. Papakonstantinou, “The proposed data 
protection Regulation replacing Directive 95/46/EC: A sound 
system for the protection of individuals”, Computer law & 
security review, vol. 28, April 2012, pp. 130-142. 
[12] European Parliament legislative resolution of 12 March 2014 
on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament 
and of the Council on the protection of individuals with 
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation) 
[2014] T7-0212/2014 
[13] European Commission Press release database. Progress on EU 
data protection reform now irreversible following European 
Parliament 
vote. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-14-186_nl.htm 
2015.02.11 
[14] W. Kotschy, “The proposal for a new General Data Protection 
Regulation—problems solved?”, International Data Privacy 
Law, vol. 4, no. 4, November 2014, p. 278. 
[15] Working Party 29 Opinion 11987/04/EN, WP 100 on on More 
Harmonised Information Provisions [2004], p. 6 [Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2004/
wp100_en.pdf 2015.02.11 
 
 
 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

