MyAccessible+ Math: Shining Light on Math Concepts for Visually Impaired Students
Abhishek Jariwala
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, USA
Email: avj0003@auburn.edu
Daniela Marghitu
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, USA
Email: marghda@auburn.edu
Abstract—For some of us, a full understanding of complex math-
ematical concepts is only achieved through a lifetime of practice.
For students with visual impairment, this process is hindered
by the inability to process complex mathematical formulae.
While computer technologies have successfully transformed and
enhanced the learning process, the potential promised by these
technologies has not become the reality for visually impaired
students. For years, the most effective way to communicate ideas
to a blind person has been through either audible conversation
or braille writing, both methods having their shortcomings for
more complex mathematical analysis. This is the purpose of the
MyAccessible+ Math Project; bridging the gap between math
professors and students who simply need instructions from a
different perspective. The motivation of this study is to introduce
a prototype of our web application that will help visually impaired
high school students to evaluate their mathematical skills. We
hope that the use and further development of our prototype shall
open doors to these students in areas of academia and beyond
that have until now seemed eternally sealed.
Keywords–Vision-impaired
students;
Accessibility;
Speech
recognition.
I.
INTRODUCTION
According to World Health Organization [1], approxi-
mately 250 million people in the world have moderate to
severe visual impairment that cannot be cured. The National
Institutes of Health (NIH) study [2] has found that 14 million
Americans aged 12 and older, are visually impaired. The
inability to process visual elements is an obstacle for many
vision-impaired students. This disadvantage leads to a big
knowledge gap between students with vision-impairment and
students without disabilities.
Figure 1. MyAccessible+ Math Design Structure.
The aim of this study is to introduce the prototype of
our Web application, MyAccessible+ Math, that helps vision-
impaired high school students evaluate their mathematical
skills. The basic design structure of the project is shown in
Figure 1. Entities associated with the module are explained
below:
•
Professor: The role of the professor is to add questions
and set points for questions. An open-source math
visual editor, Wiris MathType [3] is embedded on the
website, which makes easier for the professor to add
questions for different math topics.
•
Machine: The machine represents the ”evaluating
module” of the project. This module provides ques-
tions to the student. The module also provides help
on each question if the student seeks for it. All the
communication between the student and this module
is done through Annyang.js [4], an open-source speech
recognition library. Additionally, the module calcu-
lates the overall grade for each student and reports
it to the professor.
•
Student: The student is the most important entity of
this project. The student can use basic navigation
commands to iterate through the website. The most
useful commands are ’Go to login page’, ’help me’,
and ’logout’. Annyang.js [4] library is used for speech
recognition. In the future, more commands can be
added to extend the scope of the project.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
consists of literature review, which discusses existing tech-
niques that are currently available that facilitate teachers to
understand teaching and/or testing challenges and experiences
involving vision-impaired students. Section III demonstrates
the technologies used in the prototype. Section IV provides
a detailed implementation of the proposed prototype. Section
V concludes the project along with suggestions for future
enhancements.
II.
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
For years, the most effective way to communicate ideas to a
blind person has been through either tactile methods or audio
methods. For example, Braille is a tactile writing system in
which characters are physically raised. Audio methods include
speech-to-text and text-to-speech representation using speech
synthesizer tools.
MathSpeak [5] is an audio method for representing mathe-
matical formulae to blind students. The ﬁrst step is to scan the
mathematical formula and render it in the notation of MathML
or LaTeX. The input to the system can be either LaTeX,
MathML or AMS-TEX and the system can read equations like
text. The system can recognize all alphanumeric characters, all
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-734-4
SPWID 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

Greek letters, and other frequently used symbols in the math
formulae. One major advantage of the system is to be able to
navigate through different sections of the math equation.
MathPlayer [6] is a plug-in for Microsoft Internet Explorer
which was designed for rendering visualization of MathML. It
can easily be integrated with screen readers.
The LAMBDA project [7] is funded by the European Union
to overcome the problem of accessibility to mathematical
formulae. The system consists of a MathML markup language
that can be directly translated to the 8-point braille system,
which is an extension of the 6-point braille system.
Braille code is used to encode mathematical and scientiﬁc
notation linearly, by using 6-dot Braille cells. While Braille
is suitable for the text representation, mathematical equations
are multidimensional, and they may contain fraction, algebra,
series, log, and exponentiation [5]. Also, 6-dot braille can
represent only alphanumeric characters and a small set of
special characters by the 64 combinations of possible dot
placements. Thus, by extending the 6-dot Braille system to 8-
dot Braille system, 64 possible combinations can be extended
to 256 combinations.
This is an excellent choice for a certain context, but by
today’s digital standards, the use of Braille is expensive [8].
III.
TECHNOLOGIES USED
For this project, our main goal is to develop a robust and
ﬂexible prototype of an open-source Web application in a
structured manner and constantly reﬁne it.
The current version of the application supports a limited
number of math topics. New math topics, math questions, and
math tests can be added in the later versions. The technologies
used for the prototype are explained below:
A. Annyang.js
Annyang [4] is an open-source JavaScript Speech Recogni-
tion library that makes adding voice commands to any website
super-easy. The student is the most important entity of the
project. Navigation through Web pages is done through voice
commands.
Table I shows the list of commands current version of the
prototype supports. With Annyang, more custom commands
can be added in the future to extend the scope of the project.
TABLE I. VOICE COMMANDS LIST
Voice Commands
Action
’new user’
Redirect to the registration page
’let me in’
Redirect to login page
’practice question’
Redirect to the practice questions list
’attempt random’
Randomly selects the question and open it in
a new tab
’skip question’
Skips the question and fetches the next one
’help’
Provides more information on a question
while practicing a question
’next hint’
Speaks the next hint
’Log out’
Logs out of the system
’Hint one’
Provides the ﬁrst hint while practicing a
question
B. Wiris MathType Editor
Wiris MathType Editor [3] is embedded on Web pages for
the professor to add math questions. Math formulae can be
exported to multiple formats and are compatible with LaTex
and MathML.
C. ResponsiveVoice.js
ResponsiveVoice [9] is an open-source text-to-speech li-
brary written in JavaScript, offering an easy way of adding
voice to any website or application.
D. Linear Equation Parser
The current version of the prototype supports two types of
math problems: Linear Equation Solver and Linear Equation
Simpliﬁer.
Jep Java expression parser [10] is used to evaluate the
mathematical expressions in this prototype. Jep Java parses
and evaluates the mathematical expressions with only a few
lines of code. This package allows users to enter a formula as
a string, and instantly evaluates it. Jep supports user-deﬁned
variables, constants, and functions.
IV.
IMPLEMENTATION
MyAccessible+ Math is a Java-based Web application
developed using HTML5 and CSS3 as front-end and JSP and
Servlets as back-end. In what follows, we discuss the devel-
opment process and functional requirements of the prototype.
Initially, all the requirements were gathered and analyzed
based on Evolutionary Prototyping (EP). EP allows a continu-
ous reﬁnement of the system and is based on the understanding
of the requirements by the developers.
A. Functional Requirements
•
Home Page (index.jsp): This is a Web page where
professors and/or students can login. The machine
would recognize if the user is a student or professor
based on the username stored in the MySQL database.
The home page provides welcome text about the appli-
cation for vision-impaired students. User can say ”new
user” to navigate to the registration page. Students will
be redirected to dashboard student.jsp. Professors will
be redirected to dashboard professor.jsp.
•
Student Dashboard (dashboard student.jsp): Only stu-
dents can access this page. This is a dashboard for
students after logging in. Students can use voice
navigation commands to go to any page.
•
Attempt Questions Page (attempt questions.jsp): This
page provides a list of all practice questions. Student
can start practicing random questions by saying ”at-
tempt random”. Student can say ”help” for further
info. Figure 5 shows the attempt questions page for
students.
•
Each
Question
Page
(each question.jsp):
Student
lands on this page after choosing a question to attempt.
Web page speaks the question on page load. User can
say ”Repeat please” to listen to the question again or
can say ”skip question” to skip the question and move
to the next question. If needed, the user can ask for
the ﬁrst hint by saying ”hint one”. Student can ask
for more hints by saying ”next hint”. Figure 6 shows
each question page for students where the student can
attempt questions one by one.
•
Professor Dashboard (dashboard professor.jsp): Only
professors can access this page. Professor can quickly
add a question, see the students list, and add a math
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-734-4
SPWID 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

topic on this page. Professor can also redirect to
those pages for a detailed view. Figure 2 shows the
dashboard for the professor. In the future release, the
professor would be able to see the overall performance
of each student.
•
Math Questions Page (math questions.jsp): Figure 3
shows the math questions page. Only professors can
access this page. The professor can add or delete
questions for selected math topics.
•
Math Topics Page (math topics.jsp): Only professors
can access this page. The professor can add or delete
math topics. Once the topic is added, the professor
can add questions for that topic.
•
Math Quizzes Page (math quizzes.jsp): Figure 4
shows the math quizzes page. Professor can create a
quiz by selecting questions from the list. Since the
project is still in a development state, students cannot
attempt quizzes yet.
B. Conceptual Design
Following are screenshots of some of the pages that are de-
veloped based on functional requirements. In the future, these
pages will be modiﬁed based on information and feedback
from students.
Figure 2. Dashboard professor web page design
Figure 3. Math questions web page design
1) Professor View: In MyAccessible+ Math, several web
pages were designed for the professor to add questions, add
math topics, check the students’ list, and to create quizzes. The
web pages were developed in a way that had good usability,
likeliness, and ease of use.
Figure 4. Math quizzes web page design
Figure 5. Attempt questions web page design
Figure 6. Each question web page design
2) Student View: Students are an important entity in this
project. This application was designed and developed for vi-
sually impaired students to test their mathematical knowledge.
Therefore, all the web pages that student can access have voice
navigation enabled.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Education is one space that still has the potential to be
transformed by technology. Though this project is still under
development, it has great potential not only for improving the
education of students with visual impairments but also for
inspiring the next generation of engineers and scientists.
This prototype is developed to improve math education for
vision-impaired high school students. The following improve-
ments could be added in the future release of the work:
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-734-4
SPWID 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

•
Evaluation is important while working on an applica-
tion for vision-impaired students. We are planning to
conduct a study at Auburn University with 15 visually
impaired students enrolled in a program to evaluate
their knowledge in math. We aim to assess their
mathematical skills by evaluating their performance
using this application.
•
The prototype in this research has shown that it is pos-
sible to present mathematical expressions to students
with little or no vision and test their knowledge in
mathematics. The upcoming version of this prototype
will include teaching module of the application where
students can learn mathematics.
•
The current version of the application includes solving
and simplifying linear equations. However, different
math topics will be added in the future release of the
application.
•
Verifying and updating information, resetting pass-
word for students will be added in the future release
of the application.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Blindness
and
vision
impairment,”
2018,
URL:
https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/blindness-and-
visual-impairment [accessed: 2019-03-02].
[2]
“A
study
by
National
Institutes
of
Health,”
2006,
URL:
https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/study-ﬁnds-most-
americans-have-good-vision-14-million-are-visually-impaired
[accessed: 2019-03-02].
[3]
“MathType
demo
-
For
Developers,”
URL:
http://www.wiris.com/editor/demo/en/developers
[accessed:
2019-
07-15].
[4]
“Annyangjs - easily add speech recognition to your site,” URL:
https://www.talater.com/annyang/ [accessed: 2019-07-15].
[5]
A. Nazemi, I. Murray, and N. Mohammadi, “MathSpeak: An Audio
Method for Presenting Mathematical Formulae to Blind Students,” Jun.
2012, ISBN: 978-0-7695-4894-4, ISSN: 2158-2254.
[6]
“MathPlayer,” URL: https://www.dessci.com/en/products/mathplayer/
[accessed: 2019-07-15].
[7]
“Overview — Lambda Project,” URL: http://www.lambdaproject.org/
[accessed: 2019-07-15].
[8]
L. Ferres and J. Fuentes-Sepulveda, “Improving accessibility to math-
ematical formulas: The wikipedia math accessor,” vol. 18, Jan. 2011,
p. 25.
[9]
“ResponsiveVoice.JS Text to Speech,” URL: https://responsivevoice.org/
[accessed: 2019-07-15].
[10]
“Jep
Java
-
Math
Expression
Parser,”
URL:
http://www.singularsys.com/jep/ [accessed: 2019-07-15].
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-734-4
SPWID 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

