A Surface Electromyography-Based Platform for the Evaluation of Sarcopenia 
Andrea Caroppo, Gabriele Rescio, Alessandro Leone, Pietro Siciliano 
National Research Council of Italy - Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems 
Via Monteroni, c/o Campus Università del Salento, Palazzina A3, Lecce, Italy 
email: andrea.caroppo@cnr.it email: gabriele.rescio@cnr.it email: alessandro.leone@cnr.it  
email: pietro.siciliano@le.imm.cnr.it 
 
 
Abstract— Sarcopenia is a disorder characterized by a loss of 
muscle mass and muscle strength. It is associated with the 
natural ageing process, as well as geriatric medical conditions 
and bed rest. Consequently, it is very beneficial from a medical 
point of view to periodically monitor patients at risk of 
developing sarcopenia to early detect its onset or progression 
through objective and specific indicators. In the last years, 
surface electromyography (sEMG) increasingly plays an 
important role for prevention, diagnosis, and rehabilitation in 
this research area. Moreover, the recent progresses in EMG 
technologies have allowed for the development of low invasive 
and reliable smart EMG-based wearable device. The paper 
presents the design and implementation of an integrated 
platform that includes a sEMG based wearable device and 
interfacing with a processing software for clinical monitoring 
and management of the pathology. The system has been 
designed to both preventive (early diagnosis) and monitoring 
purposes of the patient's condition over time. Here, we present 
a preliminary study on the feasibility of the developed platform 
for management of sarcopenia. Specifically, this work deals 
with the identification of the best trade-off between sampling 
frequency of the EMG signals and variance of the highly 
discriminative features extracted within the EMG signals for 
the automatic measurement of sarcopenia. 
Keywords- wearable device; EMG; Sarcopenia; Ambient 
Assisted Living; Ageing Adults. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORKS 
A serious change associated with aging is the progressive 
decline in muscle mass, a downward spiral that can lead to 
reduced strength and function. In 1989, Rosenberg proposed 
the term 'sarcopenia' to describe this age-related reduction in 
muscle mass [1]. Although sarcopenia is primarily a disease 
of the ageing adults, its development may be associated with 
conditions that are not exclusively seen in older persons, but 
it can also be seen in younger patients, such as those with 
inflammatory diseases [2]. In sarcopenia, the loss of muscle 
mass and the consequent loss of strength are also 
accompanied by a decreased function of the muscles. In 
general, sarcopenia produces a deterioration in physical 
functions and means postural instability, alterations of 
thermoregulation (increased mortality in summer or in 
extreme winter), worse bone trophism (lack of stimulation of 
contraction), modification of glucose homeostasis (lack of 
storage and consumption) and reduction of basal energy 
production. With the passing of the years of life of a standard 
subject, the loss of muscle mass progresses in step with the 
loss of muscle strength, which can be of the same 
proportions or even greater. By age 50, many people have 
already lost around 10% of their muscle mass and by age 70 
they will have lost around 70%. 
Generally, sarcopenia is very difficult to treat because it 
is not easy to evaluate the temporal trend of its three 
fundamental components, which are: 1) muscle strength, 2) 
muscle mass, 3) physical performance such as walking 
speed. In the current state of the art, the three components 
mentioned above are evaluated with different non-invasive 
gold standard techniques, such as Computed Tomography 
(CT), Dual energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DXA) or 
Magnetic resonance Imaging (MRI) [3][4]. But all the 
aforementioned exams are rarely used in practice due to lack 
of portability and high equipment costs. Moreover, their use 
requires highly trained medical personnel.  
In the last years, smart technologies such as wearable 
devices, mobile apps and embedded systems are frequently 
discussed in the healthcare field and without doubt the use of 
enabling hardware and software technologies will play a 
crucial role in the creation of innovative and unobtrusive 
Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) systems that can support for 
early diagnosis and monitoring of patients affected by 
sarcopenia. Surface EMG (sEMG) is an important non-
invasive measurement for monitoring muscle fatigue among 
the physiological measurement systems. EMG signals are the 
electrical activity produced by the muscle’s motor units 
during their contractions. The sEMG measurement method is 
safer and less invasive than the intramuscular technique and 
it presents good performance in the muscle action potentials 
monitoring. It uses noninvasive, skin surface electrodes, 
realized with pre-gelled, textile or hydrogel materials, 
located near the muscles of interest [5]. Several works in 
literature have focused the attention on the use of the EMG 
signals in medical context [6]. For example, in [7][8] 
different applications of EMG-driven muscle models for 
determining muscle forces in the ankle, knee, back, and 
upper limb, for normal and pathological conditions were 
described. In [9] the authors developed an EMG patch, 
which could be worn on the lower leg, the gastrocnemius 
muscle, to detect real-time muscle fatigue while exercising. 
Kuthe et al. [10] quantified muscle strength based on force 
generated by the muscle during isometric contraction and the 
muscle fatigue using sEMG. Yu et al. [11] developed a 
wireless medical sensor measurement system, inclusive of 
EMG, motion detection, and muscle strength, to detect 
fatigue in multiple sclerosis patients. 
As highlighted by the brief state of the art introduced, 
sEMG is widely used for the analysis of specific pathologies 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

but very few works in literature have focused their attention 
on the use of sEMG for monitoring/evaluating sarcopenia. 
Consequently, the aim of the proposed work is to develop 
a novel platform that integrates smart sEMG technology and 
a software to provide a decision support tool to healthcare 
personnel. The platform has been included in a first 
validation in a research laboratory aimed to demonstrate the 
sensors performance and the system effectiveness. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section II describes 
materials and methods that have been used in this study, 
providing an overview of the system architecture, and 
detailing the algorithmic steps of the proposed pipeline. 
Section III presents some experiments carried out to evaluate 
the best trade-off between sampling frequency of the 
acquired signals and variance of the obtained feature values. 
Finally, section IV draws some conclusions and final 
remarks. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The overall system is compound of two main 
components, a hardware device capable of detecting all 
sarcopenia-related parameters and a software component 
capable of processing the data coming from the hardware 
component (sEMG), storing them, and making them 
available to the end user.  
To acquire data, the sEMG sensors were located on the 
Gastrocnemius Lateralis and Tibilias Anterior muscles. 
They were placed along the approximated direction of 
muscle fibers, with the inter electrode distance of about 
20mm to obtain the maximal surface EMG amplitude. The 
electrodes for Tibialis muscles were applied at about 1/3 of 
the distance between the tip of the fibula and the tip of the 
medial malleolus. As for Gastrocnemius, the electrodes 
were placed at about 1/3 of the line head of fibula on the 
most prominent bulge of the muscle. To increase the 
stability of the probes and to reduce the movement artifacts, 
each sensor was held in place by an elastic band. A 
representation of the proposed EMG-based platform for the 
measurement and management of Sarcopenia is shown in 
Figure 1.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed EMG-based platform for the 
measurement and management of sarcopenia.  
 
The hardware setup has been developed by using the 
wearable sEMG system FREEEMG1000, produced by the 
BTS Bioengineering [12].  
The system is made up of a USB receiver and up to 10 
wireless EMG probes. The considered sensors are minimally 
invasive: no wire is used, dimensions are 41.5 × 24.8 × 14 
mm, and the weight is about 10 gr. They are attached to the 
common pre-gelled electrodes by using clips, allowing a fast, 
simple, and robust mounting for the user’s movements at the 
highest level of usability.  
The probes integrate the active electrodes, which reduce 
the noise and an on-board solid-state buffer memory system, 
which guarantees the data safety in case of signal loss during 
the acquisition. The range of the wireless data transmission is 
about 20 meters in free space, according to the IEEE802.15.4 
protocol. It is possible to acquire the data for more than 8 
hours in streaming mode, through the rechargeable lithium-
ion integrated batteries. The sampling rate of up to 1000 Hz 
and the 16-bit resolution permits a high degree of accuracy.  
The real-time application has been realized using 
Microsoft C# language (Figure 2). In the design of the 
interface, it was considered that it can be used by medical 
operators and consequently it is as user friendly as possible. 
The main functions offered are: 1) display of the connection 
status of the probes (and relative battery life), 2) entry of the 
end-user fiscal code in order to associate the acquisition 
session with the user, 3) setting, pairing of the probes, 4) 
graphic display of the trend of the raw signals 5) start and 
stop of acquisition for any sub-sessions, 6) buttons for 
feature processing and possible sending of data (structured 
via REST/JSON messages) to external processes.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Interface of the software developed for the acquisition of raw 
EMG signals, data elaboration and sending to external processes.  
 
The algorithmic framework for the acquisition and 
elaboration of the EMG signals is on an embedded PC, 
which receives the data through the compact (dimensions 82 
× 44 × 22.5 mm, weight 80gr), wireless and USB interfaced 
receiver. The evaluation of muscle strength from a raw EMG 
signal generally follows three basic procedures: (1) 
continuous sample acquisition; (2) signal pre-processing, 
(e.g., filtering and/or normalization); (3) feature extraction, 
i.e., selection of relevant parameters for the specific 
application context. Some details of the implemented 
algorithmic pipeline (Figure 3) are reported in the next 
subsections. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

 
 
Figure 3. Representation with a logical block of the implemented pipeline 
for measurement and management of sarcopenia. 
A. Pre-processing 
The raw EMG signal acquired from each probe is 
subject to a pre-processing algorithmic stage to reduce the 
disturbances caused by movement artifacts and environment 
noise. In the present work this is achieved through the 
application of a bandpass filter within a frequency range of 
20–450 Hz. Moreover, for EMG-tension comparison, the 
signals are processed by generating their full wave 
rectification and their linear envelope [13]. This was carried 
out with the use of 10th order low-pass Butterworth filter, 
with a cut-off frequency of 10 Hz. An example of sEMG 
signal emitted from a single probe (a) before and (b) after 
the pre-processing step is depicted in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
  
 
      (a) 
 
     (b) 
Figure 4. (a) An example of raw EMG signal. (b) EMG signal after pre-
processing step.  
Before the evaluation of muscle strength, to increase the 
objectivity of data due to differences in individual muscle 
strength of the study subjects, a normalization stage is 
necessary with the purpose to evaluate the baseline of the 
signals. The normalization is performed in 3 phases. First, 
the subject is required to remain in an idle condition for a 
period of 5 seconds and during this temporal window the 
baseline of the sEMG signals for each probe is measured 
using the mean of the data acquired. Next, the subject 
executes the ankle plantar flexion against a fixed resistance 
and holds it constant for 5 seconds to obtain the highest 
possible sEMG signal resulting from Gastrocnemius 
Lateralis muscles contraction. The values of Maximum 
Voluntary isometric Contraction (MVC) [14] are calculated 
taking the mean amplitude of the highest signal portion of 
the data acquired. Finally, the subject executes the ankle 
dorsi flexion against a fixed resistance and holds it constant 
for 5 seconds to obtain the highest possible sEMG signal 
resulting from Tibialis Anterior muscles contraction. Even 
in this case the values of MVC are calculated employing the 
mean. 
B. Feature extracion 
To evaluate muscle strength, attention was focused on 
several low computational cost features, commonly used in 
the analysis of the lower-limb muscle activity. Usually, the 
analysis of EMG signals can be investigated in two ways 
based on the time domain and frequency domain 
characteristics [15]. 
In the present work, the following low-cost time-domain 
features were computed and tested for each probe: Root 
Mean Square (RMS), Simple Squared Integral (SSI), 
Integrated EMG (IEMG), and Waveform Length (WL). The 
features were evaluated through the following mathematical 
equations: 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
(3) 
 
 
(4) 
 
The RMS value has been used to quantify the electric 
signal because it reflects the physiological activity in the 
motor unit during contraction. SSI expresses the energy of 
the EMG signal. IEMG is generally used as a pre-activation 
index for muscle activity. It is the area under the curve of 
the rectified EMG signal. Finally, WL is the cumulative 
length of the waveform over the segment. The resultant 
values of the WL calculation indicate a measure of the 
waveform amplitude, frequency, and duration [15]. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

III. 
RESULTS 
The hw/sw platform described in Section II has been 
implemented within the SIMMS project (Sarcopenia 
Integrated Measurement and Management System), whose 
purpose is to develop an integrated technological system, 
consisting of measuring devices, including mobile and 
wearable devices, which interface with a software system 
for data collection and processing, clinical monitoring, and 
management of sarcopenia. Due to COVID-19, the trial was 
started with considerable delay, consequently at the time of 
writing this document the results obtained on samples of 
patients monitored directly in hospitals are not yet available. 
However, to validate the platform primarily in controlled 
contexts, experiments were carried out within the laboratory 
used as a "smart home", located inside the Institute for 
Microelectronics and Microsystems (IMM) in Lecce. A total 
of fifteen participants, six young (mean age of 34.8 years), 
five middle-aged (mean age of 53.1 years) and four older 
(mean age of 68.7 years) women and men participated in 
this study after providing voluntary consent. Table 1 
presents the total number of participants in the preliminary 
experimentation, broken down by age group and gender: 
TABLE I.  
TOTAL NUMBER OF SUBJECTS INVOLVED IN THE 
EXPERIMENTATION BROKEN DOWN BY AGE GROUP AND GENDER 
Gender 
Age (years) 
(29-47) 
(48-64) 
(> 65) 
Total (29-73) 
Male 
4 
3 
2 
9 
Female 
2 
2 
2 
6 
Total 
6 
5 
4 
15 
 
The study involved data analysis during the execution of 
two different tests: 1) the walking test and the 2) sit-to-stand 
test. The walking test consisted of the subject being 
monitored in the execution of a 5-meter journey, whereas 
sit-to-stand (Figure 5) is commonly used in clinical context 
for evaluating lower limb muscle function [16].  
 
 
Figure 5. Sit-to-stand test setup. 
 
The objective of the first experiment was to evaluate the 
mean and variance of the features introduced in the previous 
section by acquiring the EMG signal with different sample 
rates. Tables 2 and 3 report the mean and variance of the 
feature values for each test required by the experimental 
protocol, and considering 250Hz, 500Hz and 1000Hz as 
sampling rate of the raw EMG signal. 
TABLE II.  
MEAN AND VARIANCE OF THE FEATURE AT VARYING OF 
SAMPLE RATE DURING THE EXECUTION OF WALKING TEST 
Sampling 
Rate 
Feature 
RMS 
SSI 
IEMG 
WL 
250Hz 
0.36 (0.07) 
13.01 (3.88) 
36.05 (5.23) 0.12 (0.06) 
500Hz 
0.56 (0.04) 
31.57 (2.90) 
56.18 (2.52) 0.26 (0.03) 
1000Hz 
0.58 (0.03) 
35.33 (2.78) 
59.43 (2.38) 0.28 (0.02) 
TABLE III.  
MEAN AND VARIANCE OF THE FEATURE AT VARYING OF 
SAMPLE RATE DURING THE EXECUTION OF SIT-TO-STAND TEST 
Sampling 
Rate 
Feature 
RMS 
SSI 
IEMG 
WL 
250Hz 
0.87 (0.11) 
22.09 (5.78) 
52.18 (6.55) 0.86 (0.10) 
500Hz 
1.16 (0.07) 
43.12 (4.19) 
71.34 (4.11) 
.33 (0.08) 
1000Hz 
1.19 (0.05) 
49.19 (3.53) 
76.21 (3.78) 
.47 (0.05) 
 
The two previous tables show how the absolute values 
of the features have a limited variation when the sample rate 
is halved from 1000Hz to 500Hz while there is a fairly 
evident variation when the raw EMG signal is sampled at 
250Hz, and this is true for each considered feature and for 
each of the two tests performed by the subjects involved in 
the experimentation.  
The second experiment aimed to evaluate the time 
interval required to extract the features with different 
sample rate and as the duration of the exercise changes. Tab. 
4 reports the average processing time of the features 
extracted during the walking test by varying the duration of 
this test in the time interval 30 seconds - 2 minutes. This 
assessment was not necessary for the sit-to-stand test due to 
its limited time duration. 
TABLE IV.  
PROCESSING TIME (EXPRESSED IN SECONDS) FOR THE 
FEATURE EXTRACTION AT VARYING OF WALKING TEST DURATION 
Sampling 
Rate 
Walking test duration 
30 sec 
60 sec 
90 sec 
120 sec 
250Hz 
0.848 s 
1.345 s 
1.786 s 
2.124 s 
500Hz 
1.112 s 
1.732 s 
2.203 s 
2.568 s 
1000Hz 
1.121 s  
1.918 s 
2.413 s 
2.834 s 
 
From the analysis of the data reported in the previous 
table, the variations in computational times are negligible. 
Consequently, to obtain the best trade-off between accuracy 
in the evaluation of the features and computational cost, the 
sample rate was set to 500Hz for the subsequent validation 
in the clinical context. 
A. Clinical protocol for validation 
Due to the COVID-19 emergency, the initial 6-month 
test phase was reduced to approximately 2 months and will 
be performed at Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital in 
San Giovanni Rotondo (Lecce, Italy) on a randomized 
cohort of 100 patients aged ≥ 65 years and at risk or 
suffering from sarcopenia (i.e., ADL ≥ 4 and SARC-F ≥ 4), 
either admitted to the Geriatrics Operational Unit or 
evaluated at the Geriatrics clinic. The study will focus on 
the assessment of sarcopenia and will be carried out 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

according to the EWGSOP2 guidelines [17] in which 
muscle strength, muscle mass and functional status will be 
determined. For the evaluation of muscle strength, the EMG 
platform described in this paper will be used. Moreover, the 
total body Skeletal Muscle Mass (SMM) and the 
Appendicular Skeletal muscle Mass (ASM) will be 
determined during the clinical trial and their values will then 
be corrected for BMI. All data will be recorded and 
subsequently entered in a digital platform through a mobile 
app carried out within the same project by a private partner.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The sEMG platform described in this work was 
developed within a larger research project (SIMMS project) 
that is referred to the development of an integrated 
technological system, consisting of measuring devices, 
including mobile and wearable devices, interfacing with a 
data collection and processing software system, that can be 
used for early diagnosis and monitoring of sarcopenic 
patients. 
All the devices included in the technological system can 
evaluate sarcopenia-related parameters through the use of 
wearable devices. Specifically, the implemented sEMG 
platform was designed and developed to provide doctors or 
caregivers with a decision support tool to evaluate in an 
innovative way the temporal evolution of sarcopenia. 
Another added value of the platform is that all collected 
information can be sent to a software platform through an 
app developed on smartphones for patients, caregivers or 
doctors and can be consulted by medical personnel through 
a web application for diagnosis and interventions. 
As future work, regarding the EMG data, correlation 
will be extrapolated and statistical analyzes will be carried 
out on time series of the extracted features with the aim to 
implement an intelligent and automatic tool for early 
diagnosis of the considered pathology. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been carried out within the project SIMMS 
(Sarcopenia Integrated Measurement and Management 
System) funded by Apulian Region in the Innolabs 
Framework. Authors would like to thank colleagues of “Casa 
Sollievo della Sofferenza” Hospital, Department of Medical 
Sciences - Geriatrics Unit, in San Giovanni Rotondo (FG) 
for the clinical support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. H. Rosenberg, “Summary comments: epidemiological and 
methodological problems in determining nutritional status of 
older persons” The American journal of clinical nutrition, 
50(5), 1231-1233, 1989. 
[2] S. M. Schneider, R. Al-Jaouni, J. Filippi, J. B. Wiroth, G. 
Zeanandin, K. Arab, and X. Hébuterne, “Sarcopenia is 
prevalent in patients with Crohn's disease in clinical 
remission” Inflammatory bowel diseases, 14(11), 1562-1568, 
2008. 
[3] G. Guglielmi, F. Ponti, M. Agostini, M. Amadori, G. Battista, 
and A. Bazzocchi, “The role of DXA in sarcopenia” Aging 
clinical and experimental research, 28(6), 1047-1060, 2016. 
[4] A. J. Cruz-Jentoft, G. Bahat, J. Bauer, Y. Boirie, O. Bruyère, 
T. Cederholm, … , and M. Zamboni, “Sarcopenia: revised 
European consensus on definition and diagnosis” Age and 
ageing, 48(1), 16-31, 2019. 
[5] H. Ghasemzadeh, R. Jafari, and B. Prabhakaran, “A body 
sensor network with electromyogram and inertial sensors: 
Multimodal interpretation of muscular activities”, IEEE 
transactions on information technology in biomedicine, 14(2), 
198-206, 2009. 
[6] R. H. Chowdhury, M. B. Reaz, M. A. B. M. Ali, A. A. Bakar, 
K. Chellappan, and T. G. Chang, “Surface electromyography 
signal processing and classification techniques”, Sensors, 
13(9), 12431-12466, 2013. 
[7] C. J. Gatti, L. C. Doro, J. E. Langenderfer, A. G. Mell, J. D. 
Maratt, J. E. Carpenter, and R. E. Hughes, “Evaluation of 
three methods for determining EMG-muscle force parameter 
estimates for the shoulder muscles”, Clinical Biomechanics, 
23(2), 166-174, 2008. 
[8] L. L. Menegaldo, and L. F. Oliveira, “An EMG-driven model 
to evaluate quadriceps strengthening after an isokinetic 
training”, Procedia IUTAM, 2, 131-141, 2011. 
[9] S. H. Liu, C. B. Lin, Y. Chen, W. Chen, T. S. Huang, and C. 
Y. Hsu, “An EMG patch for the real-time monitoring of 
muscle-fatigue conditions during exercise”, Sensors, 19(14), 
3108, 2019. 
[10] C. D. Kuthe, R. V. Uddanwadiker, and A. A. Ramteke, 
“Surface electromyography based method for computing 
muscle strength and fatigue of biceps brachii muscle and its 
clinical implementation”, Informatics in Medicine Unlocked, 
12, 34-43, 2018. 
[11] F. Yu, A. Bilberg, and E. Stenager, “Wireless medical sensor 
measurements of fatigue in patients with multiple sclerosis”, 
In 2010 Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology (pp. 3763-3767). IEEE, 
2010. 
[12] https://www.btsbioengineering.com/products/freeemg/ 
last 
accessed 2021/03/15 
[13] C. J. De Luca, L. D. Gilmore, M. Kuznetsov, and S. H. Roy, 
“Filtering the surface EMG signal: Movement artifact and 
baseline noise contamination”, Journal of biomechanics, 
43(8), 1573-1579, 2010. 
[14] N. A. Hamzaid, R. M. Smith, and G. M. Davis, “Isokinetic 
cycling and elliptical stepping: a kinematic and muscle 
activation analysis”, Clinical Research on Foot & Ankle, 
2013. 
[15] A. Phinyomark, C. Limsakul, and P. Phukpattaranont, “A 
novel feature extraction for robust EMG pattern recognition” , 
arXiv preprint arXiv:0912.3973, 2009. 
[16] F. Chorin, C. Cornu, B. Beaune, J. Frère, and A. Rahmani, 
“Sit to stand in elderly fallers vs non-fallers: new insights 
from force platform and electromyography data”, Aging 
clinical and experimental research, 28(5), 871-879, 2016. 
[17] A. J. Cruz-Jentoft, G. Bahat, J. Bauer, Y. Boirie, O. Bruyère, 
T. Cederholm, ... , and M. Zamboni, “Sarcopenia: revised 
European consensus on definition and diagnosis”, Age and 
ageing, 48(1), 16-31, 2019. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

