GuideMe: A System for Indoor Orientation and Guidance 
Eirini Barri 
Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics 
University of Patras 
Patras, Greece 
e-mail: ebarri@ceid.upatras.gr 
Apostolos Gkamas 
University Ecclesiastical Academy of Vella 
Ioannina, Greece 
e-mail: gkamas@aeavellas.gr 
Christos Bouras 
Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics 
University of Patras 
Patras, Greece 
e-mail: bouras@cti.gr 
Spyridon Aniceto Katsampiris Salgado 
Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics 
University of Patras 
Patras, Greece 
e-mail: ksalgado@ceid.upatras.gr
Abstract— The demand for indoor navigational systems is 
increasing daily. The use of navigational systems is ranging 
from smart cities and robots to visually impaired people 
support to navigate safely. The GuideMe Project aims to 
provide guidance and security for people suffering from 
blindness, and in the time being, it is in the final development 
stage. This paper presents GuideMe Project goals GuideMe 
Project architecture and GuideMe final prototype. GuideMe 
Project architecture consists of the wearable device curried the 
user has, the anchors with which the wearable device works to 
determine the position of the user, the smartphone that is 
informed by the system for the route the user must follow and 
converts the message into audio information through the user’s 
headset. The headset in order to guide the user in indoor places 
and the local server who controls the protocols and the 
information, are the last parts of the architecture. It is clear 
that the system is quite complex, it consists of several entities 
and requires them to work together harmoniously to provide 
the prescribed functionality, in real-time. All the technologies 
developed to this final system, each of which has multiple sub-
entities as mentioned, handle the required functionality that is 
the provision orientation of users who are located and moving 
indoors. 
Keywords-GuideMe; indoor navigation; indoor guidance; 
people with special needs. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
GuideMe 
project 
involves 
the design 
and 
development of an indoor tracking and navigation system for 
people suffering from blindness. The core of the system is a 
device which will provide the ability to navigate through 
voice instructions. These instructions will be based on the 
positioning and orientation capabilities of the device. 
For outdoor navigation and pathfinding, the Global 
Positioning System (GPS), is the most commonly used 
technologies, among others. GPS though is only applicable 
for outdoor localization because issues arise when is about 
indoor localization. Of course, indoor navigation is very 
important to humans and has many applications for robots 
too. The most common issue regarding the use of GPS in an 
indoor environment is that there is no line of sight between 
the GPS receiver and the satellites because the building walls 
and the indoor obstacles can lead to signal reflection and 
absorption. GPS technology use is not possible inside 
buildings which makes indoor navigation more complicated, 
and the reasons are thoroughly explained in 0. 
Following the previous research in the context of 
GuideMe project, this paper presents the architecture and the 
modules of the GuideMe system that were used and 
developed for indoor navigation. Detailed presentation of the 
positioning and navigation modules of GuideMe system has 
been presented in [2]. Audio guidance refers to the ability of 
the GuideMe system to guide the user with voice navigation 
commands. The corresponding module has been presented in 
[3]. The GuideMe system consists of the following modules: 
(a) 
Indoor 
positioning 
and 
navigation 
algorithms: 
For indoor positioning, the trilateration method was selected 
because of the UWB technology. UWB technology provides 
very good position estimation, thus trilateration provides 
sufficiently precise localization. For navigation, the A* 
algorithm was implemented. It is a heuristic algorithm, 
finding the shortest distance. It searches for the minimum 
optimal path, among all possible paths to the final node 
(destination). (b) Text-to-Speech module: For the acoustic 
guidance, voice composition via Google's text-to-speech 
(TTS) was selected. Using the Google platform and the 
corresponding API, the application creates an audio mp3 file 
from the text that will be the input to the specific text-to-
speech functionality of the platform. (c) Wearable and 
anchor module: Wearable is a device that the user carries and 
works with other system entities to determine the location. 
Anchors are devices in specific locations inside the buildings 
which are used for the wearable device to locate itself. The 
device transmits and receives fixed point messages via UWB 
protocol. In addition to communicating via UWB with the 
wearable device, the anchors communicate with the local 
server via Wi-Fi. The wearable device is not connected 
anywhere. It’s an entity that just exchanges messages with 
the anchors when asked. (d) Mobile application: The 
smartphone that the user carries is informed by the system 
about the route that must be followed by the user and 
converts this information into audio messages in the user's 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

headphones. In addition to headset communication (BLE or 
wired), the smartphone also communicates with the local 
server via Wi-Fi. (e) Servers: Local server has multiple roles; 
it communicates with the host server via MQTT protocol 
messages. It also communicates with fixed devices via Wi-Fi 
for the relative distance of each mobile device. Through 
communication with the main server, it is informed about the 
user's destination and calculates routes to the destination. 
The main server collects and manages all the information for 
the users. The configurations required are integrated into the 
system, the top views, the applications that are used, and 
presents all the data that has been collected. The buldings 
floorplans are uploaded-stored to the server and computer 
vision (to detect walls, obstacles, etc.) and routing 
technologies are used to extract the best route. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the motivation behind our work. Section III 
provides a literature review of other current works on this 
subject. Section IV addresses the system’s architecture 
whereas Section V goes into finer details regarding the 
system modules for positioning and navigating in indoor 
spaces. Finally, Section VI summarizes our main findings 
and conclusions and suggests probable future work. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
Visual impairment or as it is known “Blindness” is a 
decreased ability to see and can cause difficulties in daily 
activities. Blind people face problems not fixable by usual 
means and they always depend on others. The main problem 
and the motivation of this project are that blind people may 
face problems to move through places without help.  
According to the World Health Organization, the 
following are the key facts regarding blindness and vision 
impairment [4]: (a) At least 2.2 billion people have a vision 
impairment or blindness globally, of whom 1 billion could 
have prevented or has not been addressed yet. (b) That 1 
billion include those that have a moderate or severe distance 
vision impairment or blindness due to unaddressed refractive 
error. (c) The main causes of vision impairment are 
uncorrected refractive errors and cataracts. (d) The majority 
of people with vision impairment are over the age of 50 
years. The motivation of the GuideMe project [5] is to 
provide guidance and security for outdoor travel. The main 
component of the system is a portable device that provides 
the ability to route and navigate the user by voice commands. 
Τhe device guides the user based on its location and 
orientation capabilities.  
The motivation of the paper and the main goal is to 
improve the convenience and security of the social life of 
blind people and people with special needs too. Using the 
above-mentioned system, the users will feel more secure and 
comfortable in visiting public places, especially buildings, 
such as stations, airports, shopping malls, etc. as they will be 
guided by the GuideMe system in order to arrive at their 
destination. It is also important to mention, that the user will 
be informed in case of an emergency such as fire, 
earthquake, accidents, etc.) and the user will be guided to the 
nearest exit. The target is to increase up to 20% the presence 
of the population with mobility or other problems in 
buildings. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, related research works will be mentioned 
that concern the navigation and routing indoors. The studies 
concerning indoor positioning techniques and systems are 
strongly increasing as the location-based services growing. 
Previous works focus on the need to study the general way of 
positioning and then they propose algorithms and methods 
for indoor positioning while others propose a different way 
of system architecture to achieve efficient indoor navigation. 
Significant work regarding indoor navigation for people 
with special needs is available. A comprehensive solution 
was provided by Kishore et al. [6] for indoor public transport 
for people with disabilities. Beacons (small low-power 
devices) were placed indoors and transmitted signals to the 
cell phone sensors via Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) 
technology. Another study using BLE is presented by 
Cheraghi et al. [7]. GuideBeacon is beacons-based for indoor 
navigation that simulation showed that GuideBeacon 
application reduces the time that disabled person needs to 
cross an unknown indoor area at the percentage of 30%-
50%. It also reduced the distance the disabled person has to 
walk by at least 50%. FootPath (Link et al. [8]) is a system 
that consists of a geographic map from OpenStreetMap. 
When the geographic map is downloaded, the system uses 
the accelerometer and compass on the user's phone to 
calculate and detect the user's steps. The results showed that 
the FootPath system is very accurate and can assist users 
with disabilities. Megalingam et al. [9], suggested an 
algorithm 
called 
Location-Aware 
and 
Remembering 
Navigation (LARN), which depends on Dijkstra’s algorithm 
to find the optimal path. Daramouskas et al. [10] present 
Multilateration, 
Trilateration, 
and 
Particle 
Swarm 
Optimization (PSO) algorithm in a study using methods for 
location estimation on Low Power Wide Area Networks 
(LPWAN). Zhu et al. [11] propose an indoor-outdoor 
positioning for pedestrians and vehicles by connecting an 
integrated IMU system and a GNSS receiver. Using a 
horizontal positioning indicator PACCH detects the indoor-
outdoor transition and decides whether to merge with GNSS 
positions. Next, Krishnaveni et al. [12] did an overview 
based on UWB technology for indoor positioning.  
In the existing literature about positioning, machine 
learning algorithms are widely used to calculate the position 
of the user. In [13], Peltola et al. present an architecture 
design using GNSS and UWB technologies simulated in 
MATLAB using multiple users, methods, and sensors. A 
survey of the latest indoor positioning technologies is 
provided by Alarifi et al. [15], who analyse UWB 
technologies with an analysis of Strengths, Weaknesses, 
Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT). On the other hand, Al-
Ammar et al. [16] present new taxonomies and review some 
major recent advances on indoor positioning techniques. In a 
different study, [17], Mahida et al. are dealing with 
algorithms and various positioning enabled wireless 
technologies used in realistic scenarios in order to provide 
indoor navigation. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

The algorithm proposed in [18] named FPP, combined its 
internal path and interior information. The study introduced a 
new method for dynamically changing the navigation path 
indoors. The FPP algorithm was compared with Dijkstra and 
Elastic and the comparison results showed that FPP can 
provide the shortest route for indoor navigation faster than 
the other two algorithms can. Using A* algorithm, a study in 
order to reduce the time that is required by a user to get to its 
destination is conducted by Goel, et al. [19]. In the first 
section of the paper A* algorithm is detailed presented, while 
in the second one, the authors demonstrated successfully 
why the A* algorithm is better than the Dijkstra algorithm 
for indoor navigation with barriers. Comparing A* and 
Dijkstra algorithm, A* achieves better results for indoor 
navigation through heuristic searches and delivers better 
results faster. Based on these rich and various studies 
mentioned above, in this section, we will present similar 
projects to GuideMe. San Francisco International Airport 
and Indoo.rs put their work together and created an app for 
visually 
impaired passengers 
[20]. 
Edwin 
M. 
Lee 
collaboration with the White House and other partners of San 
Francisco developed the Entrepreneurship-in-Residence 
(EIR) project. At the beginning of 2014, they chose to help 
the San Francisco Airport (SFO) create a tool to assist blind 
and visually impaired travelers [20]. Recommendation ITU-
T F.921 [21] determines how audio-based network 
navigation systems can be designed to make sure that they 
are responsive and dedicated to the needs of people with 
visual impairments. The goal is to provide network visual 
system designers with the audio data they need in the early 
stages of development. They do that contemplate and 
vanquish any constraints or obstacles that prevent vision-
impaired users from making full use of the built 
environment. A module-based application developed in [22] 
whose purpose was the blind user being able to use public 
transport secure and successfully navigate in complex public 
transport terminals. Through an appropriate user interface, 
the system combines real-time communication to and from 
public transport vehicles with precise positioning and 
guidance. It also provides additional navigation assistance.  
INK 2016: Indoor Navigation and Communication in 
ÖPNV for blind and visually impaired people [23] combines 
real-time communication to and from public transport 
vehicles. Giving accurate positioning and guidance and 
having additional video call navigation assistance where the 
user can communicate with a professional operator. 
Arikovani UK’s WeWalk, Imperial College London, Astra 
Terra, and the Royal National Institute of Blind People 
(RNIB) will join forces to moderate indoor challenges by 
developing an indoor navigation system that is reliable and 
fully accessible too for visually impaired people and anyone 
that may struggle to navigate the built environment [24]. 
A new personalized indoor navigation system that aims 
on increasing public transport accessibility for all passengers 
but especially for the visually impaired is presented in [25]. 
Project Ways4all helps the visually impaired, enabling them 
to access public transport and the necessary up-to-date traffic 
information in a very simplified way. Concluding, Project 
“Using An Integrated Techniques for Developing Indoor 
Navigation Systems to Allow the Blind and Visually 
Impaired People to Reach Precise Objects” [26] uses various 
technologies such as WIFI, Bluetooth, and RFID in order to 
help the user reach a microelement in the navigated 
environment. It composes an intelligent interface for accurate 
indoor navigation for blind and visually impaired people 
only using a smartphone. 
IV. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
This section discusses the general architecture of the 
GuideMe project. The architecture consists of the following 
parts (see Figure 1): the wearable device that the user is 
wearing, the anchors that are devices located inside a 
building that helps in the positioning process, the mobile 
application (installed in the end-user mobile phone), the 
wireless headset that provides the user with the audio 
commands for the navigation inside the building, a local 
server, and a remote server.  
 
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed architecture 
 
In this project, the main component is a small wearable 
device that helps in the user’s positioning through UWB 
technology. This technology provides perfectly accurate 
positioning, with an error of up to 10 cm. This device, apart 
from the ability to locate the user, can also determine the 
orientation of the user, receive voice commands, and 
transmit voice instructions to guide the visually impaired 
people. Specifically, as it is shown in Figure 1, in GuideMe 
system, our smart device can communicate to anchors via 
UWB technology, in order to locate the user. This device has 
the ability to provide route and navigation information to the 
user via voice commands. The anchors are calculating and 
measuring the distance between the user and the anchor. The 
distance data (between the user and the anchors), is 
transferred to a local server to measure the exact position and 
run positioning algorithms, which in our case will be based 
on the trilateration approach. The communication between 
the anchors and the local server is done using Wi-Fi 
technology and as far as the communication protocol is 
concerned the Message Queuing Telemetry Transport 
(MQTT) [27] is used. 
Furthermore, there is a remote server that has a floorplan 
of the building. This remote server, having the details of the 
building, the position of the user, and the destination of the 
user, can guide the user by giving directions. Also, the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

communication of the local servers with the remote server is 
done over REST API that ensures seamless communication, 
speed, and scalability. The navigation directions are given by 
the smartphone to the user through wireless headphones, 
using voice commands. Specifically, the communication 
between the wireless headset and the smartphone is based on 
Bluetooth technology. The mobile application is responsible 
to provide the navigation commands. The audio commands 
are extracted in the remote server and transmitted through 
the Wi-Fi network to the mobile application. 
V. 
SYSTEM MODULES 
In this section, the parts of the aforementioned 
architecture are thoroughly presented. Firstly, the indoor 
positioning and navigation algorithms used in this project are 
presented. After that, the Text-to-Speech part and the anchor 
technology are presented. Finally, the server, web, and 
mobile applications are described. 
A. Indoor positioning and navigation algorithms 
As the main goal of the GuideMe project is to provide 
indoor localization and navigation to blind people, thorough 
research has been conducted in order to choose the best 
solution. As far as the indoor positioning is concerned, the 
trilateration method was selected. The main reason for this 
choice is that UWB technology provides very good 
estimation, thus trilateration provides sufficiently precise 
localization. The algorithm was implemented following these 
steps: a) for each UWB anchor with which the user connects, 
a circle is created, with the centre the position of the user, 
and with a radius the distance between the user and the 
anchor. To locate the user, the user must be connected with 
at least three anchors. 
 
Figure 2. The UI of the dashboard when adding a floorplan. 
 
Regarding the navigation algorithms, the A* algorithm 
[31] was implemented. A* algorithm is a heuristic algorithm 
for pathfinding, that can “discover” the optimal path, under 
some circumstances. This algorithm depends on the 
structural graphs. An initial node is defined as the start point 
on the graph and tries to find the endpoint with a minimum 
cost. The cost function is defined as the travel cost is used on 
par with an estimate of the cost required to extend to reach 
the final node. In (1) the cost equation is defined. 
f(n)=g(n)+h(n)       (1) 
the g(n) signifies the travel cost from the initial node to the 
n-th node. The h(n) is the estimated cost from the nth node to 
the final node. 
As far as the development is concerned, the pathfinding 
procedure was implemented based on the [28]. Firstly, the 
library provides a floorplan with a grid. In each cell of the 
grid, we can set with 0 or 1 if the cell can be accessible (if 
there is not an obstacle in this cell). After defining the cells 
that have obstacles, then the initial point coordinates and the 
final point coordinates are defined. 
Figure 2 shows the dashboard with which the user adds a 
floorplan in the GuideMe project. 
B. Text-to-Speech 
The navigation commands to the end-user are provided 
through the Android application, using the Google Cloud 
TTS platform. The commands extracted from the TTS 
procedure are provided to the user via the SSML [32] 
language. SSML language is a part of a greater set of 
markup specifications for voice commands. The flow of the 
TTS conversion is the following: TTS operates by 
converting SSML input into audio data. Audio data is in 
human speech. The process of translating the text into 
human speech is called synthetic speech. 
C. Wearable device and Anchors 
As far as the wearable device is concerned, the processor 
that is chosen is the EC32L13 module developed by Econais 
[20]. The EC32L13 is a 32-bit processor of the product 
family STM32 processors. The processors in this family of 
processors are energy efficient, in order to expand the battery 
life. A WiFi module is also integrated into the wearable 
device. For the connectivity through UWB, we have chosen 
the module DWM1000 of Decawave [33]. 
 
Figure 3.  Overview of the device's architecture. 
In Figure 3, we present the general architecture of the 
wearable device. The device consists of a number of sensors 
including, the magnetometer and accelerometer sensors, the 
UWB module, the WiFi module, the Main Computing Unit, 
which in our case is the EC32L13, and the module for the 
battery management in order to expand the battery life as 
long as possible. In Figure 4 the user’s wearable device 
prototype is presented. 
The EC32L13 module is incorporated in both wearable 
devices and anchor. In contrast to the anchor, the wearable 
device has many sensors that help to understand the 
orientation of the user. Specifically, the gyroscope 
FXAS21002FS, 
and 
the 
magnetometer/accelerometer 
KMX62 were used. The FXAS21002FS is a small, low-
power gyroscope with a 16-bit resolution (ADC). Its full 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

range is adjustable and can reach from ± 250 ° / s to ± 2000 ° 
/ s. Microprocessor interface capabilities include I2C and SPI 
protocols. The KMX62 is a 6-degree sensor system that 
provides 16-bit precision digital outputs that can be accessed 
via the I2C interface. The KMX62 sensor consists of a three-
axis 
magnetometer 
and 
an 
additional 
three-axis 
accelerometer. Its size is 3 x 3 x 0.9mm (LGA) - 0.18um 
CMOS technology. Includes a programmable accelerometer 
± 2g / ± 4g / ± 8g / ± 16g and +/- 1200 uT range for the 
magnetometer. 
 
Figure 4.  Wearable device prototype of the GuideMe project. 
The next section describes the mobile application. 
D. Mobile App 
As far as the mobile application is concerned, we focused 
on creating an Android-based application. The application is 
responsible for several functions: (a) Connection to the local 
server via a Wi-Fi network and receive on-site navigation 
commands. The application receives the commands in a 
format defined by the communication protocol between the 
server and the defined application, converts them into voice 
commands, and transmits them to the headset. (b) Interface 
through which the user enters his passwords and is verified 
that he has the right to use the service. The authentication 
process is based on the Cognito platform of Amazon Web 
Services. (c) Interface for the wearable-application pairing. 
The wearable device was programmed to transmit to 
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) beacons, and particularly 
iBeacons [34]. iBeacons is the technology standard that 
enables mobile apps to listen to signals from Bluetooth 
devices. The logic we follow in the GuideMe application is 
this: The device periodically emits an iBeacon. In case we 
want to connect the application to the device, the user 
presses the corresponding button and places the phone very 
close to the device. At the touch of a button, the phone starts 
'listening' to BLE devices in the area for 5 seconds. If it 
“listens” to a device that it is near it (based on the RSSI 
value), at the end of five seconds it notifies the user that this 
GuideMe device (beacon) has been detected and asks the 
user if it wants to pair. (d) Provides tracking service 
assistance, using the built-in sensors (magnetic field 
detection sensor, accelerometer, etc.) on the Android mobile 
phone running the application. (e) Connection to wireless 
(Bluetooth) or wired headphones carried by the user and 
guidance with voice commands. 
E. Local and Remote Server 
Finally, project GuideMe consists of two types of 
servers, the local servers, and the remote server. The server 
offers device management functionality. There are different 
types of devices and each type is managed differently. 
Specifically, the devices that the local server manages are: 
(a) Mobile UWB devices that users carry (tags) and are 
responsible for locating them indoors. (b) UWB devices that 
located in specific areas and communicate with both mobile 
stations and the local server. (c) The local server is located 
on the building premises. 
As far as the remote server is concerned, the main 
responsibilities of the remote server are the following: (a) 
Offer user management functionality. Different levels of 
users are provided, each with different capabilities and 
rights. 
Users 
log 
in 
to 
the 
platform 
using 
a 
username/password. Modern user authentication methods 
incorporate additional mechanisms in parallel with the 
password-based methods, to verify the identity of users. In 
the GuideMe project, the Amazon Web Services' Cognito 
platform [35] was used. We generalize authentication into 
two common steps, which are implemented through two 
APIs 
provided 
by 
the 
platform: 
InitiateAuth 
and 
RespondToAuthChallenge. (b) Manage the information of 
buildings, such as maps (floorplans). (c) Gather the 
information sent by the devices, provide previous 
information, e.g., the previous locations of the user. (d) 
Provide information concerning the use and cost of the use of 
the system (accounting/billing). (e) Capture the position of 
the devices in the space on the floorplans. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This work refers to the project of GuideMe. The state of 
the art of existing approaches and the system modules that 
were implemented to complete the above-mentioned project 
in terms of navigation and indoor routing were presented. 
The system provides a wearable device, and the project’s 
purpose is the contribution to indoor navigation and 
positioning assistance for people with difficulties. The user is 
guided from the wearable device for the indoor orientation 
through voice commands and help him to avoid obstacles. 
This work is the final phase of the project that relates to 
transmitting the correct instructions to the user using the 
information and modules of the aforementioned through 
voice commands. Future work will include the participant-
based evaluation of the GuideMe system and study the 
impact of such a system in museums. Also, future work may 
include an extension of this current work by also covering 
outdoor areas through the application. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been co-financed by the European 
Union and Greek national funds through the Regional 
Operation Program “Western Greece 2014-2020”, under the 
Call “Regional research and innovation strategies for smart 
specialization (RIS3) in Communication and Information 
Technologies” (project code: 5038620 entitled “System for 
indoors orientation and guidance - GuideMe”). 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

REFERENCES  
[1] E. J. Alqahtani, F. H. Alshamrani, H. F. Syed, and F. A. 
Alhaidari, "Survey on Algorithms and Techniques for Indoor 
Navigation Systems," 21st Saudi Computer Society National 
Computer Conference (NCC), Riyadh, pp. 1-9, 2018. 
[2] E. Barri et al., “GuideMe: A networked application for indoor 
orientation and guidance”, in The Sixteenth International 
Conference on Networking and Services, ICNS 2020, 2019, 
pp. 1-6. 
[3] E. Barri et al., “Text to Speech through Bluetooth for People 
with Special Needs Navigation, in The Sixteenth International 
Conference on Networking and Services, 2019, pp. 1-6. 
[4] World 
Health 
Organization: 
https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/blindness-and-visual-impairment 
2019.12.11 (retrieved: December, 2020). 
[5] GuideMe 
project: 
http://www.guideme-project.upatras.gr/ 
2019.12.11 (retrieved: 20/12/21). 
[6] A. Kishore et al., "CENSE: A Cognitive Navigation System 
for People with Special Needs," IEEE Third International 
Conference on Big Data Computing Service and Applications 
(BigDataService), San Francisco, CA, 2017, pp. 198-203, doi: 
10.1109/BigDataService.2017.32. 
[7] S. 
A. 
Cheraghi, 
V. 
Namboodiri, 
and 
L. 
Walker, 
"GuideBeacon: Beacon-based indoor wayfinding for the 
blind, visually impaired, and disoriented," 2017 IEEE 
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and 
Communications (PerCom), Kona, HI, 2017, pp. 121-130, 
doi: 10.1109/PERCOM.2017.7917858.  
[8] J. Á. B. Link, P. Smith, N. Viol, and K. Wehrle, "FootPath: 
Accurate map-based indoor navigation using smartphones," 
International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor 
Navigation, 
Guimaraes, 
2011, 
pp. 
1-8, 
doi: 
10.1109/IPIN.2011.6071934.  
[9] R. K. Megalingam, A. P. Rajendran, D. Dileepkumar, and A. 
T. Soloman, "LARN: Indoor navigation for elderly and 
physically 
challenged," 
IEEE 
Global 
Humanitarian 
Technology Conference (GHTC), San Jose, CA, 2013, pp. 
326-330, doi: 10.1109/GHTC.2013.6713705.  
[10] I. Daramouskas, V. Kapoulas, and T. Pegiazis, "A survey of 
methods for location estimation on Low Power Wide Area 
Networks," 10th International Conference on Information, 
Intelligence, Systems and Applications (IISA), Patras, Greece, 
2019, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/IISA.2019.8900701.  
[11] N. Zhu, M. Ortiz, and V. Renaudin, "Seamless Indoor-
Outdoor Infrastructure-free Navigation for Pedestrians and 
Vehicles with GNSS-aided Foot-mounted IMU," 2019 
International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor 
Navigation (IPIN), Pisa, Italy, 2019, pp. 1-8, doi: 
10.1109/IPIN.2019.8911741.  
[12] B. V. Krishnaveni, K. S.Reddy, and P. R. Reddy, “Ultra 
Wideband Indoor Positioning Technologies: Analysis and 
Recent Advances,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 5, May 2016, pp. 
707, doi: 10.3390/s16050707. 
[13] [1]S. Bozkurt, G. Elibol, S. Gunal, and U. Yayan, “A 
comparative study on machine learning algorithms for indoor 
positioning,” 
in 
2015 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Innovations in Intelligent SysTems and Applications 
(INISTA), Madrid, Spain, Sep. 2015, pp. 1–8, doi: 
10.1109/INISTA.2015.7276725. 
[14] P. Peltola, R. Montasari, F. Seco, A. R. Jimenez, and R. Hill, 
"Multi-Platform Architecture for Cooperative Pedestrian 
Navigation Applications," 2019 International Conference on 
Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Pisa, Italy, 
2019, pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1109/IPIN.2019.8911786.  
[15] A. Alarifi et al., “Ultra Wideband Indoor Positioning 
Technologies: Analysis and Recent Advances,” Sensors, vol. 
16, no. 5, p. 707, May 2016, doi: 10.3390/s16050707. 
[16] M. A. Al-Ammar et al., "Comparative Survey of Indoor 
Positioning Technologies, Techniques, and Algorithms," 
International Conference on Cyberworlds, Santander, 2014, 
pp. 245-252, doi: 10.1109/CW.2014.41.  
[17] P. T. Mahida, S. Shahrestani and H. Cheung, "Localization 
techniques in indoor navigation system for visually impaired 
people," 17th International Symposium on Communications 
and Information Technologies (ISCIT), Cairns, QLD, 2017, 
pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ISCIT.2017.8261229. 
[18] Y. Li and B.-S. Shin, “Internal Topology Based Flexible 
Shortest Path Planning Method for Indoor Navigation,” in 
Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 
2015, 
pp. 
171–176, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-47487-7_26.  
[19] S. K. Goel, S. Ansari, and T. Kuwalekar, “Using A * 
algorithm to find shortest path in Indoor positioning system.” 
2017. 
[20] ndoo.rs: 
https://indoo.rs/indoo-rs-and-san-francisco-
international-airport-unveil-app-for-visually-impaired-
passengers/ (retrieved: December, 2020). 
[21] ITU: 
https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-F.921-201808-I/en 
(retrieved: December, 2020). 
[22] Trimis 
project: 
https://trimis.ec.europa.eu/project/indoor-
navigation-and-communication-public-transport-blind-and-
visually-impaired (retrieved: December, 2020). 
[23] Tugraz: 
https://www.tugraz.at/institute/ifg/projects/navigation/ink/ 
(retrieved: December, 2020). 
[24] Tdebproject: 
https://www.tdebproject.com/partnerships/mitigating-indoor-
wayfinding-challenges (retrieved: December, 2020). 
[25] Ways4all: 
http://www.ways4all.at/index.php/en/ways4all 
(retrieved: December, 2020). 
[26] http://it.yu.edu.jo/index.php/it-faculty/facutly-projects/123-
english-articles/242-using-an-integrated-techniques-for-
developing-indoor-navigation-systems-to-allow-the-blind-
and-visually-impaired-people-to-reach-precise-objects 
(retrieved: December, 2020). 
[27] MQTT: https://mqtt.org/ (retrieved: December, 2020). 
[28] https://easystarjs.com/?fbclid=IwAR3yU-
TK0RWn_80YY92_HafqJOc4aHQZzCTym1dK04kN803sES
zdj7ggFpQ (retrieved: December, 2020). 
[29] Electronicsdatasheets: 
https://www.electronicsdatasheets.com/manufacturers/econais
/parts/ec32l13 (retrieved: December, 2021). 
[30] Easystarjs: 
https://github.com/prettymuchbryce/easystarjs 
(retrieved: December, 2020). 
[31] Wikipedia: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A*_search_algorithm (retrieved: 
December, 2020). 
[32] Google platform: https://cloud.google.com/text-to-
speech/docs/ssml (retrieved: December, 2020). 
[33] Decawave: 
https://www.decawave.com/sites/default/files/resources/dwm
1000-datasheet-v1.3.pdf (retrieved: December, 2020). 
[34] Apple 
iBeacon: 
https://developer.apple.com/ibeacon/ 
(retrieved: December, 2020). 
[35] AWS: https://aws.amazon.com/cognito/ (retrieved: December, 
2020). 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

