E-textiles the Need to Breath: A Novel Manufacturing Process and Textile  
for Lightweight Transparent Sustainable E-textiles and Wearables  
Sonia M.Reynolds  
Nottingham Trent University: dept. Advanced Textiles 
Nottingham, United Kingdom 
e-mail: sonia.reynolds@ntu.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—The adoption and growth of e-textiles and wearables 
is largely reliant on how discreetly electrical devices can be 
applied without limiting functionality and compromising textile 
qualities. Electrical components are an important parameter for 
a variety of applications where devices are required to be in 
close proximity to the skin. One example is within the health and 
leisure industry, where sensors are used for monitoring and 
tracking bodily functions. Historically, electronics were 
aesthetically intrusive when applied to textiles, although, by 
becoming smaller and flexible this is less of an issue. A method 
to compliment those advancements further would be to 
incorporate small electrical components into a complimentary, 
open structured, lightweight, transparent textile. This would 
provide increased breathability and reduce fabric weight, 
resulting in more comfort for the user. This paper introduces a 
novel manufacturing process that accommodates these features. 
A process whereby fabrication is achieved through entangling 
the fibres on the surface of yarn. Observation is used to assess 
the level of fabric openness in relation to air permeable capacity, 
transparency and end weight. Quantitative methods were used 
via tensile testing to establish if textiles manufactured by the 
novel process met industry strength requirements. Eight 
samples were tested in total, each showed slight variations in 
results. For example, two samples tested in the weft direction 
showed a difference of 40% strain capacity. It was assumed the 
irregularity was the result of differing quantities of fibre on the 
yarn surface used for entanglement. However, all eight samples 
that underwent tensile tests were confirmed to meet the British 
Test Standard ISO 2062. 
Keywords-Wearables; Transparent e-textiles; breathability; 
Sustainable e-textiles; Novel textile manufacturing process; 
Lightweight e-textiles; electronic textiles; textile innovation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Textiles are one of mankind’s most used products. The 
earliest references to textiles come 27000 years ago in the 
form of impressions on pottery of yarn [5]. The earliest 
woven material was found in southern Turkey in Cayonu and 
is dated at 7000 BCE [2]. The earliest known examples of 
knitting have been found in Egypt and dates between the 11th 
and 14th century CE [6]. The knitting process involves the 
interlooping of a single yarn and the weave process involves 
the interlacing of at least two yarns [4]. Nonwoven fabrics are 
created from fibre webs that have not been spun into yarn [9]. 
Continuous agitation and pressing results in the hooking 
together of the fibre creating a uniform piece of nonwoven 
fabric [2]. Despite the multidisciplinary nature of electronic 
textiles and the market predicted to ‘approach $5 bn by 2027’ 
[3], the process for manufacturing e-textiles and wearables is 
limited to the three ancient practices. Wearable technology is 
a growing field. This can be credited to the decrease in size 
of electrical components and changes in people’s attitudes 
toward personal electronics [8]. This further supports the 
need for additional textile manufacturing technology with the 
capacity to support the trend of electronics miniaturization.  
      
The structure of this paper consists of the following: 
Section 2 provides the objectives of the research. 
Commencing by giving clarity to how the new process differs 
from known textile manufacturing. Methods is then presented 
in section 3, and this section identifies the methodology, 
machinery and materials used in this investigation. In section 
4, the procedure, testbed, challengers and failures are 
discussed. Focus is given to revealing how the new process 
lends itself to particular aspects of current manufacturing 
practices, also, production challengers are addressed. Section 
5 presents the results from the quantitative data collected. 
This information was derived from tensile tests obtained from 
eight samples manufactured by the new process. In section 6, 
there is discussion on fabrics created by the novel process. 
Particular attention is set around the capabilities and benefits 
that the new structure offers. This discussion is followed by 
the conclusion, section 7. Presented, is a summary of the 
functions, potential of the novel process and products created.  
Lastly, this section concludes by identifying industry sectors 
who would find value from the new method and materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Microscopic image of the novel textile. 
 
II. 
OBJECTIVES 
This paper presents a novel manufacturing process and 
textile that is created by yarn that requires neither interlinking 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

or interlooping as in the woven and knitting structure. 
Therefore, providing a textile surface more suitable for the 
inclusion of electronics. The differing properties of 
electronics and textiles such as durability (bend, stretch, twist 
and shear) is a concern for e-textile development [1]. The new 
manufacturing process removes the necessity to bend the e-
yarn or filament, totally removing interloping and interlacing, 
which have proven problematic during the production of E-
textiles and wearables. In contrast, the new textile 
manufactures a fabric with a linear structure allowing 
individual yarn strands to be fully visible, as in Figure 1. 
Thus, allowing a straight surface for electrical components to 
easily and discreetly be attached or embedded, as in Figure 4. 
 
FOYSE® is the name given to the novel manufacturing 
process. The word FOYSE is derived from the acronym: 
Fibre On Yarn Surface Entanglement. Two fabric structures 
have been manufactured using the FOYSE process to 
demonstrate design capability named Zephlinear® and 
Hover-Tex™. The name Zephlinear is derived from two 
words Zephyr and Linear and applied when the FOYSE 
process is used to manufacture a textile with one layer of yarn 
as in Figure 1 and 2.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. S. M. Reynolds, Zephlinear Single Layer Stripes Multi Yarn 
Count (ZL047), Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Fisher Fine Arts 
Library Material Collection. 
 
Hover-Tex is applied when the FOYSE process is used to 
create a minimum of two-layers of yarn, giving the 
appearance of the second layer of yarn to hover over the first. 
The layering method provides space for the embedding of 
additional elements such as yarns or filaments as in Figure 3 
and Figure 4. Hover-Tex is constructed by laying out one 
layer of parallel array of yarn and then a second layer placed 
at a 90-degree angle to the first.  It is important to note that 
the process is not limited to create fabrics with a linear 
appearance, but yarn colour and positioning can be used to 
create a preferred end appearance or function. The fabric 
surface Hover-Tex is the material that will undergo 
mechanical testing and be discussed in this paper.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. S. M. Reynolds, Zephlinear Swirls Within Open Net (ZL044), 
Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Fisher Fine Arts Library 
Material Collection. 
III. 
METHODS 
Quantitative data was collected via tensile tests on eight 
Hover-Tex fabric samples.  This data collection method is an 
established process to measure the breaking point of a textile 
material. By doing this, fabric strength is also determined. In 
addition, results provide numeric data that can be interpreted 
into several forms. Tensile tests were utilized as they are a 
proven method for evaluating the development of new 
materials while providing valuable information about a fabric 
and its associated properties. The sample in Figure 4 and 5 
are manufactured using three layers of yarn. A first and third 
layer of yarn, 70% mohair and 30% silk, and the second layer 
of yarn, 100% merino wool twisted with fine copper wire 
containing a programable LED. The Hover-Tex fabric was 
divided into eight equal parts for tensile testing. Four samples 
in the warp direction and four in the weft direction to obtain 
breaking points and elongation measurement, which are 
illustrated in Figure 6 and 7. Visual observation was 
conducted with the LED switched on and off to demonstrate 
level of transparency and discreet embedding. 
 
IV. 
PROCEEDURE, CHALLENGES AND FAILURES 
FOYSE manufacture is a semi-automated process that 
utilizes a hybrid approach, composed of adopting elements of 
the three current textile production methods. Laying out of a 
parallel array of yarn as in the woven process. The use of a 
single feed, or multiples thereof, to carry yarn similar to the 
knitting process. The entanglement of fibres via a wetting and 
drying of fibre as in the nonwoven process, albeit unlike 
nonwoven, this takes place after fibre has been spun into 
yarn. Yarn with high surface hairiness proved suitable for 
surface fibre entanglement. Yarns with minimal surface 
hairiness underwent an uncurling process via a brushing 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

system to increase the capacity of surface fibre for 
entanglement. An Olympus Digital Microscope was used as 
a testbed to observe samples created by FOYSE. A Z2.5 
Zwick/Roell tensile testing machine was used as a testbed for 
mechanical testing of FOYSE manufactured fabrics 
resistance against force. Optical microscopy, image analysis 
and tensile tests were conducted to investigate an assumed 
correlation between yarn surface entangled fibre, open areas 
and material strength. The research produced multiple 
challenges and failures, namely, methods to ensure fibre 
entanglement was limited to the fibre on the yarn surface. 
Identifying a method to regulate yarn position during 
entanglement is a present challenge as some yarns shift 
during the wetting and drying process. This results in yarns 
curving slightly which create fabrics with a wavy appearance.  
 
V. 
RESULTS 
Eight samples in total underwent tensile testing, four in 
the warp and four in the weft direction. The results from the 
first cycle of four Hover-Tex samples to be tested are 
presented in Figure 6 and 7. The warp of the Hover-Tex 
sample was constructed from mohair and silk mix yarn. The 
result stress-strain curve deviates from proportionality 
abruptly. This occurred as the yarn snapped due to pressure 
applied by the tensile testing machine. This resulted in 
changes at a peak point producing a zig zag visual appearance 
on the stress curve shown in Figure 6. The large open space 
per Hover-Tex sample also contributed to the sharp changes. 
In addition, the tight spinning of the mohair and silk yarn 
would contribute to the harsh change in the curves. The 
abrupt snapping of the yarn occurs at breaking point when the 
samples cannot withstand the stress applied, such as the 
nature of the tensile testing. The curves W2 and W4 exhibit 
breaking points 50% earlier than W1 and W3. This can be 
attributed to the samples having fewer yarns in the weft 
which can occur during the current manufacturing process. 
The results from the second cycle of four Hover-Tex samples 
to be tested are presented in Figure 7. The weft of the Hover-
Tex samples is constructed from merino wool yarn. The 
stress curves on the graph presents a steady decline of each 
of the four curves in contrast to the snapping action portrayed 
in the samples in the warp direction. This illustrates that, 
although the merino yarn had less stress resistance, it 
provided almost 50% extra elongation capacity. Weft 
samples W2 and W4 showed a difference of 40% strain 
capacity. This is contributed to the slight variation in the 
length of fibre used to manufacture the yarn during the 
spinning process, in addition, the irregularity in which the 
fibre on the surface of the yarn entangles. Results confirmed 
that all samples have resistance strength suitable for textile 
material according to British Test Standard ISO 2062. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Hover-Tex fabrics provide a structure with a unique linear 
appearance. In addition, they provide channels that offer an 
uncomplicated method for seamless insertion of electronic 
devices. The FOYSE process of manufacturing textiles, 
including adding yarn layer upon layer, provides benefits 
unachievable by woven and knitting technology. The 
removal of interlacing and interloping provides space 
between the layers of yarn to embed large or irregular shaped 
non-textile components. Incorporating different types of yarn 
elements and embellishments can dramatically alter the 
fabrics’ unique appearance and character. Assembling the 
fabric with thick and thin yarns, or coloured yarn can create 
artistic designs that enhance visual appeal. The new textile 
can potentially weigh 70% less than traditional fabrics due to 
large open areas and air circulating the raised fibres on the 
yarn surface. This provides superior breathability, which in 
turn, enhances skin comfort as textiles are often used to 
regulate temperature, moisture levels and airflow. 
 
 
Figure 4. A 3mm light-emitting semiconductor device (a) switched off 
(b) switched on, embedded with Hover-Tex. 
 
Control of airflow in woven and knit structures have been 
obtained by tightening or loosening the tension in the warp 
and weft to open up a gap in the fabric. However, this creates 
a fabric prone to movement, as within the woven and knitting 
process, the tightness of the interlacing or interloping 
contributes to the rigidness of the fabric. FOYSE fabrics 
provide options for increasing or decreasing insulation to 
regulate heat or cool, without loosening the fabric structure. 
This is due to the entangled fibre on yarn surface that sets the 
yarns in place. The level of fibre entanglement on the surface 
of yarn is only visible via observation through a microscope. 
 
In Figure 5, the black fine yarn appears to rest or hover 
above the white yarn. Therefore, fabric manufactured by the 
FOYSE process can appear fragile and unrealistic for textile 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

use. However, tensile test results shown in Figure 6 and 7 
contradict the fragile visual appearance.  The size of the open 
sections can be large yet have no bearing on moveability of 
the yarns once the fabrics manufactured by the FOYSE 
process have been finished. This is due to the fabric strength 
lays within the actual yarn or entangled fibres on the yarn.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        Figure 5. Hover-Tex 2sq m sample with a 3mm programmable light-
emitting semiconductor device switched on. Coin battery holder and circuit 
to power and control embedded device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Results from the four Hover-Tex samples in the warp direction.  
 
It is important to note, the yarns used to manufacture the 
Hover-Tex samples discussed in this paper are commercially 
available. Therefore, it is recognised that strength tests are 
conducted to confirm the yarn adequacy for constructing a 
textile. The FOYSE manufacturing process did not degrade 
the yarn structure based on the microscopic observation and 
tensile test results which are presented in Figure 6 and 7.    
 
 
Figure 7. Results from the four Hover-Tex samples in the weft direction. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The FOYSE manufacturing process allows textile 
structures to be produced with large open areas for increased 
breathability, transparency and lightweight fabric surfaces. In 
addition, the process provides multiple opportunities for 
seamless and uncomplicated integration of a variety of 
elements used to create e-textiles. This can be achieved by 
using the FOYSE process to create fabrics that embed 
electronics within the yarn, yarn twisted with conductive 
filaments or embedding components within the actual layers 
of entangled fibres. Moreover, the FOYSE process has 
successfully created and characterized fabrics using 100% 
natural fibres, supporting the demand for sustainable textiles. 
Furthermore, data from mechanical testing confirms fabrics 
created by FOYSE have strength sufficient for industry 
standards. Therefore, the FOYSE manufacturing process and 
textiles created by FOYSE will be of interest to the textile 
innovation sector and to the e-textile and wearables industry. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. A. Hardy, et al., “Wash Testing of Electronic Yarn,” in 
Materials, vol. 13. issue 5, p.1228, 2020.  
[2] E. J.W. Barber, Prehistoric textiles, reprint ed., New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press, 1991. 
[3] J. Haywood, E-Textiles 2017-2027: Technologies, Markets & 
Players - Market for E-Textiles Will Approach $5bn in Product 
Revenue by 2027 - Research and Markets. [Online]. Available from: 
PR Newswire, 2017. [Retrieved: May, 2021] 
[4] J. Theaker, Knitty: Editorial Spring 06 History 101 [Online]. 
Available.from: https://knitty.com/ISSUEspring06/FEAThistory10
1.html [Retrieved: May, 2021] 
[5] P. B. Drooker, Approaching Fabrics Through Impressions on 
Pottery, Lincoln: University of Nebraska, 2000. 
[6] R. Rutt, A History of Hand Knitting, reprint ed., Colorado: 
Interweave Press, 1989.  
[7] S. M. Reynolds, Zephlinear Single Layer Stripes Multi Yarn 
Count (ZL047), Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Fisher 
Fine Arts Library Material Collection. [Online]. Available from: 
https://library.artstor.org/asset/26462521 [Retrieved: May, 2021] 
[8] S. Mann, “Wearable Computing: A First Step Toward Personal 
Imaging” in Computer, vol.2, pp. 25-32, 1997.  
[9] W. Mullins, Felt, 1st ed., Oxford: Berg Publishers, 2009.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-867-9
SPWID 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

