Monitoring of Carried Weight During Walk
Using a Wearable Pedobarography System
Per Anders Rickard Hellstrom
Mälardalen University
Embedded Sensor Systems for Health (ESS-H)
Västerås, Sweden
e-mail: per.hellstrom@mdh.se
Mia Folke
Mälardalen University
Embedded Sensor Systems for Health (ESS-H)
Västerås, Sweden
e-mail: mia.folke@mdh.se
Abstract—
Personal health monitoring is advantageous in
heavy work environments to reduce the risk of wear and tear
and acute injuries. The study of forces between the plantar
surface
of
the
foot
and
a
supporting
structure,
pedobarography, is a promising candidate for monitoring
carried weight during walk. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the cost
effective
pedobarography
measurement
system, IngVaL. Two aspects are evaluated, namely, how well
IngVaL can monitor carried weight during walk and if the
novel implementation increased the durability. Fifteen test
persons made five treadmill walks with a carried weight of 10,
20, 0, 15, and 5 kg. The equipoise analysis method was used.
The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) for estimation of the
carried weight was 13.8 kg. A study with the earlier version of
the measurement system had a RMSE of 23.3 kg. The earlier
system, as well as commercial systems using this kind of
sensors, have problems with sensor durability. The new sensor
implementation, where the active sensor area boundary was no
longer affected by mechanical stress, resulted in no broken
sensors. This study shows an increased performance of carried
weight estimation compared with earlier work, together with
an improved sensor durability.
Keywords- pedobarography; carried weight; portable; wearable;
insole; in-shoe.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Pain in the lower back is one of the most common health
problems today and is expected to become even more
frequent in the future [1]. About a third of all employees in
Sweden, during the year 2015, had pain in their lower back
every week [2]. Heavy work load and the total amount of
lifted weights and lift frequency are moderate to strong risk
factors for lower back pain [3]. The year 2015, 16% of the
employed men and 10% of the employed women in Sweden
lifted more than 15 kg several times a day [2]. The carried
weight will vary during the work time.
Monitoring
of
the
conditions
in
heavy
work
environments is important to reduce the risk of wear and tear
and acute injuries. A wearable system would make it
possible to monitor workers that are not stationary.
Pedobarography, the study of forces acting between the
plantar surface of the foot and a supporting surface, has been
used for weight estimation while standing still [4] and is a
promising candidate for estimation of carried weight while
walking [5]. IngVaL (Identifying Velocity and Load) [6] is a
pedobarography measurement system designed to be a
robust and low cost system for monitoring of health related
walk parameters. IngVaL is an improved design of an earlier
research prototype. The earlier system has been validated for
monitoring of walking speed [7] and carried weight [5].
The aim of this study was to evaluate the cost effective
pedobarography measurement system, IngVaL. Two aspects
are evaluated, namely, (1) how well IngVaL can monitor
carried weight during walk and (2) if the novel sensor
implementation can make the sensors more durable.
In Section II, the methods for this study are explained.
Results are presented in Section III. Section IV is the
discussion and the conclusion is in Section V.
II.
METHODS
The design of this study was cross-sectional. This section
is split into the three sub-sections of hardware, experiment
setup and data analysis.
A.
Hardware
The IngVaL system consists of sensors (force sensing
resistors),
electronics
for
signal
conditioning
and
a
microcontroller based data acquisition unit. The data was
sent via Bluetooth 4.0 to a Windows tablet.
Four force sensing resistors of model A401 (Tekscan
Inc., Boston, MA, USA) are sandwiched in each shoe insole
between a base foundation made of Ethylene-Vinyl Acetate
(EVA), cork, and leather as upper layers for protecting the
sensors and also providing a comfortable, less perspiration
inducing, interface with the foot. EVA is a firm but flexible
material that is often used in sports equipment and insoles.
The heel, the lateral and medial sides of the metatarsal
pad and the big toe pad were chosen as locations for the
sensors, see Figure 1. The sensor locations are chosen like
this due to the bone structure of the foot. Each sensor has a
boundary for the active sensor area and this boundary is
sensitive for mechanical stress that can short-circuit and
damage the sensor. An earlier prototype of the insoles had
problems with sensor durability due to mechanical stress on
the boundary of the active sensor area. Besides the higher
risk of sensor damage, there were also some peaks in the
data from the prototype system due to the short-circuiting of
the sensors.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-734-4
SPWID 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

Figure 1.
Showing the location of the four insole force sensing resistors
located at the big toe, the inner and outer metatarsal pad and the heel.
In version two of the system, called IngVaL, EVA
material was removed directly under the sensor’s boundaries
to prevent the mechanical stress and resulted in a disc
structure under each sensor’s active sensor area. The block
diagram, from force sensing resistors to the data analysis, for
the IngVaL system, is shown in Figure 2.
Force Sensor
FlexiForce model A401 by Tekscan
Signal Conditioning
FlexiForce Adapter 1120 by Phidgets
Data Acquisition
IOIO-OTG by Ytai Ben-Tsvi (uses a PIC24FJ256 microcontroller)
Wireless Transmission
Nano Bluetooth 4.0 USB dongle by LogiLink
Receiving Data
Surface Pro 2 by Microsoft (Windows tablet)
Data Analysis
Excel by Microsoft
Figure 2.
Block diagram for the IngVaL measurement system.
A dynamic calibration was used since the application is
to measure during walking conditions [8] and the calibration
functions were chosen as fourth order polynomials [9]. A
Tedea-Huntleigh 1006
single
point
load
cell
(Vishay
Precision Group, Malvern, USA) was used for the calibration
of the force sensing resistors and the cell was in turn
calibrated by using calibrated weights. The calibrating force
was applied perpendicular to the active sensor area.
The data sampling (at 200 Hz) and wireless data
transmission were made using an IOIO-OTG (SparkFun
Electronics Inc., Niwot, CO, USA) which is based on a
PIC24FJ256 microcontroller. The name IOIO-OTG comes
from naming the first device IOIO, since it has many inputs
and outputs, while OTG refers to the Universal Serial
Bus (USB) standard On-The-Go (OTG). The IOIO-OTG was
connected to the two insoles using elastic cables, secured
with Velcro straps, around the ankle and around the lower
thigh. A modified version of the java program ioiometer-
pc [10] received and saved the data on a Windows tablet.
B.
Experiment Setup
Fifteen test persons were recruited from the university
staff. The test persons had an average weight of 83.9 kg.
Inclusion criteria were that they had European Union (EU)
shoe size 43-44, were healthy and able to walk naturally
when carrying the extra weight. All test persons used the
same shoes with the insoles inside, including force sensing
resistors. All the test persons performed five walks at a speed
of 1.0 m/s on a treadmill (Comfort Track Prime 97690,
LifeGear Ltd., Taiwan) after an initial test walk to see that all
sensors
were
activated
and
that
the
test person
felt
comfortable walking on a treadmill.
During each walk, the test persons carried a backpack
loaded with a pseudo-randomly chosen extra weight of 10,
20, 0, 15, and 5 kg, see Figure 3. The first author is shown
walking on the treadmill with the shoes, including the insoles
with the sensors, and with the backpack loaded with extra
weight. Extra padding was used inside the backpack along
the spine to reduce the risk of injuries.
Figure 3.
Each test person made five walks with different amount of
carried weights (each black weight symbol represents 5 kg).
Data
was
recorded
from
the
sensors
in
the
pedobarography
system
during
one
minute
per
walk.
Acceleration and deceleration phases were not part of the
recorded data. The reference weight was measured using a
GS 42 BMI electronic floor scale (Beurer GmbH, Ulm,
Germany).
C.
Data Analysis
The estimation of carried weight was made using the
equipoise method [5]. Equipoise happens once during each
stance phase (between heel strike and toe-off) and is defined
as 0.5 when half of the weight is distributed on the heel
sensor and the other half on the forward sensors. Examined
data was chosen in the equipoise range of 0.5±0.1. Data
samples are chosen if no weight was on the other foot at the
same time to make sure all weight was on one foot.
Microsoft Excel was used to calculate an average of the
forces for the equipoise samples.
Figure 4 shows an overview of the three steps of the data
analysis: (1) calculate the equipoise ratio, (2) select data in
the 0.5±0.1 equipoise range when only one foot is in contact
with the ground, and (3) calculate the average force and then
calibrate for each individual.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-734-4
SPWID 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

Calculate the equipoise ratio between
the forward sensors and the heel sensor
Select the equipoise range (where the ratio is 0.5±0.1)
when the other foot's sensors show zero
Calculate the average force of the selected
data and then calibrate for each individual
Figure 4.
Overview of the three steps of the data analysis.
Two
different
methods
were
used
for
doing
the
individual calibration. Method 1 used the walk without extra
added weight while method 2 also added the maximum
carried weight (20 kg). The estimated carried weight was
then subtracted with the known weight as measured with a
reference floor scale to calculate the error. Finally, the root
mean square errors were calculated.
III.
RESULTS
The root mean square error was 17.2 kg when method 1
was used and 13.8 kg when method 2 was used, see Figure 5.
Dots show errors using the walk without extra carried weight
for the individual calibration. Circles show errors when also
using the maximum carried weight (20 kg) for individual
calibration. There are 15 fewer dots for method 2 since
double the amount of data is used for the individual
calibration.
Figure 5.
Reference weight (measured with a floor scale) versus weight
estimation errors.
None of the sensors broke during more than 350 minutes
of walking, as well as taking off and putting on the shoes
15 times.
IV. DISCUSSION
Personal health monitoring using wearable measurement
systems is a promising way to be able to monitor health
outside of the hospital setting [11][12].
The pedobarography system, IngVaL, is designed to be a
robust and low cost measuring system for monitoring of
health related walk parameters. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the cost effective pedobarography measurement
system IngVaL. Two aspects are evaluated, namely, (1) how
well IngVaL can monitor carried weight during walk and
(2) if the novel sensor implementation can make the sensors
durable. The improvements from the first version of the
system are mainly in the sensor implementation and sensor
calibration. The improvement in the analysing method is
how the analysis also uses the maximum carried weight for
calibration.
This study used 15 test subjects and five different carried
weights for a more thorough experimental examination than
in an earlier study where ten test subjects and three different
carried weights were used [5]. The same equipoise method
was used in this study and resulted in a RMSE of 17.2 kg. A
further method improvement resulted in a RMSE of 13.8 kg.
This was a good improvement from 23.3 kg in the earlier
study (recalculated because Mean Average Error (MAE) was
used in that publication). This shows that the new system
version
(IngVaL)
performed
better
than
the
previous
prototype system. There is, however, room for improvement,
and one possibly way to reduce the RMSE is to improve the
data analysis. One challenge is to keep the thickness of the
insole from becoming larger than a normal insole. The
current insole is similar to a normal insole and has a
thickness around 5-6 mm.
To the best understanding of the authors, there are no
other wearable systems for monitoring carried weight while
walking.
There
is,
however, related
work
where
the
estimation was made after coming to a standstill after
walking and that study presented a RMSE of 10.5 kg using
nine test subjects [4]. The need of standing still during
measurement makes it unsuitable for monitoring during a
workday to see the load of the work over time.
Forces are distributed proportionally over all regions of
the foot regardless of foot arch type [13]. This enables the
use of fewer sensors instead of a more expensive sensor
matrix. It is important to design a durable system for
monitoring of heavy work environments. IngVaL used a new
way of implementing the sensors into the insoles and this
made them more durable. This resulted in no broken sensors
during more than 350 minutes of use. Four sensors broke
during 80 minutes, when using the earlier version of the
system. Sensor replacement would also mean that a new
calibration of the sensor is needed and this is a concern if the
system is to be commercialized in the future. The durability
issue made the earlier prototype system unsuitable.
A potential limitation in this study could have been the
use of a treadmill, which might result in a less natural
walking style compared to on a flat floor. On the other hand,
the equipoise is measured when one foot has equal pressure
on the forefoot sensors and the heel sensor while the other
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-734-4
SPWID 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

foot is in the air. This part of the stance phase (when the foot
is in contact with the ground) is expected to be minimally, if
at all, affected by walking style because the foot is not in
direct motion during this particular moment. The treadmill is
instead an advantage since it allows a constant walking speed
of 1.0 m/s. In order to avoid the influence of different types
of shoes, all of the 15 test subjects in the study used the same
shoes during the measurements. They also used the same
insole in the shoes.
The IngVaL system has earlier shown to be able to
measure walking speed. Together, monitoring of the carried
weight and the walking speed, enable estimation of energy
expenditure [14][15].
V.
CONCLUSION
In
this
study,
the
cost
effective
pedobarography
measurement system called IngVaL has been evaluated
considering two aspects, namely, (1) how well IngVaL can
monitor carried weight during walk, and (2) if the novel
sensor implementation can make the sensors durable. This
study shows that the root mean square error has been
decreased from 23.3 kg to 13.8 kg and validates that the new
measurement system version (IngVaL) performs better than
the previous system regarding monitoring of carried weight
during walk. The new implementation of the sensors has
made them more durable and resulted in no broken force
sensing resistors during the experiment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was supported by the Swedish Knowledge
Foundation, KKS.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Hoy et al., "A systematic review of the global prevalence
of low back pain," Arthritis Rheum., vol. 64, pp. 2028-2037,
2012.
[2] The Swedish Work Environment Authority
(Arbetsmiljöverket), Arbetsmiljöstatistik 2016:2, 2016.
[3] H. Heneweer, F. Staes, G. Aufdemkampe, M. van Rijn, and L.
Vanhees, "Physical activity and low back pain: a systematic
review of recent literature," Eur. Spine J., vol. 20, pp. 826-
845, 2011.
[4] N. A. Sazonova, R. Browning, and E. S. Sazonov, "Prediction
of bodyweight and energy expenditure using point pressure
and foot acceleration measurements," Open Biomed. Eng. J.,
vol. 5, pp. 110-115, 2011.
[5] P. Hellstrom, M. Folke, and M. Ekström, "Wearable Weight
Estimation System," Procedia Com. Sci., vol. 64, pp. 146-
152, 2015.
[6] P. A. R. Hellstrom, A. Åkerberg, M. Ekström, and M. Folke,
"Evaluation of the IngVaL Pedobarography System for
Monitoring of Walking Speed," J. Healthcare Informatics
Research, vol. 24, pp. 118-124, 2018.
[7] P. A. Hellstrom, A. Akerberg, M. Ekstrom, and M. Folke,
"Walking
Intensity
Estimation
with
a
Portable
Pedobarography System," Stud. Health Technol. Inform., vol.
224, pp. 27-32, 2016.
[8] J. Florez and A. Velasquez, "Calibration of force sensing
resistors (fsr) for static and dynamic applications," 2010 IEEE
ANDESCON, Year, pp. 1-6.
[9] J. M. Brimacombe, D. R. Wilson, A. J. Hodgson, K. C. Ho,
and C. Anglin, "Effect of calibration method on Tekscan
sensor accuracy," J. Biomech Eng., vol. 131, pp. 034503,
2009.
[10] Johannes
Rieke,
ioiometer-pc
(for
Windows),
in
https://github.com/jrieke/ioiometer-pc, 2016.
[11] B. H. Dobkin and A. Dorsch, "The promise of mHealth: daily
activity monitoring and outcome assessments by wearable
sensors," Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, 2011, pp. 788-798.
[12] K. Hurt, R. J. Walker, J. A. Campbell, and L. E. Egede,
"mHealth interventions in low and middle-income countries:
a systematic review," Glob. J. Health Sci., vol. 8, pp. 183,
2016.
[13] S. L. Goffar et al., "Changes in dynamic plantar pressure
during loaded gait," Phys. Ther., vol. 93, pp. 1175-1184,
2013.
[14] G. J. Bastien, P. A. Willems, B. Schepens, and N. C.
Heglund, "Effect of load and speed on the energetic cost of
human walking," Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 94, pp. 76-83,
2005.
[15] J. M. Falola, N. Delpech, and J. Brisswalter, "Optimization
Characteristics of Walking with and without a Load on the
Trunk of the Body," Percept. Mot. Skills, vol. 91, pp. 261-
272, 2000.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-734-4
SPWID 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

