Intelligent Wireless Body Area Network System for Human Motion Analysis 
 
Per Anders Rickard Hellstrom, Lennie Carlén Eriksson, Jonatan Scharff Willners, 
Mia Folke and Martin Ekström 
Embedded Sensor Systems for Health (ESS-H) 
Mälardalen University, Innovation, Design and Engineering (IDT) 
Västerås, Sweden 
email: per.hellstrom@mdh.se 
 
 
Abstract— 
Human motion analysis provides several 
important applications. Examples are fall risk assessment, 
sports biomechanics, physical activity monitoring and 
rehabilitation. This work in progress paper proposes an 
intelligent wireless body area network system for motion and 
gait symmetry analysis. A Bluetooth network with 
accelerometers, gyroscopes and in-shoe force sensing 
resistors gathers data and sends it to a web server after 
intelligent pre-processing and filtering. The system is flexible 
and adaptable for different use cases including combinations 
of gait analysis, gait symmetry and pressure measurements 
between foot and shoe. 
Keywords— motion analysis; wireless; body area network; 
Bluetooth Low Energy. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Analysis of human motion provides several important 
applications. One example is fall risk assessment in the 
ageing population. Falling accidents are common and the 
frequency increases with age and often result in injury or 
even death [1]. The falls are also a cost for the individual 
as well as for the society. Other motion analysis 
applications are rehabilitation [2][3], sports activity 
monitoring [4] and evaluation of the amount of physical 
activity in daily life [5]. Gait symmetry analysis is an 
important form of motion analysis [6]. 
Portable motion analysis can be done in several ways 
and some of the more popular choices of sensors include 
accelerometers, gyroscopes and in-shoe force sensing 
resistors. A combination of these approaches would give a 
more complete motion analysis. 
Pedobarography, the study of pressure fields acting 
between the plantar surface of the foot and a supporting 
surface, have been used in gait and posture analysis [7] but 
also 
in 
prosthetics 
evaluation 
[8] 
and 
sports 
biomechanics[9]. 
Accelerometers 
are 
common 
for 
monitoring physical activity and can measure the position 
and motion of the body together with gyroscopes [10]. 
The two most popular pedobarography measurement 
systems that offers telemetry options are Novel’s Pedar. 
(Novel GmbH, Munich, Germany) with capacitive sensors 
and Tekscan’s F-Scan (Tekscan Inc., Boston, MA, USA) 
with resistive sensors.  
These systems cost over €13000 for the wireless 
versions. F-scan measures up to 0.86MPa and is 0.15mm 
thick. Pedar measures up to 1.2MPa and is 1.9mm thick.  
A commercial system with inertial measurement units 
is SHIMMER3 (Shimmer, Dublin, Ireland). It is equipped 
with a MSP430 (Texas Instruments Inc., Dallas, TX, USA) 
microcontroller 
unit 
and 
uses 
Bluetooth 
2.0 
to 
communicate with other units. 
This paper describes a wireless system for motion, gait 
and symmetry analysis. A body area network with 
accelerometers, gyroscopes and in-shoe force sensors is 
proposed. The amount of sensors is decided by each 
application. Bluetooth low energy chips are used for the 
local data communication. Data can be stored locally in a 
data sink until communication with a web server is 
available. 
Calculations 
and 
analysis 
with 
low 
computational burden will be done in the sensor nodes and 
in the data sink to save bandwidth. 
The proposed system is described in Section II, with 
four 
subsections 
for 
(A) 
hardware, 
(B) 
data 
communication, (C) analysis and (D) initial measurements. 
Discussion will be in Section III. 
 
II. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
A wireless body sensor network with up to seven 
motion processing units, eight force sensing resistors and 
two temperature sensors is proposed. A data sink is used 
for temporary local data storage and uses mobile 
telecommunication or Wi-Fi to connect to a web server. 
A comparison of the proposed system and other similar 
systems are shown in Table 1. The other systems are called 
Physilog 4 Silver (Gait Up A.S., Lausanne, Switzerland) 
[11], GaitShoe [12] and SmartStep [13]. 
A. Hardware 
Bluetooth 
Smart 
modules 
BLE113 
(Bluegiga 
Technologies Ltd., Espoo, Finland) provides wireless 
communication between up to seven sensor nodes and the 
data sink. BLE113 has an 8051 microcontroller and an 8 
channels 12-bit analog-to-digital converter (ADC) at 4kHz 
for connecting external sensors such as the force sensing 
resistors. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

Table 1. COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED SYSTEM AND SIMILAR SYSTEMS 
 
Name 
Node 
dimensions 
[mm] 
Node 
weight 
[grams] 
Sensor
types
and 
analog-to-digital 
resolution [bit]
Data 
communication 
Sampling 
frequency 
[Hz] 
Battery 
life 
time [hours] 
Proposed system 
41x34x15 
Slightly 
over 20g 
3D accelerometer (16-bit)
3D gyroscope (16-bit) 
3D magnetometer (13-bit) 
Force 
sensing 
resistors 
(12-bit)
Bluetooth 
Low 
Energy ver. 4.0, 
3G/4G or Wi-Fi 
to send data to 
server
At least 1kHz is 
possible, 
30Hz 
currently 
until 
programming is 
improved 
Weeks 
without 
the force sensing 
resistors, 
otherwise at least 
24 hours
Physilog 4 Silver 
(Gait Up, newer 
version than in 
the article) [11] 
50x37x9.2 
19g 
3D accelerometer (16-bit)
3D gyroscope (16-bit) 
3D magnetometer (13-bit) 
Barometer
RF node sync., 
local data storage, 
cable to transfer 
data to computer
Up to 500 Hz 
Up to 21 hours
GaitShoe [12] 
25x44x17 
Less than 
22g 
3D accelerometer
3D gyroscope 
Force sensing resistors 
Electrical field sensor 
Bend sensor 
(12-bit)
RF
75Hz 
6 hours
SmartStep [13] 
Not known, 
node located 
on back of 
shoe 
Total 
system 
weight is 
less than 
35g 
3D accelerometer
Force 
sensing 
resistors 
(12-bit) 
 
RF
25Hz 
20 hours
 
Each sensor node has a 9 degrees of freedom motion 
processing unit MPU-9150 (InvenSense Inc., Sunnyvale, 
CA, USA). It has a 3-axis 16-bit accelerometer up to 
1kHz, a 3-axis 16-bit gyroscope up to 8kHz and a 3-axis 
13-bit magnetometer. The electronics are powered by a 
240mAh lithium-ion polymer (LiPo) battery. A sensor 
node under construction is seen in Figure 1. Time between 
charging is in the order of weeks if no external sensors are 
used and if there is not a lot of retransmission of data due 
to an extremely harsh environment. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Sensor node prototype under construction. 
Custom printed circuit boards host the following: the 
BLE113, motion processing unit MPU-9150, battery 
charging circuit with micro USB connection, JTAG 
interface for programming and headers for attaching an 
adapter card on top of the board. The block diagram of a 
sensor node is seen in Figure 2. 
The adapter card is used with the two sensor nodes 
which include the force sensing resistors and temperature  
sensors. Amplifying circuits for these sensors are also 
placed on the adapter card. 
 
Figure 2.  Sensor node block diagram. 
The force sensing resistor ESS301 (Tekscan Inc., 
Boston, MA, USA) has a round sensing area with a 
diameter of 9.5mm and is 0.20mm thick. It can withstand 
95% humidity and this is important because the sensors 
will be placed inside shoes. The temperature sensors are 
only used for compensation of the signal drift of the force 
resisting sensors due to changes in temperature. Four force 
sensing resistors will be used in each shoe positioned at 
heel (A), outer (B) and inner (C) side of the metatarsal pad 
and big toe (D). See Figure 3 for anatomical sensor 
locations. The temperature sensor goes under the foot 
valve and all these sensors are attached to the shoe insole 
which is placed inside the shoe. The discrete sensor 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

locations are common choices decided by the bones in the 
foot [8][14][15]. 
 
Figure 3.  A is heel, B and C are on metatarsal pad and D is big toe pad. 
The chest and three nodes for each leg (at the hip, just 
above the knee and on top of the shoe) are the seven 
locations for the sensor nodes. A watertight case encloses 
each sensor node. The case has the dimensions 
41x34x15mm and the total weight of a sensor node is 
slightly more than 20 grams. 
B. Data communication 
The seven sensor nodes and the data sink uses the eight 
available connections of the wireless body sensor network. 
An overview of the body area network is shown in Figure 
4. The available bandwidth is 1.5Mbit/s in each direction. 
With a sampling rate of 1kHz there is still enough 
bandwidth left for retransmissions and overhead for time 
synchronization. To get reliable data, the time between all 
measurements needs to be known and as exact as possible. 
This means the system will have a reliable time 
synchronization protocol implemented. An example of 
such a network with low latency has been provided in an 
earlier work [16]. 
The BLE113 integrates Bluetooth radio with Smart 
stack and profiles. BLE stands for Bluetooth Low Energy 
and Bluetooth Smart is the marketing name. A low 
standby power and fast wake up is the reason for power 
saving compared to earlier Bluetooth versions. The 
standby power is always present and is one of the bigger 
parts of the total energy consumption together with for 
example the number of active connections [17]. The 
transmitting power will be adjusted to be just enough for 
the body network range to reduce possible interference. 
Mobile telecommunication or Wi-Fi will link the data 
sink to a web server. Depending on the choice of wireless 
communication, a BLE compatible Android smartphone or 
myRIO (National Instruments Co., Austin, TX, USA) are 
suggested as data sinks. 
Body area network
Web server
Data sink
Left hip node
Left knee node
Left ankle node
Right hip node
Right knee node
Right ankle node
Chest node
Foot pressure
Foot pressure
User interface
 
Figure 4.  Body area network with 7 sensor nodes and a data sink. 
C. Analysis 
The main goal for the system is to check for 
differences in movement symmetry, so by matching 
periods, force and rotational velocity etc. of left and right 
legs it is possible to check for variance and abnormalities 
in this data. Interesting parameters to measure are: 
extremity movement symmetries, step length, velocity, 
peak force and the shift speed of the center of pressure. 
Kalman filtration will be performed on the data 
gathered from the sensor nodes to remove noise and 
increase accuracy for the orientation data [18]. This leads 
to the possibility of performing better analyses of the gait 
symmetry. The filtrated and analyzed data will then be 
displayed to the user through a graphical user interface in a 
way that makes it easier to understand the results. There 
are also plans to include direct feedback options with an 
audio signal or vibration in the node. 
 
D. Initial measurements 
Initial 
measurements 
with 
the 
3-axis 
16-bit 
accelerometer and 3-axis 16-bit gyroscope have been 
made at 30 Hz using BGScript version 4.0 (Bluegiga 
Technologies Ltd., Espoo, Finland). Switching to C-
programming in IAR Embedded Workbench for 8051 IDE 
version 8.30.3 (IAR Systems Group AB, Uppsala, 
Sweden) should enable a considerable increase of the 
sampling frequency, up to at least 1kHz. 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

III. 
DISCUSSION 
In this paper, a wireless system for motion, gait and 
symmetry analysis has been described. A body area 
network with inertial measurement units and in-shoe 
pressure sensors is proposed. 
By integrating both inertial sensors measurements and 
foot pressure measurements in an intelligent body area 
network will allow for a more adaptable and flexible 
system. A benefit of the system is thus that it is adjustable 
for various users and use cases. The number of sensors is 
decided by each application and the amount of transmitted 
data will also be adjusted for each application. 
By checking for asymmetry in movement of left and 
right leg the system can be useful in for example fall 
prevention, 
rehabilitation, 
sports 
performance 
and 
monitoring of the amount of physical activity. 
The aim was to develop a motion analysis system that 
could be used wherever and will not need anything else 
than a smartphone or PC as user interface. Depending on 
the application, some of the calculations can be made in 
the sensor nodes and the rest on the server. 
Another design consideration would be to use slower 
sampling rates but more sensor nodes to be able to monitor 
the arms as well as the legs.  
Technical challenges to be solved in the system are 
two. The first is to increasing the output rate of the motion 
data to 1kHz. The second is adaptable foot pressure 
measurements regardless of individual foot valves and 
shoe sizes. 
However, the size and weight of the complete system 
is of great importance since the system must not interfere 
nor affect the motion itself. An even smaller and lighter 
sensor node format is therefore desirable. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the KKS foundation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] WHO global report on falls prevention in older age. World 
Health Organization, 2008. 
[2] H.P. von Schroeder, R.D. Coutts, P.D. Lyden, E. Billings Jr., 
and V.L. Nickel, "Gait parameters following stroke : A 
practical assessment," Journal of Rehabilitation Research 
and Development, 1995, pp. 25-31. 
[3] L. Gonzalez-Villanueva, S. Cagnoni, and L. Ascari, "Design 
of a wearable sensing system for human motion monitoring 
in physical rehabilitation," Sensors (Basel), 2013, pp. 7735-
7755. 
[4] D. Benferhat, F. Guidec, and P. Quinton, "Cardiac 
Monitoring of Marathon Runners Using Disruption-Tolerant 
Wireless Sensors," Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient 
Intelligence, 6th International Conference, UCAmI, Vitoria-
Gasteiz, Spain, December 3-5, 2012, pp. 395-402. 
[5] B.H. Dobkin and A. Dorsch, "The promise of mHealth: daily 
activity monitoring and outcome assessments by wearable 
sensors," Neurorehabil Neural Repair, 2011, pp. 788-798. 
[6] H. Sadeghi, P. Allard, F. Prince, and H. Labelle, "Symmetry 
and limb dominance in able-bodied gait: a review," Gait & 
Posture, 2000, pp. 34-45. 
[7] S.M.M. De Rossi, et al., "Gait segmentation using bipedal 
foot pressure patterns," Biomedical Robotics and 
Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012 4th IEEE RAS EMBS 
International Conference on, 2012, pp. 361-366. 
[8] T.L. Lawrence and R.N. Schmidt, "Wireless in-shoe force 
system [for motor prosthesis]," Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society. Proceedings of the 19th Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE, 1997, pp. 2238-2241. 
[9] E. Eils, et al., "Characteristic plantar pressure distribution 
patterns during soccer-specific movements," Am J Sports 
Med, 2004, pp. 140-145. 
[10] C.C. Yang and Y.L. Hsu, "A review of accelerometry-
based wearable motion detectors for physical activity 
monitoring," Sensors (Basel), 2010, pp. 7772-7788. 
[11] B. Mariani, S. Rochat, C.J. Büla, and K. Aminian, "Heel 
and toe clearance estimation for gait analysis using wireless 
inertial sensors," IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, 2012, pp. 3162-
3168. 
[12] S.J. Bamberg, A.Y. Benbasat, D.M. Scarborough, D.E. 
Krebs, and J.A. Paradiso, "Gait analysis using a shoe-
integrated wireless sensor system," IEEE Trans Inf Technol 
Biomed, 2008, pp. 413-423. 
[13] E.S. Sazonov, G. Fulk, J. Hill, Y. Schutz, and R. Browning, 
"Monitoring of posture allocations and activities by a shoe-
based wearable sensor," IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 58, 
pp. 983-990, 2011. 
[14] M. Chen, B.F. Huang, K.K. Lee, and Y.S. Xu, "An 
Intelligent Shoe-Integrated System for Plantar Pressure 
Measurement," Robotics and Biomimetics. ROBIO '06. 
IEEE International Conference on, 2006, pp. 416-421. 
[15] R. Lvping, et al., "Design of in-shoe plantar pressure 
monitoring system for daily activity exercise stress 
assessment," Biomedical Engineering and Informatics 
(BMEI), 4th International Conference on, 2011, pp. 1367-
1370. 
[16] M. Bergblomma, et al., "A wireless low latency control 
system for harsh environments," 11th IFAC Conference on 
Programmable Devices and Embedded Systems (Jointly with 
the IEEE), 2012, pp. 17-22. 
[17] L. Negri, J. Beutel, and M. Dyer, "The power consumption 
of bluetooth scatternets," 2006 3rd IEEE Consumer 
Communications and Networking Conference, Vols 1-3, 
2006, pp. 519-523. 
[18] L. Pei-Chun, H. Komsuoglu, and D.E. Koditschek, "Sensor 
data fusion for body state estimation in a hexapod robot with 
dynamical gaits," IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2006, pp. 
932-943. 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

