Design Direction Analysis for a Health Knowledge Transfer System for Deaf People 
and Health Professionals in Cape Town 
Prangnat Chininthorn, Meryl Glaser,  
William D. Tucker 
Computer Science 
University of the Western Cape 
Cape Town, South Africa 
{pchininthorn, mglaser, btucker}@uwc.ac.za 
Jan Carel Diehl 
Industrial Design Engineering 
Delft University of Technology 
Delft, the Netherlands 
j.c.diehl@tudelft.nl 
 
 
Abstract— Many South African Deaf people use South African 
Sign Language (SASL) for communication, but are less skilled 
at reading and writing. In the context of healthcare, adult Deaf 
patients and health professionals therefore face problems with 
communication. These communication barriers hinder many 
Deaf people from accessing health information from various 
sources. Deaf patients need to understand conversations at a 
health facility, and also to receive accurate and comprehensible 
health information that supports their understanding of the 
diagnosed disease for self-management. Health Knowledge 
Transfer System (HKTS) is a proposed branch from a research 
and development project on a mobile communication tool 
(SignSupport) for a Deaf person in healthcare contexts. This 
paper describes the findings retrieved during the exploration 
phase regarding the design direction of the HKTS using a 
community-based co-design (CBCD) approach. Deaf adults 
and health professionals from Cape Town participated in this 
research. Health information about Type 2 diabetes as a case 
study and mobile devices as information transferring tools 
were selected. The HTKS is envisioned as part of an assistive 
device for health care system integration to provide 
information in SASL thus serving the needs of the Deaf 
patients. It focuses on a scenario in which the targeted diabetic 
Deaf patients can access health information from anywhere. 
Keywords-Deaf patients; low health literacy; community-
based co-design; health information sources; mHealth. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Deaf with a capital ‘D’ refers to a cultural group of 
people with hearing loss who mainly use a signed language 
for communication; many of them have limited reading and 
writing skills [1]. In the South African healthcare context, 
Deaf patients and health professionals have problems with 
communication, in the absence of a SASL interpreter, due to 
their language differences [2]. Therefore, our research team, 
together with a Deaf NGO, started developing a 
communication tool on Android mobile phones called 
“SignSupport” to bridge limited and patterned conversations 
through the CBCD approach [3]. The communication during 
a medication dispensing process was taken as a specific case 
study. SignSupport prompts a pharmacist to explain the 
medication instructions by typing in and selecting buttons 
matched with pre-recorded SASL videos, so the Deaf patient 
can view and understand the instructions [4][5]. The research 
team later found that Deaf patients needed to acquire 
additional health information to support their understanding 
of 
the 
diagnosed 
disease 
and 
self-management.  
Consequently, we decided to branch out with a sub-project to 
design and develop a HKTS which addresses this need 
amongst Deaf patients and health professionals. The system 
aims to provide adult Deaf users with comprehensive 
information in signed language and in their preferred 
presentation method on a low cost mobile platform. 
Section 2 of this paper presents the background 
information from literature reviews. Section 3 accounts the 
methodology used in the project. Section 4 describes the 
empirical findings covering the current situation of health 
information distribution from the point of view of both Deaf 
people and health knowledge providers, including the ideas 
for solutions from all participants. Section 5 explains the 
decisions made on the design direction.  Section 6 envisions 
the integration of HKTS and SignSupport, and the co-design 
of the information content and its presentation techniques as 
future work. Section 7 concludes with the work that will be 
proceeded after this exploration. 
II. 
PROJECT BACKGROUND 
Many South African Deaf people experience a disparity 
in accessing comprehensive health information.  
A. Problems in health communication 
Health professionals and Deaf patients in South Africa 
frequently experience communication problems in the 
absence of the scarce, and relatively expensive, SASL 
interpreters. The most common problems are as follows: 
1) Language differences: A signed language cannot be 
translated word-for-word to a spoken or a written language, 
or vice versa, due to the differences in sentence structure 
[6]. This is why the majority of Deaf people find it difficult 
to learn and understand a spoken or a written language [7]. 
The majority of South African Deaf adults can therefore 
read and write only simple vocabulary, are unable to 
communicate with health professionals, and have limited 
exposure to health information from the mass media. 
Problems in health communication can have an adverse 
effect on the patient’s health condition [8][9].  
2) The lack of SASL interpreters: The communication 
problem could be overcome with the assistance of signed 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

language interpreters. However, only 84 SASL interpreters 
are registered at the National Institute for the Deaf [10]; this 
number of registered SASL interpreters is inadequate to 
serve the demands of approximately 600,000 South African 
Deaf people across the country [11]. In addition, 90% of the 
Deaf population is born into hearing families many of 
whom cannot sign [12]. These reasons explain why many 
Deaf patients cannot easily find a SASL interpreter or a 
family member who is capable of communicating in SASL 
to escort them to a health facility [2]. 
B. Interferences with information understanding and 
adherence 
Misconceptions and the lack of fundamental knowledge 
can interfere with the understanding of the given health 
information and the subsequent adherence to the suggested 
treatment from a health professional [13].  
1) Health 
misconceptions: 
Several 
misconceptions 
about various diseases, their prevention and detection, and 
treatment were found by different researchers. Deaf people 
in a community share similar health misconceptions through 
close-knit communication, e.g., the so-called “grapevine”; 
and it is difficult for a hearing health professional, who is an 
outsider, to influence them [4][14]-[16]. Many Deaf 
individuals do not question new information they receive 
from others, unless it goes against their own beliefs [2].  
2) The lack of fundamental health knowledge: This is 
caused by a number of issues which are that (1) Deaf people 
receive inadequate health education during childhood [4], 
(2) many Deaf individuals miss opportunities to receive 
health information through incidental learning, especially 
from their hearing family members [17]. Lastly, (3) due to 
functional illiteracy, the vast majority of Deaf people have 
limited exposure to health information promoted via the 
mass media [18]. Without fundamental knowledge, Deaf 
people can hardly detect erroneous health information 
shared among their Deaf peers nor understand the health 
explanations from health professionals. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. CBCD approach 
In the field of Information and Communication 
Technologies for Development (ICTD), the CBCD approach 
is applied by research groups in different countries to deal 
with multiple stakeholders and social complexity [19]. Our 
research team applies CBCD as part of action research, 
which involves end-users and communities with their social 
and cultural factors in design stages. We explore and 
develop solutions with participants in order to achieve an 
accessible and viable HKTS in the Cape Town context [3]. 
The decisions for the design direction of the HKTS were 
made based on the preferences, ideas and preliminary 
requirements from Deaf and health knowledge provider 
participants. There were four main considerations within 
this decision making process, which were: (1) the type of 
media to provide Deaf people access to health information 
(i.e., TV or mobile phone), (2) health information of interest 
and relevance for Deaf participants (i.e., type of disease), (3) 
the targeted group(s) of Deaf users of the HKTS, and (4) the 
targeted group(s) of health knowledge provider users of the 
HKTS. The research team then planned to start the design 
and development process with a relevant case study. 
B.  Methods 
Interviews with sensitizing tools were applied to the 
research with Deaf participants and health knowledge 
provider participants. All the Deaf participants were 
interviewed in groups, while the health knowledge providers 
were interviewed either in groups or individually based on 
their availability. The interviews aimed to (1) identify the 
organizations and individuals who are the current health 
information sources to Deaf people in Cape Town, (2) 
investigate problems in the transfer of health information 
between the information sources and Deaf people, (3) define 
both effective and ineffectual techniques in health 
information transfer, (4) identify urgently needed health 
information among Deaf people, and (5) elicit ideas for 
solutions for improved health information transfer. 
The interviews were conducted with different groups of 
Deaf people: males, females, and Deaf families. These 
interviews covered topics (1) to (5). Next, we approached 
health professionals who were frequently mentioned as 
health information sources by the Deaf participants. The 
interviews with these health professionals touched upon 
topics (2), (3), and (5). The health professional participants 
were health policy makers, Deaf health workers (health 
workers who are Deaf themselves), and hearing healthcare 
providers. These participants have experience in providing 
health information and services to Deaf people. A qualified 
SASL interpreter assisted in all interviews with the Deaf 
participants. 
C. Techniques used for data collection 
1) Question sets for the interviews: There are two 
different sets of questions— one for Deaf people and one for 
health professionals. The questions facilitate them to think 
about their experiences during health communication and 
solutions that could meet their needs. 
2) Sensitizing tools for Deaf people’s reflection on their 
access to health information from different sources: The 
researcher wrote down on sticky notes each health 
information source mentioned by the Deaf participants 
during a group session. After leading the participants 
through the questions, they were asked to discuss within 
their group, and rate their accessibility to, each mentioned 
source on a ‘map’ of A0-sized paper. The map was divided 
into five areas, using scales of zero to five, from very poor 
to 
high 
accessibility, 
respectively. 
Thereafter, 
the 
participants were asked if they wanted to adjust their rating 
or to add any missing health information sources.  
3) Sensitizing tools for eliciting ideas for solutions from 
Deaf people and health professionals: After sharing their 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

experiences and the communication techniques used during 
health communication, the participants were asked to think 
of solutions that could meet their needs in effective health 
information transfer. Sheets of A4-sized paper, coloured 
markers, stickers in different shapes and colors were 
provided to participants to express their ideas. 
D. Participants  
Participants were invited from different Deaf communities 
and health organizations in Cape Town.  
1) Deaf people: (1) Male group and female group—   
Six Deaf males and six Deaf females were invited from two 
Deaf communities. Their level of hearing loss, education, 
health literacy, and experience with telecommunication and 
technology were disregarded. (2) Deaf family groups—  
Three Deaf families (altogether eleven participants) who 
have low-to-medium experience with technology and the 
internet, were invited from two Deaf communities to join 
separate group interviews. Each group consisted of a Deaf 
father, a Deaf mother, and at least one child who was 
attending school regardless of the child’s hearing ability. 
2) Health professionals: (1) Health policy makers— 
Two participants from a governmental organization were 
approached for a group interview. (2) Deaf health 
workers— Four health worker participants who are Deaf 
from a Deaf community were invited. These participants 
were trained specifically for HIV/ AIDS counselling. (3) 
Hearing healthcare providers— Two doctors, one nurse, and 
one clerk were approached from a public health community 
centre where several Deaf people visit. 
E. Ethics  
All participants were informed about the objectives of the 
interview, the activities, and also their participation rights. 
The participants were asked to give consent to the research 
team before the interview started. All interviews were video 
recorded and were to be kept in secured storage with access 
by the research team members only. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The outcomes that are of relevance for the upcoming 
CBCD process can be described as follows:  
A. Overview of health information distribution modes to 
Deaf people 
The Department of Health of the Republic of South 
Africa promotes the distribution of information about 
diseases by partnering with Deaf organizations. The Deaf 
organisations invite Deaf members to distribute the 
information through health events. There are only four Deaf 
health workers in Cape Town, and all are based at one Deaf 
NGO. These Deaf health workers organize health events and 
individual counselling in SASL through available subsidy. 
In addition, Deaf people can also acquire health information 
during consultations with doctors. 
B. Problems in health information transfer 
Health policy makers were aware of the problems in 
distributing information and services to the Deaf population. 
They also realized the critical lack of SASL interpreters in 
the health care context.  
Several of the hearing health professionals tended to 
write to communicate with the Deaf patient during the 
communication in the absence of a SASL interpreter, 
without knowing that the patient could not fully understand 
the written messages nor easily find someone at home to 
interpret for them. Some auxiliary information, which could 
help the patient build up their understanding and knowledge 
about the disease, was discarded due to communication 
breakdowns. In addition, some health professionals also 
required lip reading skills from Deaf patients during the 
explanation about health information. 
Deaf health workers are eligible persons who are Deaf or 
have SASL competence. They are trained for specific 
counselling, viz. HIV/AIDS. These workers may not have 
knowledge about other diseases beyond their trained 
subject. However, Deaf clients normally approach them 
with questions about all types of diseases. 
Health information available in the mass media is not 
fully understood by a Deaf audience due to their functional 
illiteracy and hearing loss.  
C. Existing vs. ideal health information sources  
Deaf people mentioned a range of existing sources for 
their acquired health information. The two most frequently 
mentioned sources are consultation with a doctor in the 
absence of a SASL interpreter, and health workshops and 
counselling provided by Deaf health workers from a Deaf 
NGO in Cape Town. Several other health information 
sources such as the mass media (e.g., newspapers, TV 
programmes, and health pamphlets) and individual persons 
(e.g., friends and parents) were considered as existing health 
information sources with less frequent mention. Figure 1 
presents the ranking of existing against ideal health 
information sources. 
 
Figure 1.  Existing vs. ideal health information sources. 
Consultation with a doctor in the absence of a SASL 
interpreter was noted as a frequent health information source. 
However, the information provided by doctors (or other 
health staff) was not understood by the Deaf patients. As a 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

result, the ranking of this source as an ideal health 
information source to Deaf people is relatively low. Health 
workshops and counselling provided by Deaf health workers 
from a Deaf NGO was highly rated as an existing source that 
Deaf people turn to, and also as an ideal information source. 
Deaf participants expressed their satisfaction with health 
drama in SASL performed by the Deaf health workers, who 
also provided a Q&A platform to the Deaf audience.  
D. Health information of interest to Deaf people 
Deaf males, Deaf females, and Deaf families were asked 
to discuss and prioritize the top three health information 
topics which are the most relevant for their own group. The 
Deaf health workers were also asked to prioritize the health 
information which is urgently needed by all Deaf people. 
The results are described in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
THE PRIORITIZED HEALTH INFORMATION OF INTEREST 
AND RELEVANCE FOR SPECIFIC GROUPS OF DEAF PEOPLE 
For the interest 
and relevance of 
Information of interest in prioritized order 
1st  
2nd  
3rd 
Young Deaf men 
safe sex 
sterile 
circumcision 
sexually 
transmitted 
diseases 
Deaf women 
cancer 
depression 
swollen feet 
Deaf parents 
diabetes 
cancer 
children’s 
health  
All Deaf people 
diabetes 
hypertension 
tuberculosis 
As a result, diabetes was concluded as the most popular 
and relevant health information of interest among the Deaf 
paticipants. 
E. Effective and ineffectual techniques in delivering health 
information to Deaf people 
These findings were extracted from the responses of all 
participants.  
1) Effective techniques: (1) SASL is the “mother 
tongue” among South African Deaf people. Therefore, 
delivering health information in SASL is the most effective 
technique. (2) Drama in SASL is a form of health 
information delivery that Deaf people appreciate. The health 
drama delivers information inclusive of entertainment. It 
also covers information to correct health misconceptions 
among Deaf people. (3) Pictures with concise text 
descriptions. Some Deaf participants mentioned optimizing 
their understanding of concepts with pictures combined with 
short descriptions.  
2) Ineffectual techniques: (1) Communication that 
requires reading and writing skills from Deaf people is not 
effective because many Deaf people are functionally 
illiterate. (2) Communication that requires lip-reading skills 
is also ineffectual. The accuracy of English messages 
understood via lip-reading is only about 30-35% [20]. 
F. Ideas for solutions from all participants 
We retrieved 45 ideas from drawings and verbal/signed 
explanations by participants. These ideas were sorted into 
three categories, which are solutions through the use of (1) 
human-to-human interactions (16 ideas), (2) mass media (12 
ideas), and (3) ICT (information and communication 
technology) (17 ideas). The most popular ideas from each 
category respectively are an increase of the health drama 
teams by involving more Deaf members (C 1), TV 
programmes, health videos at health facilities, and health 
DVDs with SASL interpretation (C 2), and mobile devices as 
a health knowledge tool (C 3). Table II shows the analysis of 
the suitability of each popular idea as a solution in the Cape 
Town context. 
TABLE II.  
ANALYSIS OF SUITABLE SOLUTIONS FOR IMPROVING THE 
HEALTH INFORMATION DISTRIBUTION IN THE DEAF CONTEXT 
Considered 
performance 
Popular solutions proposed by participants 
(C 1) 
(C 2) 
(C 3) 
Accommodate 
different data types of 
information (SASL 
videos, pictures, texts) 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Available health 
communication 
bridging 
× 
× 
√ 
Allow information 
reviews, private search, 
self- learning 
× 
× (TV programmes & 
health videos at 
health facilities) 
√ (health DVD) 
√ 
Can be updated by 
health knowledge 
providers 
√ 
√ (health videos in 
the waiting areas of 
health facilities & 
health DVDs) 
× (TV programmes) 
√ 
Initial cost of 
production and 
development 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Operational cost 
Medium 
Low (health videos at 
health facilities & 
health DVDs) 
High (TV 
broadcasting) 
Medium 
Costs were estimated from the monthly allowance for a 
research assistant to develop and maintain the system and an 
allowance for groups of four Deaf people to prepare a drama. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This section discusses the decision-making on the design 
direction of the HKTS design and development. 
A. Decision-making on the design direction 
1) Type of solution to improve access to health 
information: The type of solution was selected based on the 
considerations as stated in Table II. Mobile devices have the 
potential to present information in SASL videos, as Deaf 
people explicitly expressed this need, and in mixed media. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

2) Information for the disease of interest among Deaf 
people: Type 2 diabetes is selected for this case study due to 
the interest of Deaf participants and also its prevalence in 
the health care context of South Africa. There are  3,500,000 
people in South Africa (6% of the population) suffering 
from Type 2 diabetes [21]. We can assume 1%, i.e. 35,000, 
are Deaf (similar to the 1% of the population being Deaf as 
opposed to deaf and/or hard-of-hearing). 
3) Targeted groups of Deaf users: Middle-aged males 
and females and mothering females are the targeted groups 
of Deaf people for this case study. These people are in the 
age range of diabetes onset, and they are amenable to the 
use of mobile devices as the tool for accessing information. 
4) Targeted groups of health knowledge providers: 
Doctors and ancillary staff who are involved in diabetes care 
will be invited to join this participatory research. They will 
be asked to provide insights into what diabetic patients 
should know, understand, practice, and manage. 
B. Preferred information transfer methods to Deaf users 
Deaf participants required viewing health information in 
SASL. They also favour health dramas in SASL as they have 
experienced from a Deaf NGO in Cape Town. However, the 
entertaining elements in the drama may deflect the 
audience’s attention from the important health messages. In 
addition, coherent pictures can enhance the understanding of 
the information among Deaf users because of their strong 
visual-spatial working memory [22]. 
VI. 
FUTURE WORK 
The designed and developed HKTS is meant to 
complement the use of SignSupport (see Figure 2) as it will 
be a relevant health education source for Deaf adults.  
A. Integration of HKTS and SignSupport 
Deaf patients can use SignSupport (Communication 
tool) to communicate with hearing staff at a public health 
facility, from arrival until departure. Figure 2 indicates the 
stages at which a doctor or ancillary staff members can refer 
to different topics of health information from the HKTS 
(health knowledge source) to explain the diagnosed 
condition and self-management. This will help the patient 
understand the disease in more depth and can help improve 
or maintain their health condition at home. 
B. Co-design of information content and the transfer 
process with end users  
Co-design with Deaf participants with Type 2 diabetes 
and diabetes doctors and involved ancillary staff will take 
place in Phase 2 of the research to define the design of the 
health information content and the delivery structure in 
detail. Together with these participants, the research team 
can (1) identify the information (based on or in addition to 
the topics proposed in Figure 2) which need to be available 
on the HKTS, and (2) understand suitable methods to 
transfer health information that meets Deaf people’s 
requirements and their learning capabilities. We envisage 
that the end-users will require a mix of techniques in 
delivering specific health information, e.g., Deaf patients 
may require explanation about insulin through the combined 
techniques of animation and SASL narration. This 
assumption will be explored and validated during the co- 
design sessions. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This HKTS can be one of the ways to solve the 
challenges of Deaf people’s inaccessibility to health 
information due to language barriers and the scarcity of a 
signed language (SASL) interpreting service for healthcare. 
It will complement the use of the mobile communication 
tool, SignSupport, to provide access to accurate and 
comprehensible health information for Deaf people. The 
design direction of the HKTS is selected. Its content and 
structure will suit the SASL communication needs of Deaf 
people. The content and the structure will be designed 
through a case study of Type 2 diabetes care in the Cape 
Town context. Deaf users in the middle-aged and mothering 
phase are at risk of this type of diabetes, so they, and the 
health professionals (doctors, clinical nurses, and ancillary 
staff) involved, are invited to join the design case study of 
the HKTS. These users can have access to the information 
about fundamental knowledge of the disease, self-
management, and life-style modification. The main approach 
is CBCD, or so called─ a participatory design approach. 
Therefore, Deaf and health professionals will collaborate 
with the research team to derive an accessible and viable 
HKTS. We expect that the derived content structure will be 
applicable to the information for other chronic diseases. 
 
Figure 2.  Integration between SignSupport and the HKTS during a patient’s journey in the diabetes care
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the Deaf Community of Cape Town for their 
involvement. We also thank Telkom, Cisco, and the THRIP 
(Technology and Human Resources for Industry Partnership) 
initiative of the South African Department of Trade and 
Industry for financial support via the Telkom Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) programme. THRIP funding (project 
TP13072623839) is managed by the National Research 
Foundation (NRF). Any opinion, findings and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the 
authors and therefore the NRF/THRIP does not accept any 
liability in regard thereto. We also plan to publish some part 
of this paper in a journal to disseminate the knowledge for 
readers in the field of design and development for improving 
health education for people with disability.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. A. Padden and T. L. Humphries, Inside Deaf Culture. 
Cambridge, MA: Havard University Press, 2005. 
[2] J. Kritzinger, “Exploring the barriers and facilitators to health 
care services and health care information for deaf people in 
Worcester,” M.A. thesis, Dept. Psychology. Stellenbosch 
Univ., Stellenbosch South Africa, 2011.  
[3] E. Blake, W. Tucker, M. Glaser, and A. Freudenthal, “Deaf 
telephony: Community-based co-design”, Interaction Design: 
Beyond Human-Computer Interaction, 3rd Edition, Y. Rogers, 
H. Sharp and J. Preeece, Eds., Chichester: Wiley, pp. 412–
413, 
2011 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.id-
book.com/downloads/casestudy_11point1.pdf. [Accessed: 12 
November 2014] 
[4] P. Chininthorn, M. Glaser, A. Freudenthal, and W.D. Tucker, 
“Mobile Communication Tools design for a South African 
Deaf Patient in a Pharmacy Context“ Proc. Information 
Society Technologies – Africa (IST-Africa), P. Cunningham 
and M. Cunningham, Eds. Dublin: IIMC, May. 2012, pp.1-8, 
ISBN: 978-1-905824-34-2. 
[5] M. Mothlabi, M. Glaser, M. Parker, and, W. D. Tucker 
“Improving Usability and Correctness of a Mobile Tool to 
help a Deaf person with pharmaceutical instruction,” Proc. 
The 
Fourth 
Annual 
Symposium 
on 
Computing 
for 
Development (DEV), ACM Press, Dec. 2013, pp. 1-10, doi: 
10.1145/2537052.2537063. 
[6] W. C. Stokoe, “Sign Language Structure,” Annual Reviews 
Anthropol, 
vol 
9, 
Oct. 
1980 
pp. 
365–390, 
doi:10.1146/annurev.an.09.100180.002053. 
[7] J. du Bruyn, N. Southey, and R. Viljoen, “Deaf youth tell 
their stories,” in ‘Deaf Me Normal’: Deaf South Africans Tell 
Their Llife Stories, R. Morgan, Eds. South Africa: UNISA 
Press, 2008, pp. 11-38. 
[8] D. Aarons and P. Akach, “South African Sign Language: One 
Language or Many?,” in Language and Social History, R. 
Mesthrie, Eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2002, pp. 1–28. 
[9] G. Bartlett, R. Blais, R. Tamblyn, R. J. Clermont, and B. 
MacGibbon, “Impact of patient communication problems on 
the risk of preventable adverse events in acute care settings,” 
Canadian Medical Association, vol. 178, Jun. 2008, pp. 1555–
1562, doi: 10.1503/cmaj.070690. 
[10] Deaf Federation of South Africa, “Policy on the provision and 
regulation of South Africa Sign Language interpreter,” Deaf 
Federation of South Africa, Document, 2011 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.deafsa.co.za/documents/SASLI_policy.pdf. 
[Accessed: 22 November 2014]. 
[11] Deaf Federation of South Africa, “Deaf schools in South 
Africa,” Deaf Federation of South Africa,  [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.deafsa.co.za/current-development/. 
[Accessed: 19 vol. 273, pp. November 2014].  
[12] E. Dolnick, “Deafness as Culture,” The Atlantic, vol. 272, 
Sep. 1993, pp. 37–53.  
[13] S. Barnett and P. Franks, “Health care utilization and adults 
who are deaf: relationship with age at onset of deafness,” 
Health Service Research, vol. 37, Feb. 2002, pp. 103–118, 
doi:  10.1111/1475-6773.99106. 
[14] Y. Bat-chava, D. Martin, and J.G. Kosciw, “Barriers to 
HIV/AIDS knowledge and prevention among deaf and hard of 
hearing people,” AIDS Care, vol. 17, Jan. 2007,  pp. 623–634, 
doi: 10.1080/09540120412331291751. 
[15] N. E. Groce, A. K. Yousafzai, and F. van der Mass, 
“HIV/AIDS and disability: Differneces in HIV/AIDS 
knowledge between deaf and hearing people in Nigeria,” 
Disability and Rehabilitation, vol. 29, 2007, pp. 367–371, 
doi:10.1080/09638280600834567. 
[16] P. Tamaskar, T. Malia, C. Stem, D. Gorenflo, H. Meador, and 
P. Zazove, “Preventive attitude and belief of deaf and hard-of-
hearing individuals,” Archives of Family Medicine, vol. 9,  
Jun. 2000, pp. 518–525. 
[17] P. C. Hauser, A. O’Hearn, M. McKee, A. Steider, and D. 
Thew, “Deaf epistemology: Deafhood and deafness,” 
American Annals of the Deaf, vol. 154, Nov. 2010, pp. 486–
492,  doi: 10.1353/aad.0.0120. 
[18] L. M. Harmer, “Health care delivery and Deaf people: 
Practice, problems, and recommendations for change,” 
Journal of Deaf education and Deaf study, vol. 4, 1998, pp. 
72–110, doi: 10.1093/deafed/4.2.73. 
[19] S. David, A. G. Sabiescu, L. Cantoni, “Co-design with 
Communities. A Reflection on the Literature,” Proc. The seventh 
International Development Informatics Association Conference 
(IDIA), Nov. 2013, pp. 152-166, ISBN: 978-0-620-58040-3 
[20] N. Bauman, “ Successfully Copping with Hearing Loss: 
Speechreading 
(Lip- 
reading),” 
Internet: 
http://www.hearinglosshelp.com/articles/speechreading.htm., 
Mar. 2000 [Accessed: 24 November 2014] 
[21] B. Otterman. “Prevalence of diabetes in South Africa.” 
Internet: http://www.health24.com/Medical/Diabetes/About-
diabetes/Diabetes-tsunami-hits-South-Africa-20130210, 
3 
Nov. 2014 [Accessed: 2 December 2014] 
[22] M. Marschark, C. Morrison, J. Lukomski, G. Borgna, and C. 
Convertino, “Are deaf students visual learners?, “ vol. 25, 
Feb. 2013, pp. 156–162, doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2013.02.006 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

