Wearable Technologies for Multiple Sclerosis 
The future role of wearable stress measurement in improving quality of life 
 
 
Daniel Lopez Martinez 
Harvard-MIT Division of  
Health Sciences and Technology 
Cambridge, MA, USA 
e-mail: dlmocdm@mit.edu 
Prof Rosalind Picard 
MIT Media Lab 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA, USA 
e-mail: picard@media.mit.edu
 
 
Abstract— Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common 
autoimmune disorder affecting the central nervous system. 
Most often diagnosed in young adults, MS runs a chronic, 
unpredictable course, often leading to severe disability: 50% of 
MS patients are unable to perform household and employment 
responsibilities 10 years after disease onset, and 50% are 
nonambulatory 25 years after disease onset. While it is not clear 
what factors influence the prognosis of MS, exposure to stress 
has long been suspected as a factor that can aggravate its 
progression. In this paper, we discuss the opportunities for 
wearable sensors in the management of stress in multiple 
sclerosis patients.    
Keywords–multiple sclerosis; stress; wearable; biosensor; 
electrodermal activity; heart rate variability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory, 
demyelinating and neurodegenerative autoimmune disease of 
the human central nervous system, affecting more than 2.3 
million people worldwide. The median clinical onset of MS is 
approximately 29 years of age, with affected women 
outnumbering men with a ratio of almost 3:1 [1].  
The clinical disease course is variable. In most cases, MS 
begins 
with 
a 
relapsing-remitting 
(RRMS) 
course 
characterized by periods of exacerbation, lasting from days to 
weeks, followed by periods of substantial remission, often 
with some residual disability. In a later stage, anytime 
between 5-35 years after onset, most patients develop a 
secondary progressive course (SPMS), marked by a 
continuous and irreversible neurological decline. A small 
proportion of patients have a primary progressive course 
(PPMS) from the onset. 
Common symptoms of MS include, but are not limited to, 
loss of function or feeling in limbs, loss of bowel or bladder 
control, sexual dysfunction, debilitating fatigue, blindness due 
to optic neuritis, loss of balance, pain, cognitive dysfunction, 
and emotional changes [2]. 
While little is known about its cause or the factors that 
contribute to its unpredictable course, evidence indicates that 
both genetic susceptibility and environmental factors play a 
role [3]. One such factor is psychological stress, which has 
been implicated repeatedly as a determinant of disease activity 
ever since MS was first described in the 19th century. 
In this paper, we discuss the impact of stress on MS 
progression and the opportunities for wearable biosensors and 
and autonomic activity measurement in the management of 
stress in MS, with the subsequent improvement in quality of 
life. 
II. 
THE ROLE OF STRESS IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 
Stress is a broad concept used to describe conditions 
ranging from environmental threats to psychological 
responses relevant to anxiety. Despite the great variability in 
how people perceive and experience stress, both patients and 
clinicians note that increased stress increases relapses. In fact, 
the most recent meta-analysis of studies linking stress and 
disease exacerbations found that out of the 17 studies 
reviewed, 15 showed a significant association [4]. 
Furthermore, acute stressful events or chronic stressful 
situations have also been associated with the onset of the 
disease [4] 
While relapses are the primary measure in these studies, 
the count of new lesions on magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) has proven to be a far more sensitive outcome as a 
measure of disease activity.  Although only two studies have 
studied the relationship of stress and MRI lesion activity, both 
found that stress increases disease activity on MRI. In one 
study, the risk development of new  lesions 4–9 weeks after a 
major negative life event was increased, while positive 
stressful events reduced this risk [5]. A previous smaller study 
had a similar finding [6]. 
These findings are not surprising, since neuroendocrine 
hormones triggered during stress may lead to immune 
dysregulation or to altered or amplified cytokine production, 
resulting in atopic autoimmune activity or decreased host 
defense [7]. 
III. 
WEARABLE STRESS MEASUREMENT 
Researchers have studied a wide variety of approaches to 
measure stress, such as self-report measures, collected 
through retrospective surveys and/or experience sampling, 
and hormone analysis. However, stress also produces a well-
studied set of physiological changes that can be continuously 
monitored using wearables for the purpose of stress 
measurement. These physiological changes are controlled by 
the autonomic nervous system (ANS), which regulates 
important 
bodily 
functions 
including 
digestion, 
thermoregulation, cardiac output, regional blood flow, 
ventilation, and many aspects of emotional behavior: feelings 
of fear, anger, happiness, and sadness have characteristic 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

autonomic manifestations. The ANS is divided into the 
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the parasympathetic 
nervous system (PNS). While SNS mobilizes the body’s 
resources in response to a challenge or a threat (e.g., quickens 
the pulse, deepens the respiration and tenses the muscles), the 
PNS works antagonistically to control this process.  
In the past, to accurately gather measurements of 
autonomic responses in the midst of daily activity, 
cumbersome electronics such as sticky electrodes on the chest 
were usually required. Therefore, so far studies of stress in MS 
that have looked beyond self-report surveys have relied on 
single time-point measurements of autonomic responses to a 
standardized stressor, such as public speaking or a cognitive 
task [8]. However, the most recent commercially available 
wearable biosensors can accurately and unobtrusively 
measure autonomic responses through electrodermal activity 
and heart rate variability data collected from the wrist: 
A. Electrodermal activity 
Electrodermal 
activity 
(EDA) 
biosensors 
measure 
electrical conductance changes in the skin reflecting eccrine 
sweat-gland activity. Unlike other bodily functions, EDA is 
controlled exclusively by the SNS, making it an ideal 
physiological signal for stress measurement. Using EDA, 
stress can be distinguished from other similar  responses such 
as cognitive load. As an example of an EDA application, 
Hernandez et al. discriminated stressful and non-stressful calls 
at the call center environment using EDA features [9]. 
B. Heart rate variability analysis 
Heart rate variability (HRV) analysis describes the 
variability of heart rate (HR) over time. In general, HRV 
analysis takes into consideration the frequency power of low-
frequency (LF, 0.01−0.08 Hz) and high-frequency (HF, 
0.15−0.5 Hz) bands, which reflects SNS and PNS modulation 
of HR respectively. HRV can be performed from blood 
volume 
pulse 
(BVP) 
signals 
obtained 
from 
wrist 
photoplethysmograph (PPG) sensors and, similar to EDA, 
used as a biomarker for psychological stress. 
IV. 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR WEARABLE-BASED STRESS 
MANAGEMENT IN MS 
Although the studies examining interventions to reduce 
stress in people with MS are few, it has been shown that stress 
management programs can result in a significant reduction of 
both MS symptoms [10] and new brain lesions [11]. While 
these programs offer great promise, their effect disappear 
rather quickly after the therapy is stopped. Therefore, there is 
a need for alternative ways of delivering stress management 
therapy that can result in longer-lasting effects.  
Recent advancements in wearable stress measurement 
technologies offer an opportunity for the development of 
biofeedback-assisted stress management therapies that could 
potentially satisfy this need, resulting in a significant 
improvement in the quality of life of multiple sclerosis 
patients. Specifically, we believe the more scalable, adaptive, 
customizable and interactive behavior interventions that can 
be achieved with wearable-based behavior intervention 
technologies tailored to the specific needs of MS patients may 
result in increased patient engagement, improved stress 
reduction, and longer-lasting effects. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been supported by La Caixa Foundation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S.-M. Orton, et al., “Sex ratio of multiple sclerosis in 
Canada: a longitudinal study.,” The Lancet Neurology, 
vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 932–936, Nov. 2006. 
[2] 
D. C. Mohr and D. Cox, “Multiple sclerosis: Empirical 
literature for the clinical health psychologist,” J. Clin. 
Psychol., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 479–499, 2001. 
[3] 
L. Belbasis, V. Bellou, E. Evangelou, J. P. A. Ioannidis, 
and I. Tzoulaki, “Environmental risk factors and 
multiple sclerosis: an umbrella review of systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses,” The Lancet Neurology, 
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 263–273, Feb. 2015. 
[4] 
A. K. Artemiadis, M. C. Anagnostouli, and E. C. 
Alexopoulos, “Stress as a Risk Factor for Multiple 
Sclerosis Onset or Relapse: A Systematic Review,” 
Neuroepidemiology, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 109–120, 2011. 
[5] 
M. N. Burns, E. Nawacki, M. J. Kwasny, D. Pelletier, 
and D. C. Mohr, “Do positive or negative stressful 
events predict the development of new brain lesions in 
people with multiple sclerosis?,” Psychol. Med., vol. 44, 
no. 2, pp. 349–359, May 2013. 
[6] 
D. C. Mohr, et al., “Psychological stress and the 
subsequent appearance of new brain MRI lesions in 
MS,” Neurology, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 55-61, 2000. 
[7] 
L. 
Stojanovich, 
“Stress 
and 
autoimmunity,” 
Autoimmunity Reviews, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. A271–A276, 
Mar. 2010. 
[8] 
J. Lovera and T. Reza, “Stress in Multiple Sclerosis: 
Review of New Developments and Future Directions,” 
Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep, vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 398–6, 
Oct. 2013. 
[9] 
J. Hernandez, R. R. Morris, and R. W. Picard, “Call 
Center Stress Recognition with Person-Specific 
Models,” in Social Computing, Behavioral - Cultural 
Modeling and Prediction, vol. 6974, no. 16, Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 125–
134. 
[10] A. K. Artemiadis, et al., “Stress management and 
multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled trial.,” Arch 
Clin Neuropsychol, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 406–416, Jun. 
2012. 
[11] D. C. Mohr, J. Lovera, T. Brown, B. Cohen, T. Neylan, 
R. Henry, J. Siddique, L. Jin, D. Daikh, and D. Pelletier, 
“A randomized trial of stress management for the 
prevention of new brain lesions in MS,” Neurology, vol. 
79, no. 5, pp. 412–419, Jul. 2012.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

