Development of an Active Sensor for non-Invasive Arterial Blood Pressure 
Monitoring 
 
 
Viacheslav Antsiperov, Gennady Mansurov 
Laboratory of Diagnostic Systems 
Kotel’nikov Institute of REE of RAS 
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: antciperov@cplire.ru 
Basil Bonch-Bruevich 
Department of Research Projects 
Joint Stock Company NEUROCOM 
Moscow, Russia  
e-mail: v.bonch-bruevich@neurocom.ru
 
 
Abstract—The paper presents the latest results of developing a 
new method of noninvasive continuous blood pressure 
monitoring. This method is based on the principle of pulse 
wave compensation. It is shown that sensors for such a 
measurement should be not only smart, but also active. In this 
connection, the concept of smart sensors is expanded to the 
concept of active sensors. The technical design of the active 
sensor for noninvasive pressure measurement is described. The 
results of active sensor calibration and testing are under 
discussion. The main section of the report is devoted to the 
development of software for active sensor control - its 
intellectual stuffing. We describe and justify a new principle of 
active measurement of quasi-periodic processes - pulse wave 
compensation based on prediction patterns. The progress 
achieved in research and the ways for further investigation is 
outlined in the conclusion. 
Keywords- smart and active sensors; compensation method of 
measuring; noninvasive arterial blood pressure monitoring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The progress in information technology involves 
accelerating development and deployment of fundamentally 
new medical technologies of patients’ evaluation, as well as 
a substantial revision of the classical ones. А central problem 
here is the development of informative, efficient and reliable 
methods for measuring and processing medical and 
biological data of the patient.  
 
Figure 1.  The principal components architecture of smart sensors [1]. 
 
One of the main trends in solving this problem, as well as 
in the broader field in the development of industrial control 
and monitoring systems is a full implementation of smart 
sensors, whose main task is maximizing automation of 
measurement and minimizing the role of man in this process 
[1]. An important feature of a hardware implementation of 
smart sensors is the use of microprocessors (μP) and as a rule  
the use of wireless communication units (CU), see Figure 1.  
Our initial goal was to provide the features of a smart 
sensor for a popular medical device – arterial blood pressure 
(ABP) monitor. But it turned out, that the use of powerful 
computational tools, embedded in such a device (i.e., modern 
microcontrollers), can produce much better results than in 
the case of a standard digital tonometer. The reason for it is 
not in the nature of the measurement itself - continuous or 
single-sampled – it lies in the nature of the value measured. 
It is known that all the non-invasive measuring devices 
measure not the pressure itself, but some value associated 
with it (the volume of the blood vessel, its wall displacement, 
the force with which the wall acts on the sensor unit, etc.) 
[2]. Using  compensation method, we succeeded in 
measuring the ABP in absolute units i.t., in mmHg. 
However, to measure the pressure by the method put forward 
we had to go even one-step further to introduce a feedback 
loop, depending on observed data sensor control. As a result, 
the idea of an active sensor was created, whose engineering 
expands the design of smart sensors as shown in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2.  The principal components architecture of active sensors. 
 
 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

In this paper we present the latest results of research and 
development concerning the active sensor for non-invasive 
arterial blood pressure monitoring. After a short overview in 
Section 2 of existing non-invasive methods and after a short 
discussion in Section 3 of compensation based ABP 
monitoring principal, in Section 4 we describe in detail the 
structure and design of the sensor developed. In Section 5 we 
report the results obtained in real experiments with active 
blood pressure monitoring and in Section 6 we schedule 
ways to overcome the shortcomings associated with the 
incomplete compensation of time–varying blood pressure 
caused by a simplified structure of the PID (proportional–
integral–derivative) 
feedback 
controller. 
Finally, 
the 
Conclusion briefly summarizes the problems discussed in the 
article.  
II. 
CURRENT ABP MONITORING APPROACHES 
Jan Peňáz was among the first to put forward a method of 
continuous non-invasive blood pressure monitoring [3]. His 
method described in 1973 was aimed at reducing the risks of 
arterial cauterization. The Peňáz  method employed the idea 
of “vascular unloading”, based on the assumption that in the  
“unloaded state” the pressure inside the blood vessel is equal 
to the outside pressure. 
The basic element of the device proposed by Peňáz is a 
small finger cuff ( Figure 3 (A)) that has an infra-red (IR)  
light source on one side and a light receiver on the opposite 
side. The blood volume of the finger is estimated via the 
absorbance of IR light. The signal obtained by such a 
plethysmograph is further used in a feedback loop to control 
the pressure in the cuff. The pressure is controlled in such a 
way that blood volume in the finger is kept constant in time 
and equal to the volume which corresponds to the unloaded 
vessels state defined during the calibration process. In this 
case the oscillations of the controlling pressure are 
approximately equal to pressure in the arteries. Later some 
formulae were proposed for recalculating pressure from 
finger vessels to brachial arteries, which made it possible to 
verify the method with respect to classical procedures.  
 
Figure 3.  Modern approaches to ABP monitoring systems . 
Another technique which provides continuous non-
invasive blood pressure monitoring is arterial tonometry [4]. 
Like the Peňáz method arterial tonometry is based on pulse 
oscillation estimates, but here the principal of arterial  
unloading is different. In this case the cuff is placed on the 
wrist, so the sensor is over the radial artery (Figure 3 (B)). 
The sensor presses the artery to the radial bone until it is 
flattened enough but not occluded. At this intermediate 
position arterial wall tension becomes parallel to the 
tonometer sensing surface and arterial pressure is then the 
remaining stress (perpendicular to the surface) measured by 
the sensor. The pressure needed to flatten but not occlude the 
artery is known as the “proper hold-down pressure” and is 
calculated by a complicated algorithm which includes the 
preliminary estimate of systolic, diastolic and pulse pressures 
over a range of “hold-down pressures”. 
Currently the devices employing these methods include 
in particular the CNAPTM (Peñáz’s approach, Figure 3, left) 
and T-line from Tensys Medical (arterial tonometry 
approach, Figure 3, right). 
The methods of continuous non-invasive blood pressure 
monitoring have both advantages and disadvantages [5]. We 
believe that the main drawback of these non-invasive 
methods is the following: irrespective of the method of 
vascular unloading the control of the unloading is exercised 
on the basis of integral parameters (blood vessels filling, 
overall  sensor force,  sensor displacement, etc.).  It enables 
monitoring an average pulse wave of ABP but does not 
guarantee the details of the pulse form. We proposed a new 
method of arterial blood pressure monitoring that is aimed at 
local unloading of arterial walls by compensating local 
pressure. 
III. 
COMPENSATION BASED APPROACH TO ABP 
MONITORING   
When analyzing well–known methods of non–invasive 
continuous measurement of blood pressure, we can conclude 
that the best results of monitoring non–stationary dynamics 
of blood pressure are achieved by the so–called 
compensation methods or methods similar to them.  
Compensation methods are applied for measurement of 
various physical quantities and are based on the 
compensation of an unknown measured value by controlled 
counter value and nullification of their difference. The 
simplest example of the compensation method is the use of 
balance scales on which unknown mass Wu  is measured 
using a set of weights Wv, Figure 4 (A). The predetermined 
position of the balance beam or the associated arrow serves 
as a null indicator of the balance scales. 
 
Figure 4.  Measurement of physical quantities by compensation methods. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

 Compensation methods as methods of high precision are 
used for mechanical and electrical measurements, in 
embodiments having a bridge and half-bridge circuits, Figure 
4 (B, C). Note that compensation methods are usually used 
to measure the static variables – constant unknown resistance 
Ru in bridge circuit on Figure 4 (B) and the steady pressure 
Pu in aggressive environment on Figure 4 (C) . 
We 
consider 
the 
compensation method as the 
fundamental basis to measure the varying blood pressure. 
The application of this method for measuring the non–static 
dynamic quantity has become possible, for two reasons. 
Firstly, the fact that blood pressure changes are not so fast, 
its rhythm is of the order of one beat per second, and its 
spectrum fits into the range of a few tens of Hz. Secondly, 
there are relatively cheap, high performance microcontrollers 
available for which a change in pressure is quasi-static.  
IV. 
THE STRUCTURE AND DESIGN OF THE SENSOR  
As noted above, our method of measuring ABP is aimed 
at local, without cuffs, unloading of arterial walls by means 
of compensating intra–arterial pressure by controlled 
pressure. Our method of measurement is similar to the 
method of bridge measurement of unknown pressure Pu in 
Figure 4 (C), but it has dynamic, “adaptive” features as in the 
Peňáz method [3]. The appearance of the device developed 
for continuous ABP monitoring and its typical use for 
measuring intra–arterial pressure is presented in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Active sensor for continuous blood pressure monitoring and its 
typical arangement on the patient’s wrist. 
Note that the device developed (Figure 5(A,B)) conforms 
exactly to the concept of an active sensor (see Introduction, 
Figure 2). The main role here is played by the programmable 
microcontroller μC (STM32L152RBT), that has the 
communication I/O (USB) on one side, and on the other side 
it has pm (pressure monitor – signal line) and pc (pressure 
control – control line) interfaces to the measuring element 
SU (sensor unit). The signal line pm contains membrane 
displacement indicator SC (signal conditioning) and pressure 
gauge with instrument amplifier M, the control line pc 
includes the pump PD and the chip for pump control CD 
(control driver). Both lines – pm and pc – are tubes coming 
from the fluid-filled cavity of the measuring element SU. SU 
is a camera with an aperture covered by an elastic membrane 
(of red color in Figure 4(D)) and containing a thin rod with 
one end attached to the membrane, the other end partially 
overlaps IR-radiation flux inside optoelectronic infrared pair 
IRp. Thus, this rod gives us a way to measure the membrane 
deformation as it serves as an indicator of displacement. 
When the pressure in the SU chamber and directly behind 
the membrane are different, the membrane will be deformed 
in one or the other direction by moving the rod in the 
direction of deformation. This movement will bring about a 
change in the area of IRp flux, which is registered by 
displacement indicator SC. If the controlling pressure in the 
SU returns the membrane to flat, not deformed state, we can 
conclude that pressures on both sides of the membrane are 
equal, thus external pressure will be measured. If SU is 
arranged above the radial artery, as shown in Fig. 5(C,D), 
then, assuming that at certain SU position the external 
pressure is equal to ABP, we will measure its value. This is 
precisely the key concept, underlying our compensation 
measurement technique. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS WITH THE SENSOR DEVELOPED  
The above qualitative description of the sensor can be 
illustrated by quantitative results obtained in the device 
calibration and testing. Figure 5(A) shows the deformation of 
the membrane displacement (in ADC units of SC indicator) 
in response to a uniform increase over time of the pressure P 
inside the SU at constant external atmospheric pressure. ΔP 
in Figure 5(A) is the pressure readings of M measured from 
atmospheric pressure, so ΔP is the pressure difference across 
the membrane. It can be seen from the graphs that for small 
(± 5 mmHg) difference in pressures on both sides of the 
membrane the signal of displacement indicator SC is linearly 
proportional to the pressure difference. Figure 5(B) shows 
the dynamics of the membrane displacement and the 
corresponding changes of pressure P within the SU when 
external pressure uniformly increases and control line pc is 
enabled for its compensating.   
 
Figure 6.  The dynamics of the SU membrane displacement (ADC units) 
in response to changes of the pressure difference inside and outside the SU. 
The compensating pressure P in SU is produced by the 
pump when the PWM (pulse-width modulated) voltage, 
formed by CD chip, is applied to the PD. 
Not specifying the details of the mechanism of formation, 
the resulting P may be thought of as proportional to the 
control signal, which the microcontroller sends to CD in 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

response to the measured by SC membrane displacement (as 
well as its previously stored values). The algorithm of simple 
PID [6] controller was originally selected as feedback control 
algorithm. 
On the basis of the calibration data numerous 
experiments on monitoring blood pressure were carried out. 
The results of one of the measurements are given in Figure 7. 
The lower part of the figure graph shows that the use of the 
PID control makes it possible to hold the membrane close to 
undistorted (flat) state for all the time of blood pressure 
measurement. The quality of such regulation can be 
estimated by the value of uncompensated difference in 
pressures equivalent (proportionate) to deviations of the 
membrane from the flat position (a kind of the membrane 
jitter). To illustrate the compensation, Figure 7 (top) shows a 
graph of pressure P inside the chamber SU (the data from 
pressure gauge M), as well as the same data corrected by the 
membrane jitter values.  
It can be seen that in comparison with P uncompensated 
difference in pressures ΔP is not large. Figure 7 also shows 
that P coincides generally with the corrected blood pressure, 
but at times with the rapid change in the shape of the pulse 
wave, the controller fails to keep track of these changes. 
 
Figure 7.  The dynamics of the SU membrane displacement  (ADC units) 
while compensating the time-varying outside blood pressure.  
The overall impression of the first results of monitoring 
blood pressure with the help of the above–described active 
sensor is ambivalent. On the one hand, the sensor does its 
task – it can be used not only to measure the main parameters 
of blood pressure – systolic and diastolic blood pressure 
(range of ABP), but also to observe the varying pulse wave, 
and not through indirect measurements but by measuring the 
pressure itself ( in mmHg). On the other hand, as we could 
initially assume a simple PID controller does not provide full 
compensation, which leads to the distortion of the pulse 
wave components. Practically, the compensation algorithm 
based on PID control proved to be very difficult in changing 
its settings. 
VI. 
PULSE PRESSURE COMPENSATION CONTROL ON THE 
BASIS OF PULSE WAVE PATTERNS  
These shortcomings associated with the incomplete 
compensation of time–varying blood pressure have a simple 
explanation.  
Firstly, the PID controller used is the special case of 
linear regulators class and it is well known that linear 
methods for treating biological signals, especially, linear 
adaptation methods are used in limited ranges of their 
changes and only under strictly controlled (for example, 
laboratory) conditions. This is due to highly non-linear non–
equilibrium nature of living systems [7]. Even a small 
change in physiological state can lead to considerable 
changes in the result. 
Secondly, PID control takes into account only local 
characteristics of the signals, as it is customary in the theory 
of dynamic systems. In the case of dynamic systems, such a 
regulation is natural, as such systems are deterministic. 
However, living systems and their subsystems are known to 
be poorly described by models of dynamic systems, even if 
there is a freedom of choice of corresponding differential 
equations coefficients [7]. Living systems are much more 
consistent with models of stochastic, non–deterministic 
systems.  
Thirdly, in solving technical problems low order of PID 
control is preferred due to its ease of implementation.  When 
we deal with a complex biomedical signal, particularly, an 
ABP signal, low order of control is a drawback.   
These facts indicate that the pulse wave of blood pressure 
is much more similar to a wideband pulse signal than the 
sum of harmonic components. In view of the foregoing it can 
be assumed that a random point process is a closer 
mathematical model of blood pressure pulsating. A point 
process is an increasing sequence of time moments (points) 
of certain homogeneous events, such as the arrival pulse 
wave, with a random length of time intervals between them. 
Excluding the changes in the pulse wave pattern, and treating 
them as a stream of homogenous sequence of events, it 
would be legitimate to use theoretical methods dealing with 
the problems associated with the heart rate. 
One such well-developed theory today is the theory of 
radar signal processing. A major problem of this theory is  
determining the unknown arrival time of an electromagnetic 
pulse emitted by radar and reflected from a target. The 
method of matched filtering should be noted as one of the 
most effective methods for solving this problem. In this 
method the filter response is matched with the radar pulse, so 
that the maximum signal of the filter output is observed at 
time, when the reflected pulse arrives. Essentially, the 
matched filter generates a covariance of sent and received 
pulses, and it is well known that if both pulses have the 
same, up to a constant factor, shape, the maximum of the 
covariance will be achieved when they coincide. The 
corresponding displacement between pulses will estimate the 
time of arrival. 
The principle of the matched filtering could be 
interpreted in a different way, more suitable for our tasks. 
Let’s assume at some moment, the time T between the ABP 
pulse wave is known along with the shape of the current 
pulse, further considering the shape of next pulse to be same 
as the current one, we can easily predict the future signal.  
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

 
Figure 8.  Two methods of predicting the pulse signal future:  A - by PID 
regulation and B - based on the local quasi-period (QP) estimate.  
For this purpose, we should take an existing fragment of 
the signal of duration T, immediately preceding the current 
time and move it to the time T into the future (see Fig.7). 
From the theory of the matched filter, it follows that the 
expected ABP pulse will coincide with the prediction. This 
idea is illustrated in Fig.7, which also shows a comparison of 
the proposed signal prediction with the prediction carried out 
by PID. As stated above, the PID controller makes a 
prediction on the basis of current, local estimates of the 
fundamental frequency, the amplitude of the main 
component and amplitudes of neighboring harmonics. 
VII. 
 CONCLUSION 
Summing up the results of the investigation we can 
conclude that when we use compensatory ABP measurement 
it is the current pattern of the pulse wave which efficiently 
predicts the expected signal. This pattern must be dirigible 
enough to change significantly with changes in the state of 
the object measured as well as changes in the conditions of 
its active measurement.  
 For this reason, realized by the classic regulators 
including the PID controllers, patterns in the small 
parametric models of ABP waves are of little use for active 
blood pressure measurement. An idea of forming the 
adequate patterns in the task is given in the above qualitative 
reasoning. It is based on the property of quasi-periodicity of 
ABP signal.  
This property lies in the fact that high variability of the 
period of heart contractions occurs only at long time 
intervals, whereas at short time intervals of several seconds 
or a few heart beats its changes are generally small and fall 
within a couple of percent.  
Therefore, estimating the current period, more precisely 
the quasi-period T, we can get a pulse wave pattern as a 
signal fragment of T duration immediately preceding the 
current time moment. Thus, the task of building a pattern for 
current pulse of the signal is reduced to the task of effective 
evaluation of its current quasi-period.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by RFBR (Russian Foundation 
for Basic Research) grant 14-07-00496-a. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Chaudhari and S. Dharavath, “Study of Smart Sensors and their 
Applications,” Intern. J. of Adv. Research in Computer and Comm. 
Engineering, vol. 3(1), Jan. 2014, pp. 5031–5034. 
[2] 
G. Drzewiecki, “Noninvasive arterial blood pressure and mechanics,” 
in The Biomedical Engineering Handbook, 2nd Edition, Ed. Joseph 
D. Bronzino, CRC Press and IEEE Press, 2000.  
[3] 
J. Peňáz, “Photoelectric measurement of blood pressure, volume and 
flow in the finger,” Digest of the 10th International Conference on 
Medical and Biological Engineering, Dresden, 1973, p.104. 
[4] 
G. Drzewiecki, J. Melbin, A. Noordergraaf,  “Arterial tonometry: 
review and analysis,” J Biomech., vol. 16(2), 1983 , pp. 141-152. 
[5] 
E. Chung, G. Chen, B. Alexander, M. Cannesson, “Non-invasive 
continuous blood pressure monitoring: a review of current 
applications,” in Front Med, vol. 7(1), 2013, pp. 91-101. 
[6] 
K. Astrom and T. Hagglund, “PID Controllers: Theory, Design and 
Tuning,” 2nd Edition, Triangle Park, North Carolina: Instrument 
Society of America, 1995. 
[7] 
W. Klonowski, “From conformons to human brains: an informal 
overview of nonlinear dynamics and its applications in biomedicine,” 
Nonlinear Biomedical Physics, vol. 1, article 5,  2007,  DOI 
10.1186/1753-4631-1-5. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-480-0
SPWID 2016 : The Second International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

