Towards a Multi-agent based demand-driven control
of Building Systems.
Labeodan Timilehin
Building services group, Department of the built
environment, Technical University Eindhoven, Den Dolech
2, 5612AZ, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
T.labeodan@tue.nl
Zeiler Wim
Building services group, Department of the built
environment, Technical University Eindhoven, Den Dolech
2, 5612AZ, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
W.zeiler@tue.nl
Abstract— Occupant presence and behavior in buildings
have been shown to have a significant impact on the
energy consumed in buildings for space conditioning.
Towards effort to improve the energy efficiency and
performance of buildings, demand driven control of
building systems and appliances have been proposed and
implemented in a number of studies. A core component of
demand-driven control in building operation is occupancy
detection. The performance of the occupancy detection
system impacts the controllability of demand driven
applications, the accruable energy savings and comfort of
building users. This paper provides initial results from an
ongoing research into the development of a multi-agent
system
(MAS)
coordinated
demand–driven
control
application for building operations which utilizes a robust
and low-energy wireless sensor network (WSN) technology
for occupancy measurement.
Keywords—Multi-agents; Wireless sensor networks; Energy;
HVAC systems
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is a well-established fact that the primary role of buildings
and building services is the provision of a comfortable,
healthy and safe work as well as living space for its
inhabitants [1]. In performing its functions, buildings have
been shown to account for between 30-35% of total final
energy consumption in the USA, EU and other Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development
(OCED)
countries [2-4]. The impact of building energy consumption
on the sustainability of non-renewable energy supply sources
and greenhouse a gas emissions has resulted in it being the
target
of
a
number
of
energy
efficiency
improvement
strategies [5]. To this end, buildings have been identified as a
key potential contributor to efforts to safeguard security and
sustainability of energy supplies as well as efforts to mitigate
climate change [6].
In buildings, lighting, heating, ventilation and air–conditioning
systems
are
the
top
energy
consuming
systems,
both
accounting for more than half of total energy consumed [7-8].
Several studies have shown that the interaction of building
occupants with these building systems and their controls has a
greater impact on energy consumption [9]. It has therefore
become more important to understand individual behavior of
building occupants as well as fine-grained evaluation of
energy end point utilization in buildings in order to help
reduce energy consumption and carbon emissions in existing
buildings.
Demand-driven control strategies are measures aimed at
improving the energy efficiency and performance of building
systems through the use
of actual building occupancy
information. This includes measures such as turning off or
dimming
artificial
lighting
systems
and
controlling
the
ventilation, heating and cooling of spaces using actual
occupancy information. As demonstrated in a number of
studies [10], energy savings of between 3-84% can be
achieved in office buildings through demand driven control of
lighting systems. Also as demonstrated by the authors in [11]
through dynamic occupant driven use and control of HVAC
systems in an office, energy savings of up to 30% was shown
to be attainable. A core component of demand-driven control
applications in building operation is occupancy information.
Information on occupancy, may lead to very fine delivery of
lighting and heating, ventilation and air conditioning and
visualization of the use of space.
Over the years, a number of studies [12] have developed
occupancy prediction models for control processes in building
operation. Though with impressive results, these models are
often building specific and do not proffer a generic solution to
occupancy measurement in buildings, which varies with a
building’s functions, location and person. As a result, most
commercial buildings still operate based on fixed schedules
and assumed occupancy information, despite studies showing
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

that average occupancy in buildings even at peak times is
usually below 70% [13-14].
Of
recent
however,
non-model
based
generic
solutions
providing near real-time occupancy information and based on
wireless
sensor
network
technologies
[15-16]
are
been
considered in demand-driven control applications in buildings.
In
addition,
for
coordination
of
demand-driven
control
applications, solutions based on the multi-agents design
paradigm are also been introduced in building operation as a
result
of
their
distributed,
autonomous
and
adaptive
capabilities [13, 17].
The subsequent sections of this paper describe the design
framework for a MAS coordinated demand driven control of
building systems and appliances utilizing wireless sensor
networks for occupancy detection. The proposed system can
be integrated into existing building’s comfort and energy
management system for control of lighting & HVAC systems
to improve buildings responsiveness to demand response and
smart grid interaction. Initial experimental results from the
test-bed building are also presented as well as the energy
savings obtainable from the application of the proposed
system in operation of the building.
II.
BACKGROUNG
A.
Sensor network and localization
The advancement in radio and embedded systems technology
has significantly enhanced the proliferation of various wireless
communication
systems
in
a
large
number
of end-use
applications. A representative of this class that has received
considerable
attention
from
the
research
community
is
wireless sensor network, which consist of numerous tetherless
devices that are released into the environment and organize
themselves in an adhoc fashion [18, 19]. The main goal of
wireless sensor networks in most application is to perform
monitoring tasks and a key component of tasks monitoring
applications
is
information
on
the
location
of
occurrences/events. Not only is this information needed for the
sensor network to report the location where events take place,
it also assists in group-querying or routing traffic to a
designated geographic destination and provides information
on physical network coverage [18].
In general they are composed of three major components as
depicted in figure 1[15, 18]; (a). A transmitting device- with
the capability to communicate with other nodes within a
certain communication range using signals such as radio
frequency (RF), acoustic, infrared and ultrasound [19,20]. The
nodes can either be an active or passive and includes devices
such as RFID (radio frequency identification) tags, mobile
phones, laptop computers enabled with a transmitter; (b). A
receiving device or readers; (c). A data collection and
processing sub system.
In applications requiring localization, the system measures
either the timing or energy of the transmitted signal and uses
the information to estimate the location of mobile nodes. A
detailed discussion of these methods can be found in [19]. In
wireless sensor network applications based on RF signals, the
received signal strength indicator (RSSI) which is used for
network planning and localization [18]. Measurement of the
RSSI from nodes is a distance estimation technique that uses
the measured signal power at the receiver and the known
transmit power to estimate propagation loss. The propagation
lose is subsequently translated into distance using theoretical
models.
Figure 1: Client/server Wireless network components
B.
WSN in Demand driven applications in buildings
For demand driven control applications in buildings, the
common desires information on building occupancy as shown
in figure 2 includes [16, 21];
Figure 1: Occupancy Information
(A).Location- which provides information about ‘where’ in
the building or particular thermal zone within the building
occupants are situated (B).Presence- provides information
about ‘when’ particular occupants are in particular thermal
zones within a building; (C).Count- provides information on
the ‘number’ of occupants in a particular thermal zone;
(D).Identity-provides information on ‘who’ is in particular
thermal zones; (E). Activity- provides information on ‘what’
activity is been carried out by individual occupants in
particular thermal zones. (User activity determines the body
metabolism rate which is one of the parameters required in the
determination of thermal comfort [22]); (F) Track- provides
information about particular occupants movement across
different thermal zones in the building.
Sensing and
Transmitting device
Receiver
Data processing sub-
system
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

In a comparative study, the authors in [20] investigated the
performance of different wireless systems utilizing the RSSI
distance estimation method in indoor localization applications.
Also using RFID tags, the authors in [15] demonstrated the
capability a system utilizing the RSSI distance estimation
technique to provide information on location, presence, count,
activity, identity and track. In both studies and other similar
studies on the use of WSN in building operations for
localization
[23-25],
the
network
design
were
mostly
centralized and based on the client/server communication
architecture depicted in figure 1.
In client/server network
architecture, static nodes with known locations transmit
messages such as; the received signal strength indicator,
contact time, and nearest neighbor information to a processing
station wherein, the position estimation algorithm is installed.
In
occupancy
measurement
for
demand
driven
control
applications in buildings, the centralized
nature of the
client/server localization architecture does however pose a
number of challenges:
(a) Delayed control response time- Users might have to
tolerate some level of discomfort as a result of the delay from
aggregated communication between the sensing, control and
actuation nodes [26].
(b) Complex and high computing requirement- In studies
that have demonstrated the feasibility of wireless sensor based
localization [15, 20] indoors, a limited number of participants
were considered and complex computing was required to
obtain the needed information. In a typical commercial office
building, occupancy count is usually much higher than
demonstrated in these studies, thus becoming more complex
and requiring more processing power.
C.
Multi-agent systems(MAS) for demand driven control
applications.
Considering
the
drawbacks
of
the
client/server
WSN
architecture
in
demand-driven
control
applications
in
buildings, solutions based on the MAS paradigm have been
proposed [13, 26]. In artificial intelligence, agents are physical
or virtual entities that intelligently interact in an environment
by both perceiving and affecting it [13]. Consequently an
agent can be described as a computational system with a high
degree
of
autonomy
performing
actions
based
on
the
information
received
from
the
environment.
A
system
comprising multiple intelligent agents, commonly referred to
as a multi-agent system (MAS). Within a MAS, agents interact
to achieve cooperative (e.g. distributed problem-solving) or
competitive (e.g. coalition formation, auction) group behavior.
Agents achieve this by sharing a minimum amount of
information between modules and asynchronous operation
implemented via message exchanges [27].
The concept of intelligent agent technology is at an intriguing
stage in its development as commercial strength agent
applications are increasingly being developed in domains as
diverse as manufacturing, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)
mission management and in operation and management of the
smart grid [27-28]. In wireless sensor network applications,
they are capable of roaming in the network, collecting data,
aggregating and making decisions at the node level [29]. The
agent paradigm promotes the use of independent, loosely
coupled software entities that encapsulate some specific
functionality and interaction with each other to solve tasks.
The authors in [27-31] summarize the key features of MAS as:

Autonomous nature- agents can act rationally and
operate without the direct intervention of humans. They
have individual internal states and goals, and act in such a
manner as to meet their goals. A key element of
autonomy is pro-activeness, i.e., the ability to ‘take the
initiative’ rather than acting simply in response to their
environment.

Co-operation- agents may interact with each other both
indirectly (by acting on the environment) or directly (via
communication and negotiation). To co-operate, agents
need to possess a social ability, i.e., the ability to interact
with
other
agents
and
possibly
humans
via
some
communication language.

Intrinsic distributed nature- A MAS system is a
distributed system consisting of multiple agents, which
forms a loosely coupled network, in which agents work
together
to
solve
problems
that
are
beyond
their
individual capabilities or knowledge of each individual
agent. In addition, they are mobile, scalable and modular,
able to transport from one machine to another

Learning ability - agents are able to learn and adapt to
changes in the environment they live in. A key attribute of
any intelligent being is its ability to learn and for agent
systems to be truly intelligent, they would have to learn as
they interact with their environment. In addition, agents
are reactive which makes them respond to changes in the
environment in a learned way and timely fashion. Agents
are also goal oriented, acting in own self-interest and do
not just act in response to the environment.
III.
PROPOSED SYSTEM ARCHTECTURE .
A.
General System Architecture
Leveraging on the above described capabilities of MAS, we
propose a system with the architecture depicted in figure 2 and
comprised of the following agents- manager, room, zone,
building, and occupancy and user agents.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

Manager agent- MAS design paradigms provides a flexible
framework in which agents can be included and remove at any
time without causing disruption in the systems operation. It is
however necessary to have up-to-date information about the
state of agents operating in the system. The task of the
Manager agent is thus to monitor all agents (active, passive,
dead or alive) operating in the system.
Room-agent- The room-level is critical for striking a balance
between user comfort and energy efficiency as this is where
both goals have contradictory requirements. The role of the
room agent is hence a decision maker. Using information on
the room properties, actuation and control possibilities, room
state, occupancy information as well as user preference, the
room agent determines the optimal room condition to satisfy
the building policy on energy and comfort.
Zone-agent- In the design of building thermal systems, it is
common
to
have
areas
of
a
building
having
similar
cooling/heating requirement to be either virtually or physically
grouped. A zone can thus be a group of rooms, a single room
or multiple floors, which share comfort resources such as
ventilation, heating and cooling. Depending on the building
layout and design, the zone agent is responsible for optimal
delivery of required comfort index of occupants located within
particular zones in an energy efficient manner. In cases where
the distribution of resource is shared with multiple rooms, the
room agent would have to communicate with the room agent
on the most efficient means of resource sharing.
Building agent- The building agent performs the role of an
aggregator. It collates and aggregates information on energy
utilization
within
the
building.
With
more
fine-grained
information on energy utilization in the building, the buildings
responsiveness to demand response and smart grid interactions
can be improved [32].
Occupancy Agent- The occupancy agent provides the room
agent with more fine-grained occupancy information. Further
detail on the occupancy agent is provided in subsequent
sections.
User Agent- The user in conjunction with the occupancy
agent provides information on user identity, preference and
activity to the room agent.
B.
Physical Architecture.
The physical architecture for the proposed MAS system for an
Integrated Room Automation (IRA) for office buildings is
depicted in figure 3. IRA deals with the automated control of
blinds, electric lighting, heating, cooling, and ventilation of an
individual building zone or room. As shown, the setup is
comprised of three agents- the user, room-occupancy, and
room agents.
Users-agent- The user agent are mobile devices such as RFID
tags, mobile phones or devices with radio signal transmission
capability. Each building user is provided with a device which
is unique to individual building occupants. This agent provides
the room-occupancy agent with user identity information (tag
ID), activity (analysis of the RSSI) and presence.
Figure 3: Physical architecture of the proposed System.
Room-occupancy agent- These are fixed nodes with assigned
to particular building rooms and other known locations such as
exits,
conference
rooms
and
lunch
rooms.
The
room-
occupancy agent obtains the RSSI from mobile nodes as well
as the ID. It analyses the RSSI signal and provides information
about user presence, count and activity which is sent to the
room agent. For tracking, room occupancy agents at known
locations exchange information with room occupancy agents
User agent
Room agent
Room Occupancy
agent
Mobile nodes
Fixed nodes
Figure 2: Architecture of the proposed MAS Demand control system
<Component>
Room Agent
<Component>
Building Agent
<Component>
Manager Agent
<Component>
User Agent
<Component>
Occupancy Agent
<Component>
Zone Agent
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

assigned
to
particular
rooms.
As
an
example,
through
measurement of the RSSI, the room occupancy agent assigned
to room A of an office building is able to determine if the
particular room occupant through the tag ID has exited the
room to the conference room. It however awaits information
from the room occupancy agent in the conference room before
passing the information to the room agent.
The room–agent- The room agent receives occupancy
information from the room occupancy agent assigned to
individual rooms and adjusts the room conditions based on the
received information. As an example, since each building
occupant is attached to known offices and do have a unique
ID. When the room agent receives information about the
presence and departure of unassigned user ID’s in the room it
is assigned, it sends the needed control signal to the room
actuator so as to conserve energy and improve user comfort.
In addition, considering the slow response of some building
systems such as HVAC systems, the room agent uses the track
information provided by the room-occupancy agent to make
time-dependent adjustment to building systems in a manner
that does not disrupt the comfort of building occupants.
Figure 4: Agent based detection system
In contrast to the typical client/server wireless network model,
the required information such as user location, presence and
identity is shared between nodes. As information exchange is
between nodes and decision making is decentralized, network
resource is more adequately utilized thus reducing congestion
while also making the systems more robust.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP
A.
The wireless network
In order to test the performance of the wireless sensor network
indoors
as
well
as
to
provide
data
for
performance
comparison,
a
WSN
for
occupancy
detection
was
implemented in a test-bed office building.
Utilizing a low-
cost, low power WSN system based on the MyriaModem and
MyriaNed [33]. For communication between nodes, the
network does not utilize any particular topology but utilizes a
gossip mechanism. To accomplish synchronization between
wireless nodes without the risk of a separate network
evolving, a join mechanism is embedded in the nodes.
Through this mechanism all nodes are synchronized.
Figure 5: Mobile and static nodes
B. Test-bed office building.
The initial test setup was implemented on the whole floor of
an office building with area of approximately 500 m2. The
floor is made up of 29 flexible open plan work spaces and 5
cell offices. For the purpose of this experiment, 18 employees
with workspaces located in the flexible open plan spaces
participated fully for a period of three weeks.
Figure 6: Test-bed office building
Each participant was assigned a node depicted in figure 4. The
static and mobile nodes are physically the same but run
different application software.
C.
Experimental Results
Using
the
described
client/server
WSN
localization
architecture, static nodes were programmed with known
locations and provided location estimation with their own
known locations. Based on the signal strength from the
surrounding static nodes, the mobile node takes over the
location of the closest static node, which is sent along with the
tag ID, time and location to the server.
Location information- Static nodes were placed at known
locations such as users’ workstations, coffee as well as printer
locations. Post –processing of the obtained data as depicted in
figures 7 & 8, shows that participants were only at their
workspace for less than 70% through the duration of the study.
For about 30% of the time spent within the office building,
participants were at other locations. An interesting discovery
however, was the fact that even at these periods when
occupants were at other locations, the energy consumption of
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

building appliances and systems as depicted in figure 8
remained unchanged.
64%
6%
17%
13%
Work-
Space
Work-
Related
Figure 7: Occupancy Distribution
Figure 8: Percentage of time participants were present at other locations
Figure 9: occupancy and appliance energy use
Presence information- Each of the participant had a mobile
node on their person thus making it relatively straight forward
to determine their presence at each location. Post processing
results did however show that the average presence was below
60% for this particular office building for the duration of the
study. Other similar studies have also shown that average
presence in buildings is using less than 70% even at periods of
peak occupancy [13, 14, 34].
Count Information- Since each occupant was with a tag,
establishing the number of participants was also a relative easy
task. It was however observed that participants did at some
point forgot to make use of their tags.
Identity- Each participant was assigned particular nodes,
which also had unique ID’s used to distinguish different
participants.
Figure 10: Mean Occupancy.
Track- participants locations as depicted in figure 8 was
obtained through post-processing of the data sent to the server
from the receiver nodes.
V.
DISCUSSION
As shown through the implementation of the client/server
localization architecture, obtaining information on track,
activity as well as location would require so more network
resource if it is to be used for demand-driven control
applications in building operations in particular for control of
HVAC systems. Utilizing the distributed and autonomous
properties of MAS as well as the described MAS based
architecture does however reduce the overhead. Since nodes
have more autonomy and can exchange information with other
nodes, obtaining tracking and presence information utilizes
minimal network resources thus making the WSN more
robust.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK.
In this paper, the framework for a multi-agents coordinated
occupancy
detection
system
for
demand-driven
control
applications
in
building
to
improve
buildings
energy
efficiency as well as responsiveness to the smart grid was
presented. The framework described uses a different approach
from the conventional client/server network architecture
commonly for localization in wireless sensor networks. Initial
experimental result from a test-setup in an office building
using
the
typical
client/server
WSN
architecture
was
presented. The proposed MAS based system is currently under
development and would be implemented in the test-bed office
building.
Its performance would be evaluated with results
obtained from the client/server WSN model.
REFERENCES
[1]. Barna, E., & Bánhidi, L. (2012). Combined effect of two local
discomfort parameters studied with a thermal manikin and
human subjects. Energy and Buildings, Vol. 51, pp. 234–241.
[2]. Cantin, R., Kindinis, A., & Michel, P. (2012). New approaches
for overcoming the complexity of future buildings impacted by
new energy constraints. Futures, Vol. 44, pp. 735–745.
[3]. Department of Energy (DOE), Buildings Energy Data Book,
2009.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

[4]. EIA, International energy outlook , July 2013.
[5]. EU. Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of
the council of 19 May 2010 on the energy performance of
buildings (recast). Official Journal of the European Union
2010;53.
[6]. Cole, R. J., Robinson, J., Brown, Z., & O’shea, M. (2008). Re-
contextualizing the notion of comfort.
Building Research &
Information, Vol. 36(4), pp. 323–336.
[7]. Thanayankizil, L. V, Ghai, S. K., Chakraborty, D., & Seetharam,
D. P. (2012). Softgreen: Towards energy management of green
office buildings with soft sensors. In proceedings COMSNETS
‘12, pp. 1–6.
[8]. Pérez-Lombard, L., Ortiz, J., & Pout, C. (2008). A review on
buildings
energy
consumption
information.
Energy
and
Buildings, Vol. 40(3), pp. 394–398.
[9]. Page, J., Robinson, D., Morel, N., & Scartezzini, J.-L. (2008). A
generalised stochastic model for the simulation of occupant
presence. Energy and Buildings, 40(2), 83–98.
[10]. Haq, M. A. U., Hassan, M. Y., Abdullah, H., Rahman, H. A.,
Abdullah, M. P., Hussin, F., & Said, D. M. (2014). A review on
lighting control technologies in commercial buildings, their
performance and affecting factors. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, Vol. 33, pp. 268–279.
[11]. Agarwal, Y., Balaji, B., Gupta, R., Dutta, S., Wei, M., & Weng,
T. (2010). Duty-cycling buildings aggressively: The next
frontier in HVAC control. Proceedings IPSN’11
[12]. Nguyen, T. A., & Aiello, M. (2013). Energy intelligent
buildings based on user activity: A survey. Energy and
Buildings, Vol.56, .244–257.
[13]. Klein, L., Kwak, J., Kavulya, G., Jazizadeh, F., Becerik-Gerber,
B., Varakantham, P., & Tambe, M. (2012). Coordinating
occupant behavior for building energy and comfort management
using multi-agent systems. Automation in Construction, Vol. 22,
pp. 525–536.
[14]. Maripuu, M. (2011). Demand controlled ventilation ( DCV )
for better IAQ and Energy Efficiency. RHEVA Journal, pp.26-
30.
[15]. Li, N., Calis, G., & Becerik-Gerber, B. (2012). Measuring and
monitoring occupancy with an RFID based system for demand-
driven HVAC operations. Automation in Construction, Vol. 24,
pp. 89–99.
[16]. Melfi, R., Rosenblum, B., Nordman, B., & Christensen,
K.(2011). Measuring building occupancy using existing network
infrastructure. In proceedings IGCC’11, Orlando, Florida, USA.
[17]. Wang, Z., Wang, L., Dounis, A. I., & Yang, R. (2012). Multi-
agent control system with information fusion based comfort
model for smart buildings. Applied Energy, Vol. 99, pp. 247–
254.
[18]. Savvides, A., Han, C.-C., & Strivastava, M. B. (2001).
Dynamic fine-grained localization in Ad-Hoc networks of
sensors. Proceedings of the 7th Annual International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking - MobiCom ’01, pp.
166–179.
[19]. Boukerche,
A., Oliveira, H., Nakamura, E., & Loureiro, A.
(2007). Localization systems for wireless sensor networks. IEEE
transactions on wireless communications, Vol. 14(6). pp. 6-12.
[20]. Khoury, H. M., & Kamat, V. R. (2009). Evaluation of position
tracking technologies for user localization in indoor construction
environments. Automation in Construction, Vol. 18(4), 444–
457.
[21]. Teixeira, T., Dublon, G., & Savvides, A. A survey of human-
sensing: methods for detecting presence, count, location, track,
and
identity.
Online:
available
from:
http://www.eng.yale.edu/enalab/publications/human_sensing_en
alabWIP.pdf
[22]. Dear, J., Akimoto, T., Arens, E., Brager, G., Candido, C.,
Cheong, K., Nishihara, N., Sekhar, S., Tanabe. S., Toftum. J.,
Zhang, H., & Zhu, Y. (2013). Progress in thermal comfort
research over the last twenty years. Indoor Air, Vol.23 pp. 442-
461.
[23]. De Paola, A., Gaglio, S., Lo Re, G., & Ortolani, M. (2012).
Sensor9k : A testbed for designing and experimenting with 
WSN-based ambient intelligence applications. Pervasive and
Mobile Computing, Vol. 8(3), pp. 448–466.
[24]. Lertlakkhanakul, J., Yoon, S., & Choi, J. (2010). Developing a
Building Energy Management Framework Based on Ubiquitous
Sensor Networks. Indoor and Built Environment, Vol. 19(1),
pp.192–201.
[25]. Spataru, C., & Gauthier, S. (2014). How to monitor people
“smartly” to help reducing energy consumption in buildings?
Architectural Engineering and Design Management, Vol. 10(1-
2), pp. 60–78.
[26]. Farias, C. De, Soares, H., Pirmez, L., Delicato, F., Santos, I.,
Carmo, L. F., &Dohler, M. (2014). A control and decision
system for smart buildings using wireless sensor and actuator
networks.
Trans.
on
Emerging
Telecommunications
Technology, Vol. 25, pp. 120–135.
[27]. Seghrouchni, A., Florea, A., & Olaru, A. (2010). Multi-Agent
Systems : 
A 
Paradigm 
to 
Design 
Ambient 
Intelligent 
Applications. Intelligent distributed computing IV. Studies in
computational intleiigentce Vol. 315. pp. 3–9.
[28]. Jarvis, D., Jarvis, J., Rönnquist, R., & Jain, C. (2013). Multi-
agent Systems and Applications, Intelligent systems reference
library, Vol. 46, pp. 1–12.
[29]. Shakshuki, E., Malik, H., & Xing, X. (2007). Agent –based
routing for wireless sensor network. In proceedings ICIC’07. Pp
68-79.
[30]. Woolridge, M., & Jennings, N. (1995). Intelligent agents:
theory and practice, The Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol.
10(2), pp. 115—152.
[31]. Kofler, M. J., Reinisch, C., & Kastner, W. (2012). A semantic
representation of energy-related information in future smart
homes. Energy and Buildings, Vol. 47, pp. 169–179.
[32]. Georgievski, I., Degeler, V., Pagani, A., Nguyen, T., Lazovik,
A. (2012). Optimizing Energy Costs for Offices Connected to
the Smart Grid, Vol.3(4), pp. 2273–2285.
[33]. MyriaNed on the MyriaModem- Van Mierlo Ingenieursbureau
BV Eindhoven, The
Netherlands.
Online
from:
http://www.vanmierlo.com
[34]. Mahdavi, A., Mohammadi, A., Kabir, E., & Lambeva, L.
(2008). Occupants’ operation of lighting and shading systems in
office buildings. Journal of Building Performance Simulation,
1(1), 57–65.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-446-6
SPWID 2015 : The First International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

