Exploring Smart Watch Ecosystem Value Co-creation Experience: A Qualitative 
Case Study 
 
Sarfraz Iqbal 
Department of Informatics 
Linnaeus University  
Växjö/Kalmar, Sweden 
email: Sarfraz.iqbal@lnu.se 
Päivi Jokela 
Department of Informatics 
Linnaeus University  
Växjö/Kalmar, Sweden 
email: Paivi.jokela@lnu.se
 
 
Abstract—Internet of Things (IoT) is a technology paradigm 
comprising physical objects such as smart watches embedded 
with sensors, software, and networking technologies that are 
used to connect and exchange data with other devices such as 
smart phones and systems over the Internet. Smart watches and 
other wearables are emerging at a rapid speed, and they have 
engaged the users in redefining their interaction with mobile 
and pervasive technologies by creating an ecosystem of relevant 
devices. This research work focused on the issue of value co-
creation and better understanding of smart watch consumer’s 
adoption and appropriation process which can highlight the 
factors motivating or demotivating the consumers to use the 
smart watches to achieve different objectives. Through a 
qualitative research method, empirical data was collected by 
observation, written questionnaire, and interviews. Using a 
thematic analysis scheme, the following four themes were 
generated from the collected data: (1) Getting motivated and 
maintaining motivation, (2) Usefulness – value-in-use and value-
in context, (3) Technical issues with smart watch resources, and 
(4) Information security and privacy concerns about smart 
technologies.  
Keywords- Internet of Things; smart watch; ecosystem; value 
co-creation; service dominant logic. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of Things (IoT) is envisioned as a huge global 
network of machines and smart devices capable of interacting 
with each other, with an overall purpose of enabling 
humancentric pervasive application development to facilitate 
people’s daily lives [1]-[4]. Diverse and powerful embedded 
sensors make a ubiquitous platform to acquire and analyze 
data in order to monitor human activities for health and 
wellness, for activity recognition and tracking, as well as to 
provide a safe environment for the users [1]-[3]. 
These IoT devices, such as smart watches and other 
wearables, are emerging at a rapid speed and they have 
engaged the users in redefining their interaction with mobile 
and pervasive technologies by creating an ecosystem of 
relevant devices [5][6]. Researchers believe that in this era of 
IoT the inter-networking of physical devices such as smart 
watches and smart phones, enables these objects to collect and 
exchange data over the Internet to accomplish different 
objectives including real time continuous monitoring of 
physical activity and physiological measures[7][8]. 
Apple, Xiaomi, Samsung and Fitbit are leading the 
wearable device industry with Apple holding 34.1 percent, the 
highest market share of wearable device unit shipments 
worldwide until 2020 [9]. Fashion accessories, smart watches, 
fitness trackers, gaming devices, and navigation tools are 
among different types of wearable devices. Smart watches are 
one of the most popular wearables categories globally and are 
expected to reach shipments of more than a quarter of a billion 
units by 2025, currently, with the Apple watch installed 
base reaching over 100 million users worldwide in 2020 [10].  
 
 
Figure 1.  Smart Watch Ecosystem 
Figure 1 above shows the smart watch ecosystem 
consisting of end-users, a smart watch, and a smart phone. The 
devices in the physical layer of this ecosystem are embedded 
with electronics, software, sensors, actuators, and network 
connectivity. The users need to connect the smart watch with 
the smart phone using Bluetooth connection. It is 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-963-8
SPWID 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

recommended that the phone should have the updated 
software for better connectivity and experience. Once both 
devices are synchronized, the users can receive notifications 
from smartphone, receive phone calls, read emails and 
messages, 
and 
view 
their 
calendar 
appointments. 
Additionally, users can also install third party applications 
such as the popular chatting application WhatsApp. A smart 
watch helps users to monitor and measure their daily 
activities, including sleep patterns, exercise routines, number 
of steps during walk, as well as calorie burned during both 
indoor and outdoor workouts. 
It is considered that “smart watches have the potential to 
support health in everyday living by: enabling self-monitoring 
of personal activity; obtaining feedback based on activity 
measures; allowing for in-situ surveys to identify patterns of 
behavior; and supporting bi-directional communication with 
health care providers and family members” [8]. However, 
there is still a lack of studies on the social, behavioral, 
economic, and managerial aspects of the IoT applications in 
different areas [6]. There is still a need for investigation about 
factors that determine the customer acceptance including 
customer perception of IoT and wearable technology [7][11]-
[13]. Researchers argue that considering the recent 
development of IoT [6], there are still very few studies to 
address the specific characteristics that enhance the 
confirmation, satisfaction, and continued use of the smart 
watch [14]. This research work focuses on the question: how 
do different users interact with the smart watch ecosystem to 
participate in the value co-creation process through their 
expectations, skills, and abilities? Hence, this research work 
attempted to bring insights into the adoption, value co-
creation and appropriation process of a wearable device, 
through a qualitative study on smart watches. This research 
work focuses on the better understanding of smart watch 
consumers' adoption and appropriation process which can 
highlight the factors motivating or demotivating the 
consumers to use the smart watches for different activities 
/objectives. Consequently, the results can be useful for the 
smart watch or other wearable users and developers to 
understand their consumer’s needs and experiences. 
Service science can be used as a conceptual framework to 
study the dynamics of systems, where human actors co-create 
value, when they collaborate and interact with innovative 
technology, this process is called value-in-use [15]-[17]. 
Service providers make value propositions by offering access 
to service, i.e., wearable devices and systems, but they cannot 
define how individual users perceive the value of the service 
[18]. It is also important to acknowledge that each user’s value 
creation process and its outcomes depend on both the user’s 
needs and condition, as well as the current circumstances. This 
is referred to as value-in-context [18]. 
The rest of the article is arranged as follows: Section II 
describes the method. Section III describes the results. Section 
IV presents the discussion of results and ends the article with 
further research suggestions. 
II. 
METHOD 
This research work adopted a qualitative research method. 
We selected the sample users belonging to different 
professional / educational backgrounds to gather responses 
from a wider audience. Table 1 shows the details of data 
collection. 
TABLE I.  
PARTICIPANTS OVERVIEW 
Respondents  
User groups/Profession 
Experience 
3 
MSc students 
Novice 
3 
Local Gym participants 
Novice 
2 
Police department / 
trainee students 
Novice 
1 
Professor 
Novice 
1 
PhD student 
Novice 
1 
Under-graduate student  
Novice 
1 
Associate professor  
Novice 
1 
IT Technician 
Expert 
1 
Associate Professor 
Expert 
1 
PhD Student 
Expert 
 
Purposeful sampling was required to select project 
participants who own an iPhone since the Apple smart watch 
is only compatible with an iPhone. Another salient feature was 
that the participant must be technology literate to understand 
and operate both devices successfully without any tutorial 
provided. Two types of participants were targeted based on 
their experience with smart watch. The first type that are 
called 'novices' consisted of users who own a smart phone, 
they have a desire to use the smart watch, but they did not yet 
experience any smart watch. This research work gives us the 
opportunity to explore the value co-creation process of the 
novice users, their expectations from the smart watch, their 
user experience, transformation of their thought process after 
the practical experience of smart watch usage, and consumer-
device interaction. The second group of participants consisted 
of three experts who already use the Apple smart watch 
regularly. Their input was important to understand the factors 
motivating them to adopt and continue using their smart 
watch. 
We could manage to buy five Apple smart watches of 
series 5 with the available budget. The watches were ordered 
and received before June 2020. Due to the coronavirus 
pandemic, it was a bit challenging to recruit the required 
sample participants. The data collection activity for smart 
watch adoption and use spanned between August 2020 and 
January 2022. Every participant used the watch for minimum 
two weeks. The participants were informed that they can use 
the smart watch as they wish. We did not bind them to 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-963-8
SPWID 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

anything specific to make sure that the participants were not 
influenced in any way. The freedom to let the participants 
choose when and how they want to use the smart watch was 
also important to keep them motivated and engaged during the 
entire test period.  
We had the chance to observe some of the users after their 
permission in their natural settings. This observation was 
conducted in the gym. A written questionnaire was prepared 
for the evaluation of the Apple smart watch by participating 
users. All the users’ consents were obtained by informing 
them that the data will be used solely for research purposes 
keeping 
the 
participant’s 
identity 
confidential. 
The 
questionnaire (see Appendix) included 5 sections based on the 
Likert scale around topics of motivation and comfort for using 
a smart watch, value creation, some usability heuristics 
including perceived service and system quality, user 
satisfaction, and perceived smart watch performance. In 
addition to that, the participants were asked to write answers 
on questions pertaining to the overall experience of using an 
Apple smart watch during this project under ongoing 
pandemic conditions for minimum two weeks’ time. Short 
interviews based on open ended questions were also held with 
the participants ranging between 15-20 minutes each. As the 
number of participants was small, all collected data, 
questionnaire answers, interview transcripts and observation 
notes, were considered as textual data and analyzed using 
qualitative methods. 
Lichtman’s thematic analysis [19] technique was used to 
analyze the findings. This qualitative analysis technique is 
composed of systematic identification, organization and 
understanding of repetitive patterns within the textual data, 
through successive construction of codes, categories and 
themes (concepts) [19][20]. This approach was mainly 
inductive, as the themes were generated based on the collected 
data. Moreover, the analysis was semantic and descriptive, i.e. 
the result was a descriptive summary of the explicit content of 
the data [14].  
III. 
RESULTS  
The following four themes were generated from the data 
collected from the participants: (1) Getting motivated and 
maintaining motivation, (2) Usefulness – value-in-use and 
value-in context, (3) Technical issues with smart watch 
resources, and (4) Information security and privacy concerns 
about smart technologies. In the following section, the 
empirical findings are presented under each theme.  
A. Getting motivated and maintaining motivation 
For the novice users, it was quite easy to initially get 
motivated; they were very excited to use the smart watch since 
they did not own and have never used one before this project. 
The majority of the participants agreed that the setup was 
easy, whereas three participants needed help to complete the 
setup and pair the watch successfully with their smartphone.    
Maintaining long-term motivation was possible for the 
majority of the participants. They agreed that they do not face 
any problems using smart watch applications and they were 
able to integrate smart watch easily in their daily routine 
habits. However, a couple of participants mentioned during 
the interview that they lost their motivation to use the smart 
watch after the first week because of various factors, which 
included the charging of the watch, feeling the watch is an 
accessory rather than a complete communication device in the 
presence of a smart phone, and using it rarely, only during 
walks or exercise.  
One participant mentioned that the overall experience of 
using the watch has been great but also mentioned that “I use 
and carry my phone with me everywhere I go. Therefore, these 
two weeks with the smart watch have not changed my life 
tremendously”. A few participants noticed a change in habits 
such as checking the phone again and again for notifications, 
messages. Another participant felt more comfortable with the 
smart watch and wrote “Seamless experience of using the 
ecosystem of Apple Smart watch, iPhone and Mac book 
which makes the sharing of data, application resources easy 
and user friendly”.  
It was also interesting to note that the majority of the 
participants did not agree that the smart watch has supported 
their memory or helped them to enhance their cognitive 
capabilities. Only two participants agreed that they got the 
memory support in some form. 
B. Usefulness – value-in-use and value-in-context 
The majority of participants felt that the use of the smart 
watch added value to their smart devices experience to 
achieve certain objectives.” I found the device very useful for 
me and I got used to using a lot of its functions for these two 
weeks. That device can upgrade my daily routine with a way 
more immersive experience, and I enjoyed it so far. It is not 
cheap, but it is a high-quality and hi-tech device for sure. The 
durability and materials are good enough though.” 
Several appreciated features were related to health and 
wellness, and especially in relation to activity recognition and 
tracking. Many of the participants mentioned that they used 
the smart watch during exercise and other health related 
activities, and six of the participants agreed that the smart 
watch supported their health and well-being. For instance, 
one of the participants wrote that “While training, I was able 
to monitor my heart rate (beats per minute) and then every 
training goes to training diary, with the information of length, 
calories, average Beats Per Minute (BPM), type of training. I 
also noticed that the watch was able to monitor my activity 
and suggest that I am training – it happened twice, while I 
was riding my bike to the city center and when I was walking 
fast outdoor around the lake. These functions made my usual 
sports activities way more immersive – I do like to monitor 
my status and create a sports statistics journal”. One of the 
expert users wrote “Regarding health support from a more 
medical perspective, I think the Heart Rate (HR), Heart Rate 
Variability (HRV) and blood oxygen levels can be very 
useful; these data can support the users in detecting changes 
or deciding when they need to seek health care.” 
Special usefulness was experienced during the pandemic: 
“It can be recommended for people of different age since it 
has both entertainment and health functions (also, it can make 
emergency calls for the elderly people). Especially now, in the 
time of the pandemic, a lot of that contact-less and health 
functions can help us to stay healthy!”. One of the expert users 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-963-8
SPWID 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

mentioned during interview that “I am quite happy with this 
watch because it reminds me to be more active specially 
during this pandemic when you are sitting at home. I usually 
get stuck in front of the computer and watch reminds me to 
stand up.” Another of the expert users told during interview “I 
have bought this watch for measuring blood oxygen level. In 
the beginning, I was afraid of getting covid, so I felt more safe 
when I had the smart watch as it was measuring my blood 
oxygen level since it is a very early sign that your blood 
oxygen level goes down so this was the reason I upgraded to 
the latest version of the watch”.  
Although the question regarding an award system was 
ignored by the majority of the participants, two expert users 
mentioned that the award system can motivate people to 
achieve something extra. “I also think that, last year, when the 
pandemic was there, I had a monthly challenge with myself. 
If I fill up the ring, I can get this reward. I had this new year 
resolution to fill all the goals I setup on my watch. This was 
something that challenged me just to get some fun out of it 
and hopefully that could have made my isolation less boring 
and hopefully effect my health.” 
Some other important functions within the smart watch 
such as sleep care system, Pay Pass, breath and mediate, wash 
your hands etc., were also appreciated by users, for instance, 
“Secondly, I really like the sleep care system. I set up the time 
when I want devices to shut down and notify me to go to sleep. 
Both phone and watches started night mode automatically and 
notify me to go to bed. In the morning, the watch starts the 
alarm with the haptic vibration and light sound – I am sure that 
it was the best experience for me because I do not like loud 
noisy alarms”. Another user commented “Functions like 
“Take a breath and meditate”, “Stand up for a minute every 
hour” and “Wash your hands thoroughly” are cool and caught 
my attention for that simple, but important routine. Also, my 
lovely Pay Pass function”. Setting up the Apple pay on the 
smart watch application makes it easy for the user to pay 
without the need of an iPhone in hand.  
Also, some shortcomings were identified during the test 
period. One expert user wrote that “The HR measure is 
valuable for detecting stress, and I´ve been a bit more attentive 
to changes in my health, etc. Now, I also have data on HRV, 
but I would like to be able to filter between sedentary HRV 
and HRV during physical activity. I see some spikes, but I 
can´t interpret them. This measurement should vary a lot 
depending on what you do, so a mean value is useless”. 
C. Technical issues with Smart watch resources 
It is possible for a person to receive Short Message Service 
(SMS), Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS), or push 
notifications from third-party applications on the cellular 
Apple smart watch without having their phone with them, 
however, the paired iPhone must be switched on and 
connected to a Wi-Fi or cellular network. Health related 
applications, such as Electrocardiogram (ECG) application, is 
considered useful by some participants. A participant 
mentioned during the interview that he could not use the ECG 
app because “there was a problem with the software update, 
and it took quite long time”. In general, users are advised to 
keep software updated to use such applications appropriately. 
However, according to Apple, the ECG app is not available in 
some countries. One participant mentioned “Apple makes you 
choose their smart watches to be able to use an eco-system of 
your devices but there were some restrictions due to law 
policy in Russia, that is why ECG, and some health functions 
were disabled in my home country”. 
One of the expert users wrote “Not really technical issues, 
but low reliability in the tracking features and a lot of design 
issues. It seems to have a low sensitivity regarding exercise, 
and a low specificity regarding physical activity”. 
D. Information security and privacy concerns about smart 
technologies 
This theme emerged as part of the data collection 
activities. Generally, some participants felt comfortable using 
the smart watch and considered the information security and 
privacy issues like their iPhone. One of the expert users 
mentioned “I use Apple’s stuff and they are famous for their 
privacy policy and things are locally stored. I am not sure 
about the security and privacy policies of different apps, if I 
download other health apps and give them access to the data I 
collect from the watch.” Another expert said during the 
interview “I trust the information from Apple that they use the 
data from the smart watch for internal purposes and do not 
share it with other companies. I think they use it for their own 
purpose. I have accepted to share my data with Apple”.  
The researchers noticed that many young participants in 
the project have shown their information security and privacy 
concerns regarding the use of the smart watch. For instance, a 
group discussion with participants from a local gym, together 
with the contact person at the gym (facilitator for recruitment 
of participants) revealed that at least 3 young people ranging 
between the ages 20-25 refused to use the smart watch due to 
privacy concerns. They thought their usage of the smart watch 
could be monitored or their activities could be tracked.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
The research question is: how different users interact with 
the smart watch ecosystem to participate in the value co-
creation process through their expectations, skills, and 
abilities? The answer is slightly different for the two types of 
users, the novices, and the expert users. 
It seems that the novice users’ intrinsic curiosity about the 
new technology was an important contribution to getting 
motivated in the beginning. However, as the novelty has worn 
off, the advantages of the smart watch functions must be 
proven to maintain the long-term motivation of the users. In 
this value creation process, users’ different needs and 
requirements, as well as their different settings become more 
central, i.e. value-in-use is integrated with value-in-context 
[15]-[18]. 
For both user categories, smart watch functions that help 
the users to monitor and keep record of health and 
performance related parameters seem to be the most popular 
features [15]-[18]. Especially, these functions can be 
anticipated to create value when the users are training and 
exercising, and when they need an extra push to get started. 
During the data collection period of this study, the pandemic 
created a special context: as the gyms still followed strict 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-963-8
SPWID 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

criteria of keeping distance between people due to ongoing 
covid-19 pandemic issue, most of the people kept themselves 
busy with their IoT enabled devices, such as a smart watch. 
This may have given them the feeling of belonging by 
tapping on the watch every now and then either to check the 
calories burned, goals achieved, or in terms of other 
interactions such as reading quick messages without opening 
their phones.  
For the novice users, the main reasons for quitting to use 
the smart watch seemed to be related to an abundance of 
mobile and pervasive technologies in the everyday life [15]-
[18]. Consequently, for some participants, the smart watch did 
not create any significant extra value in addition to the smart 
phone, and so they only used the watch on specific occasions, 
such as during exercise. In such cases, when the users could 
not easily integrate the new technology in their daily routines, 
both value-in-use and value-in-context were not perceived 
high enough to maintain long-term motivation [15]-[18]. The 
results show that the value co-creation process with the smart 
watch ecosystem requires individuals to be motivated to 
interact with the resources available in the ecosystem, possess 
nominal digital skills for appropriate interaction, and to pursue 
collaboration with other actors with individual objectives. 
The results show that the active consumers of the smart 
watch can experience the value-in-use and value-in-context in 
several different ways such as: feeling motivated for physical 
activities during the pandemic (this feeling is not only keeping 
the users busy but also challenges them in several ways 
including comparison of their own previous records for a 
higher reward and providing them with a feeling of 
companionship), seamless sharing of data in the ecosystem 
including music and documents etc., between watch, phone 
and computer, using the watch in different contexts as a quick 
and safe payment resource, keeping an eye on vital health 
related issues via appropriate digital measurements such as 
breathing rate, HR, HRV, oxygen levels, and ECG, among 
others. These factors play an important role in the change of 
behavior for the end user’s smart watch adoption and 
appropriation process in the longer period. Hence, research 
results suggest that the value created by the individual users 
through interactions within the smart watch ecosystem may 
enable them to make smart decisions and provide necessary 
support to improve their quality of life while performing 
regular activities. For instance, if someone notices low oxygen 
levels by using a smart watch, he/she can opt for a covid test 
to find out if he/she is suffering from asymptomatic covid. 
Proliferation of wearable and hand-held devices, such as 
smart watches, has not only enticed huge number of end users 
but at the same time created fears of data privacy and 
information security. The results show that, on one hand, 
some of the young novice users thought that their activities 
can be tracked, and data could be compromised. However, on 
the other hand, more mature novice users and expert users 
considered that the security of the smart watch has the same 
privacy and security standard as their associated smart phone. 
Conclusively, novice user’s privacy concerns could fall under 
the more general phenomenon of “fear of unknown 
technology”. 
This research work contributes to the existing research by 
presenting the smart watch ecosystem based on service 
dominant logic. This research work shows how different users 
have different value creation processes that are defined 
through their expectations, skills, and abilities. These results 
provide necessary insights and awareness to encourage both 
researchers and practitioners to keep pace with the rapidly 
evolving digital transformation process and the emerging 
smart ecosystems. Consequently, they will help to understand 
the shifting focus from product centric ideology to more 
customer centric system where value co-creation process is 
highly important [15]-[18]. 
We concur with Reeder and David [8] that, despite some 
shortcomings, the smart watches have the potential to support 
health related interventions, such as focusing on exercises, and 
monitoring a person’s own health activities. In this study, the 
sample size was small, hence, large scale studies with a larger 
number of participants are required in the longer run to 
validate the claims regarding technical functionality, 
adoption, and effectiveness in supporting health and well-
being of the individual users, particularly those with specific 
health issues. An IoT based smart watch ecosystem can 
support people in several areas of their daily life to achieve 
certain objectives in a smart way that includes physical fitness 
and well-being, entertainment, shopping, and socializing with 
other people through communication.    
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Iqbal et al., “Wearable Internet-of-Things platform for 
human activity recognition and health care,” Int. J. Distrib. 
Sens. Netw., vol. 16, no. 6, p. 1550147720911561, 2020. 
[2] J. Passos et al., “Wearables and Internet of Things (IoT) 
Technologies for Fitness Assessment: A Systematic Review,” 
Sensors, vol. 21, no. 16, p. 5418, 2021. 
[3] F. J. Dian, R. Vahidnia, and A. Rahmati, “Wearables and the 
Internet of Things (IoT), applications, opportunities, and 
challenges: A Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 69200–69211, 
2020. 
[4] P. Asghari, A. M. Rahmani, and H. H. S. Javadi, “Internet of 
Things applications: A systematic review,” Comput. Netw., 
vol. 148, pp. 241–261, 2019. 
[5] X. Chen, T. Grossman, D. J. Wigdor, and G. Fitzmaurice, 
“Duet: exploring joint interactions on a smart phone and a 
smart watch,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2014, pp. 159–168. 
[6] I. Lee and K. Lee, “The Internet of Things (IoT): Applications, 
investments, and challenges for enterprises,” Bus. Horiz., vol. 
58, no. 4, pp. 431–440, 2015. 
[7] L. Benamar, C. Balagué, and Z. Zhong, “Internet of Things 
devices appropriation process: the Dynamic Interactions Value 
Appropriation (DIVA) framework,” Technovation, vol. 89, p. 
102082, 2020. 
[8] B. Reeder and A. David, “Health at hand: A systematic review 
of smart watch uses for health and wellness,” J. Biomed. 
Inform., vol. 63, pp. 269–276, 2016. 
[9] L. S. Vailshery, Market share of wearables unit shipments 
worldwide from 2014 to 2020, by vendor. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/515640/quarterly-
wearables-shipments-worldwide-market-share-by-vendor/ 
2022.05.01 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-963-8
SPWID 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

[10] L. S. Vailshery, Smartwatches - Statistics & Facts. [Online]. 
Available from: 
https://www.statista.com/topics/4762/smartwatches/#dossier
Keyfigures 2022.05.01 
[11] P. M. Madhani, “Enhancing customer lifetime value in fast 
fashion retailing with RFID initiatives,” Int. J. Bus. Glob., vol. 
15, no. 2, pp. 205–237, 2015. 
[12] L. Gao and X. Bai, “A unified perspective on the factors 
influencing consumer acceptance of Internet of Things 
technology,” Asia Pac. J. Mark. Logist., 2014. 
[13] H. Evanschitzky, G. R. Iyer, K. G. Pillai, P. Kenning, and R. 
Schütte, “Consumer trial, continuous use, and economic 
benefits of a retail service innovation: The case of the personal 
shopping assistant,” J. Prod. Innov. Manag., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 
459–475, 2015. 
[14] O. Ogbanufe and N. Gerhart, “Watch it! Factors driving 
continued feature use of the smartwatch,” Int. J. Human–
Computer Interact., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 999–1014, 2018. 
[15] J. Grenha Teixeira et al., “The MINDS method: integrating 
management and interaction design perspectives for service 
design,” Journal of Service Research, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 240-
258, 2017. 
[16] R. F. Lusch and S. Nambisan, “Service innovation: A Service-
Dominant Logic Perspective,” MIS Q., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 155–
176, 2015. 
[17] N. Pinho, G. Beirão, L. Patrício, and R. P. Fisk, 
“Understanding value co-creation in complex services with 
many actors,” J. Serv. Manag., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 470-493, 
2014. 
[18] A. Ordanini and A. Parasuraman, “Service innovation viewed 
through a service-dominant logic lens: a conceptual framework 
and empirical analysis,” J. Serv. Res., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 3–23, 
2011. 
[19] M. Lichtman, “Making meaning from your data,” Qual. Res. 
Educ. User’s Guide Third Ed Thousand Oaks Sage Publ., 
2013. 
[20] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Thematic analysis.,” APA Handb. 
Res. Methods Psychol. Ed. H Cooper vol. 2, Res. Des. 57–71 
Wash. DC APA Books, 2012. 
 
 
Appendix 
 
Questionnaire for the Evaluation of Apple smart watch 
 
The information will solely be used for the purpose of research activities, and no unauthorized persons will have access to the 
response. By answering this questionnaire, you provide your consent to use this data for research purposes. The text-based 
answers will be analyzed based on common themes, and quotes may occur in the reporting, but no names are revealed in the 
report. The quantitative results will be analyzed statistically and reported at the group level. No personally identifiable data 
will be used anywhere.  
 
Section 1: Personal Information  
 
Age:                  Gender:  
 
Section 2:  Motivation and Comfort with smart watch 
 
Items 
TA 
A 
NN 
D 
TD 
I was motivated to use the smart watch. 
 
 
 
 
 
I didn’t face any problems using smart watch applications. 
 
 
 
 
 
I was able to integrate smart watch easily in my daily routine habits 
 
 
 
 
 
Put an X, TA= totally agree, A = agree, NN = neither nor, D = disagree, TD = totally disagree  
 
Section 3: Value creation  
 
Items 
TA 
A 
NN 
D 
TD 
I understood what I could expect to learn by using smart watch. 
 
 
 
 
 
It was easy to learn and operate different applications on smart watch. 
 
 
 
 
 
The smart watch enhanced cognitive capabilities  
Should be specified, for instance: 
 
 
 
 
 
Using the smart watch supported my memory. 
 
 
 
 
 
Using the smart watch improved my attention span. 
 
 
 
 
 
Using the smart watch supported my health and wellbeing. 
 
 
 
 
 
Using the smart watch helped me to keep motivated. 
 
 
 
 
 
Put an X, TA= totally agree, A = agree, NN = neither nor, D = disagree, TD = totally disagree  
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-963-8
SPWID 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

 
Section 4: System quality and Service Quality, User satisfaction:  
 
Items 
TA 
A 
NN 
D 
TD 
I am satisfied with the smart watch 
 
 
 
 
 
I enjoyed the experience of using the smart watch 
 
 
 
 
 
I believe the smart watch system is successful 
 
 
 
 
 
The smart watch is easy to use 
 
 
 
 
 
The smart watch is user friendly 
 
 
 
 
 
The smart watch is stable 
 
 
 
 
 
The smart watch is secure  
 
 
 
 
 
The smart watch meets my needs 
 
 
 
 
 
The smart watch is responsive 
 
 
 
 
 
Put an X, TA= totally agree, A = agree, NN = neither nor, D = disagree, TD = totally disagree 
 
Section 5: Smart watch performance 
 
Item 
TA 
A 
NN 
D 
TD 
It was easy to install and establish a connection with phone. 
 
 
 
 
 
I didn’t face any difficulties while working with smart watch. 
 
 
 
 
 
Put an X, TA= totally agree, A = agree, NN = neither nor, D = disagree, TD = totally disagree 
 
Section 6: Please write short answers. 
 
1. What type of applications did you use most on the smart watch? 
2. Describe your experience of using smart watch during the covid-19 pandemic. 
3. How can the smart watch support individuals’ health and wellbeing and keep them motivated during the pandemic? 
4. In your opinion, what was the greatest benefit when using the smart watch?  
5. How confident are you at using the smart watch? 
Not at all confident……….... confident…..………very confident………… 
6. How does the award system help in motivating smart watch users? 
7. If you experienced any technical problems when working with smart watch resources, please provide details here:  
8. Any other comments? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-963-8
SPWID 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

