Detecting Garbage Collection Duration Using Motion Sensors
Mounted on Garbage Trucks Toward Smart Waste Management
Yasue Kishino, Yoshinari Shirai,
Koh Takeuchi, Futoshi Naya, Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science laboratories
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation
Email: {kishino.yasue, shirai.yoshinari,
takeuchi.koh, naya.futoshi,
ueda.naonori}@lab.ntt.co.jp
Yin Chen, Takuro Yonezawa,
Jin Nakazawa
Graduate School of Media and Governance
Keio University
Email: {yin, takuro, jin}@ht.sfc.keio.ac.jp
Abstract—Solid waste collection is one of the fundamental services
provided by local governments in support of our daily lives. In
this paper, we describe a basic framework for estimating the
amounts of solid waste and propose a method for detecting the
time required for garbage collection with a view to realizing smart
waste management. The proposed method recognizes garbage
collection duration by using motion sensors mounted on a garbage
truck. We also report a preliminary evaluation of the proposed
method using actual motion sensor data.
Keywords–Smart city; Activity recognition;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Solid waste collection is one of the fundamental services
provided by local governments in support of our daily lives.
Efﬁcient waste management is important if we are to sustain
stable waste collection service in the future. The optimization
of waste collection operations and domestic waste reduction
are key factors related to efﬁcient waste management. At
the same time, we are investigating smart city sensing using
car-mounted sensors. Smart waste management using garbage
trucks equipped with sensors could provide a powerful solu-
tion. In this paper, we propose a method for detecting the time
required for garbage collection with a view to realizing smart
waste management.
In conventional waste management, the amount of solid
waste for a given region is summarized by weighting the
waste delivered by garbage trucks assigned to the region to
incineration plants. In fact, one truck collects solid waste in
multiple separated areas to allow workload balancing, and
therefore the summarized result includes some degree of error
and waste collection operations are planned based on human
intuition.
We propose a method for estimating regional amounts of
solid waste based on the garbage collection duration in each
area and the waste weight measured at incineration plants. The
garbage collection duration is estimated from the vibration
of the garbage truck when it scoops up the garbage with a
rotating plate. We mounted motion sensors on garbage trucks
and measured the changes in vibration. This paper reports a
preliminary evaluation of our estimation of garbage collection
duration and discusses the feasibility of the proposed method.
Determining the estimated amounts of regional amounts of
solid waste enable us to realize the following applications.
•
Support when planning future solid waste collection:
We can obtain the long-term ﬂuctuation and regional
seasonal variations in the amount of solid waste by
measuring the amounts in small areas such as those
covered by a residents’ association. This information
will also enable us to estimate future solid-waste
amounts in detail thus allowing waste management
planning.
•
Feedback garbage amounts to citizens:
Most residents know neither the amount of garbage
that they produce nor the total amount of garbage
in their area. If a resident knows that he produces
more than the average amount of garbage, he will try
to reduce it. Moreover, if a resident knows that the
total amount of garbage produced by his residents’
association is less than the average, he may try to
persuade his neighbors not to exceed the average. In
this way, regional feedback regarding the amount of
solid waste will promote its reduction.
This paper describes a method for detecting the time taken
by a garbage truck during garbage collection and a method
for estimating the amount of solid waste that is collected. We
also report a preliminary evaluation of the collection duration
detection method using actual motion sensor data.
II.
RELATED WORK
Activity recognition research using motion sensors started
with human activity recognition [2] and studies are under
way with a variety of targets such as animals, buildings,
cars [6]. Moreover, most recent smartphones are equipped
with motion sensors. We can easily develop such activity
recognition systems for use in various ﬁelds.
Recently, a road surface quality monitoring system using
a mobile device was proposed [7]. This system allows us to
monitor road surface quality without the need for a dedicated
car. Although we use dedicated sensor nodes for ﬁeld trials,
we consider that we can detect the time taken for garbage
collection using a smartphone equipped with a motion sensor.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

garbage amount
area A
area C
area B
！?
garbage amount
air pollution
A
B
C
time
ambient noise 
from airplane
Figure 1. Spatio-temporal event detection using car mounted sensors
In the future, it is possible that we will be able to monitor
road surface quality and measure regional solid-waste amounts
simultaneously using motion sensors mounted on the garbage
trucks that travel around cities every day.
There is another type of smart waste management in which
smart sensors are attached to garbage carts [3]. We can monitor
the number of garbage carts remotely, and the best garbage
collection route is provided by the service providers. However,
this approach is not available for some types of garbage
collection system such as where residents place their garbage
in bags in front of their house and the bags are regularly
collected by trucks.
III.
SENSORIZED GARBAGE TRUCK
We are investigating city event detection technology using
environmental data collected via car-mounted sensors. Car-
mounted sensors provide signiﬁcantly more detailed data both
in space and time than ﬁxed monitoring stations. Figure 1
shows an image of spatio-temporal event detection. Such ﬁne-
grained environmental data help us to detect spatio-temporal
city events in more depth, for example the emergence of
air pollution hot spots, the generation of ambient noise, and
sudden increases in residential solid waste.
We have installed dozens of car-mounted sensors on
garbage trucks that travel daily around Fujisawa city, Kana-
gawa, Japan [1], [5]. Figure 2 is a picture of a sensorized
garbage truck. The truck is equipped with four microphones,
a GPS receiver, a motion sensor, and a sensor node to manage
these sensors. We also installed various types of sensors such
as NO2, CO, PM2.5, temperature, humidity, UV sensors on
other garbage trucks. Sensor data measured by these sensorized
garbage trucks are sent to a data server via a mobile Internet
connection service.
IV.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION IN JAPAN
This section describes residential solid waste collection in
Japan in detail. Garbage bags are put out in front of houses
facing the road or at collection sites and are regularly collected
by garbage trucks. Solid waste is separated into several types
such as combustible waste, incombustible waste, glass bottles,
recyclable plastic, and paper. Each type of waste is collected
on a designated day of the week.
microphone
GPS
sensor node
motion sensor
microphone cable
Figure 2. Sensorized garbage truck
Regarding residential solid waste collection, a garbage
collector drives a garbage truck to the assigned area. He stops
the truck at each collection site or in front of a house and
loads garbage bags into the truck by hand. Actual examples
of garbage collection in Japan are shown in [8]. When the
opening at the back of the truck is full, the garbage collector
starts the rolling plate and the garbage bags are packed into the
container. Before the container of the truck is full, he drives
to an incineration plant or a recycle plant. The weight of the
collected solid waste is measured at the plant.
In Fujisawa city, the site of our experimental facility, the
garbage collector plans a detailed garbage collection route at
his discretion, and he also decides when to visit the inciner-
ation plant depending on trafﬁc condition, road construction
schedule, and the amount of garbage. Sometime a garbage
collector is asked to collect forgotten garbage from another
garbage truck temporarily. Thus, we cannot obtain the regional
solid-waste amount in detail using only the measured weight
of solid waste in incineration plant.
V.
SOLID WASTE WEIGHT ESTIMATION SCHEME
We assume that the operating duration of the rotating plate
is in proportion to the amount of solid waste and we estimate
the regional solid-waste amount by distributing the weight
from the operating duration of the rotating plate. Figure 3
shows a simple example of this approach.
The examined rear loader type garbage truck operates its
rotating plate and packer blade by using a power take-off
(PTO). The engine speed and vibration pattern are switched
when the rotating plate and packer blade are operated. The
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

Area A
Area B
Area C
Total
Collection duration
20 min.
10 min. 10 min.
40 min.
Estimated garbage weight
100Kg
50Kg
50Kg
200Kg
Area A
Area B
Area C
Start
Incineration 
plant
Weight: 200Kg
Figure 3. Garbage amount estimation
Start
Load motion sensor data and GPS record
Feature extraction
End
Garbage collection?
SVM classifier
Record position and collection duration
Summarize collection duration in each area
Distribute weight from collection duration
Y
N
Arrive at incineration plant?
Calculate solid waste amount in each area
Y
N
Garbage weight data
Y
Speed is less than v km?
N
Figure 4. Flowchart of proposed solid-waste amount estimation
proposed method recognizes the difference in the vibration
pattern using a motion sensor.
We also discuss a method that estimates the regional solid-
waste amount from the trip times for each area using only
GPS records. However, with actual garbage collections, narrow
roads require additional time to allow the garbage collector to
reach a secluded collection site on foot. Alternatively garbage
collectors may be able to load large amount of solid waste
quickly at a large collection site in a large apartment. Thus, it
is difﬁcult to estimate regional solid-waste amounts in detail
using GPS records.
Moreover, we also discussed a method using sound to
detect rotating plate operation and a method by garbage
bag detection from camera image. However, these methods
require additional devices outside of the truck. In addition,
these microphone and camera approaches may violate citizens’
privacy by capturing their voice and face. Our method can
be implemented by using a recent smartphone equipped with
motion sensors and it is easier to install in a garbage truck.
A. Garbage collection duration detection using motion sensor
Figure 4 shows a ﬂowchart of our proposed method for
estimating the amounts of solid waste.
1) Garbage-truck motion measurement: We mounted mo-
tion sensors on garbage trucks and measured garbage truck
(a) Garbage collection
(Rotating plate working)
(b) Driving
(c) Idling
Time (msec)
Acceleration
Power
Frequency (Hz)
Time (msec)
Frequency (Hz)
Time (msec)
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 5. Acceleration sensor data and power spectrum
vibration. In the proposed method, acceleration data and gyro
data are adopted. Figure 5 shows examples of acceleration
sensor data and their power spectra. As the ﬁgure shows, we
can ﬁnd different peak acceleration frequencies depending on
the garbage truck’s situation (collecting garbage, driving, or
idling). The peak frequencies differ according to the engine
speed in each situation. We collected motion sensor data at
100 Hz, because the peak frequency during garbage collection
was approximately 45 Hz.
2) Feature Extraction: Feature vectors are generated from
motion sensor data by applying a sliding window framework.
In the sliding window framework, features are calculated on N
sample windows of sensor data with M samples overlapping
between consecutive windows. We decided on N = 1024
and M = 100 in the latter evaluation. The sliding width M
corresponds to the interval of GPS records.
LPC (Linear Predictive Coding) based cepstrum coefﬁ-
cients for each axis of the acceleration sensor data are extracted
as features. LPC-based cepstrum coefﬁcients are commonly
used for speech recognition. We use the variations in the cep-
strum coefﬁcients obtained with the motion sensor depending
on the situation of the truck. The feature extraction method is
based on [4] where we provide more details.
3) Labeling: We selected a typical garbage collection day
and annotated the sensor data with a “rotating” label. “Rotat-
ing” means that a garbage collector is operating the rotating
plate. Closing door vibration causes a large noise regarding
rotating duration detection. A garbage collector sometimes
closes the door while another garbage collector is loading
garbage. Thus, we do not annotate “rotating” labels to avoid
the effect of the noise.
We annotated the labels by listening to sound recorded by
microphones mounted on the garbage truck.
4) Supervised learning: We adopted SVM (Support Vector
Machine) with a polynomial kernel as a classiﬁer. We selected
the same numbers of feature samples randomly for “rotating”
and no-label.
We assume that the garbage bags are loaded on the garbage
truck while the truck is stationary. We calculated the speed
of the garbage truck using GPS records, and selected feature
vectors whose speed was less than v km. We used v = 10 in
the latter evaluation.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

09:47
09:48
09:49
09:50
Ground truth
Predict
Figure 6. Part of garbage collection duration estimation result
TABLE I. RECOGNITION RESULT
Recognition result
Rotating
No-label
Accuracy (%)
Ground truth
Rotating
662
138
82.8
No-label
63
737
92.1
5) Garbage collection duration detection: The garbage
collection duration is estimated by aggregating time samples
classiﬁed as “rotating” by the SVM. We record the detected
garbage collection duration and its locations. When the garbage
truck arrives at the incineration plant, we summarize the data
and then estimate the amount of solid waste by region as
described next.
B. Estimation of solid waste amount
We estimate the amount of solid waste by region using the
solid waste weight measured of incineration plants. We assume
that the operating duration of the rotating plate is proportional
to the amount of solid waste. We calculate the amount of solid
waste by region by distributing the weight from the operating
duration of the rotating plate. We total the amount of solid
waste in each city block or each resident association.
VI.
EVALUATION
First, we extracted feature vectors from acceleration and
gyro sensor data and annotated them using sound data recorded
by microphones mounted on the outside of the garbage truck.
Then, we evaluated the recognition accuracy of the estimated
garbage collecting duration.
We selected two days’ motion sensor data where the same
garbage truck collected the same type of solid waste. The
garbage truck collected combustible waste during the morning.
We selected 400 labeled feature vectors randomly for each
label (“rotating” and no-label) and for each day.
Table I is the confusion matrix of cross-validation using 3-
axis acceleration sensor data and 3-axis gyro sensor data. We
created a classiﬁer by using one day’s motion sensor data and
tested the motion sensor data of the other day. The precision
was 88% and the recall was 87%.
Figure 6 shows the result of our garbage collection duration
estimation. Some errors occurred at the start and the end of the
garbage collection. Developing a post-processing technique to
reduce estimation error is our next goal.
The result shows that the proposed method can accurately
recognize garbage collection duration. However, we used mo-
tion sensor data from just one garbage truck in this evaluation,
and the garbage was all the same. Further evaluation of, for
example, difference between garbage trucks and the difference
between different types of garbage constitutes our future work.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a garbage collection duration
detection method and a framework for solid waste estimation
using the detected duration and total solid waste weight. We
also reported a preliminary experiment and showed that the
proposed method could detect the garbage collection duration
accurately for one garbage truck and one type of garbage.
As the next step in this research, we plan to evaluate
the proposed method in more detail and extend the method
to detect garbage collection durations for multiple types of
garbage trucks and multiple types of garbage. We will also
develop a post-processing technique to reduce noise such as
the vibration of a closing door. Moreover, we are planning to
create a system to feed back the estimated regional amount of
the solid waste to citizens and to examine the effectiveness of
our proposed approach for waste reduction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Part of the research was supported by “Research and
Development on Fundamental and Utilization Technologies
for Social Big Data,” which is Commissioned Research of
the National Institute of Information and Communications
Technology (NICT), Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Chen, J. Nakazawa, T. Yonezawa, T. Kawasaki, H. Tokuda, “An
Empirical Study on Coverage-Ensured Automotive Sensing using Door-
to-door Garbage Collecting Trucks,” in Proceedings of International
Workshop on Smart Cities: People, Technology and Data (SmartCities ’
16), 2016.
[2]
O. D. Lara and M. A. Labrador, “A Survey on Human Activity
Recognition using Wearable Sensors,” IEEE Communications Surbeys
& Tutorials, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 1192–1209, 2013.
[3]
S. Longhi, D. Marzioni, E. Alidori, G. D. Buo, M. Prist, M. Grisostomi,
and M. Pirro, “Solid Waste Management Architecture using Wireless
Sensor Network Technology,” in Proceedings of International Confer-
ence on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), pp. 1–5,
2012 .
[4]
F. Naya, R. Ohmura, M. Miyamae, H. Noma, and M. Imai, “Wireless
Sensor Network System for Supporting Nursing Context-awareness,”
International Journal of Autonomous and Adaptive Communications
Systems, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 361–382, 2011.
[5]
Y. Shirai, Y. Kishino, F. Naya, and Y. Yanagisawa, “Toward On-Demand
Urban Air Quality Monitoring using Public Vehicles,” in Proceedings of
International Workshop on Smart Cities: People, Technology and Data
(SmartCities ’ 16), 2016.
[6]
M. Takagi, K. Fujimoto, Y. Kawahara, and T Asami, “Detecting Hybrid
and Electric Vehicles using a Smartphone,” in Proceedings of the
2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing (UbiComp2014), pp. 267–275, 2014.
[7]
A. Vittorioa, V. Rosolinoa, I. Teresaa, C. M. Vittoriaa, G. Vincenzo
P., and D. M. Francescoa, “Automated Sensing System for Monitoring
of Road Surface Quality by Mobile Devices,” Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 111, pp. 242–251, 2014.
[8]
“How to separate garbage and resources,”
https://www.city.fujisawa.kanagawa.jp/kankyo-j/foreignlang.html
[retrieved: May, 2017].
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-569-2
SPWID 2017 : The Third International Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented Devices and Systems

