210
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Management Control System for Business Rules Management 
 
Koen Smit 
Digital Smart Services 
HU University of Applied Sciences Utrecht 
Utrecht, the Netherlands 
koen.smit@hu.nl 
 
Martijn Zoet 
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl 
 
 
 
Abstract — With increasing investments in business rules 
management (BRM), organizations are searching for ways to 
value and benchmark their processes to elicitate, design, specify, 
verify, validate, deploy, execute and govern business rules. To 
realize valuation and benchmarking of previously mentioned 
processes, organizations must be aware that performance 
measurement is essential, and of equal importance, which 
performance indicators to apply as part of performance 
measurement processes. However, scientific research on BRM, in 
general, is limited and research that focuses on BRM in 
combination with performance indicators is nascent. The 
purpose of this paper is to define performance indicators for 
previously mentioned BRM processes. We conducted a three 
round focus group and three round Delphi Study, which led to 
the identification of 14 performance indicators. In this paper, we 
re-address and - present our earlier work [33], yet we extended 
the previous research with more detailed descriptions of the 
related literature, findings, and results, which provide a 
grounded basis from which further, empirical, research on 
performance indicators for BRM can be explored. 
Keywords-Business Rules Management; Business Rules; 
Performance Measurement; Performance Indicator. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
       Business rules are an important part of an organization’s 
daily activities. Many business services nowadays rely heavily 
on business rules to express assessments, predictions and 
decisions [7][27]. A business rule is [23] “a statement that 
defines or constrains some aspect of the business intending to 
assert business structure or to control the behavior of the 
business.” Most organizations experience three challenges 
when dealing with business rules management: 1) consistency 
challenges, 2) impact analysis challenges, and 3) transparency 
of business rule execution [4]. A consistent interpretation of 
business rules ensures that different actors apply the same 
business rules, and apply them consistently. This is a 
challenge since business rules are often not centralized, but 
they are embedded in various elements of an organization's 
information system instead. For example, business rules are 
embedded in minds of employees, part of textual procedures, 
manuals, tables, schemes, business process models, and hard-
coded as software applications. Impact assessment determines 
the impact of changes made to business rules and the effect on 
an existing implementation. Currently, impact assessments can 
take significant time, which results in situations where the 
business rules already have changed again while the impact 
assessment is still ongoing [2]. Transparency, or business rules 
transparency, indicates that organizations should establish a 
system to prove what business rules are applied at a specific 
moment in time. To tackle the previously mentioned 
challenges and to improve grip on business rules, 
organizations search for a systematic and controlled approach 
to support the discovery, design, validation and deployment of 
business rules [7][32]. To be able to manage or even address 
these challenges, insight has to be created concerning business 
rule management processes at organizations. This can be 
achieved using performance management, which can provide 
insight into an organization’s current situation, but can also 
point towards where and how to improve. However, research 
on performance management concerning BRM is nascent. 
       The measurement of performance has always been 
important in the field of enterprise management and, therefore, 
has been of interest for both practitioners and researchers [9]. 
Performance measurement systems are applied to provide 
useful information to manage, control and improve business 
processes. One of the most important tasks of performance 
management is to identify (and properly) evaluate suitable 
Performance Indicators (PI’s) [13]. The increase of interest 
and research towards identifying the right set of indicators has 
led to ‘standard’ frameworks and PI’s tailored to a specific 
industry or purpose. Examples of such frameworks are the 
balanced scorecard, the total quality management framework, 
and the seven-S model [19][31]. Moreover, research on 
standard indicators is increasingly performed for sales and 
manufacturing processes. To the knowledge of the authors, 
research, which focuses on performance measures for BRM is 
absent. This article extends the understanding of performance 
measurement with regard to the BRM processes. To be able to 
do so, the following research question is addressed: “Which 
performance indicators are useful to measure the BRM 
processes?” 
       This paper is organized as follows: In section two we 
provide 
insights 
into 
performance 
management 
and 
performance measurement. This is followed by the exploration 
of performance measurement Systems in section three. In 
section four, we provide an overview of the BRM capabilities 
and their goals. In section five, we report upon the research 
method utilized to construct our set of PI’s. Next, the data 
collection and analysis of our study is described in section six. 
In section seven, our results, which led to our PI’s for BRM are 

211
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
presented. This is followed by a critical view of the research 
method and results of our study and how future research could 
be conducted in section eight. Lastly, in section nine, we 
discuss what conclusions can be drawn from our results. 
II. PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE 
MEASUREMENT 
       When examining PI’s and what role it plays in the 
performance measurement and performance management 
domains, the first essential question is what is meant by these 
terms. In theory and practice, multiple different acronyms are 
adhered to when trying to define the concept of performance 
management [9]. In our research we adhere to the popular 
definition 
provided 
by 
Amaratunga 
& 
Baldry 
[3]: 
“Performance Management is the use of Performance 
Measurement information to effect positive change in 
organizational culture, systems and processes, by helping to 
set 
agreed-upon 
performance 
goals, 
allocating 
and 
prioritizing resources, informing managers to either confirm 
or change current policy or programme directions to meet 
these goals, and sharing results of performance in pursuing 
those goals.” This definition instantly elaborates upon the 
relationship between performance measurement (utilizing 
PI’s) and performance management. Additionally, the 
definition includes multiple domains (culture, systems, and 
processes) and takes into account the overall goal of 
performance management. Performance Measurement plays 
an important role in the Performance Management Processes, 
and is defined as [25]: “The process by which the efficiency 
and effectiveness of an action can be quantified.” To visualize 
the relationship between both concepts, Kerklaan [19] created 
a basis for the performance feedback loop that could be 
utilized when a performance management and performance 
measurement solution need to be designed, see Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1. Performance Measurement within Performance Management 
III. PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS 
      Taking into account possible research avenues in the light 
of Performance Management and Performance Measurement, 
Ferreira and Otley [13] identified the demand for a holistic 
view for researching and designing Performance Management 
solutions. In their work, a selection of 12 key aspects are 
highlighted that make up the core of the Performance 
Management Systems Framework. The framework consists of 
8 aspects that are the building blocks of a Performance 
Management System; 1. Vision and mission 2. Key success 
factors, 3. Organization structure, 4. Strategies and plans, 5. 
Key performance measures, 6. Target setting, 7. Performance 
evaluation, and 8. Reward systems. Furthermore, the 
remaining four key aspects comprise; 9. Information flows, 
systems, and networks, 10. Use of the Performance 
Management System, 11. Performance Management System 
change, and 12. Strength and coherence, which represent the 
contextual and cultural factors of an organization. As the first 
four key aspects are relevant, but already being explored by 
researchers in the field of BRM, our focus in this study lies on 
the exploration and development of the fifth key aspect; key 
performance measures. As performance measures are 
operationalized in performance measurement systems we first 
analyze more in depth what a performance measurement 
system entails and what types of performance measurement 
systems are utilized for what goals. 
       The aim of using a performance measurement system is to 
provide a closed loop control system in line with predefined 
business objectives. In scientific literature and industry, an 
abundance of performance management systems exists [14]. 
Although a lot of performance systems exist, in general, they 
can be grouped into four base types [19]: 1) consolidate and 
simulate, 2) consolidate and manage, 3) innovate and 
stimulate, and 4) innovate and manage. The predefined 
business objectives, and, therefore, the creation of the closed 
loop control system, differ per base-type. In the remainder of 
this section, first, the four performance measurement system 
base-types will be discussed, after which the registration of a 
single performance measure will be presented.  Subsequently, 
the processes will be discussed for which the performance 
management system is created. The last paragraph will focus 
on bringing all elements together. 
       Performance measurement systems of the first base-type, 
consolidate and stimulate, are utilized to measure and 
stimulate the current system performance. The formulation 
process of PI’s is usually performed with employees that work 
with the system, possibly in combination with direct 
management, and is, therefore, a bottom-up approach. 
Examples of this type of performance measurement system are 
the “control loop system” or “business process management 
system”. Performance measurement systems, that focus purely 
on measuring and maintaining the current performance level, 
are classified as the second base-type consolidate and 
manage. Consolidate and manage is a purely top-down 
approach in which PI’s are formulated by top management 
based on the current strategy. Each PI defined by the top-
management is translated into multiple different underlying 
PI’s by each lower management level. Two examples of 
performance 
measurement 
systems 
of 
this 
type 
are 
“management 
by 
objectives” 
and 
“quality 
policy 
development”. The third base-type, innovate and stimulate, 
focuses on the customer and the product or service delivered 
to the customer by the organization. To define the PI’s, first, 
the quality attributes of the product or service delivered to the 
customer need to be defined. Based on these quality attributes, 
PI’s for each business process that contributes to the product 
or service is defined. An example of a performance 
measurement system of this type is Quality Function 

212
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Deployment (QFD). The fourth base-type, innovate and 
manage, focuses on the future of the organization while 
managing the present. It is a top-down approach in which PI’s 
are formulated, based on the strategy of the organization. 
Furthermore, these PI’s are then translated to the lower 
echelons of the organization. Moreover, PI’s that are used to 
manage the current state of the organization are specified. The 
combination of both measures is used to make sure that the 
company is performing well while at the same time steering it 
into the future. An example of this performance measurement 
system type is the Balanced Score Card.  
       In addition to choosing the (combination of) performance 
measurement system(s), the individual performance indicators 
(PI’s) of which the performance measurement system is 
composed have to be defined. A PI is defined as [19]: “an 
authoritative measure, often in quantitative form, of one or 
multiple aspects of the organizational system.” Scholars as 
well as practitioners debate on which characteristics must be 
registered with respect to PI’s [18][26]. Comparative research 
executed by [25] identified a set of five characteristics each 
scholar applies: 1) the PI must be derived from objectives, 2) 
the PI must be clearly defined with an explicit purpose, 3) the 
PI must be relevant and easy to maintain, 4) the PI must be 
simple to understand, and 5) the PI must provide fast and 
accurate feedback. 
IV. BUSINESS RULES MANAGEMENT  
       The performance measurement system in this paper is 
developed 
for 
the 
elicitation, 
design, 
specification, 
verification, validation, deployment, and execution process of 
BRM. To ground our research a summary of BRM is provided 
here.  
       BRM is a process that deals with the elicitation, design, 
specification, verification, validation, deployment, execution, 
evaluation and governance of business rules for analytic or 
syntactic tasks within an organization to support and improve 
its business performance [8], see Figure 2.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. BRM capability overview. 
 
The purpose of the elicitation capability is twofold. First, the 
purpose is to determine the knowledge that needs to be 
captured from various legal sources to realize the value 
proposition of the business rules. Different types of legal 
sources from which knowledge can be derived are, for 
example, laws, regulations, policies, internal documentation, 
guidance 
documents, 
parliament 
documents, 
official 
disclosures, 
implementation 
instructions, 
and 
experts. 
Depending on the type of knowledge source(s), for example 
documentation versus experts, different methods, processes, 
techniques and tools to extract the knowledge are applied [21]. 
The output of the elicitation capability is the knowledge 
required to design the business rule architecture. The second 
purpose is to conduct an impact analysis is if a business rule 
architecture is already in place. The business rule architecture 
itself is the output to be realized by the design capability. The 
business rule architecture consists of a combination of context 
designs and derivation structures. A context design is a set of 
business knowledge (in terms of business rules and fact types) 
with a maximum internal cohesion and a minimal external 
coherence, which adheres to the single responsibility principle 
[22]. The relationship between different context designs is 
depicted in a derivation structure. After the business rule 
architecture is designed, the contents of each individual 
context design need to be specified in the specification 
capability. The purpose of the specification capability is to 
write the business rules and create the fact types needed to 
define or constrain some particular aspect of the business. The 
output of the specification capability is a specified context that 
contains business rules and fact types. After the business rule 
architecture is created it is verified (to check for semantic / 
syntax errors) and validated (to check for errors in its intended 
behavior). The first happens in the verification capability of 
which the purpose is to determine if the business rules adhere 
to predefined criteria and are logically consistent. For 
example, a business rule could contain multiple verification 
errors, such as domain violation errors, omission errors, and 
overlapping condition key errors. If errors are identified, two 
scenarios can occur. First, the business rules can be specified 
based on the current elicitated, designed and specified 
knowledge. Secondly, the design or specification could be 
altered. Verification errors not properly addressed could result 
in the improper execution of the value proposition in the 
execution capability later on in the BRM processes [34]. 
When no verification errors are identified, the created value 
proposition is reviewed in the validation capability. The 
purpose of the validation capability is to determine whether 
the verified value proposition holds to its intended behavior 
[35]. To be able to do so, two processes can be applied. First, 
scenario-based testing can be applied. The scenario-based 
testing applies pre-defined test sets to check the behavior. 
Secondly, colleague-based testing can be applied. In this case, 
a colleague checks if the context is in concurrence with law. 
When validation errors are identified the created element (i.e. 
decision, business rule, fact type) is rejected and an additional 
cycle of the elicitation, design, specification, and verification 
capabilities must be initiated to resolve the validation error. 
Validation errors not properly identified or addressed could 
lead to economic losses or loss of reputation [35]. When no 

213
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
validation errors are identified the context is approved and 
marked for deployment. The purpose of the deployment 
capability is to transform the verified and validated value 
proposition to implementation-dependent executable business 
rules. However, this does not necessarily imply that the actor 
that utilizes the value proposition is a system, as the value 
proposition could also be used by subject-matter experts [34]. 
An implementation-dependent value proposition can be source 
code, handbooks or procedures [23]. The output of the 
deployment capability is then executed in the execution 
capability, which delivers the actual value proposition. To 
realize the added value, human or information system actors 
execute the business rules. Overall, covering the full range of 
capabilities described earlier, two more capabilities are of 
importance; governance and monitoring. The governance 
capability 
consists 
of 
three 
sub-capabilities; 
version 
management, traceability, and validity management [23]. The 
goal of the versioning capability is to capture and keep track 
of version data regarding the elements created or modified in 
the elicitation, design, specification, verification, validation, 
deployment and execution capabilities. Proper version control 
as part of the BRM processes allows organizations to keep 
track what elements are utilized in the execution and 
deliverance of their added value. For example, the 
governmental domain needs to support several versions of a 
regulation as it takes into account different target groups under 
different conditions. The traceability capability is utilized to 
create relationships between specific versions of elements 
used in the value proposition. The goal of the traceability 
capability is to make it possible to trace created elements, as 
parts of the value proposition, to the corresponding laws and 
regulations on which they are based. Another goal of the 
traceability capability is the foundation it forms for impact 
analysis when new or existing laws and regulations need to be 
processed into the value proposition. The third sub-capability 
comprises validity management. The goal of validity 
management is to be able to provide, at any given time, a 
specific version of a value proposition. Validity management 
is utilized to increase transparency. Transparency is achieved 
as validity management enables organizations to provide when 
a specific value proposition was, is or will be valid. Lastly, the 
monitoring capability observes, checks and keeps record of 
not only the execution of the value proposition but also the 
full range of activities in the previously explained BRM 
capabilities that are conducted to realize the value proposition. 
The goal of the monitoring capability is to provide insights 
into how the BRM capabilities perform and, additionally, 
suggest improvements [5].  
      To further ground our research a summary of artefacts that 
are utilized in the BRM processes by the Dutch government 
are provided here, see also a schematic overview of the 
concepts in Figure 3.  
     Overall, a difference is made between implementation-
independent design and implementation-dependent design of 
artefacts (these are: scope, context, business rule, fact type 
model, and facts). An implementation-independent artefact is 
always designed in a notation that is not adjusted to 
accommodate a specific system. 
 
 
Figure 3. Overview of the relationship between a scope and multiple contexts 
 
On the other hand, an implementation-dependent artefact is 
adjusted to a specific system, and thus can only be utilized in 
relation to that specific system. The highest level abstraction 
artefact is referred to as a scope. The scope is dynamic in size 
as it represents the established limits of the value proposition 
that must be realized in the elicitation, design, specification, 
verification and validation processes. A scope could be further 
divided into one or multiple collections of knowledge, 
containing sources, business rules, and fact type models [16]. 
This is also referred to as a context. A context is characterized 
by a maximum internal coherence and a minimal external 
coherence. The goal of a context is the identification of 
artefacts that can be independently developed within the 
defined scope. A context contains one or more sources, a fact 
type model, and business rules. A source can be defined as an 
authority that imposes requirements to the value proposition 
that has to be realized, for example, published laws and 
regulations from the parliament, court decisions, regulations 
promulgated by executive governmental branches, and 
international treaties. A fact type model provides an overview 
of terms and the relationship between these terms, which 
represent facts. For example, a country (term) has a province 
(term) or state (state), which contains a city (term). In the 
elicitation, design and specification processes the collection of 
a scope containing all underlying artefacts is defined as a 
scope design. Consequently, the same holds for a context 
containing source(s), a fact type model, and business rules, 
which is defined as a context design. Each of the BRM 
capabilities described can be measured and should be 
measured to continuously improve the process and stay 
competitive and innovative. The actual measurements applied 
depends on the base-type(s) the organization chooses to apply. 
The four base types are based on two main axes. The first axis 
described the current focus of the organization: consolidating 
versus innovating. On the other hand, the management style is 
described by the second axis: stimulate versus control, which 
leads to the question for which base type performance 
measurements are most needed?  

214
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
       The current trend in business rules management is a shift 
from an information technology perspective towards a broader 
information systems perspective. Therefore, researchers and 
scientist are interested in measuring the current state of 
business rules management implementations and capabilities 
[20][28][34]. An important question when measuring the 
current state is that organizations want to compare and 
benchmark their implementations, processes, and capabilities. 
For this purpose, multiple initiatives are started, for example, 
expert group BRM [17], the blue chamber [6]. This trend of 
comparing different parts of a BRM implementation also 
concerns the comparison of different rule sets built for the 
same solutions. An example of this are the challenges released 
by the decision management community [10]. Every month 
they release a problem for which different vendors provide 
their solutions such that they can be compared to each other. 
To 
manage 
and 
improve 
the 
different 
BRM 
capabilities/processes insight has to be created regarding the 
current situation of these processes. Thus, on the current focus 
of the organization axis we adopt the consolidating 
perspective over the innovating perspective for this study.  
       The selection of the participants should be based on the 
group of individuals, organizations, information technology, 
or community that best represents the phenomenon studied 
[33]. In this study, we want to measure the current practice of 
the work of the employees that perform the capabilities. This 
implies that we will apply a bottom-up approach and will 
involve employees working on business rules and their direct 
management. Therefore, on the second axis we focus on the 
stimulating over controlling, thereby adopting the perspective 
of the first base-type, consolidate and stimulate, as described 
in detail in section three.  
       Our focus per PI will be on the characteristics as defined 
by [18]: 1) derived from objectives, 2) clearly defined with an 
explicit purpose, 3) relevant and easy to maintain, 4) simple to 
understand, and 5) provide fast and accurate feedback. These 
PI’s form the basis to build a framework that organizations 
can utilize to design their BRM evaluation process focused on 
evaluating and improving its business performance. 
V. RESEARCH METHOD 
       The goal of this research is to identify performance 
measurements that provide relevant insight into the 
performance 
of 
the 
elicitation, 
design, 
specification, 
verification, 
validation, 
deployment, 
execution, 
and 
governance processes of BRM. In addition to the goal of the 
research, also, the maturity of the research field is a factor in 
determining the appropriate research method and technique. 
The maturity of the BRM research field, with regard to non-
technological research, is nascent [20][27][34]. Focus of 
research in nascent research fields should lie on identifying 
new constructs and establishing relationships between 
identified constructs [12]. Summarized, to accomplish our 
research goal, a research approach is needed in which a broad 
range of possible performance measurements are explored and 
combined into one view in order to contribute to an 
incomplete state of knowledge.  
Adequate research methods to explore a broad range of 
possible ideas / solutions to a complex issue and combine them 
into one view when a lack of empirical evidence exists consist 
of 
group-based 
research 
techniques 
[11][24][29][30]. 
Examples of group based techniques are Focus Groups, Delphi 
Studies, Brainstorming and the Nominal Group Technique. 
The main characteristic that differentiates these types of group-
based research techniques from each other is the use of face-to-
face versus non-face-to-face approaches. Both approaches have 
advantages and disadvantages, for example, in face-to-face 
meetings, provision of immediate feedback is possible. 
However, face-to-face meetings have restrictions with regard 
to the number of participants and the possible existence of 
group or peer pressure. To eliminate the disadvantages, we 
combined the face-to-face and non-face-to-face technique by 
means of applying the following two group based research 
approaches: the Focus Group and Delphi Study. 
VI. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
Data for this study is collected over a period of six months, 
through three rounds of focus groups (rounds 1, 2 and 3: 
experts focus group) and a three-round Delphi study (rounds 4, 
5 and 6 Delphi study), see Figure 4. Between each individual 
round of focus group and Delphi Study, the researchers 
consolidated the results (rounds 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7: research 
team). Both methods of data collection and analysis are further 
discussed in the remainder of this section. 
A. Focus Groups 
      Before a focus group is conducted, a number of key issues 
need to be considered: 1) the goal of the focus group, 2) the 
selection of participants, 3) the number of participants, 4) the 
selection of the facilitator, 5) the information recording 
facilities, and 6) the protocol of the focus group. The goal of 
the focus group was to identify performance measurements for 
the performance of the elicitation, design, specification, 
verification, 
validation, 
deployment, 
execution, 
and 
governance capabilities of BRM. The selection of the 
participants should be based on the group of individuals, 
organizations, information technology, or community that best 
represents the phenomenon studied [33]. In this study, 
organizations and individuals that deal with a large amount of 
business rules represent the phenomenon studied. Such 
organizations are often financial and government institutions. 
During this research, which was conducted from September 
2014 to December 2014, five large Dutch government 
institutions participated. Based on the written description of 
the goal and consultation with employees of each government 
institution, participants were selected to take part in the three 
focus group meetings. In total, ten participants took part, 
which fulfilled the following positions: two enterprise 
architects, two business rules architects, three business rules 
analysts, one project manager, and two policy advisors. Each 
of the participants had, at least, five years of experience with 
business rules. Delbecq and van de Ven [11] and Glaser [15] 
state that the facilitator should be an expert on the topic and 
familiar with group meeting processes. The selected facilitator 
has a Ph.D. in BRM, has conducted 7 years of research on the 

215
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
topic, and has facilitated many (similar) focus group meetings 
before. Besides the facilitator, five additional researchers were 
present during the focus group meetings. One researcher 
participated as ‘back-up’ facilitator, who monitored if each 
participant provided equal input, and if necessary, involved 
specific participants by asking for more in-depth elaboration 
on the subject. The remaining four researchers acted as a 
minute’s secretary taking field notes. They did not intervene in 
the process; they operated from the sideline. All focus groups 
were video and audio recorded. A focus group meeting took 
on average three and a half hour. Each focus group meeting 
followed the same overall protocol, each starting with an 
introduction and explanation of the purpose and procedures of 
the meeting, after which ideas were generated, shared, 
discussed and/or refined.  
 
 
Figure 4. Data collection process design 
      Prior to the first round, participants were informed about 
the purpose of the focus group meeting and were invited to 
submit their current PI’s applied in the BRM process. When 
participants had submitted PI’s, they had the opportunity to 
elaborate upon their PI’s during the first focus group meeting. 
During this meeting, also, additional PI’s were proposed. For 
each proposed PI, the name, goal, specification and 
measurements were discussed and noted. For some PI’s, the 
participants 
did 
not 
know 
what 
specifications 
or 
measurements to use. These elements were left blank and 
agreed to deal with during the second focus group meeting. 
After the first focus group, the researchers consolidated the 
results. Consolidation comprised the detection of double PI’s, 
incomplete PI’s, conflicting goals and measurements. Double 
PI’s exist in two forms: 1) identical PI’s and 2) PI’s, which are 
textually different, but similar on the conceptual level. The 
results of the consolidation were sent to the participants of the 
focus group two weeks in advance for the second focus group 
meeting. During these two weeks, the participants assessed the 
consolidated results in relationship to four questions: 1) “Are 
all PI’s described correctly?”, “2) Do I want to remove a PI?” 
3) “Do we need additional PI’s?“, and 4) “How do the PI’s 
affect the design of a business rule management solution?”. 
This 
process 
of 
conducting 
focus 
group 
meetings, 
consolidation by the researchers and assessment by the 
participants of the focus group was repeated two more times 
(round 2 and round 3). After the third focus group meeting 
(round 3), saturation within the group occurred leading to a 
consolidated set of PI’s. 
B. Delphi Study 
      Before a Delphi study is conducted, also a number of key 
issues need to be considered: 1) the goal of the Delphi study, 
2) the selection of participants, 3) the number of participants, 
and 4) the protocol of the Delphi study. The goal of the Delphi 
study was twofold. The first goal was to validate and refine 
existing PI’s identified in the focus group meetings, and the 
second goal was to identify new PI’s. Based on the written 
description of the goal and consultation with employees of 
each organization, participants were selected to take part in the 
Delphi study. In total, 36 participants took part. Twenty-six 
experts, in addition to the ten experts that participated in the 
focus group meetings, of the large Dutch government 
institutions were involved in the Delphi Study, which was 
conducted from November 2014 to December 2014. The 
reason for involving the ten experts from the focus groups was 
to decrease the likelihood of peer-pressure amongst group 
members. This is achieved by exploiting the advantage of a 
Delphi Study, which is characterized by a non-face-to-face 
approach. The non-face-to-face approach was achieved by the 
use of online questionnaires that the participants had to return 
via mail. Combined with the ten participants from the focus 
groups, the twenty-six additional participants involved in the 
Delphi Study had the following positions: three project 
managers, four enterprise architects, ten business rules analyst, 
five policy advisors, two IT-architects, six business rules 
architects, two business consultants, one functional designer, 
one tax advisor, one legal advisor, and one legislative author. 
Each of the participants had, at least, two years of experience 
with business rules. Each round (4, 5, and 6) of the Delphi 
Study followed the same overall protocol, whereby each 
participant was asked to assess the PI’s in relationship to four 
questions: 1) “Are all PI’s described correctly?”, “2) Do I 
want to remove a PI?” 3) “Do we need additional PI’s?“, and 
4) “How do the PI’s affect the design of a BRM solution?” 
  
VII. RESULTS 
      In this section, the overall results of this study are 
presented. Furthermore, the final PI’s are listed. Each PI is 
specified 
using 
a 
specific 
format 
to 
convey 
their 
characteristics in a unified way. Before the first focus group 
was conducted, participants were invited to submit the PI’s 
they currently use. This resulted in the submission of zero 
PI’s, which is in conformance with the literature described in 
section four. Since this result can imply a multitude of things 
(e.g., total absence of the phenomena researched or 
unmotivated participants), further inquiry was conducted. The 
reason that no participants submitted PI’s was because none of 
the participants had a formal performance measurement 
system in place. Some measured BRM processes, but did so in 
an ad-hoc and unstructured manner.  

216
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
TABLE I. EXAMPLE OF PI RESULT: TIME MEASUREMENT TO 
DEFINE, VERIFY, AND VALIDATE A BUSINESS RULE. 
 
 
PI 09: The amount of time units needed to define, verify, 
and validate a single business rule. 
 
Goal: Shortening the time needed to deliver defined, 
verified, and validated business rules. 
 
 
S 
 
The number of time units per selected single business 
rule: 
 
Measured over the entire collection of 
context designs;  
 
During the design process; 
 
(Sorted by selected context design); 
 
(Sorted by selected complexity level of a 
business rule); 
 
(Sorted by selected scope design); 
 
(Sorted by selected time unit). 
 
 
M 
 
 
Context design 
 
Business rule 
 
Complexity level of a business rule 
 
Scope design 
 
Time unit 
A. First Focus Group 
       The first focus group meeting resulted in 24 PI’s. As stated 
in the previous section, for each PI the name, goal, 
specification, and measurements were discussed and noted. 
This led to two discussions: 1) different levels of abstraction 
and 2) person-based measurements. The discussion with 
regards to the abstraction level of sorting indicates that a 
specific organization chooses for a different level of detail 
when exploring the KPI. For example, in PI09, ‘the number of 
time units per selected single business rule’ can be sorted by 
scope design or by context design. The first is a higher 
abstraction level then the latter. Because the goal of the 
research is to formulate a set of PI’s that can be widely applied, 
the choice has been made to add sorting possibilities. In Table 
I, dimensions are displayed between brackets, for example, 
sorted by selected context design. Therefore, each organization 
can choose to implement the PI specific to their needs. The 
second discussion was if PI’s are allowed to be configured to 
monitor a specific individual. For example, ‘the number of 
incorrectly written business rules per business rule analyst.’ 
The difference in opinion between the participants could not be 
bridged during this session. Since the discussion became quite 
heated during the meeting, it was decided that each expert 
would think about and reflect on this question outside the 
group and that this discussion would be continued in the next 
focus group meeting. After the first focus group, the results 
have been analyzed and sent to the participants. 
B. Second Focus Group 
       During the second focus group, the participants started to 
discuss the usefulness of the PI’s. This resulted in the removal 
of ten conceptual PI’s. The ten PI’s were discarded because 
they did not add value to the performance measurement 
process concerning BRM. This resulted into 14 remaining 
PI’s, which had to be further analyzed by the researchers. 
Also, the discussion about the PI’s formulated to measure 
specific individuals was continued. At the end, only three 
participants thought this was reasonable. The other seven 
disagreed and found it against their organization's ethics. 
Therefore, the group reached a consensus that this dimension 
should be added as optional. 
C. Dimensions 
      The respondents discussed per PI the dimensions they 
should be measured by. In total, this resulted into five new 
dimensions. The first dimension is the business rule 
complexity level. The business rule complexity describes the 
effort it takes to formulate one business rule. The participants 
did state that, currently, no widely supported hierarchy to 
express the dimension level complexity exists. Two examples 
were provided by different respondents. The first example 
came from a respondent which indicated that business rule 
complexity can be determined by the amount of existing 
versus non-existing facts in the fact model that are utilized in a 
business rule, the impact a business rule has on other business 
rules when modified or removed, and the type of business 
rule. The second example came from a respondent which 
indicated that they use two languages to write business rules 
in. The complexity, in this case, is influenced by the language 
in which the business rule is written.  
       The second dimension represents the time unit that is used 
in the PI statement. The participated organizations all 
indicated different time units as part of their PI’s due to 
differences in release schedules or reporting requirements. For 
example, one of the participated organizations currently 
adheres to a standard period of three months, while another 
adheres to a standard period of six months due to agreements 
with their parent ministry that publishes new or modified laws 
and regulations in the same cycle of six months. For example, 
the PI (09): ‘The number of time units required to define, 
verify, and validate a single business rule’, is sorted by the 
dimension time unit.        
       The third dimension represents the roles and individuals. 
One observation regarding the third dimension, focusing on 
the utilization of roles in PI’s, are the different labels for very 
similar or equivalent roles the participated organizations 
utilize in their BRM processes. For example, the PI (02): ‘The 
frequency of corrections per selected context design, emerging 
from the verification process, per business analyst and per 
type of verification error’ can be sorted by the measure 
‘business analyst.’ The business analyst role is a generic role, 
which each organization can replace by a specific role. 
Examples of roles other respondents applied are: “business 
rules writer”, “business rules analyst” or “business rule 
expert.” 
       The fourth dimension represents the error type, which 
describes the specific errors that can occur. Error types are 
applied as measures in two PI’s: PI 07 (validation errors) and 
PI 08 (verification errors). With respect to verification errors 

217
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
three types can be recognized: 1) context error types, 2) 
business rules errors, and 3) fact type errors. Examples of 
specific errors are: circularity error, consequent error, 
unnecessary condition fact type error, interdeterminism error, 
overlapping condition key coverage error, unused fact type 
error and domain violation error. Not every organization can 
measure every error type, as this depends on the language and 
tool they apply. Therefore, the dimension can vary per 
organization. 
       The fifth dimension represents the implementation of the 
business 
rules: 
implementation-independent 
versus 
implementation-dependent. In this first case, an organization 
elicits, designs, specifies, verifies and validates the business 
rules in an implementation-independent way. Therefore, the PI 
also focuses on the implementation-independent part. 
However, one of the participated organizations already 
designs, specifies, verifies and validates the business rules in 
an implementation-dependent environment. In this case the 
PI’s focus on the implementation-dependent part. 
D. The Third Focus Group 
       During the third focus group, the participants discussed 
the remaining 14 final PI’s, which led to the further 
refinement of goals, specifications, and measurements. 
Additionally, the subject-matter experts expressed a certain 
need to categorize PI’s into well-known phases within the 
development process of business rules at the case 
organizations. From the 14 remaining PI’s, nine PI’s were 
categorized as business rule design PI’s, two PI’s were 
categorized as business rule deployment PI’s, and three PI’s 
were categorized as business rules execution PI’s.  
E. Delphi Study       
       After the third focus group, the 14 PI’s were subjected to 
the Delphi Study participants. In each of the three rounds, no 
additional PI’s were formulated by the 26 experts. However, 
during the first two rounds, the specification and measurement 
elements of multiple PI’s were refined. During the third round, 
which was also the last round, no further refinements were 
proposed and participants all agreed to the 14 formulated PI’s, 
which are presented in Table II.  
 
TABLE II. PI'S for BRM 
 
 
PI 01: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
design emerging from the verification process. 
Goal: Improve upon the design process of 
business rules. 
PI 02: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
design, emerging from the verification process, per business 
analyst and per type of verification error. 
Goal: Improving the context design. 
PI 03: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
design emerging from the validation process per complexity 
level of a business rule. 
Goal: Improve upon the design process of 
business rules. 
PI 04: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
design emerging from the validation process per type of 
validation error. 
Goal: Improve upon the validation process for the 
benefit of improving the context design. 
PI 05: The frequency of corrections per selected context 
architecture emerging from the design process per scope 
design. 
Goal: Improve upon the design process for the 
benefit of improving the context architecture. 
PI 06: The frequency of instantiations per selected context 
design 
Goal: Provide insight into the possible instances of 
a context design. 
PI 07: The frequency per selected type of validation error. 
Goal: Improve upon the design process for the 
benefit of improving the context design. 
PI 08: The frequency per selected type of verification error  
Goal: Improve upon the design process for the 
benefit of improving the context design. 
PI 09: The number of time units required to define, verify, 
and validate a single business rule. 
Goal: Shortening the lead time of a business rule 
with regard to the design process. 
PI 10: The frequency of deviations between an 
implementation 
dependent 
context 
design 
and 
an 
implementation independent context design. 
Goal: Improve upon the deployment process. 
PI 11: The frequency of executions of an implementation 
dependent business rule. 
Goal: Gaining insight into what business rules are 
executed. 
PI 12: The frequency of execution variants of a scope 
design. 
Goal: Gaining insight into what decision paths are 
traversed to establish different decisions. 
PI 13: The number of time units required for the execution 
per execution variant. 
Goal: Shortening the lead time of an execution 
process with regard to enhancing an execution 
variant. 
PI 14: The amount of business rules that cannot be 
automated.  
Goal: Provide insight into what business rules 
cannot be automated. 
 
 
 
 
Analyzing the defined PI’s showed that three out of 
fourteen (PI 11, 12, and 14) are PI’s that can be classified as 
‘innovate and manage’ PI’s.  PI number eleven and twelve 
focus on the number of times a business rule is executed, 
thereby providing insight on which business rules are most 
applied. PI twelve goes beyond that and shows which variants 
of business rules are executed. In other words, it shows the 
characteristics of the decision based on which citizens or 
organizations get services. This insight can be used to 
determine how many and which citizens or organizations are 
affected by changing specific laws (and, therefore, business 
rules). In other words, this can be used to further support the 

218
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
development of law. PI fourteen indicated the amount of 
business rules that cannot be automated, in other words, that 
need to be executed manually. This can also provide an 
indication of the amount of workload that organizations 
encounter due to the manual execution of these specific 
business rules.  This PI can be used to decide if these business 
rules should be executed manually or that they should be 
reformulated in such a manner that they can be executed 
mechanically. 
VIII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
      From a research perspective, our study provides a 
fundament for PI measurement and benchmarking of the 
elicitation, design, specification, verification, validation, 
deployment, execution, and governance capabilities of BRM. 
In addition to the PI’s, one of the biggest discussion has been 
the question whether a PI should be measured per individual 
person. Regarding this discussion most respondents in our 
research agreed that PI’s should not measure the performance 
of an individual person. This could be related to the fact that 
the sample group didn’t contain respondents from a 
commercial organization where it might be more accepted that 
the performance of an individual person is measured. From the 
perspective of performance management systems we focused 
on the base type 1) consolidate and simulate. When BRM 
implementations become more mature, innovation should be 
encouraged and PI’s for the base types 3) innovate and 
stimulate, and 4) innovate and manage should be measured. 
From an economic perspective, our research results contribute 
to the design of a proper performance measurement design for 
the BRM capabilities in order to provide insights about how 
organizational resources are utilized and how they could be 
utilized more effectively. 
       Another discussion focused on the terminology applied to 
formulate the PI’s. The discussion started because the 
organizations that employ the participants applied different 
terms and definitions to describe the same elements. This is 
mainly caused by the different business rule management 
methods used, business rule management systems applied, 
business rule language(s) used or business rule engines 
implemented by the participating organizations. Most of the 
proprietary systems apply their own language, thereby 
decreasing interoperability. For example, one organization has 
implemented Be Informed, which applies the Declarative 
Process Modeling Notation while another organization 
implemented The Annotation Environment, which applies 
Structured Dutch. Therefore, the terminology chosen to 
formulate the PI’s is neutral. However, the terms of the PI’s 
can be adapted to the specific organization. 
       Several limitations may affect our results. The first 
limitation is the sampling and sample size. The sample group 
of participants is solely drawn from government institutions in 
the Netherlands. While we believe that government 
institutions are representative for organizations implementing 
business 
rules, 
further 
generalization 
towards 
non-
governmental 
organizations, 
amongst 
others, 
is 
a 
recommended direction for future research. Taken the sample 
size of 36 participants into account, this number needs to be 
increased in future research as well. Another observation is the 
lack of PI’s regarding some BRM capabilities described in 
section four. This could have been caused due to participants 
focusing on a specific BRM capability in practice, limiting the 
input of PI’s regarding other BRM capabilities. Future 
research should focus on including participants, which are 
responsible for one capability (taking into account to cover all 
capabilities) a combination of BRM capabilities, or all BRM 
capabilities (higher level management). 
       This research focused on identifying new constructs and 
establishing relationships given the current maturity of the 
BRM research field. Although the research approach chosen 
for this research type is appropriate given the present maturity 
of the research 
field, research focusing on further 
generalization should apply different research methods such as 
qualitative research methods, which also allow incorporating a 
larger sample size in future research regarding PI’s for BRM. 
IX. CONCLUSION 
      This research investigated PI’s for the elicitation, design, 
acceptance, deployment and execution of business rules with 
the purpose of answering the following research question: 
“Which performance measurements are useful to measure the 
BRM processes?” To accomplish this goal, we conducted a 
study combining a three round focus group and three round 
Delphi Study. Both were applied to retrieve PI’s from 
participants, 36 in total, employed by five governmental 
institutions. This analysis revealed fourteen PI’s. We believe 
that this work represents a further step in research on PI’s for 
BRM and maturing the BRM field as a whole.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. M. Zoet, K. Smit, and E. Y. de Haan, “Performance 
Indicators for Business Rule Management,” Proceedings of the 
Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management - EKNOW, Venice, 2016. 
[2] M. Alles, G. Brennan, A. Kogan, and M. Vasarhelyi, 
“Continuous monitoring of business process controls: A pilot 
implementation of a continuous auditing system at Siemens,” 
International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 7, 
2006, pp. 137-161. doi: 10.1016/j.accinf.2005.10.004 
[3] D. Amaratunga and D. Baldry, “Moving from performance 
measurement to performance management,” Facilities, 20(5/6), 
2002, pp. 217-223. 
[4] D. Arnot and G. Pervan, “A critical analysis of decision support 
systems research,” Journal of information technology, 20(2), 
2005, pp. 67-87. 
[5] M. Baject and M. Krisper, “A methodology and tool support for 
managing business rules in organisations,” Information Systems, 
30, 2005, pp. 423-443. 
[6] Blue Chamber, “Legislation to services: an approach for agile 
execution of legislation,” 2013. 
[7] J. Boyer and H. Mili, “Agile Business Rules Development: 
Process, Architecture and JRules Examples,” Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2011. 
[8] J. Breuker and W. Van De Velde, “CommonKADS Library for 
Expertise Modelling: reusable problem-solving components,” 
Amsterdam: IOS Press/Ohmsha, 1994. 
[9] G. Cokins, “Performance Management: Integrating Strategy 
Execution, Methodologies, Risk, and Analytics,” Hoboken: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN13: 9780470449981, 2009. 

219
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[10] Decision 
Management 
Community, 
“DMcommunity”  
Retrieved 
November, 
2016, 
from 
https://www.dmcommunity.org. 
[11] A. L. Delbecq and A. H. Van de Ven, “A group process model 
for problem identification and program planning,” The Journal 
of Applied Behavioral Science, 7(4), 1971, pp. 466-492.  
[12] A. Edmondson and S. McManus, “Methodological Fit in 
Management Field Research,” Academy of Management 
Review, 32(4), 2007, pp. 1155-1179.  
[13] A. Ferreira and D. Otley, “The design and use of performance 
management 
systems: 
An 
extended 
framework 
for 
analysis,” Management accounting research, 20(4), 2009, pp. 
263-282. 
[14] M. 
Franco-Santos, 
L. 
Lucianetti, 
and 
M. 
Bourne, 
“Contemporary performance measurement systems: A review of 
their consequences and a framework for research,” Management 
Accounting Research, 23(2), 2012, pp. 79-119.  
[15] B. 
Glaser, 
“Theoretical 
Sensitivity: 
Advances 
in 
the 
Methodology of Grounded Theory,” Mill Valley, CA: Sociology 
Press, 1978. 
[16] I. Graham, “Business Rules Management and Service Oriented 
Architecture,” New York: Wiley, 2006. 
[17] Handvestgroep Publiek Verantwoorden, “Together means 
more,” HPV, Den Haag, 2013, pp. 22-23. 
[18] M. Hudson, A. Smart, and M. Bourne, “Theory and practice in 
SME performance measurement systems,” International Journal 
of Operations & Production Management, 21(8), 2001, pp. 
1096-1115.  
[19] L. Kerklaan, “The cockpit of the organization: performance 
management with scorecards,” Deventer: Kluwer, 2007. 
[20] A. Kovacic, “Business renovation: business rules (still) the 
missing link,” Business Process Management Journal, 10(2), 
2004, pp. 158-170.  
[21] S. H. Liao, “Expert System Methodologies and Applications - A 
Decade Review from 1995 to 2004,” Expert Systems with 
Applications, 28(1), 2004, pp. 93-103 
[22] R. Martin, “Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns 
and Practices,” New York, 2003. 
[23] T. Morgan, “Business rules and information systems: aligning 
IT with business goals,” London: Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[24] M. K. Murphy, N. Black, D. L. Lamping, C. M. McKee, C. F. 
B. Sanderson, and J. Askham, “Consensus development 
methods and their use in clinical guideline development,” 
Health Technology Assessment, 2(3), 1998, pp. 31-38.  
[25] A. Neely, H. Richards, H. Mills, K. Platts, and M. Bourne,  
“Designing performance measures: a structured approach,” 
International Journal of Operations and Production, 17(11), 
1997, pp. 1131-1152. 
[26] A. Neely, “The evolution of performance measurement research: 
developments in the last decade and a research agenda for the 
next,” International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 25(12), 2005, pp. 1264-1277. 
[27] M. L. Nelson, J. Peterson, R. L. Rariden, and R. Sen, 
“Transitioning to a business rule management service model: 
Case studies from the property and casualty insurance industry,” 
Information & Management, 47(1), 2010, pp. 30-41. 
[28] M. L. Nelson, R. L. Rariden, and R. Sen, “A Lifecycle 
Approach towards Business Rules Management,” Proceedings 
of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, Hawaii, 2008. 
[29] C. Okoli and S. D. Pawlowski, “The Delphi method as a 
research 
tool: 
an 
example, 
design 
considerations 
and 
applications,” Information & Management, 42(1), 2004, pp. 15-
29.  
[30] R. Ono and D. J. Wedemeyer, “Assessing the validity of the 
Delphi technique,” Futures, 26(3), 1994, pp. 289-304.  
[31] V. Owhoso and S. Vasudevan, “A balanced scorecard based 
framework for assessing the strategic impacts of ERP systems,” 
Computers in Industry, 56, 2005, pp. 558-572.  
[32] R. Ross, “Business Rule Concepts,” Houston: Business Rule 
Solutions, LLC, 2009. 
[33] A. Strauss and J. Corbin, “Basics of qualitative research: 
Grounded theory procedures and techniques,” Newbury Park: 
Sage Publication, INC, 1990. 
[34] M. M. Zoet, “Methods and Concepts for Business Rules 
Management,” Utrecht: Hogeschool Utrecht, 2014. 
[35] M. M. Zoet and J. Versendaal, “Business Rules Management 
Solutions Problem Space: Situational Factors,” Proceedings of 
the 2013 Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Jeju, 
2013. 
 
 
 

