203
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Towards an Improved IT Service Desk System and Processes: A Case Study
Marko Jäntti
School of Information and Communication Technology
Nathan Campus, Grifﬁth University
170 Kessels Road, Nathan
Brisbane, Queensland 4111, Australia
University of Eastern Finland
School of Computing
Software Engineering Research Group
P.O.B 1627, 70211 Kuopio, Finland
Email: marko.jantti@uef.ﬁ
Anup Shrestha, Aileen Cater-Steel
School of Information Systems
Faculty of Business and Law, University of Southern Queensland
Toowoomba, QLD 4350 Australia
Email: {anup.shrestha, caterst}@usq.edu.au
Abstract—An IT service desk provides a Single Point of
Contact for the customers and users regarding support re-
quests. The world-wide adoption of IT Infrastructure Library
(ITIL) framework has also pushed organizations to improve
their service desk operations. However, improving the service
desk is a serious challenge for many IT service providers. Many
government organizations in Finland have started to use ITIL
in their service desks and need help in conﬁguring service desk
tools and deﬁning processes. The research problem of this study
is: How could an IT service provider’s service desk operations
be improved by using IT service management best practices?
The main contribution of this paper is to present results of a
case study on IT service support in Finnish Tax Administration.
First, the customer support challenges are described. Second,
we present how these challenges were solved by using ITIL-
based practices. Third, we show how service desk performance
and ITSM training usefulness were measured. Finally, lessons
learnt from the case are presented.
Keywords-Service Desk; service management; IT service; in-
cident management.
I. INTRODUCTION
The service desk is a crucial contact point between
customers, users, IT service providers and third-party service
providers. The service desk is responsible for carrying out
incident management and request fulﬁllment processes. The
main objective of the service desk is to restore normal
service for users as quickly as possible. Because the service
desk is located at the heart of the customer interface, it has
a strong impact on customer satisfaction or dissatisfaction.
The service desk is known by many names such as help
desk, support center, information center, IT solutions center
or technical support. There are also call centers and contact
centers that handle contact requests, service requests and
complaints but they do not focus on providing specialist
support for solving problems. The goal of IT service desk
agents is to record, classify, diagnose and resolve service
desk cases from customers and users. Service desk cases
can be incidents (e.g., software or hardware failures), service
requests (e.g., requests for resetting passwords), complaints
or feedback. Service desk engineers may also be responsible
for identifying requests for a change (a request for change,
RFC of an existing service or a feature in a service) or
problems (causes of repeating incidents).
The service desk is often the most visible part of the
IT organization. It is a function that is under continuous
improvement and thus a very fruitful research target. This
paper focuses on the improvement of the service desk both
from a tool and process perspective. The paper is based on
the previously published conference paper on service desk
challenges [1]. This paper provides a wider literature review
on service support and provides a more detailed case study
description.
The IT service desk provides customers and users with
support for using IT services. Information system and
technology (IST) services can be broadly classiﬁed into
four categories [2]: Application services are services that
are delivered via software applications. Operational ser-
vices maintain the IT environment such as installation ser-
vices for hardware and software, change management, and
trouble-shooting services and running the data centre. Value-
enabling services increase the value of information assets
(e.g., consulting, systems design, and help desk). Finally,
infrastructure services focus on technical capabilities of IT
infrastructure, such as capacity and security of IT assets.
Customers aim to achieve certain business beneﬁts by using
the IT services. Therefore, if services are not available or
there are many incidents that cause barriers for service
usage, those business beneﬁts may not be fully realized.
One of the most important tasks of the service desk is
to effectively communicate with customers. This includes
keeping customers and users informed on the progress
of their support requests. Frequent communication usually
means better customer service experiences. Shaw and Ivens

204
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[3] deﬁne customer experience as an interaction between an
organization and a customer. They describe the customer
experience as “a blend of an organization’s physical per-
formance, the senses stimulated and emotions evoked, each
intuitively measured against customer expectations across
all moments of contact”. One of the most interesting parts
in their work is a customer experience pyramid with four
sides: marketing, sales, service and support. Each area con-
sists of building blocks: elements, sub-elements, standards,
measures, targets, and improvements.
In the context of IT service management, the service
desk is the interface of customer experience. Regardless of
the maturity of IT service processes, sophistication of the
ITSM tools and the skills and training of the service staff,
customer experience in ITSM is provided by the service
desk. The service can only be experienced by the customer
through the service desk function of the IT service provider.
Hence the service desk function must deal with "all" service
requests coming through phone calls, the internet, email or
in person [4]. The role of ITSM in this environment is not
only to provide an effective customer experience but also a
consistent one across all channels.
A. Related work
The service desk belongs to the services operation phase
in the services lifecycle within services computing [5]. Many
IT service provider organizations consider the improvement
of IT service management processes as a difﬁcult and
challenging task. Typically, the process improvement is
based on the processes and methods of the IT Infrastructure
Library (ITIL). ITIL is the most widely used IT service
management framework consisting of a set of best practices
for managing IT services. One of the main beneﬁts of ITIL is
standardization of the customer support terminology. Lack of
standardized terms and terminology differences cause prob-
lems for classifying support requests and communication
between different service provider organizations.
The service management section of ITIL version 2 con-
sists of two parts [6]: 1) Service Delivery (Service level man-
agement, IT ﬁnancial management, availability management,
capacity management, IT service continuity management)
and 2) Service Support (service desk function, incident
management, problem management, change management,
conﬁguration management and release management). ITIL
version 3 emphasized the service lifecycle thinking and
introduced ﬁve core books: Service Strategy [7], Service
Design [8], Service Transition [9], Service Operation [10]
and Continual Service Improvement [11]. The recent update
as ITIL 2011 edition did not introduce radical changes to
Service Operation processes. However, the Service Strategy
book was completely rewritten.
In order to improve IT service management processes,
organizations can use various IT service management frame-
works, such as the Control Objectives for IT and related
Technology (COBIT) framework [12], Microsoft Operations
Framework (MOF) [13], Kapella’s Framework for Incident
Management and Problem Management [14], IT Service
Capability Maturity Model [15] or IT service management
standard ISO/IEC 20000 [16].
Several process improvement guidelines are available for
improving IT service processes. Two of the most popular
frameworks that support ITSM process improvement are
Tudor’s ITSM Process Assessment (TIPA) [17] that uses
ITIL and the international standard for process assessment
ISO/IEC 15504; and Standard CMMI Appraisal Method for
Process Improvement (SCAMPI) [18] that can be used to
improve organization’s processes based on the model of
CMMI for Services (CMMI-SVC). Moreover, Lahtela et al.
[19] have explored how to measure IT service management
processes for improvement in practice and discussed the
value of real-time measurement information from IT service
support processes.
Recently, there has been collaboration between the ﬁeld
of ITSM and process assessment in the International Or-
ganization of Standardization (ISO) publication. The ITSM
standard ISO/IEC 20000 Technical Report Part 4 has been
published showing how ISO/IEC 20000 requirements are
translated into a process reference model (PRM) [20].
This model deﬁnes the ITSM processes in a life cycle
described in terms of process purpose and outcomes along
with an architecture describing the relationships between
the processes [17]. Such a PRM is a requirement for a
conformant assessment using a process assessment model
(PAM) based on ISO/IEC 15504 [21]. A PAM provides
a detailed model based on one or more PRMs for the
purpose of assessing process capability [22]. The recently
published Part 8 of standard ISO/IEC 15504 provides an
exemplar process assessment model for ITSM [23]. The use
of these standards can provide a useful tool to assess process
maturity, performance and work products.
These frameworks are crucial to improve the underlying
processes of the service desk, i.e., incident management and
request fulﬁllment and the interfaces of these processes with
other processes such as problem management and event
management. A frequently asked question in IT service
management is the differences between ISO/IEC 20000
standard, ITIL and COBIT frameworks and their role in
process improvements within the function of service desk.
First, COBIT framework [12] is designed for IT man-
agement for governance purposes. COBIT 5 includes 37
governance and management processes that are categorized
under ﬁve COBIT domains: Evaluate, Direct and Monitor;
Align Plan and Organize; Build, Acquire and Implement,
Deliver Service and Support; Monitor, Evaluate and Assess.
Many of the ITIL processes can be easily found in the
COBIT framework. For each process, COBIT deﬁnes the
goal of the process, control objectives, process inputs and
outputs, key activities, roles and responsibilities (usually

205
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
deﬁned using RACI chart), metrics and a process maturity
model. Goals and metrics have been divided into three
groups: IT, Process and Activities. Managing Service Desk
and Incidents is included in the COBIT framework in the
Deliver, Service and Support domain.
While the COBIT format is very compact (4 pages for
each process), ITIL provides detailed guidance on how to
implement best practices. For example, ITIL v3 Incident
Management [10] consists of 18 pages. For each process,
ITIL describes process objectives; scope; value to business;
policies, principles and basic concepts; process activities,
methods and techniques; metrics; roles and responsibilities;
critical success factors and risks.
ISO/IEC 20000 is an international standard for IT service
management. It deﬁnes the auditable requirements for IT
service management system. The standard consists of several
parts with different purposes. ISO/IEC 20000-1 deﬁnes the
mandatory (shall) requirements for a service management
system. ISO/IEC 20000-2 Part 2: Code of practice for
service management provides guidelines for interpreting the
Part 1 requirement and addresses the recommended (should)
approaches in implementing the service management sys-
tems. ISO/IEC TR 20000-3 Information Technology - Ser-
vice Management - Guidance [24] helps in scope deﬁnition
and applicability of ISO/IEC 20000-1.
There are several factors that might prevent an effective
process improvement in the service desk. First, companies
usually use external ITIL consultants to provide training for
their employees. These consultants know the ITIL frame-
work and IT service management concepts very well but
have limited knowledge on the existing business concepts,
methods, tools, services, and the structure of service desk
groups. Second, inadequate or too complex IT service man-
agement tools may slow down any IT service management
process improvement initiative.
Third, lack of process culture and process thinking is a
very common phenomenon among IT companies. ITIL is a
process oriented framework. Thus, the ITIL implementation
team should be well-trained and have excellent process
improvement and change management skills. Finally, lack
of management support for ITSM project may cause an
organization to not allocate sufﬁcient resources for the pro-
cess/tool improvement. Besides allocating enough resources
for improvement work, management needs to motivate and
reward people who pass the ITIL Foundation certiﬁcate
exams and who participate in IT service management in their
service support and delivery work activities in a consistent
and structured manner as guided by the ITIL framework.
Improvement of the processes however represents only
one aspect of service desk challenges. Bardhan et al. [25]
state that IT services have aspects such as the high degree
of involvement by people in delivery and that they are more
or less intangible. Therefore, challenges of the service desk
extend beyond the process view and include more subjective
"people" aspects such as staff motivation and customer
experience to generate business value. Simply put the service
desk is the "face" of the IT services in an organization. It
is required to be functioning effectively in order to raise the
proﬁle of IT in businesses. Hence overcoming the challenges
of the service desk should be a key driver in service strategy
of any organization.
There is a wide number of IT service management studies
available. Previous studies on IT service management have
put research efforts on success factors in implementing IT
service management [26], [27], measuring ITIL implemen-
tation projects [28], implementation of service-oriented IT
management [29], creating a taxonomy for ITIL processes
[30], ITIL implementation maturity models [31], process
maturity self-assessment [32], ITIL process integration ar-
chitecture [33], and prioritization of service incidents [34].
Many studies have explored service management pro-
cesses, such as improvement of incident management pro-
cesses based on ITIL practices [35], creating a mature
problem management process [36], service testing [37],
service level management [38], change and conﬁguration
management [39] and release management challenges [40].
Shariﬁ et al. [41] present causes why ITIL implementa-
tions fail with some references to the service desk. They
identify the following factors: spending too much time on
complicated process diagrams, not creating work instruc-
tions, not assigning process owners, concentrating too much
on performance, being too ambitious, allowing departmental
demarcation and ignoring reviewing of the ITIL. Mohamed
et al. [42] have integrated knowledge management elements
to the IT service management providing a framework to
attain effectiveness, efﬁciency and innovation during ITIL
implementation in organizations.
There are also studies that have dealt directly with help
desk activities such as a knowledge management-centric
help desk [43]. Bruton [44] has identiﬁed ten key steps for
managing the IT Help Desk. The service Desk encapsulates
the services provided by the Help Desk. We analyzed the
steps of Bruton [44] from the overall viewpoint of IT
service management best practices. We list the ten steps for
managing IT Help Desk from Bruton [44] and alongside
provide our interpretation of evaluating the steps in terms of
IT service management (in italics) using the ITIL framework
with the focus on the service operation phase of the service
lifecycle.
• Know your resources. Examine your resources to ﬁnd
out what you are capable of delivering and what you are
not. Implement ways of improving your skills, equip-
ment and contacts. IT service management: In ITSM,
knowing your resources is important. However, organi-
zations should also take into account the capabilities
required to deliver services. Resources and capabilities
combine as Service Assets [6]. Resources are "con-
sumed" as direct inputs for service delivery whereas

206
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
capabilities represent the abilities required to manage
resources [4]. Therefore, identifying and understanding
performance of service assets is an important step for
service management in general. Without the knowledge
of resources and capabilities, there is no basis to deﬁne
service value.
• Know your customers. Identify your customers, both
users and non-users of your service and list them in
order of priority. IT service management: Differences
between customers and users are clariﬁed in the ITSM
discipline. Customers and users are both important
stakeholders in service management. Customers rep-
resent individuals or groups that "purchase" services
which includes deﬁnition and agreement of service level
targets. On the other hand, users "use" the services
at an operational level and may be distinct from cus-
tomers.
• Launch your services. Launch a set of services that
meets the majority of customers’ needs. Encourage
any customer who ﬁnds the services inappropriate to
consider the service statement as merely a basis for
negotiating a special service level agreement with them.
IT service management: Launching services refers to
the service transition phase of the service lifecycle.
However, planning for the services to be launched
should be initiated during the service design phase in
the service catalogue management process. Informa-
tion on launched services should be available in the
service catalogue. There may be two levels in a service
catalogue: business level (designed for customers) and
technical level (designed for service production teams).
• Manage the support workﬂow. This requires estab-
lishment of effective workﬂow management in the sup-
port department. This should cover call management,
query prioritization, job allocation, problem escalation
and staff motivation. IT service management: The key
to managing a successful service support workﬂow is
planning during the service design stage. Agreed ser-
vice levels deﬁned during the service level management
process should ensure that the service delivery teams
are conﬁdent in supporting the services. Service Level
Agreements should be frequently reviewed to check
whether they are consistently and accurately deﬁned
so that service level targets are achievable. After good
planning, the most challenging areas in managing
the incident workﬂow are incident classiﬁcation and
prioritization.
• Ensure good problem closure techniques. It is not
enough to solve the user’s technical problem. Establish
query closure methods to encompass ensuring customer
satisfaction as well as analyzing recently completed
jobs to see what lessons learnt can be extracted from
how they were handled. IT service management: In
the ITSM, there are separate closing procedures for
incidents and problems. In practice, this means that
closing a problem may result in the closure of multiple
incidents related to that problem. Problem management
staff are responsible for maintaining the known error
database before closing the problem so that future
incidents and problems can be addressed in a more
orderly fashion.
• Instant workload status reporting. Set up your re-
porting routines to provide instant snapshots of the
current workload status as well as routine historical
information. This will enable you to make decisions
about how to deploy your resources. IT service man-
agement: Modern ITSM tools enable a real time view
of the resources that have been spent in the incident
management and the number of the open/solved cases
as well as performance measurement (average incident
resolution and response time). Use of such metrics
in the service desk function enables efﬁcient resource
consumption and optimizes service operations.
• Be proactive - take control. Look for and implement
ways of dealing with the workload proactively instead
of just reactively. Don’t let the workload control your
department, you should control the work. IT service
management: Service management should focus on
proactive work instead of reactive. This is one of the key
beneﬁts of implementing the ITSM model in the service
organisation. Proactive actions are especially visible
in the problem management process (major problem
reviews, trend analysis, deﬁning preventive actions) and
in the Continual Service Improvement process (deﬁne
what to measure, measure data, process data, analyse
data and implement improvements continually). These
actions ultimately facilitate the service desk to focus
on the critical and urgent issues and eliminate the "ﬁre
ﬁghting" attitude.
• Regular
contacts
with
customers. Communicate
with your customers, through newsletters, workshops,
knowledge provision, and most importantly, personal
contact - get out there and mix. IT service manage-
ment: Communication plays a very important role in
service management. The service desk is responsible
for communicating incident resolutions, progress of
the resolutions, and updated information on new and
existing services. Communication can also occur in the
form of service reviews, communicating Service Level
Agreements and deﬁning Service Level Requirements
from the early stages to meet customer’s expectations.
The ITIL framework stresses consistent communication
in every phase of the service lifecycle.
• Conduct surveys. Establish ways of surveying your
customers for their views on how the service is being
delivered. Use this information to make improvements
to your support service and always report your ﬁndings
and your subsequent actions to your customers. IT ser-

207
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
vice management: This is consistent with the previous
discussion about the value of communication in service
management. Service management may involve several
types of surveys: surveys after incident resolution or
service request fulﬁllment or periodic customer sat-
isfaction surveys. Besides customer surveys, employee
surveys provide useful information on staff perception
about service delivery and service bottlenecks. Reviews
should be organized after service delivery, for example,
after service deployment or after implementation of new
or changed services. Survey results have to be analyzed
so that it can be used as input for service improvements.
• Redo all the above every 4 to 6 months. Do not rest
on your laurels no matter how good you are. Go back to
step 1 every four to six months and review your whole
set-up. IT service management: Within service manage-
ment, there is a continual service improvement phase
in the service lifecycle based on Deming’s Plan-Do-
Check-Act cycle [11]. The Continual Service Improve-
ment philosophy in service management encapsulates
the entire service lifecycle from strategy to design to
transition to service operation. Thus, the basic ideology
is that the improvement of services, products, tools and
processes should never stop applies in the service desk
function as well.
These ten steps can be used as a generic checklist while
implementing or improving service desk activities. The
number of academic studies published in the ﬁeld of IT
service management is rapidly increasing. However, many
of them focus on presenting success factors or developing
new features for the service management tools. More studies
are needed to provide information on service desk im-
provement projects that have used IT Infrastructure Library
as an improvement framework because the transition from
a traditional help desk to a service-focused service desk
typically involves many challenges.
B. Our Contribution
This paper is related to an IT service management re-
search project Keys to IT Service Management and Effective
Transition of Services (KISMET) conducted in Finland. The
main contribution of this paper is to
• describe the strengths and challenges regarding IT
service desk of Finnish Tax Administration,
• present how identiﬁed challenges were solved by using
ITSM best practices,
• discuss ways to overcome service desk challenges as
part of continual service improvement,
• explain how service desk performance and ITSM train-
ing usefulness were measured and
• provide lessons learnt from the case study.
The results of this study might be useful for service man-
agers, service desk managers and IT service management
process managers.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the research methods of this study are described.
In Section III, service desk challenges and activities to
improve the service desk are presented. Section IV is the
analysis of ﬁndings. The discussion and the conclusions are
given in Section V.
II. RESEARCH PROBLEM & METHODOLOGY
This case study is a part of the results of the KISMET
project. The research problem of this study is: How could an
IT service provider’s service desk operations be improved by
using IT service management best practices? The research
problem was divided into the following research questions:
• What types of tools are used by the IT service desk
workers?
• How are self-service methods used in the service desk?
• How has the service desk function been organized?
• What types of challenges exist in the IT service
provider’s customer support?
• How were these challenges solved by using service
management best practices from the IT Infrastructure
Library?
• What can be learnt based on IT service management
training?
According to Yin [45], a case study is "an empirical
inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon within
its real-life context". Eisenhardt [46] deﬁnes case study
research as "a research strategy focusing on understanding
the dynamics present within single settings". The settings
of this paper is the customer support environment of Tax
Administration. A case study research method with a single
case was used to address the research problem. Figure 1
describes the research settings of the case study. The study
was carried out in Finnish Tax Administration’s Kuopio unit.
Figure 1.
The research settings of the case study
A. The Case Organization and Data Collection Methods
Our case organization is the Information System Man-
agement unit of Finnish Tax Administration that provides

208
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IT services (e.g., desktop services, service desk) to the
tax administration staff. In Finland, taxation is carried out
mainly by four organizations: Ministry of Finance, Tax
Administration, Customs Finland and TraFi (Trafﬁc safety
agency). Tax Administration provides e-services for tax
payers through the Tax.ﬁ website. These services include tax
card, revising the tax card, tax return online, notiﬁcations of
changed bank account details.
In order to demonstrate the complexity of the IT service
management, we present a short summary of Tax Admin-
istration’s 12 organizational units. Each unit has its own
special role in Finnish taxation:
• The Individual Taxation Unit (private customers, busi-
ness owners and self-employed persons)
• the Corporate Taxation Unit (limited companies and
corporate customers, customer information and tax con-
trol)
• the Tax Collection Unit (payment, collection, recovery
and remittance of taxes and the tax account procedure)
• The Tax Auditing Unit (tax auditing activities as a part
of tax control, tax audits, EU trade supervision and tax
control duties).
• The Joint Services Unit (contact channels, language
services ,tax risk management process, coordination of
development projects and quality work)
• The IT Services Unit (responsible for application, pro-
duction and ICT services; directs and oversees the use
of ICT)
• The Administrative Unit (HR, ﬁnancial and general
administration tasks),
• The Executive and Legal Unit (Tax Administration’s
steering and management system),
• The Internal Auditing Unit (internal audits in Tax
Administration)
• Communications Unit (communications and marketing)
• The Grey Economy Investigation Unit (producing and
distributing information on the grey economy and ac-
tion against it)
• The Tax Recipients’ Legal Services Unit (the rights of
tax recipients in taxation matters)
The Tax Administration organization had 5.300 full-time
employees in 2011. The number of employees working in
IT user support was 70. The organization used a phased
approach for implementing service management processes.
In the ﬁrst phase, the focus was on incident management and
the ITIL-based service desk service was launched in Spring
2011.
The case study was carried out in August 2011 - March
2012. In order to increase the quality of the case study, re-
searchers used three important principles of data collection:
1) using multiple sources of evidence: three researchers par-
ticipated in data collection from several sources 2) creating
a case study datastore (a case study diary) 3) maintaining
a chain of evidence (linking observations to data sources).
The following sources of evidence were used:
• Documentation from the case organization (e.g., inci-
dent management process description, service support
metrics, ITSM tool user guide, service catalogue, ser-
vice area, event management material, error handling
guide).
• Archives (service classiﬁcation schema, incident and
service request records)
• Interviews/discussions (discussions in work meetings
between a research team and the case organization,
informal coffee table discussions with service support
workers, email conversations with service managers,
a focused interview on self service methods with an
ITSM tool administrator)
• Participative observation (process improvement meet-
ings and workshops (CSI workshop 27 September) and
ITSM process training (45 minutes ITSM Introduction,
3 hour Basics of ITSM, ca. 70 participants) organized
by the KISMET research team
• Physical artifacts: Service desk tool, intranet
B. Data Analysis Method
There are two main techniques to analyze case study data:
a case comparison technique and a within-case technique. A
within case analysis technique [46] was used in this study
to analyze the collected case study data. The within-case
analysis focuses on examining each case carefully as a stand-
alone entity before making any generalizations. Additionally,
researcher triangulation was used in data analysis. Three
case study researchers participated in the data collection and
analysis to obtain a richer view on the case organization’s
behavior. Instead of a formal database, we used Windows
folder as a datastore for documents, memos, records and
other material that we received from the case organization.
The case study ﬁndings were validated in weekly meetings
with the case organization. At the end of the research period,
a case study report was sent to the case organization for
validation.
III. TOWARDS AN IMPROVED IT SERVICE DESK
We used KISMET (Keys to IT Service Management
Excellence Technique) model as a process improvement
tool. The model consists of the following seven phases:
Create a process improvement infrastructure, Perform a
process assessment, Plan process improvement actions, Im-
prove/Implement the process based on ITSM practices,
Deploy and introduce the process, Evaluate process improve-
ment and Continuous process improvement. In this paper, we
focus on the ’Perform a process assessment’ and ’Process
Improvement’ phases.

209
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Perform a Process Assessment
The process assessment focused on observing the current
state of the service desk including process goals, inputs,
outputs, roles and responsibilities, activities, metrics, and
relationships to other processes. The assessement was not
carried out as a formal process assessment but was based on
ITIL v2 and v3 best practices and ISO 20000-1 requirements
for incident management. The assessment was carried out by
three ITSM researchers.
Strengths: During the study, we observed the following
strengths regarding the service desk and customer support
from an IT service management viewpoint:
• Many processes were described by using activity dia-
grams. Thus, it was easy to get overview of support
practices.
• The organization had created an Incident Management
process description (including inputs and outputs and
process activities)
• The organization had a strong focus on continuous
improvement of services (the performance of the ser-
vice desk was measured with several metrics, frequent
surveys were carried out to collect feedback both from
customers and staff concerning service desk opera-
tions).
• Management support and commitment for improvíng
IT service management was highly visible in the orga-
nization
• The selected service desk tool supported IT service
management principles and a tool administration team
had skills and was very motivated to improve the ser-
vice desk tool based on service management practices.
• Service desk employees were really interested in receiv-
ing ITSM training. Some people who were not able to
participate in ITSM training days asked whether they
could get a short summary or personal training.
Potential improvement areas: The following improve-
ment areas regarding the service desk and customer support
were identiﬁed. These challenges (P= Process-related chal-
lenge, T= Tool-related challenge) should not be considered
as weaknesses but as potential ways to make customer
support more effective and service-focused.
• Challenge: Classiﬁcation of support requests in the
service desk requires clariﬁcation. (T) Improvement
suggestion: Clarify the options in ’Reason for Contact
Request’ ﬁeld of the incident record in the service desk
tool. Make the difference between service requests and
incidents visible. Service area and the type of support
requests should be separate ﬁelds. Collect concrete
examples of both incidents and service request for
training purposes.
• Challenge: Customers are not able to classify sup-
port requests correctly. (T) Improvement suggestion:
Remove the classiﬁcation option from customers and
simplify the submission of support requests.
• Challenge: It is difﬁcult to identify repeating inci-
dents from the service desk system (T). Improvement
suggestion: Mark the repeating incidents (for exam-
ple, create an additional ’check box’ type data ﬁeld
to an incident record: Repeating incident = x). Use
the ’Relate Cases’ function to establish relationships
between similar cases. Create a problem record based
on a repeating incident.
• Challenge: The interface between incident manage-
ment and problem management does not work. People
do not understand the difference between incidents and
problems. (P) Improvement suggestion: Train employ-
ees to open a problem record. Establish a simple-to-
understand guidelines for problem management includ-
ing triggers for problem management.
• Challenge: Service desk workers record several cases
under one incident. (P) Improvement suggestion:
Train service desk workers to record cases in such a
way that one incident record includes only one issue.
• Challenge: Improvement ideas are not recorded sys-
tematically into the service desk system. (P) Improve-
ment suggestion: Improvement ideas should be sent
to a Continual Service Improvement team or Change
Management team.
• Challenge: Lack of a formal Conﬁguration Manage-
ment Database (CMDB). (P, T) Improvement sugges-
tion: Establish a Conﬁguration Management process
that is responsible for updating, maintaining and man-
aging a Conﬁguration Management Database (CMDB).
Customer support tools: Based on the interview with a
service desk tool administrator (who also held a supervisor
role in the Operations Bridge (OB); OB is responsible for
observation and monitoring of the IT Infrastructure), we
identiﬁed the following tools and applications that were used
by customer support teams.
• A service desk tool (ITIL-compliant IT service man-
agement tool)
• A virtual phone system
• Screenshot application
• Ofﬁce guidebook
• Information Board (a website of known problems)
A participative observation carried out by the research
team revealed that besides the IT service management tool,
a large amount of customer support information had been
stored on the intranet sites. We found information on conﬁg-
uration items, change requests and problems and errors. This
information was valuable for researchers because it showed
how customer support practices are performed without ITIL.
We expected that it might be difﬁcult to persuade employees
to give up the intranet based practices and use the IT service
management tool instead.
Self-service methods: Based on interviews, we found out

210
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
that self service methods in the service desk included a
knowledge base; Information Board (a website on known
problems); customer portal that enabled 24/7 submission
of incidents and service requests, as well as monitoring
the progress of customer’s own incidents and service re-
quests. The information stored by customer support in the
knowledge base includes short tips, advice, workarounds,
and operational guidance (in the service desk’s internal use).
B. Improving the IT Service Desk: Tools and Processes
This phase started when the research team asked the case
organization which challenges they consider most important.
In this section, we discuss how these challenges were solved.
We focused the research efforts especially on four issues:
improving the classiﬁcation, deﬁning the interface between
incident and problem management, raising the awareness of
IT service management through training, and improving the
measurement of the service desk.
Because the time for research was limited, the process
improvement started very soon from improving the classi-
ﬁcation. Based on discussions with IS management, a tool
administrator, service support engineers and observations by
researchers, the research team decided that support request
classiﬁcation required changes. There was a ’Reason for
contact’ ﬁeld in the support request record. Overlapping
categories (failure, error) were removed or renamed in the
categories of the ’Reason for contact’ ﬁeld . The new
categories included: incident (failure or error), request (feed-
back), request (improvement idea), request (order), request
(other service request), request (advice), request (informa-
tion/notiﬁcation).
Additionally, the case organization’s representatives asked
whether the research team could improve the service area
deﬁnitions. It was a challenge for a research team to explore
the service areas and classify them into three tiers, because
the number of service areas was large and researchers did
not know the exact role and purpose of some service areas.
The improved category tree was submitted to the case
organization for validation. As an end result, a new service
category tree was established (see Figure 2).
The second improvement area was related to deﬁning
the interface between incident and problem management
processes. In the meeting (March 8th), there was a discussion
on why incident management and problem management
have to be separate processes. Two main beneﬁts from
having separate processes were identiﬁed. First, incident
management can resolve cases faster by using workarounds
from problem management. Second, problem management
enables the detailed investigation of the case although the
original incident has been resolved. The research team
created a simple procedure for problem management. The
procedure addressed how to use the ITSM tool to support
the problem management process. The workﬂow from inci-
dents and problems was explored using the scenario-based
Figure 2.
A part of a service category tree
technique. We selected four real customer support cases,
analyzed the workﬂow, and compared the handling proce-
dure to an ITIL-based handling procedure. The improvement
work also included the conﬁguration and customization of
a problem record (see Figure 3).
Figure 3.
A problem ticket
In the Problem Management workshop (February 21-
22, 2012), the case organization decided to establish a
problem management group that has responsibility to
• search cases that are potential problems
• model the problem management process in the User
support services unit
• store essential conﬁguration items to the service desk
tool
• record known errors to the knowledge base.
The research team organized ITSM training in the case

211
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
organization in seven different locations. The following
feedback (questions and comments) were collected from IT
service management training sessions (Sep. 13th, Sep. 19th,
Sep. 20th, Sep. 21th, Oct. 5th, Oct. 7th):
• “What is the current status of the service desk tool and
the incident management process?”
• “How support requests should be classiﬁed and ITSM
concepts integrated to the service desk?”
• “Which interfaces do service desk and incident man-
agement have?”
• “How IT service management training for service desk
people should be conducted?”
• “What does continual service improvement mean for
service desk?”
• “How do other organizations use ITIL?”
• “Is it possible to enable parallel handling of work tasks
regarding one incident?”
• “How can incidents be connected to each other?”
• “It was difﬁcult to adopt English ITIL terms, but after
training, terms are much more clearer”.
• “Service desk should see the big picture of customer
support, for example, whether the issue is related to
some existing problem?”
• “We have thought that process frameworks are only for
managers. Now, it looks that they are coming to the
ﬁeld, too”.
• “We should think about sending people to ITIL certiﬁ-
cation courses”.
• “Support requests are complicated and manysided.
Many service desk workers log cases incorrectly as
problems if they can choose ’problem’ from the contact
type list”.
• “ITILv2 looks like a blueprint of a French nuclear plant,
it was really good that you (trainer) showed it in the
end of the presentation”.
• “Not every support group uses automatic alerts for
support cases. It may happen that they do not know
that they have received an incident or a problem”.
• “The large number of customer support teams is a
problem (routing cases between many teams increases
the likelihood that the support case will be lost)”.
After training, we collected feedback from employees
how useful they considered IT service management training.
Regarding the role of respondents, 14 were IT support
engineers, 12 were designers, and 2 were management. The
average of responses was 3.46 on a scale of 1 - not valuable
at all, to 5 - very useful.
On March 12, the research team held an IT service
management measurement workshop with the tool ad-
ministrator to show the incident/service request listing in
MS Excel format. The ratio between incidents and service
requests was 114/304. The goal was to identify the dif-
ferences between service requests and incidents. The tool
Table I
FEEDBACK FROM ITSM TRAINING: HOW USEFUL WAS THE TRAINING?
(N=28)
Grade
Description
Responses
1
Not valuable at all
1
2
Less than useful
2
3
Somewhat useful
12
4
Quite useful
9
5
Very useful
4
administrator reported that some cases include both the
description of failure but also a request for more detailed
investigation of the case. It was agreed that unclear cases
shall be recorded as service requests. The research team had
prepared Critical Success Factors, Key Performance Indica-
tors and Metrics. The following ITIL metrics were selected
as potential process metrics for the incident management
process:
• Number of opened incidents
• Incident resolution time
• Incidents resolved within SLA targets
• Number of open incidents
• Call response time
• Customer satisfaction on resolved incidents
• Number of opened service requests
The measurement was considered an important part of
Continual Service Improvement. The research team also
studied whether service level agreements were used in the
organization. We observed that there were no SLAs related
to incidents in the operation. Another thing we observed
was that prioritization of a case was not automatically based
on urgency and impact of a case. This is one of the key
requirements for incident management. The IT management
listed the Service Level Management as a future improve-
ment target.
IV. ANALYSIS
In this section, the analysis of results is presented. Results
were categorized according to research questions. In order
to maintain the chain of evidence, we describe the source
for ﬁndings in parentheses (AR= Archives and records,
D= Documentation, ID= Interviews and discussions, O=
Observation, PA= Physical artefacts, ST= Seminars and
training organized by the research group). Lessons learnt
are presented after the analysis of each research question.
RQ1: What types of tools are used by the IT service
desk workers? (PA, O, ID) Regarding the service desk,
we observed during the study that the service desk tool
supports the implementation of IT service management
well. The tool was called a service desk tool although it

212
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
might have also supported many other support processes,
because it was compatible with the concepts of the ITIL
framework. Lesson 1: Although the improvement focus
would be incident management, take other processes into
account while deﬁning the records in the ITSM tool. The
self-service interviews and participative observation revealed
the usage of tools, such as a virtual phone system, screen-
shot application, ofﬁce guidebook, and information board.
The information board was related to problem management
because it seemed to store information on known problems.
One important observation we made was that there were
many dataﬁelds in the service desk tool that can be reused
between different records (incidents, problems, requests for
change) if carefully designed.
RQ2: How are self-service methods used in the ser-
vice desk? (ID, AR) The organization had invested in
automatizing the handling of service requests and electronic
forms were well exploited in service request management.
Many customer support workers were interested in using
the knowledge base module of the IT service desk tool.
This led us to deﬁne Lesson 2: Market self-service tools,
such as a knowledge base, not only to customers and users
but also to service desk workers. A well-designed and
maintained knowledge base available to the service desk can
remarkably decrease the incident resolution time. Typically,
a self-service portal allowed customers to check the status of
their support request and submit new incidents and service
requests 24/7. Self-service tools are often considered too
strongly as a customers’ tool.
RQ3: How has the service desk function been orga-
nized? (O, I, D) The service desk and customer support
were organized into three levels: Level 1 was responsible
for resolving simple requests and incidents and routing more
complicated requests to Level 2 that provided more advanced
support, such application support for Tax applications etc.).
Level 3 consisted of application development and hardware
and software vendors as external stakeholders.
Lesson 3: Establish a group that promotes the prob-
lem management process and practices in the organization.
Regarding incident management roles, we observed that
roles and responsibilities and incident management activities
were deﬁned in the process description and followed the
IT service management terminology. However, we noticed
that there was no responsible person or a group for problem
management. The organization had assigned a well func-
tioning team (2-3 persons) for conﬁguring the IT service
management tool. Detailed process descriptions had been
created for ITSM processes. Regarding the results, it has to
be mentioned that the organization had focused on service
desk and incident management in the ﬁrst phase of the
process improvement cycle (starting from Spring 2011).
Therefore, the remaining ITSM processes, such as change
management and problem management, were immature.
RQ4: What types of challenges exist in the IT service
provider’s customer support? (AR, PA, O, ID, D, ST)
Many of the challenges seemed to be related to classiﬁcation
of support requests. Service desk workers indicated both
in training and in discussions that users and customers
have problems in classifying requests. However, nobody had
measured the number of incorrectly classiﬁed requests.
Lesson 4: Train customer support workers in the early
phase to use the ’problem’ concept correctly and to identify
problems. Based on the knowledge from our previous stud-
ies, it was not a surprise that the organization experienced
difﬁculties with problem management. This challenge has
been noted also in our previous studies. Some service desk
workers had classiﬁed a case as a “problem” when the
problem was one of the options in Reason for Contact ﬁeld.
Crucial for problem management would be recording infor-
mation on which incidents are repeating incidents and thus
sources of problems. Discussions in training also indicated
that some service desk teams were interested in identifying
and ﬂagging repeating incidents.
Lesson 5: Establish clear escalation rules and automatic
email alerts on new support cases. Comments from ITSM
training and participative observation also revealed that inci-
dent escalation and routing involves challenges, for example,
all teams do not use automatic alerts that send a message
to email that they have received a new case. There was
also a need to parallel handling of incident tasks in order to
accelerate the resolution process.
RQ5: How were customer support challenges solved
using service management best practices from the IT
Infrastructure Library? (AR, PA, O, ID, D, ST) Creating
an effective measurement framework for IT service manage-
ment is a difﬁcult task. Measurement is visible especially in
the ITIL Continual Service Improvement (CSI) book that
provides guidance on measuring IT services.
Lesson 6: Establish a CSI process and deﬁne the rela-
tionship between Measurement activity, Reporting activity
and Managing Improvement Ideas activity. Customizing the
ITIL CSI is not an easy task because the ITIL CSI does not
provide a clear process description or a process diagram.
CSI consists of three main areas: measurement, reporting
and management of improvement ideas. We organized two
workshops related to measurements: a CSI workshop that
increased the employee’s awareness of CSI practices and a
measurement workshop that focused on selecting appropriate
process metrics. The problem with some ITIL based metrics
was that they were described with complex terminology.
There were some metrics the implementation of which
would have needed changes to the service desk tool, such
as the number of incidents reopened and as a percentage
of the total. Regarding the service desk, we observed that
there were over 10 metrics. Additionally, we observed the
case organization needed a model of how to handle service
improvement ideas in a more systematic way. One possi-
bility would be to assign development ideas to the change

213
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
management team that would open a Request for Change.
Lesson 7: Separate conﬁguration item, the contact request
type, and the service area from each other in order to
enable reuse of categories. After examining the service
desk tool and incident classiﬁcation rules the research team
suggested to the case organization that the service area
requires changes and that the using the service desk system
should be as simple as possible for customers. Our solution
was to separate a conﬁguration item, the contact request
type, and the service area from each other. This solution
enabled reusing of service area and conﬁguration items in
other records, such as in Request for Change and Problem
records.
Lesson 8: Start building the CMDB from the most
frequently used conﬁguration items, such as applications,
operating systems, and desktops. While investigating the
incident classiﬁcation in the service desk tool, we observed
that the interface between incident management and con-
ﬁguration management requires clariﬁcation. This led us to
deﬁne a preliminary model of how to store information on
conﬁguration items (CIs). We created a table with three
columns: CI Family, CI Class and CI Name and started
from application CIs. The result was Software Family,
8 CI application classes (for example, Ofﬁce application,
administration application, access management application)
and CI names (MS Word). We continued the validation of the
CI model by selecting incidents randomly from the service
desk tool and exploring which CI the incident is related to
and whether the CI is deﬁned in our model.
RQ6: What can be learnt from IT service management
training (ST) Service management training serves two main
purposes. First, it helps managers to decrease the employees’
change resistance to new IT service management terms
and processes “...It was difﬁcult to adopt English ITIL
terms, but after training, terms are much more clearer...”.
Additionally, organizing continuous ITSM training is the
only way to ensure that ITSM practices are really adopted
by the organisation’s employees. Lesson 9: ITSM training
helps to decrease change resistance to ITSM. We observed
that after training, some employees seemed to be ready
to recommend ITSM principles to their colleagues and
were interested in receiving more ITSM training. Training
increases the employees’ awareness on the objectives and
beneﬁts of ITSM implementation and may act as a reminder
that employees are also responsible for service management
“...We have thought that process frameworks are only for
managers. Now, it looks like they are coming to the ﬁeld, too
...”. Employees participate more in the training discussions
when they ﬁnd their own position in the ITSM framework.
Usually, service desk employees discuss more in ITIL train-
ing than programmers, but why? Is the reason that service
desk and incident management are more visible in ITIL than
application development? A rival explanation would be that
service desk workers are more social than programmers and
tend to speak more than programmers.
Second, IT service management training is a valuable
source of improvement ideas. This leads to our ﬁnal lesson
Lesson 10: ITSM training helps to identify improvement
targets. Questions and comments during ITSM training
often reveal bottlenecks, challenges and unclear ITIL issues.
For example, in our case, ITSM training provided valu-
able information on improvement areas, such as interfaces
between the service desk and other ITSM processes, for
example, between incident management and conﬁguration
management, change management, and event management.
We learnt that face-to-face training resulted in much more
discussion compared to remote training, and observed that
small training groups (less than 10 people in a group) work
very well in Awareness training because people are not afraid
of asking questions.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The service desk plays a very important role in IT service
management because it is responsible for daily communi-
cation with customers and users. In the IT Infrastructure
Library, the service desk is a function that performs the
incident management process. This paper aimed to answer
the research problem: How could an IT service provider’s
service desk operations be improved by using IT service
management best practices? The main contribution of this
study was to explore 1) service desk tools, 2) self-service
methods, 3) structure of the service desk function, 4) chal-
lenges related to the service desk and customer support and
5) solutions to these challenges based on ITSM practices.
The case organization Finnish Tax Administration was
a representative case of a government agency that is im-
plementing service management based on ITIL. The key
challenges we identiﬁed in service desk operations were
related to classiﬁcation of support requests both from the
service desk workers’ viewpoint and customers’ viewpoint,
understanding the differences between incident and prob-
lem management processes, and identifying the sources of
problems and interfaces between IT service management
processes.
The study also presented solutions to identiﬁed chal-
lenges. Regarding classiﬁcation of requests and incidents,
an improved service category tree was established and cate-
gories of the Reason for Contact ﬁeld in the incident record
were clariﬁed. Regarding the interface between incident and
problem management, a customized problem record was
created, a simple problem management procedure created,
and the problem management group created. The improve-
ments on ITSM measurement practices included selection
of incident management metrics and two workshops (CSI
workshop and Measurement Workshop). Additionally, ITSM
training was organized for the case organization’s employ-
ees. Feedback from training was presented in this paper as

214
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
well as comments and questions that participants asked dur-
ing training. Data were analyzed according to the research
questions and lessons learnt from researchers’ viewpoint
were presented as a part of the analysis.
This case study included certain limitations. First, re-
garding internal validity, data were collected using quali-
tative research methods. Quantitative methods, such as a
customer satisfaction survey on service desk could have
provided a richer view on the organization. However, the
qualitative case study method is well-suited to research busi-
ness process-related challenges in organizational context.
Additionally, we used a rich set of data sources and three
researchers to build a detailed view of the organization and
its customer support.
Second, concerning case selection and external validity,
the case organization was a partner of the software engi-
neering unit’s research project. Thus, convenience sampling
was used as a sampling strategy. It is a generally accepted
way to obtain case organizations. Third, this study included
one service area of the case organization. A larger number of
cases and comparison between them based on the preselected
categories would have increased the quality of case study.
This study can act, for example, as a pilot case study for
further studies. During the study we identiﬁed several targets
for further research. Further research could explore, for
example, the role of social media in service desks, impact
of service desk improvements on the business, or IT service
management process assessment tools.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is based on research in KISMET project
funded by the National Technology Agency TEKES (no.
70035/10), European Regional Development Fund (ERDF),
and industrial partners. We would also like to acknowledge
research contribution from University of Southern Queens-
land, Australia and Grifﬁth University, Australia in this
study.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Jäntti, “Examining challenges in it service desk system
and processes: A case study,” in Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Systems 2012 (ICONS2012).
CPS Publishing, 2012, pp. 105–108.
[2] J. Peppard, “Managing it as a portfolio of services,” European
Management Journal, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 467–483, August
2003.
[3] C. Shaw and J. Ivens, Building Great Customer Experiences.
Palgrave-Macmillan, 2005.
[4] P. Bernard, Foundations of ITIL.
Zaltbommel, Netherlands:
Van-Haren Publishing, 2012.
[5] L.-J. Zhang, J. Zhang, and H. Cai, Services Computing.
Ts-
inghua University Press, Beijing and Springer-Verlag GmbH
Berlin Heidelberg, 2007.
[6] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce, ITIL Service Delivery. The
Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2002.
[7] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(a), ITIL Service Strategy.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[8] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(b), ITIL Service Design.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[9] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(c), ITIL Service Transition.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[10] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(d), ITIL Service Operation.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[11] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(e), ITIL Continual Service
Improvement.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[12] COBIT 5, Control Objectives for Information and related
Technology: COBIT 5.
ISACA, 2012.
[13] Microsoft,
“Microsoft
operations
framework,”
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc506049.aspx,
December 2012.
[14] V. Kapella, “A framework for incident and problem manage-
ment,” International Network Services whitepaper, 2003.
[15] F. Niessinka, V. Clerca, T. Tijdinka, and H. van Vliet, “The
it service capability maturity model version 1.0,” CIBIT
Consultants&Vrije Universiteit, 2005.
[16] ISO/IEC 20000, IT Service Management, Part 1: Speciﬁcation
for service management.
ISO/IEC JTC1/SC7 Secretariat,
2005.
[17] B. Barafort, V. Betry, S. Cortina, M. Picard, M. St-Jean,
A. Renault, and O. Valdes, ITSM Process Assessment Sup-
porting ITIL.
Zaltbommel, Van Haren Publishing, 2009.
[18] CMMI, Standard CMMI Appraisal Method for Process Im-
provement (SCAMPISM) A, Version 1.3: Method Deﬁnition
Document.
USA: Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University, 2011.
[19] A. Lahtela, M. Jäntti, and J. Kaukola, “Implementing an
itil-based it service management measurement system,” in
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Digital
Society.
St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles: IEEE Computer
Society, February 2010, pp. 249–254.
[20] ISO/IEC, TR 20000-4:2010 - Information technology -
Service management - Part 4: Process Reference Model.
Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for Standard-
ization, 2010.
[21] A. Mesquida, A. Mas, E. Amengual, and J. Calvo-Manzano,
“It service management process improvement based on
iso/iec15504: A systematic review,” Information and Software
Technology, vol. 54, no. 3, 2012.
[22] ISO/IEC 2004, ISO/IEC 15504-2:2004 - Information technol-
ogy - Process Assessment - Part 2: Performing an Assessment.
Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for Standard-
ization, 2004.

215
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[23] ISO/IEC TS 15504-8:2012(E), Information technology - Pro-
cess assessment -Part 8: An exemplar process assessment
model for IT service management.
ISO/IEC TC JTC1/SC7
Secretariat, 2012.
[24] ISO/IEC, ISO/IEC TR 20000-3 Information Technology -
Service Management - Guidance on scope deﬁnition and
applicability of ISO/IEC 20000-1.
ISO/IEC JTC1/SC7
Secretariat, 2010.
[25] I. Bardhan, H. Demirkan, P. Kannan, R. Kauffman, and
R. Sougstad, “An interdisciplinary perspective on it services
management and service science,” Journal of Management
Information Systems, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 13–64, 2010.
[26] W.-G. Tan, A. Cater-Steel, and M. Toleman, “Implementing
it service management: A case study focussing on critical
success factors,” Journal of Computer Information Systems,
vol. 50, no. 2, 2009.
[27] C. Pollard and A. Cater-Steel, “Justiﬁcations, strategies, and
critical success factors in successful itil implementations in
u.s. and australian companies: An exploratory study,” Infor-
mation Systems Management, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 164–175,
2009.
[28] J. Iden and T. R. Eikebrokk, “Understanding the itil im-
plementation project: Conceptualization and measurements,”
in Proceedings of 2011 22nd International Workshop on
Database and Expert Systems Applications.
Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE, 2011.
[29] A. Hochstein, R. Zarnekow, and W. Brenner, “Itil as com-
mon practice reference model for it service management:
Formal assessment and implications for practice,” in EEE
’05: Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference
on e-Technology, e-Commerce and e-Service (EEE’05) on e-
Technology, e-Commerce and e-Service.
Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 704–710.
[30] M. Brenner, “Classifying itil processes; a taxonomy under
tool support aspects,” in Business-Driven IT Management,
2006. BDIM ’06. The First IEEE/IFIP International Work-
shop on, april 2006, pp. 19–28.
[31] R. de Sousa Pereira and M. da Silva, “A maturity model for
implementing itil v3,” in Services (SERVICES-1), 2010 6th
World Congress on, july 2010, pp. 399 –406.
[32] R. Meziani and I. Saleh, “e-government: Itil-based service
management case study,” in Proceedings of the 12th Interna-
tional Conference on Information Integration and Web-based
Applications &#38; Services, ser. iiWAS ’10.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 509–516.
[33] S. Zhang, Z. Ding, and Y. Zong, “Itil process integration in the
context of organization environment,” in Computer Science
and Information Engineering, 2009 WRI World Congress on,
vol. 7, 31 2009-april 2 2009, pp. 682–686.
[34] J. Barlow and P. Stewart, Branded customer service: the new
competitive edge.
United States of America: Berret-Koehler
Publishers, Inc., 2004.
[35] M. Jäntti, “Lessons learnt from the improvement of customer
support processes: A case study on incident management,”
in Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, ser. Lec-
ture Notes in Business Information Processing, W. Aalst,
J. Mylopoulos, N. M. Sadeh, M. J. Shaw, C. Szyperski,
F. Bomarius, M. Oivo, P. Jaring, and P. Abrahamsson, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 32, pp. 317–331.
[36] M. Kajko-Mattsson, “Problem management maturity within
corrective maintenance,” Journal of Software Maintenance,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 197–227, 2002.
[37] M. Jantti and T. Kujala, “Exploring a testing during main-
tenance process from it service provider’s perspective,” in
Information Science and Service Science (NISS), 2011 5th
International Conference on New Trends in, vol. 2, oct. 2011,
pp. 318–323.
[38] M. Kajko-Mattsson, C. Ahnlund, and E. Lundberg, “Cm3:
Service level agreement,” in ICSM ’04: Proceedings of the
20th IEEE International Conference on Software Mainte-
nance.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society,
2004, pp. 432–436.
[39] C. Ward, V. Aggarwal, M. Buco, E. Olsson, and S. Wein-
berger, “Integrated change and conﬁguration management,”
IBM Syst. J., vol. 46, pp. 459–478, December 2006.
[40] H.-M. Sihvonen and M. Jantti, “Improving release and patch
management processes: An empirical case study on process
challenges,” Proceedings of the International Conference on
Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2009), vol. 0, pp.
232–237, 2010.
[41] M. Shariﬁ, M. Ayat, A. A. Rahman, and S. Sahibudin,
“Lessons learned in itil implementation failure,” in Informa-
tion Technology, 2008. ITSim 2008. International Symposium,
vol. 1, aug. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[42] M. Mohamed, V. Ribiere, K. O’Sullivan, and M. Mohamed,
“The re-structuring of the information technology infrastruc-
ture library (itil) implementation using knowledge manage-
ment framework,” The Journal of Information and Knowledge
Management Systems, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 315–333, 2008.
[43] L. M. Gonzalez, R. E. Giachetti, and G. Ramirez, “Knowledge
management-centric help desk: speciﬁcation and performance
evaluation,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 389–405,
2005.
[44] N. Bruton, How to manage effective IT Help Desk.
Butter-
worth Heinemann, 2002.
[45] R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage Publishing, 1994.
[46] K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,”
Academy of Management Review, vol. 14, pp. 532–550, 1989.

