Fiber Optic Capillary Sensor with Smart Optode for Rapid Testing  
of the Quality of Diesel and Biodiesel Fuel 
 
Michal Borecki, Piotr Doroz, Przemysław Prus,  
Paweł Pszczółkowski, Jan Szmidt 
Warsaw University of Technology 
Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics 
Warsaw, Poland 
E-mail: borecki@imio.pw.edu.pl 
Jarosław Frydrych 
Automotive Industry Institute 
Warsaw, Poland.  
e-mail: j.frydrych@pimot.eu 
Michael L. Korwin-Pawlowski 
Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie 
Université du Québec en Outaouais 
Gatineau, Québec, Canada 
e-mail: michael.korwin-pawlowski@uqo.ca 
Andrzej Kociubiński, Mariusz Duk 
Lublin University of Technology 
Department of Electronics 
Lublin, Poland.  
e-mail: akociub@semiconductor.pl 
 
 
Abstract—There are many fuel quality standards introduced 
by national organizations and fuel producers. Usual techniques 
for measuring the quality of fuel, as for example cetane index, 
fraction composition and flash point, require relatively 
complex and expensive laboratory equipment. Therefore, 
testing of fuel is not rapid and can be costly. On the fuel user 
side, fast and low cost sensing of useful state of biodiesel fuel is 
important. One of the devices that address this task is the fiber 
optic capillary sensor in which forced local conversion of diesel 
fuel into vapor is implemented. The present paper concentrates 
on the critical elements the construction of the sensor as well as 
on the interpretation of experimental results. We have 
investigated the construction of the micro heater and the 
technology of smart capillary optrode preparation. We propose 
a capillary optrode construction and technology that reduces 
unwanted light coupling, as well as a new micro heater 
construction that uses a silicon carbide heating element. Our 
experimental assumption is that diesel fuel quality can be 
correlated with the type and concentration of its bio-
components. We examined fuels that are mixtures prepared 
from components that are in line with European Union 
standards. The components used are petrodiesel fuel and bio-
esters as well as edible rapeseed oil. For the mentioned fuels, 
we showed that the results of experiments are easy to interpret 
and that the useful state of diesel and biodiesel fuels can be 
determined from the time of local heating that is required for 
vapor phase creation and the local time of vapor bubble 
formation. 
Keywords-biodiesel fuel; fuel quality; useful state of fuel; 
fiber optic capillaries; fiber optic sensors; capillary sensor; smart 
capillary optrode 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper’s focus is on selected aspects of construction 
of sensor that uses capillary optrode and enables rapid testing 
of quality of diesel and biodiesel fuels, the principle and 
preliminary results of which were presented in [1]. 
A. Diesel and biodiesel fuel production examination and 
usage 
Rudolf Diesel constructed the first internal combustion 
engine using pure plant oil as carburant in 1912. The fuel 
was 100% peanuts oil; therefore, today this fuel 
classification is PPO – pure plant oil. The next time engines 
operated on PPO were built in 1985 [2]. 
Classical fuels are made from distillated products of 
crude oil. After distillation the oil composition depends on 
the process and on the crude oil parameters. The parameters 
of oil distillation process are not merely the boiling 
temperature but include such distillation characteristics as: 
initial distillation temperature (about 170ºC), end distillation 
temperature (about 370ºC) and the fractional contents 
temperatures. Those characteristics determine also the basic 
fuel parameters. 
On the practical side, diesel engine performance, fuel 
consumption, and emitted pollutants result from the 
combustion process. The environment of combustion, the 
injected fuel’s form and the fuel quality all play a primary 
role in the diesel combustion process. One of the most 
important diesel fuel quality parameters is ignition quality. 
The ignition quality depends on the molecular composition 
of the fuel. The ignition quality in turn is linked with ignition 
delay time, which is the time between the start of injection 
and the start of combustion. Measurements of ignition 
quality of fuel (CN) have to be carried out in the Cooperative 
Fuel Research (CFR -5) engine, under carefully controlled 
test conditions. The smaller is the delay of testing, the CN 
value is greater. The CN scale is based on the characteristics 
of know chemical single components liquid hydrocarbons. 
Therefore, the CFR-5 engine is also called cetane engine. 
The basic disadvantage of such approximation to fuel quality 
measurement is the high cost of the measurement device and 
the 
complexity 
of 
the 
procedure. 
The 
alternative 
approximation is the use of ignition quality tester (IQT™) 
57
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and the ASTM D6890/EN 15195(IP 498) test methods. The 
mentioned devices can be seen in [3, 4]. 
Nowadays, producers define the useful state of diesel fuel 
by several parameters: cetane number (min 51.0), density 
(860 to 890 kg/m3), and distillation temperatures (for 
example T90 maximal value is 360C), kinematic viscosity at 
40°C (3.5 to 5.0 mm2/s), etc. Other diesel fuel parameters 
characterize its operability: carbon residue, water and 
sediment, cloud point, conductivity at 20C, oxidation 
stability, acidity, copper corrosion, flashpoint, lubricity, 
appearance, and color [5]. For the ordinary fuel user such 
collection of parameters is often too complex for practical 
use because their testing requires special laboratory 
equipment. Therefore, fuel examination is not rapid and can 
be costly.  
The introduction of biodiesel fuel increases the number 
of parameters connected with the bio-component content [6]. 
In this situation the user requires the simplest possible 
answer to a question: Is that fuel useful for my engine?  
B. Economical reason of sensor of diesel and biodiesel fuel 
examination 
Sensing of useful state of biodiesel fuel is exceptionally 
important for car fleet owners and farmers.  
Car fleet owners are interested because of legal 
regulations and of the risks of buying poor quality fuel [7]. In 
certain countries, including Poland, units of public 
administration, production and customers the law prescribes 
public auction for transactions of larger quantities of fuel. In 
such auction the ordered fuel is certified on the day of 
delivery as meeting national standards, like the Polish norm 
PN-EN 590. The purchased quantity of the fuel is often split 
between different tanks belonging to the buyers. During the 
fuel transfer into the buyers’ tanks the buyers’ representative 
may be present. Even though the ordered fuels may have to a 
certificate of quality, the buyers often reserve the rights to 
check the quality of the fuel. Quite often the delivered fuel 
quality tests are at the option of the buyers, and are often 
waived because of the associated costs, with sometimes 
conflicts arising when the poor quality is discovered at a later 
stage.  
Farmers are often very interested in examination of diesel 
fuel quality because they can produce bio-fuel components 
for their own use. The characteristics of those home-
produced components are not optima [8]. One can see clear 
differences between the freshly pressed technical rapeseed 
oil and the edible rapeseed oil, which is chemically clarified 
and stabilized with antioxidants, such as vitamin E. For 
practical fuel application the technical rapeseed oils have too 
small cetane numbers and too high viscosities. It seems that 
one of the reasons of low biodiesel fuel mixtures usage by 
farmers is the absence of a low cost device to evaluate its 
useful state [9]. In certain regions, there are in use mixtures 
of rapeseed oil with diesel fuel, sometimes they are modified 
with n-butanol or ethanol [10]. However, the viscosities of 
oils decrease with the increase of temperature. For these 
reasons, in tropical countries the potential of using biodiesel 
fuels is larger. The uses of mixtures of soapnut oil with 
petrodiesel fuel are discussed in [11]. It turns out that, 
despite significant differences in fuel viscosity and flash 
point, the observed engine parameters with the prepared 
mixtures were very similar [12].  
In a European study, it was observed that using the 
biodiesel fuel of the first generation at low environment 
temperatures can lead to the degeneration of engine 
parameters [13]. Therefore, production standards for 
biodiesel fuel were introduced: density at 15°C (ISO3675) 
and temperature of fluidity for the transitional periods of 
season and winter (DIN EN 116). The disadvantages of 
biodiesel fuel can be overcome by fuel processing [14] or by 
using biopetrodiesel fuel mixtures [15]. There are also 
publications describing low energy processes for upgrading 
the technical parameters of biofuels. For example: 
transestrification of soybean oil with the use microwave and 
nanopowders enables creation of biodiesel fuel, which meets 
the requirements of the EN-14214 norm [16]. A new 
generation of 100% biodiesel fuel can be made with 
isomerization [17, 18]. Neste Oil proposes NExBTL bio 
component that can be used as 100% biodiesel fuel that 
means the diesel fuel without petrodiesel components, and is 
known as NesteGreen 100. The hydrogenated vegetable oils 
(HVO) are also used as biodiesel components. Their 
advantage is agreement with diesel particulate filter (DPF) of 
engines. 
C. Critical points of diesel fuel conversion into energy 
The starting point of this development of a new sensing 
method of the useful state of diesel and biodiesel fuels was to 
consider the two critical points of fuel conversion into 
energy. The first is the injector of atomized fuel into the 
combustion chamber by forcibly pumping it through a small 
nozzle. The second critical point is the exhaust of gases 
filtered with the diesel particulate filter. Periodically, the 
DPF has to be taken up to high temperatures to burn off the 
matter it has collected, which is realized by contact of DPF 
with a part of fuel vapor [19]. 
Typically, fuel is injected into the cylinders just after the 
vapor fires and the exhaust valve opens. At injection point, 
the fuel vaporizes and a part of vapor moves down the 
exhaust to the DPF and cleans it in a precisely controlled 
injection scheme [20]. Because biodiesel fuel has a higher 
distillation temperature than petrodiesel fuel, it does not 
vaporize as fast [21, 22]. Some of the biodiesel fuel can end 
up adhering to the injector, the cylinder wall or runs past the 
rings, diluting the engine oil and diluting DPF deposits 
instead of cleaning it. 
Therefore, the examination of vapor creation parameters 
of biodiesel fuels is critical to evaluate its useful state 
regardless of the composition of fuel. The methods of spray 
forming observation in diesel engine have been used [23], 
but are not good for integration into a sensor device.  
In this work, we present new developments and new 
applications of on capillary photonic sensors working on the 
principle of monitoring optical intensity changes in 
dynamically forced measurement cycles, first postulated in 
[24]. We present the idea of the sensor, the construction of 
the head, the experimental results of testing biodiesel fuels 
for their quality for use, and conclusions. 
58
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The sensors use fiber optic capillaries in which the phase 
of the filling liquid changes locally to gas when forced by 
local heating, while the propagation of light in the capillary 
is monitored. Therefore, the sensors examine simultaneously 
many parameters of the liquids. To evaluate the performance 
of the sensors, we used oils with known quality. 
II.  
IDEA OF SENSOR HEAD  
The sensor head idea is inspired by one of most critical 
diesel engine element that is fuel injector and nozzle. The 
actual dimensions of the typical nozzle showed in Fig. 1 are 
ID/Id = 4, L/Id = 5 and Id = 0.2mm. The fuel injector nozzle 
diameters depending on construction can vary from 50 to 
200m [25].  
The influence of relation between nozzle dimensions, 
pressure ratio on the type of diesel fuel flown is under 
investigations [26]. The character of the fuel flow through 
the nozzle depends strongly on the pressure difference. It can 
be classified as cavitating or non-cavitating type, while in the 
non-cavitating flow case we distinguish between the 
turbulent and the laminar flow. The caviting flows happen 
when the difference in pressures is high enough. The input 
pressure (Pi) can vary from 15MPa to 110MPa. The output 
pressure (Pn) is of the order of 6MPa. 
Typical temperatures inside the fuel injection nozzle are 
from 235 to 275C, the maximum does not exceed 300C 
[25]. The flame temperatures in the cylinders (Tn) are about 
1500C and the wall temperatures are under 350C. 
Therefore, we cannot replicate the flame temperatures and 
pressures in small portable sensor devices. 
On the other hand, the volume of a single injection of the 
fuel is at the range of 3÷50mm3. The fuel injected into 
cylinder forms a spray and enters the cylinder in about few 
milliseconds [28]. Then it vaporizes and flames.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic construction of the nozzle. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Schematic construction of sensor head. 
These processes are correlated with the quality of 
ignition, which forms one of the major factors of the fuel 
quality. The second factor when considering biodiesel fuel is 
connected with fuel viscosity. Therefore, we intend to 
examine in our sensor the fuel vaporization and forced flow 
in conditions that are as close to reality as possible. We have 
to create a setup allowing the examination of partial 
evaporation of fuel, which take place in the nozzle and can 
move the fuel into the orifice of few hundreds micrometers 
diameter. Such a nozzle can be modeled with two glass 
capillaries that would allow observation of the direct optical 
fuel phases and their movement. The capillary with the 
smaller outer diameter can be positioned inside the bigger 
capillary using glue forming a single-use replaceable optrode 
[1].  
The inner temperature that is needed to create the bubble 
of vapor can be achieved with a local heater positioned near 
the capillary. With one end of capillary closed, the local 
heater can act as a fuel pump by producing a vapor pressure 
(see Fig. 2). The set of commercially available capillaries 
produced by VitroCom enables to prepare the optrode that is 
characterized by dimensions close to those of practical 
nozzles. For example; as the inner capillary we can use 
CV3040Q capillary that Id = 300µm as the outer capillary 
we can use CV7087Q capillary, which ID = 700µm. Both 
capillaries can work in temperatures up to the quartz glass 
annealing point, which is 1070ºC. The outer capillary 
(CV7087Q) length should be greater than 7.8mm to move 
3mm2 of fuel.  
The creation and movement of the bubble in the liquid 
depends on the liquid thermo-dynamical parameters as well 
as its viscosity and its vapor phase parameters, and also on 
the container’s geometry and the outer thermo-dynamical 
conditions [29]. The faster is the bubble creation from liquid 
phase, the more probable is the turbulent flow of fuel in the 
nozzle. Therefore, we have to distinguish two stages of the 
bubble creation: the time of liquid fuel heating and the time 
of phase change from liquid to vapor that forms the bubble 
filling the full cross section of the capillary.  
 
III. 
HEAD CONSTRUCTION 
The sensor’s head consists of two functional blocks: the 
base and the optrode [30]. The base is used to integrate the 
micro heater, the optical path of source and receiver as well 
as for positioning the optrode. The optrode is the replaceable 
part of the head that imitates the geometry and the main 
physical characteristics of a fuel nozzle and enables 
monitoring of creation of the vapor bubble. 
A. Micro heater 
The micro heater has to supply sufficient heat for the 
biodiesel fuel to reach over 200C inside the capillary. We 
examined experimentally and by numerical modeling the 
map of temperatures in the model of nozzle. We used the 
Coventor software, a R300 NEC thermo-vision camera, and 
the InfReC analyzer software. The results of micro heater 
simulation are presented in Fig. 3.  
59
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3.  Temperature map in [˚K] at 30s of heating for a glass capillary 
CV7087Q filled with diesel fuel. 
In both cases, the capillary optrode and its position over 
heating element is the same. The situation in Fig. 3a 
concerns thick film type planar heating element with total 
dimension 4mm×8mm×0.635mm. The element is equipped 
with a resistance heating element and with connection pads. 
The resistance element area covers 4×4mm and is positioned 
at 50m under the capillary. For dissipating 5W in 30 
seconds the temperature of the surface of the heater reached 
327C while the temperature inside the capillary reached 
247C. The full microheater assembly (Fig. 3b) including the 
mounting base requires dissipating of 7W in 30 seconds to 
achieve the same temperature inside the capillary. 
Sequential simulations showed that for the 290ºC 
temperature inside the filled up capillary and for the assumed 
distance between the capillary and micro heater surface, the 
micro heater with dimensions of 5mm×5mm, the upper 
surface temperature has to be at least 350C. This 
temperature is more than can withstand the planar resistors, 
e.g., Vishay High Power Thin Film Wraparound Chip 
Resistor in type 2512 package [31]. Wire heaters can easily 
work at such temperatures, but since such constructions do 
not provide a constant and repeatable distance between the 
microheater and the capillary, they cannot replace the planar 
structures. The most favorable shape of planar microheaters 
is rectangular with side length from 2mm to 5mm, and the 
recommended power of heating is 7÷10W. The power 
density can reach 1.6W/mm2, which is also too high for 
commercial hybrid resistors. For the heater current supply 
the recommended value of resistance is between 10÷50Ω. 
Even current dividers from Vishay like the Current Sensing 
Bondable Chip Resistors type S.C. are not optimal for such 
application. More over, the head construction requires that 
the microheater has to be positioned on a rectangle shaped 
substrate with the length of 3cm and width of 5mm. On this 
substrate the electrical contacts for the heating element and 
wire connections have to be provided, as well as isolating 
pads for mounting the head. The isolating regions are 
necessary because the head base is made of metal. The micro 
heater base is outlined in Fig. 4. 
We have built different versions of planar micro heaters. 
In all construction we used alundum ceramic bases with the 
thickness of 635μm. For preparing the heating elements we 
used thick film and thin film hybrid technologies as well as 
monolithic silicon carbide semiconductor technologies.  
The thick film technology enabled us to make a fully 
integrated micro heater in the form of one piece. In our 
investigation this element worked repeatable in 20 seconds 
cycle without long term resistance changes when end 
temperatures did not exceed 200C. The parameters of the 
micro heater were stable for temperature shocks from 30°C 
to 200°C – the reversible resistance changes were low, 
within 1.5Ω at 30Ω of nominal resistance. When the 
temperature exceeded 200ºC we observed cracking of the 
resistive layer followed by the splitting of ceramic base into 
two parts. Therefore, we examined the two other 
technologies.  
We used thin film metal deposition technology to prepare 
standalone resistance elements. The metal was deposited on 
a silicon substrate. There were three areas in the element: 
one square resistive heating area and two areas for electrical 
connections. The connections between the heating element 
and the microheater base were made by wire bonding or with 
high temperature conductive glue use. To bond it, we at first 
positioned the element on the base with dielectric glue. At 
that, we observed two unwanted phenomena, both due to the 
high temperature of the connected elements. For wire 
bonding technology we observed at 150C that standard 
dielectric glue gave smoke, but we did not detect any rapid 
changes of the resistance of the micro heater. With 
conductive glue technology use at 300C we observed that 
the high temperature connecting glue, which was specified as 
working up to 400C also gave smoke while the connections 
resistance increased from 1 Ω to 10Ω. This increase had an 
unstable character, but the glue still properly positioned 
heating element on the base. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Micro heater base outline. 
60
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5.  Tested micro heaters. 
Moreover, the thin film heating element increased its 
resistance during heating cycles in such way that the initial 
resistance of following heating cycle was bigger than in 
previous one. We think that special passivation of thin metal 
layer will solve this problem.  
At last we evaluated monolithic silicon carbide heating 
elements. The element enabled heating capillary to the 
required temperature in 30 second cycles. The increase of 
time of heating from 25 to 30 second with decreased power 
but maintained final temperature resulted in partial 
degradation of the glue used for bonding. We used high 
temperature conductive glue; therefore, we observed the 
mentioned degradation as small permanent changes in the 
microheater’s resistance. Hence, we limited heating time to 
25 seconds. The next heating cycle with maximum power 
was safe, when the heater was allowed to cool down to room 
temperature. In normal condition it required about 2 minutes 
for cooling. The tested micro heaters are shown in Fig. 5. 
 
B. Path of optical signal 
The creation of the bubble can be observed from outside 
or inside of capillary with the use of optical fibers [32]. The 
bubble position can vary in the area of local heating due to 
variation of fuel composition and real geometrical 
dimensions of capillaries within with their specified 
tolerances. Moreover, the outside observations of effects 
happening inside the capillary are sensitive to outer capillary 
cleanness [33, 34]. Therefore, the observation from outside is 
not optimal for measuring the bubble creation time. 
Observation of the bubble creation with two fibers 
positioned inside the capillary is not convenient for a 
replaceable optrode setup, and also complicates the fuel 
flow. To overcome those problems, we used a modified 
capillary optrode with a phosphor layer to convert radiation 
(see Fig. 6).  
In the presented optrode, the phosphor converts the light 
from 460nm wavelength of the high power light emitting 
diodes, to 562nm. Only part of the light radiated in the full 
angle extent propagates in the inner capillary to the area of 
examination. The fragment of optrode where phosphor is 
deposited is presented in Fig. 7. When we illuminated the 
phosphor with the radiation of 460nm at the cross section of 
outer capillary of optrode we registered the presence of 
radiation at 460nm and 562nm wavelengths (see Fig. 8). 
 
Figure 6.  Optrode that uses phosphor to convert outer radiation into light 
inside capillary. 
 
Figure 7.  Optrode part where UV phosphor is deposited. 
 
Figure 8.  Cross section of outer oprtode when phosphor is radiated with 
radiation at 460nm wavelength, the output power is at the rank of 300nW. 
To eliminate the coupling to the receiver of the unwanted 
radiation propagating into the wall of outer capillary, we 
used two means of protections. First, the receiver fiber plug 
was inserted into optrode. Second, the optrode walls at the 
plug side were covered with a thin metal layer (see Fig. 9) 
[35]. The optical quality of thin film protection is presented 
in Fig. 10, where the optical beam coupled into the outer 
capillary has 2mW of power at 675nm. No optical signal that 
would output from the capillary walls is in evidence, 
contrary to the situation presented in Fig. 8. 
61
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 9.  The end of optrodes with deposited thin film metal layers. 
 
Figure 10.  The end walls of outer capillary protected with metal layer, 
when 2mW optical beam was coupled into the capillary. 
The efficiency of light conversion in the developed 
optrode is low, but acceptable. We optimized the optrode 
elements position: Lp, Lb and Lw (see Fig. 6), as well as the 
method and parameters of phosphor deposition. After 
optimizing the construction, we got from a L7113QBC-G 
LED operating at 20mW, at the end of the plug made from 
optical fiber, 111nW for an empty capillary and 0.3µW for a 
capillary filled with biodiesel fuel. The uncertainty of low 
signal level in our construction was 10nW. The optrode was 
held in position with elastic magnetic strips, while the optical 
fiber was secured with miniature neodymium magnets. The 
construction of the head is presented in Fig. 11. The two 
types of micro heaters were installed. In Fig. 11A, the 
holders of micro heater are better visible than in Fig. 11B. 
The electrical connections from micro heater to power 
supply are made at some distance from the heating element 
to secure their proper working temperature.  
Though we predicted that thick film micro heater may be 
not proper for biodiesel fuel examinations, we checked such 
a possibility by making a series of fuel examination 
experiments. The results showed that a critical degradation 
of such micro heater happens after over a dozen measuring 
cycles. Therefore, for further experiments we used only 
micro heaters with SiC heating element. 
 
Figure 11.  The head construction. 
C. Optoelectronic signal processing 
As the light source driver we built an electronic device 
that enabled current modulation from DC to 50 kHz at 
selected frequencies, which was equipped with configurable 
current limiters to prevent accidental LED burning. To 
improve the rejection of ambient light influence on the 
experimental results in our experiment we used electrically 
modulated light with 1kHz frequency. 
The optoelectronic detection unit of our own construction 
had an SMA fiber input and consisted of an integrated photo-
amplifier and a band-pass filter with amplification and RMS 
detection. We used the S8745-01, AD8253, UAF42, AD536 
and AD8250 components. In the realized construction we 
were able to measure signals in the range from 10nW up to 
500nW with 2nW accuracy when the signal duration was 
0.01s. The optoelectronic unit was connected to a personal 
computer through an analog input IOtech personal Daq 3000 
16bit/1MHz USB data acquisition system. We fed the heater 
from a laboratory power supply Hameg HM8143 controlled 
by the analog output from Daq. The view of sensor hardware 
set-up is presented in Fig. 12. We also used a Daq 3000 
system to monitor the temperatures of the measuring head 
base and of the surrounding ambient with two LM35DT 
circuits connected by low pass filters.  
62
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 12.  View of experimental set-up, [1]. 
To operate the system, we designed a script in DASYLab 
with a 0.01s sampling rate. The script automates the 
measurements and automatically switched off the micro 
heater when the light signal dropped under a specified value 
corresponding to the point of vapor bubble creation or when 
maximum time of local heating is exceed. The length of 
signal registration was 60s. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In this section are presented the experimental procedure 
and the results of examination of different diesel and 
biodiesel fuels. 
A. Experiment procedure 
At the start of the experiment the optrode was closed 
with a fiber optic plug without use of sealant and then is 
placed in the head. The LED was switched on at the power 
of 20mW. The initial output signal was measured and when 
it was greater than 110nW we assumed that the optrode was 
qualified to use (see Fig. 13). Next, the optrode was filled 
with fuel, after which its end was closed with fiber optic plug 
secured with sealant. When there were bubbles of gas 
observed at the initial state of experiment, the optrode and 
capillary had to be withdrawn [29]. When the capillaries 
were filled uniformly by the liquid, the optrode was placed 
into the head and the initial levels of transmitted signal were 
examined and used as reference levels. In normal situation 
the signal should be greater than 300nW. We normalized 
such initial signal level to 4 a.u. (in Fig. 13).  
As the examined fuel in the useful state was 
semitransparent, we expected initially high signal levels, and 
then low signal levels when the bubble would appear. The 
bubble directed the signal from the liquid to the capillary 
walls [32]. When the transmitted signal decreased rapidly it 
gave the impulse to switch off the microheater. We 
terminated the heating when the signal dropped under 
2.5 a.u.  
 
 
Figure 13.  Initial situations of experimental procedure. 
Depending on the thermo-dynamical conditions; the 
vapor gas phase moved the fuel to the open end with a 
laminar or a turbid flow. The turbid flow could be detected 
optically after the experiment as a presence of series of small 
bubbles in the optrode. Depending on the flow type and fuel 
decomposition after heating we could observe two situations 
presented in Fig. 14. 
Both situations presented in Fig. 14 result in the 
reduction of the output optical signal and are difficult to be 
distinguished in the measurement, but are easy to be 
distinguished visually. The small bubble appears at the stable 
position over center of micro heater, where the temperature 
achieves its maximum. We thought that a small bubble 
appeared and lasted in the fuel due to structural changes 
induced by heating to some components that were added 
after distillation, or to some decomposition of bio-
components, since the bubble was particularly present after 
examination of edible oils [36].  
 
 
Figure 14.  Two possible situations after local heating procedure. 
63
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Diesel and biodiesel fuels used for examination 
 
We examined six potential fuels in which set five fuels 
were prepared from the same pure and fresh components at 
different ratios. For these fuels we use petrodiesel, fatty acids 
methyl esters (FAME) and additives according to EU 
standard. As sixth potential fuel we suppose edible rapeseed 
oil (ERO). The edible rapeseed oil has to be distinguished 
from technical rapeseed oil (TRO). Technical rapeseed oil is 
the direct product of rapeseed corn pressing, while edible oil 
is the product of technical oil purification and addition of 
antioxidants.  
We defined the fuel quality as: premium, good, 
acceptable for selected engines and acceptable for special 
engines. As the premium quality fuel we evaluated the clear 
and fresh petrodiesel component that was mixed with 
selected additives according to EU standards. The good 
quality fuel was premium quality fuel mixture with 10 of 
FAME. The acceptable for selected (tolerant) engines fuels 
consisted of 30 and 60% of FAME. We assumed that the 
FAME with additives fuel known as 100% biodiesel fuel 
could be used in special engines.  
Selected parameters of prepared fuels are grouped in 
Table I. The examination of the fuels in the laboratory prior 
to the experiment showed that fuels P100, B10, B30 and B60 
were meeting the norms. The FAME fuel starts to distillate at 
an unacceptable high temperature. B100 - modified FAME 
may 
start 
distillation 
at 
T0 
= 
280ºC 
while 
T10≈T50≈T90≈340ºC, therefore, its usage in classic diesel 
engines is questionable [13]. The used ERO is characterized 
by a very quick start of distillation at 170-200ºC, then no 
observable change to 295ºC, where it starts distillate as fuel 
up to 363ºC. The B100, TRO and ERO did not meet the 
distillation standards of fuels.  
 
TABLE I.  
SELECTED PARAMETERS OF PREPARED FUELS 
Parameter 
Fuel acronym 
P100 
B10 
B30 
B60 
B100 
Assumed fuel 
quality 
P 
G 
Ab 
Ab 
Bb 
Base oil [%] 
100 
90 
70 
40 
0 
FAME [%] 
0 
10 
30 
60 
100 
Density at 15ºC 
[kg/m3] 
832.6 
837.4 
847.0 
862.3 
883.2 
Temp of flame [°C] 
74 
75.5 
79.5 
90 
163 
Kinematic viscosity 
at 40ºC [mm2/s] 
3.367 
3.432 
3.595 
3.934 
4.509 
CI 
54.9 
57.7 
57.5 
56.8 
* 
CN 
59.6 
57.3 
54.9 
54.0 
51.2 
T0 [ºC] 
188.6 
195.6 
196.7 
200.2 
369*# 
T10 [ºC] 
225.7 
230.4 
242.1 
278.1 
* 
T90 [ºC] 
345.5 
343.6 
344.1 
345.3 
* 
 
Abbreviations used: FAME – Fatty acids methyl esters (bio-component); 
CI – cetane index, CN – cetane number, T0 temperature of distillation start, 
TX – temperature of x% volume of distillation, * - our lab equipment do to 
allow of such examination, value given in [14]. Assumed fuel quality set: P 
– premium, G – good fuel, Ab – acceptable bio fuel for selected engines, 
Bb – acceptable biofuel for special engines. 
C. Examination of biodiesel fuels using the developed 
sensor 
Our aim was to distinguish fuels by their quality. For 
this purpose we set in the experiment the power of micro 
heater and the maximum time of local heating. The 5W of 
power in thick film heating element and corresponding 7W 
of power dissipated in SiC micro heater in up to 25 seconds 
enabled to produce vapor phase for fuels that meets the norm 
as well as ERO. 
We examined at least 3 times samples of each fuel, and 
on the following figures we present representative 
measurement cycle signal. As micro heater we used the SiC 
component.  
We made the first experiments with P100 fuel at two 
powers of heating 5W and 7W (Fig. 15 and Fig. 16). The 
experiments showed that increasing the power from 5W to 
7W reduced the average time of heating  from 14.5 seconds 
to 9 seconds, and it reduced the average time of vapor phase 
creation from 0.2 seconds for 5W, to 0.1 seconds for 7W. 
The reductions in those times were in agreement with the 
theory of thermo dynamics.  
The next experiments were made with 7W heating power 
and their results are presented in Fig. 17 to Fig. 20.  
From our experimental results we saw that P100, B10 
and B30 fuels did not differ significantly. The B60 fuel 
formed in our heating condition a vapor phase, but the 
mixture was characterized by very high dispersion of time of 
heating - . 
 
 
Figure 15.   Measurement procedure representative signal of P100 heated 
with 5W. 
 
Figure 16.   Measurement procedure signals of P100 heated with 7W. 
64
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 17.  Measurement procedure signals of B10 heated with 7W. 
 
Figure 18.  Measurement procedure signals of B30 heated with 7W. 
 
Figure 19.  Measurement procedure signals of B60 heated with 7W. 
 
Figure 20.  Measurement procedure signals of ERO heated with 7W. 
 
Figure 21.  Small bubble remaining after heating of rapeseed edible oil in 
the center of the micro heater. 
B100 required a longer time of heating to form bubble 
phase than our procedure enables. Only 30% of samples 
showed bubble creation in 25 seconds of local heating. This 
was made intentionally to enable proper classification of 
diesel fuel with acceptable parameters while time of heating 
is considered as a one of key factors. Sometimes B100 
showed a lower time of bubble creation than ERO. 
Interestingly, according to our experimental data the B100 
seemed to be a worse fuel than ERO. The ERO forms vapor 
phase in all cycles was similar to that of B10 fuel. But ERO 
had the lowest  dispersion, which was in agreement with its 
distillation starting point at 170-200ºC. This is not a good 
property for a fuel. For ERO we observed a repeatable 
presence of a small bubble that remained after heating of 
edible rapeseed oil in the center of the micro heater (see 
Fig. 21). 
We think that was the result of thermal decomposition of 
rapeseed edible oil components. It was most probably 
connected to the degradation of vitamin E, which occurs at 
200ºC. Therefore, in ERO we examined only a part of 
distillation parameters, but this disadvantage could be 
corrected 
by 
observation 
of 
optrode 
after 
sample 
examination. 
The summarized results 
of experiment of 
fuel 
examination are presented in Table II. What was expected 
but not obvious, our head was not sensitive to local heater 
construction as long as the temperature conditions of heating 
were the same. We see an agreement of the results collected 
with hybrid micro heater presented in [1] and those presented 
in this paper measured using the SiC micro heater. 
TABLE II.  
EXAMINED PARAMETERS OF FUELS HEATED WITH 6W 
Parameter 
Fuel acronym 
P100 
B10 
B30 
B60 
B100 
ERO 
Average [s] 
9 
12 
13 
22 
* 
13 
Average [s] 
0.10 
0.13 
0.18 
0.30 
* 
0.64 
Percent of samples 
with created bubble 
100 
100 
100 
100 
30 
100 
*- the average value does not exist. 
65
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

On the base of data collected in the experiments we can 
set the parameters determining the useful state of biodiesel 
fuel as: the upper limits of average time of heating – avg(, 
the range of dispersion of time of heating – std() and the 
upper limit of time of vapor phase creation – max(). The 
analysis of data showed that in our method the useful state of 
diesel biodiesel fuel was directly and firmly connected with 
the gas phase creation. For example, the unacceptable fuels 
are characterized by  greater than 0.3s while premium 
fuels  have to be lower than 0.13s. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We proposed a sensor working on the principle optical 
examination of fuel under local heating. Our optoelectronic 
devices allowed conducting the experiment in ambient room 
conditions. The analysis of the measured signals of diesel 
and biodiesel fuels showed the relationship of times of gas 
phase creation parameters with the useful state of diesel fuel. 
We showed that the information on useful state of diesel fuel 
could be presented in the form of recommended ranges and 
times of fuel heating and vapor creation. Because the heating 
was taking place in a closed capillary, the fuel did not ignite 
during experiments. We conclude that the proposed 
construction may be in future the base of commercially 
marketable instruments.  
The future work will consist of optimization of the 
construction especially enabling observation of optrode 
above the center of micro heater. The sensor construction 
needs to be integrated into a complete portable instrument 
and be built more resistant for use in harsh environments 
outside of the laboratory. For this purpose, the first step was 
achieved, as thanks to indirect light coupling the optrode 
walls are not much sensitive to soiling. The next required 
step is the development of new simpler in usage optrode 
plug. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by: the European Union 
structural funds grant InTechFun task 5, “Multi parametric 
classificatory of liquid biofuels useful state”. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Borecki, P. Doroz, J. Szmidt, M.L. Korwin-Pawlowski, A. 
Kociubiński, and M. Duk, “Sensing method and fiber optic 
capillary sensor for testing the quality of biodiesel fuel,” 
IARIA, Proc. Sensordevices 2013, pp. 19–24. 
[2] G. Knothe, “Historical perspectives on vegetable oil-based 
diesel fuels,” Industrial Oils, vol. 12, 2001. 
[3] http://www.compass-instruments.com/waukesha.shtml, 
accessed 05.12.2013 
[4] http://www.aet.ca/index.php?section=20, accessed 05.12.2013 
[5] Department of Industry, Science and Resources, “Setting 
national fuel quality standards - Discussion paper 4,” in 
“Operability 
fuel 
parameters 
(petrol 
and 
diesel),” 
Environment Australia, 2001.  
[6] D. Mueller, M.F. Ferrão, L. Marder, A.B. da Costa, and R. de 
Cássia de Souza Schneider, “Fourier transform infrared 
spectroscopy 
(FTIR) 
and 
multivariate 
analysis 
for 
identification of different vegetable oils used in biodiesel 
production,” Sensors, vol. 13, 2013, pp. 4258–4271. 
[7] G. Mothé, M. Castro, M. Sthel, G. Lima, L. Brasil, L. 
Campos, A. Rocha, and H. Vargas, “Detection of greenhouse 
gas precursors from diesel engines using electrochemical and 
photoacoustic sensors,” Sensors, vol. 10, 2010, pp. 9726–
9741. 
[8] N. Li, Q. Zhou, X. Li, W. Chu, J. Adkins, and J. Zheng, 
“Electrochemical detection of free glycerol in biodiesel using 
electrodes with single gold particles in highly ordered SiO2 
cavities,” Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 196, 2014, 
pp. 314–320. 
[9] P.L. Faccendini, M.É. Ribone, and C.M. Lagier, “Selective 
application of two rapid, low-cost electrochemical methods to 
quantify glycerol according to the sample nature,” Sensors 
and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 193, 2014, pp. 142–148. 
[10] I. Barabas, A. Todorut, and D. Baldean, “Performance and 
emission characteristics of an CI engine fueled with diesel-
biodiesel-bioethanol blends,” Fuel, vol. 89, 2010, pp. 3827–
3832. 
[11] R.D. Misra and M.S. Murthy, “Performance, emission and 
combustion evaluation of soapnut oil–diesel blends in a 
compression ignition engine,” Fuel, vol. 90, 2011, pp. 2514–
2518. 
[12] C. Ketlogetswe and J. Gandure, “Blending cooking oil 
biodiesel with petroleum diesel: a comparative performance 
test on a variable ic engine,” Smart Grid and Renewable 
Energy, vol. 2, 2011, pp. 165–168. 
[13] M. Balat and H. Balat, “A critical review of biodiesel as a 
vehicular fuel,” Energy Convers Manag., vol. 49, 2008, pp. 
2727–2741. 
[14] S. Gryglewicz, “Rapeseed oil methyl esters preparation using 
heterogeneous catalysts,” Bioresource Technology, vol. 70, 
1999,  pp. 249–253. 
[15] A.R. Sadrolhosseini et al., “Physical properties of normal 
grade biodiesel and winter grade biodiesel,” Int. J. Mol. Sci., 
vol. 11, 2011, pp. 2100–2111. 
[16] W. Gis, A. Zoltowski, and A. Bochenska, “Properties of the 
rapeseed oil methyl esters and comparing them with the diesel 
oil properties,” J. of KONES Powertrain and Transport, vol. 
18, 2011, pp. 121–127.  
[17] N.E. Leadbetter et al., “Fast, easy preparation of biodiesel 
using microwave heating,” Energy & Fuels, vol. 20, 2006, pp. 
2281–2283. 
[18] M.C. Hsiao, C.C. Lin, and Y.H. Chang, “Microwave 
irradiation-assisted transesterification of soybean oil to bio-
diesel catalyzed by nanopowder calcium oxide,” Fuel, vol. 90, 
2011, pp. 1963–1967. 
[19] M.V. Twigg and P.R. Phillips, “Cleaning the air we breathe – 
controlling diesel particulate emissions from passenger cars,” 
Platinum Metals Rev., vol. 53, 2009, pp. 27–34. 
[20] B. Kegl, “Numerical analysis of injection characteristics using 
biodiesel fuel,” Fuel, vol. 85, 2006, pp. 2377–2387. 
[21] M. Gumus, C. Sayin, and M. Canakci, “The impact of fuel 
injection pressure on the exhaust emissions of a direct 
injection diesel engine fueled with biodiesel–diesel fuel 
blends,” Fuel, vol. 95, 2012, pp. 486–494. 
[22] W. Yuan, A.C. Hansen, and Q. Zhang, “Vapor pressure and 
normal boiling point predictions for pure methyl esters and 
biodiesel fuels,” Fuel, vol 84, 2005, pp. 943–950. 
[23] B. Kegl, M. Kegl, and S. Pehan, “Optimization of a fuel 
injection system for diesel and biodiesel usage,” Energy & 
Fuels, vol. 22, 2008, pp. 1046–1054. 
[24] M. Borecki, M. L. Korwin-Pawlowski, and M. Bebłowska, 
“A method of examination of liquids by neural network 
analysis of reflectometric and transmission time domain data 
66
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

from optical capillaries and fibers,” IEEE J. Sensors, vol. 8, 
2008, pp. 1208–1213. 
[25] D.L. Siebers and L.M. Pickett, “Injection pressure and oritice 
diameter effects on soot in DI diesel fuel jets,” in Thermo- 
and fluid dynamic process in diesel engines 2 - Selected 
papers from Diesel 2002 conference Valencia, Spain, J.H. 
Whitelaw, F. Payri, C. Arcoumanis, and J-M. Desantes, Eds., 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,  2002, pp. 
109–131. 
[26] X. Wang and WH. Su, “A numerical study of cavitating flows 
in high-pressure diesel injection nozzle holes using a two-
fluid model,” Chinese Sci Bull, vol. 54, 2009, pp. 1655–1662. 
[27] N. Ladommatos, Z. Xiao, and H. Zhao, “The effect of piston 
bowl temperature on diesel exhaust emissions,” Proc. 
IMechE. vol. 219 Part D: J. Automobile Engineering, 2005, 
pp. 371–388. 
[28] C. Crua, J.C. Evans, D.A. Kennaird, and M.R. Heikal, “In-
cylinder study of the formation, autoignition and soot 
production of diesel sprays at elevated pressures,” 9th 
International Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray 
Systems (ICLASS) Sorrento, Italy, 13-17 July 2003, 
http://eprints.brighton.ac.uk/2184/ access 07.02.2014 
[29] M. Borecki, M. Korwin Pawlowski, P. Wrzosek, and J. 
Szmidt, “Capillaries as the components of photonic sensor 
micro-systems,” J. of Mater. Sci. and Technol., vol. 19, 2008, 
pp. 065202. 
[30] M. Borecki, M.L. Korwin-Pawlowski, M. Beblowska, J. 
Szmidt, and A. Jakubowski, “Optoelectronic capillary sensors 
in microfluidic and point-of-care instrumentation,” Sensors, 
vol. 10, 2010, pp. 3771–3797. 
[31] www.vishay.com, Document Number: 53013, Revision: 25-
Aug-09 39, pp. 39-39 [retrieved June 1, 2013]. 
[32] M. Borecki and M.L. Korwin-Pawlowski, “Optical capillary 
sensors for intelligent microfluidic sample classification,” in 
“Nanosensors: 
Theory 
and 
Applications 
in 
Industry, 
Healthcare and Defence,” T.C. Lim, Ed., CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, FL, USA, 2011, pp. 215–245.  
[33] P. Rugeland, C. Sterner, and W. Margulis, “Visible light 
guidance in silica capillaries by antiresonant reflection,” 
Optics Express, vol. 21, 2013, pp. 29217–29222. 
[34] R.S. Romaniuk, “Geometry design in rerfractive capillary 
optical fibers,” Photonics Letters of Poland, vol. 2, 2010, pp. 
64–66. 
[35] J. Gryglewicz, P. Firek, J. Jasiński, R. Mroczyński, and Jan 
Szmidt, “Characterization of thin Gd2O3 magnetron sputtered 
layers,” Proc. of SPIE, vol. 8902, 2013, pp. 89022M. 
[36] A.G. de Souza1, J.C. Oliveira Santos, M.M. Conceição, M.C. 
Dantas Silva, and S. Prasad, “A thermoanalytic and kinetic 
study of sunflower oil,” Brazilian Journal of Chemical 
Engineering, vol. 21, 2004, pp. 265–273. 
 
 
67
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

