72
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Scientific Challenges in Archaeology 
Is modern computer science ready for archaeology? 
 
Lutz Schubert 
IOMI, University of Ulm 
Ulm, Germany 
lutz.schubert@uni-ulm.de 
Gill Hunt 
Hunt Lancaster 
Lancaster, UK 
ghunt@huntlancaster.co.uk 
 
Keith Jeffery 
Keith G Jeffery Consultants 
Faringdon, UK 
keith.jeffery@keithgjefferyconsultants.co.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Digital Humanities is receiving growing interest in 
academia. However, in most cases it is understood as teaching 
computer science in humanities, much rather than actually 
merging the subjects. In fact, most computer scientists regard 
humanities as a “trivial” challenge without “hard, scientific” 
problems. However, many areas in humanities pose hard 
challenges to which current computer science cannot provide 
sufficient solution approaches. In this paper, we examine the 
specific scientific problems in archaeology that pose new hard 
and interesting challenges to computer science. 
Keywords – advanced applications; archaeology; high 
performance computing; physics; simulation; network analysis; 
social networks; agent systems; theoretical computer science. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In this paper we examine the challenges presented at the 
INFOCOMP conference in 2017 [1] and expand them with 
new insights and a concrete case study: 
Dealing with one of the oldest subjects, archaeology is 
one of the youngest scientific fields, which developed really 
only in the late 19th century [2]. To many people it comes as 
a surprise how methodological and scientific such a 
discipline is that seemingly still works with shovels, pen and 
paper. In fact, archaeology is an early adopter to many new 
technologies, such as radiocarbon dating, remote sensing, 
LIDAR, photogrammetry etc. [3][4]. 
Yet what computational tasks may arise from a field that 
deals with interpretation much more than with hard facts? 
Why should statistical methods, databases and current 
analytical tools be insufficient? Let alone pose new problems 
to computer science? 
To illustrate the problems faced by archaeology and the 
types of analysis typically performed, it is best to examine a 
typical, yet slightly more baffling case in archaeology 
(Section II). We will use this concrete case study to elaborate 
the analytical tasks of archaeology and examine the scientific 
foundations it builds up upon. We will analyse each of these 
methods in light of current computer science and its 
deficiencies, as well as potential solution approaches. We 
cannot propose a solution here: there is none as yet! All these 
challenges remain to be addressed by computer science and 
for this, more interdisciplinary research is needed. We will 
discuss this briefly in Section III. 
 
 
Figure 1. Archaeologist mapping the layout of a trench. Source: Wikipedia. 
II. 
CASE STUDY: THE MYSTICAL COIN 
 
Figure 2. The excavation site at Okinawa. Source: Uruma City Educational 
Board. 
In 2016, a group of 10 roundish, metal objects was found 
in Okinawa, Japan, 1m deep in the ground among a set of 
symmetrically shaped, roughly geometrically aligned set of 

73
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
stones [5]. To be precise, two types of shapes and geometries 
could be observed, but we will ignore this for simplicity 
sake. In Figure 2, you will probably recognise the ground 
plan of a building right away, and you may suppose that the 
metal plates are coins – but bear in mind that Japanese 
coinage in the past was quite distinctive (see Figure 8). 
 
But we are already jumping ahead of ourselves: past? We 
are only talking about something in the ground! Building? 
Aligned stones! Why dig here in the first instance? 
A. Geophysics 
Many readers will have visited one archaeological site or 
the other and will probably have a mental image such as of 
the Acropolis (Figure 3), yet this is obviously basing on 
decades of reconstruction. 
 
 
Figure 3. The Acropolis of Athens. Source: Savin, Wikimedia Commons. 
Instead, archaeologists are happy if some indicator of the 
site is visible from the ground (see Figure 4). The most 
typical approach even nowadays still is to probe the ground 
at a “promising” location, viz. basing on historical records, 
sporadic finds or indeed indicators on the ground. 
 
 
Figure 4. Archaeological site on Samothraki, GR. Try to find the buildings. 
Photo by the author. 
Over recent years, other methods have evolved to detect 
buildings and structures that were otherwise covered up or 
undetectable. One such method, LiDAR recently just made 
the headlines, when the technique helped to discover a Maya 
“Megalopolis” in the jungles of Guatemala [6]. LiDAR bases 
on the capability of laser to penetrate the green foliage, thus 
displaying the elevation otherwise hidden by the trees.  
Another, slightly less known technique exploits the fact 
that the density, magnetic or electric characteristics are 
different between materials. Thus, by applying a current, or 
injecting radar or sound waves into the ground, we can 
measure different “replies” depending on the material 
properties and the depth (distance, current, run-time) 
investigated. GPR (Ground Penetrating Radar) is one such 
technique, which is also exploited for oil exploration [7].  
Such techniques have the major advantage that they are 
faster than a test dig and do not destroy the evidence in the 
ground. In other words, the archaeologists can safely explore 
the area to decide on where and how to excavate. On the 
negative side, the technique is expensive and still time 
consuming enough to not be executed on a more global 
scale, but is more localised.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Ground Penetrating Radar (left) and map resulting from a 
resistance survey (right). Source: Wikipedia. 
Scientific Challenge(s). The technique can only observe 
differences in material properties and allows (so far) little 
information about the material itself (see Figure 5, left). In 
general, the runtime evaluation is already computationally 
intensive [7]. What is more, however, there is still a wide gap 
to better assess the types of material in the ground and to 
assess the results in the first instance (see Figure 5, right). 
 
 
Figure 6. GPR survey of a Roman Stadium floor in Turkey. Source: [8]. 
Geology can provide additional information about the 
material constitution in the respective area. This provides a 

74
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
first insight into the expected conductive / reflective 
behaviour of the ground material (as is used in oil 
exploration in fact), and thus any deviation is highly 
indicative.  
At the moment, computation of the results generates a 
pseudo 3d image that indicates the depth of material changes 
over the area covered (see Figure 6), but requires a 
considerable amount of interpretation.  
In order to improve interpretation of the data, the 
different layouts and principle material characteristics need 
to be put into relationship with regional / context 
information. The granularity of the technique implies that 
only structures of larger granularity (typically buildings) can 
be identified. Nonetheless, as with any human (or in fact 
animal) artefacts, non-regarding all past and present 
standardisation efforts, individual structures will differ from 
each other – be it only for aesthetic preferences. In addition 
to this, local circumstances, as well as the differences in 
collapse and deterioration will lead to strong individual 
deviations. 
This deviation needs to be taken into consideration when 
trying to interpret the structures under ground: changes in 
material properties may(!) represent structural elements 
which need to be compared against possible structures in the 
region – bearing the regional and individual differences in 
mind. Physical collapse as well as human influence in 
destruction (both see below) thereby equally play a role – we 
will come back to that later again.  
Matching the 3d information needs a different way of 
representing and matching 3d structures than currently 
exists: the shape is not only rotation and scale invariant, but 
may also change considerably between instances – not only 
in terms of different collapse and destruction, but also in 
terms of individual builders’ preferences. 
Another way with related challenges consists in “space 
archaeology” [9], i.e., analysis of satellite images for 
potential features on the ground. Considering the amount of 
images and the details that could mark a site, this exceeds 
current image analysis techniques by far: both in terms of 
identifying the features, as well as the speed of execution. 
B. Stratigraphy? 
Though analysis of the GPR and satellite data may have 
given us an indicator for the site to dig, we still need 
somehow assign a date to the location: 
Anyone who has ever dug a hole will have noticed that 
the constitution of the ground changes in sometimes clearly 
visible layers (or “strata”). Archaeologists (and in fact all 
geoscientists) can use this information to measure time – or 
more correctly, sequences of actions. To illustrate this, think 
about your own trashcan (see Figure 7): as you fill it over the 
days, it will accumulate garbage that reflects your past 
actions: at the lowest layer, the bottom of the trashcan, you 
can find whatever you threw away the very first day after the 
trashcan was emptied – let us say it’s a set of different 
organic matter from a nice meal you prepared for friends. 
The next day you cleaned your house and threw away dirt 
from the vacuum cleaner, and assembled dirt from around 
the house – you may not even have eaten a lot, but only had 
some leftovers from the previous day, which generated little 
extra trash. The day after you threw away the old broken cup 
and some ugly ceramics that was gathering dust in the 
cupboard… and so on. 
 
 
Figure 7. Stratigraphic layers in a trashcan. Source: Canterbury 
Archaeological Trust Ltd. 
If you could cut your trashcan in half and look at it from 
the side, you could now see distinctive layers of different 
types of trash – each reflecting your daily activities and the 
garbage you produced. Of course, you will object that these 
layers are hardly that different over a normal week, which is 
one of the reasons that only major changes are actually 
observable (as changes) in the archaeological context. Since 
these layers decompose and compress, a meter can represent 
hundreds of years, or as Jared Diamond put it 
“we can travel in time, it is just in a different direction 
than we expected.” 
Obviously, the relationship is not as simple as x meters 
down equals y years: strata build up differently in different 
regions (think forest floor vs. desert) and human (and 
animal) interference will change the layout, such as when 
digging a hole and filling it up with material from another 
location – we will look at this again later, in the context of 
“big data” below. 
For now, let us assume that this gives us sufficient 
information to date the set of metal objects to the 15th 
century. Where was the computer science challenge in this? 
Scientific Challenge(s). How material builds up and 
behaves over time is still mostly unknown. The information 
available so far bases mostly on experimental data and 
experience. In fact, chemical properties, composting, even 
compression of organic material is still too complex for 
modern computer simulations. Though we can model air and 
water flow, electro-chemical properties and deformation of 
metal etc. we still struggle with composite material that 
combines different properties and, which is worse, reacts 
with its environment and thereby changes its properties.  
As computer scientists, we are used to precise 
computation – in fact, much algorithmic work is invested 
into increasing the precision without increasing the 
computation time. However, whilst this is of scientific 
interest, it is hardly of any practical value. Many computer 
scientists before have already noted that we could potentially 

75
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
achieve more if we would change the way we are asking 
questions – if we invest into “what” we want to achieve, 
rather than “how”. The EC Cloud Computing Expert Group 
published one report to the end that software engineering 
needs to refocus the way we are thinking about problems 
[10]. Similarly, the whole area of “imprecise computing”, as 
a rising IT field, is investigating whether we cannot achieve 
the same results with less precision [11].  
What is more, the timescale of a typical simulation 
ranges in the order of milliseconds (such as for protein 
folding) to minutes (such as in airflow simulation). The 
longest time-span is probably in the order days with weather 
simulations, but bear in mind that this already belongs in the 
realm of imprecise and statistical computing.  
Multi-level computing is still on the rise and problems 
such as the Virtual Physiological Human [12] cannot be 
solved before we cannot reduce the computational 
complexity. 
Organic 
composting, 
compression 
and 
composite material, though all highly important for building 
management, engineering etc. are so far only scientifically 
investigated by archaeology and build up on human expertise 
and experience.  
C. Multidisciplinary Statistical Big Data 
Until now, we identified the site itself and have a rough 
feeling for the time to which the metal plates belonged. As 
we will discuss in more details below, timing just by 
stratigraphy is insufficient as it differs too strongly between 
regions and circumstances.  
One of the most frequent and most challenging tasks in 
archaeology consists in data analysis (and as we shall see, 
reasoning): in our example we have identified so far a 
location, the structure itself and a set of round metal objects. 
Analysing them goes far beyond the traditional material 
probing (though this can help dating). Primarily, any 
interpretation in archaeology is trying to link data with 
known facts. Let us concentrate on the building itself first: 
We have known parameters: location, rough dimensions 
and ground plan, as well as depth (and therefore indicative 
age). With this, we can start looking for registries, historical 
records, 
architectural 
analysis 
etc. 
Other 
potential 
information involve the geological source of the stones, the 
shape and methods in which the stones were shaped (as 
observable by rough and microscopic surface analysis), the 
overall layout (as in cultural building traditions), any 
signatures, stamps, inscriptions and of course all other 
objects found on site. Archaeology is one of the most 
interdisciplinary scientific fields and combines information 
from a multitude of sources – we will come across this issue 
repeatedly in this text. For now, however, let us assume that 
historical records of the respective building exist – in this 
case, a Japanese castle from the 14th century.  
Scientific Challenge(s). Cross-relating such information 
is a typical task and requires searching through different 
sources, ranging from geology, over climatology to 
anthropology, architecture, biology etc. Archaeology thereby 
has way less hard data at its disposal than other scientific 
fields – already the constant changes in radiocarbon-dating 
[13] or the constant reinterpretation of genetic data [14] is 
witness to the instability. In most cases, these re-
examinations were in fact triggered by archaeologists, when 
the data generated by the so-called “hard scientific methods” 
was in conflict with the archaeological evidence or 
contradictory to reasoning. 
The main challenges is however not so much the scope 
and interdisciplinarity, as one might expect, but the fact that 
most of the data is not concrete and that there can be only 
“interpretative” links, as the actual “facts” may change at any 
time. Just like in other scientific fields, once enough 
evidence is gathered that is in conflict with current thinking, 
the current facts need to be rethought. In the context of 
humanities, however, the actual subject (humans) are way 
more complex and facts considerably less stable. 
In other words, the main challenge is to reason over 
different data and assess likelihood of certain events or 
situations. As we shall see, a simple stochastic reasoner is 
insufficient, as we must also consider stability of a belief and 
thus its impact on the overall conclusions, should it change. 
Data mining hence needs to be extended with 3 aspects: 
interpretation (as any social data is subject to interpretation 
rather than a simple hard fact), reasoning (see below) and 
likelihood. In terms of likelihood, we need to distinguish 
between direct facts (i.e., the evidence gathered from 
whichever means – be that the stones or the metal plates on 
site, or the genome sequence from a human bone) and 
inferred facts and their relationship. For example, the best 
evidence suggests that the rock assemblage was indeed a 
Japanese castle (given the location and the rough age), but 
the documents may be false, the site may have been reused 
within a short timespan etc. In almost all archaeological 
cases no historical data exists in the first instance, thus 
making the interpretation even more subject to likelihood 
based on inference and assumptions.  
The 
archaeological 
pictures 
(and 
in 
fact 
our 
understanding of ourselves as humans) gets constantly 
updated, as we gather more knowledge and gain more 
insight. In every step, all knowledge acquired needs to be 
considered and revised – potentially affecting all data. 
Let us look back at the metal plates found in what we 
know presume to be a Japanese castle of the 14th century. By 
logical inference, we may first assume that the metal plates 
must be as old as the castle, but we have to be careful about 
this interpretation: the castle may have been built in the 14th 
century, but it was in use until the 15th century. Even then, it 
only slowly disintegrated and thus the coverage of dirt may 
indeed be from the 18th century and the metal plates of 
according age. In other words, the finds can only be as old, 
as the first layer on top of it – at the same time, it cannot be 
older than the first layer underneath it. Bear in mind that this 
applies to the age of last use of the object, not to the age of 
the object itself. 
In this specific case, the evidence suggests indeed that the 
objects were or discarded some time in the 14th or 15th 
century. But what does that make them?  
D. Advanced Image Recognition 
As already noted in “Geophysics” above, one of the 
typical challenges consists in interpreting evidence – 

76
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
visually. Though more elaborate analysis methods exist, they 
typically base on material constitution, chemical consistency 
etc. but only visual analysis helps for interpreting shapes and 
shapes can be interpreted through similarity: in rare cases are 
two objects identical – in particular if manufactured by hand. 
Yet we can infer producer (artist) and cultural traits from 
artistic decoration and shape [15] – for example, the “art 
nouveau” period left a distinctive mark in visual cues and it 
is pretty easy to distinguish individual artistic schools. Such 
classification is subject to a lot of research in image 
recognition, yet in our case here, we not only have to 
recognize styles, we also have to deal with deterioration and 
destruction. 
In the case of our set of metal plates, the first association 
by inference was that these may have served as armor plates, 
as local coinage would have had a distinctive square hole 
(see Figure 8). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Examples of Japanese coinage from the 14th-17th century. Source: 
Wikipedia. 
It was sheer luck that one of the archaeologists 
recognized a similarity with Roman coins based on 
experience gained in Egypt. What makes the challenge much 
harder is the fact that not only knowledge about the other 
context (here: Roman) is needed, but also that artefacts 
deteriorate. In case of the coin, Figure 9 depicts how the coin 
was found in Japan (left) and how it could have looked like if 
it would have been preserved better (right). 
 
 
 
Figure 9. The Roman coin found on the Japanese site (left, Source: Uruma 
City Educational Board) and a well preserved version of (probably) the 
same coin (right, Source: www.wildwinds.com). 
Scientific Challenge(s). As we have already noted 
multiple times, identification of finds, their classification and 
timing requires a big data comparison over multiple different 
sources. The case here clearly illustrates how ignorance of all 
information can lead to misinterpretation of the artefacts and 
thus to misinterpretation of whole region and its past. We 
will see later how the (correct) interpretation is actually not 
very helpful in this case. 
Years are spent in analysing the finds from a site and 
even with the best archaeologists, mistakes in interpretation 
can happen. A computer aided interpretation process could 
greatly support this endeavour but would require that image 
recognition is expanded to consider deterioration processes. 
Much like we will discuss below in “Physics” and in 
“Geophysics” above, these processes can be modelled to a 
certain degree. 
Differences in the manufacturing process (such as 
stamping coins) can already to a certain degree be analysed, 
yet the process is still very crude and does not really allow to 
compare 
coins 
of 
different 
origin. 
Analysis 
of 
microabrasions, experimental archaeology and simple 
experience so far help much more than the analysis 
capabilities of modern software. Again, combination of 
approaches are needed to expand the algorithmic quality. 
E. 3d Recognition and Matching 
More typically, though not the case in our example, 
archaeological finds are in fragments, such as broken pieces 
of ceramics, or the famous Lionman, which consists of more 
than 300 fragments of ivory and still is not complete – the 
smallest of the fragments is thereby only a few millimetres. 
Next to the general layout of the finds, the actual material 
and shape of the fragments themselves provide indicators for 
their relationship. Consider the various forms of pottery that 
can be found in archaeology: shape, material and texture, 
respectively decoration are good indicators as to whether two 
sherds may have belonged to the same object. This also 
applies to (human) bones, larger sculptures etc.  
Generally, parts are missing, scattered, or even archived 
in a completely different city / country due to different 
excavation processes, movement after excavation etc. 
Furthermore, due to the vast amount of similar fragments, 
identification of corresponding parts is close to impossible. 
 
 
Figure 10. Matching sherds on basis of profile information [16].  
Scientific Challenge(s). In itself, this is a considerable 
big data process where multiple factors need to be compared 
and cross-correlated to identify potential matches. These in 
turn will have to be matched in shape and against types of 
objects. Ideally, the fragments touch and thus have a 
common breakage area. Though this may sound like “just” a 
fitting task, one needs to consider (a) the amount and size of 
fits and (b) that natural processes change the breakage area 
by smoothing and reducing it etc., so that no perfect fit can 

77
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be achieved. Such processes have to be taken into account 
when asserting whether two fragments match [17]. 
In most cases, no 3d models are available, let alone 
sufficient details to attempt a match in the first instance. As 
the number of available models increases, so does the 
complexity to match all the available finds – but even just 
within a single excavation, the effort is considerable. 
As noted, though, in our example no such matching 
needs to take place. 
F. Physics & Material Deterioration 
We already mentioned in the context of Geophysics, 
above, that physical (there: biochemical) processes need to 
be understood when examining a site or the artefacts found 
therein. Of specific interest here are thereby the deterioration 
processes from exposure to the elements – this equally 
includes rusting of the metals objects, stratigraphic built-up, 
as well as structural collapse.  
In the case of our castle, it is not only covered up by 
increasing layers of compost, loose dirt and rubble. The 
building probably also collapsed due to structural weakness 
and, what is more, human intervention: people always have 
and always will reuse buildings for new structures, as a 
material source, or just use the space for other purposes, 
thereby flattening the remainders. This poses extremely hard 
challenges on reconstructing the processes and simple rigid 
body physics simulations are insufficient to take all these 
factors into account. 
It is however not only structural analysis that can benefit 
from physics simulation: humans and animals having been 
killed violently and / or moved after death will end up in 
certain positions and orientation. For example, skeletons in 
the Tollense valley have been moved by water slides and 
thus ended up in a collective heap [18]. Knowing the shape 
of the land, the flow of water and intensity of rainfall allows 
reconstructing where the bodies originated from, and (to a 
degree) their original positions. As the process is irreversible, 
this is not entirely possible – but the order of skeletons 
already indicates how they must have been flooded down the 
hill. Notably, the state of decomposition makes a major 
difference with this respect.  
Related to this, marks in the skeleton give an indicator 
for strength and direction of a blow or projectile. Arrow-
heads embedded in bones tell something about the position 
of the opponents relative to each other, but also about how 
the weapon was used and the force that the respective 
weapon can transmit. Human factors have to be taken into 
consideration, such as whether the force could be created by 
muscle strength (spear) or whether additional means would 
have been needed (bow). Given e.g., the Tollense layout, a 
reconstruction of the event can be attempted. 
Scientific Challenge(s). As noted, rigid body physics 
simulations are good to get some feeling for how buildings 
can collapse, and thus good for educative purposes, but they 
are far from providing insight into the processes that actually 
took place on site. Just as with geophysics, what is needed is 
multi-level simulations in order to take all the different 
factors into account.  
By nature, however, physics is a chaotic process with 
little influences leading to major changes in the outcome. 
Therefore, it is highly unlikely that we can recreate all the 
circumstances that led to a specific constellation as found in 
an archaeological site (or in fact any site). Archaeologists 
essentially invert physics and try to find logical explanations 
for which forces may have acted to result in this outcome.  
Physics inversion is mathematically impossible, but 
stochastic relationships between forces and outcomes are 
possible [19][20][21]. The shape and layout of the elements 
in the heap allow reasoning over the possible original 
structures. By comparing these possibilities with existing, 
similar ones, we can make even reasonable assumptions 
about the factors that led to the final distribution. 
Such methods essentially can only be used for verifying 
(respectively falsifying) certain assumptions, such as that the 
likelihood of a specific distribution of stones can be the 
result of natural phenomena, or that the distribution of food 
remainders has not been tampered with [19][22].  
Notably, we need an assessment for the forces that may 
have acted on the site – one of the most difficult to measure 
and analyse being human intervention. 
 
With all the information gathered so far we know now 
that the metal plate is indeed Roman, and given the 
deterioration, as well as the expected initial shape, we can 
assume that the coin is from the Roman Emperor 
Constantine. We also know that the coin must have been lost 
some time in the 14th or 15th century. Now let us apply our 
big data analysis again: Emperor Constantine lived from 272 
to 337 AD – certainly way before our Japanese castle was 
built. His coins may have been in use past his reign, but since 
every emperor decreed new coins, it is unlikely that this 
lasted for very long. Obviously, the coins did not get in full 
disuse, yet at the 14th century, Roman coinage was not a 
currency anymore. Though the Roman empire still existed at 
this point, it had lost most of its influence and was quickly 
succumbing to the Arabian conquest (see Figure 11). 
 
 
Figure 11. The Roman empire around the 14th century. Source: Wikipedia. 
Which leads us to a simple question: how did a more than 
1.000 year old coin end up in a place more than 10.000 km 
away from its origin (see Figure 12)? Japan was never part of 
the Roman empire and had its own coinage, but some human 

78
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
contact must obviously have taken place: we have hard 
scientific evidence in the undeniable coin’s existence and 
location.  
 
 
Figure 12. Map of Eurasia showing the main Roman empire and Japan. 
What can we say about the human agents that must have 
been involved? 
G. Simulating Human Behaviour 
Archaeology is about humans: how they lived, what they 
have done, when and why. However, in an illiterate society, 
ways of thinking leave no traces and even in literate 
societies, written evidence should not be confused with facts 
[3]. The challenge for archaeology therefore consists in 
relating finds to potential behaviour, intentions and way of 
thinking. Some of this behaviour is obvious and straight-
forward: a ceramic pot indicates that (a) someone was there 
to leave the pot behind and (b) someone made the pot. 
However, was the pot used as a domestic item, was it an item 
of worship, was it just decorative, was it discarded right 
away? All this cannot be gathered from the pot alone. 
As seen (data mining, above), a considerable amount of 
information has to be cross-linked. What is more, though, is 
that human behaviour, intentions and beliefs, capabilities and 
knowledge etc. stand at the middle of the explanation chain 
and form the basis for any conjecture. As indicated above, 
this can obviously take different levels: 
Presence. Straight-forward, remains are “just” indicators 
for human presence and actions, such as that someone must 
have brought the find to the location, must have made it etc. 
Notably, not always is a find clearly of human origin, as e.g., 
is the case with some Palaeolithic “tools” [23]. This is the 
level of direct archaeological evidence. 
Capabilities. At an intermediate level of complexity, 
human capabilities must be taken into consideration. This 
defines whether it was e.g., possible to reach a location, build 
a structure etc. How humans reached the American continent 
is one such unsolved question. At this level we talk about the 
assumptions that can be substantiated by archaeological 
evidence (existence of boats), but not fully proven. 
Belief and Intention. At the most complex level we need 
to argue over belief and actions that are behind the evidence. 
It is a frequent cliché that archaeologists classify any 
evidence without clear functionality as “ritualistic”. Indeed, 
it is difficult to assess the intention of an object that has no 
comparison in modern context. At this level, all “evidence” 
is pure conjecture and may change on basis of new theories. 
Whereas knowledge at level 1 and partially at level 2 
falls clearly into big data management, i.e., cross-checking 
facts, most of level 2 and in particular level 3 are conjecture 
and base on logical possibilities alone. Aspects such as 
movement of peoples require that the behaviour is simulated 
and the likelihood assessed on basis of this simulation. 
Scientific Challenge(s). Even the best swarm simulation 
software cannot accurately model human behaviour beyond 
simple crowd movement. The typical approach consists in 
agent based simulations, which model multiple entities and 
their interactions on a simplified level [24]. There is a 
considerable amount of criticism of these models, as they 
must be incomplete and error prone – it is currently not 
possible to appropriately simulate how even just a small 
settlement would behave [25]. 
Human behaviour is complex and cannot be easily 
abstracted, so a major question relates to which human 
aspects have to be modelled in the first instance and how. 
Much can be learned from social network interactions, but 
care must be taken when applying modern contexts to 
ancient circumstances, as behaviour and mindset are in 
constant flux [3]. As indicated in the context of simulating 
physics, we can however argue about the likelihood of a 
specific behaviour (see below).  
Statistical analyses can reduce the computational effort, 
even though they have a high error margin. They can help to 
eliminate unlikely situations, such as for the Roman “tourist” 
in Japan, which would necessitate the according means of 
travel, communication etc. In [26] the authors suggest an 
analysis based on throwing angles and strengths to assess the 
layout of shell middens. This is a highly simplified human 
behaviour model but already allows for some degree of 
feasibility assessment.  
H. Network Analysis 
 
Figure 13. A social network diagram for Facebook. Source: Archaeological 
Networks. 
A special and indirect form of human behaviour analysis 
consists in social network analysis (SNA). SNA gets a 
growing interest in archaeological analysis, as it is taken as 
an objective evaluation of the hard evidence. It belongs into 
the domain of big data analysis, but given its prominence and 
growing interest, it deserves its own subsection. 
A network analysis assesses the statistical likelihood of 
two entities being related or connected. It is frequently used 

79
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in social analysis to identify social relationships between 
people all over the world. Typical parameters are thereby 
simple knowledge of each other such as through Facebook 
(see Figure 13). Such a network can be analysed in different 
ways: if only social relationship is observed, clusters of high 
connectivity depict the relational intensity, i.e., “friends with 
common friends” – outliers or loose connections between 
clusters indicate isolated groups with little knowledge of 
each other. Such a relationship is interesting e.g., for target 
market analysis, to see which people may most influence 
each other’s taste.  
Frequently, other parameters are used for analysis, such 
as indeed shopping behaviour: people with similar taste are 
more likely to buy the same items. In other words: the more 
your shopping behaviour links to other people, the more 
likely their taste is comparable to yours. Whilst this works on 
average, it certainly fails in the specifics, as everyone 
looking at “personalised recommendations” knows.  
In archaeology, other “similarity factors” are typically 
used, such as the similarity between art forms, genetic 
relatedness, or in our case, appearance of Roman coins. To 
be meaningful, the information typically needs to be 
projected onto a map, ideally also across time. Not 
surprisingly, we would expect that the occurrence of Roman 
coins diminishes over distance and time – and in fact, no 
other occurrence of Roman coins in Japan is known. 
Scientific Challenges. SNA is far from a hard analysis 
tool and there are many problems with such an analysis. 
Unfortunately, results from SNA are frequently mistaken for 
facts, leading to potential misinterpretations.  
Let us look at some of the base issues with network 
analysis – specifically in the context of archaeology:  
1. Encoding “soft” parameters: similarity and thus 
potential relationship based on e.g., similarities of shape 
need to be encoded in a parametric form. Try a network 
analysis of all different forms of art nouveau and its 
appearance over the globe and you will notice that defining 
similarity is a hard task. By using too many parameters, 
relationship will diminish to nothing and by using too few 
(e.g., “coin”) you will end up with too many relationships. 
Depending on who defines the parameters and how, 
completely different graphs can be produced – and hence 
completely different interpretations.  
2. “Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence”: just 
because no Roman coins have been recorded in Japan, this 
does not mean that they may not have been misinterpreted 
(or simply not found yet). Obviously, the network will 
immediately change, when more evidence is uncovered, but 
the reason for evidence being available is manifold and 
ranges from archaeological accuracy, destruction, investment 
to preservation conditions. 
3. Different analysis methods lead to different results, but 
their interpretation is once again up to the human user: the 
obvious connection between the Roman empire and a 
Japanese castle does not imply that a Roman time traveller 
lived in a Japanese castle – we will need to turn back to that 
in “Reasoning” below. 
Network analysis in the context of archaeology needs to 
be extended with the capability to assess the “stability” of the 
relationships. In other words: which impact would other 
analysis methods, new evidence, or change in parameters 
have on the network shape and in particular on its clustering.  
Another, growing trend, is to assign weights to the 
relationships in the network graph – mostly in order to reflect 
the transportation or communication cost implied by distance 
(i.e., when project the graph onto a map). This provides an 
additional interpretation factor, which relates to the 
likelihood aspects mentioned above: the more difficult 
(costly) the connection, the less the impact and hence the 
weaker the relationship. 
In context of the Roman coin, the cost for travelling 
10.000 kms at Roman time would be tremendous. However, 
we thereby neglect a few factors, which we shall turn to next: 
I. 
Reasoning 
With the data we have from the Japanese site so far we 
may infer multiple interpretations, such as that a Roman 
travelled to Japan to live there and leave the coin as a 
heritage to his children; that a 2nd century Japanese travelled 
to Rome and returned with a coin; that a 14th century 
Japanese travelled through time and space and so on. Though 
some of these explanations will immediately seem 
ridiculous, we must note that none of them contradicts the 
data or interpretation we have so far.  
The key point here being that some of the interpretations 
stand to reason that they cannot be correct – such as for the 
time traveller. In fact, if we consider the data carefully 
enough, we will even notice that the Roman travelling 
10.000 kilometers is highly unlikely given the situation and 
travelling options at the time. This form of restricting the 
options (and thus weighing the relationship) is a form of big 
data analysis, but implies logical constraints and derivations 
– for example, by applying the average travelling speed at 
given times as a factor. 
 
 
Figure 14. Relationship between numbers of pirates and global average 
temperature. Source: Forbes. 
Modern analysis methods are bad at such behaviour and 
generally just generate statistical relationships. A classic 
example of such a “maladjusted” interpretation is the 
relationship between pirates and global warming: because a 
correlation between numbers of pirates and global 
temperature can be observed (see Figure 14) [28]. Since 
there is no logical check involved, this assumption is fair – 

80
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
we may even be inclined to take the inversion of the false 
cause-and-effect chain and thus presume that we need more 
pirates to counteract global warming. It is only because it is 
so obviously wrong, that this assumption is not taken up – 
what, however, if the logical mistake is not so obvious? 
Scientific Challenge(s). Reasoning in AI methods is still 
a new field, but an increasing amount of voices raise 
concerns about potential misinterpretations of data. Note 
though that reasoning itself is a type of big data challenge as 
even though the logical operators are constraint, the number 
of potential logical assertions is infinite.  
Such attempts relate strongly to the domain of semantic 
reasoning and are still under development, but should not be 
left aside when interpreting data. 
 
What does all this leave us for interpreting the data at the 
Japanese site? Obviously, we cannot get a definite answer, 
but several explanations reach a certain plausibility: (1) there 
are more Roman coins in Japan that just have not been 
discovered, (2) the most likely candidate for a transfer route 
is the silk road, which equally existed in Roman and 
medieval times. We can only make assumptions about why 
the coin ended up here and obviously, anything from a 
collector, over heirloom to an exotic gift may be valid.  
Obviously, we can come up with many more alternative 
routes, but we hopefully managed to reproduce the 
archaeologist’s way of thinking in an algorithmic fashion, as 
well as showing which challenges this still poses for 
computer science. 
For the sake of completeness, we can identify many more 
such challenges, such as: 
J. 
Simulating Climate 
Climate is constantly changing – not only due to human 
interference, but also due to the earth’s rotation and 
movement, leading to glacial and hot periods. The 
implication of such weather changes is obvious and can 
already be observed today: different plants grow in different 
climatic zones, animals (and certainly humans) move to 
different areas, clothing changes etc. In times before Air 
Conditioning, this hit doubly strong and will have caused 
(and prevented) massive movement and settlement patterns, 
following game or reacting to environmental pressure. 
Climate completely changes the face of the earth, from 
rising (and sinking) sea levels to landscapes covered in ice 
sheets or turned into steppes. These changes leave their 
marks and are sometimes directly measurable, such as in tree 
growth (dendrochronology) or remains of marine life in the 
dessert, respectively vice versa [3] [4].  
In the archaeological context climate is only of interest 
insofar as it influences humans [27]. As such, it is only a 
contributing factor to Simulating Human Behaviour (see 
Section II.G) and can serve equally as an explanation, as well 
as an obstacle. For example, the movement of Homo Sapiens 
to the American continent is frequently explained by the 
possibility of a connection between North America and 
Siberia (the Bering land bridge) [29]. This land bridge could 
have existed due to a massive amount of water being locked 
in ice, thus causing the sea-level to sink considerably. 
Similarly, the movement of hominins into central Europe 
from Africa may have been made possible by fluctuations 
(inter-pluvial arid periods) in the temperature of the Sahara 
[30].  
Climate conditions apparently play a role in any 
discussion about behaviour influenced by weather, such as 
clothing, foodstuff etc. Therefore, modelling the weather and 
in particular the climatic changes over history is a relevant 
aspect of the argumentation chain related to Simulating 
Human Behaviour (see Section II.G). 
Approaches. It is well-known that weather simulation 
belongs to the most difficult tasks in advanced applications 
[31]. While meteorological simulations try to accurately 
predict local, minute changes in the weather, climate models 
can be more coarse-grained, identifying patterns of general 
weather trends over longer periods of time. However, 
already the overall climatic changes in the glacial and 
interglacial periods are difficult to predict and not all factors 
are known. Such models base more on observed factors, such 
as glacial movements and encapsulated CO², than on 
calculations [4].  
Nonetheless, different models are under development 
[32] and particularly try to provide more local and fine-
grained climatic conditions, so as to assess the size and 
distribution of ice sheets, but also just to predict shorelines, 
climatic zones etc. Such models can be validated partially 
against archaeobotanical finds, i.e., seeds that have been 
preserved under anaerobic conditions. 
K. 3d images 
3d scanning is a growing field of interest in general, but 
also more and more archaeologists 
make use of 
photogrammetry to document the excavation [33]. There is a 
high risk that this is considered sufficient documentation, 
though it cannot replace profile drawings or good maps, but 
we shall not follow this discussion in this paper. 
Generating 3d models from pictures taken in the open 
field is still time consuming and error prone, where missing 
pictures can only be identified after generation of the point 
cloud, which can take days in itself. Since the excavation 
will have progressed by then, this can lead to considerable 
problems. Better methods are needed to assess quality and 
potential gaps right at the time of taking the pictures, and the 
process in general needs to become more flexible – both 
require new algorithmic approaches that are highly related to 
performance optimisation in general. 
One should also not ignore the fact that 3d scanning 
generates massive amount of data (i.e., the 3d points) that so 
far cannot be easily processed. Identifying an object in 3d 
space, i.e., which points belong to each other to form an 
artefact of its own, is still basically impossible. Similar 
challenges exist in 2d image analysis, where major progress 
has been made. So far most approaches simply generate a 
mesh of the whole scan, thus not allowing to (re)move 
individual objects, let alone perform an analysis on this level. 
Since the advent of LIDAR scanning [34], processing of 
3d images becomes an important factor for detecting hidden 
and obscured structures, very similar to identifying hidden 
structures in geophysical data. 

81
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Approaches. So far, most approaches rely on methods 
from 2d image processing, such as similarity of colour, 
identification of key features and of their relationship etc., 
but application in 3d is still very limited – not alone because 
the size of data is considerably larger (at least from n² to n³).  
Google and Microsoft already try to incorporate scans 
and 3d data from multiple (social) sources, but the sheer 
amount and computational complexity is still an unsolved 
challenge. Ideally, however, multiple sources are integrated 
in scanning, but notably, these will all have to be calibrated 
individually and the data then has to be cross-correlated first. 
Some attempts also try to make use of additional data, 
such as arising from the accelerometer to pre-assess the 
quality and usability of the images, but there is no general 
good solution as yet and the amount of data will only 
increase. 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The list of issues presented in this paper is far from 
exhaustive but already demonstrates the shortcoming of 
current computer science methodologies with respect to the 
needs of archaeology. Specifically, by addressing these 
challenges and incorporating knowledge from archaeology, 
the following improvements could be achieved: 
 
improved geological modelling: archaeology has 
knowledge about more short-term processes, such as 
soil deposition and collapse that can be exploited for 
engineering, city planning etc.; 
 
better human and agent models: anthropology and 
archaeology have information about human move-
ment that is not reflected in simulation, thus leading 
to unrealistic movement and agency models; 
 
prospecting can benefit from prediction models and 
material knowledge gained from excavations; 
 
data mining and big data do not address complexities 
raised 
by 
such 
interdisciplinary 
fields 
as 
archaeology, which develops such methods for 100 
years now; 
 
statistical analysis is an important field in 
archaeology and needs to be applied differently for 
network analysis, clustering etc. The feedback is 
rarely incorporated (see e.g., [35]);  
 
structure from motion is constantly being improved 
through landscape archaeology and field surveys 
[33] – new more robust methods and better object 
recognition are still being researched; 
 
most simulations model time forward from a given 
situation– in archaeology, time needs to be modelled 
backwards, i.e., leading from effect to cause, which 
in turn improves simulation performance and 
analysis capabilities [26]; 
 
dealing with incomplete data by adding assumption 
models: archaeology is using methods for this on a 
daily basis, yet big data still struggles with it; 
 
both fields need better methods to capture the 
probability and likelihood of complex data to be 
correct and to identify logical and improbable errors;  
 
reasoning needs to improve beyond stochastic data 
mapping and in particular needs to include the 
probability that two actions are related. Artificial 
Intelligence concepts from the 90ies already 
approach such issues on a limited scale. 
Not only can computer science improve archaeology 
further, but also knowledge from archaeology can help 
advance computer science capabilities in particular for 
application in any human-centric simulation or modelling. 
We hope that this paper has shown that there remain 
many challenging tasks for IT in archaeology and that 
computer science still has many things to learn from the 
approaches in archaeology. The authors directly contribute to 
such a collaboration via a dedicated working group in the 
CAA International (Computer Applications and Quantitative 
Methods in Archaeology). 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Schubert, K. Jeffery, and G. Hunt, “Challenges for 
Advanced Applications in Archaeology,” In Proceedings of 
The 
Seventh 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Communications and Computation, June 25-29, 2017, Venice, 
Italy, C.-P. Rückemann, I. Flood, I. Schwerdtfeger, C. 
Simmendinger, G. Beckett, (Eds.), International Academy, 
Research, and Industry Association, 2017, pp. 29-34, ISSN: 
2308-3484, 
ISBN: 
978-1-61208-567-8, 
URL: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
infocomp_2017_3_30_60034 [retrieved: March 2018]. 
[2] K. Greene and T. Moore, “Archaeology: An Introduction,” 
Routledge, 2010. ISBN: 978-0415496391 
[3] M. Sutton, “Archaeology: The Science of the Human Past,” 
Routledge, July 2015. ISBN: 978-0205572373 
[4] M.J. Aitken, “Science-Based Dating in Archaeology,” 
Routledge, February 2014. ISBN: 978-0582493094 
[5] E. Jozuka, “Ancient Roman coins found in ruined Japanese 
castle,” 
CNN, 
2017 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://edition.cnn.com/2016/09/27/luxury/ancient-roman-
coins-japan/ [retrieved: May 2018] 
[6] T. 
Clynes, 
“Ground Penetrating 
Radar 
Theory 
and 
Applications,” National Geographic News, 2018 [Online]. 
Available 
at: 
https://news.nationalgeographic.com/2018/02/maya-laser-
lidar-guatemala-pacunam/ [retrieved: May 2018] 
[7] H.M. Jol (Ed.), “Ground Penetrating Radar Theory and 
Applications,” Elsevier, 2008. ISBN: 978-0-444-53348-7 
[8] V. Karabacak, Ö. Yönlü, E. Dökü, N. Kıyak, E. Altunel, S. 
Özüdoğru, C.C. Yalciner, and H.S. Akyuz, “Analyses of 
Seismic Deformation at the Kibyra Roman Stadium, 
Southwest Turkey,” Geoarchaeology. 28, 2013, pp. 531-543. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/gea.21456 
[9] R. Lasaponara and N. Masini, “Satellite Remote Sensing: A 
New Tool for Archaeology,” Springer, 2012. ISBN: 978-
9400796157 
[10] L. Schubert and K. Jeffery, "New Software Engineering 
Requirements in Clouds and Large-Scale Systems," in IEEE 
Cloud Computing, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 48-58, Jan.-Feb. 2015. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCC.2015.13 
[11] J. M. Cadenas and M. C. Garrido, “Intelligent Data Analysis, 
Soft Computing and Imperfect Data,” in Soft Computing 
Based Optimization and Decision Models, D. A. Pelta and C. 
Cruz Corona, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
2018, pp. 25–43. ISBN: 978-3319642857 
[12] M. Viceconti, “The Virtual Physiological Human: Computer 
Simulation for Integrative Biomedicine: Papers of a Theme 

82
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Issue,” Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of 
London / A: Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society. 
Royal Society, 2010. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2010.0096 
[13] Y. Asscher, S. Weiner, and E. Boaretto. “A new method for 
extracting the insoluble occluded carbon in archaeological 
and modern phytoliths: Detection of 14C depleted carbon 
fraction and implications for radiocarbon dating,” Journal of 
Archaeological 
Science 
78, 
2017, 
pp. 
57-65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2016.11.005 
[14] R. Eisenhofer, A. Anderson, K. Dobney, A. Cooper, and L.S. 
Weyrich, “Ancient Microbial DNA in Dental Calculus: A 
New method for Studying Rapid Human Migration Events,” 
The Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology, 2017, pp. 1-
14. https://doi.org/10.1080/15564894.2017.1382620 
[15] A. M. W. Hunt, “The Oxford Handbook of Archaeological 
Ceramic Analysis,” Oxford University Press, 2017. ISBN: 
978-0199681532 
[16] M.I. Stamatopoulos and C.-N. Anagnostopoulos, “3D digital 
reassembling of archaeological ceramic pottery fragments 
based on their thickness profile,” ResearchGate 2016. 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/301873740_3D_digi
tal_reassembling_of_archaeological_ceramic_pottery_fragme
nts_based_on_their_thickness_profile [retrieved: May 2018] 
[17] F. Stanco, S. Battiato, and G. Gallo, “Digital Imaging for 
Cultural Heritage Preservation: Analysis, Restoration, and 
Reconstruction of Ancient Artworks,” CRC Press, 2011. 
ISBN: 978-1439821732 
[18] A. Curry, “Slaughter at the bridge: Uncovering a colossal 
Bronze Age battle,” Science Magazine 2016. [Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/03/slaughter-bridge-
uncovering-colossal-bronze-age-battle [retrieved: May 2018] 
[19] L. Schubert and K. Jeffery, “Interpreting Shell Middens 
through Physics Simulation,” In Proceedings of the Computer 
Applications & Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA) 
International Conference, 2017. In print. 
[20] L. Schubert, S. Metz and K. Jeffey, “Inverting Physics – a 
future for the past,” In Proceedings of the ICNAAM 
Conference, 2017. In print. 
[21] L. 
Schubert, 
R. 
Warden, 
and 
T. 
Guderjan, 
“Site 
Reconstruction from Partial Information,” In Proceedings of 
the Computer Applications & Quantitative Methods in 
Archaeology (CAA) International Conference, 2018. In print. 
[22] L. Schubert, A. Predoi, and K. Jeffery, “Analysing the 
archaeological context: Reconstructing stratigraphic layers,” 
In 
AIP 
Conference 
Proceedings, 
2017. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4992196 
[23] K. Wong, “Wild Monkeys’ Stone ‘Tools’ Force a Rethink of 
Human Uniqueness,” Scientific American, 2016 [Online]. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/wild-monkeys-
stone-tools-force-a-rethink-of-human-uniqueness/ [retrieved: 
May 2018] 
[24] G. Wurzer, K. Kowarik, and H. Reschreiter (eds.), “Agent-
based Modeling and Simulation in Archaeology,” Springer 
2015. ISBN: 978-3319342825 
[25] D. Thalmann and S.R. Musse, “Crowd Simulation,” Springer 
2012. ISBN: 978-1447144496 
[26] L. Schubert and K. Jeffery, “Modelling Physics in Shell 
Middens,” Proceedings of the CAA 2017, in print 
[27] M. Tallavaara, M. Luoto, N. Korhonen, H. Järvinen, and H. 
Seppä, “Human population dynamics in Europe over the Last 
Glacial Maximum,” PNAS, vol. 112, no. 27, pp. 8232-8237, 
July 2015. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1503784112 
[28] E. Andersen, “True Fact: The Lack of Pirates Is Causing 
Global Warming,” Forbes Online, 2012. Available at: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/erikaandersen/2012/03/23/true-
fact-the-lack-of-pirates-is-causing-global-warming/ 
[Retrieved: May 2018] 
[29] S. Armstrong Elias, “First Americans Lived on Bering Land 
Bridge for Thousands of Years,” Scientific American 2016 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/first-americans-
lived-on-bering-land-bridge-for-thousands-of-years/ 
[retrieved: May 2018] 
[30] W.J. Burroughs, “Climate Change in Prehistory: the end of 
the reign of chaos,” Cambridge University Press, 2007. ISBN: 
978-0521070102 
[31] U. Gähde, S. Hartmann, and J. Henning (Eds.), “Models, 
Simulations, and the Reduction of Complexity,” de Gruyter, 
2013. ISBN: 978-3110313604 
[32] J.d’A. Guedes, S.A. Crabtree, R.K. Bocinsky, and T.A. 
Kohler, “21st-Century Approaches to Ancient Problems: 
Climate and Society,” PNAS, vol. 113, no.51, pp. 14483-
14491. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1616188113 
[33] M. Llobera, “Archaeological Visualization: Towards an 
Archaeological Information Science (AISc),” J Archaeol 
Method Theory, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 193-223, September 2011. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-010-9098-4 
[34] A.J. Clark, “Seeing Beneath the Soil, Prospecting Methods in 
Archaeology,” 
Batsford 
London, 
1990. 
ISBN: 
978-
0415214407 
[35] A. Collar, F. Coward, T. Brughmans, and B.J. Mills, 
“Networks 
in 
Archaeology: 
Phenomena, 
Abstraction, 
Representation,” J Archaeol Method Theory, vol. 22, no. 1, 
pp. 1–32. January 2015. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-014-
9235-6 

