113
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Towards Conceptual Knowledge Reference Implementations for
Context Integration and Contextualisation of
Prehistory’s and Natural Sciences’ Multi-disciplinary Contexts
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU), Germany;
Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany;
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This
paper
delivers
contributions
towards
new
conceptual knowledge reference implementations and the results
of the requirements study on a new context integration system for
conceptual contextualisation of prehistory’s and natural sciences’
universal multi-disciplinary contexts. The conceptual knowledge
reference implementations focus on general multi-disciplinary
coherent conceptual knowledge integration, for case studies
here
especially
on
prehistory-protohistory
and
archaeology.
The conceptual knowledge reference implementations can be
used in ﬂexible ways, e.g., creating and employing a frame
of
component
reference
implementations.
The
methodology
provides a coherent conceptual knowledge integration, fostering
consecutive coherent analysis based on information science
fundaments. The methodological approach enables an inclusion of
new insight and newly created knowledge, e.g., via deployment of
knowledge resources and structures. The programmatic approach
and new conceptual knowledge reference implementation span
multi-disciplinary knowledge in a coherent, consistent, and multi-
lingual way. The methodology to consistently integrate knowledge
context
from
prehistory
and
archaeology
disciplines
with
knowledge in natural sciences and humanities is accompanied
by ongoing multi-disciplinary case studies implementing the
required methods. The focus of this research is on knowledge-
based methodologies and deployment of information science
methods, especially, universal conceptual knowledge, for the
goal of creating and developing conceptual knowledge reference
implementations towards coherent and general multi-disciplinary
contextualisation and context integration, targeting further future
creation of new insight, strategies, and perspectives.
Keywords–Conceptual Knowledge Reference Implementations;
Prehistory;
Natural
Sciences;
Humanities;
Contextualisation;
Conceptual Knowledge.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Multi-disciplinary context integration and contextualisation
are relevant for most scientiﬁc disciplines. This paper presents
new conceptual knowledge reference implementations and the
results of the requirements study on a new context integration
system for conceptual contextualisation of prehistory’s and nat-
ural sciences’ universal multi-disciplinary contexts. The con-
ceptual knowledge reference implementations focus on multi-
disciplinary coherent conceptual knowledge integration, e.g.,
on prehistory-protohistory and archaeology natural sciences,
and humanities. The paper delivers practical development
stages of future Conceptual Knowledge Reference Implemen-
tations (CKRI) and the results of previous and ongoing re-
search initiatives, which integrate based on information science
fundaments for a coherent conceptual integration, enabling
consecutive coherent analysis. The conceptual knowledge ref-
erence implementations can be used in a ﬂexible way, e.g.,
employing a frame of component reference implementations.
This paper is an extended presentation of the research based
on the publication and presentation at the INFOCOMP 2021
conference in Valencia, Spain [1]. When dealing with context,
the signiﬁcation of the terms ‘complex’ and ‘complicated’ is
often mixed up. Complexity is a concomitant phenomenon of
context, which, when not well comprehended, appears compli-
cated. Both, complexity and context, are linked by manyfold
inter-dependencies and often experienced together. Context
is witness-context in many cases, in prehistory and natural
sciences. Understanding context and gathering complexity in
a coherent, consistent, and methodological way are therefore
important fundaments, which can lead to consequent system-
atical instrumentalisation, consecutive coherent analysis, and
aspiring new insight.
The new conceptual knowledge reference implementations
are employed in practical and presented regarding their
methodological and systematical fundaments and components
for implementing a multi-disciplinary integration of prehistory
and its context. The paper summarises the results of immanent
milestones and, based on these, proposes the next complemen-
tary methodological and practical resources’ developments.
Further, details on complements and results of speciﬁc appli-
cation scenarios will be discussed in separate extended papers.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II
introduces into the information science fundaments. Section III
gives the essential background of motivation resulting from dif-
ferent disciplinary views. Section IV introduces to disciplinary
background and requirements. Section V presents the method-
ological fundaments and components. Section VI presents a
short overview of component implementations for integration.
Section VII delivers the results and state of major coherent
conceptual knowledge reference implementations. Section VIII
presents a practical example of an integration case scenario.
Sections IX and X discuss the lessons learned and summarise
conclusions and future work.
II.
FUNDAMENTS
The fundaments of terminology and understanding the
essence of knowledge are layed out by Aristotle, being a
central part of ‘Ethics’ [2]. Information sciences can very much
beneﬁt from Aristotle’s fundaments and a knowledge-centric
approach [3] but for building holistic and sustainable solutions,
supporting a modern deﬁnition of knowledge and subsequent
component instrumentation [4], they need to go beyond the
available technology-based approaches and hypothesis [5] as
analysed in Platon’s Phaidon. Aspects of meaning can be
described using knowledge complements, e.g., considering fac-
tual, conceptual, procedural, metacognitive [3], and structural

114
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
knowledge. Especially, conceptual knowledge can relate to any
of factual, conceptual, and procedural knowledge.
To a comparable extent, metacognitive knowledge can relate
to any of factual, conceptual, and procedural knowledge.
Knowledge complements are a means of understanding, e.g.,
enabling advanced contextualisation, documentation, prospec-
tion, integration, and analysis. From an information science
point of view, the classical fundaments of episteme, techne, and
doxa are intrinsically tied complements. However, knowledge
complements, when consequently applied, do not make the
creation and development of resources instantaneously easier.
They do not make problem solving algorithms simpler. Knowl-
edge complements do not make scientiﬁc contexts obsolete,
they do neither make qualiﬁed expertise unneeded nor do they
lead to faster education or cheaper gain of research results and
insight.
The focus of this research is on knowledge-based method-
ologies and deployment of information science methods, espe-
cially universal conceptual knowledge, for the goal of creating
a component framework of reference implementations for
coherent and general multi-disciplinary contextualisation tar-
geting the creation of new insight, strategies, and perspectives.
This research is part of several extensive long-term strategies
and concentrating on contextualisation and context integration
for prehistory, protohistory, archaeology and their associated
contexts, especially natural sciences and humanities. Contexts
in prehistory are special in a way that there are no direct
historical sources and respectively no literary reference and
documentation. Contextualisation is therefore a main intrinsic
task in prehistory and protohistory. From the knowledge point
of view, also when looking on methodological conditions, pre-
history shares many characteristics and factual conditions with
natural sciences, e.g., geology and soil science. A coherent
conceptual knowledge approach can enable to establish ties
and building bridges between contributing knowledge, includ-
ing future methodologies and contributions from disciplines.
III.
MOTIVATION
Complexity is carrying information. Therefore, from in-
formation science point of view, we should take care not
to loose complexity whenever dealing with information. The
complexity of appearing context is commonly even increased
when applying methods from multiple disciplines. So far, there
are no other comparably holistic and systematical approaches
and implementations on conceptual contextualisation known
and published besides the presented approach. Contrary, during
the last decades, it has become common practice to tackle
challenges regarding knowledge and related content solely
with procedural approaches, contrary to the fact that creation
processes, handling, and management may allow more effec-
tive and efﬁcient measures in context of analysis, long-term
development of resources, computation, and processing, Com-
mon ways of implementing procedural approaches as plain
technical solutions are often neither effective nor efﬁcient. In
addition, such approaches often lack long-term adaptability and
scalability.
How can we create a suitable, practical system of coherent
knowledge? Such a system has to conform with information
science fundaments and universal knowledge and has to enable
an integration of the required components from methodologies
to realisations for knowledge representations of realia and
abstract contexts [6]. Many facets of knowledge, including
prehistory, need to be continuously acquired and reviewed [7].
Knowledge itself is part of cognitive processes and requires
an understanding of epistemological fundaments, depending
on participated disciplines and views [8], [9].
We should therefore create a system of balanced fundaments
of sustainable, complementary solutions based on informa-
tion science and contextualisation-aware methodologies and
complements [10], which allows the application of coherent
conceptual knowledge in theory and practice. The conceptual
knowledge approach should provide facilities expressing in-
stances of mental concepts and the state of research of their
perception. The creation of object types may be inﬂuenced
by criteria, e.g., by education, experience, and social context.
The approach should enable further development of practical
disciplinary terminology assignment, e.g., adaption and syn-
chronisation of terminology.
IV.
CONSIDERATION OF DISCIPLINARY BACKGROUND
Prehistoric context, even for chorologically, chronologi-
cally, and thematically restricted object groups [11], [12],
[13] comprises of a wide and highly variable spectrum of
knowledge, applied approaches, and formalisation, including
abstraction [14] and documentation [15]. Almost all knowledge
is further referring to complex contexts of many associated
disciplines and views.
In complex scenarios, like multi-disciplinary prehistoric
realia founded contexts, we should utilise as much complexity
and structure with knowledge complements as possible in order
to achieve a high level of integration of factual, conceptual,
and structural but also of procedural and metacognitive knowl-
edge. In practice, these approaches are often not followed.
In many cases, simple convenience of workﬂow tasks might
suggest to integrate ‘data’ available as is. Even standards and
implementations may not be optimal, they can result from
the fact that information and data are often determined by
technological means. The result may be a limitation regarding
the fundamental coherence of knowledge and it may limit the
applicability and use of methods and algorithms.
Basic deﬁcits of simpliﬁed approaches and many com-
monly used frameworks (e.g., context-unaware approaches for
maps/earth services) make these approaches undesirable for a
general and coherent scientiﬁc and methodological realisation.
Further, the application of not well satisfying approaches
and methodological deﬁcits, especially in multi-disciplinary
context, are often fragmented, heterogeneous, and lacking
required coherence and precision [16] or require unnecessary
estimations and approximations [17].
Further, in addition to such contrary practice there are multi-
fold cases, which should direct to more feasible approaches,
e.g., in situations
•
when terminology does –in any case– not reﬂect the
context of respective ﬁndings,
•
when relocated objects require contextualisation and
descriptive conceptual knowledge,
•
where indications of resources are available without
respective artefacts,
•
isolated ﬁndings of various levels exist,
•
when objects with presently isolated contexts require
coherent chronology.

115
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Examples of associated, guiding questions are: How can
existing and emerging knowledge from prehistory and other
disciplines be methodologically integrated? Which multi-
disciplinary contexts and approaches can be considered on
a coherent, consistent information science base? What are
context areas of special characteristics, e.g., where are possible
regions of interest and further research? Which fundaments and
component implementations should be in focus of contextual-
isation?
A basic approach for prehistoric contextualisation should be
characterised by modular components and premises, namely,
•
a coherent, multi-disciplinary methodology, spanning
disciplines and ﬁelds,
•
an overall coherent and consistent knowledge base,
•
principle concepts for knowledge description,
•
implementing the state of the art in information science
and knowledge,
•
considering long-term time ranges for continuous devel-
opments,
•
enabling wide context integration,
•
enabling representation of different views,
•
enabling representation of different actual perceptions,
•
allowing to complement terminology where required,
•
and integration of standards and frameworks.
The premise of coherency of the knowledge base is important
in a way that solutions should not be restricted to proce-
dural components and interfaces, which intrinsically require
additional multi-level formalisation. The coherent approach
can provide required descriptive complements to otherwise
prescriptive terminologies. The integration should be aware of
cognitive visualisation aspects. The contextualisation should
further enable to continuously integrate results of past and
ongoing research of prehistoric on-site context surveys.
A means of choice in order to achieve overall efﬁcient
realisations even for complex scenarios, integrating arbitrary
knowledge, is to use the principles of Superordinate Knowl-
edge. The core assembly elements of Superordinate Knowl-
edge are methodology, implementation, and realisation [18].
The presented implementations strictly follow the fundamental
methodological algorithm base of the the Conceptual Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching (CKPM) methodology [6], providing
and accessing knowledge object patterns based on the Su-
perordinate Knowledge Methodology, which allows system-
atical use and thorough processing. Respective results from
a methodology targeting structures, including implementation,
and knowledge-aware application of the methodology were
layed out and are available with practical examples [19].
V.
METHODOLOGICAL FUNDAMENTS AND COMPONENTS
The methodological and systematical fundaments for con-
textualisation of prehistory, protohistory, and contexts require
modularity and ﬂexibility with structure levels and multi-
dimensional knowledge context, especially regarding
•
prehistoric object groups,
•
prehistoric objects,
•
inter-object group context and references,
•
chorological and chronological context,
•
context correlation for soil context,
•
material context, and
•
toponymic context,
with further natural and environmental context, regarding
methods and extendability, valorisation, analysis, and potential
for new insight. At these conditions and based on the previous
research and project practice, basic fundaments are:
•
Universal, coherent, and consistent conceptual knowl-
edge system.
•
Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks from dis-
ciplines and contexts.
•
Formalisation for complements, coherence, consistency.
•
Methodologies, general problem solution, workﬂow in-
tegration. Implementation and deployment of methods
and algorithms.
•
Prehistory and protohistory knowledge resources and
complements.
•
Natural sciences knowledge context resources and com-
plements.
•
Inherent representation groups of context resources.
•
Scientiﬁc context parametrisation.
•
Universal structures and data standards.
•
Facilities for analysis.
•
Spatial mapping.
•
Symbolic representation of context information.
•
Facilities for automation.
•
Long-term development and sustainability.
Besides obvious reasons, e.g., spatial ranges, serious depen-
dencies are made up by conditions of required mathematical
algorithms and the context of available data. These depen-
dencies cannot be overcome in many cases as, e.g., it is not
possible to get direct data from the original context of a
prehistorical site. Targeting contextualisation, the conceptual
implementation should integrate knowledge for natural con-
ditions and processes, soil-afﬁne and respective soil-related,
e.g., agricultural or geoforensic, contexts. The implementation
should consider different systems of chorologies and chronolo-
gies, e.g., prehistorical and geological time frames, palaeolithic
to neolithic in coexistence with Pleistocene to Holocene and
other conceptual and absolute chronologies. The achieved
results of respective developments and implementations of the
components will be discussed in the following sections.
VI.
METHODOLOGICAL COMPONENT IMPLEMENTATIONS
Focus is on required methodological, conceptual, non-
procedural, non-interactive, and non-technical components.
Practical components for systematical and methodological
implementations are deﬁned and developed according to the
analyses in already realised projects and case studies of prac-
tical scenarios as cited here and described in the references.
These items can only give a minimal necessary background
for CKRI development editions regarding the component
groups of an implementation frame. Overall results on a fully
compatible respective component reference implementation
frame are to be published including details on component
implementations and realisations [20]. The next sections brieﬂy
summarise components used for addressing knowledge with
multi-disciplinary Knowledge Resources (KR).

116
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Conceptual knowledge frameworks
Examples of frameworks developed and used in prac-
tice with ongoing long-term research and applied for multi-
disciplinary KR are stages of the future prehistory-protohistory
and archaeology Conceptual Knowledge Reference Implemen-
tation (CKRI), including multi-disciplinary contexts of natu-
ral sciences and humanities (E.0.4.4) [10], an environmental
information systems conceptual knowledge framework [21],
and a mathematical and computational conceptual knowledge
framework [22].
The methodology allows to address any other references on
a coherent information science knowledge base, e.g., geoscien-
tiﬁc knowledge from natural sciences KR components. Further,
the reference implementation enables to address chorology on
the coherent knowledge base.
Table I shows a general overview containing an excerpt of
major references of coherent conceptual knowledge, relevant
for the case scenario. Universally consistent conceptual knowl-
edge is based on UDC references [23] for demonstration cases
of references implementations and examples.
B. Conceptual knowledge base
The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [24] is a
general plan for knowledge classiﬁcation. UDC is also the
world’s foremost document indexing language in the form
of a multi-lingual classiﬁcation scheme covering all ﬁelds
of knowledge and constitutes a sophisticated indexing and
retrieval tool. UDC-based references in this publication are
taken from the multi-lingual UDC summary [24] released by
the UDC Consortium under a Creative Commons license [25].
C. Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks
The integration includes relevant scientiﬁc practices, frame-
works, and standards from disciplines and contexts, e.g.,
natural sciences. Geosciences and soil science are continuously
delivering updated insight on state of the art research, including
the geodiversity and standardisation [26] as required for con-
textualisation. Essential base context sources should provide
worldwide homogeneous and consistent data [27] allowing
extrapolation and interpolation in various dimensions.
D. Formalisation
All integration components, for all disciplines, require an
explicit and continuous formalisation [28] process in order
to conform with the information science principles according
to the practices in the disciplines. This includes knowledge
objects and entities as well as procedural components and ad-
dressing aspects of discipline related parole [29]. Components
can deploy Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE) [30]
syntax for specifying common string patterns.
E. Methodologies and workﬂows integration
Methodologies for creating and utilising methods include
model processing, remote sensing, spatial mapping, high in-
formation densities, and visualisation. The respective con-
textualisation of prehistoric scenarios should each be done
under individual prehistoric conditions, supported by state-
of-the-art methods, especially, consistent sources of standard
algorithms [31], multi-dimensional criteria, spatial operations,
interpolation geodesic computation [32], triangulation [33],
gradient computation [34], and projection [35]. Workﬂow inte-
gration also includes the overall spectrum of problem solving,
e.g., mathematical algorithms, mathematical processes, ﬁlter
processes, but also phonetic and linguistic context support [36].
F. Prehistory Knowledge Resources
Common sources of information in many disciplines are
often not yet aware of universal knowledge concepts and multi-
lingual approaches, not sufﬁciently coherent, consistent, and
structured and more often they show to be fragmented and
heterogeneous. In order to be independent of these basic short-
comings, all of the objects, entities, and respective conceptual
knowledge references’ excerpts and examples are taken from
The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA).
PAKA has been in continuous development for more than three
decades [37] and is released by DIMF [38].
G. Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources
Sources of information regarding natural sciences and con-
texts are provided by Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources,
an implemented system of major natural sciences’ context
object groups from KR realisations [24], [19].
H. Inherent representation groups
Most relevant data in participated disciplines is addressed in
deﬁned ways regarding structure and form. According to their
inherent representation and common utilisation, major disci-
pline and context object groups can be referred by conceptual
knowledge.
I.
Scientiﬁc context parametrisation
Scientiﬁc context parametrisation of prehistoric targets can
use the overall insights, e.g., from geoscientiﬁc disciplines
[39], [40]. A relevant example is contextualisation with
palaeolandscapes [41]. In case of prehistory, parametrisation
depends on the prehistorical context, e.g., the geoscientiﬁc
parametrisation and geoscientiﬁc contextualisation depend of
the respective selected prehistorical object groups and associ-
ated properties.
J. Structures and symbolic representation standards
The deployment of long-term universal structure and data
standards is essential. Relevant examples of sustainable im-
plementations are NetCDF [42] based standards, including
advanced features, hybrid structure integration, and parallel
computing support (PnetCDF).
VII.
COHERENT CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE REFERENCE
IMPLEMENTATIONS (CKRI)
Relevant knowledge can be referenced, e.g., from the
implemented development stage prehistory-protohistory and
archaeology CKRI (E.0.4.4) [10]. The methodology allows
to address any other references on a coherent conceptual
knowledge base, e.g., geoscientiﬁc knowledge from natural
sciences KR components (Table I). The following sections
present excerpts of the development stages of the long-term

117
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE REFERENCE IMPLEMENTATION: COHERENT CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE DEPLOYED FOR CREATION OF CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE REFERENCE IMPLEMENTATIONS, CONTEXT INTEGRATION, AND CONTEXTUALISATION, SELECTED UDC CODE REFERENCES (EXCERPT,
INCLUDING PREHISTORY-PROTOHISTORY AND ARCHAEOLOGY CKRI DEVELOPMENT STAGE E.0.4.4).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:0
Science and Knowledge. Organization. Computer Science.
Information. Documentation. Librarianship. Institutions. Publications
UDC:004
Computer science and technology. Computing.
UDC:1
Philosophy. Psychology
UDC:2
Religion. Theology
UDC:3
Social Sciences
UDC:5
Mathematics. Natural Sciences
UDC:52
Astronomy. Astrophysics. Space research. Geodesy
UDC:528
Geodesy. Surveying. Photogrammetry. Remote sensing. Cartography
UDC:528.2
Figure of the Earth. Earth measurement. Mathematical geodesy. Physical geodesy. Astronomical geodesy
UDC:528.3
Geodetic surveying
UDC:528.4
Field surveying. Land surveying. Cadastral survey. Topography. Engineering survey. Special ﬁelds of surveying
UDC:528.5
Geodetic instruments and equipment
UDC:528.7
Photogrammetry: aerial, terrestrial
UDC:528.8
Remote sensing
UDC:528.9
Cartography. Mapping (textual documents)
UDC:53
Physics
UDC:539
Physical nature of matter
UDC:54
Chemistry. Crystallography. Mineralogy
UDC:55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC:550.3
Geophysics
UDC:550.7
Geobiology. Geological actions of organisms
UDC:550.8
Applied geology and geophysics. Geological prospecting and exploration. Interpretation of results
UDC:551
General geology. Meteorology. Climatology. Historical geology. Stratigraphy. Palaeogeography
UDC:551.44
Speleology. Caves. Fissures. Underground waters
UDC:551.46
Physical oceanography. Submarine topography. Ocean ﬂoor
UDC:551.7
Historical geology. Stratigraphy
UDC:551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC:56
Palaeontology
UDC:6
Applied Sciences. Medicine, Technology
UDC:63
Agriculture and related sciences and techniques. Forestry. Farming. Wildlife exploitation
UDC:631
Agriculture in general
UDC:631.4
Soil science. Pedology. Soil research
UDC:7
The Arts. Entertainment. Sport
UDC:8
Linguistics. Literature
UDC:9
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:902
Archaeology
UDC:903
Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
UDC:904
Cultural remains of historical times
UDC (1/9)
Common auxiliaries of place
UDC:(1)
Place and space in general. Localization. Orientation
UDC:(2)
Physiographic designation
UDC:(20)
Ecosphere
UDC:(21)
Surface of the Earth in general. Land areas in particular. Natural zones and regions
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally. Mountains
UDC:(24)
Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
UDC:(25)
Natural ﬂat ground (at, above or below sea level). The ground in its natural condition, cultivated or inhabited
UDC:(26)
Oceans, seas and interconnections
UDC:(28)
Inland waters
UDC:(3/9)
Individual places of the ancient and modern world
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
UDC:(4)
Europe
UDC:“...”
Common auxiliaries of time.
UDC:“6”
Geological, archaeological and cultural time divisions
UDC:“62”
Cenozoic (Cainozoic). Neozoic (70 MYBP - present)

118
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
results of CKRI realisations, which are used in this context
with ongoing research:
•
Prehistory-protohistory and archaeology contexts.
•
Natural Sciences.
•
Soil diversity.
•
Inherent representation groups.
A. CKRI: Prehistory-protohistory and archaeology contexts
The
Prehistory-protohistory
and
Archaeology
CKRI
(E.0.4.4) can, in
future, address all facets, referencing
multi-disciplinary
prehistory-protohistory
and
archaeology
contexts.
Table II shows examples of prehistory and protohistory rit-
ual/burial objects and subgroups, and conceptual view groups,
an excerpt of UDC:903.. . .:2 groups [24] for prehistory and
protohistory.
TABLE II. CKRI: PREHISTORY-PROTOHISTORY AND ARCHAEOLOGY, VIEW
GROUPS [24] (EXCERPT, E.0.4.4).
Major Object
Conceptual
Reference Group
View Group
Earthworks
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Settlements
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Fortiﬁcations
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Architectures
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Structures and arrangements
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Timber
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Stone
UDC:[903,902].. . .
. . .
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Rock art
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Sculptured objects
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Resources (usage, mining, etc.)
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Ritual places, burials
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Cemetery
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Barrow
UDC:[903,902].. . .
round
UDC:[903,902].. . .
long
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Cist
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Dolmen
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Tomb
UDC:[903,902].. . .
chamber
UDC:[903,902].. . .
court
UDC:[903,902].. . .
portal
UDC:[903,902].. . .
rock cut
UDC:[903,902].. . .
wedge
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Pithos burial
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Cave
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Body ﬁnding
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Urn
UDC:[903,902].. . .
. . .
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Relics, organic and non-organic
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Organic
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Metal
UDC:[903,902].. . .
. . .
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Artefacts, organic and non-organic
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Organic
UDC:[903,902].. . .
Metal
UDC:[903,902].. . .
. . .
UDC:[903,902].. . .
. . .
UDC:[903,902].. . .
The conceptual view group is prehistory and archaeol-
ogy, including prehistoric remains, artefacts, and antiqui-
ties. Context integration and contextualisation include multi-
disciplinary contexts, e.g., natural sciences and humanities.
The reference groups and CKRI (E.0.4.4) can be referenced
in any knowledge resources, e.g., the shown groups are prac-
tical examples from the PAKA [37], [38]. Objects are selected
from a major object group, including subgroups.
B. CKRI: Natural Sciences
The Natural Sciences CKRI development stage (E.0.2.6) can
address all facets, referencing multi-disciplinary natural sci-
ences’ contexts. Table III shows a plain representation excerpt
of an implemented system of major natural sciences’ context
object groups from respective KR realisations employing a
system of context object groups and conceptual views groups
[24], [19].
TABLE III. CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE REFERENCE IMPLEMENTATION:
NATURAL SCIENCES / NATURE CKRI, VIEWS GROUPS [24] (EXCERPT,
E.0.2.6).
Major Object
Conceptual
Reference Group
View Group
Landmarks
UDC:55+539. . .
Height
UDC:55+539. . .
Depth
UDC:55+539. . .
. . .
UDC:55+539. . .
Caves
UDC:55+539. . .
Natural resources
UDC:55+539. . .
Rock outcrops
UDC:55+539. . .
Well springs
UDC:55+539. . .
Soil features
UDC:55+539. . .
Volcanological features
UDC:55+539. . .
Impact features
UDC:55+539. . .
. . .
UDC:55+539. . .
The conceptual view group is earth sciences and geological
sciences, physical nature of matter, including geophysics,
historical geology, and palaeogeography, soil science and re-
search.
The reference groups and CKRI can be referenced in any KR
realisations e.g., the shown groups are practical examples from
the Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources, which provide
sources of information regarding natural sciences and contexts.
C. CKRI: Soil diversity
The Soil Diversity CKRI development stage (E.0.6.2) pro-
vides an implemented and realised soil type conceptual ref-
erence system compilation (UDC:631.4. . . base), shown in
Table IV. The Soil Diversity CKRI (E.0.6.2) can be seamlessly
integrated with respective prehistory and archaeology contexts.
The soil type reference system is based on soil diversity
standards and universal conceptual knowledge. The reference
system deploys implemented and realised World Reference
Base (WRB) standard soil type reference groups and soil type
speciﬁcations for soil resources [43], [44].
Associated information, e.g., on soil drainage, wetness, pH
status, base saturation, chloride, subsoil organic material, and
stiffness can be found as reference in the World Reference

119
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Base (WRB) for soil resources [43], [44] from the Food and
Agriculture Organisation (FAO), United Nations.
For this research, the created reference system is based on
standard soil references and UDC, both enabling a system-
atic and coherent approach. In this context, the conceptual
references are referring to the respective categories, e.g.,
UDC:631.4. . .:903+“4. . .”. The conceptual view group is soil
science, pedology, and soil research.
Soil diversity groups are relevant for prehistorical and ar-
chaeological objects and contexts. Contextualised soil diversity
groups are referenced in a consistent, standardised way.
Properties based reference systems can be created from this
base compilation, e.g., a properties based reference system
for further contextualisation, parametrisation, and processing
with the ongoing research on soil diversity for prehistory and
archaeology.
D. CKRI: Inherent representation groups
The Inherent Representation CKRI (Table V) development
stage (E.0.2.2) refers to conceptual knowledge of inherent rep-
resentations objects, e.g., objects used for implementations and
realisations of structure and form in disciplines, processing,
symbolic representation, and scientiﬁc analysis.
TABLE V. CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE REFERENCE IMPLEMENTATION:
INHERENT REPRESENTATION CKRI, VIEW GROUPS [24] (EXCERPT,
E.0.2.2).
Major Object
Conceptual
Reference Group
View Group
Points, (Points of Interest, PoI)
UDC:52+004. . .
Polygons
UDC:52+004. . .
Lines
UDC:52+004. . .
Digital Elevation Model (DEM) repr.
UDC:52+004. . .
z-value representations
UDC:52+004. . .
Distance representations
UDC:52+004. . .
Area representations
UDC:52+004. . .
Raster
UDC:52+004. . .
Vector
UDC:52+004. . .
Binary
UDC:52+004. . .
Non-binary
UDC:52+004. . .
. . .
UDC:52+004. . .
The excerpt shows a plain representation of major discipline
and context object groups regarding their inherent representa-
tion and common utilisation using a system of context object
groups and conceptual view groups [24]. The conceptual view
group is astronomy, astrophysics, space research, and geodesy,
computer science and technology, computing, and data pro-
cessing, including earth measurement, ﬁeld surveying, pho-
togrammetry, remote sensing, data processing, interpretation,
mapping, data representation, data handling, and computer
languages. The reference groups and CKRI can be referenced
in any KR realisations e.g., the shown groups are practical
examples used with the case scenarios.
VIII.
INTEGRATION CASE EXAMPLE
The integration may be illustrated by a compact case exam-
ple of contributions, which employs the presented
•
coherent conceptual knowledge reference implementa-
tions, with realised KR components and
•
systematical
chorological
knowledge
for
multi-
disciplinary
contexts,
e.g.,
arbitrary
group
representations, classiﬁcation based representations, and
geospatial representations, with further components.
A. Contributions from implementations and realisations
A means of choice in order to achieve overall efﬁcient
realisations even for complex scenarios, integrating arbitrary
knowledge, is to use the principles of Superordinate Knowl-
edge. The core assembly elements of Superordinate Knowl-
edge are methodology, implementation, and realisation [18].
In the following example solution [1], [45], scenario targets
with required contributions are named in the following listing.
•
Contexts of prehistoric cemeteries and burials
•
at the North Sea coast, in North-Rhine Westphalia,
Lower Saxony, and The Netherlands.
•
Integration targets are natural sciences and
•
speleological contexts, caves and cave systems
•
in North-Rhine Westphalia, Lower Saxony, and The
Netherlands,
•
soil diversity, and overall integration with
•
chorological, symbolical, spatial context representations,
e.g., place, spatial planning,
•
auxiliary subdivisions for boundaries and
•
spatial forms,
•
administrative units, and
•
resources suitable for computing,
for all of which knowledge needs to be created, contin-
uously developed, and re-used [1], [45] A prominent pre-
historic valorisation example using auxiliaries is the swim-
ming reindeer [46], included in detail in [10]. Therefore, this
integration case, considers the major conceptual references.
Speciﬁc research can address further detail on any contexts
and properties, e.g.,
•
prehistoric object groups,
•
object characteristics, and
•
object properties,
•
topographic properties,
•
soil properties, and many more.
B. Multi-disciplinary coherent knowledge integration
An excerpt, deploying CKRI based reference facets of
coherent knowledge, of an implemented and realised multi-
disciplinary target contextualisation for a case scenario is
shown in Table VI. The case scenario integrates facets for ref-
erences from a number of respective reference implementations
the prehistory-protohistory and archaeology CKRI (E.0.4.4),
the natural sciences CKRI (E.0.2.6), the soil diversity CKRI
(E.0.6.2), the inherent representation CKRI (E.0.2.2), and
auxiliary tables.

120
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IV. CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE REFERENCE IMPLEMENTATION: SOIL DIVERSITY CKRI, VIEW GROUPS (UDC:631.4. . .), IMPLEMENTED AND
REALISED WRB STANDARD SOIL TYPE REFERENCE GROUPS AND SOIL TYPE SPECIFICATIONS (CKRI EXCERPT, E.0.6.2).
Soil Type
Soil Type Speciﬁcation
Conceptual
Reference Group
Name in WRB 2006 / WRB 1998
View Group
Acrisol
Haplic / Ferric, Gleyic, Haplic, Humic, Plinthic
UDC:631.4. . .
Alisol
Plinthic
UDC:631.4. . .
Albeluvisol
Haplic / Endoeutric, Gleyic, Haplic, Histic, Stagnic, Umbric
UDC:631.4. . .
Andosol
Aluandic / Dystric, Humic, Umbric, Mollic, Vitric
UDC:631.4. . .
Anthrosol
Anthrosol, Plaggic
UDC:631.4. . .
Arenosol
Albic, Haplic, Protic
UDC:631.4. . .
Calcisol
Aridic
UDC:631.4. . .
Chernozem
Calcic, Haplic, Gleyic, Haplic, Luvic
UDC:631.4. . .
Cambisol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Chromic, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Gleyic, Haplic, Mollic, Vertic
UDC:631.4. . .
Fluvisol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Gleyic, Haplic, Histic, Mollic, Salic, Thionic
UDC:631.4. . .
Gleysol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Haplic / Haplic, Histic, Humic, Mollic, Thionic
UDC:631.4. . .
Gypsisol
Haplic / Aridic
UDC:631.4. . .
Histosol
Histosol, Hemic / Dystric, Hemic / Eutric, – / Fibric, – / Gelic, – / Sapric
UDC:631.4. . .
Kastanozem
Calcic, Haplic, Luvic
UDC:631.4. . .
Leptosol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Haplic / Haplic, Haplic / Humic, Rendzic, Lithic
UDC:631.4. . .
Luvisol
Albic, Haplic / Arenic, Calcic, Haplic / Chromic, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Ferric, Gleyic, Haplic, Vertic
UDC:631.4. . .
Phaeozem
– / Albic, Haplic / Calcaric, Gleyic, Haplic, Luvic, Haplic / Sodic
UDC:631.4. . .
Planosol
Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Haplic
UDC:631.4. . .
Podzol
Haplic / Carbic, Haplic / Entic, Gleyic, Haplic, Leptic, Placic, Haplic / Rustic, Umbric
UDC:631.4. . .
Regosol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Haplic
UDC:631.4. . .
Solonchak
Gleyic, Haplic, Haplic / Takyric, Mollic
UDC:631.4. . .
Solonetz
Gleyic, Haplic, Mollic
UDC:631.4. . .
Umbrisol
Arenic, Gleyic
UDC:631.4. . .
Vertisol
Haplic / Chromic, Haplic, Haplic / Pellic
UDC:631.4. . .
TABLE VI. CKRI BASED REFERENCE FACETS OF MULTI-DISCIPLINARY
TARGET CONTEXTUALISATION (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref.
Verbal Description (EN)
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:903.. . .
Prehistory, prehistoric remains, artefacts,
antiquities
. . .:2
referring to religion and rituals
. . .,“62. . .”
from Holocene
. . .,(4. . .DENW) . . . in North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany
. . .,(4. . .DENI)
. . . in Lower Saxony, Germany
. . .,(4. . .NL)
. . . in The Netherlands
Earth sciences, geological sciences
UDC:551.44
Speleology, caves, ﬁssures, underground waters
Applied sciences, agriculture in general
UDC:631.4
Soil research data
Geodesy. Photogrammetry
UDC:52. . .,(23)
Remote sensing data, above sea level
UDC:52. . .,(24)
Remote sensing data, below sea level
Contextualisation Place
UDC:(4)
Europe
Organization. Computer Science
UDC:004. . .
Computer science and technology. Computing.
Respective sketch maps for various practical examples,
considering major conceptual references, have been recently
published [45], [47]. Conceptual sketch views can result in
levels of arbitrary numbers of different integrations of comple-
ments and associated properties as resulting from the integrated
KR. The individual possibilities of views and contextualisation
are literally unlimited.
C. Knowledge Resources and components
The knowledge integration for prehistoric, natural sciences,
and spatial contextualisation for excerpts of prehistoric ceme-
teries’ and caves’ distributions, remote sensing data, and soil
properties with respective knowledge references [1], [45] is
achieved by following major reference implementation com-
ponents as given. The knowledge integration enables universal
conceptual knowledge for all components, a wide range of
knowledge contextualisation and high ﬂexibility for implemen-
tation and realisation. Especially, the methodology allows ﬂexi-
ble component realisations for integration of contexts, enabling
management of KR, symbolic representation, and projection.
In this integration case, the coherent multi-disciplinary contex-
tualisation employs a base of the following contexts:
•
Knowledge objects and contexts are provided by
The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive
(PAKA) [37] [38].
•
New
soil
system
reference
development
/
(UDC:631.4. . .), WRB standard,
•
reference
contexts
are
deﬁned,
especially
for
UDC:903.. . .:2,551.7+“628”.. . .,
•
prehistorical, protohistorical time & artefacts related to
religion and rituals,
•
geology, especially stratigraphy and
•
palaeogeography, quaternary, especially late glacial and
Holocene.
•
The integrated natural sciences KR further provide in-
formation on caves in the respective region.
•
The reference implementations allow for ﬂexible multi-
disciplinary scientiﬁc, chorological contextualisation,

121
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
e.g., Digital Elevation Model (DEM) data from satellites
and drones.
For contextualisation and symbolic representation, plain
Digital Chart of the World (DCW) data [48] can be used.
Coastline database can be the Global Self-consistent Hi-
erarchical High-resolution Geography (GSHHG) [49] [50],
which was mainly compiled from the World Vector Shorelines
(WVS) [51], the CIA World Data Bank II (WDBII) [52], and
the Atlas of the Cryosphere (AC).
An equal area projection (Eckert IV) is advised due to the
type of discipline knowledge representation. The compilation
can use the World Geodetic System (WGS).
The symbolic representation of the contextualisation can
be done via LX Professional Scientiﬁc Content-Context-Suite
(LX PSCC Suite) deploying the Generic Mapping Tools
(GMT) [53] for visualisation.
IX.
DISCUSSION
Many measurements and and contexts in prehistorical ar-
chaeology and natural sciences cannot be ‘sensed’ directly and
require further endeavours. [20]. Multi-disciplinary scenarios
often require to consider a wide range of contexts with
disciplines put to their level. It is the coherent knowledge
of contexts, which is most relevant for new insight. There-
fore, contextualisation should not be done without considering
multi-disciplinary coherency and expert views from different
disciplines put on a par with respective further scientiﬁc
collaboration and support.
The range of application scenarios of the presented coherent
conceptual knowledge reference implementations is far beyond
any examples, which might be given. Nevertheless, the pre-
sented practical conceptual knowledge reference implementa-
tions and conceptual knowledge base are in continuous long-
term development.
The status of integration potentials and the outlook on
concrete targets were reviewed based on the lessons learned
from the methodological component implementations. The
component related processes are challenging and not trivial,
especially formalisation and parametrisation. This is the more
true for the integration processes. The resulting bases, CKRI
and CRI, are the start of a continuous long-term integration
on contextualisation for prehistory and multi-disciplinary con-
texts. All the presented components were created, developed,
and evaluated with the referred practical project results and
case studies. The conceptual knowledge reference implementa-
tions, especially the prehistory CKRI and components showed
that they are best choice addressing required properties and
features for the tasks. The presented components’ set of
reference implementations and components also allows fur-
ther development, targeting the integration for coherent con-
textualisation including required standards from information
science, conceptual knowledge, prehistory and archaeology,
natural sciences and geosciences, soil science, satellite and
spatial data, and processing algorithms, for the purpose of
contextualisation and further utilisation and prospection in
prehistory and context.
It should be explicitely noticed, that the integrated methods,
resources, and workﬂows have to support features beyond
methodological compatibility, suitability, modularity, and ﬂex-
ibility on the task, e.g., with development, storage, transfer,
and utilisation. Especially, the presented conceptual knowledge
system enables to respect the rights of participated parties and
conform with and adhere to intellectual properties, privacy, and
licensing of resources and components, e.g., with intermediate,
and resulting structures, formats, and procedural components.
In consequence, practical integration can refer to involved
resources and components from all disciplines, prehistory,
geosciences, soil science, remote sensing, application of ref-
erence implementations and standards, creation of knowledge,
procedural realisations, e.g., algorithms and model processing,
and results, e.g., symbolic representation of prehistoric context.
The conceptual knowledge reference implementations and
methodologies were lately publicly presented and discussed
at the Informational Modeling - Theory and Practice - Inter-
national Conference, Soﬁa, Bulgaria [10], at the International
Conference on Mathematics of Informational Modeling, Varna,
Bulgaria [54], both Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, at the
Delegates’ Summit, Symposium on Advanced Computation
and Information in Natural and Applied Sciences, Rhodes,
Greece [55], and at the Machine Learning for Industry Forum
hosted by the High-Performance Computing Innovation Center
and Data Science Institute at the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, USA [56].
Practical applications and concrete developments of concep-
tual knowledge reference implementations and a component
reference implementations frame were discussed regarding
ongoing and future research initiatives in prehistory and prehis-
torical archaeology, natural sciences, and integrative industry
applications. Conceptual knowledge solutions are recognised
a fundament of future industrial learning, collaborative, and
multi-disciplinary information science.
The component reference implementations frame resulting
from this research has shown to provide a ﬂexible framework
for the required implementations and realisations including the
multi-disciplinary coherent knowledge integration. Especially,
the respective coherent conceptual knowledge reference im-
plementations integrate seamlessly with coupled components
addressed by provided Component Reference Implementations
(CRI) frames [20]. The integration allows a ﬂexible contextu-
alisation for many peculiarities and situations, e.g., for multi-
disciplinary coherent conceptual and chorological contexts.
X.
CONCLUSION
This research successfully achieved to deliver new, widely
deployable, coherent Conceptual Knowledge Reference Imple-
mentations (CKRI) from the results of the long-term require-
ments study on a new context integration system for conceptual
contextualisation of prehistory’s and natural sciences´ universal
multi-disciplinary contexts.
Coherent conceptual knowledge reference implementations
integrate seamlessly with Knowledge Resources and coupled
components, e.g., via Component Reference Implementations
(CRI) frames. The integration allows a ﬂexible contextuali-
sation for many peculiarities and situations, e.g., for multi-
disciplinary coherent conceptual and chorological contexts.
Employed resources are in continuous development. In ad-
dition, the conceptual views groups are a unique, ﬂexible,
and extendable approach of addressing multi-lingual verbal
descriptions with a systematic approach and standardised
implementation framework for multi-disciplinary and multi-
dimensional scenarios of coherent conceptual knowledge, be-
yond plain representation.

122
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This research contributed on knowledge-based methodolo-
gies and deployment of information science methods, espe-
cially universal conceptual knowledge, for contextualisation
and context integration of multi-disciplinary contexts of pre-
history and natural sciences, which can enable coherent future
analysis. The results of long-term research projects in differ-
ent disciplines leading to this publication contributed to the
achieved goal to create reference implementations for coherent
and general multi-disciplinary contextualisation, which repre-
sents more than its component parts. The integration enables to
deal with knowledge complements, e.g., factual, structural, and
formalised like time periods but also with metacognitive like
experience, meaning, and symbolism. The presented results are
nevertheless the start of a consecutive long-term integration
project and continuing projects in participated disciplines. The
presented methodological approach allows to systematically
overcome conceptual fragmentation and to foster on a multi-
level coherency for multi-disciplinary knowledge. The multi-
lingual conceptual reference implementation allows to address
problems of various language dependent fragmentation, e.g.,
to resolve national and local terminology fragmentation. This
is increasingly relevant for coherency of inter-disciplinary
knowledge in contextualisation. The new CKRI and facili-
ties for a component reference implementations frame enable
a coherent conceptual integration of prehistory and context
disciplines and can foster the consideration and visibility of
inherent aspects. CKRI and facilities for a component refer-
ence implementations frame allow to address, correlate, and
integrate contexts of prehistory-protohistory and archaeology
and context of natural sciences and related disciplines, e.g.,
diversity of soil and relevant properties.
Methodology and implementation allow a wide range or
multi-disciplinary contexts and approaches for prehistoric con-
text research for arbitrary regions on interest based on context
knowledge, which can globally kept homogeneous and consis-
tent as allowed by publicly available state-of-the-art resources.
Examples are geoscientiﬁc and mathematical parametrisation
and model computations for prehistoric scenarios. The devel-
oped reference implementations and components have been
in continuous further development to address the continuous
development of multi-disciplinary knowledge resources and
new methodological implementations.
Overall, in result, contextualisation fosters careful and dili-
gent scientiﬁc analysis and interpretation, besides global ap-
plicability of the methodology and implementations.
Future research targets on long-term development of a co-
herent consistent conceptual knowledge framework focussing
on model creation and analysis of prehistory and archaeology
case scenarios, taking new ﬁndings, contexts, and context
integration into account. Foci are on new advanced, practical
editions of a prehistory-protohistory and archaeology CKRI,
a natural sciences CKRI, a soil diversity CKRI, and an
inherent representation groups CKRI. That includes context-
aware surveys on prehistoric object groups, multi-disciplinary
contextualisation of prehistory-geodiversity scenarios, modular
integration, analysis, and symbolic representation models for
prehistory and context disciplines, e.g., concentrating on Cen-
tral European supra-regional and on micro-regional studies in
Northern Germany (North-Rhine Westphalia, Lower Saxony)
and The Netherlands coast areas. The integration and priorities
with information science research depend on the state-of-the-
art results and development in contributing disciplines.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This ongoing research is supported by scientiﬁc organisa-
tions and individuals. We are grateful to the “Knowledge in
Motion” (KiM) long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches
Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for par-
tially funding this research, implementation, case studies, and
publication under grants D2018F1P04962, D2018F3P04932,
D2018F6P04938, D2019F1P04998, and D2020F1P05228 and
to its senior scientiﬁc members and members of the permanent
commission of the science council, especially to Dr. Friedrich
H¨ulsmann, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB)
Hannover, to Dipl.-Biol. Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz
Universit¨at Hannover, to Dipl.-Ing. Martin Hofmeister, Han-
nover, and to Olaf Lau, Hannover, Germany, for fruitful discus-
sion, inspiration, and practical multi-disciplinary case studies.
We are grateful to Dipl.-Geogr. Burkhard Hentzschel and
Dipl.-Ing. Eckhard Dunkhorst, Minden, Germany, for proliﬁc
discussion and exchange of practical spatial and drone case
scenarios. We are grateful to Dipl.-Ing. Hans-G¨unther M¨uller,
G¨ottingen, Germany, for providing specialised, manufactured
high end computation and storage solutions. We are grateful
to The Science and High Performance Supercomputing Cen-
tre (SHPSC) for long-term support. / DIMF-PIID-DF98 007;
URL: https://scienceparagon.de/cpr .
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Prehistory’s
and
Natural
Sciences’
Multi-
disciplinary Contexts: Contextualisation and Context Integration Based
on Universal Conceptual Knowledge,” in Proceedings of The Eleventh
International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computa-
tion (INFOCOMP 2021), May 30 – June 3, 2021, Valencia, Spain.
XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2021, ISSN: 2308-3484,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-865-5, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.
php?articleid=infocomp 2021 1 20 60011 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[2]
Aristotle, The Ethics of Aristotle, 2005, Project Gutenberg, eBook,
EBook-No.: 8438, Rel. Date: Jul., 2005, Digit. Vers. of the Orig. Publ.,
Produced by Ted Garvin, David Widger, and the DP Team, Edition 10,
URL: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8438 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[3]
L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, Eds., A Taxonomy for Learning,
Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educa-
tional Objectives.
Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA (Pearson Education
Group), USA, 2001, ISBN: 978-0801319037.
[4]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, F. H¨ulsmann, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, P. Skurowski,
and M. Staniszewski, Knowledge and Computing.
Post-Summit Re-
sults, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and Deﬁnitions of Knowledge
and Computing, Sept. 23, 2015, The Fifth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and
Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 13th Int. Conf.
of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–29, 2015,
Rhodes, Greece, 2015, pp. 1–7, DOI: 10.15488/3409.
[5]
Plato, Phaedo, 2008, (Written 360 B.C.E.), Translated by Benjamin
Jowett, Provided by The Internet Classics Archive, URL: http://classics.
mit.edu/Plato/phaedo.html [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[6]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “From Knowledge and Meaning Towards Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching: Processing and Developing Knowledge Objects
Targeting Geoscientiﬁc Context and Georeferencing,” in Proc. of The
Twelfth Internat. Conf. on Advanced Geographic Information Systems,
Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2020), November 21–25,
2020, Valencia, Spain. XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2020,
pp. 36–41, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-762-7.
[7]
R. Gleser, “Klassiﬁkation, Verbreitung und chemische Zusammenset-
zung kupferzeitlicher Metallartefakte and Rhein, Mosel und Saar,” in
Proceedings, Beitr¨age des international Symposiums zur Arch¨aologie in
der Großregion, 14.–17. April 2016, Europ¨aische Akademie Otzenhau-
sen, 2017, pp. 163–189, (title in English: Classiﬁcation, Distribution,
and Chemical Composition of Copper-age Metal Artefacts at the Rhine,
Moselle, and Saar), Arch¨aologentage Otzenhausen, Band 3, Arch¨aologie
in der Großregion, Koch, M. (ed.), ISBN: 578-3-941509-14-6.

123
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[8]
R. Gleser, Rekonstruktion der Vergangenheit: Zur methodischen Eige-
nart pr¨ahistorischen Erkennens. mentis, Paderborn, 2018, pp. 199–237,
(title in English: Reconstruction of the Past: On the Methodical Pecu-
liarity of Prehistorical Cognition), in: A.-S. Naujoks, J. Stelling, and
O. R. Scholz (eds.), Von der Quelle zur Theorie. Vom Verh¨altnis zwis-
chen Objektivit¨at und Subjektivit¨at in den historischen Wissenschaften,
ISBN: 978-3-95743-136-3.
[9]
R. Gleser, Zu den erkenntnistheoretischen Grundlagen der Pr¨ahis-
torischen Arch¨aologie.
Leiden, 2021, 2021, (title in English: On
the Epistemological Fundaments of Prehistorical Archaeology), in: M.
Renger, S.-M. Rothermund, S. Schreiber, and A. Veling (Eds.), Theorie,
Arch¨aologie, Reﬂexion. Kontroversen und Ans¨atze im deutschsprachi-
gen Diskurs, (in print).
[10]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Information Science Paragon: Allow Knowl-
edge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches to Universality,
Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” The International Journal
“Information Models and Analyses” (IJ IMA), vol. 9, no. 3, 2020,
pp. 203–226, Markov, K. (ed.), ISSN: 1314-6416 (print), Submitted
accepted article: November 18, 2020, Publication date: August 17, 2021,
URL: http://www.foibg.com/ijima/vol09/ijima09-03-p01.pdf [accessed:
2021-11-28].
[11]
H.-J. H¨aßler, Ur- und Fr¨uhgeschichte in Niedersachsen.
Nikol,
Hamburg, 2002, ISBN: 3-933203-61-9.
[12]
H. Kr¨ober, Natur und Landschaft in Niedersachsen, Die Naturdenkmal-
Typen. Schl¨utersche Verlagsgesellschaft mbH & Co. KG, 2001, ISBN:
3-87706-616-X.
[13]
R. Wiechers-Weidner, Großsteingr¨aber in Westfalen.
Landschaftsver-
band Westfalen-Lippe, Landesbildstelle Westfalen, 1985, (title in En-
glish: Megalithic Tombs in Westphalia).
[14]
A. Cochrane and A. M. Jones, Eds., Visualising the Neolithic: Abstrac-
tion, Figuration, Performance, Representation.
Oxbow Books, Oxford
and Oakville, 2012, ISBN: 978-1-84218-477-7, Neolithic Studies Group
Seminar Papers 13.
[15]
P. Skoglund, J. Ling, and U. Bertilsson, Eds., Picturing the Bronze
Age.
Published in the United Kingdom by Oxbow Books, Oxford &
Philadelphia, 2015, Swedish Rock Art Series: Volume 3, ISBN: 978-1-
78297-879-4.
[16]
B. Fritsch, M. Furholt, M. Hinz, L. Lorenz, H. Nelson, G. Schaf-
ferer, S. Schiesberg, and K.-G. Sj¨ogren, “Dichtezentren und lokale
Gruppierungen – Eine Karte zu den Großsteingr¨abern Mittel- und
Nordeuropas,” jungsteinSITE, Oct. 2010, ISSN: 1868-3088, (title in
English: Centres of Density and Local Groups – A Map of Megalithic
Tombs in Central and Northern Europe).
[17]
C. Nimura, Prehistoric Rock Art in Scandinavia: Agency and Environ-
mental Change.
Published in the United Kingdom by Oxbow Books,
Oxford & Philadelphia, 2016, Swedish Rock Art Series: Volume 4,
ISBN: 978-1-78570-119-1.
[18]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Principles of Superordinate Knowledge: Separation
of Methodology, Implementation, and Realisation,” in The Eighth
Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences
(SACINAS), Proceedings of The 16th Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and
Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 13–18, 2018, Rhodes, Greece, AIP CP,
Vol. 2116.
AIP Press, American Institute of Physics, Melville, New
York, USA, 2019, ISBN: 978-0-7354-1854-7, DOI: 10.1063/1.5114033.
[19]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Impact of Information Science Accompanied
Structural Information on Computation of Knowledge Pattern Matching
and Processing: A Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and
Humanities Conceptual Integration Perspective,” in Proc. of The Tenth
Int, Conf. on Adv. Comm. and Comp. (INFOCOMP 2020), Sept.
27 – Oct. 1, 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN:
978-1-61208-807-5, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=infocomp 2020 1 10 60015 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[20]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Towards a Component Reference Implementa-
tions Frame for Achieving Multi-disciplinary Coherent Conceptual and
Chorological Contextualisation in Prehistory and Prehistoric Archaeol-
ogy,” International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements,
vol. 14, no. 1&2, 2021, (to be published).
[21]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Sustainable Knowledge and Resources Management
for Environmental Information and Computation.
Business Expert
Press, Manhattan, New York, USA, Mar. 2018, Ch. 3, pp. 45–88, in:
Huong Ha (ed.), Climate Change Management: Special Topics in the
Context of Asia, ISBN: 978-1-94784-327-1, in: Robert Sroufe (ed.),
Business Expert Press Environmental and Social Sustainability for
Business Advantage Collection, ISSN: 2327-333X (collection, print).
[22]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Superordinate Knowledge Based Comprehen-
sive Subset of Conceptual Knowledge for Practical Mathematical-
Computational Scenarios,” in The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf.
in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), Proceedings of The 17th
Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28,
2019, Rhodes, Greece, AIP CP, Volume 2293 A.
AIP Press, American
Institute of Physics, Melville, New York, USA, Nov. 2020, pp. 040 002–
1 – 040 002–4, ISBN-13: 978-0-7354-4025-8, DOI: 10.1063/5.0026478.
[23]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Main Tables,” 2020, Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: https://udcdata.info/
078887 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[24]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[25]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2021-11-28],
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
[26]
B. M. Das, Advanced Soil Mechanics; Fifth Edition, 5th ed.
CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, London, New York, 2019,
ISBN: 978-0-8153-7913-3.
[27]
“Land Processed Distributed Active Archive Center,” 2021, LP DAAC,
URL: https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[28]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, A. Tsitsipas,
L. Schubert, F. H¨ulsmann, O. Lau, and M. Hofmeister, Best Practice
and Deﬁnitions of Formalisation and Formalism. Post-Summit Results,
Delegates’ Summit: The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in
Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 17th Int. Conf. of Num.
Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28, 2019, Rhodes,
Greece, 2019, pp. 1–16, DOI: 10.15488/5241.
[29]
F. de Saussure, Cours de linguistique g´en´erale, 1916, (title in English:
Course in General Linguistics), C. Bally and A. Sechehaye (eds.).
[30]
“Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE),” 2021, URL: https://
www.pcre.org/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[31]
W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Nu-
merical Recipes in Fortran 90, The Art of Parallel Scientiﬁc Computing.
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[32]
T. Vincenty, “Direct and inverse solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid
with application of nested equations,” Surv. Rev., vol. XXII, no. 176,
1975, pp. 88–93.
[33]
R. J. Renka, “Algorithm 772: STRIPACK: Delaunay Triangulation and
Voronoi Diagram on the Surface of a Sphere,” AMC Trans. Math.
Software, vol. 23, no. 3, 1997, pp. 416–434.
[34]
B. K. P. Horn, “Hill-Shading and the Reﬂectance Map,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 69, no. 1, 1981, pp. 14–47.
[35]
A. J. Kent and P. Vujakovic, Eds., The Routledge Handbook of Mapping
and Cartography.
Taylor & Francis Group, London and New York,
2018, ISBN: 978-1-138-83102-5.
[36]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Archaeological and Geoscientiﬁc Objects used with
Integrated Systems and Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources,” Int. Jour.
on Adv. in Systems and Measurements, vol. 6, no. 1&2, 2013, pp. 200–
213, ISSN: 1942-261x, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?
articleid=sysmea v6 n12 2013 15 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[37]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Information Science and Inter-disciplinary Long-
term Strategies – Key to Insight, Consistency, and Sustainabil-
ity: Conceptual Knowledge Reference Methodology Spanning Pre-
history, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Humanities,” Interna-
tional Tutorial, DataSys Congress 2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020,
Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2020/
ProgramINFOCOMP20.html [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[38]
“The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) license,”
2021, (release 2021), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): All rights reserved. Rights retain to
the contributing creators.

124
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[39]
R. Brinkmann, Abriß der Geologie, Bd. 2, Historische Geologie, neube-
arbeitet von Karl Kr¨ommelbein, 12th/13th ed.
Ferdinand Enke Verlag,
Stuttgart, 1986, ISBN: 3-432-80603-5.
[40]
P. Woldstedt and K. Duphorn, Norddeutschland und angrenzende Ge-
biete im Eiszeitalter, 3rd ed., 1974.
[41]
G. N. Bailey, J. Harff, and D. Sakellariou, Eds., Under the Sea:
Archaeology and Palaeolandscapes of the Continental Shelf, ser. Coastal
Research Library.
Springer International Publishing AG 2017,
2017, vol. 20, ISSN: 2211-0577, ISBN: 978-3-319-53158-8, DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-53160-1.
[42]
“Network
Common
Data
Form
(NetCDF),”
2021,
DOI:
10.5065/D6H70CW6,
URL:
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/
netcdf/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[43]
“World reference base for soil resources,” 1998, World Soil Resources
Report No. 84, ISSS-ISRIC-FAO, Rome.
[44]
“World reference base for soil resources,” 2006, World Soil Resources
Report No. 103, ISSS-ISRIC-FAO, Rome.
[45]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Methodology of Chorological and Coherent Concep-
tual Knowledge Contextualisation: Approaches for Multi-disciplinary
Contexts in Prehistory and Archaeology,” in Proceedings of The
Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Infor-
mation Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2021),
July
18
–
22,
2021,
Nice,
France.
XPS
Press,
Wilming-
ton, Delaware, USA, 2021, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-
61208-871-6, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
geoprocessing 2021 1 60 30045 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[46]
J. Cook, The Swimming Reindeer, ser. British Museum Objects in
Focus.
The British Museum Press, 2015, ISBN: 978-0-7141-2821-
4, (ﬁrst published 2010).
[47]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Approaches to Coherent Conceptual Knowledge
Integration for Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Human-
ities: Information Science Based Computation of Structural Knowledge
and Spatial Context Information,” International Journal on Advances in
Software, vol. 14, no. 1&2, 2021, (to be published).
[48]
P. Wessel, “The Digital Chart of the World for GMT 5 or later,” 2018,
URL: ftp://ftp.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2021-11-28], URL: http:
//www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/dcw/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[49]
P. Wessel, “Global Self-consistent Hierarchical High-resolution Geogra-
phy,” 2016, URL: ftp://ftp.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2021-11-28],
URL: http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/gshhg/ [accessed: 2021-11-
28].
[50]
P. Wessel and W. H. F. Smith, “A global, self-consistent, hierarchical,
high-resolution shoreline database,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 101, no. B4,
1996, pp. 8741–8743.
[51]
E. A. Soluri and V. A. Woodson, “World Vector Shoreline,” Int.
Hydrograph. Rev., vol. LXVII, no. 1, 1990, pp. 27–35.
[52]
A. J. Gorny, “World Data Bank II General User Guide,” 1977.
[53]
P. Wessel, W. H. F. Smith, R. Scharroo, J. Luis, and F. Wobbe,
“The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT),” 2020, URL: http://www.
generic-mapping-tools.org/ [accessed: 2021-11-28], URL: http://gmt.
soest.hawaii.edu/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[54]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Keynote Lecture: The Multi-disciplinary Case of
Prehistorical Insight: Information Science at the Edge of Structured Data
Comprehension,” The XI-th International Conference - Mathematics
of Informational Modeling, Institute of Mathematics and Informatics,
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, July 1–2, 2021, Varna, Bulgaria, URL:
http://math.bas.bg [accessed: 2021-11-28], 2021.
[55]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, Z. Kovacheva, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz,
F. H¨ulsmann, and I. Naydenova, Best Practice and Deﬁnitions –
Concepts of Cognostic Addressing Structured and Non-structured Data.
Post-Summit Results, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and Deﬁnitions
– Concepts of Cognostic Addressing Structured and Non-structured
Data, The Eleventh Symposium on Advanced Computation and In-
formation in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 19th
International Conference of Numerical Analysis and Applied Mathe-
matics (ICNAAM), September 20–26, 2021, Rhodes, Greece, 2021, (to
appear).
[56]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Coherent Knowledge Solutions From Prehistory to
Future – Towards Coherent Multi-disciplinary Knowledge Reference
Implementation Blueprints for Industrial Learning: Insight from Consis-
tent Coherent Conceptual Integration of Prehistory, Archaeology, Natu-
ral Sciences, and Humanities,” ML4I – Machine Learning for Industry
Forum 2021; hosted by the High-Performance Computing Innovation
Center (HPCIC) and Data Science Institute (DSI), at the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), August 10–12, 2021, Liver-
more, California, U.S.A., (Invited Speech), URL: http://www.llnl.gov
[accessed: 2021-11-28], 2021.

