Archaeological and Geoscientiﬁc Objects used with Integrated Systems and
Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU),
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover,
North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN), Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents the methods and results from
combining Integrated Information and Computing System
components with classiﬁcation for the purpose of enabling
multi-disciplinary and dynamical use of information systems
and supercomputing resources for Archaeological Information
Systems. Focus is on soft criteria, structures, and classiﬁcation
for knowledge discovery for sustainable, long-term knowledge
resources. The essential base are a ﬂexible collaboration
framework, suitable long-term documentation, structuring and
classiﬁcation of objects, computational algorithms, object rep-
resentations, and workﬂows as well as portable application
components like Active Source. Case studies of the successful
implementation of integration of archaeology and geosciences
information and facilitation for dynamical use of High End
Computing resources are discussed. The implementation shows
how the goal of integrating information and systems resources
and advanced scientiﬁc computing for multi-disciplinary appli-
cations from natural sciences and humanities can be achieved
by creating and using long-term knowledge resources.
Keywords–Integrated
Systems;
Scientiﬁc
Supercomputing;
Knowledge Resources; Archaeology; Geosciences; Information
Systems; Phonetic Algorithms; High Performance Computing.
I. INTRODUCTION
The target of this development is sustainable long-term
knowledge resources providing information found by nec-
essarily sophisticated workﬂows considering content and
context. This has to go along with systematically structuring
system components and information and describing content
and context of objects. With archaeology the objects are
commonly handled in a data collection different from the
natural sciences objects. The collection and description
normally shares no geoscientiﬁc, physical, and secondary
data, e.g., from natural sciences.
Technology and components are used for digital library
components, classiﬁcation of objects, and realia. Neverthe-
less, it is important for many use cases in geosciences
and archaeology to enable a dynamical use of Integrated
Systems and computing resources [1]. In order to overcome
many of the complex scientiﬁc impediments in prominent
disciplines we do need mighty information systems but
the more they are used for interactive use they show up
needing capabilities for the state-of-the-art in dynamical
computing. The studies and implementations of Integrated
Information and Computing Systems (IICS) have shown a
number of queuing aspects and challenges [2], [3]. In the
case if archaeological information systems needed for multi-
disciplinary investigation the motivation is the huge potential
of integrative beneﬁts and even more pressing that archives
are needed for multi-disciplinary records of prehistorical
and historical sites while context is often being changed or
destroyed by time and development. Besides the academic,
industrial, and business application scenarios in focus of the
Geo Exploration and Information collaborations (GEXI) [4]
in order to integrate the necessary computing facilities with
these systems, on the technical side the recent implementa-
tions for spatial control problems, e.g., for wildﬁre control
[5], integrating GIS, and parallel computing are promising
candidates for future support. This research paper especially
contributes to the most important aspect of soft criteria in
creating knowledge resources and implementing effective
knowledge discovery.
This paper is organised as follows. Sections II and III
introduce the basic knowledge resources and the neces-
sary long-term investments. Section IV shows the essential
prerequisites of information and structure for the informa-
tion and computing systems. Sections V and VI describe
the results from the development of “silken criteria” and
presents examples from phonetic support. Sections VII and
VIII show a workﬂow from these developments and explain
the importance of these criteria for the context. Section
IX presents the high-level results for the computation and
parallelisation with these workﬂows. Sections X to XIV
describe and evaluate the resulting implementation for an
Archaeological Integrated Information and Computing Sys-
tems and computation results from the components, based
on the knowledge resources and digital library examples.
Section XV summarises the conclusions and future work.
II. KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES
Knowledge resources provide the universal base for using
information and computing resources for a multitude of pur-
poses. They contain systematically gathered, structured and
documented content and context on any kind of information,
object, sources, and tools.
200
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

This includes systematically structuring system compo-
nents and information and describing content and context of
objects. The architecture and structure enables to use any
kind of workﬂow, e.g., ﬁlter stacks using ﬂexible algorithms
on different type of content and context. Information and
data can be data-mined, analysed, retrieved, and used, e.g.,
for processing, computing or typesetting by sophisticated
workﬂows considering any qualities or properties of the
material. Examples for the material are data sets from
natural sciences, documentation texts on multi-disciplinary
topics, descriptive texts on humanities, media data, photo
documentation on objects, e.g., from digital libraries, and
visualised data.
III. SUSTAINABLE LONG-TERM INVESTMENTS
Although there is some overlap, investments can be
categorized in investments for disciplines, services, and
resources. For long-term scientiﬁc goals, the most signiﬁcant
investment is in knowledge resources. As disciplines have
to care for their content and results these may be the
investments being closest to the work within disciplines.
Nevertheless, there will be a number of components,
e.g., algorithms and applications, which will directly be
cared for by disciplines. Services are regulary provided by
specialised groups. Computing and storage resources can be
provided by various groups, as long as the necessary size
and performance is not at the top edge.
All the developments presented in this paper can be
considered to be tightly coupled to the knowledge resources,
therefore being of close interest for participating disci-
plines: Silken criteria, parallelisation, workﬂow and context,
information structure, classiﬁcation, integrated information
and computing systems. The investments in the knowledge
resources have proved to provide highest sustainability for
over twenty-ﬁve years now.
IV. INFORMATION AND STRUCTURE
It must be emphasised that the complexity of the ecosys-
tem of algorithms and disciplines necessary to achieve an in-
tegration of multi-disciplinary information and components
is by nature very high so besides the system components we
have not only to integrate unstructured but highly structured
data with a very complex information structure.
The overall information is widely distributed and it is
sometimes very difﬁcult and a long lasting challenge even to
get access to a few suitable information sources. The goal for
these ambitions is an integrated knowledge base for archae-
ological geophysics. Example data resources and methods
are [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. For all components
presented, the main information, data, and algorithms are
provided by the LX Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources [13].
Structuring information requires a hierarchical, multi-
lingual and already widely established classiﬁcation imple-
menting faceted analysis with enumerative scheme features,
allowing to build new classes by using relations and group-
ing. This is synonym to the Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation
(UDC) [14]. In multi-disciplinary object context a faceted
classiﬁcation does provide advantages over enumerative
concepts. Composition/decomposition and search strategies
do beneﬁt from faceted analysis. It is comprehensive, and
ﬂexible extendable. A classiﬁcation like UDC is necessarily
complex but it has proved to be the only means being able
to cope with classifying and referring to any kind of object.
V. SILKEN CRITERIA: PHONETIC SUPPORT
Common means of knowledge exploitation provide string
search, precise mathematical algorithms for selections and so
on. These are rather sharp with their precision. Even string
searches based on regular expressions using advanced means
of wildcards are limited in terms of not simply matching the
characters but the meaning or context.
For increasing the quality of exploiting knowledge re-
sources we have to build sophisticated means of searching
and ﬁltering information objects. For example, if knowledge
resources contain more features, these can be used in com-
bination:
• Structure,
• Classiﬁcation,
• Language distinction,
• Pattern recognition,
• “Sound” recognition, . . .
The entirety of the knowledge resources being part of the LX
Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources [13] does provide unique
means of collective use of features that can be used for
knowledge based recognition.
Building applications based on the integrated features, this
results in synergy on the one hand and in a much higher
Quality of Data (QoD) on the other hand. For example,
with search requests, the percentage of information used
with the resulting matrix is much higher with integrated
features. Standard search includes about 20–50 percent of
the available ﬁrst level information. Integrated search allows
to gain up to over 90 percent of suggested information
in the ﬁrst level and about the same for the second and
following levels. This does require much higher demands
for computation, with most applications even in interactive
time range, but this should not be a problem today.
In many of the applications built on knowledge resources,
an uncertainty for various attributes is necessary. Algorithms
solely being precise as well as those implementing an
uncertainty have shown drawbacks when being used for
increasing the quality of the results. The solution for many
application is to implement sequences of those types of
algorithms.
So, with the above mentioned features of the knowledge
resources, the individual strengths are that, for example:
201
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• Structure can integrate scientiﬁc names, e.g., botanical
names, with commonly used names whatever they
might be matching.
• Pattern recognition can be used to ﬁnd matching objects
on string basis, e.g., from exactly matching character
strings.
• Classiﬁcation can help to ﬁnd context as well as choos-
ing object or ﬁltering besides any pattern or structure
matching, e.g., with UDC codes.
• Language distinction can be used for supporting classi-
ﬁcation and pattern matching as well as typesetting and
hyphenation support, mostly by improving the precision
of meaning and context, e.g., generating publishing
objects.
• Sound recognition can help ﬁnd homophones and com-
parable objects, e.g., searching and selecting additional
paths of knowledge discovery to follow in a workﬂow
or ﬁlter process.
So, with these resources, even elementary modules for sound
and pattern recognition can be of huge beneﬁts when being
integrated with the other methods.
VI. SUPPORTING SILKEN SELECTION
The knowledge resources can be used by any algorithm
suitable for a deﬁned workﬂow. One of the available module
implementing a silken selection based on the Soundex prin-
ciple is the knowledge_sndx_standard application.
The historical Soundex [15] is a phonetic algorithm for
indexing names by sound. The goal with this algorithm
is to encode homophones so that they can be represented
by the same resulting code in order to match persons’
name despite differences in writing and spelling [16]. The
basic algorithm mainly encodes consonants. Vowels are not
encoded unless being a ﬁrst letter. The U.S. Government
is using a modiﬁed modern rule set [17] for purposes in
census and archives. The original intention was to catch
the English pronunciation, anyhow there are many different
implementations in use today.
Listing 1 shows a Perl source code used
in the
knowledge_sndx_standard module, modelled after
the standard Perl implementation [18], for computing
LX Soundex codes [19], being available based on different
programming concepts [20], [21]. The various workﬂows
can deﬁne and integrate their own Soundex codes for dif-
ferent purposes and topics.
1
#!/usr/bin/perl
2
#
3
# knowledge_sndx_standard -- (c) LX Project -- CPR
1992, 2012
4
#
5
6
$string=$ARGV[0];
7
$sndx_nocode = undef;
8
9
sub knowledge_sndx_standard
10
{
11
local (@s, $f, $fc, $_) = @_;
12
push @s, ’’ unless @s;
13
14
foreach (@s)
15
{
16
$_ = uc $_;
17
tr/A-Z//cd;
18
19
if ($_ eq ’’)
20
{
21
$_ = $sndx_nocode;
22
}
23
else
24
{
25
($f) = /ˆ(.)/;
26
tr/AEHIOUWYBFPVCGJKQSXZDTLMNR
/00000000111122222222334556/;
27
($fc) = /ˆ(.)/;
28
s/ˆ$fc+//;
29
tr///cs;
30
tr/0//d;
31
$_ = $f . $_ . ’000’;
32
s/ˆ(.{4}).*/$1/;
33
}
34
}
35
36
wantarray ? @s : shift @s;
37
}
38
39
$code = knowledge_sndx_standard $string;
40
print ("SNDX-standard:$code:$string\n");
41
42
##EOF:
Listing 1.
LX Soundex SNDX-standard module Perl source code.
The next examples are multi-disciplinary objects from one
context, linked by the references in the knowledge resources.
If the SNDX-standard: preﬁx is left out in the following
examples, the code refers to this standard code.
A. Geology and volcanology
Listing 2 shows some computed LX Soundex codes for
the La Soufri`ere volcano and the reference-internal com-
parable sound occurrences. The code uniﬁes a number of
different versions primarily linked by the preﬁx but classiﬁed
by the object classiﬁcation.
1
L216:La_Soufriere
2
L216:La_Soufri{‘e}re
3
L216:La_Soufri`ere
Listing 2.
SNDX-standard codes for La Soufri`ere.
The same is true for the following related object. Listing 3
shows computed LX Soundex codes for the Vesuvius and
the reference-internal comparable sound occurrences.
1
V210:Vesuv
2
V210:Vesuvio
3
V212:Vesuvius
Listing 3.
SNDX-standard codes for Vesuvius volcano.
Both of these object examples are referring to the volcano
database.
B. Archaeology
The archaeological objects, too, very well ﬁt with these
algorithms. This is true for a large number of more than 95
percent of classiﬁed entries. Listing 4 shows some computed
LX Soundex codes for Yucat´an and the reference-internal
comparable sound occurrences.
202
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1
Y235:Yucatan
2
Y235:Yucat’an
3
Y235:Yucat´an
Listing 4.
SNDX-standard codes for Yucat´an.
Listing 5 shows a number of computed LX Soundex
codes for Chich´en Itz´a and the reference-internal comparable
sound occurrences.
1
C250:Chich´en
2
C253:Chich’en_Itz’a
3
C253:Chichen_Itza
4
C253:Chich´en_Itz´a
Listing 5.
SNDX-standard codes for Chich´en Itz´a.
Listing 6 shows computed LX Soundex codes for Cob´a
and the reference-internal comparable sound occurrences.
1
C100:Coba
2
C100:Cob’a
3
C100:Cob´a
Listing 6.
SNDX-standard codes for Cob´a.
C. Biology and botanics
For any of the objects there may be different spellings
or even different terms. This means that there are, e.g.,
botanical names, which are not homophonetically near to the
other terms. Listing 7 shows some computed LX Soundex
codes for the Chiricote and the reference-internal compara-
ble sound occurrences.
1
G260:Geiger
2
C623:Chiricote
3
C623:Ciricote
4
Z623:Ziricote
5
C630:Cordia
Listing 7.
SNDX-standard codes for Chiricote.
The higher variability of codes from the knowledge re-
sources is a good source for calculating new trees for the
knowledge discovery workﬂow.
D. Names and sources
Searching the knowledge resources for “geology, vol-
canology, and earthquake” delivers a person “Leibniz” in the
result Matrix, referring to one of the early statements that
volcano activity can result in earthquakes. As the Leibniz
object carries a large number of pseudonyms, it can be
interesting to follow these as non-explicit references.
An algorithm supports building groups of pseudonyms.
Listing 8 shows a computed LX Soundex code for a selection
of names used in context with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
(1646–1716) and their reference-internal comparable sound
occurrences, as computed for the result matrix.
1
SNDX-standard:C260:Caesar
2
SNDX-standard:C262:Caesarius
3
SNDX-standard:C265:Caesarinus
4
SNDX-standard:F612:Freybach
5
SNDX-standard:F623:Fuerstenerius
6
SNDX-standard:F623:F¨ursteneer
7
SNDX-standard:F623:Furstenerius
8
SNDX-standard:F623:F¨urstenerius
9
SNDX-standard:G163:Goffredo
10
SNDX-standard:G244:Guglielmo
11
SNDX-standard:G316:Godefridus
12
SNDX-standard:G316:Godefroy-Guillaume
13
SNDX-standard:G316:Godfridus
14
SNDX-standard:G316:Godofredus
15
SNDX-standard:G316:Godofridus
16
SNDX-standard:G316:Gotfrid
17
SNDX-standard:G316:Gotfrids
18
SNDX-standard:G316:Gothofredus
19
SNDX-standard:G316:Gotofredus
20
SNDX-standard:G316:Gottefridus
21
SNDX-standard:G316:Gottfredus
22
SNDX-standard:G316:Gottfrid
23
SNDX-standard:G316:Gottfried
24
SNDX-standard:G316:Gottofredus
25
SNDX-standard:G426:Gallo-Graecus
26
SNDX-standard:G445:Guilelmus
27
SNDX-standard:G445:Guilielmus
28
SNDX-standard:G445:Guillielmus
29
SNDX-standard:G445:Gulielmus
30
SNDX-standard:G620:Georg
31
SNDX-standard:G622:Georgius
32
SNDX-standard:G622:Graecus
33
SNDX-standard:G655:Germano
34
SNDX-standard:G655:Germanus
35
SNDX-standard:J235:Justiniano
36
SNDX-standard:L152:Leibnics
37
SNDX-standard:L152:Leibniz
38
SNDX-standard:L152:Leibnizius
39
SNDX-standard:L152:Leibn¨uz
40
SNDX-standard:L152:Leibnuzius
41
SNDX-standard:L152:Leibn¨uzius
42
SNDX-standard:L153:Laipunitsu
43
SNDX-standard:L153:Leibnitio
44
SNDX-standard:L153:Leibnitius
45
SNDX-standard:L153:Leibnits
46
SNDX-standard:L153:Leibnitz
47
SNDX-standard:L153:Leibnitzius
48
SNDX-standard:L153:Leibn¨utz
49
SNDX-standard:L215:Lajbnic
50
SNDX-standard:L215:Lejbnic
51
SNDX-standard:L315:Lithvanus
52
SNDX-standard:L352:Lithuanus
53
SNDX-standard:R114:Republicanus
54
SNDX-standard:R153:Raibunittsu
55
SNDX-standard:S125:Sibisimilis
56
SNDX-standard:S516:Semper
57
SNDX-standard:U421:Ulicovius
58
SNDX-standard:V445:Vilhelm
59
SNDX-standard:V632:Veridicus
60
SNDX-standard:W445:Wilhelm
Listing 8.
LX SNDX-standard codes for “Leibniz” pseudonym parts.
The result shows that the name-Soundex algorithm delivers
several phonetical groups. Distinction criteria for modelling
the results can be based on considering knowledge re-
sources’ structure, attributes, and features, e.g., language,
topic context, and name-string order.
Here, the most frequent groups are G316, G244, G163,
G445, W445, L152, L153, L215. On the one hand, these ob-
viously correspond with different spellings of the real name.
On the other hand, pseudonym name parts are especially
carrying codes as C260, C262, C265, F612, F623, G622,
G426, G655, J235, L315, L352, R114, R153, S125, S516,
U421, V632. Further, if necessary for a workﬂow, it is as
well possible to handle phonetical variances and pseudonym
names separately, oeven with separate phonetical algorithms.
Listing 9 shows some essential modiﬁcations for the
SNDX-latin
module
knowledge_sndx_latin
com-
203
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

pared to the SNDX-standard (Listing 1), to be used with
these groups of objects.
1
tr/AEHIOUWYBFPVCGJKQSXZDTLMNR
/00000000111122022222324556/;
Listing 9.
LX Soundex SNDX-latin modiﬁcation for SNDX-standard.
Listing 10 shows a computed LX Soundex code for an
excerpt selection as above but with the SNDX-latin module.
1
SNDX-latin:L152:Laipunitsu
2
SNDX-latin:L152:Lajbnic
3
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibnics
4
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibnitio
5
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibnitius
6
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibnits
7
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibnitz
8
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibnitzius
9
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibniz
10
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibnizius
11
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibn¨utz
12
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibn¨uz
13
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibnuzius
14
SNDX-latin:L152:Leibn¨uzius
15
SNDX-latin:L152:Lejbnic
Listing 10.
LX SNDX-latin codes for “Leibniz” pseudonym name
parts (excerpt) showing the harmonised codes.
The newly created algorithm has harmonised the codes
L152, L153, L215 for the “Leibniz”-object regarding ‘z’
and ‘t’ as well as ‘i’ and ‘j’ to become SNDX-latin:L152.
In order to beneﬁt from the improvements with algorithms,
objects can carry any references to these algorithms. For the
disciplines creating the content and references it is important
not only to see the result matrix but also the reasons for the
codes and ranking and to be able the modify the source
codes with any objects.
VII. WORKFLOW AND SILKEN CRITERIA
The workﬂow for applying these algorithms for an en-
riched result matrix is as follows:
1) Object search using string and classiﬁcation criteria
on the knowledge resources and references results in
primary result matrix.
2) Object search using smooth, silken criteria, e.g.,
Soundex, on attribute- selected content in the primary
result matrix results in secondary result matrix.
3) References to object from the secondary result matrix
are used to search objects from the knowledge base
and references in order to create a tertiary result
matrix.
4) The tertiary result matrix is integrated with objects
from all steps and a deﬁned ranking is used to create
the ﬁnal result matrix.
Methods include the structure of objects, language at-
tribute, transliterations, transcriptions, synonyms, references
and so on. In most cases these features are precisely deﬁned.
The silken support is provided by an algorithm deﬁned
for and by the user application within the scenario. This
algorithm, by concept, is designed to enable a use case
speciﬁc implementation.
VIII. WORKFLOW AND CONTEXT
In the regular expression - knowledge resources workﬂow
(workﬂow 1), the result will be based on the chain “Vol-
cano - Vesuvius - Vesuv” (workﬂow 1 result chain). In the
context regular expression - knowledge resources - phonetic
algorithms - language attributes - context categorisation -
references - sources/material (workﬂow 2), the knowledge
resources workﬂow resembles results based on a chain of
“Volcano - Vesuvius - Vesuv - Leibniz - terrae motus -
letter/communication - Vesuvium - Fumarole - Solfatara”
(workﬂow 2 result chain).
The ﬁrst connections can be found by structure, refer-
ences, and regular expressions. The various Leibniz infor-
mation and references in the second workﬂow have solely
been found by phonetic algorithms. The references from
English to Latin or German content has solely been possible
by language attributes. In order to ﬁnd further information
for the result matrix even these methods would not be
sufﬁcient. Thus, the terrae motus path has been recognised
using context categorisation, e.g., context keywords. With a
sophisticated combination of these methods new references
and new links to sources and material could be found for
an improved result matrix. In this example, the term “terrae
motus” has been one of the keys opening up a multitude of
further information.
Material in specialised collections, for example in the
European Cultural Heritage Online [22] would not be ac-
cessible due to the type and context of the material.
In the above workﬂow, within the chain from the stage
“Leibniz” on, the content of archaeology and geosciences
will not be accessible, for example the communication
regarding volcanoes, earthquakes, and caves in manuscripts
and letters or content of pictorial objects are not available via
search engines. In this example, there is a rich contribution
for the result matrix on volcanism, volcanology, and geology
by various historical objects, references, and sources, espe-
cially for volcanism, Vesuvius [23], as well as earthquake
related context [24], even from concept glossaries [25],
manuscript collections and catalogues [26], [27] as, e.g.,
[28], [29], or Leibniz related copperplates [30]. For example,
the “praehistoric unicorn” reconstruction [31], as well as
material on geological context has not been referenced
before from the objects of the knowledge resources and is
not freely and publicly available as a direct reference, media
or veriﬁcation [32].
Therefore, with conventional search concepts, the con-
tent and any information from it will be missed within
the workﬂow and any information will not contribute to
the result matrix. Reasons for these misses can, e.g., be
historical language, type of material, licensing, property and
access rights. All of these being at least as important as
the technical issues. Using the available features, e.g., the
context categorisation from the knowledge resources it is
204
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

possible to catch this information and to drastically increase
the spectrum of gathering information and complementing
the result matrix. The workﬂows and algorithms presented
here can be used in order to overcome missing links in
between different information pools.
Listing 11 shows an excerpt from the keyword context
data of an ‘Leibniz’-object.
1
...
2
keyword-Context: KYW :: Leibniz, Korrespondent,
Tschirnhaus
3
keyword-Context: TXT :: Venedig, Neapolis, Puzzolo,
Grotta del Cane
4
keyword-Context: TXT :: Neapolis, welches nach Rom und
Venedig eine der sch¨onsten st¨adten Italiae ist
5
keyword-Context: TXT :: schw¨ofel b¨ader, schweffel
6
keyword-Context: KYW :: Schwefel, Solfatara, Fumarole
7
keyword-Context: TXT :: Neapolis, den brennenden Berg
Vesuvium
8
keyword-Context: TXT :: Grotta del Cane
9
keyword-Context: TXT :: Neapolis, den brennenden Berg
Vesuvium
10
keyword-Context: KYW DE :: Vulkanismus, Vulkanologie,
Vesuv, Vesuvius, Vesuvium, Erdbeben, Beben
11
keyword-Context: KYW EN :: volcanism, volcanology,
Vesuvius, Vesuvium, earthquake, quake
12
...
13
link-Context: LNK :: http://www.gwlb.de/Leibniz/
Leibnizarchiv/Veroeffentlichungen/III7B.pdf
14
keyword-Context: TXT :: terrae motu, Sicilien
15
keyword-Context: KYW :: Erdbewegungen, Erdbeben,
Vulkane, terrae motu, terra motus, Sicilien, Sizilien
16
...
17
link-Context: LNK :: http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de
18
keyword-Context: KYW DE :: Nicolaus Seelaender,
Nicolaus Seel¨ander, Kupferplatten, Leibniz, Leibniz
Einhorn, Einhornh¨ohle b. Scharzfeld im Harz
19
...
20
link-Context: LNK :: http://www.leibnizcentral.de/
CiXbase/gwlbhss/
21
keyword-Context: TXT :: 1631/1632 16xx, terra motus,
fogelius
22
keyword-Context: KYW DE :: Erdbeben, Seismologie,
Seismik, Fogel, Fogelius, Vulkan, Vesuvius, CiXbase,
cixbase
23
keyword-Context: KYW EN :: earthquake, seismology,
seismics, Fogel, Fogelius, volcano, Vesuvius, CiXbase,
cixbase
24
...
25
link-Context: LNK :: http://www.leibnizcentral.com
26
keyword-Context: KYW DE :: Vulkan, Erdbeben,
Seismologie
27
keyword-Context: KYW EN :: volcano, earthquake,
seismology
Listing 11.
Keyword context data from a ‘Leibniz’-object (excerpt).
Listing 12 shows an excerpt from the keyword context
data of two cave objects, which are referenced from the
above object.
1
link-Context: LNK :: http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/
content/copperplates
2
keywords-Context: KYW :: Leibniz, Nicolaus Seel¨ander,
Kupferstichplatte, Copperplate, Baumannsh¨ohle
3
link-Context: LNK :: http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/
content/copperplates
4
keywords-Context: KYW :: Leibniz, Nicolaus Seel¨ander,
Kupferstichplatte, Copperplate, Einhornh¨ohle, Harz
Listing 12.
Keyword context data from cave objects (excerpt).
For ﬁnding these, the context descriptions have been evalu-
ated [30], [22]. An example for the context description for
one of these is shown in Listing 13.
1
Kupferstichplatten
2
Titel:
K 220 Einhorn und versteinerter Zahn
3
Beschriftung:
Tab. XII; Dens animalis marini Tidae
prope Stederburgum e colle limoso effossi. Figura
Sceleti prope Qvedlinburgum effossi.
4
Stecher:
Seel¨ander [signiert: N. Seelaender sc.]
5
Format:
318x196 mm
6
Bemerkung:
Abzug unter cua stark besch¨adigt. -
Liste 1727, Nr. 23; Liste 1729a, Nr. 10. Abzug (ohne
Tafelnummer) auch in Noviss. 56: IV,3, Bl. 12. Lt.
Manuskript XXIII, 23b, Bl. 57’ u. 57a, sollte dies
urspr¨unglich Tafel X sein.
7
Abdruck:
Leibniz, Protogaea, Taf. XII, Text dazu
S. 64 [¨uber den Fund bei Quedlinburg]:Testis rei est
Otto Gerikius, Magdeburgensis Consul, qui nostram
aetatatem novis inventis illustravit [...] Gerikius
igitur libro de vacuo edito, per occasionem narrat,
repertum Sceleton unicornis in posteriore corporis
parte, ut bruta solent, reclinatum, capite vero sursum
levato, ante frontem gerens longe extensum cornu
quinque fere ulnarum, crassitie cruris humani, sed
proportione quadam decrescens. Ignorantia fossorum
contritum particulatimque extractum est, postremo
cornu cum capite et aliquibus costis, et spina dorsi
atque ossibus Principi Abbatissae loci allata fuere.
Eadem ad me perscripta sunt; additaque est figura,
quam subiicere non alienum erit. [Zusatz im Manuskript
, nicht im Druck:] Simile ingens animal Tidae prope
Stederburgum nuper repertum est in monte a limo de
cujus quodam immania ossa apud me sunt.
;
8
Nachgestaltung:
Nachstich in Leibniz, Opera
omnia, studio L. Dutens, 1768. - Wallmann, Abhandlung
von den sch¨atzbaren Alterth¨umern zu Quedlinburg, 1776,
Tafel S. 39.
;
9
Literatur:
Achim Rost, Das fabelhafte Einhorn. In:
Die Welt im leeren Raum, 2002, S. 120-132. Vgl. dort
auch S. 376 u. 378.
10
Signatur:
cup 4048
11
Signatur(Abzug):
cua 3203
Listing 13.
Example for evaluated context description.
IX. COMPUTATION AND PARALLELISATION
The computation time for about 100000 objects is about
20 seconds on one processor. As per request it is necessary
to have several runs, for several references, this add up to
about 10 minutes even for a simple object if done linear.
Most of these processes can be done in parallel but due
to the complexity of the knowledge content and the ﬂexi-
bility implemented thereof implemented for the knowledge
resources it is not possible to have a general algorithm and
type of parallelisation. The basic types of workﬂows used
with object extraction are:
1) Linear workﬂows do not beneﬁt from parallelisation
inside the workﬂow. However, if a large number of
comparable operations have to be executed, the overall
application will beneﬁt from a more or less loosely
coupled parallelisation of these operations. The efﬁ-
ciency depends on the application using the results
and triggering the events for the operations.
2) Parallel workﬂows can beneﬁt from a parallelisation
inside the workﬂow. This can, for example, result
from operations inside the workﬂow that have to use
persistent as well as volatile information processing.
A simple case is a workﬂow based on a regular
pattern expression on classiﬁed object groups using
205
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

homophones for ﬁnding additional object identities. In
this case, the phonetic calculations can be done “on
the ﬂy”, for ﬁnding the homophones in parallel for all
objects as soon as they are delivered by the regular
expression pattern search.
3) Partially parallel workﬂows will combine both linear
and parallel sequences in their workﬂow.
Therefore, the degree of parallelisation depends on the
height of the level of the implementation. The integration of
knowledge resource structure, classiﬁcation, and algorithms
does provide large beneﬁts on the result matrix:
• Long-term sustainable knowledge base,
• Improved Quality of Results,
• Improved Quality of Data,
• Maximum ﬂexibility.
X. INTEGRATED INFORMATION AND COMPUTING
The integration issues of information, communication,
and computing are well understood [2], [33], [34] from the
“collaboration house” framework [1] integrating information
and scientiﬁc computing.
A. Collaboration and multi-disciplinary workﬂow
Based on the collaboration framework the IICS enables to
collaborate on disciplines, services, and resources and oper-
ational level. It allows disciplines to participate on multi-
disciplinary topics for building Information Systems and
to use scientiﬁc supercomputing resources for computing,
processing, and storage, even with interactive and dynamical
components [35]. The screenshot (Figure 1) illustrates some
features, as with Active Source, computed and ﬁltered views,
LX information, and aerial site photographs, e.g., from
Google Maps. Many general aspects of dynamical use of
information systems and scientiﬁc computing have been
analysed with the collaboration house case studies.
B. Integrative and synergetic effects
With IICS we do have integrative as well as synergetic
effects from the participating disciplines. For example, the
Roman city of Altinum, next to Venice, Italy, would not
have been re-discovered without the combination of archae-
ological information, aerial photographs, satellite images,
and digital terrain models [36]. Even in unorganised cir-
cumstances, like with this discovery, the multi-disciplinary
cooperation can lead to success. The more we need an
integrated information system approach for “disciplines on
demand” in order to improve the collaboration and the
sustainability of results.
On the other hand we have synergetic effects with the
same scenario of archaeology and geosciences, too, the
research does have beneﬁts for archaeology and geosciences
as the collection of information from archaeological probing
will help to describe the underground, which is of immense
importance for the future of the area [37] and its attractive-
ness [38].
XI. ARCHAEOLOGICAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Anyway, there should be a principle solution, considering
the hardware and software if so individually available, with-
out restructuring complex data all the time when migrating to
different architectures or to be prepared for future resources.
A. Archaeology and geosciences
So, in case of Archaeological Information Systems (AIS),
for advanced Archaeological IICS, cultural heritage, and
geoscientiﬁc information, and computing systems, there is
a strong need for integration and documentation of different
data and information with advanced scientiﬁc computing,
e.g., but not limited to:
• Object, site, artifact, spatial, multi-medial, photographi-
cal, textual, properties, sources, referencial information.
• Landscape and environmental information, spatial, pho-
tographical information.
• Geophysical information, geological information.
• Event information.
Important aspects with all this information are the distribu-
tion analysis and spatial mapping. With dynamical informa-
tion systems for this scenario the components must enable
to weave n-dimensional topics in time, use archaeological
information in education, implement n-dimensional docu-
mentation, integrate sketch mapping, provide support by
multi-disciplinary referencing and documentation, discovery
planning, structural analysis, multi-medial referencing.
B. Creating metadata for documentation and computing
It will need a number of metadata types, depending from
the variable type of content, describing all kind of relevant
information regarding the data and the use of this data [39].
Some important groups are category, source, batch-System,
OS version and implementation, libraries, information on
conversion, virtualisation environment, and automation.
Currently only a few projects in some disciplines have
worked on long-term content issues [40], [41], [42], [43],
[44]. Commonly only three categories are relevant to ar-
chaeological projects, project level metadata (e.g., keywords,
site, dates, project information, geodata), descriptive and
resource level metadata (e.g., comprehensive description,
documents, databases, geo-data), and ﬁle level metadata
(software, hardware, accompanying ﬁles). As we saw above,
from information science point of view this is by far not
sufﬁcient as there are, e.g., licensing and archiving restric-
tions, precision restrictions, network limitations, context of
environment, hardware, and software, hardware restrictions,
tools and library limitations and implementation speciﬁcs.
The long-term aspects for big heterogeneous data hold
very difﬁcult and complex challenges as big data storage
facilities [45], for users there are, e.g., free public access and
long-term operational issues, for context provisioning huge
amount of work have to be done, e.g., handling licensing,
archiving, context, hardware availability and many more.
206
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1.
Dynamical use of information systems and scientiﬁc computing with multi-disciplinary and universal knowledge resources [1].
XII. IMPLEMENTATION OF COMPONENTS
A. Targets and means
The main target categories and means of information to be
addressed are interdisciplinary, multi-disciplinary, intercul-
tural, functional, application, and context information. The
main functional targets with IICS are integrative knowledge,
education, technological glue, linking isolated samples and
knowledge databases, language and transcription databases,
classiﬁed Points on Interest (POI), InfoPoints, multime-
dial information. The organisational means are commonly
grouped in disciplines, services, resources and operation.
B. Information sources
All media objects used here with components and views
are provided via the Archaeology Planet and Geoscience
Planet components [13]. The related information, all data,
and algorithm objects presented are copyright the LX
Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources [13]. It provides multi-
disciplinary information and data with its knowledge re-
sources, e.g., for archaeology, geophysics, geology, envi-
ronmental sciences, geoscientiﬁc processing, geoprocess-
ing, Information Systems, philology, informatics, computing,
geoinformatics, cartography.
C. Information, structure and classiﬁcation
The following examples illustrate the retrieved object
information, media, and sources with examples for their
multi-disciplinary relations. The information is retrieved
from the LX Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources [13], [2], [46]
and categorised with means like UDC. Listing 14 shows an
excerpt of a LX object entry used with IICS.
1
Cenote Sagrado [Geology, Spelaeology, Archaeology]:
2
Cenote, Yucat´an, M´exico.
3
Holy cenote in the area of Chich´en Itz´a.
4
...
5
%%UDC:[55+56+911.2]:[902+903+904]:
[25+930.85]"63"(7+23+24)=84/=88
6
%%Location: 20.687652,-88.567674
7
Syn.: Cenote Sagrada
8
s. also Cenote, Chich´en Itz´a
Listing 14.
Structure of object entry (LX Resources, excerpt).
Listing 15 shows a classiﬁcation set of UDC samples used
with the knowledge resources and IICS.
1
UDC:[902+903+904]:[25+930.85]"63"(7)(093)=84/=88
2
UDC:[902+903+904]:[930.85]"63"(23)(7):(4)=84/=88
3
UDC:[55+56+911.2]:[902+903+904]:[25+930.85]"63"
(7+23+24)=84/=88
4
UDC:[25+930.85]:[902]"63"(7)(093)=84/=88
5
UDC:[911.2+55+56]:[57+930.85]:[902+903+904]"63"
(7+23+24)=84/=88
6
UDC:[911.2+55]:[57+930.85]:[902]"63"(7+23+24)=84/=88
Listing 15.
Classiﬁcation set (UDC samples, excerpt).
207
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The classiﬁcation deployed for documentation [47] must
be able to describe any object with any relation, structure,
and level of detail. Objects include any media, textual
documents, illustrations, photos, maps, videos, sound record-
ings, as well as realia, physical objects such as museum
objects. A suitable background classiﬁcation is, e.g., the
UDC. The objects use preliminary classiﬁcations for multi-
disciplinary content. Standardised operations with UDC are,
e.g., addition (“+”), consecutive extension (“/”), relation
(“:”), subgrouping (“[]”), non-UDC notation (“*”), alpha-
betic extension (“A-Z”), besides place, time, nationality,
language, form, and characteristics.
D. Communication and computing
The
central
component
groups
for
bringing
multi-
disciplinary information systems into practice are IICS and
documentation of objects, structure, and references. List-
ing 16 shows an example of a dynamical dataset from
an Active Source [35] component provisioning information
services.
1
#BCMT--------------------------------------------------
2
###EN \gisigsnip{Object Data: Country Mexico}
3
#ECMT--------------------------------------------------
4
proc create_country_mexico {} {
5
global w
6
$w create polygon 0.938583i 0.354331i 2.055118i ...
7
...
8
proc create_country_mexico_autoevents {} {
9
global w
10
$w bind legend_infopoint <Any-Enter> {set killatleave [
exec ./mexico_legend_infopoint_viewall.sh $op_parallel
] }
11
$w bind legend_infopoint <Any-Leave> {exec ./
mexico_legend_infopoint_kaxv.sh }
12
$w bind tulum <Any-Enter> {set killatleave [exec
$appl_image_viewer -geometry +800+400 ./
mexico_site_name_tulum_temple.jpg $op_parallel ] }
13
$w bind tulum <Any-Leave> {exec kill -9 $killatleave }
14
} ...
Listing 16.
Dynamical data set of Active Source component.
Batch and interactive features are integrated with Active
Source event management [35], e.g., allowing structure
and UDC based ﬁltering. Computing interfaces can carry
any interactive or batch job description. Taking a look
onto different batch and scheduling environments one can
see large differences in capabilities, handling environments
and architectures. In the last years, experiences have been
gained in simple features for different environments for High
Throughput Computing like Condor, workload schedulers
like LoadLeveler and Grid Engine, and batch environments
like Moab / Torque.
XIII. RESULTING IMPLEMENTATION IN PRACTICE
A. Scientiﬁc documentation
Scientiﬁc documentation is an essential part of a Uni-
versal IICS (UIICS), revealing associations and relations
and gaining new insight. Handling the available information
does provide transparent how puzzle pieces of a scientiﬁc
context do ﬁt, e.g., not only that terms like Bronze Age, Ice
Age, Stone Age are only regional but in quantity and quality
how the transitions and distributions in space and time are.
Information on objects, archiving, analysis, documentation,
sources and so on will be provided as available with the
dimension space. Besides the dynamical features the objects
carry information, e.g., references, links, tags, and activities.
B. Dimension space
The information matrix spans a multi-dimensional space
(Table I). It illustrates the multi-faceted topic dimension
containing important cognitive information for disciplines
and applications. Examples of multi-disciplinary information
in archaeological context are stony and mineral composition,
e.g., of dead freight or ballast in ship wrecks, mineral
material in teeth, ﬁngerprints of metals used in artifacts, and
genetic material of biological remains. Further there exists
a “vertical” multi-dimensional space to this information
matrix, carrying complementary information, e.g., color,
pattern, material, form, sound, letters, characters, writing,
and so on. The documentation can handle the holistic multi-
dimensional space, so we can ﬂatten the views with available
interfaces to three or four dimensional representations.
Table I
DIMENSIONS OF THE INFORMATION MATRIX (EXCERPT).
Dimension Meaning, Examples
Time
Chronology
Topic
Disciplines
Purpose (tools, pottery, weapons, technology, architecture,
inscriptions, sculpture, jewellery)
Culture (civilisation, ethnology, groups, etymology)
Infrastructure (streets, pathways, routes)
Environment (land, sea, geology, volcanology, speleology,
hydrogeology, astronomy, physics, climatology)
Genealogy (historical, mythological documentation)
Genetics (relationship, migration, human, plants)
Biology (plants, agriculture, microorganisms)
Trade (mobility, cultural contacts, travel)
Depth
Underground, subterranean
Site
Areal distribution, region
. . .
. . .
Data
Resources level, virtualisation
The dimensions are not layers in any way so it would
contradict to percept their documentation with integrated
systems in data or software layers. With these IICS we are
facing a multi-dimensional volume, like multi-dimensional
“potato shapes” of knowledge objects. Layer concepts are
often used with cartographic or mapping applications but
these products are infeasible for handling complex cognitive
context.
C. IICS dimension view
As with the structure the communication and compute
processes are getting resource intensive, the available storage
and compute resources are used with the IICS. The following
small example shows an excerpt of a tabulated dimension
view (Table II). The last column shows if an object is de-
posited on site (O) or distributed (D) and if additional media
208
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

is available and referenced. The table shows if a storage or
and additional compute request has been necessary for the
resulting object or media. Information is given if primarily
a storage request (S) for persistant media or a compute
request (C) deploying High End Computing resources is
dynamically used for creating the appropriate information.
Table II
DIMENSION VIEW WITH ARCHAEOLOGICAL IICS (EXCERPT).
Topic
Purpose / Environment / Infrastructure
Ref.
Egypt
Architecture
Rome
Architecture
Catalonia
Architecture
Monument de Colom, Port, Barcelona, Spain
OC
Maya
Architecture
Kukulk´an Pyramid, Chich´en Itz´a, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
Nohoch Mul Pyramid, Cob´a, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
El Meco Pyramid, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
El Rey Pyramid, Canc´un, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
Pelote area, Cob´a, Yucat´an, M´exico
OS
Pok ta Pok, Canc´un, Yucat´an, M´exico
OS
Templo del Alacran, Canc´un, Yucat´an, M´exico
OS
Port, Tul´um, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
Infrastructure
Sacb´e, Chich´en Itz´a, Yucat´an, M´exico
OS
Sculpture
Diving God & T. Pinturas, Tul´um, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
Diving God, Cob´a, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
Precolombian Architecture
Caribbean
Environment (volcanology, geology, hydrogeology)
La Soufri`ere volcano, Guadeloupe, F.W.I.
OC
Mt. Scenery volcano, Saba, D.W.I.
OC
Cenote Sagrado, Chich´en Itz´a, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
Ik Kil Cenote, Yucat´an, M´exico
OC
Arawak
Architecture
Prehistory
Architecture
Topic:
architecture
mythology
environment
infrastructure
Entity:
Object Location: O On site, D Distributed; Object Media: C Compute, S Storage.
Compute:
CONNECT
REFERTO-TOPIC
REFERTO-SPATIAL
VIEW-TO
VIEW-FROM
The following examples explain views from disciplines
and topics (Figure 1) as computed and ﬁltered with the
IICS, using photo media samples (media samples c⃝ C.-P.
R¨uckemann, 2012, 2013). It must be emphasised that the
applications can provide any type of objects, high resolution
media, and detailed information. The ﬁrst view (Figure 2) is
a simple example from the above table for an excerpt of the
computed class of regional pyramid object representations
(Yucat´an Peninsula, provinces Yucat´an and Quintana Roo).
Figure 2.
Object SAMPLE – regional pyramid of Maya, Yucat´an, M´exico.
Figure 3 illustrates the computed objects for the above
REFERTO-TOPIC and REFERTO-SPACE chain classiﬁca-
tion, e.g., here via UDC “(7):(4)” relation.
Figure 3.
Cross-purpose REFERTO – Diving god, Tul´um, Colom.
Besides that, viewing directions can be referred, e.g.,
“view to”, “view from”, “detail” as shown with a VIEW
example (Figure 4) for the above selection with UDC
“(23)”, “(24)”.
Figure 4.
In-purpose: VIEW-TO VIEW-FROM – Volcanoes and Cenotes.
D. Topic view and object representation
The following sample excerpt tabulates a topic view
(Table III) and shows the computed object representation
(Figure 5) for an in-topic CONNECT example. From the
eight samples of Chich´en Itz´a shown, the Sacb´e pathway
connects the Kukulk´an Pyramid with the Cenote Sagrado.
The table shows a sample of referred (Geo) information.
Table III
TOPIC VIEW WITH ARCHAEOLOGICAL IICS (EXAMPLE, CHICH´EN ITZ ´A).
Site
Topic / Purpose
Selected: Geo
Ref
Chich´en Itz´a
Kukulk´an Pyramid, El Castillo
Limestone
OC
Sacb´e
Limestone
OC
Cenote Sagrado
Doline, hydrology
OC
Jaguar temple
OS
Tzompantli
OS
Temple of the warriors
OS
Caracol
OS
Chac temple
OS
Figure 5.
In-topic CONNECT – Kukulk´an, Cenote, connected by Sacb´e.
209
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As Figure 1 showed, the objects resulting from the
computation can contain any additional attributes, e.g., geo-
referenced relations for further application within spatial
context or multi-disciplinary analysis and evaluation.
E. Object space grouping
The objects are linked by relations in the n-dimensional
object space. The slices with a selected number of di-
mensions carry the common information, e.g., “Stone Age
ﬂint arrow heads” in a speciﬁc area. It is essential not to
sort objects into layers within a database-like structure. So
vectors and relations can help to represent their nature in
a more natural way. The views, even traditional layered
ones, are created from these by appropriate components.
The following ﬁgures illustrate structure and references for
collections, context, and integration of multi-disciplinary
information: museum topical collection (Figure 6), context
of amphores (Figure 7), and geology information (Figure 8).
Figure 6.
Sample COLLECTION – Precolombian Museum.
Figure 7.
Sample CONTEXT – Pottery (amphores).
Figure 8.
Sample DISCIPLINE – Geology (Caribbean limestone and tuff).
XIV. DIGITAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL LIBRARY EXAMPLES
In combination with the above shown features, objects
in digital archaeological libraries have been enriched with
various information, e.g., on museum, library information,
archives, network information, mapping services, locations
and Points Of Interest (POI).
Due to the knowledge resources organisation, the objects
can be used in references as well as in the cache for
interactive components at any stage within the workﬂow
process. Combining the structure and classiﬁcation with the
silken selection algorithms leads to very ﬂexible, multi-
disciplinary interfaces.
Each group of digital images shows the result matrix
from a selection process. The following ﬁgures illustrate
resulting objects from the digital library of the LX knowl-
edge resources with multi-disciplinary background, in these
examples regarding material, function, and model or recon-
struction purposes.
Selecting
archaeological
objects
from
Central
and
Southern America, ancient art, and consisting of Gold
(UDC:902+(7),(8)+700.32+546.59)
results
in
a
subset from the gold objects collection (Figure 9).
Figure 9.
Sample COLLECTION – Jewelery + material: gold.
Selecting archaeological objects, ancient art, and being
part of the collier collection (UDC:902+700.32) results
in a subset from the jewelery collection (Figure 10).
Figure 10.
Sample COLLECTION – Jewelery + function: collier.
The result shows, that objects can be member of any num-
ber of collections and result matrices, as compared to the re-
sult from the museum topical collection (Figure 6). Selecting
archaeological objects, watercraft engineering, marine engi-
neering, boats, ships, boat building, ship building, and being
models having origin from ancient Egypt and the Mediter-
ranean (UDC:902+629.5+(32),(37),(38)) results in
a subset from the ship model collection (Figure 11).
Figure 11.
Sample COLLECTION – Ship + type: model.
Any silken criteria can be used for the transliteration,
transcriptions and other content and context. So if not limited
to ﬁxed criteria, the resulting matrix is highly dynamical and
supports a ﬂexible modelling of the relations and explicit and
implicit references within the available material.
XV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
It has been shown how long-term knowledge resources
have been created and used for more than twenty-ﬁve
years considering content and context with sophisticated
workﬂows implementing various technology over the years.
210
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The knowledge resources have proven to provide a univer-
sal way of describing multi-disciplinary objects, expressing
relations between any kind of objects and data, e.g., from
archaeology, geosciences, and natural sciences as well as
deﬁning workﬂows for calculation and computation for
application components. Systematically structuring, classiﬁ-
cation, as well as soft ‘silken’ criteria with LX and UDC
support have provided efﬁcient and economic means for
using Information System components and supercomputing
resources. With these, the solution scales, e.g., regarding
references, resolution, and view arrangements even with
big data scenarios and parallel computing resources. The
concept can be transferred to numerous applications in a
very ﬂexible way and has shown to be most sustainable.
The successful integration of IICS components and ad-
vanced scientiﬁc computing based on structured information
and faceted classiﬁcation of objects has provided a very
ﬂexible and extensible solution for the implementation of
Archaeological Information Systems.
It has been demonstrated with the case studies that Ar-
chaeological IICS can provide advanced multi-disciplinary
information as from archaeology and geosciences by means
of High End Computing resources.
The basic architecture has been created using the col-
laboration house framework, long-term documentation and
classiﬁcation of objects, ﬂexible algorithms, workﬂows and
Active Source components. As shown with the examples,
any kind of computing request, e.g., discovery, data re-
trieval, visualisation, and processing, can be done from the
application components accessing the knowledge resources.
Computing interfaces can carry any interactive or batch job
description. Anyhow, the hardware and system resources
have to be conﬁgured appropriately for a use with the
workﬂow. For future applications a kind of “tooth system”
for long-term documentation and algorithms for use with
IICS and the exploitation of supercomputing resources will
be developed. Besides this, it is intended to further extend
the content spectrum of the knowledge resources.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to all national and international academic,
industry, and business partners in the GEXI cooperations and
the Science and High Performance Supercomputing Centre
(SHPSC) for long-term support of collaborative research
and the LX Project for providing suitable resources. Many
thanks to the scientiﬁc colleagues at the Leibniz Universit¨at
Hannover, the Institute for Legal Informatics (IRI), and the
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at (WWU), sharing experi-
ences on ZIV, HLRN, Grid, and Cloud resources and for
participating in fruitful case studies as well as the partici-
pants of the INFOCOMP and DigitalWorld conferences as
well as the postgraduate European Legal Informatics Study
Programme (EULISP) for proliﬁc discussion of scientiﬁc,
legal, and technical aspects over the last years.
Thanks for excellent inspiration, support, and photo
scenery go to the Saba Conservation Foundation, Saba
Marine Park, and National Heritage Foundation St. Maarten
(D.W.I.), National Park Guadeloupe and Museum St. Mar-
tin (F.W.I.), Instituto Nacional de Antroplog´ıa e Historia
(I.N.A.H.), Mexic´o for providing access to the sites of
Chich´en Itz´a, Cob´a, Tul´um, El Meco, El Rey, and many
more as well as to the Eco-Parc Xel H´a, M´exico, and
especially to Ms. Maureen Felix (Consejo de Promoci´on
Tur´ıstica de M´exico, CPTM) for her excellent support, the
Museu Barbier-Mueller d’Art Precolomb´ı and Museu Egipci
Barcelona, Museu Urbana, Valencia, Spain, as well as Canon
for the photo equipment.
REFERENCES
[1] C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Enabling Dynamical Use of Integrated
Systems and Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources for Ar-
chaeological Information Systems,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Advanced Communications and
Computation (INFOCOMP 2012), October 21–26, 2012,
Venice, Italy.
XPS, Xpert Publishing Services, 2012, pp.
36–41, R¨uckemann, C.-P. and Dini, P. and Hommel, W.
and Pankowska, M. and Schubert, L. (eds.), ISBN: 978-
1-61208-226-4, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.
php?articleid=infocomp 2012 3 10 10012 [accessed: 2013-
06-09].
[2] C.-P. R¨uckemann, Queueing Aspects of Integrated Informa-
tion and Computing Systems in Geosciences and Natural
Sciences.
InTech, 2011, pp. 1–26, Chapter 1, in: Ad-
vances in Data, Methods, Models and Their Applications in
Geoscience, 336 pages, ISBN-13: 978-953-307-737-6, DOI:
10.5772/29337, OCLC: 793915638, DOI: http://dx.doi.org/
10.5772/29337 [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[3] C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Implementation of Integrated Systems and
Resources for Information and Computing,” in Proceedings of
the International Conference on Advanced Communications
and Computation (INFOCOMP 2011), October 23–29, 2011,
Barcelona, Spain, 2011, pp. 1–7, ISBN: 978-1-61208-009-
3, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
infocomp 2011 1 10 10002 [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[4] “Geo Exploration and Information (GEXI),” 1996, 1999,
2010, 2013, URL: http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/
rprojs/en/index.html#GEXI (Information) [accessed: 2013-
05-26].
[5] L. Yin, S.-L. Shaw, D. Wang, E. A. Carr, M. W. Berry, L. J.
Gross, and E. J. Comiskey, “A framework of integrating GIS
and parallel computing for spatial control problems - a case
study of wildﬁre control,” IJGIS, ISSN: 1365-8816, DOI:
10.1080/13658816.2011.609487, pp. 1–21, 2011.
[6] National Park Service, “National Register of Historic Places
Ofﬁcial Website, Part of the National Park Service (NPS),”
2013, NPS, URL: http://www.nps.gov/nr [accessed: 2013-05-
26].
[7] “North American Database of Archaeological Geophysics
(NADAG),” 2013, University of Arkansas, URL: http://www.
cast.uark.edu/nadag/ [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[8] “Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies (CAST),” 2013,
University of Arkansas, URL: http://www.cast.uark.edu/ [ac-
cessed: 2013-05-26].
211
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[9] “Archaeology Data Service (ADS),” 2013, URL: http://
archaeologydataservice.ac.uk/ [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[10] “Center for Digital Antiquity,” 2013, Arizona State Univ.,
URL: http://www.digitalantiquity.org/ [accessed: 2013-05-
26].
[11] “The Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR),” 2013, URL:
http://www.tdar.org [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[12] IBM, “City Government and IBM Close Partnership to Make
Rio de Janeiro a Smarter City,” IBM News room - 2010-
12-27, USA, 2012, URL: http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/
pressrelease/33303.wss [accessed: 2012-03-18].
[13] “LX-Project,” 2013, URL: http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/
cpr/x/rprojs/en/#LX (Information) [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[14] “Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Consortium (UDCC),”
2013, URL: http://www.udcc.org [accessed: 2013-02-10].
[15] R. C. Russel and M. K. Odell, “U.S. patent 1261167,” 1918,
(Soundex algorithm), patent issued 1918-04-02.
[16] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming: Sorting and
Searching.
Addison-Wesley, 1973, vol. 3, ISBN: 978-0-201-
03803-3, OCLC: 39472999.
[17] National
Archives
and
Records
Administration,
“The
Soundex Indexing System,” 2007, 2007-05-30, URL: http:
//www.archives.gov/research/census/soundex.html [accessed:
2013-05-26].
[18] M. Stok, “Perl, Soundex.pm, Soundex Perl Port,” 1994, (code
after Donald E. Knuth).
[19] “LX SNDX, a Soundex Module Concept for Knowl-
edge Resources,” LX-Project Consortium Technical Report,
2013, URL: http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/rprojs/en/
#LX (Information) [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[20] E. Rempel, “tcllib, soundex.tcl, Soundex Tcl Port,” 1998,
(code after Donald E. Knuth).
[21] A. Kupries, “tcllib, soundex.tcl, Soundex Tcl Port Documen-
tation,” 2003, (code after Donald E. Knuth).
[22] Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, Max-
Planck Institut f¨ur Wissenschaftsgeschichte, “European Cul-
tural Heritage Online (ECHO),” 2013, Berlin, URL: http:
//echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/ [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[23] E. W. von Tschirnhaus, “Brief (Letter), Ehrenfried Walther
von
Tschirnhaus
an
Leibniz
17.IV.1677,”
pp.
59–73,
1987, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, S¨amtliche Schriften und
Briefe, Mathematischer, naturwissenschaftlicher und technis-
cher Briefwechsel dritte Reihe, zweiter Band, 1667 – 1679,
Leibniz-Archiv der Nieders¨achsischen Landesbibliothek Han-
nover, Akademie-Verlag Berlin, 1987, herausgegeben unter
Aufsicht der Akademie der Wissenschaften in G¨ottingen;
Akademie der Wissenschaften der DDR.
[24] G.
F.
von
Franckenau,
“Brief
(Letter),
Georg
Franck
von Franckenau an Leibniz 18. (28.) September 1697,
Schloss Frederiksborg, 18. (28.) September 1697,” pp.
568–569, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB),
Leibniz-Archiv
der
Nieders¨achsischen
Landesbibliothek
Hannover, URL: http://www.gwlb.de/Leibniz/Leibnizarchiv/
Veroeffentlichungen/III7B.pdf [accessed: 2013-05-26] .
[25] Berlin-Brandenburgische
Akademie
der
Wissenschaften,
“Leibniz Reihe VIII,” 2013, Glossary, Concepts, BBAW,
Berlin,
URL:
http://leibnizviii.bbaw.de/glossary/concepts/
[accessed:
2013-05-26]
(concepts
glossary),
URL:
http://leibnizviii.bbaw.de/Leibniz Reihe 8/Aus+Otto+
von+Guericke,+Experimenta+nova/LH035,14,02 091v/
index.html
[accessed:
2013-05-26]
(transcription),
URL:
http://leibnizviii.bbaw.de/pdf/Aus+Otto+von+Guericke,
+Experimenta+nova/LH035.14,02 091v/LH035,14!02 091+
va.png [accessed: 2013-05-26] (scan).
[26] Gottfried
Wilhelm
Leibniz
Bibliothek
(GWLB),
Nieders¨achsische Landesbibliothek, “GWLB Handschriften,”
2013, hannover, URL: http://www.leibnizcentral.de/CiXbase/
gwlbhss/ [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[27] “LeibnizCentral,” 2013, URL: http://www.leibnizcentral.com/
[accessed: 2013-02-10].
[28] M. Fogel, “Brieffragmente (Letter fragments) about 16xx,
Historici
Pragmatici
universal,
Terrae
motus,
Physica,”
manuscript ID: 00016293, Source: Gottfried Wilhelm Leib-
niz Bibliothek (GWLB), Nieders¨achsische Landesbiblio-
thek, GWLB Handschriften, Hannover, URL: http://www.
leibnizcentral.de/CiXbase/gwlbhss/ [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[29] M.
Fogel,
“Brieffragmente
(Letter
fragments)
about
16xx,
Terrae
Motus
in
Nova
Francia,”
manuscript
ID:
00016278,
Source:
Gottfried
Wilhelm
Leibniz
Bibliothek
(GWLB),
Nieders¨achsische
Landesbib-
liothek,
GWLB
Handschriften,
Hannover,
URL:
http://www.leibnizcentral.de/CiXbase/gwlbhss/
[accessed:
2013-05-26].
[30] Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek Hannover, “Collection
of Copperplates,” 2013, URL: http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.
de/content/copperplates [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[31] N.
Seel¨ander,
“Dens
animalis
marini
Tidae
prope
Stederburgum
e
colle
limoso
effossi,
Figura
Sceleti
prope Qvedlinburgum effossi,” about 1716, Copperplate,
(Kupferstichplatten), printed in “Leibniz, Protogaea, Tab.
XII”,
re-printed
in
“Leibniz,
Opera
omnia,
studio
L.
Dutens, 1768 – Wallmann, Abhandlung von den sch¨atzbaren
Alterth¨umern zu Quedlinburg, 1776, Tafel S. 39”, URL:
http://echo.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/ECHOdocuView?url=
/mpiwg/online/permanent/echo/copperplates/Leibniz cup4/
pageimg&start=41&pn=73&mode=imagepath
[accessed:
2013-05-26].
[32] C.-P. R¨uckemann and B. F. S. Gersbeck-Schierholz, “Ob-
ject Security and Veriﬁcation for Integrated Information and
Computing Systems,” in Proceedings of the Fifth Interna-
tional Conference on Digital Society (ICDS 2011), Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Technical and
Legal Aspects of the e-Society (CYBERLAWS 2011), February
23–28, 2011, Gosier, Guadeloupe, France / DigitalWorld
2011.
XPS, 2011, pp. 1–6, ISBN: 978-1-61208-003-
1, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
cyberlaws 2011 1 10 70008 [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[33] C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Dynamical Parallel Applications on
Distributed and HPC Systems,” International Journal on
Advances in Software, vol. 2, no. 2&3, pp. 172–187,
2009, ISSN: 1942-2628, LCCN: 2008212462 (Library of
Congress), URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=soft v2 n23 2009 1/ [accessed: 2013-05-
26] (ThinkMind(TM) Digital Library), URL: http://www.
iariajournals.org/software/soft v2 n23 2009 paged.pdf
[ac-
cessed: 2013-05-26].
[34] C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Legal Issues Regarding Distributed and
High Performance Computing in Geosciences and Explo-
ration,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
212
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

on Digital Society (ICDS 2010 / CYBERLAWS 2010),
February 10–16, 2010, St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles,
D.W.I.
IEEE Computer Society Press, IEEE Xplore
Digital Library, 2010, pp. 339–344, ISBN: 978-0-7695-
3953-9, URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=
&arnumber=5432414 [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[35] C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Beitrag
zur
Realisierung
portabler
Komponenten f¨ur Geoinformationssysteme. Ein Konzept zur
ereignisgesteuerten und dynamischen Visualisierung und
Aufbereitung
geowissenschaftlicher
Daten,”
Dissertation,
WWU,
M¨unster,
Deutschland,
2001,
161 (xxii+139) S.,
Deutsche
Nationalbibliothek
H
2002
A
103
(German
National Library), urn:nbn:de:swb:14-1011014626187-99999
(persistent
URN),
oai:d-nb.de/dnb/964146754
(German
National Library), OCLC: 50979238, URL: http://www.user.
uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/publ/2001/dissertation/wwwmath.uni-
muenster.de/cs/u/ruckema/x/dis/download/dis3acro.pdf
[accessed: 2013-05-26].
[36] J. A. Lobell, “Roman Venice Discovered,” Archaeological
Institute of America, November/December 2009, vol. 62,
no. 6, 1996, URL: http://www.archaeology.org/0911/trenches/
roman venice.html [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[37] A.
J.
Ammerman,
“Probing
the
Depths
of
Venice,”
Archaeological
Institute
of
America,
July/August
1996,
vol. 49, no. 4, 1996, URL: http://www.archaeology.org/9607/
abstracts/venice.html [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[38] “Venice
Mobility
Project
-
Pedestrian
Modeling,”
Santa
Fe
Complex,
2012,
February,
2012,
URL:
http://sfcomplex.org/2012/02/venice-mobility-project-
pedestrian-modeling [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[39] C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing and
Multi-Disciplinary
Documentation
for
Geosciences
and
Archaeology
Information,”
in
Proceedings
of
The
International
Conference
on
Advanced
Geographic
Information
Systems,
Applications,
and
Services
(GEOProcessing 2013), February 24 – March 1, 2013,
Nice, Cote d’Azur, French Riviera, France.
XPS Press,
2013, pp. 81–88, R¨uckemann, C.-P. (ed.), ISSN: 2308-393X,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-251-6, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/
download.php?articleid=geoprocessing 2013 4 10 30035
[accessed:
2013-05-26],
URL:
http://www.iaria.org/
conferences2013/ProgramGEOProcessing13.html
(Program)
[accessed: 2013-05-26].
[40] K. Perrin, “Archaeological Archives: Documentation, Access
and Deposition. A Way Forward,” English Heritage, 2002.
[41] D. H. Brown, “Safeguarding Archaeological Information:
Procedures
for
minimising
risk
to
undeposited
archaeological
archives,”
English
Heritage,
2011,
URL:
http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/publications/
safeguarding-archaeological-information/
[accessed:
2012-
04-08].
[42] “Guides to Good Practice,” 2013, ADS, URL: http://guides.
archaeologydataservice.ac.uk/ [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[43] H. Eiteljorg II, K. Fernie, J. Huggett, and D. Robinson, CAD:
A Guide to Good Practice.
Archaeology Data Service,
2002, ISSN: 1463-5194, URL: http://ads.ahds.ac.uk/project/
goodguides/cad/ [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[44] “Archaeological Archives Forum (AAF),” 2013, URL: http:
//www.britarch.ac.uk/archives/ [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[45] DigitalWorld 2012 / GEOProcessing International Expert
Panel on Challenges in Handling Large Data Volume
for
GEO
Processing,
January
31,
2012,
Valencia,
Spain
The
International
Conference
on
Advanced
Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
(GEOProcessing 2012), Polytechnic University of Valencia,
January 30 – February 4, 2012, Valencia, Spain, 2012, URL:
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2012/ﬁlesGEOProcessing12/
GEO 2012 PANEL.pdf
[2013-05-26],
URL:
http://www.
iaria.org/conferences2012/ProgramGEOProcessing12.html
(Program) [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[46] C.-P. R¨uckemann, Integrated Information and Computing
Systems for Advanced Cognition with Natural Sciences.
Premier Reference Source, Information Science Reference,
IGI Global, 701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Suite 200, Hershey
PA 17033-1240, USA, Oct. 2012, pp. 1–26, chapter I,
in: R¨uckemann, C.-P. (ed.), Integrated Information and
Computing
Systems
for
Natural,
Spatial,
and
Social
Sciences,
543
(xxiv
+
519)
pages,
21
chapters,
ill.,
ISBN-13: 978-1-4666-2190-9 (hardcover), EISBN: 978-1-
4666-2191-6 (e-book), ISBN: 978-1-4666-2192-3 (print &
perpetual access), DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-2190-9, LCCN:
2012019278 (Library of Congress), OCLC: 798809710, URL:
http://www.igi-global.com/chapter/integrated-information-
computing-systems-advanced/70601 [accessed: 2013-05-26],
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/978-1-4666-2190-9.ch001
[accessed: 2013-05-26].
[47] C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Integrating Information Systems and
Scientiﬁc Computing,” International Journal on Advances in
Systems and Measurements, vol. 5, no. 3&4, pp. 113–127,
2012,
ISSN:
1942-261x,
LCCN:
2008212470
(Library
of Congress), URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?
view=article&articleid=sysmea v5 n34 2012 3/
[accessed:
2013-05-26]
(ThinkMind(TM)
Digital
Library),
URL:
http://www.iariajournals.org/systems and measurements/
sysmea v5 n34 2012 paged.pdf [accessed: 2013-06-09].
213
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

