 
 
The Impact of Control Setpoints on Building Energy Use in Different Weather 
Conditions 
 
Stephen Treado 
Department of Architectural Engineering 
Pennsylvania State University 
University Park, PA, USA  
streado@psu.edu 
Xing Liu 
Department of Architectural Engineering 
Pennsylvania State University 
University Park, PA, USA 
xul121@psu.edu
 
Abstract - This paper examines the impact of building Heating, 
Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) control system 
setpoints such as temperature and flow rate on total building 
energy requirements, for a typical system design and operation 
in four different weather conditions.  Through the simulation 
and the result sensitivity analysis, the range of energy usage 
and the potential for minimizing building energy requirements 
by dynamically adjusting setpoints are presented in this paper. 
Keywords-buildings; cooling; control systems; energy; 
heating; HVAC; simulation; setpoints  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The increasing demand of air-conditioning and the 
energy crisis during the last decades have led to a surge of 
attention and there is no doubt that the improvement of the 
Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning (HVAC) control 
system is one of the effective solutions to realize sizable 
energy-saving for the building sector. The aim of HVAC 
control is to provide a comfortable, safe, healthy and 
productive environment for occupants using the least 
energy.  Significant energy saving potential exists for 
building systems during operation with the help of current 
technology such as intelligent, adaptive or model predictive 
control.  The development of this kind of technology has led 
to the possibility of the improvement of building operational 
performance.  However, it is difficult to evaluate the 
potential or effectiveness of the new control strategies 
without first gaining a better understanding of the range of 
operating 
conditions 
possible 
for 
any 
particular 
building/HVAC system combination. That is, the amount of 
energy savings is a function of both the actions of the new 
control strategy and the fundamental capabilities of the 
HVAC system.  In its most basic form, a building control 
system can do no more than monitor sensors, apply logic 
and manipulate actuators. Thus, the main objective of the 
work described in this paper is to clearly identify and define 
the space within which the building/HVAC combination is 
capable of operating in order to enable the determination of 
both energy saving potential and optimal setpoints and 
control logic. While this is not specifically an optimization 
effort, i.e., we are not seeking a single optimal solution 
since it is understood that setpoints and control logic may 
need to be adjusted on a dynamic basis, the primary metric 
utilized, namely total building energy usage, can be 
considered as an objective function. 
The content is organized as follows. Section II reviews 
the recent studies. Section III presents the models adopted 
and simulation work. Section IV gives the results and 
analysis.  Lastly, Section V presents the conclusions and 
possible future work. 
II. 
LITERATURE RIEVEW 
Simulation is taken as one of the oldest but very 
effective tools to engineers in every discipline. Building 
simulation began in the 1960s and became the hot topic of 
the 1970s within the energy research community. For 
nowadays, computer simulation is not only used for the 
building design stage like sizing and configuration design, 
but also adopted for system performance analysis more and 
more widely.  Building simulation can be applied to reveal 
the inter-actions between the building itself and its 
occupants, HVAC systems, and the outdoor climate This 
paper is a further improvement to our previous work [1].  A 
large amount of work has been done to show how important 
building simulation is in the study of building energy 
performance [2].  For examples, Li et al. [3] and Pan et al. 
[4] analyzed and displayed the building energy break-down 
with calibrated models in 2007 and 2009, respectively; 
however, more effort is needed to understand how to obtain 
optimum operating parameters, particularly for building 
control 
systems. 
Simulation 
does 
provide 
a 
good 
opportunity 
to 
evaluate 
the 
dynamic 
and 
energy 
performance of HVAC system control strategy in a 
convenient and low cost way. The control strategy can also 
be pre-tuned before being utilized in the real system with 
the help of simulation. Recent research also showed 
performing building simulation analysis enabled diagnosis 
of malfunctioning or incorrectly commissioned equipment 
within the building and thus also assisted with future 
commissioning and tuning of the building performance [5].  
Future development and application of information 
technology in the building industry will lead to a completely 
new building design philosophy and methodology [6].  In 
2003, Mathews and Botha [7] conducted simulation with 
three cases and proved that simulation does indeed have the 
1
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
TABLE I. 
REFERENCE CHARACTERISTICS OF EQUIPMENT 
*T-Temperature, V-Flow Rate, lcw-leaving chilled water, ecf-entering 
condenser fluid, chw-chilled water, cdw-condenser water 
 
TABLE II. 
DEFAULT PARAMETER VALUE FOR SIMULATION 
 
ability to improve the thermal and energy management of 
building HVAC systems.  A lot of work has been done in 
the field of building energy consumption simulation but 
more work remains to be done.  Traditionally, less attention 
has been put on buildings operation compared with the 
design of a system and its construction/installation. What’s 
more, the simulation software has been evolving steadily 
over recent years. HVAC component and subsystem models 
are now generally well understood and have been the 
subject of a number of researches [8].  Simulation has been 
extended to the use to the building operation process, 
although it has been traditionally regarded as a design tool.   
III. SIMULATIONS 
The simulations were performed in four different cities. 
They are: State college, Pennsylvania; Miami, Florida; 
Phoenix, Arizona and Minneapolis, Minnesota.  The 
weather files used in this paper are typical meteorological 
year (TMY) format, which are widely adopted in the 
building energy simulation software nowadays and are 
obtained from the United States Department of Energy 
website (2010).  A typical meteorological year (TMY) is a 
collation of selected weather data for a specific location, 
generated from a data bank much longer than a year in 
duration.  It is specially selected so that it presents the range 
of weather phenomena for the location in question, while 
still giving annual averages that are consistent with the long-
term averages for the location in question.  TMY annual 
weather data information is known to be used in the 
EnergyPlus program.  As the weather data is given for each 
hour throughout the year, the simulation is run at intervals 
of one hour.  The four different cities were chosen based on 
their typical weather patterns.  Minneapolis was chosen for 
its cold and dry climate, State college for its mild climate, 
Phoenix for its hot and dry climate and Miami for its hot, 
and humid weather.  The detail weather profile for these 
four cities are not presented here but can be found at the 
United States Department of Energy website. 
The simulations that were conducted consisted primarily 
of quasi steady state determinations of hourly incremental 
and total building energy requirements for a range of 
setpoint combinations and exposed to a summer (cooling) or 
winter (heating) condition.  In essence, a grid was 
established, which represented a collection of setpoints, and 
annual building energy performance was determined for 
each grid point. The setpoints were constrained to maintain 
proper equipment operating conditions (e.g., temperature, 
mass flow).  The primary objective of the simulations was 
to quantify the range of possible operating points and the 
maximum potential savings under different weathers, 
assuming that the control logic could direct the HVAC 
system to the optimal operating conditions.  HVAC 
Equipment performance was modeled as described below. 
Total 
building 
energy 
was 
determined 
utilizing 
performance characteristics of the each component: the 
chiller, the cooling tower, the chiller water pump and the 
supply air fan plus the energy input value related to lighting 
and other electrical equipment. The evaluation metric is:  
Etotal   =  Elighting  + Eequipment
 + Echiller  + Epump  + Efan
(1) 
where: 
E total = total energy power density 
E lighting = lighting power density input 
E equipment = Equipment power density input 
E chiller = chiller power density input 
E pump = pump power density input 
E fan = fan power density input 
The first two terms are specified as follows, according to 
ASHRAE Standard 90.1 IP [9]: 
Components 
Selected parameters values 
Chiller 
33    Capacity (hp) 
2.75        COP 
44          T_lcw (℉) 
85           T_ecf (℉) 
4.24     V_chw (ft3/min) 
4.87      V_cdw (ft3/min) 
Natural Gas 
Boiler 
0.8         Boiler Efficiency 
950         Heat Value 
(Btu/lb) 
Variable 
Volume Fan 
4500        Rated Flow rate 
(ft3/min)  
3       Rated Power (hp) 
0.087   Pressure Rise (psi) 
0.7          Fan Efficiency 
Variable 
Speed Pump 
2.54     Rated Flow rate 
(ft3/min)) 
2         Rated Power (hp) 
50         Pump head (ft) 
0.66       Pump Efficiency 
Variable 
Value 
Zone Area 
S=750 ft2 
Overall Envelope Heat 
Transfer Rate 
U = 0.064 Btu/h-ft2-℉ 
Ambient Temperature 
 
T a = 90 ℉ (summer condition) 
T a = 30 ℉ (winter condition) 
Ambient Pressure 
P = 1 atm 
Zone Air Temperature 
T z = 75 ℉ (summer condition) 
T z = 72 ℉ (winter condition) 
Outdoor Air fraction 
F o = 30% 
Solar Heat Gain 
q S =1.5 w/ft2 (summer condition) 
q S =0.8 w/ft2 (winter condition) 
Lighting Heat Gain 
q l = 1.0 w/ft2 
 
Equipment Heat Gain 
q e = 1.5 w/ft2 
 
Occupants Heat Gain 
q o = 1.0 w/ft2 
Ventilation Air Flow rate 
M v = 1.5 cfm/ft2 
Infiltration Air Flow Rate 
M i = 0.1 cfm/ft2 
Heat Exchanger Effectiveness 
U1 = 75% 
Energy Recovery Effectiveness 
U2 = 70% 
2
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
E lighting =1.0 w/ft2          
E equipment =1.5 w/ft2         
The system schematic is presented in Figure 2. As the 
diagram shows, one zone of a multiple zone Variable Air 
Volume (VAV) system with energy recovery ventilator was 
studied for this simulation analysis. For HVAC component 
energy consumption analysis, polynomial fits were used 
with representative coefficients, with the important variables 
being chilled water supply temperature, coil loads, chilled 
water flow rate, outdoor air fraction, supply airflow rate, 
supply air temperature and room temperature [10].  These 
component mathematical equation models are commonly 
used in similar applications. For the simulation software, 
Engineering Equation Solver (EES) [11] was selected 
because of its built–in high-accuracy thermodynamic and 
heat transfer parameters and capability for solving design 
problems in which the effects of one or more parameters 
must be determined.  Previous research work also shows 
that the simplicity of the models and the use of an equation 
solver to run the simulation ensure good robustness and full 
transparency [12].  Then Equation-based simulation models 
were created through the EES and the equation-based 
simulation models use generalized solution techniques to 
solve arbitrarily complex sets of differential and algebraic 
equation, which is another one of the main advantages of 
this approach: the easiness of developing and maintaining 
model.  Table I summarizes the model parameters.  
To minimize the effect from the building itself on the 
simulation results, the zone is simplified as much as 
possible. The case that is used in this simulation is assumed 
to be an office zone has a dimension of 25ft ×30ft with a 9ft 
high ceiling and 12ft wall height.  An overall envelop 
thermal transfer rate is given. The U value is assumed to be 
0.064 Btu/h-ft2-℉. The infiltration rate through the exterior 
walls is set at 0.1cfm/ft2, which is based on information 
from [13].  This infiltration occurs 24 hours a day.  The 
ventilation rate is assumed to be 1.5 cfm/ ft2 which is an 
assumption for the most energy-intensive scenario.  For the 
lighting and occupants heat gain are all assumed equal to 
1w/ft2, the equipment heat gain is assumed at 1.5w/ft2.  
Also, the effectiveness of the energy wheel is assumed to be 
constant throughout the year while it is not true in real word.  
It should change with the outdoor temperature and humidity 
changes throughout the year.  For this case, the effectiveness 
is set at 70% constantly and the effectiveness for the heat 
exchanger is assumed to be 75%. It is worth mentioning that 
the system efficiency is more important than the efficiency 
of individual components, when the energy performance of 
HVAV system is evaluated.   
The zone load is defined as the sum of all kinds of loads, 
internal and external, sensible and latent, which are needed 
to be balanced from the indoor zone to keep a comfort 
environment.  In other words, the zone load is actually the 
sum of heat gains transferred from outer space such as sun, 
occupant, equipment etc. to the zone air.  As a result, there 
are different types of heat gains, solar, heat transmission 
through the walls, human, lights, ventilation and infiltration.  
Depending on the building characteristics, these heat gains 
are converted to loads after some time delay.  The latent 
load, which is produced when moisture in the air goes from 
a vapor to a liquid state, is not calculated in this paper but 
will be discussed in the future work.  In order to evaluate the 
objective function as defined, it is necessary to specify some 
parameters first (Table II).  
Qz   =  qs  + qi  + qt  + qo  + qe  + ql
(2) 
where: 
q s = solar load 
q i = infiltration air load 
q t = envelope thermal load  
q o = occupants load 
q e = equipment load 
q l = lighting load 
 
As shown above, for this simulation, the zone load is 
made up of solar load, lighting load, equipment load, 
occupants load, infiltration air load and envelope thermal 
load (heat gains to zone were assumed as positive). The 
zone heating and cooling loads are met by supplying 
conditioned air to the zone such that the product of the mass 
flow rate of the supply air, the specific heat of air and the 
temperature change of the air from supply (Ts) to return (Tr) 
are equal to the zone thermal load:  
qi   =  m i  · cpair  · ( Tz  – Ta )
                     (3) 
qt   =  UA  · ( Tz  – Ta )
                                 (4) 
Since the heat gain from lighting, equipment occupants 
and solar was already set up, the load values of infiltration 
and envelope thermal conduct can be determined from the 
thermodynamic relationships as described above, the zone 
load can be figured out for the energy consumption 
simulation. 
Echiller   =  
Qavail  · ChillerEIRFTemp  · ChillerEIRFPLR
COPref
(5) 
                    (6) 
Ef an   =  fpl  · m design  · 
Prise
etot  · rair
                 (7) 
where: 
Q avail = Q ref × ChillerCapFTemp 
vwater = mass flow rate of chilled/hot water 
f pl = air part load factor 
m design = fan design flow rate 
P rise = fan pressure rise 
e tot = fan total efficiency 
ρ air = density of air 
 
Epump   =  vwater  · 
PumpHead
TotalEf f iciency
3
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
In the heating situation, the fuel input was calculated 
with this equation [14]: 
Fboiler   =  m hw  · cpwater  · 
Thws  – Thwr
BE  · VHI
 · 3600
 (8) 
where: 
BE = boiler efficiency 
VHI = fuel heat value 
      m hw = hot water mass flow rate 
      cp water = specific heat capacity of water 
      T hws = hot water supply temper 
      T hwr= hot water return temperature 
 
The operating hours are assumed from 6:00 to 22:00. 
Fan efficiency is selected as 70% as shown in Table I.  For 
the gas boiler energy consumption, the energy consumed in 
the form of natural gas is converted to electricity by the unit 
conversion from BTU/h to KW.  The heat rate of natural gas 
is 1000 BTU/ft3. 
For the cooling and heating coils, cooling/heating and 
dehumidification/humidification of the incoming fresh air is 
performed here.  The temperature effectiveness in a heating 
or cooling is governed by the effectiveness relationship.  An 
effectiveness of 75% is assumed as presented previously in 
Table II.  In sum, the effectiveness of all the main 
components are related to design and operating conditions.  
When the operating conditions fluctuate near design 
conditions, the effectiveness change is really small.  To 
simplify analysis, effectiveness for various components is 
assumed to be constant as discussed in the previous part. 
Fan and pump energy is an important factor in the 
annual energy consumption of an HVAC system.  Fan 
(pump) performance can be characterized by its efficiency, 
which itself is dependent on operational air-flow rate.  
Mostly, rated volumetric flow rate, pressure rise and 
efficiency are available from the manufacturer.  But for this 
research, these numbers are assumed as shown in Table I 
with reasonable values. 
Last thing to notice is that HVAC components such as 
chiller and pumps are composed of a number of sub-
components such as engine, evaporator, compressor, 
condenser and throttling valve, but these sub-components 
are not included for this study as in the energy balance 
equation derived for the simulation, only the inter-
connections are of interest. 
The setpoints were changed as described in Table III.  
For the summer condition simulation, five parameters, 
condenser entering temperature, chilled water supply 
temperature, chilled water mass flow rate, supply air 
temperature and flow rate are set as variables. Ten different 
values are selected for each parameter so there are 50 
different scenarios in total. As only hot water supply 
temperature and mass flow rate, supply air temperature and 
flow rate were changed in the winter condition, 40 group of 
total power density resulted from the simulation.  But here 
as the whole year total energy consumption is the object of 
study, the summer cooling and winter heating will be 
simulated simultaneously with a condition judgment 
statement coded in EES.  To simply simulation, the 
heating/cooling is assumed to be enabled immediately when 
the outdoor air temperature below/above corresponding 
setpoint temperature.  For this simulation, when the outdoor 
air temperature is greater than 80 °F, the cooling will be on 
and when the outdoor air temperature is less than 55°F, the 
heating will be simulated.   
IV. 
RESULTS 
The simulation figure depicts the one whole year total 
power density as a function of different setpoint settings. 
The total power density consumed in each city is shown in 
figures below.  Each city stands for a typical weather 
conditions. 
Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 illustrate the annual power density 
for four different weather cases from highest to the lowest 
for the year around.  The different colors present the 
breakdown of the electricity usage.  As we can see, HVAC 
system (including chiller, cooling tower pump, chiller water 
pump and supply air fan) is the biggest electric consumer in 
the model, which accounts for around 60% of total energy 
consumption, while both lighting and equipment account for 
around 15% of the total power consumption, respectively.  
According to Table IV, the maximum annual power density 
can reach 36.121kwh/sf-year at Miami when the chilled/hot 
water flow rate at the biggest value and a small supply air 
flow rate can decrease the energy consumption to 
26.712kwh/sf-year at state college.  Please note the annual 
power density is high compared to typical office buildings’ 
numbers due to the high ventilation air flow rate setting in 
the simulation.  The simulation is operated in this way to 
reflect the possible situation using the most energy.  
Figure 7 is the simulated building energy usage 
breakdown in the four weather conditions.  The percentage 
of the total power that is required by HVAC system to 
ventilate and condition (fans, pumps, chillers and boilers) is 
67% in Minneapolis, 71% in Miami, 68% in Phoenix and 
63% in state college.  Among the HVAC system energy 
consumption itself, chiller and boiler is the largest power 
consumer while the pump consumes the least energy.  
To sum up, the energy performance of this particular 
building/HVAC system combination was evaluated for 
typical scenarios in order to illustrate the methodology and 
the 
energy 
saving 
potential 
of 
dynamic 
setpoint 
manipulation.  While the magnitude of the potential energy 
savings would be expected to vary for different buildings 
and locations, the methodology would still be applicable 
and useful provided the proper information was available to 
accurately model the HVAC system and its components.  
The methodology could also be used to evaluate the 
effectiveness of advanced control strategies by comparing
4
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
TABLE III. 
CASE DESCRIPTION FOR THE TWO CONDITIONS 
 
Cases(summer) 
Simulation Description 
1 (10 numbers) 
Increase condenser entering temperature (50-60 ℉) 
2 (10 numbers) 
Increase chilled water  flow rate (0.4-0.7 lbm/s)       
3 (10 numbers) 
Increase chilled water supply temperature (45-55 ℉) 
4 (10 numbers) 
Increase supply air flow rate (500-700 cfm)       
5 (10 numbers) 
Increase supply air temperature (60-65 ℉) 
 
Cases(winter) 
Simulation Description 
1 (10 numbers) 
Increase hot water supply temperature (185-195 ℉) 
2 (10 numbers) 
Increase hot water supply flow rate (0.4-0.7 lbm/s)       
3 (10 numbers) 
Increase supply air flow rate (500-700 cfm) 
4 (10 numbers) 
Increase supply air temperature (85-95 ℉) 
 
TABLE IV. 
COMPARISON OF POWER DENSITY IN DIFFERENT 
SCENARIOS  
 
City 
Annual 
Power 
Density 
maximum 
(Kwh/sf-
year) 
Annual 
Power 
Density 
minimum 
(Kwh/sf-
year) 
Potential 
Energy 
Saving 
(Kwh/sf-
year) 
Saving 
Percentage 
Minneapolis 
34.689 
31.723 
2.966 
8.55% 
Phoenix 
33.423 
31.645 
1.778 
5.32% 
Miami 
36.121 
35.340 
0.781 
2.16% 
State College 
28.644 
26.712 
1.932 
6.75% 
 
TABLE V. 
RESULT STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
 
City 
Mean Value of 
Annual Power 
Density 
Standard deviation 
of Annual Power 
Density minimum 
Minneapolis 
32.65 
0.45 
Phoenix 
32.37 
0.29 
Miami 
35.61 
0.11 
State College 
27.63 
0.34 
 
TABLE VI. 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS RESULTS FOR: 
(A) MILD, (B) COOL AND DRY, (C) HOT AND DRY 
AND (D) HOT AND HUMID WEATHER CONDITION 
 
Parameters 
SC(A) 
SC(B) 
SC(C) 
SC(D) 
Supply air flow rate 
0.51 
0.47 
0.54 
0.38 
Chilled/hot water supply flow  
0.49 
0.51 
0.68 
0.26 
Supply air temperature  
0.011 
0.73 
0.89 
0.41 
Condenser entering 
temperature  
0.0037 
0.012 
0.015 
0.13 
Chilled/hot water supply 
temperature 
0.0021 
0.045 
0.0092 
0.084 
 
the energy savings predicted or realized by those methods to 
the maximum potential savings identified using the 
approach described here. 
To gain a deeper understanding of the simulation results, 
statistical analysis was carried out showing the cumulative 
percent of the total data population described at each yearly 
energy density value, working from smallest to largest.  The 
distribution of the data is close to a normal cumulative 
distribution, which agrees with previous assumption that 
most total energy consumption for buildings has a normal 
distribution.  It can be seen that the considered cases show a 
significant energy usage difference between the best and 
worst cases.  Thus, there should be a significant savings 
potential, which can be potentially achieved by adjusting the 
HVAC system setpoints. 
Another thing should be noticed is that the standard 
deviation and mean numbers for these four conditions as 
presented in Table V.  The mean number stands for the 
average energy usage during a whole year.  So, based on the 
results, Miami (hot and humid weather) has the largest 
average power density while state college (mild weather) 
has the smallest one.  Perhaps the difference on the running 
time of chillers may contribute to such an outcome.  
In statistics and probability theory, the standard 
deviation shows how much variation or dispersion from the 
average exists.  A low standard deviation indicates that the 
data points tend to be very close to the mean; a high 
standard deviation indicates that the data points are spread 
out over a large range of values.  So for here, a larger 
standard deviation means the energy usage is relatively 
unstable when changing the setpoints, but at the same time 
it also indicates a larger saving potential.  Minneapolis has 
the biggest standard deviation which is consistent with the 
results in Table IV.  And Miami has a relatively stable data 
so it is likely in the hot and humid weather condition, 
changing system setpoints will not bring a significant 
fluctuation in the energy usage per to this study.   
To evaluate the effects of these key parameters on the 
energy performance in different climate conditions, 
sensitivity analysis was generated.  Sensitivity Analysis 
(SA) is defined as the study of how uncertainty in the output 
of a model (numerical or otherwise) can be apportioned to 
different sources of uncertainty in the model input [15], 
which provides a good opportunity of giving a hierarchical 
rating to a large number of energy model inputs based on 
their relative importance to building energy consumption.  
When mentioned the method of sensitivity analysis, [16] 
documents three SA Techniques: Differential Sensitivity 
Analysis (DSA), Monte Carlo Analysis (MCA) and 
Stochastic Sensitivity Analysis (SSA), the DSA is most 
commonly used due to its simplicity and easy-to-
understand. For this research, the DSA method is picked to 
assess the relative influences of selected inputs on the 
energy consumption. 
The sensitivity coefficient presented below is defined as 
the percentage change of the output divided by the 
percentage change of the input. Figure 1 provides a more 
vivid picture of the proposed procedure. 
5
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Total Power Density for Winter Condition 
The equations used for the sensitivity analysis are shown 
as below: 
 
 
     en
(
)
O
S
sitivityCoeffecient SC
I

 
     (9) 
where: 
 
                           
pert
base
base
O
O
O
O



                           (10) 
                             
min
pert
base
base
I
I
I
I
I

 

                             (11) 
 
These two terms are the changes of the ouput and input 
relative to the base model and input, respectively.  Obase and 
Ibase are the base model output and input, respectively.  Opert, 
Ipert and Imin are the perturbed model output, input and 
potential minimum value of input, respectively. 
In this paper, the interested simulation outputs include 
whole building annual electricity (lighting, etc.) and boiler 
gas energy uses, as well as the chiller, the pump and the fan 
energy uses.  And these outputs are connected to certain 
input parameters.  So, to sum up here, for both the cooling 
and heating conditions, there are five interested input 
variables, they are condenser entering temperature, 
chilled/hot water supply temperature, chilled/hot water 
supply flow rate, supply air flow rate and supply air 
temperature.  Then, the range of each parameter was 
determined according to the actual building operation 
situation.  But here the range is set as shown in Table III.  
Perturb one parameter at a time while keeping other 
parameters constant, the sensitivity coefficient can be 
calculated based on the simulated output.  
So, based on the sensitivity-analysis method described in 
previous, and pre the simulation results for these four 
different climates, the sensitivity coefficient (SC) that 
determined by their relative importance to the annual whole 
building energy use for the four different climates is 
demonstrated as in Table VI. 
According to the data shown in the previous page, with 
regards to the mild weather, the supply air flow rate has the 
largest sensitivity coefficient, which means minimizing the 
supply air flow rate is shown to be the most effective 
measure to save the energy usage.  On the opposite, 
chilled/hot water temperature has the smallest value, which 
indicates the variation on the chilled/hot water temperature 
settings will have the least influence on the power 
consumption. While for the rest three outdoor conditions, 
the supply air setpoint temperature is in the driving position.  
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
A methodology was developed and demonstrated for 
determining the impact of HVAC control system setpoints 
on the total building energy requirements for a typical 
combination of HVAC system in four different outdoor 
environment situations in order to quantify the maximum 
potential energy 
savings due to dynamic setpoint 
adjustment.  The analysis reveals that a large potential of 
energy reduction exists in the building.  Whole building 
energy saving from fine tuning HVAC system can be 
significant in certain condition.  According to the simulation 
result, the energy saving potential through possible optimum 
control is substantial and more noticeable in winter season. 
The potential saving can be as high as 8.55% and as low as 
2.16% for cold and dry climate and hot and humid climate, 
respectively, when comparing the best performance with the 
worst one.  Sensitivity analysis shows different control 
system setpoints provide different degree of energy savings. 
Minimizing the supply air flow rate is shown to be the most 
effective measure to save electricity usage in mild weather, 
while a too high or too low supply air temperature may lead 
to overwhelm other settings effects on power consumption 
in other three weather conditions.  The results suggest that 
control strategies that are capable of dynamically adjusting 
setpoints in response to environmental and occupant 
conditions can potentially save a substantial amount of 
energy as compared to fixed setpoints.   
What’s more, the use of the engineering equation solver 
computer program to perform simulations on a conditioned 
zone with various collections of setpoints in four different 
cities which stand for four different outdoor environments 
further proofs of the possibility and usability of equation-
based simulation methods. 
However, there are still some investigations needed.  For 
the future work, the following recommendations are made 
for future work: 
 
• 
The number of setpoints studied is limited and the 
more detailed model could be studied. 
• 
Latent load should be considered in the future 
work. 
• 
The results should be conducted with cross 
comparison with other software output. 
• 
More comprehensive climate regions should be 
further extended and investigated.  
• 
Sensitivity 
analysis 
might 
consider 
the 
simultaneous variation of parameters and interaction term. 
• 
The energy recovery system efficiency could 
include the effects from outdoor air temperature and 
humidity. Perform an energy consumption simulation with 
variable effectiveness values of energy recovery system to 
see the effect of changing effectiveness due to outdoor 
temperature and humidity on the result. 
6
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Treado and X. Liu, “The Impact of Control Setpoints on     
Building Energy Use,” Proceedings of SIMUL 2013, Venice, 
Italy, 2013, pp. 187-192. 
[2] J. Clarke, J. Cockroft, S. Conner, J.Hand, N. Kelly, R. Moore, 
T. O’Brien, and P. Strachan, “Simulation-assisted control in 
building energy management systems,” Energy and Buildings, 
34, 2002, pp. 933-940. 
[3] Y. Li, Y. Pan, and C. Chen, “Study on energy saving 
retrofitting strategies for existing public building in 
Shanghai,” Proceedings of Energy Sustainability 2009, San 
Francisco, California, USA, 2009. pp. 301-307. 
[4] Y. Pan, Z. Huang, and G. Wu, “Calibrated building energy 
simulation and its application in a high-rise commercial 
building in Shanghai,” Energy and Buildings 39, 2007, pp. 
651-657. 
[5] G. Osborne, “The contribution of simulation to the building 
tuning process for 2 Victoria Avenue,” Proceedings of 
Building Simulation, Sydney, Australia, November 14-16, 
2011, pp. 239-246. 
[6] T. Z. Hong, S. K. Chou, and T. Y. Bong, “Building simulation: 
an overview of developments and information sources,” 
Building and Environment 35, 2000, pp. 347-361. 
[7] E. H. Mathews and C. P. Botha, "Improved thermal building 
management with the aid of integrated dynamic HVAC 
simulation," Building and Environment 38, 2003, pp. 1423-
1429. 
[8] R. C. Clark, “HVACSIM+ Building Systems and Equipment 
Simulation Program Reference Manual,” Published by the 
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, 
National Engineering laboratory, Center for Building 
Technology, Building Equipment Division, Gaithersburg, MD 
20899 
[9] ASHRAE, 2010. ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2010, Energy 
standard for buildings except low-rise residential buildings, 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers, Inc. 
[10] Energy Plus, Engineering Reference Manual, U.S. Dept. of 
Energy, 2010. 
[11] Engineering Equation Solver, User Manual, F-Chart Software, 
1992. 
[12] S. Bertagnolio, P. Andre, and V. Lemort, “Simulation of a 
building and its HVAC system with an equation solver: 
Application to audit,” Building Simulation, Volume 3, Issue 2, 
pp. 139-152, June 2010.  
[13] F.C. McQuiston and J.D. Spitler, Cooling and Heating Load 
Calculation Manual, 2nd ed., American Society of Heating, 
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., Atlanta, 
Georgia, 1992. 
[14] A. Wienese, “Boiler, Boiler Fuel and Boiler Efficiency,” 
Proceedings of South African Technology Association, 2001, 
pp. 275-281. 
[15] A. Saltelli, K. Chan,, Scott, E.M., and others, “Sensitivity 
analysis,” Wiley New York, 2000. 
[16] K.J Lomas, H.Eppel, “Sensitivity analysis techniques for 
building thermal simulation programs,” Energy and Buildings 
19, 21–44, 1992. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 
System Schematic 
 
 
8
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Annual Power Density in Minneapolis 
 
 
Figure 4. 
Annual Power Density in Phoenix 
 
 
9
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 5. 
Annual Power Density in Miami 
 
Figure 6. 
Annual Power Density in State College 
 
 
10
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 7. 
Breakdown of Power Use 
11
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

