Carrier Photogeneration in Metal-Semiconductor Structures Using Thin Films of 
Rutile-Phase TiO2 Nanoparticles 
 
Joel Molina, Carlos Zuniga, Edmundo Gutierrez, 
Electronics Department, 
National Institute of Astrophysics, Optics and Electronics 
Santa Maria Tonantzintla, Puebla, Mexico 
E-mails: jmolina@inaoep.mx, czuniga@inaoep.mx, 
edmundo@inaoep.mx 
Eunice Mendoza, Jose Luis Sanchez, Erick Bandala 
Energy and Environment Research Group, 
Universidad de las Americas, Puebla 
San Andres Cholula, Puebla, Mexico 
E-mails: edith.mendozaco@udlap.mx, 
jluis.sanchez@udlap.mx, erick.bandala@udlap.mx
 
 
Abstract — In this work, rutile-phase TiO2 nanoparticles (r-
TiO2) are embedded within a Spin-On Glass oxide matrix 
(using a simple, low thermal budget and economic deposition 
method) and the final TiO2:SiO2 suspension is used as 
photoactive material in Metal-Semiconductor structures. For 
this purpose, so-called “horizontal” and “vertical” structures 
are fabricated and characterized under I-V-Light conditions. 
The 
electronic, 
physical, 
chemical 
and 
photovoltaic 
characteristics of the final structures are obtained and 
correlated when irradiated with ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) 
light sources. I-V-Light characterization of these structures 
shows a reduction in the total resistance of thin aluminum 
stripes or reduction in the resistance state of TiO2:SiO2 
composed dielectric when irradiated with UV light (compared 
to dark conditions). Because of the photogenerated carriers, 
these structures have photoresistor or photocapacitor features, 
which are quite useful for solar energy conversion and storage. 
Keywords-TiO2 nanoparticles; photoresistor; photocapacitor; 
photogeneration; sol-gel processing; metal-semiconductor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, carrier photogeneration during ultraviolet-
visible (UV-Vis) irradiation upon rutile TiO2 nanoparticles 
has been demonstrated by using so-called “horizontal” and 
“vertical” metal-semiconductor structures based on binary 
metal oxides [1]. There, direct exposure of TiO2 
nanoparticles to light irradiation enables a reduction in the 
total resistance of thin aluminum stripes or the sudden 
increase of the gate current of a Metal-Insulator-Metal 
(MIM) structure by about 4-7 orders of magnitude, thus 
showing the potential of TiO2 nanoparticles for photovoltaic 
conversion and even solar energy storage. 
It is widely known that TiO2 (whether in rutile, anatase 
or brookite crystalline phases) posses enough photocatalytic 
properties than can be used for efficient conversion of solar 
energy into electric current if proper device architectures are 
provided. Photogeneration of electron–hole pairs in TiO2 
occurs naturally when this material is irradiated under high 
energy conditions like ultraviolet-visible light sources, and 
whose energy (in electron-Volts, eV) is well matched to the 
energy gap of TiO2. After electron–hole photogeneration, an 
efficient mechanism for separation of these carriers is needed 
and the simplest way to achieve this is by developing a large 
enough electric field so that the negative and positive 
charges are attracted to the positive and negative polarities of 
the applied voltage, respectively. These very simple 
mechanisms of photogeneration and carrier separation by 
electric field are what most solar cells (mostly based in P–N 
junctions) use for conversion and handling of an electric 
current whose magnitude is in direct proportion to the energy 
and density of radiation being absorbed. 
On the other hand, the use of TiO2 nanoparticles for 
energy conversion is quite attractive given its high contact 
surface area as compared to a dense bulk film of the same 
material. This is important since, after irradiation with the 
proper light sources, a larger density of photogenerated 
carriers are expected in devices using photoactive 
nanoparticles. These photogenerated carriers could then be 
used for more efficient energy conversion ad even, 
simultaneous energy conversion and storage of the carriers in 
the same device. In this sense, and even though rutile-phase 
TiO2 is considered a very inefficient material in terms of its 
photocatalytic activity (ability for carrier photogeneration) 
[2-3], use and development of this semiconductor material is 
quite important since the chemical synthesis of TiO2 usually 
produces rutile phase TiO2 quite easily, with relatively low 
concentration of impurities and also, economically. On the 
other hand, the synthesis of anatase-phase TiO2 is more 
complicated, usually involving complex chemistry and/or 
doping with some metal or non-metal elements in order to 
increase its photocatalytic activity when exposed to UV or 
visible irradiation [4-7]. 
Additionally, low thermal budget processing of metal-
semiconductor structures based on TiO2 nanoparticles is 
useful in order to increase the lifetime of photogenerated 
carriers. This way, relatively higher quantum efficiency 
during photon-electron conversion is expected and therefore, 
higher densities of photogenerated currents upon light 
irradiation. In both our horizontal and vertical devices, a low 
thermal budget has been kept by using a maximum 
processing temperature of 250°C, which can be even lowered 
to 100°C in order to evaporate mostly water and some 
organic solvents off the TiO2:SiO2 suspension and for film 
densification. This low-thermal budget process makes these 
devices ideal for fabrication on large-area flexible substrates 
(like PET or any other polymer) with the potential to 
decrease their final costs for widespread use. 
34
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In this work, we embed rutile-phase TiO2 nanoparticles 
(r-TiO2) within an organic SiO2 matrix and the final mixture 
of this dielectric structure is deposited on thin films of 
evaporated aluminum stripes. The final “horizontal” metal-
semiconductor structure is then electrically characterized 
under dark and light conditions (I-V-light) so that the total 
resistance of a simple aluminum stripe is measured and 
compared before and after UV irradiation. Compared to dark 
conditions, excess carriers are photogenerated within the 
TiO2 nanoparticles after light exposure and they are directly 
transferred to both ends of the aluminum stripe after 
applying a low potential difference. The highest density of 
photogenerated carriers is obtained when the TiO2:SiO2/Al is 
irradiated with UV-B light so that the total aluminum 
resistance is reduced by about 43%. Therefore, this initial 
device acts like a very simple “photoresistor”. Additionally, 
we also fabricate so-called “vertical” metal-semiconductor-
metal structures in order to obtain a solar energy conversion 
device with the intrinsic ability to self-store must of the 
converted energy in the form of a rechargeable capacitor. 
This device then acts like a very simple “photocapacitor” [8-
9]. The state-of-the-art regarding these latest structures 
makes use of complex layered structures going from photo-
rechargeable textiles for wearable power supplies [10], up to 
dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) connected in series with 
Li-ion batteries, metal oxides and/or TiO2 nanotube arrays in 
order to increase energy conversion efficiency [11-13]. 
However, because of increasing fabrication complexity and 
use of a third additional electrode (in order to switch between 
the functions of energy conversion, storage and output), 
which consumes extra energy and increase cost of 
fabrication, a simpler two-electrode device is needed and that 
requirement is met by our proposed device structures. 
This paper is arranged as follows: in Section I, we gave 
an introduction about the importance of testing simple 
“horizontal” and ”vertical” metal-semiconductor structures, 
which make use of TiO2 nanoparticles in order to promote 
energy conversion in “photoresistor” and “photocapacitor” 
devices. Section II presents the experimental conditions used 
for fabrication of these structures as well as details about the 
measurement setup that is used for their physical and photo-
electrical characterization. Section III presents and discusses 
the main experimental results that are found for these 
structures, thus confirming the ability of r-TiO2 to act as 
photoactive material for both conversion and storage of solar 
energy. Finally, the main conclusions drawn from all results 
are highlighted in Section IV, from where we state that it is 
possible to use the “vertical” structure as a photocapacitor, 
thus enabling direct storage of solar energy. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
A. Deposition of Thin Metal Films by Electron-Beam 
Evaporation under Ultra-High Vacuum Conditions 
For the horizontal TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass structures, and 
previous to depositing TiO2 nanoparticles on Corning glass 
slides (2947, size of 75 mm × 25 mm), the initial substrates 
were degreased by ultrasonic cleaning in trichloroethylene 
and acetone (10 min and 10 min, respectively). After 
cleaning the Corning glass slides, 400 nm of aluminum was 
deposited on one surface of the substrates by e-beam 
evaporation under ultra-high vacuum conditions (UHV). A 
metal mask was used during this metallization so that 
relatively large stripes of aluminum (18mm× 3mm) were 
left on the glass slides and these substrates are now ready 
for deposition of TiO2:SiO2 suspensions. For the vertical 
Ti/TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass structures, 400 nm of aluminum are 
initially deposited on one surface of the cleaned glass slides 
without using any metal mask. This initial aluminum layer 
works as the bottom electrode of the MIM structure. After 
deposition of the TiO2:SiO2 suspension, 100 Å of titanium is 
then deposited by e-beam evaporation (also in UHV 
conditions). This second metallization with titanium is now 
performed through a metal mask so that stripes (same size 
as before) are left on top of the final vertical structure. For 
all aluminum and titanium metallization, a same deposition 
rate of 1 Å/sec inside a vacuum of 10−7 Torr was used. 
B. Preparation of Thin FilmsBased on TiO2 nanoparticles 
Embedded within an Organic SiO2 matrix 
We have used a low-organic content or silicate-type spin-
on glass (SOG)-based SiO2 (700B from Filmtronics, Corp.) 
as a matrix for immobilization of r-TiO2 (Dupont, R-706 
with 93% purity and having an average diameter of 360 nm 
before embedding). Initially, specific amounts of commercial 
r-TiO2 are suspended in deionized water by hydrolyzing this 
TiO2:H2O mixture in a hot water bath (baine marie, 45°C, 30 
min) and then, adding SOG-based SiO2 so that the final 
TiO2:SiO2:H2O mixture is again subjected to a final hot 
water bath (baine marie, 80°C, 1 hr) in order to obtain an 
homogeneous suspension. The concentration ratios of TiO2 
(solute) to SiO2:H2O (solvent) are 200, 100, 50 and 10 
mg/mL and these suspensions are labeled as A, B, C and D, 
respectively. The solute concentrations were measured with 
an analytical balance AG285 from Mettler-Toledo. The final 
TiO2:SiO2:H2O suspensions were directly applied on the 
surface of glass slides (Corning glass 2947, size of 75 mm X 
25mm), that were previously metalized with aluminum 
stripes. The suspensions were first spinned at 3000 rpm, 30 
sec, and then 4000 rpm, 15 sec in order to obtain uniform 
layers of r-TiO2 embedded in SiO2. After spinning, all films 
(A-D) were baked for 2 hours using a hot plate at 250°C in 
N2 flow (99.99% purity) in order to evaporate mostly water 
and some of the organic solvents present in the SOG-based 
SiO2 matrix. For FTIR characterization, the same processing 
sequence was followed and the final solution was applied on 
prime-grade P-type silicon wafers (100) with resistivity of 5–
10 cm in order to eliminate most of the organic and 
impurity elements present within the Corning glass slides. 
Given the ultra low thermal budget required for fabrication 
of these simple structures, their introduction into large area 
flexible substrates is expected, thus promoting wide spread 
use of optimized devices. The fabrication process flow for 
both structures is briefly summarized in Figure 1. 
 
35
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 1. Process flow for fabrication of “horizontal” and “vertical” Metal-
Semiconductor structures using r-TiO2 as photoactive material. 
 
It is important to notice that we did not synthesize the r-
TiO2 used for fabrication of all proposed structures. Instead, 
we decided to use readily available commercial TiO2 
nanoparticles (with rather low purity of 93% and large 
average diameter of 360 nm) in order to test the ability of 
this material for carrier photogeneration under several 
sources of light irradiation. 
C. Chemical and Physical Characterization of TiO2 
nanoparticles Embedded within SiO2 
Dynamic-Light 
Scattering 
(DLS) 
measurements 
(Nanotrac Wave, from Microtrac) [14] were done in order to 
determine the final size distribution of TiO2 nanoparticles 
after the embedding process. By using DLS, we are able to 
determine both the size and size distribution profile of TiO2 
nanoparticles in the final suspension (before deposition on 
metalized glass surfaces). In particular, the size distribution 
profile for r-TiO2 is obtained with high accuracy by this 
system (close to 100% signal intensity), thus giving a direct 
estimation of the homogeneity of the r-TiO2 in the final 
suspension. Also, thicknesses for all films were measured by 
profilometry (DEKTAK, V200-SI) after partially etching the 
TiO2:SiO2 film using a strong acid solution composed of 
diluted HF (HF:H2O, with 1:2 ratio). The crystalline phases 
of the resulting TiO2-based films were obtained after XRD 
measurements using an X-ray diffractometer (Empyrean, 
from PANalytical), with a scanning step of 0.02°, using Cu-
K radiation with = 1.5406 Å as an X-ray source. The band 
gap energies Eg of the resulting films were calculated using 
optical transmittance data measured with an UV-Vis 
absorption spectrometer (LAMBDA 3B with double beam 
from Perkin Elmer, with Corning glass used as substrate) and 
the Tauc method [15]. Chemical compositional analyses for 
all films were obtained by FTIR spectrum measurements in 
absorbance mode with a Bruker Vector-22 system after 5 
min of purge in N2. The samples were measured against 
crystalline silicon substrate or SOG based silicon dioxide on 
glass (both were used as references). 
D. Electrical Characterization of Horizontal and Vertical 
Metal-Semiconductor Structures under I-V-Light 
As stated before, only the most concentrated suspension 
(A suspension) was used for fabrication of the horizontal and 
vertical 
structures 
and 
therefore, 
for 
I–V–Light 
characterization (I–V measurements under dark/illumination 
conditions). For characterizing these final structures we have 
used an HP4156B semiconductor parameter analyzer at 300 
K. As light source, we have used natural light conditions of 
sunlight coming indirectly to the laboratory room, sunlight 
plus a white lamp put right above all the structures and an 
UV-B lamp ( 300nm). For the horizontal structure, an I–V 
sweep was applied to the ends of the same aluminum stripe 
while limiting the current compliance to 100 mA. For the 
vertical structure, an I–V measurement in sampling mode 
was used where the gate current was constantly monitored 
with time while the gate voltage was kept constant at Vg = 
10 V. In this latter case, the gate current was limited to 100 
A. For all structures, I-V-Light measurements were applied 
to at least 10 different metal-semiconductor devices in order 
to obtain typical experimental data. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Structure’s Schematics and Energy Band Diagrams 
Figure 2 shows the 3-D and top view schematics for the 
horizontal TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass structure that has been used as 
a photoresistor upon irradiation of different light sources.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 3D and top views of r-TiO2:SiO2 deposited on Aluminum/Glass. 
 
Because 
of 
the 
preparation 
method 
(previously 
discussed), uniform distribution of the r-TiO2 within the 
oxide matrix is promoted so that these nanoparticles should 
have almost the same diameter size and separation in 
between as well. The aluminum stripes have an area of 18X3 
mm2 with thickness of 400 nm. For this structure, I-V-Light 
characterization takes place by measuring a current flow at 
36
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

both ends of the same bottom aluminum electrode while both 
bottom and top electrodes are used in the vertical structure. 
Figure 3 shows the idealized energy band diagrams for 
TiO2 and TiO2:SiO2/Al systems during photogeneration of 
carriers after irradiation with energies greater than the band 
gap of TiO2 hEg(TiO2). The band gap Eg, in 
semiconductor theory, is the void energy region that 
separates the valence band from the conduction band. For 
TiO2, the band gap can be overcome with energy from near 
UV photons. In the first band diagram, all physical 
mechanisms during light irradiation, (1) excitation, (2) 
relaxation and (3) diffusion are also shown while a small 
potential difference is developed in the second diagram so 
that carriers are injected in the metal. Excitation of a TiO2 
system with any light irradiation source having an energy h 
 Eg (TiO2), will generate an electron-hole pair density 
proportional to the irradiation density of the light source. 
These photogenerated electron and hole pairs are then 
enabled for electrical conduction within the conduction and 
valence bands, respectively. After excitation, relaxation 
mechanisms lower the potential energy of the excited carriers 
and then, diffusion by means of a concentration gradient, or 
even drift, by means of an applied electric field, is possible. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Idealized energy band diagrams for TiO2, TiO2:SiO2/Al systems. 
 
By applying a small potential difference to opposite ends 
of the same bottom aluminum electrode (see Figure 2 and 
right side of Figure 3), photogenerated carriers are then 
injected into this metal and immediately separated by the 
electric field, thus decreasing its original bulk resistance. In 
the vertical structure, a potential difference applied to both 
top/bottom electrodes would separate all photogenerated 
carriers thus increasing the level of the original gate current 
(decreasing the original resistance state of the combined 
TiO2:SiO2). In both cases, we do not take into account most 
of the physical mechanisms responsible for lowering the 
quantum 
efficiency 
of 
the 
structures: 
trapping, 
recombination, phonon interaction, annihilation, interface 
defects, etc. However, those mechanisms and defects are 
important in order to properly engineer the fabrication 
process for these structures and then, increase their quantum 
efficiency for less energetic sources like visible instead of 
UV irradiation (reducing Eg or increasing the lifetime of 
photogenerated carriers before recombination). 
On the other hand, the photocatalytic properties of TiO2 
(quite useful for its bactericide properties) are derived from 
the formation of photogenerated charge carriers (hole and 
electron), which occurs upon the absorption of ultraviolet or 
visible light and that corresponds to the band gap of this 
material [16-20]. The photogenerated holes in the valence 
band diffuse to the TiO2 surface and react with adsorbed 
water molecules, forming hydroxyl radicals (•OH). The 
photogenerated holes and the hydroxyl radicals oxidize 
nearby organic molecules on the TiO2 surface. Meanwhile, 
electrons in the conduction band typically participate in 
reduction processes, which typically react with molecular 
oxygen in the air to produce superoxide radical anions 
(O2•−). In this sense, because of the high surface contact area 
presented by TiO2 nanoparticles, this material will generate a 
large density of electron and hole pairs, which then can be 
used for both photovoltaic or photocatalytic applications 
having a high degree of effectiveness. 
 
B. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) and Profilometry 
Results for Measuring Diameter of r-TiO2 and Thickness 
of TiO2 :SiO2 Based Thin Films 
As result of synthesis of the corresponding suspensions, 
Figure 4 shows the average TiO2 particle diameters for two 
conditions: as-prepared (measured after at least 24 h of 
settling time of the synthesized suspensions) and right after 
sonication using an ultrasonic vibrator (Branson B1510, 2 
min at 40 kHz and room temperature). The dotted arrow 
shows the nominal average diameter as stated by the 
manufacturer and that is located at about 360 nm. The as-
prepared samples present a larger particle diameter because 
of their tendency to agglomerate or aggregate after 
dispersion and settling within a liquid suspension. During 
sonication, enhanced dispersion of TiO2 agglomerates is 
obtained by overcoming their weaker attractive forces, the 
final result being smaller TiO2 nanoparticle diameters. The 
average physical size for sonicated r-TiO2 nanoparticles is 
around 300 nm. Figure 4 also shows the final TiO2 film’s 
thickness after deposition (by spinning on silicon) and 
thermal treatment of the prepared suspensions. Thicker TiO2 
films were obtained for more concentrated suspensions as 
expected. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. DLS and profilometry data showing the nanoparticle diameter size 
(before and after sonication) and TiO2:SiO2 thin film thickness, respectively. 
 
37
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As reference, film thickness of SOG based oxide alone 
(without dilution in H2O) was about 400 nm, which 
compares well with data obtained for similar spinning 
conditions [21]. Since all A–D suspensions were prepared 
using different TiO2:SiO2:H2O volume ratios (see the 
experimental procedure), different concentrations of TiO2 
within the same matrix would produce different thin film 
thicknesses. A similar trend of thickness reduction for SiO2 
when diluted using different percentages of H2O was also 
found by Molina et al. [21] and final thickness of SiO2 could 
be further reduced when the samples were annealed at higher 
temperatures. Given that for sample D there is a minimum 
amount of TiO2 nanoparticles (only 10 mgmL-1), the final 
average thickness for this film was kept below the average 
nanoparticles’ diameter because of the reduction in most of 
the SiO2 thickness by enhanced H2O dilution and also, 
because larger amount of water per volume induces further 
dilution or dispersion of previously agglomerated TiO2 
nanoparticles. 
Finally, it is important to notice that since these 
TiO2:SiO2 based films will be under direct irradiation of 
visible-ultraviolet light sources, measurements of the 
nanoparticles’ sizes and their distribution at both the film’s 
interfaces and in the bulk are necessary to mainly correlate 
surface distribution of nanoparticles to their carrier 
photogeneration. These measurements could be done by 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) or atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) for the surface, while transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM) could be done to obtain the 
characteristics of the nanoparticles in the bulk of the 
embedding matrix. These last measurements are actually 
under progress, and the results will be published elsewhere. 
 
C. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) 
After obtaining TiO2-based thin films, Figure 5 shows the 
XRD diffraction patterns for all thin films including sample 
0 (only SOG based SiO2), which is only the amorphous 
matrix of SiO2 deposited atop the glass slides and cured at 
the same temperature. It is clear that sample 0 does not 
present the characteristic sharp diffraction peaks of a 
crystalline material because the incident X-rays are scattered 
in many directions leading to a large bump distributed over a 
wide range of 2, just like the one shown here for reference 
purposes. Samples C–D present the lowest intensities for the 
diffraction peaks related to the crystalline phase of TiO2, 
since their nanoparticle concentrations were quite small, (50 
and 10 mgmL-1, respectively). On the other hand, samples 
A–B (with concentrations of 200 and 100 mgmL-1, 
respectively) clearly present the characteristic sharp 
diffraction peaks for rutile-phase TiO2 including the broad 
amorphous phase from both the SiO2 matrix and the glass 
slide (used for TiO2 immobilization and mechanical support 
purposes, 
respectively). 
Given 
the 
relatively 
high 
concentration density of r-TiO2 embedded within the SiO2 
matrix for the A-B samples, it is clear that sharper diffraction 
peaks will be obtained possibly because of nanoparticles’ 
agglomeration. This effect could be triggered during 
spinning, which make use of high speed centrifugal forces 
during step 4 of the process flow; see Figure 1. In particular, 
sample A showed the clearest and highly intense diffraction 
peaks, which fit well with those of standard rutile TiO2 
(Powder Diffraction File No. 21-1276). 
 
 
 
Figure 5. XRD data show existence of rutile phase for TiO2 nanoparticles. 
 
These results provide direct evidence of the existence of 
rutile phase in the thin TiO2 films after using high TiO2 
nanoparticle concentrations (at least 50 mgmL-1). This is 
important since rutile-phase TiO2 is considered a very 
inefficient material in terms of its photocatalytic activity and 
yet, we could obtain moderate photovoltaic activity by using 
the proposed horizontal and vertical metal-semiconductor 
structures here discussed. 
 
D. Fourier-Transformed InfraRed (FTIR) Spectroscopy 
The IR spectra for all samples are shown as absorption 
coefficient a after normalization of each sample to a single 
and averaged TiO2 film thickness. It is important to notice 
that these samples are quite different for bulk and dense TiO2 
thin films. In these films, the TiO2 nanoparticles tend to 
disperse within the SiO2 matrix (generating empty spaces) 
thus avoiding normalization with respect to each physical 
thickness. Figure 6 shows typical chemical bond vibration 
energies in absorption mode, found in samples A-D for all 
the range of interest (wavenumbers from 4000–400 cm-1). 
The IR spectra for SOG-based SiO2 (deposited on glass) 
is also included and whose absorption peaks for the Si-O 
bonds are detected at 1070, 943, 801, 570, and 443 cm-1 
(peaks 1-5). The bands centered at 1070 and 801 cm-1 
correspond to symmetric and asymmetric stretching 
vibrations of Si-O-Si bonds; the bands at 943 and 443 cm-1 
correspond to bending vibrations of the Si-OH and Si-O-Si 
bonds, 
respectively, 
which 
confirm 
that 
the 
main 
composition of this material is SiO2. The absorption band at 
570 cm-1 is assigned to symmetric Si-O-Si vibrations of the 
SOG oxide. A decrease in the intensities of the absorption 
band related to Si-O-Si stretching vibrations was observed 
for the SOG and D-A spectra (in that sequence), which imply 
that IR energy is absorbed by the presence of other material. 
38
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

On the other hand, a combination of both the glass slide and 
the 
SOG-based 
SiO2 
present 
high 
IR 
absorption 
characteristics (high Si–O–Si bond density), which screen-
out the presence of any detectable Ti–O–Ti bonds. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. IR spectra (absorbance mode) of TiO2:SiO2/glass samples (A-D). 
Because of the high density of Si–O and Si–O–Si bonds, the presence of any 
detectable Ti–O–Ti bonds has been screened out in these measurements. 
 
In order to analyze only the contribution of TiO2 in the 
films, the IR spectra of A-D samples must be obtained using 
only the SOG-based oxide film as reference (SiO2/glass) and 
take these measurements at wavenumber between 1600 and 
400 cm-1 approximately. This way, we are able to eliminate 
the influence of the highly absorbent peaks related to Si–O 
and Si–O–Si bonds (those especially found at 1070 and 443 
cm-1), which could screen-out the presence of any detectable 
Ti–O–Ti bonds. Figure 7 shows the new IR spectra (using 
the SiO2/Glass sample as reference) including some 
absorption bands at 765 (black arrow at shoulder section), 
530 and 395 cm-1. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. IR spectra (absorbance mode) of TiO2:SiO2/glass samples (A-D) 
and using SiO2/Glass as reference in order to detect Ti–O–Ti bonds. 
 
The band detected as a shoulder at 765 cm-1 is 
comparable with the IR spectrum of crystalline TiO2 (having 
anatase or rutile crystalline structure) due to symmetric 
stretching vibrations of the Ti–O bonds. Most importantly, 
the absorption peaks for these Ti–O bonds increase with the 
content of TiO2, thus confirming proper chemical bonding of 
this photoactive material for even the larger TiO2 
concentrations. Also, even though the main absorption bands 
for the Si–O–Si bonds mostly disappear when SOG-based 
oxide film is used as reference, some Si–O bonds appear in 
these samples surely because of vibrations of Si–O–Ti 
bonds, as observed in the band at 1005 cm-1. On the other 
hand, the bands at 627 and 1325 cm-1 are thought to be 
related to vibrations of some Al–O bonds while the band at 
868 cm-1 is related to a combination of both Al–O and Si–O 
bonding vibrations. Detecting contributions of both Al–O 
and Si–O bonds, make sense considering that commercial 
TiO2 nanoparticles consist, according to the manufacturer, of 
93% TiO2, 2.5% Al2O3 and 3% SiO2 (the remaining 
percentage consisting of other undetectable elements). 
Figure 8 shows the IR absorption spectra of TiO2:SiO2 
films from 4000 to 2600 cm-1, where the presence of strong 
absorption bands in the region of 3200-3500 cm-1, 
(corresponding to bending vibrations of adsorbed and 
possibly coordinately bounded OH molecules with Ti or Si) 
are noticed. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. IR spectra (absorbance mode) of TiO2:SiO2/glass samples (A-D) 
for wavenumbers in the 4000 to 2600 cm-1 region. This measurement 
enables detection of any remaining organic impurities in the samples. 
 
Also, the weak absorption peaks in the region of 2920-
2930 cm-1 among others are related to the presence of 
organic residues that were not fully evaporated or 
decomposed during the low-temperature thermal treatments 
applied to the TiO2 films. For comparison, the IR spectra for 
SOG-based oxide is also shown so the main absorption 
bands related to purely organic elements can be easily 
identified (having the strongest absorption peaks). Since the 
highest thermal treatment applied to all A-D samples was 
only 250°C, higher temperatures for this final curing process 
would evaporate or reduce these organic residuals more 
39
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

efficiently. However, for practical applications, it is desired 
to reduce the total thermal budget for this material so that it 
could be possible to develop coatings of TiO2 (with enough 
photovoltaic or light response) on plastic or other economic 
and readily available flexible substrate for large area 
applications. 
 
E. UV-Vis Transmittance Spectroscopy 
Optical band gap Eg, is an important physical parameter 
in semiconductor materials because it allows knowing the 
threshold energies to which a material in particular, like 
TiO2, is “transparent” or able to absorb incident photons and 
therefore, create electron-hole pairs that could participate in 
photovoltaic processes. The UV-Vis spectra from 190 to 
900 nm region for the different TiO2 concentrations (A-D 
samples), including the spectrum for only the glass 
substrate, are all shown in Figure 9. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. UV-Vis spectra obtained for all TiO2:SiO2 (A–D, Glass) samples 
showing that transmittance is in reverse proportion to TiO2 concentration. 
 
It can be seen that strong absorption occurs at 
wavelengths <290 nm (UV-B regime) for all samples and 
that transmittance is reduced in direct proportion to the r-
TiO2 concentration as expected. Even though the physical 
thicknesses for all samples are different (see Figure 4), 
minimum variations in their optical band gap are expected if 
we consider different densities for these films. 
Additionally, since the number of interference fringes is 
not visible, this avoids using the Swanepoel model for 
optical band gap calculation Eg [22] and therefore, a fast 
estimation was done to obtain this important parameter. 
Figure 10 shows the transmittance spectra versus photon 
energy for the A-D samples. The inflexion point is the 
crossing for all samples after linearly extrapolating all slopes 
with the axe for photon energy. The band gap Eg is 
determined by dividing this inflexion point by √2 [23]. The 
inflexion points cut the photon energy axis at between 4.41–
4.42 eV so that the correspondent optical band gap Eg for all 
A-D samples lies at 3.11-3.12 eV. 
 
This band gap energy Eg corresponds well with the 
reported Eg for anatase or rutile TiO2, between 3.0 and 3.2 
eV, respectively [24-25]. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Extrapolation of UV-Vis transmittance data to photon energy for 
all A-D samples in order to obtain TiO2 band gap energy (Eg). 
 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
for 
the 
vertical 
structure 
(Ti/TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass device), we make use of an ultra-thin 
titanium stripe (thickness of 100 Å) in order to use it as a 
conductive top electrode while being able to transmit most of 
the UV-Vis irradiation through itself, thus allowing efficient 
photogeneration of carriers in the TiO2. In order to obtain the 
optical properties of this electrode, the transmittance spectra 
(from 190 to 900 nm region) for different ultra-thin titanium 
films are shown in Figure 11. 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Transmittance (UV-Vis) spectra of ultra-thin titanium films. 
The titanium film having 100 Å in thickness was used as the top electrode in 
the vertical Ti/TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass MIM structures. 
 
We clearly notice that the thinner titanium films (100 and 
200 Å in thickness) transmit virtually the complete (100%) 
electromagnetic spectra from 900 nm down to 290 nm, thus 
being transparent to the visible, the UV-A and UV-B regions 
40
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

as well. For the UV-C region, all films readily absorb or 
reflect this energy so that the transmittance characteristics 
are lost. For a titanium film of 400 Å in thickness, the 
original transmittance falls to about 93% from 900 nm down 
to ∼400 nm, thus this sample is transparent to only the 
visible region of the spectra. At wavelengths of 400 nm and 
downwards, this sample starts to absorb/reflect UV-A and 
UV-B thus it is not useful for proper absorption of those 
energies (by TiO2) in the vertical structures. We also show 
the very low transmittance characteristics (around 10%) 
obtained from a thicker titanium film (1000 Å) as a 
reference. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Photograph showing the transmittance quality of ultra-thin 
titanium films. The titanium films having 100 and 200 Å in thickness (in the 
form of stripes) are optically transparent while titanium films having 400 
and 1000 Å in thickness are opaque since they absorb/reflect most UV. 
 
Figure 12 above shows the optical transparency of thin 
titanium films deposited on Corning glass slides in the form 
of stripes (after E-beam evaporation under ultra-high vacuum 
conditions). We clearly notice that titanium films having 100 
and 200 Angstroms in thickness are optically transparent 
while thicker films are opaque. In our vertical MIM 
structures, we have used an ultra-thin titanium film (having 
only 100 Å in thickness) so that we ensure good 
transmittance characteristics (especially in the UV regime) 
along with good conductive properties in order to have a 
transparent-conductive electrode. 
 
F. I-V-Light Response of Horizontal TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass 
Figure 13 shows the I-V-Light characteristics of the 
structure shown previously in Figure 2 (A sample only). 
Dark, sunlight, sunlight+lamp and UV-B light (300 nm) 
conditions were all applied on top of the structures so that 
surface r-TiO2 were the first to absorb all possible irradiation 
coming from these sources. Compared to dark conditions, 
photogeneration of excess carriers (both electrons and holes) 
within the TiO2 nanoparticles is greater after UV-B light 
exposure and these carriers are directly transferred to both 
ends of the Al-stripe after applying a low potential 
difference. During UV-B light irradiation, the total 
aluminum resistance is reduced by about 43%, which 
represent a moderate change in resistance given by rather 
low quantum efficiency presented by this structure. 
 
 
 
Figure 13. I–V–Light characteristics of an aluminum stripe (horizontal 
TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass structure) before and after light irradiation. This 
device acts as a photoresistor. 
 
G. I-V-Light Response of Vertical Ti/TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass 
Previously, I-V-Light characterization for horizontal 
structures produced a moderate photogeneration of carriers 
so that the total resistance of an aluminum strip was reduced. 
However, given that some of the photogenerated carriers will 
be trapped, recombined or “lost” within the SiO2 matrix or at 
its interface with r-TiO2 (any annihilation mechanism), the 
“horizontal path” followed by carriers in the initial structure 
would reduce their lifetime once they are photogenerated in 
the r-TiO2. In order to increase photocarrier lifetime before 
recombination and thus, increase quantum efficiency during 
UV-B irradiation, vertical structures are proposed, see Figure 
14. 
 
 
 
Figure 14. 3D view for a vertical Ti/TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass structure where the 
titanium electrode is 100 Å in thickness, thus being optically transparent. 
 
These vertical structures use titanium as a gate electrode 
(only 100 Å in thickness) so that a capacitor in the form of a 
Metal-Insulator-Metal structure is formed. Because of the 
ultra-thin titanium layer, this gate electrode is highly 
transparent to all UV-Vis irradiation so that when all carriers 
are being photogenerated, a vertical transition of these 
carriers between bottom/top electrodes (by an applied 
external electric field) would require a shorter distance thus 
41
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

increasing their lifetime before recombination as compared 
to the horizontal structures. 
Figure 15 shows the I–V–Light characteristics (under 
dark/illumination conditions) of three vertical Ti/TiO2:SiO2/ 
Al/Glass structures. Here, an I–V measurement in sampling 
mode (I-time) was used where the gate current Ig was 
constantly monitored with time and the gate voltage was kept 
constant (Vg = 10 V, applied at the semitransparent Ti 
electrode). We notice that the gate current increases about 4-
7 orders of magnitude when the structures are exposed to 
sunlight. A high velocity photo-response to optical excitation 
is obtained given the shortest vertical transition between top 
and bottom electrodes. 
 
 
Figure 15. I–V–Light characteristics of three different MIM capacitors 
(Ti/TiO2:SiO2/Al/Glass structures) before and after sunlight irradiation. All 
samples present rapid dark-to-illuminated Ig transitions and vice versa. Any 
of these devices acts as a photocapacitor, thus enabling direct storage of 
solar energy after photogeneration of carriers. 
 
These vertical structures are able to photogenerate and 
store carriers quite similar to the so-called photocapacitor [7-
8], where all carriers could be efficiently stored within the 
dielectric itself right after photogeneration. Thus, a light-
driven self-charging capacitor having a direct and efficient 
storage mechanism of solar energy has been obtained. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Photocarrier generation during UV-B exposure of rutile-
phase TiO2 nanoparticles in horizontal and vertical metal-
semiconductor structures, reduces the total resistance of an 
aluminum stripe by about 43% or instantly increase the gate 
current Ig for about 4-7 orders of magnitude, respectively. 
Both structures can be fabricated using simple and economic 
processing techniques with low thermal budget. The vertical 
structure works as a photocapacitor, enabling simultaneous 
conversion and storage of solar energy. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was fully supported by the National Council of 
Science and Technology (CONACyT-Mexico). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Molina, C. Zuniga, E. Gutierrez, E. Mendoza, J.L. Sanchez, 
and E.R. Bandala, “Carrier photogeneration during UV-Vis 
irradiation on horizontal and vertical metal-semiconductor 
structures based on rutile-phase TiO2 nanoparticles,” Proc. of 
the Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device 
Technologies and Applications, SENSORDEVICES 2013. 
vol. 1, pp. 41-45, 2013. 
[2] Z. Ding, G.Q. Lu, and P.F Greenfield, “Role of the crystallite 
phase of TiO2 in heterogeneous photocatalysis for phenol 
oxidation in water,” J. Phys. Chem. B, vol. 104, April 2000, 
pp. 4815-4820. 
[3] T.A. Kandiel, R. Dillert, A. Feldhoff, and D. Bahnemann, 
“Direct synthesis of photocatalytically active rutile TiO2 
nanorods partly decorated with anatase nanoparticles,” J. 
Phys. Chem., vol. 114, February 2010. pp. 4909-4915. 
[4] M.A. Behnajady, N. Modirshahla, M. Shokri, and B. Rad, 
“Enhancement of photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles 
by silver doping: photodeposition versus liquid impregnation 
methods,” Global NEST Journal, vol. 10-1, 2008, pp. 1-7. 
[5] D.H. Kim, D.K. Choi, S.J. Kim, and K.S. Lee, “The effect of 
phase type on photocatalytic activity in transition metal doped 
TiO2 nanoparticles,” Catalysis Communications, vol. 9, 
March 2008, pp. 654–657. 
[6] C.D. Valentin, G. Pacchioni, and A. Selloni, “Origin of the 
different photoactivity of N-doped anatase and rutile TiO2,” 
Phys. ReV. B., vol. 70, August 2004, pp. 085116-1--085116-
4, 2004. 
[7] O. Diwald, L. Thompson, E.G. Goralski, S.D. Walck, and J.T. 
Yates, “The effect of nitrogen ion implantation on the 
photoactivity of TiO2 rutile single crystals,” J. Phys. Chem. B, 
vol. 108, January 2004, pp. 52-57. 
[8] T. Miyasaka and T.N. Murakami, “The photocapacitor: an 
efficient self-charging capacitor for direct storage of solar 
energy,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 85, October 2004, pp. 3932-
3934. 
[9] C.W. Lo, C. Li, and H. Jiang, “A photoelectrophysical 
capacitor with direct solar energy harvesting and storage 
capability,” Optical MEMS and Nanophotonics (OPT 
MEMS), 2010 International Conference on, August 2010, pp. 
65-66. 
[10] T. Song and B. Sun, “Towards photo-rechargeable textiles 
integrating power conversion and energy storage functions: 
can we kill two birds with one stone?,” ChemSusChem, vol. 
6, January 2013, pp. 408–410. 
[11] X. Zhang, X. Huang, C. Li, and H. Jiang, “Dye-sensitized 
solar cell with energy storage function through PVDF/ZnO 
nanocomposite counter electrode,” Adv. Mater., June 2013, 
pp. 1-4. 
[12] W. Guo, X. Xue, S. Wang, C. Lin, and Z.L. Wang, “An 
integrated power pack of dye-sensitized solar cell and Li 
battery based on double-sided TiO2 nanotube arrays,” Nano 
Lett., vol. 12, no. 5, April 2012, pp. 2520–2523. 
[13] M.S. Nuckowska, K. Grzejszczyk, P.J. Kulesza, L. Yang, N. 
Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, E. Johansson, and A. Hagfeldt, 
“Integration of solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell with metal 
oxide charge storage material into photoelectrochemical 
capacitor,” J. of Power Sources, vol. 234, no. 15, July 2013, 
pp. 91-99. 
[14] “Microtrac: total solutions in particle characterization, 
NanotracWave,” App Note, Microtrac. October 2012, pp. 1-4. 
http://www.microtrac.com/MTWP/wp-content/uploads/2012/ 
10/Nanotrac-Wave-Temp-Brochure-Ver-9.pdf 
[15] J. Tauc, “Optical properties and electronic structure of 
amorphous Ge and Si,” MRS Bulletin, vol. 3, January 1968, 
pp. 37-46. 
42
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[16] A. Fujishima, T.N. Rao, and D.A. Tryk, “Titanium dioxide 
photocatalysis,” J. Photochem. Photobiol. C: Photochem. 
Rev., vol. 1, March 2000, pp. 1–21. 
[17] A. Fujishima, X. Zhang, and D.A. Tryk, “TiO2 photocatalysis 
and related surface phenomena,” Surf. Sci. Rep., vol. 63, 
December 2008, pp. 515–582. 
[18] K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, “TiO2 photocatalysis: design and 
applications,” J. Photochem. Photobiol. C: Photochem. Rev., 
vol. 13, June 2012, pp. 169–189. 
[19] M.R. Hoffmann, S.T. Martin, W. Choi, and D.W. 
Bahnemann, “Environmental applications of semiconductor 
photocatalysis,” Chem. Rev., vol. 95, January 1995, pp. 69–
96. 
[20] D.S. Bhatkhande, V.G. Pangarkar, and A.A.C.M. Beenackers, 
“Photocatalytic degradation for environmental applications – 
a review,” J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., vol. 77, January 
2002, pp. 102–116. 
[21] J. Molina , A.L. Munoz, A. Torres, M. Landa, P. Alarcon, and 
M. Escobar, “Enhancement of the electrical characteristics of 
MOS capacitors by reducing the organic content of H2O-
diluted spin-on-glass based oxides,” Mater. Sci. Eng. B, vol. 
176, no. 17, March 2011, pp. 1353-1358. 
[22] R. Swanepoel, “Determination of the thickness and optical 
constants of amorphous silicon,” J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum., vol. 
16, no. 12, December 1983, pp. 1214-1222. 
[23] M. Sreemany and S. Sen, “A simple spectrophotometric 
method for determination of the optical constants and band 
gap energy of multiple layer TiO2 thin films,” Materials 
Chemistry and Physics, vol. 83, no. 1, January 2004, pp. 169–
177. 
[24] J. Dharma and A. Pisal, “Simple method of measurement the 
band gap energy value of TiO2 in the powder form using 
UV/Vis/NIR spectrometer,” App Note, Perkin-Elmer Inc. 
January 2009, pp. 1-4. 
[25] S. Valencia, J.M. Marin, and G. Restrepo, “Study of the 
bandgap of synthesized titanium dioxide nanoparticules using 
the sol-gel method and a hydrothermal treatment,” The Open 
Materials Science Journal, vol. 4, January 2010, pp. 9-14. 
 
 
 
43
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

