The Social Accumulator as a Concept to Manage Social Energy  
in the Age of Digital Transformation 
An Explanation Model for Digital Interaction among Human Actors 
Karsten Böhm 
FH Kufstein Tirol – University of Applied Sciences 
Kufstein, Austria 
e-mail: karsten.boehm@fh-kufstein.ac.at 
Jürgen Sammet, Joel Schmidt 
HAM – University of Applied Management 
Ismaning, Germany 
e-mail: {juergen.sammet|joel.schmidt}@fham.de 
 
 
Abstract—The increasing intensity of digital supported inter-
action and communication stimulated by the COVID19 pan-
demic over a period of roughly two years has changed the 
perception and experiences with those new forms of interaction 
by human actors. While not being completely new, the massive 
use of the technologies made a difference for the users that lead 
to different socio-technical effects. As a result, the concept of the 
Social Accumulator (SOAC) is introduced in this paper and 
related to known concepts like Social Energy. It builds on the 
experiences from the intensified digital interactions both in 
academia and business life and should serve as an explanation 
model for the effects of digital interaction that is easy to 
understand and to apply. The SOAC should help to understand 
the processes of Knowledge Creation and Knowledge Sharing 
when being driven by digital tools, which becomes increasingly 
important in a world that transforms education and businesses 
towards a highly digitized world.  
Keywords—Digital 
Transformation; 
Social 
Interaction; 
 Social Energy; Higher Education; Digital Interaction; CSCW; 
Communication; Collaboration. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 In recent years, digitization and digital transformation of 
the economy and society have emerged as central topics. 
Furthermore, the global COVID-19 pandemic has acted as a 
catalyst for rapid digital transformation in many economies. 
Austria and Germany witnessed a significant real-world 
application of fully digital work experiences during this period, 
representing a large-scale implementation. In contrast, 
countries such as Sweden, Denmark, and Estonia had already 
gained extensive experience with digital transformation on a 
broad scale. These varied experiences underscore the need for 
support in navigating digital shifts and the lack of simple, 
effective frameworks for understanding the effects of digital 
transformation on cognition and social interaction.  
 This paper builds on Böhm's [1] contribution at the 2022 
eKNOW conference held in Porto, Portugal, making several 
valuable contributions extending the original content: 1) an 
expanded time-frame including 2023 promotes a shift of focus 
to post-pandemic conditions reflecting the current movement 
of organizations to use digitally supported communication; 2) 
an increased depth and breadth of theoretical foundations, as 
the SOAC concept is embedded within the theory of social 
energy, providing new insights and understanding of 
relationships between these two concepts; 3) an extension of 
potential applications of the SOAC concept in three areas. 
In terms of knowledge management, the pandemic 
situation offers a unique context for the use of information 
technology in developing knowledge intensive businesses and 
activities. Much can be gained by reflecting on experiences 
during the pandemic from the perspective of knowledge 
management considering the interactions among human users 
(mostly) using digital channels. 
 Initially, during early stages of the pandemic the technical 
challenges 
dominating 
the 
agendas 
of 
businesses, 
organizations and academia included improvement of 
infrastructure, availability of software systems and the 
development of necessary skills. Yet surprisingly, the 
challenges that were at first considered major barriers to 
technology adoption within the knowledge management 
community were resolved rather quickly. For example, 
collaboration challenges in the digital world were solved with 
new tools and strategies, which gained almost immediate 
acceptance, becoming the "new normal" of online interaction. 
As the duration of the pandemic extended into the second year, 
it became increasingly apparent that the new mode of digital 
interaction had unique properties resulting in both advantages 
and disadvantages.  Advantages included the ability to 
establish immediate connections between colleagues and 
peers; communication and collaboration between individuals 
and groups of all sizes was facilitated by a wide range of 
useful tools that were developed on demand as new needs, 
requirements and features were identified. Geographic 
distance and location were no longer impediments, meaning 
frustrations with travel times were non-existent. The transition 
from paper to digital in office settings became a reality, and 
its implementation lead to easier and more efficient ways of 
knowledge sharing among office staff.  Disadvantages 
included the difficulties in differentiation between working 
time and free time as boundaries became much more blurred; 
the significant increase in frequency and duration of digital 
meetings; and the shrinking availability of time slots for 
concentrated work. Despite massive use of digital 
communication tools, the individual feelings of loneliness and 
isolation 
increased, 
as 
informal 
conversation 
or 
communication became more difficult or simply did not occur. 
This has hindered informal knowledge exchange and will 
91
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

continue to have a negative impact on human health and well-
being. The long-term negative effects led to a unique form of 
tiredness and exhaustion, which became known as “Zoom 
fatigue” [2]. Recent research has validated this effect in a 
study carried out in Germany [3].  
Channel 
reduction 
theory 
(from 
the 
German 
"Kanalreduktionstheorie") [4] assumes that remote communi-
cation generally has deficits. Recent studies identify a shift in 
relationships between communication partners. At the same 
time, new phenomenon starts to emerge: 1) Intimacy between 
communication partners can be even higher in an online 
setting, because the situation leads to a higher readiness of 
self-revelation (phenomenon: “talking to a stranger”); and 2) 
digital settings often focus only on the factual level. These 
new developments are positively received as communication 
is more efficient and less status oriented, referring to the 
disentrainment hyperpersonal model of computer mediated 
communication [5]. 
Based on the situation described above, “this rapid and 
large-scale switch from in-person to remote interactions”, had 
already been identified in the literature as remote living or 
“Telelife” [6], which emphasizes that people will collaborate 
more remotely. Given these observations, it is clear that the 
massive application of technology mediated communication 
and collaboration does not only have benefits and positive 
effects, but also drawbacks – which is to be expected in 
massive use of any technology. Therefore, the right balance 
between digital interaction and direct interaction of human 
actors is of critical importance and warrants more in-depth 
exploration and consideration.  
Direct interaction between human and digital interaction, 
in which technical means are used for the communication (e.g., 
a phone call, a chat or a video conference call) are perceived 
differently in terms of richness and cognitive load, as well as 
towards trust building and perceived interactivity. As this 
might simply be due to the fact that the channels are less rich 
[7], [8], both channels will be included in this current analysis. 
In essence, most users perceive direct interactions as more 
attractive and easier to use than digital interactions. This 
became increasingly clear during the COVID19-pandemic 
with the switch to solely digital interaction for an extended 
period of time. With this understanding in mind, it is important 
to address the questions of when and how: When to use each 
channel? How to more effectively interweave the two 
channels? 
This paper introduces the concept of the Social 
Accumulator (SOAC) as an explanation model for the digital 
interaction of human actors, focusing on both positive and 
negative effects of computer supported collaborative work 
(CSCW). By emphasizing different factors in a simple 
conceptual model, the SOAC supports the interweaving of 
digital and in-person channels during communication and 
collaboration activities.  
The paper is structured as follows: Section II provides an 
overview of the concepts of social energy; Section III 
introduces the concept of SOAC; Section IV provides an 
illustration of positive and negative characteristics effecting 
the SOAC of human actors; Section V presents application 
areas of the model, including challenges for implementation. 
The paper concludes in Section VI with a summary and an 
outlook for future research. 
II. 
SOCIAL ENERGY 
The concept of energy is a crucial element in 
understanding psychological well-being, yet there is no 
standard definition of energy in the body of relevant literature. 
According to Lavrusheva [9] it is often linked with vitality, 
vigor, and overall well-being. Lavrusheva has identified five 
characteristics of vitality, which are also applicable to the 
energy concept. First, vitality is subjective, reflecting the 
feeling of aliveness and energy of an individual. Therefore, 
assessing energetic or vital states depends on self-reported 
evaluations, resulting in various interpretations. Second, 
vitality is deeply tied to positivity, involving a positive 
sensation of energy [10]. This means that energy is frequently 
associated with positive experiences. Third, vitality is in an 
ongoing state of fluctuation, as it becomes depleted and 
replenished, which encourages comparison to a renewable 
resource [11], [12]. Fourth, vitality can be regulated and 
managed by individuals, which can assist in dealing 
effectively with life's challenges and improving performance 
at work [13]. Fifth, vitality includes both physical and 
psychological aspects, underscoring its comprehensive nature 
[9]. 
Klijn and colleagues [14] have also outlined four 
dimensions of “personal energy”, namely physical, emotional, 
mental and spiritual. The physical dimension pertains to 
nutrition, exercise, sleep, and overall physical health. 
Emotional energy involves positive emotions and the 
avoidance of negative emotions, contributing to feeling 
“energized”. The mental energy dimension emphasizes 
cognitive focus and maintaining a peaceful mind, similar to 
Csiksentmihalyi's flow [15]. Lastly, spiritual energy relates to 
beliefs and personal values, where feelings of meaningfulness 
lead to an energized state. 
Among the various theoretical frameworks that have been 
applied to the study of vitality, self-determination theory 
(SDT) is one that is most commonly [9]. Developed by Deci 
and Ryan in the early 1970s [10], SDT argues that individuals 
have inherent psychological needs for autonomy, competence, 
and relatedness. As explained by Ryan and Frederick [10], 
when these needs are fulfilled, individuals experience an 
increase in vitality. Autonomy involves a sense of self-
directed behavior and volition, leading to greater satisfaction, 
intrinsic motivation, and authenticity. Competence refers to 
the desire for skill development, aligning with personal values 
and interests, fostering a sense of achievement and self-
efficacy. And finally, relatedness emphasizes the importance 
of social connections and a sense of belonging, fulfilling the 
inherent need for meaningful relationships and emotional 
support. 
92
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In conclusion, the exploration of “energy” and “vitality” 
in psychological well-being reveals the multi-dimensional 
nature of these constructs and their interplay with individual 
and social factors. An aspect that is particularly interesting 
from the standpoint of social energy is the need for relatedness. 
Social interactions have long been recognized as energy-
consuming processes, as posited in the communicate bond, 
belong (CBB) theory, which is based on human energy 
management (HEM) [16]. HEM is guided by two principles: 
energy conservation (where individuals seek to minimize 
energy 
expenditure) 
and 
energy 
investment 
(where 
individuals invest energy to achieve valued goals, often with 
the intention of conserving energy in the long run) [17]. One 
of the valued goals in energy investment is the “need to belong” 
[18], which drives individuals to invest social energy in 
interactions to fulfill the desire for connection and avoid 
disconnection, ultimately resulting in feeling energized. 
One current definition of social energy, is put forward by 
Hall and Merolla who define it “as the behavioral, perceptual, 
emotional, and cognitive tasks required for engaging in social 
interactions” [19], where the level of social energy plays a 
significant role in determining the outcomes of these 
interactions. Both connecting and disconnecting socially 
demand substantial energy expenditures [20]. Interestingly, 
research has shown that individuals who feel more connected 
after a social interaction are more likely to seek solitude later 
in the same day, suggesting a need for energy recovery [20]. 
It has also been shown that repeated social interactions lead to 
the investment of more energy in relationships, resulting in 
reduced energy requirements during future interactions [21]. 
These findings support the CBB model as it maintains that 
energy recovery takes place during periods of solitude. 
Various factors influence the level of social energy 
expended during interactions. Topics of communication, 
personal interests, and characteristics of conversation partners 
all play a crucial role [20]. Interaction length also affects 
energy expenditure. 
In a separate study, Hall et al. investigated which commu-
nication media is most suitable to satisfy the need to belong 
[22]. Face-to-face interactions were found to have a primacy 
for promoting connection and avoiding disconnection. 
However, the results for video-calls were inconclusive, with 
mixed evidence for their ability to foster connecting and avoid 
disconnecting. 
In conclusion, the SOAC model, especially its focus on the 
need for relatedness, provides valuable insights into human 
energy management during social interactions. Understanding 
the dynamics of energy expenditure and recovery in social 
settings contributes to a deeper understanding of human 
behavior and well-being. 
As noted, the medium in which interaction occurs plays a 
significant role in determining the amount of social energy 
that must be expended to satisfy the need to belong (CBB) or 
the need for relatedness (SDT). The COVID-19 pandemic has 
popularized videoconferencing in unprecedented ways (both 
in terms of frequency of use and length of use). At the same 
time, there are indications that videoconferencing can be 
exhausting and often results in the opposite of feeling 
energized, culminating in the phenomenon of “Zoom fatigue”. 
Shockley et al. [23] determined that one major cause of fatigue 
lies in the way individuals present themselves through the 
camera. Self-presentation is fundamental to any form of 
interaction [24] as individuals strive to appear in a positive 
light. Self-presentation requires a high level of self-regulation 
and monitoring. Thus, it is an activity that consumes energy. 
When a person sees their own image on the screen, it leads to 
an increased use of self-evaluation [25]. Simultaneously, 
uncertainty grows, as only a small video clip is visible. Users 
continuously 
receive 
non-verbal 
cues 
that 
are 
incomprehensible due to the limited video frame. Perception 
of the images is only possible in 2D, and the other three senses 
are not directly engaged. Furthermore, reciprocal eye contact 
is not possible, affecting perception [26]. This results in 
uncertainty along with further increased use of self-
monitoring [27]. The use of the camera is tiring, but Bennett 
et al. [28] describe various ways to reduce this fatigue or even 
reverse it. Indeed, their research asserts that video 
conferencing can be a good way to satisfy the need to belong. 
Bennett and colleagues identified seven recommendations for 
reducing fatigue and increasing energy:  
 
1. Holding meetings earlier in the day can help to 
reduce fatigue, since they would be scheduled when 
employees are generally less tired, according to 
Hülsheger et al. [29]. Consequently, meetings as 
emotionally charged events [30] could even have a 
positive impact on the energy curve of the day [30]. 
2. Enhancing group cohesion helps to reduce fatigue 
by making participants feel more connected with 
each other and increasing interest in participating in 
meetings, thereby minimizing attention-demanding 
efforts and associated fatigue, as shown by Kaplan 
and Berman [31]. 
3. Muting the microphone during a meeting when not 
speaking can help to reduce attention and thereby 
fatigue, as proposed by Kaplan [32], since it 
minimizes distractions from background noise, 
lowering the mental effort required to maintain a 
quiet environment during the meeting. 
4. Turning the video camera on during a meeting can 
affect the sense of group belonging, as it helps a 
person to feel more connected with the other 
participants, which could reduce fatigue. 
5. Turning the video camera off during a meeting helps 
to reduce the number of visual stimuli on the screen, 
which could decrease fatigue. With the video 
camera turned off it helps a person to spend less time 
worrying about their appearance or what is 
happening in the background while enhancing the 
sense of group belonging. 
6. Breaks during and between video conferences are an 
effective way to reduce fatigue, according to Kaplan 
93
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[32]. These breaks provide participants with the 
opportunity to mentally disengage and switch off, 
which is of critical importance when there are no 
natural breaks occurring between meetings. 
7. Establishing group norms can reduce fatigue, as they 
eliminate uncertainties about acceptable behavior, 
thereby reducing the mental effort required by 
participants [32], [33]. Additionally, strong norms 
could enhance the sense of group belonging, helping 
to increase interest and participation in meetings, 
which could further reduce fatigue. 
 
To summarize, it can be concluded that the concept of 
social energy is a broadly researched topic that has gained new 
attention within the context of the pandemic situation and the 
massive use of digital communication channels, and has had a 
lasting impact on the way people communicate and 
collaborate with each other in both enterprise settings and 
educational settings. The ideas presented in this paper provide 
insight into the current evolution of the workplace of the 
future (often referred to as “New Work”) that is only just 
beginning. This evolution will be driven by (positive) social 
energy as it achieves an interactive and long-lasting change 
process [34]. An explanation model that makes the changes 
brought about by social energy more visible, would be a 
valuable contribution to this context of evolution and change. 
III. 
 THE CONCEPT OF THE SOCIAL ACCUMULATOR 
The main contribution of this paper is the concept of the 
SOAC, which serves as an explanation model for the 
characteristics of (intensified) digital interaction. The authors 
perceive a need for deeper understanding of the positive and 
negative effects of digital interaction in a simplified form in 
order to plan, facilitate and execute digital communication and 
other forms of direct communication in the most effective way, 
without needing to be an expert in that research field. The 
concept of the SOAC provides insight and guidance in 
achieving the right balance between traditional and digital 
communication and interaction in an increasingly digital 
world. The SOAC concept is also very relevant, offering 
valuable contributions in the discussion about the future 
workplace [35] and post pandemic education models [36]. 
The SOAC builds on the analogy of an electric accumu-
lator that stores electric energy, transformed to the aspect of 
interaction between human actors. Recharging activities are 
providing an energizing element and feel good for the humans 
interacting with each other. However, there are also draining 
activities which are perceived by the human actors as taking 
energy from them. These positive/negative or charging/drain-
ing aspects with the perceived social or personal energy have 
also been identified by other models, as elaborated in Section 
II, but the SOAC incorporates those observations and bundles 
them together by using a metaphor that is easy to understand 
for non-experts, as it draws from our everyday experiences 
with rechargeable batteries. This approach of connecting to 
everyday experience is also supported by [37] who 
investigated the appropriateness of a battery shaped icon 
scales to represent energy levels. Figure 1 illustrates the 
concept of a SOAC. 
 
 
Figure 1. The social accumulator (SOAC) concept with examples of 
charging and discharging aspects. 
 
The term social accumulator is not a common term, 
although it is briefly mentioned over ten years ago in [38], 
albeit within a very different context, namely the social status 
of youth.  
A related concept to the SOAC is the term “social battery”, 
which is not a medical concept, but rather a “metaphor for 
explaining how much energy a person has for socializing” 
[39]. This metaphor relates to the SOAC in terms of 
conceptualizing the limited capacity that each individual has 
for engaging with others (“socializing”). This limited capacity 
depends on individual aspects, such as personality (e.g., being 
more introverted or more extroverted), as well as social 
interaction (which can lead to feeling either drained or 
recharged, depending on one's personality) [39], [40]. In 
addition, a number of aspects have been identified that deplete 
the social battery (for instance, a person's social network, the 
type of interaction, the size of the group, to name a few), but 
there is no mention of the digital channel or digital tools as a 
potential cause for depletion. Therefore, the social battery 
concept differs from the concept of the SOAC, which has a 
special focus on digital channels and the use of digital tools, 
in order to effectively balance draining and charging aspects. 
The concept of a social battery is mostly used by youth in the 
generation Z, and is often related to social media settings [40]. 
Research is still lacking on the term and concept, but it is 
interesting to note that there is an awareness about limited 
capacity, including charging and discharging aspects of social 
interaction, especially in younger generations that might even 
lead to consequences like social burnout [41]. Relating to the 
observations of social energy in Section II, there are similar 
characteristics found in a number of models. The authors 
interpret these similarities to mean that the existence of social 
energy can be viewed as a valuable and finite resource, a 
viewpoint common in younger generations who are intuitively 
aware of both benefits and limitations as they monitor their 
interactions more or less closely. Digital technologies 
(especially in the domain of social media) may amplify these 
94
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

effects, which contributes to the awareness and the potential 
negative effects (e.g., affecting the “need to belong” [18], both 
in a positive or a negative way). 
For the sake of completeness, it should be noted, that the 
term social battery is misleading in terms of the analogy to the 
technical concept of a battery: an ordinary battery cannot be 
recharged without damaging it, whereas an accumulator can 
be recharged multiple times. The authors therefore prefer to 
use the term accumulator. 
 Furthermore, the authors are convinced that the metaphor 
of a battery charging or discharging enables the intuitive 
perception of comparison with communication or cooperation 
activities. In terms of digital interaction, it is important to 
consider the general observation that a direct conversation 
between human actors ("face to face") is perceived as richer 
and more satisfying than a digital interaction. Therefore, the 
SOAC concept identifies in-person types of interactions as 
positive (charging) activities, while extensive digital 
interactions are identified as negative (discharging) activities, 
in line with the concept of zoom fatigue. 
Based on these observations the concept of a SOAC is 
“charged” in (most) direct face-to-face interactions of human 
users and “discharged” in (many) digital interactions. Recent 
research [42] has found that a low level of interaction between 
participants in a digital domain might also lead to the 
perception of fatigue. However, the involvement of all 
stakeholders in a digital communication is important, which 
can be easily overlooked in this context. When balanced 
correctly a viable amount of social energy is available for the 
human user, and the interaction is perceived as sufficient. If 
the level drops below a certain level, this becomes a 
(perceived) problem, affecting the well-being of the user, 
especially if the situation continues over a longer timeframe 
(which explains observations from the longer COVID19 
periods). If the level substantially exceeds the average energy 
level, then the interaction is perceived as a valuable interaction 
(e.g., users refer to a good chat as being inspirational). If this 
excessive level situation occurs more often, then the context 
of the interaction is positively perceived (e.g., an inspirational 
workplace or motivating group). Figure 2 illustrates the 
process on a schematic level. 
It is important to note that neither digital nor direct 
interaction are inherently negative (discharging) or positive 
(charging), but that with the right balance or orchestration, 
both charging and discharging effects are important for a 
functioning 
communication 
relationship 
between 
the 
participants. In the context of active management of social 
energy of individuals and groups, it is important to monitor 
and influence the levels in such a way that they remain above 
the lower threshold and at times exceed the higher threshold 
in order to achieve "inspirational peaks" in individual or group 
collaboration. Due to the greater importance of digital 
interaction and the limitations of digital channels in terms of 
richness for all senses, social energy management in this area 
is even more important. In this case, awareness of the SOAC 
charging level for individuals or groups can be used as a 
management objective. 
The level of social energy available to human actors has a 
strong influence on the ability to create and share knowledge, 
and could also affect levels of creativity and innovation [40], 
thereby resulting in a strong impact on knowledge intensive 
activities (e.g., in companies or in educational institutions).  
The 
relationship 
between 
social 
energy 
and 
communication is not adequately defined and described only 
informally in the literature [43]. In the context of this paper, 
social energy is defined as the individual and subjectively 
perceived energy level of a human actor in terms of their 
capability or willingness to participate in or contribute to a 
physical or digital conversation.  
Figure 2. Changes in the SOAC charging stage influenced by direct interactions and digital interactions over time. 
95
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As discussed in Section II, the concept of social energy has 
multiple dimensions, leading to many different effects. Figure 
3 presents the most important dimensions of social energy, 
personal energy, and the effects of digital communication. A 
special emphasis is placed upon digital communication, which 
is influenced by the other two dimensions. For example, the 
level of personal energy at a specific time of day may impact 
the perceived energy level of the SOAC (which might not 
relate to the digital communication channel, but rather to 
personal circumstances). An assessment of the individual 
SOAC level should also consider other dimensions as 
contextual parameters. 
As an immediate result of the charging and discharging 
effects, social energy has a strong impact on knowledge 
related activities, such as knowledge creation, knowledge 
sharing, knowledge use and knowledge transfer. Social energy 
changes over time and even during a conversation. Parallel to 
this, the management of social energy is not usually the main 
focus of the interacting users, and consequently, may not be 
noticed early enough to intervene before the primary activity 
is harmed or influenced. 
The awareness created by the SOAC model enables 
reflection on a person’s communication and collaboration 
situation, making it possible for the actor to take appropriate 
and effective action. 
 
 
Figure 3. The different influences on charging and discharging  
effects of SOAC, with an emphasis on the effects of digital channels  
 
Assessing the current situation provides a starting point in 
becoming more aware of the SOAC charging state, and with 
reflection can lead to a change of the communication mode 
(e.g., from digital interaction to direct interaction). Possible 
next steps taken by a human actor could involve tracking 
social energy over time to learn more about positive and 
negative aspects on digital interaction from their individual 
perspective.  
The intent of the authors is to use this model to explain the 
dichotomy of direct vs. digital communication. The focus is 
placed on the channel and its methods and characteristics. It is 
clear that human interaction is also largely influenced by the 
topic of the communication, along with the opinions and 
general feelings of human actors. These aspects have positive 
and negative aspects, requiring specific and appropriate 
responses (e.g., conflict resolution). However, these responses 
are not dealt with in detail within this paper. 
IV. 
CHARGING AND DISCHARGING THE SOAC 
The aspects and characteristics of both digital and direct 
communication channels can be considered in terms of their 
charging effects (adding social energy to the SOAC) and the 
discharging effects (taking social energy from the SOAC), 
which will also be a subject for detailed future research. Some 
general observations regarding “Zoom fatigue” have already 
been illustrated in Section II. In order to examine the effects 
on digital channels and direct interaction in greater detail, 
some examples of both categories will be described in the 
following subsections. 
A. Positive aspects charging the SOAC 
To illustrate the positive (charging) aspects that increase 
social energy some examples are described below in more 
detail: 
 
1. A fruitful conversation: between two human actors 
that evolves into interesting and sometimes 
unexpected results is a good example of a charging 
activity. Very often it is not only the exchange of 
information, but the overall situation, including 
gestures and mutual empathy that makes a positive 
impact. As an important side effect psychological 
safety is created in such situations.  
2. An informal talk: at a coffee corner or similar place 
is a form of latent communication that happens as a 
by-product of another activity (e.g., taking a coffee). 
This often leads to the exchange of interesting 
information, knowledge sharing and even the 
creation of new knowledge stimulated by the situ-
ation. The main characteristic is spontaneity that it is 
unplanned, but not unlikely. These events happen 
less frequently in digital interactions. A possible 
explanation for this could be that interactions in 
digital environments are less frequent and less 
original.  
3. A team experience: almost always requires a pre-
sence setting to allow for the emergence of team 
spirit while working on a common goal or being 
submerged in a joint activity. Very often these 
activities serve as trust building entities for new 
groups or are reassessing mutual trust levels for an 
existing team charging the SOACs of the participants. 
Such settings can create transparency within the 
group as an important side-effect that fuels the 
positive perception of the group-members.  
Personal
Energy
Social
Energy
Effects of 
Digital Channels
Causes for SOAC 
Charging/Discharging
96
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

4. A collaborative activity: working together within the 
same time and space toward a common aim can 
contribute to the sense of belonging and might even 
stimulate a mutual learning from the observations 
and activities of the people involved. The joint goal 
and making contributions to it provides opportunities 
for charging effects for the SOAC. When working 
together on the same physical object (e.g., a shared 
physical whiteboard or similar collaboration space) 
the perception of joint work might also be intensified. 
B. Negative aspects discharging the SOAC 
To illustrate the negative (discharging) aspects that 
decrease social energy some examples are described below in 
more detail: 
 
1. A high frequency and/or long duration of digital 
interactions: might be considered as tiring to the 
human actors. This fact has been reported in a 
number of studies and it is important to clarify that 
this could also occur in situations in which only one 
of the human actors is under such a high load of 
digital interaction leading to a communication 
setting which is perceived very different by the 
participants (e.g., a team lead that is connecting to its 
peers in a 1:1 session). 
2. Few interactions during a digital interaction: are 
another impact factor that is adding cognitive load to 
the human user, especially if the video setting is 
static, which requires additional effort for the human 
brain to remain focused. When presentation settings 
are transferred 1:1 from an in-person setting, they are 
often perceived as more demanding in the digital 
communication and take more time or include more 
interactions to retain the attention of the audience.  
3. The perception of constant availability: for human 
actors also adds to the perceived stress level. The 
lowered barrier of getting in contact with the other 
participants in a synchronous interaction might 
impact the current working process. The cultural 
assumption within the organization that everyone is 
expected to be almost always available and instantly 
can lead to less efficiency in the working tasks and a 
high level of engagement at the same time. 
4. An imbalance of the presence for different users: 
When different means of participating in the digital 
communication are used with different levels of 
channel richness (e.g., video on/off, different audio 
quality) the perception of direct engagement and 
involvement might vary among the users, leading to 
a discharging effect on human users, independent of 
their role in the setting (active/passive). It is a 
challenging situation for presenters if they cannot 
“perceive” their audience because the cameras are 
turned off and the level of interaction is limited. 
V. POTENTIAL APPLICATION AREAS OF SOAC 
In this section potential application areas for the SOAC 
will be explained in detail. It is interesting to note that the 
SOAC can serve different purposes in diverse application 
areas. From a knowledge management perspective, the 
charging and discharging aspects of the SOAC are helpful to 
identify barriers in the related fields of knowledge (co)-
creation, knowledge sharing and knowledge use among the 
different actors in the application settings that are described 
below. The concept of the SOAC can also contribute to 
achieving the right balance of in-person activities and online 
activities in the post-pandemic era, in which almost all sectors 
are reconfiguring their mode of operation in order to anticipate 
the experience from the past two years, along with the 
challenges and expectations for the future of the new 
work(place) [44].  
A. The context of higher education  
The effects of the COVID19 pandemic and the intensified 
use of distant teaching has transformed how higher education 
of the future is seen by students and lecturers alike. Initial 
studies after the pandemic show that the fast transition to 
distant teaching had a massive impact, as [43] reported for the 
medical domain. Although focused on a specific sector, the 
results could be similar in other areas, especially those where 
more intensive communication and collaboration is as 
important as experience and applicable knowledge for 
(complex and diverse) problems. Learning from these 
experiences is important not only to be better prepared for 
similar situations in the future, but also to strike a balance 
between face-to-face and distance learning (sometimes 
referred to as hybrid learning) in academic institutions. 
Due to those experiences higher education institutions 
(HEI) will have to reflect on how to modernize the education 
in post-pandemic age with a mixture of in-person and distance 
teaching activities. It is very likely that even education pro-
grams that in the past have relied solely on in-person teaching 
will (have to) include some form of distance learning elements 
into their curricula, also due to expectations of Generation Z 
[45]. Even hybrid settings where in-person teaching and 
distance teaching occur simultaneously might be a valid 
scenario for the future.  
It is obvious, that some topics are more suitable for 
distance teaching than others (e.g., labs and exercises), yet 
some students will favor digital interactions, while others will 
prefer a more direct interaction. Balancing those two forms of 
interaction between lecturer and students in the right way (in 
terms of didactic requirements and individual preferences), 
will retain a competitive advantage for an HEI in a market that 
is constantly becoming more competitive and globalized, due 
to extension into the digital domain by market participants 
(e.g., Coursera, Udacity and others). Additionally, a 
generation issue is currently felt in this area as the behavior 
and expectations of lecturers (often members of Generation X 
or Y) and students (often members of Generation Z) differ 
substantially, as [46] reported.  
97
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

From a post-pandemic perspective, it is interesting to 
recognize the initial movement away from online teaching and 
the return to in-person teaching, on the student side as well as 
on the lecturers/HEI side. With the model of the SOAC in 
mind, this shift can be explained by a reaction on the number 
of discharging effects given the massive use of digital 
channels that needed to be compensated by social interactions 
(charging the SOAC). For some groups this effect has already 
been mitigated, since the positive aspects of distance learning, 
such as time and location independence gained focus again, 
which has led to requesting more digital channels. From a 
SOAC perspective, this development can be explained in a 
fully recharged state (by direct interaction) that provides 
enough energy for a set of digital interactions. In the long-term, 
it will be important for HEI to understand the duality of in-
person and online teaching, and to use both modes in a 
systematic and planned ways that helps lecturers and learners 
to plan the different activities in the most efficient way. The 
SOAC 
model 
might 
support 
this 
development 
of 
understanding in this context as a balancing device. Otherwise 
important experiences and knowledge gains within the HEI 
are in danger to be lost as initiatives of individuals may not be 
valued and recognized, and investments in technology might 
not be used as planned, which will prevent their maintenance 
and iterative development. 
The SOAC helps instructors to derive a measurement 
system during planning and execution of their teaching to find 
the right mix of direct and digital interaction. For students 
SOAC can function as a tool for self-reflection on individual 
learning preferences, in terms of their preferred form of 
communication, helping them to adapt accordingly by 
becoming aware of the advantages and drawbacks of digital 
interaction.  
B. The context of professional trainings 
For professional training in workplace settings and as part 
of lifelong learning, the results of the COVID19 pandemic 
revealed to companies and trainers that digital training can be 
effective and efficient. The requirement of traveling to a 
training became less of a demand and the integration into 
everyday work schedules was much easier for digital training, 
leading to a higher acceptance rate for training in general and 
budget saving aspects (no travel and accommodation costs). 
However, the focus on the training itself in an in-person 
training, along with the direct and valuable exchange between 
participants and towards the trainer, had been assigned a new 
value due to the drawbacks of digital trainings. Overall, it can 
be expected that the market for professional trainings will 
change, due to the results of the pandemic. Yet it still remains 
to be seen what exactly the long-term effects will be.  
The SOAC can be helpful in two distinct ways. First, in 
many organizations, training is still understood as mostly a 
passive transmission of knowledge, with the focus primarily 
on content. Aspects of relationship building and interaction 
are often neglected in this approach. In this context, the SOAC 
can assist by creating an awareness of the social aspects of 
learning, emphasizing the importance of collaboration, 
communication, and engagement in the learning process.  
Second, the SOAC can help trainers design interaction 
with the participants more effectively by mixing direct and 
digital interactions so that participants receive optimal benefit 
from the training. Being aware of the characteristics of the 
charging and discharging effects helps to establish a level of 
social interaction that is common in a direct training, and also 
in a digital setting. The SOAC is not merely another plea for 
the well-known concept of blended learning, but rather goes a 
level deeper. It recognizes that the different mix of various 
learning formats, such as online training, peer-learning, 
classroom training, self-study, and more, serves not only the 
design of the content level of the learning process, but also the 
social energy levels. Unlike traditional models that primarily 
focus on content, the SOAC emphasizes a more holistic 
approach. In the SOAC model, content learning objectives are 
supplemented by "social energy objectives." This shift 
recognizes the importance of human interaction, collaboration, 
and engagement as essential elements of the learning 
experience. Rather than simply transferring information, the 
emphasis is on creating a dynamic and interactive learning 
environment where participants can energize and motivate 
each other. 
SOAC helps to incorporate education in professional job 
settings, achieving a match to the individual requirements, 
thereby providing a framework for the trainer to derive and 
monitor the charging state of the participants. The concepts of 
SOAC can also be combined with more agile approaches in 
delivering the teaching practices. By emphasizing the human 
and interactive dimensions of training, the SOAC framework 
enables a more effective, responsive, and learner-centered 
approach, which is essential in the ever-evolving landscape of 
professional learning  
C. The context of companies and digital business 
The third application area highlighting the benefits of 
SOAC is the digitization process within companies, which 
have also been accelerated by the pandemic situation. Here, 
the concept of “New Work” [46][47] became a reality through 
the perception and evolving work models of many 
organizations, who had previously resisted such changes. This 
significant and ongoing change in the organization of 
companies often leads to more distributed or even virtualized 
companies, especially in the IT-domain. While it is a common 
pattern in northern European countries, this is relatively new 
in the DACH area.  
In the post-pandemic context in 2023 a re-evaluation of 
the office and mobile work (home office) environment is 
being carried out in many organizations, often moving 
towards one of the extremes: either (fully) back to the office 
or (fully) remote work. Some initial studies, such as [49] [35] 
indicate that there are different perspectives, including the 
organization, the employer, and also the regulatory side with 
laws and rules that create a framework. Apart from setting up 
the rules [49] this perspective emphasizes the need to 
98
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

communicate an organizational decision to move back to the 
office, which represents at least one aspect where the SOAC 
model can be useful as an explanation model (e.g., to (re)build 
a team spirit within an otherwise distributed team).  
The influence of the pandemic can also have future 
impacts on the workplace based on the experiences and 
expectations of the new workforce (Generation Z), who 
demand more remote work possibilities wherever possible, 
addressing their need for autonomy and freedom. This means 
the attractiveness of the workplace will also be measured in 
the dimension of flexibility between working remotely and 
on-site, which directly relates to direct and digital 
communication channels and the effects on the SOAC. Some 
sectors will be more affected by this movement than others; 
the IT-sector might be a good example as it is an employee-
market in the DACH-region (there is more demand than 
supply for employees) and since the work context is already 
digital and predominantly digitized. 
From a managerial point of view this change creates new 
challenges for managing teams and projects due to the fact of 
(perceived) fewer social interactions. From the perspective of 
digital leadership, these aspects were already being discussed 
even before the pandemic. Digital leadership refers to both the 
restructuring of organizational and infrastructural frameworks, 
as well as the design of new working methods and styles that 
positively embrace digital transformation. Consequently, it 
affects both corporate management (including both strategic 
and operational levels), and personnel leadership. Similar to 
professional trainings, the focus in many organizations has 
been less on social aspects and more on technical, strategic, 
and organizational factors. 
Many studies have found that only a few leaders possess 
the competencies of a digital leader. In a rapidly changing 
digital landscape, leadership must go beyond merely under-
standing technology; it requires a blend of strategic insight, 
adaptability, and a keen awareness of the human factors that 
drive innovation and change. 
In this context, the SOAC can create an easily 
understandable framework to shift the awareness towards the 
social aspects of interaction. By placing an emphasis on the 
relational and interactive elements of leadership, it 
complements the technical and strategic components. The 
SOAC underscores the importance of empathy, collaboration, 
and social engagement in leading a modern organization, 
particularly in an era where digital transformation is 
paramount. 
The SOAC as a managerial concept will help managers 
and team leaders to better understand the needs of their 
colleagues and team mates, and to act according to their 
(individual) needs, since they are able to sense and classify the 
charging and discharging activities during the digital and 
direct interactions. For employees the SOAC functions as a 
model that helps them to become aware and to voice their 
needs in terms of communication and interaction over the 
various channels. 
Monitoring the social energy of the members of a group 
has always been an important task for leaders. However, in a 
hybrid working environment with a large amount of digital 
interaction it will be more important to monitor the social 
energy of the team members and to recharge their SOACs 
early enough to prevent “outages” that might affect team 
motivation and performance. The concept of SOAC can help 
to manage team social energy more actively. 
D. Challenges for the application of SOAC 
Applying the mental model of a SOAC has its challenges, 
which are a subject for future research. Some of the foreseen 
challenges are briefly mentioned in order to provide some 
hints for the application in the settings described above. 
It will be important to retain the simplicity of the concept 
and to stay as close to the accumulator metaphor as possible 
in order to make application simple and intuitive for the 
human actors in the communication process. The notion of the 
social battery that is familiar to the younger generation might 
help to introduce the concept.  
Likewise, it will be important and challenging to make the 
current social energy visible for the individual and for the 
group in order to create awareness and the opportunity to 
appropriately act on critical states of the SOAC. A promising 
approach for teams could be the use of retrospectives as a 
method from the agile software development for groups [50]. 
An adapted and simplified version might even work for the 
individual as a form of self-retrospective that can be mapped 
to the communication events in the recent period to plot the 
social energy levels over time. Integration in already 
established routines will be a key factor in this context, and 
feedback activities of all sorts might be a promising candidate 
for integrating SOAC. 
Finally, charging and discharging factors will overlay each 
other and communication setting (in-person or digital) might 
not be directly related to the social energy level or being 
conscious for the human users in every situation. Therefore, 
the identification of relevant communication events and their 
contribution to the social energy level in a precise way is going 
to be another challenge. As indicated in Figure 3, personal 
energy and social energy may also influence the SOAC 
concept as it focusses on digital versus direct communication 
and collaboration; therefore, these aspects should be 
considered as contextual factors. Furthermore, the capacity 
and the loading/unloading events are highly individual and 
subjective by nature, which makes a comparison of SOACs of 
different persons challenging, the observation of an individual 
SOAC charging state over time might be more promising. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE RESEARCH 
The main contribution of this paper is the introduction of 
the SOAC as a mental concept that serves as a simple 
explanation model depicting the social energy level of an 
individual or a group, along with the perceived differences of 
direct and digital interactions. The SOAC concept supports 
understanding and the interplay between the different forms 
of interaction and thus enables the improvement of the overall 
interaction between human users, as both forms are and 
99
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

continue to be present in our daily professional life. In 
addition, the paper helps to identify various individual aspects 
that need to be considered when planning and orchestrating 
the various forms of interaction. This is exemplified by using 
application examples from three different fields. The 
embedding of the concept in the field of social energy clarifies 
the current state of the art in this domain and explains the 
contribution of the SOAC concept with its focus on the 
alternation between direct and digital communication and 
collaboration.  
A limitation of the research is the current focus on the 
conceptual level. There is a lack of empirical data, the 
collection of which is the subject of further research in the 
various usage scenarios mentioned above. This next step will 
also serve to gather responses from the human actors in the 
interaction process regarding the understanding and 
usefulness of the mental model of a SOAC. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the Tyrolean Science 
Fund (“Tiroler Wissenschaftsförderung”), which supported 
this research under grant number F.33280/6-202 and the 
colleagues and reviewers which helped to improve it. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Böhm, ‘The Social Accumulator (SOAC) An 
explanation model for digital interaction among human 
actors’, Proc. EKNOW 2022 - Fourteenth Int. Conf. Inf. 
Process Knowl. Manag., pp. 69–74, 2022. 
[2] 
G. Fauville, M. Luo, A. C. Muller Queiroz, J. N. 
Bailenson, and J. Hancock, ‘Zoom Exhaustion & 
Fatigue Scale’, Social Science Research Network, 
Rochester, NY, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3786329, 
Feb. 2021. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3786329. 
[3] 
J. Rump and M. Brandt, ‘Zoom-Fatigue’. Accessed: 
Mar. 27, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.ibe-
ludwigshafen.de/zoom_fatigue/ 
[4] 
N. Döring, Social Psychology of the Internet. The 
importance of the Internet for communication 
processes, identities, social relations and groups., 2nd 
ed. Göttingen Bern: Hogrefe Verlag, 2003. 
[5] 
J. Walther, ‘The Effect of Feedback on Identity Shift’, 
Comput.-Mediat. Commun. Media Psychol., vol. Vol. 
14, no. Issue 1, pp. 1–26, 2011. 
[6] 
J. Orlosky et al., ‘Telelife: The Future of Remote 
Living’, ArXiv210702965 Cs, Jul. 2021, Accessed: Jul. 
10, 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.02965 
[7] 
K. Ishii, M. M. Lyons, and S. A. Carr, ‘Revisiting 
media richness theory for today and future’, Hum. 
Behav. Emerg. Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 124–131, 
2019, doi: 10.1002/hbe2.138. 
[8] 
A. M. Johnson and A. L. Lederer, ‘The Effect of 
Communication Frequency and Channel Richness on 
the Convergence Between Chief Executive and Chief 
Information Officers’, J. Manag. Inf. Syst., vol. 22, no. 
2, 
pp. 
227–252, 
Nov. 
2005, 
doi: 
10.1080/07421222.2005.11045842. 
[9] 
O. Lavrusheva, ‘The concept of vitality. Review of the 
vitality-related research domain’, New Ideas Psychol., 
vol. 
56, 
p. 
100752, 
Jan. 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.newideapsych.2019.100752. 
[10] R. M. Ryan and C. Frederick, ‘On energy, personality, 
and health: Subjective vitality as a dynamic reflection 
of well-being’, J. Pers., vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 529–565, 
1997, doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1997.tb00326.x. 
[11] A. Rozanski, J. A. Blumenthal, K. W. Davidson, P. G. 
Saab, and L. Kubzansky, ‘The epidemiology, 
pathophysiology, and management of psychosocial risk 
factors in cardiac practice: the emerging field of 
behavioral cardiology’, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 45, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
637–651, 
Mar. 
2005, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2004.12.005. 
[12] G. A. Nix, R. M. Ryan, J. B. Manly, and E. L. Deci, 
‘Revitalization through self-regulation: The effects of 
autonomous and controlled motivation on happiness 
and vitality’, J. Exp. Soc. Psychol., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 
266–284, 1999, doi: 10.1006/jesp.1999.1382. 
[13] P. Dubreuil, J. Forest, and F. Courcy, ‘From strengths 
use to work performance: The role of harmonious 
passion, subjective vitality and concentration’, J. Posit. 
Psychol., vol. 9, pp. 1–15, Apr. 2014, doi: 
10.1080/17439760.2014.898318. 
[14] A. Klijn, M. Tims, E. Lysova, and S. Khapova, 
‘Personal Energy at Work: A Systematic Review’, 
Sustainability, vol. 13, p. 13490, Dec. 2021, doi: 
10.3390/su132313490. 
[15] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Beyond boredom and anxiety, 1st 
ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1975. 
[16] J. A. Hall and D. C. Davis, ‘Proposing the 
Communicate Bond Belong Theory: Evolutionary 
Intersections 
With 
Episodic 
Interpersonal 
Communication’, Commun. Theory, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 
21–47, 2017, doi: 10.1111/comt.12106. 
[17] D. C. Davis, ‘Development and initial tests of a human 
energy management theory of communication - 
ProQuest’. Accessed: Jul. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.proquest.com/openview/871024fddd3185
b82078b958050d1e5d/1?pq-
origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y 
[18] R. F. Baumeister and M. R. Leary, ‘The need to belong: 
desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental 
human motivation’, Psychol. Bull., vol. 117, no. 3, pp. 
497–529, May 1995. 
[19] J. A. Hall and A. J. Merolla, ‘Connecting Everyday 
Talk and Time Alone to Global Well-Being’, Hum. 
Commun. Res., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 86–111, Jan. 2020, 
doi: 10.1093/hcr/hqz014. 
[20] J. A. Hall, ‘Energy, Episode, and Relationship: A Test 
of Communicate Bond Belong Theory’, Commun. Q., 
vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 380–402, Aug. 2018, doi: 
10.1080/01463373.2017.1411377. 
100
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[21] J. Dominguez, S. Bowman, J. A. Hall, and A. Merolla, 
‘Working hard to make a good impression: the 
relational consequences of effortful self-presentation’, 
Commun. Res. Rep., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 276–285, Oct. 
2020, doi: 10.1080/08824096.2020.1846511. 
[22] J. A. Hall, N. Pennington, and A. J. Merolla, ‘Which 
mediated social interactions satisfy the need to belong?’, 
J. Comput.-Mediat. Commun., vol. 28, no. 1, p. 
zmac026, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1093/jcmc/zmac026. 
[23] K. M. Shockley, M. A. Clark, H. Dodd, and E. B. King, 
‘Work-Family 
Strategies 
During 
COVID-19: 
Examining Gender Dynamics Among Dual-Earner 
Couples With Young Children’, J. Appl. Psychol., no. 
106(1), 
pp. 
15–28, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000857. 
[24] A. C. Klotz, W. He, K. C. Yam, M. C. Bolino, W. Wei, 
and L. Houston III, ‘Good actors but bad apples: 
Deviant consequences of daily impression management 
at work’, J. Appl. Psychol., vol. 103, no. 10, pp. 1145–
1154, 2018, doi: 10.1037/apl0000335. 
[25] A. L. Gonzales and J. T. Hancock, ‘Mirror, Mirror on 
my Facebook Wall: Effects of Exposure to Facebook 
on Self-Esteem’, Cyberpsychology Behav. Soc. Netw., 
vol. 14, no. 1–2, pp. 79–83, Jan. 2011, doi: 
10.1089/cyber.2009.0411. 
[26] E. Berninger-Schäfer, Online Coaching. Wiesbaden: 
Springer Fachmedien, 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-
39133-1. 
[27] J. N. Bailenson, ‘Nonverbal Overload: A Theoretical 
Argument for the Causes of Zoom Fatigue’, Technol. 
Mind Behav., vol. 2, no. 1, Feb. 2021, doi: 
10.1037/tmb0000030. 
[28] A. A. Bennett, E. D. Campion, K. R. Keeler, and S. K. 
Keener, ‘Videoconference fatigue? Exploring changes 
in fatigue after videoconference meetings during 
COVID-19.’, J. Appl. Psychol., vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 
330–344, Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1037/apl0000906. 
[29] U. R. Hülsheger, ‘From dawn till dusk: Shedding light 
on the recovery process by investigating daily change 
patterns in fatigue.’, J. Appl. Psychol., vol. 101, no. 6, 
pp. 905–914, 2016, doi: 10.1037/apl0000104. 
[30] S. G. Rogelberg, J. A. Allen, L. Shanock, C. Scott, and 
M. Shuffler, ‘Employee satisfaction with meetings: A 
contemporary facet of job satisfaction’, Hum. Resour. 
Manage., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 149–172, Mar. 2010, doi: 
10.1002/hrm.20339. 
[31] S. Kaplan and M. G. Berman, ‘Directed Attention as a 
Common Resource for Executive Functioning and Self-
Regulation’, Perspect. Psychol. Sci., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 
43–57, Jan. 2010, doi: 10.1177/1745691609356784. 
[32] S. Kaplan, ‘The restorative benefits of nature: Toward 
an integrative framework’, J. Environ. Psychol., vol. 15, 
no. 3, pp. 169–182, Sep. 1995, doi: 10.1016/0272-
4944(95)90001-2. 
[33] J. R. Hackman, ‘Group influences on individuals in 
organizations’, in Handbook of industrial and 
organizational psychology, Vol. 3, 2nd ed, Palo Alto, 
CA, US: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1992, pp. 
199–267. 
[34] U. Brandes, Social Energy. Campus Verlag, 2018. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.campus.de/buecher-
campus-verlag/business/fuehrung/social_energy-
10867.html 
[35] D. Smite, N. B. Moe, J. Hildrum, J. G. Huerta, and D. 
Mendez, ‘Work-From-Home is Here to Stay: Call for 
Flexibility 
in 
Post-Pandemic 
Work 
Policies’, 
ArXiv220311136 Cs, Mar. 2022, Accessed: Apr. 29, 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11136 
[36] L. Bayerlein, M. T. Hora, B. A. Dean, and S. Perkiss, 
‘Developing skills in higher education for post-
pandemic work’, Labour Ind., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 418–
429, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1080/10301763.2021.1966292. 
[37] O. Weigelt et al., ‘Time to recharge batteries – 
development and validation of a pictorial scale of 
human energy’, Eur. J. Work Organ. Psychol., vol. 31, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
781–798, 
Sep. 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1080/1359432X.2022.2050218. 
[38] D. V. Lepeshev and A. N. Teslenko, ‘Social status of 
scientific activity in the minds of the youth of 
Kazakhstani’, Eur. Sci. J. ESJ, vol. 10, no. 17, Art. no. 
17, Jun. 2014, doi: 10.19044/esj.2014.v10n17p%p. 
[39] ‘Social battery: What it is and how to recharge it’. 
Accessed: 
Jul. 
25, 
2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/social-
battery 
[40] ‘7 Ways to Recharge When You’re Feeling Drained of 
Social Energy’, Andy Mort. Accessed: Apr. 29, 2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.andymort.com/social-energy/ 
[41] ‘How to Take Care of Your “Social Battery” - 
Preventing Social Burnout’. Accessed: Jul. 25, 2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.mindtools.com/at5m4h1/social-battery 
[42] N. Nurmi and S. Pakarinen, ‘Virtual meeting fatigue: 
Exploring the impact of virtual meetings on cognitive 
performance and active versus passive fatigue.’, J. 
Occup. 
Health 
Psychol., 
Oct. 
2023, 
doi: 
10.1037/ocp0000362. 
[43] B. Vaca-Cartagena, E. Quishpe, H. Ulloa, and P. 
Estévez, ‘Differences in medical education before, 
during, and in the post-peak period of the COVID-19 
pandemic—exploring 
senior 
medical 
students’ 
attitudes’, BMC Med. Educ., vol. 23, Jul. 2023, doi: 
10.1186/s12909-023-04489-6. 
[44] J. Kamis, Z. Rahim, Y. Yusoff, N. A. Husin, and R. 
Yuliviona, ‘A Review on Hybrid Work and Work 
Performance During Post-Pandemic’, KnE Soc. Sci., Jul. 
2023, doi: 10.18502/kss.v8i13.13756. 
[45] M. Kumar and P. Mamgain, ‘Generation‐Z Student 
Video‐Based Learning Pedagogy Preference and 
101
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Teaching Challenges’, 2023, pp. 155–167. doi: 
10.1002/9781119867647.ch9. 
[46] W. Elshami, M. Taha, M. E. Abdalla, M. Abuzaid, and 
S. Kawas, ‘Bridging the Gap in Online Learning 
Anxiety Generation X teaching Millennial and Z 
generations’, Sultan Qaboos Univ. Med. J., vol. 21, Apr. 
2021, doi: 10.18295/squmj.4.2021.040. 
[47] R. C. Barnett, ‘A New Work-Life Model for the 
Twenty-First Century’, Ann. Am. Acad. Pol. Soc. Sci., 
vol. 562, no. 1, pp. 143–158, Mar. 1999, doi: 
10.1177/000271629956200110. 
[48] M. Helmold, ‘Culture Change Towards New Work 
Concepts’, in New Work, Transformational and Virtual 
Leadership: Lessons from COVID-19 and Other Crises, 
M. Helmold, Ed., in Management for Professionals. , 
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 45–
54. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-63315-8_4. 
[49] J. Koenig, ‘Home Office: Before, During and after 
Corona’, Aug. 2022. 
[50] Y. Andriyani, R. Hoda, and R. Amor, ‘Reflection in 
Agile Retrospectives’, in Agile Processes in Software 
Engineering 
and 
Extreme 
Programming, 
H. 
Baumeister, H. Lichter, and M. Riebisch, Eds., in 
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing. 
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 3–
19. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-57633-6_1. 
 
 
 
102
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

