Assisting the Detection of Spatio-Temporal Patterns in Temporally Transformed 
Map Animation 
Salla Multimäki and Paula Ahonen-Rainio 
Dept. of Real Estate, Planning and Geoinformatics 
Aalto University, School of Engineering 
Finland 
e-mail: salla.multimaki@aalto.fi, paula.ahonen@aalto.fi 
 
 
Abstract— Animated maps are widely used in visualizing the 
temporal aspect of geographical data, even though their 
effectiveness depends on multiple factors and is far from 
obvious. Especially when the temporal structure of a dataset is 
irregular, new methods for exploratory analysis are required. 
This paper presents a novel method to manipulate map 
animations by transforming the temporal dimension so that 
events are located in equal intervals into a time period. This 
temporal transformation applies the idea of spatial equal 
density transformation, which is familiar from cartography, in 
order to ease the cognitive load on a user caused by the temporal 
congestion of the dataset. A user test with a transformed 
animation of two different datasets indicated that the 
transformed animation is useful in revealing spatio-temporal 
patterns, which could not be detected from an original, 
untransformed animation. The transformed animations were 
found insightful and useful by the test users. These findings 
indicate that a temporally transformed animation would be a 
useful addition to a toolbox for exploratory analysis of spatio-
temporal data.   
Keywords-map 
animation; 
cognitive 
load; 
temporal 
transformation; equal density; user testing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is extending the previous study of temporal 
transformation [1] with more thorough review of cognitive 
load and a task definition of exploratory analysis.  
A map animation is a common method for visualizing 
spatio-temporal information. The reason for this is simple: an 
animated map follows the congruence principle [2], which 
achieves the natural correspondence between the subject and 
its representation, by allowing spatial information to be 
presented on a map and, at the same time, using the temporal 
dimension for presenting changes over time. However, an 
animated map does not automatically result in effective 
comprehension. The comparison between animations and 
static visualization methods has been considered in many 
studies, both in computer graphics [2] [3] and in cartography 
[4] [5] [6]. The results from these studies show variation in the 
superiority of the methods, depending on the types of tasks 
and datasets.  
Fabrikant et al. [7] pointed out that well-designed map 
animations are inherently different from well-designed static 
maps and comparison between these two methods is not even 
meaningful. They argued that instead the attention should be 
focused on studying when and why these methods do work. 
Lobben [8] showed that animations are better suited when 
users’ tasks deal with time, and also found some evidence that 
static maps could work better with location-based tasks. 
Simultaneous changes at many discrete locations are difficult 
to perceive from an animation but as a presentation of general 
spatio-temporal patterns and the behaviour as a whole an 
animation can be most valuable [9].  
Harrower and Fabrikant [9] argued that passive viewing of 
an animation, without any control tools, is more valuable in 
an early phase of an analysis, offering an overall picture of the 
phenomenon. It is evident that in later phases user control may 
increase the usability of an animation and the effectiveness of 
its comprehension. In many cases, user control improves 
users’ performance [10], but at the same time, it may distort 
the continuity of the animation so much that the advantages of 
the animation are lost [9]. The use of control tools always 
produces a split attention problem and increases the users’ 
cognitive load [11].  
These inefficiencies of traditional animations suggest that 
in order to support the interpretation of map animations we 
should search for methods to overcome these issues. These 
kinds of methods would especially be required in the 
exploratory analysis of spatio-temporal datasets with an 
irregular temporal structure containing long still periods 
and/or dense temporal clusters.  
Especially with temporally irregular datasets, the ability to 
control the animation becomes essential. Without any control, 
such an animation would be inefficient and dull, and sudden 
changes could easily be missed [9]. Dykes and Mountain [12] 
argue that animations that present time linearly and 
continuously are not suitable for all kinds of exploratory 
analysis tasks, and call for more advanced visualization 
methods. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
motivates the study and Section III discusses the cognitive 
load of animated maps. Section IV presents the equal density 
transformation and Section V covers the user test and 
interviews. The results are presented in Section VI, after 
which these results are discussed in detail in Section VII. 
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VIII. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
The dynamic visual variables duration, order, and rate of 
change [13] make it possible to present different spatio-
temporal datasets meaningfully in an animation. Typically, 
the duration of the scenes is kept constant throughout the 
168
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

whole animation, although Harrower and Fabrikant [9] 
provide a reminder about the possibility of modifying the 
duration of the scenes dynamically during the animation.  In 
animations that present changes over time, the order of the 
scenes must be chronological. The rate of change depends on 
the sampling rate of the real-world phenomenon in the dataset. 
The duration and rate of change together produce the 
perceived speed of the animation.  
Monmonier [14] gave examples of how to apply spatial 
generalization operators such as displacement, smoothing, 
and exaggeration to the temporal dimension of dynamic 
statistical maps, but his motivation was to avoid incoherent 
flicker and twinkling dots and instead allow the perception of 
salient patterns in dynamic thematic maps. Kraak [15] 
experimented with the transformation that he calls “from time 
to geography”, for static presentations. It stretches the famous 
Minard’s Map according to the temporal dimension in such a 
way that the time periods with slow or no movement stretch 
the 
spatial 
representation 
of 
the 
trajectory, 
and, 
correspondingly, fast movement is shrunken into shorter. This 
example differs from so-called travel time cartograms since it 
does not consider any location as a reference point to which 
the travelling times are calculated. Andrienko et al. [16] 
presented a time transformation called a “trajectory wall”, 
where the time axis of a space-time cube is modified to present 
the relative order of the events. Therefore, trajectories that 
follow the same route do not overlap with each other, but form 
a wall in which the order of the trajectories on the time axis is 
determined by their starting times.  
With static maps, cartographic transformations, such as 
density transformation, are used to present a phenomenon 
from different perspectives and to reveal patterns that would 
otherwise stay hidden. This inspired us to study the possibility 
of benefiting from a similar transformation of the temporal 
dimension in animated maps. 
In this study, our aim was to ease the interpretation of 
temporally irregular datasets by presenting the data from a 
different perspective and with a different temporal emphasis. 
For the study, we created transformed map animations of two 
different datasets with different temporal structures. As a 
result of the transformation, the events recorded in a dataset 
were evenly located in time over the whole time period, 
keeping their order. The basis of this transformation is 
somehow similar to a trajectory wall [16], since it preserves 
the order of the events, but it is implemented in a dynamic 
display.  We call this transformation as “temporal equal 
density transformation” because it equalizes the time intervals 
between consecutive events. Our hypothesis was that this kind 
of transformation could support the analysis of spatio-
temporal phenomena. We performed concept testing and 
interviews with users to study the potential of temporal equal 
density transformation in detecting spatio-temporal patterns.  
III. 
COGNITIVE LOAD OF MAP ANIMATIONS 
In this section, we look at those parts of cognitive loads 
that are relevant for this research. This is to demonstrate the 
effect of human cognitive processes when studying irregular 
spatio-temporal datasets.  
The human brain collects information from the 
environment through several information channels and 
processes this data in working memory. The number of 
objects that the working memory can handle at one time is 
limited; estimate of this differ from 7±2 [17] to only three or 
four [18]. From working memory, we move processed 
information to long-term memory, which has practically 
unlimited capacity. The research on this moving process has 
developed cognitive load theories [19].  
Theories of cognitive load are widely accepted and used, 
but in the context of this study it is meaningful to specify 
which part of the data visualization causes an increase in the 
cognitive load. Paas et al. [19] divide the cognitive load into 
three parts: the intrinsic, extraneous, and germane cognitive 
loads. The intrinsic cognitive load is caused by the data itself, 
the extraneous cognitive load means the unnecessary 
information caused by the visualization or user interface, and 
the germane cognitive load deals with the presentation of the 
task and even the motivation of the user to fulfil the task. If 
the data contains thousands of separate objects, we must, in 
one way or another, enable all these objects to be handled in 
the working memory. In cartography, this intrinsic cognitive 
load is usually handled by means of generalization or 
classification of the data. For decades, cartographic 
visualization has aimed to reduce the extraneous load of 
unnecessary information by selecting, filtering, and 
emphasizing the relevant parts of the information. Clarifying 
the task of the user and presenting the information in a feasible 
way are essential in order to reduce the germane cognitive 
load. 
Alternatively, we can discuss the “load on the working 
memory” or simply “mental load”. Mayer and Moreno [20] 
use the term mental load when presenting a scenario in which 
both information channels, verbal and visual, are overloaded. 
As a solution for this kind of overload Mayer and Moreno 
suggest segmenting the information into parts. The principle 
is that enough time must be given for the user to process one 
part of the information before the next part is presented. This 
processing time can be pre-defined or the user can give a 
signal (for example, by clicking “continue”) that he/she is 
ready to move on.  
With animated map visualizations this segmenting means 
that the duration of the scenes [13] must be selected to be such 
that the user can perceive all the important elements on the 
map. The more elements that are visible, the more time we 
need to perceive them all. However, as mentioned earlier, the 
temporal structure of the dataset can have such a nature that 
simply slowing down the animation is not reasonable. 
Therefore, we must search for other ways to offer the time 
needed for processing.  
IV. 
EQUAL DENSITY TRANSFORMATION 
The spatial and temporal dimensions of geographic data 
share commonalities, such as scale and its relation to the level 
of details of the phenomena that are represented [21]. When 
we present a real-world space on a map, we shrink the 
presentation into a smaller scale and, in most cases, explicitly 
inform the users about the scale either by number or a line. In 
169
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a map animation, real-world time is usually correspondingly 
scaled down into a shorter display time. Despite the fact that 
the temporal scale, just like the spatial scale, has a strong 
influence on the observation and understanding of the 
phenomena, the temporal scale is not commonly calculated 
and expressed numerically in an animation. Instead, the 
passing of time is presented as a relative location of a pointer 
on a time slider. This time slider often works both as a 
temporal legend and a control tool. 
In addition, the spatial and temporal dimensions have 
some similar topological and metric relationships. The 
temporal topological relationships presented by Allen [22] 
show many similarities to spatial data: moments in time can 
be ordered, and temporal objects can be equal to, meet, 
overlap with, or include each other. However, because of the 
one-dimensional nature of time, the temporal order is 
unambiguous and each point object can have only two 
neighbours in time: the one that is the closest before and the 
one after. The only temporal metric relationship is the length 
of time (the duration of an event or an interval between two 
events), corresponding to distance in space. 
The idea of many of the geographic transformations, such 
as equal density transformation [23] and fish-eye zooming 
[24], are adaptable to the time dimension, while some other 
transformations cannot strictly be applied to the time axis 
because of the one-dimensional nature of time. 
Spatially, in equal density transformation the areas of 
high density of the phenomenon are made bigger and the 
areas of low density become smaller, so that the spatial 
density of the phenomenon becomes constant [23]. This 
transformation is presented in an example in Figure 1. The 
distances between points are equalized and the reference grid 
stretches and shrinks correspondingly.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. A small spatial example dataset (left) and the effect of spatial 
equalized density transformation to it (right).  
In the temporal version of equal density transformation 
that we study, the time intervals between each two 
consecutive events are equalized in length over the whole 
time period. Equal density transformation is performed by 
counting the number (N) of events (E) in the dataset in the 
time period (P), which is the time between the time stamps of 
the first (t0) and last (tn) event of the dataset, and then 
calculating the new time stamps t’ for each E. Each event E 
gets its own portion equal length of the time period and is 
placed in the middle of its portion. 
 
t’ (Ei) = t0 + (i - 1/2) * (P/N) 
 
If the dataset contains events that feature duration, their 
start and end times are simply handled as separate events on 
the timeline. In this transformation, the accurate timestamps 
of events are lost, but the temporal topological relationships 
remain constant. Should there be any events with exactly the 
same timestamp, their mutual order must be determined by 
some other attribute or one must diverge from the principle 
of equality and present those events at the same time. 
An example of a set of temporal events in its original form 
and after the equal density transformation is shown in Figure 
2. Events are presented in changing colour, emphasizing their 
order. In Figure 2, it can be seen that the degree of 
transformation reflects the density of the events. When the 
events are condensed, time around them is stretched to last 
longer. Consequently, time periods with sparse events are 
speeded up. This reduces the user’s temptation to fast-
forward those periods that might cause some potentially 
important information remaining unobserved. 
The temporal equal density transformation follows the 
segmenting solution suggested by Mayer and Moreno [20]. It 
gives enough time to perceive every single event and, 
simultaneously, eliminates the unnecessary empty periods, 
which would grow even longer if the animation were slowed 
down traditionally. Therefore, it avoids composition of 
artificial groups, which can happen when segmenting the 
time into equal periods. Segmenting the time dimension into 
periods of equal duration and presenting all the events in one 
period at the same time is a method used when animating 
maps. The aim is to reduce the required computer capacity 
and the cognitive load on the user. However, this segmenting 
causes a common problem: if the dataset is artificially divided 
into even time periods, it is possible that temporal clusters in 
the dataset get unintentionally chopped. On the other hand, 
events that end up in the same period are automatically 
grouped together even though they can actually be temporally 
rather far from each other.  
It must be underlined that like spatial equal density 
transformation, this temporal transformation can serve 
different purposes. Spatial equalization can be used to show 
the relative importance or weight of areas with different 
densities of objects, or for the closer examination of dense 
clusters. Similarly, temporal transformation can make all the 
events visible and reveals the temporal order of the data. At 
the same time it reduces the worthless empty periods. This 
feature is more important than in static spatial visualizations, 
where the user can simply ignore the areas with no events.  If 
temporal equalization were used to show the importance of 
different periods, the visualization of the timeline, as in 
Figure 2, would play a critical role. 
V. 
USER TEST AND INTERVIEWS 
In this section, we first describe the datasets and the test 
animations, the test setting and interviews, and finally the 
analysis of the results.  
170
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The aim of the user test was to find out whether the 
transformation would support the recognition of spatio-
temporal patterns in the analysis process. Therefore, we 
prepared a set of test animations and questions that the test 
users were to answer while viewing the animations. The 
number of times they viewed each animation and the 
additional comments they made during the test were recorded. 
 
A. Test Data and Animations 
The dataset used in this test contained Twitter messages, 
so-called tweets, from the area of Port-au-Prince, Haiti, from 
a four-month period after the earthquake in January 2010. 
Twitter was used to search for help and food or water supplies 
and also to find missing persons. A Twitter user can allow the 
exact coordinates of the tweets to be saved and shown by the 
service provider, and all the tweets with these coordinates 
were included in the test dataset. 
For this test, two different datasets were prepared. The first 
dataset covered the four-month period after the earthquake, 
but to keep the size of the dataset reasonable, only every tenth 
tweet was selected. In this dataset, most of the tweets were 
strongly compressed into the first days and weeks of the time 
period, and after that the density of the tweets decreased 
remarkably. The densest period was around January 22nd. This 
dataset is referred to as the “Every 10th” dataset and is shown 
on a timeline (a) in Figure 3. The other dataset contained the 
very first tweets right after the earthquake. To achieve the 
same number of objects (193 tweets), the dataset was cut to 
cover about an 84-hour period. Because of the problems in 
electricity production in Haiti, only those tweets that were sent 
between 6 am and 6 pm were successfully published. This 
caused strong periodicity in the data. This dataset is referred 
to as the “First days” dataset and is shown in timeline (b) in 
Figure 3. Spatially, the events of the “First days” dataset are 
clustered  more  into  the  centre  of  Port-au-Prince, while the 
 
 
events of the “Every 10th” dataset are spread more evenly 
over the area of the city (Figure 4). It must be emphasized that 
the users never saw these datasets side by side as in Figure 4, 
because they examined only one dataset at the time. 
Both datasets were equal density transformed by using 
Microsoft Excel. In the transformed datasets, the time interval 
between two consecutive events is the whole time period 
divided by the number of events. Timeline (c) in Figure 3 
shows the effect of the equal density transformation; these two 
datasets become similar. The timestamps are not visible in this 
timeline, because they were artificially modified and did not 
correspond to the real-world time. 
Four map animations were made with ArcGIS10; two 
presented the original “Every 10th” and “First days” datasets 
and two presented the equal density transformed datasets. All 
animations were of equal length, 60 seconds, and they each 
contained 193 events. The events were presented on a 
background map with red dots that appeared brightly and 
faded to a less saturated red after that. In addition to the 
animations, the timeline visualization was presented in the test 
view immediately below the test animation (Figure 4) to help 
the test users to comprehend the temporal patterns of the data. 
The effect of the transformation to the animation of the 
dataset “Every 10th” can be seen in Figure 5. In the upper 
figure, both animations are paused after 15 seconds. In an 
original animation (left), majority of the events are already 
appeared while the events in the transformed animation (right) 
run slower. In the lower figure, where the animations are 
paused after 45 seconds, this difference is almost tied. 
In the “Every 10th” dataset, the events are congested into 
the first days and weeks after the earthquake, the most dense 
period being around January 22nd. The “First days” dataset 
shows that there were no events between 6:00 pm and 6:00 
am, and that there were relatively few events on the very first 
day after the earthquake.  
 
Figure 3. The top row (a) shows the “Every 10th” dataset visualized on a timeline.  The middle row (b) shows the “First days” dataset visualized on a 
timeline. Note that the scales of the timelines are different. The bottom row (c) shows both datasets after the equal density transformation.  
Figure 2. An example showing temporal events on a timeline (above) and the same dataset after the temporal equal density transformation (below). Grey 
and white areas behind the event points indicate the time units; in the upper timeline they are all of equal length, but after the transformation those time 
units with many events stretch and those with fewer or no events shrink. 
171
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Test Setting 
Main concepts and terminology of the test, such as 
pattern and spatio-temporal information, were introduced to 
the user in the beginning of the test. Then the user was able 
to familiarize himself/herself with an example animation (a 
10-second clip showing a zoomed part of one of the 
animations), layout, and arrangements of the user interface. 
The test contained two parts. One part presented the original 
and transformed animations of the “First days” dataset and 
the other part the corresponding animations of the “Every 
10th” dataset. Each test user performed both parts, but the 
order of these parts varied between the users in order to avoid 
the influence of the learning effect. These two parts were 
identical in terms of their layout and arrangements.   
In the first phase, the user first had the opportunity to view 
only the original animation as many times as he/she wanted, 
and after that was asked to answer Questions 1.1 and 1.2 
(Table I). The questions dealt with the overall impression of 
the dataset. Then the user viewed the temporally transformed 
animation and answered the same questions. The order of the 
animations was fixed to this, because we wanted to simulate 
the explorative analysis task where the user first gets an 
overview of the data and then uses more complex tools, 
focusing on more detailed analysis.  
In the second phase, the user could use both of these two 
animations to answer three more detailed questions 
(Questions 2.1-2.3 in Table I) about the behavioural patterns 
of the data. Because of the differences in the datasets, the 
questions varied slightly between the two datasets. After 
finishing both parts of the test, the user was interviewed. The 
interview was semi-structured and covered the following 
topics: 
 
 
Was the temporal transformation as a method easy to 
understand? 
 
What could have made the transformation easier to 
understand? 
 
 
Did you use the animation, timeline, or still picture 
of the animation to answer the questions? 
 
Was the transformed animation useful when 
answering the questions? Why? 
 
In what tasks was the transformation especially 
useful? 
 
Could this kind of tool be useful in your job? 
 
Some users had already discussed these topics during the 
test, and in these cases not all the questions were explicitly 
gone through during the interview. 
The test was completed by nine users. They were 
professional cartographers or geographers with experience of 
temporal datasets. Four of them were female and five male. 
Their ages varied between 28 and 55 years. 
The users did the test on a laptop computer that was 
connected to a data projector. The evaluator observed the 
user’s performance via the data projector, calculating the 
viewing times for each animation. The users could answer the 
test questions either by typing their answers into a textbox on 
the display or verbally to the evaluator, who wrote those 
answers down. The answers in the interviews were also 
written down by the evaluator. 
TABLE I. QUESTIONS IN THE USER TEST. 
Q 
“First days” dataset 
 “Every 10th” dataset 
1.1 
What kind of patterns do you find from the data?  
1.2 
Are there any events which seem not to fit the data or draw your 
attention in some other way? 
2.1 
Where are the first and last 
events of the dataset located? 
In what area are the first ten 
events of the dataset located? 
2.2 
Is there a location on the map 
where there are multiple 
sequential events? Where is 
it? 
Are there time periods when 
the events are clustered into a 
certain area? 
2.3 
Is there an area on the map 
where the events are clustered 
both spatially and 
temporally? 
Does the centroid of the events 
move during the animation? 
Figure 4. Spatial distribution of the events of both datasets used in the user test, “First Days” (left) and “Every 10th” (right). During the first days, 
there were very few events from outside the urban area of Port-Au-Prince.  
172
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Analysis of the Material 
From the user test, the following indicators were 
analysed: 
1. the number of times the user viewed each animation 
in each task, and whether he/she viewed the whole 
animation or was the viewing discontinued; 
2. the kinds of behaviour patterns the user found from 
the animations and whether these findings were  
appropriate; 
3. whether the user’s impression of the phenomenon 
represented in the dataset differed between the 
original and transformed animations. 
 
Figure 5. The test setting and the effect of the transformation. The original animation of “Every 10th” dataset is on left and the transformed 
animation of the same dataset is on right. Above the animations is a short instruction text. Under the animations is the timeline of the dataset 
showing its temporal structure. On bottom left is the task question, and on bottom right is the text box in which the user can write the answer. 
On upper figure, both animations are paused after 15 seconds. On lower figure, the animations are paused after 45 seconds. 
173
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

From the users’ comments during the test and their 
answers in the interview, the following factors were 
calculated: 
1. positive and negative comments the users made 
about each animations; 
2. faulty and inaccurate interpretations that the users 
made from the animations; 
3. cases where the user made different interpretations 
from the same dataset on the basis of the two 
animations. 
Because of the small number of test users, no statistical 
significance parameters were calculated from these results. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
In the test, the users chose to view the transformed 
animation slightly more often than the original animation. 
This trend was particularly clear with Questions 2.1 and 2.2, 
which dealt with so-called elementary lookup tasks [25]. 
With more complex analysis tasks, the users tended to 
interrupt the flow of the original animations by pausing or 
fast-forwarding, while the transformed animations were more 
often viewed in their entirety. This pattern can be seen in 
Table II. The first, bold number in each box marks the times 
when the animation was viewed completely, and the second 
number (in parentheses) marks the times when the animation 
was viewed partially, which means that the user paused, fast-
forwarded, or interrupted it in some other way during the 
viewing. Every row in the table corresponds to one task in the 
test. 
The differences between the results for the two datasets in 
Question 2.3 are caused by the difference in the questions. 
With the “First Days” dataset, the question concerned the 
whole time period, and, therefore, the users had no choice but 
to view the animation completely. On the contrary, with the 
“Every 10th” dataset the task was to find a spatio-temporal 
cluster, and the users could stop viewing the animation after 
finding the first one. 
TABLE II. THE VIEWING TIMES OF EACH ANIMATION IN THE 
USER TEST 
 
Every 10th dataset 
First Days dataset 
original 
temporally 
transf. 
original 
temporally 
transf. 
Q 1.1 and 1.2 
16(2) 
 
16(2) 
 
Q 1.1 and 1.2 
 
15(2) 
 
17(0) 
Q 2.1 
2(10) 
3(14) 
5(6) 
3(12) 
Q 2.2 
4(5) 
9(2) 
6(1) 
11(0) 
Q 2.3 
6(10) 
9(4) 
9(1) 
8(0) 
 
When viewing the transformed animation of the “First 
days” dataset, in the first phase of the test six out of the nine 
users mentioned that they perceived a location at which 
several events appeared sequentially. This location can be 
seen as the latest and brightest dot in the upper-right map of 
Figure 5. Later, when explicitly asked (Q2.2), the remaining 
three users also perceived it. From the original animation, 
none of the users perceived this kind of behaviour at first, and 
after the question Q2.2, only one user mentioned that he also 
saw that phenomenon in the original animation, “but much 
more weakly than in the transformed animation”. This 
location with sequent events proved to be a police station in 
the centre of Port-au-Prince. Our assumption is that the 
inhabitants of the city went to the police station to seek their 
missing relatives after the earthquake, and the police used 
Twitter to support the search and rescue efforts.  
The users learned to favour the transformed animation 
with some tasks even during this kind of very short test. For 
the questions Q2.1 and Q2.2 the transformed animation was 
used approximately 40 % more often than the original, and 
was viewed more often without interruption. With the 
question Q2.3 the preference between the animations varied, 
depending on the dataset, but the transformed animation was 
viewed in its entirety more often.  
In the interviews most of the users had a positive attitude 
towards the transformed animations. They were apparently 
pleased and said that the transformation was “charming” or 
“nicer”. They also mentioned that the transformed animation 
was “better” and “easier to watch”. Two users said that the 
transformed animation was “exhausting” and its “continuous 
info flow was tiring”. However, these two users also 
commented that the transformation was useful in some cases. 
A summary of elements calculated from the interviews is 
shown in Table III. 
TABLE III. SUMMARY FROM THE INTERVIEWS 
 
Original animation 
Temporally 
transformed 
animation 
More useful (pos.) 
2 
14 
Unpleasant to view 
(neg.) 
1 
2 
Misinterpretations 
Not applicable 
2 
Different 
interpretations 
8 
 
The users had varying opinions about the applicability of 
the transformation. For example, when the task was to find 
spatio-temporal clusters (Q 2.3), some of the users said that 
the transformed version was “essential”, while others said 
that it did not suit those tasks. When asked about the use cases 
for this kind of transformation, the users mentioned several 
possible application areas in addition to elementary lookup 
tasks dealing with time. For example, traffic planning, crowd 
movement analysis, environmental analysis, and oil 
destruction activities were proposed. The users also pointed 
out the possibility of combining the analysis of the temporal 
dimension on the timeline with behavioural analysis of the 
transformed animation.   
From the interviews it became clear that a proper 
temporal legend could have improved the performance; five 
of the nine test users mentioned this when asked about 
development ideas. More specifically, the idea of colouring 
174
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the events according to their timestamp was mentioned by 
several users. Another suggestion was to improve the linking 
between the timeline and the animation; a moving pointer 
should show the flow of time of the transformed animation 
on the timeline of the original data.  
The test results indicate that it is essential to ensure that 
the user understands how the transformation influences the 
animation. In several cases (eight out of the 27 behaviour 
descriptions recorded) the users’ impression about the 
phenomenon varied between the original and transformed 
animations, even though they knew that the animations 
presented the same dataset. Some clear misinterpretations 
appeared; in one case the user grouped the last events of one 
day and the first events of the next day into the same spatio-
temporal cluster despite the fact that there was a 12-hour gap. 
The same user also made a false statement about the location 
of the last event of the dataset. 
VII. 
DISCUSSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
The results presented above are discussed from two 
different perspectives: usefulness and limitations of the 
temporal equal density transformation that was tested. These 
considerations are followed by the evaluation of the study. 
A. Usefulness of the Tested Transformation 
The user test shows that temporal equal density 
transformation of the animation revealed the location of 
sequential events that were not detected from the original 
animation. These sequential events were temporally so close 
to each other that, without the transformed animation, this 
pattern would have remained unnoticed by most users. 
Additionally, this pattern was found spontaneously; in the 
majority of cases it arrested the attention of the users without 
any specific search task. This kind of capacity is an important 
feature of the visual analysis tool when it is used for data 
exploration. 
As the test results and interviews with the users suggest, 
the power of the temporal equal density transformation lies 
in the fact that it seems to reduce the user’s need to interrupt 
the animation, and therefore offers a smooth overall 
evocation of the phenomenon. At the same time, it eases the 
cognitive load on the user by offering a continuous, 
temporally predictable change with no congested periods. It 
emphasizes the order of the events and equalizes them in 
relation to time, thus attributing equal significance to all the 
events. 
B. Limitations of the Tested Transformation 
The findings indicate that the disadvantage of the 
transformation is that misinterpretations of the effect of the 
transformation 
are 
possible, 
even 
probable. 
These 
misinterpretations could be reduced with a temporal legend 
in which the user can always perceive the phase of the 
animation. For a more sophisticated approach, we suggest 
two possible solutions for this problem; segmenting and 
colour.  
The equal density transformation itself is simultaneously 
in line and contradiction of the principle number 2 of Mayer 
and Moreno [20]: “Provide pauses”. It gives the user time to 
recognize each event separately, but lacks the longer pauses 
needed for processing the information in order to move it into 
long-term memory. This was also found from the user 
feedback on the test: one user stated that the animation was 
“exhausting”. Our suggestion is to add longer pauses to mark 
natural time periods in the data. These pauses would work for 
two purposes: they give time for the user to process the 
information more deeply, and separate the natural time 
periods from each other. These time periods could be, for 
example, days, but the phenomenon can also have such a 
nature that using midnight to divide the periods can cause the 
splitting of temporal clusters. This solution would be suitable 
for bigger datasets, if the events of one period were being 
processed as one mental chunk with no intention to 
understand more than the overall behaviour of the 
phenomenon.  
Furthermore, properly designed colours for the events 
could indicate the degree of the transformation, and these 
colours could be used for linking the timeline and the 
animations. The idea of colouring the events according to 
their timestamp also arose repeatedly in the interviews. The 
users suggested, for example, that the colour of the events 
might change smoothly day by day. This solution would help 
the user to detect spatio-temporal clusters from the map and 
it also communicates about the temporal discontinuities in the 
data.  
However, a disadvantage of the use of colour as a 
temporal legend is that one cannot visualize any attribute data 
by means of colours at the same time. When the events are 
point-type and visualized with small, round objects, other 
ways to present attribute information are limited. Therefore, 
consideration should be given to whether the combination of 
these two variables with the use of colour is possible. Brewer 
[26] proposed a set of colour scheme types to be used with 
bivariate data, but this set does not contain the combination 
of qualitative attribute information and a bipolar subordinate 
variable (the temporal transformation can affect the time 
either by stretching or shrinking it, and, therefore, its 
visualization should be bipolar). If the degree of temporal 
transformation is simplified to binary data (= slower or faster 
than the original), then Brewer’s “qualitative/binary” 
combination can be used. In this schema, the qualitative data 
is visualized with different hues and the binary data is 
visualized with the lightness of the colour. It must be noted 
that Brewer’s model is designed for choropleth maps, and its 
applicability to point-type data is not obvious. Therefore, it is 
clear that more research is needed to test whether 
discrimination between these two variables is possible in a 
use case similar to the case in this study. 
Another possible way to provide the information about 
the speed of the animation is sound. Kraak et al. [10] suggest 
sonic input to represent the passing of time. This could also 
be a useful technique with an animation with changing speed, 
175
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

since human hearing is relatively sensitive to changes in 
rhythm and pitch. 
C. Evaluation of the Study 
In this study, we tested the concept of temporal equal 
density transformation and therefore wanted to keep the test 
arrangement as simple as possible. The influence of attribute 
information was not evaluated in this study; therefore, we 
suggest that the method studied here is better suited to pre-
processed data where the selection of relevant events is 
performed beforehand and the interest of the analyst is in the 
spatio-temporal behaviour of the data. However, this method 
does not rule out the possibility of classifying the events 
according to their thematic content and visualizing this 
classification by colour, if colour is not used to present the 
flow of time (as suggested earlier). 
Because of the simplicity of the test procedure, the user 
control over the animations was limited. The users did not 
have a chance to adjust the speed of the animation nor to filter 
its content. However, we offered the most common user 
control tools; playing, pausing, and the opportunity to jump 
to any moment in the animation. A wider selection of control 
tools might have increased the cognitive load on the user and 
drawn the user’s attention away from the task being tested. 
Finally, we want to emphasize that temporal equal density 
transformation, in the form that was tested here, is suitable 
only for relatively small datasets because it shows every 
event individually. Theoretical maximum number of events 
can be calculated by multiplying the minimum time of each 
eye saccade and attentional blink caused by the perception 
time of one event (together they take approximately 300 ms) 
with the maximum length of working memory without any 
revision (20 seconds).  With this calculation we suggest that 
no more than 60-70 events should be presented consequently 
without pausing. Additionally, the method was only tested 
with two datasets with different temporal structures: one with 
decreasing intensity of events and the other with clear 
variation of empty and dense periods. More tests are needed 
to study the usefulness of the method with different spatio-
temporal datasets. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The human ability to adopt information from an animated 
map is limited. If the animation runs too fast, is too long, or 
presents too many events simultaneously, a user can easily 
miss some information, and, therefore, is not able to form a 
full image of the phenomenon being presented. The 
traditional control tools of an animation, such as pausing, 
jumping to a specified scene, or looping, have a limited 
capability to improve this understanding. 
This paper presented a novel method for equal density 
transformation of the temporal dimension of map animations 
by equalizing the time intervals between each two 
consecutive events. The user test showed that the 
transformation can reveal patterns that would have been left 
unnoticed with traditional animation. Transformed animation 
in parallel to an original, untransformed animation seems to 
be understandable for the users and useful for spatio-temporal 
analysis.  
In exploratory analysis a rich variety of tools that 
complement each other is a necessity. The results from this 
user test and interviews indicate that temporal equal density 
transformation might be an appropriate technique to 
complement a set of such analysis tools. Our suggestion is 
that temporal equal density transformation should be used for 
those datasets that a) have an irregular temporal structure and 
b) are small enough to be able to be examined individually. 
The transformed animation could, if reasonable, be 
segmented so that the natural periods in the dataset are 
separated from each other with a longer pause. As a result of 
these kinds of improvements the transformed animation, 
complemented with an original, untransformed animation to 
offer an overall image of the phenomenon, would complete 
the toolbox of spatio-temporal exploratory analysis. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. 
Multimäki 
and 
P. 
Ahonen-Rainio, 
“Temporally 
Transformed Map Animation for Visual Data Analysis,” The 
Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic 
Information 
Systems, 
Applications, 
and 
Services 
(GEOProcessing 2015), C.-P. Rückemann and Y. Doytsher 
(eds.) IARIA Feb.2015, pp. 25-31, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-383-4. 
[2]  B. Tversky, J. B. Morrison, and M. Betrancourt,  “Animation: 
can it facilitate?” International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 
vol 
57, 
2002, 
pp. 
247-262, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.2002.1017. 
[3]  D. Archambault, H. C. Purchase, and B. Pinaud, “Animation, 
small multiples, and the effect of mental map preservation in 
dynamic graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics, vol. 17(4), pp. 539-552, 2011, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.78. 
[4]  A. Koussoulakou and M.-J. Kraak, “Spatio-temporal maps 
and cartographic communication,” The Cartographic Journal, 
vol. 
29(2), 
pp. 
101-108, 
1992, 
doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/caj.1992.29.2.101. 
[5]  T. S. Slocum, R. S. Sluter, F. C. Kessler, and S. C. Yoder, “A 
qualitative evaluation of MapTime, a program for exploring 
spatiotemporal point data,” Cartographica, vol. 39(3), pp. 43-
68, 2004, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3138/92T3-T928-8105-
88X7. 
[6]  A. Griffin, A. MacEachren, F. Hardisty, E. Steiner, and B. Li, 
“A comparison of animated maps with static small-multiple 
maps for visually identifying space-time clusters,” Annals of 
the American Cartographers, vol. 96(4), pp. 740-753, 2006, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8306.2006.00514.x. 
[7]  S. I. Fabrikant, S. Rebich-Hespanha, N. Andrienko, G. 
Andrienko, and D. R. Montello, “Novel method to measure 
inference affordance in static small multiple displays 
representing dynamic processes,” The Cartographic Journal, 
vol. 
45(3), 
pp. 
201-215, 
2008, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/000870408X311396.  
[8]  A. Lobben, “Influence of data properties on animated maps,” 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, vol. 
98(3), 
pp. 
583-603, 
2008, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045600802046577. 
176
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[9]  M. Harrower and S. Fabrikant, “The role of map animation for 
geographic visualization,” In: M. Dodge, M. McDerby, and 
M. Turner (Eds.), Geographic Visualization. John Wiley & 
Sons, 
2008, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9780470987643.ch4. 
[10]  M.-J. Kraak, R. Edsall, and A. MacEachren, “Cartographic 
Animation and Legends for Temporal Maps: Exploration and 
or Interaction,” In: Proceedings of the 18th International 
Cartographic Conference, Stockholm, Sweden, 1997, pp. 253-
260. 
[11]  M. Harrower, “The cognitive limits of animated maps,” 
Cartographica, 
vol. 
42(4), 
pp. 
349-357, 
2007, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3138/carto.42.4.349. 
 [12]  J.A. Dykes and D.M. Mountain, "Seeking structure in records 
of spatio-temporal behaviour: visualization issues, efforts and 
applications," Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, vol. 
43.4, pp. 581-603, 2003, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-
9473(02)00294-3. 
[13]  D. DiBiase, A. M. McEachren, J. Krygier, and C. Reeves, 
“Animation and the role of map design in scientific 
visualization,” Cartography and Geographic Information 
Systems, vol. 19(4), pp. 201-214, 265-266, 1992. 
[14]  M. Monmonier, “Temporal generalization for dynamic 
maps,” Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 
vol. 
23 
(2), 
pp. 
96-98, 
1996, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1559/152304096782562118. 
[15]  M.-J. Kraak, “Mapping Time: Illustrated by Minard's Map of 
Napoleon's Russian Campaign of 1812.” ESRI Press, 
California, 2014. 
[16] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski, 
“Visualization of trajectory attributes in space-time cube and 
trajectory wall,” in Cartography from Pole to Pole, Lecture 
Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography, M. Buchroitner, 
N. Prechtel, and D. Burghardt, Eds.  Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 
pp. 
157-163, 
2014, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-32618-9_11. 
[17]  G.A. Miller, “The magical number seven, plus or minus two: 
some limits on our capacity for processing information,” 
Psychological review, vol. 63(2), pp. 81-97, 1956, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0043158. 
[18] R.A. Rensink, “Internal vs. External Information in Visual 
Perception,” Proceedings of the 2nd international symposium 
on 
Smart 
graphics, 
Jun. 
2002, 
pp. 
63-70, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/569005.569015. 
[19]  F. Paas, A. Renkl, and J. Sweller, "Cognitive load theory and 
instructional design: recent developments," Educational 
psychologist, 
vol. 
38.1, 
pp. 
1-4, 
2003, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15326985EP3801_1. 
[20]  R.E. Mayer and R. Moreno, "Nine ways to reduce cognitive 
load in multimedia learning," Educational psychologist vol. 
38.1, 
pp. 
43-52, 
2003, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15326985EP3801_6. 
[21]  G. Andrienko et al., “Space, time, and visual analytics,” 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
vol. 
24 
(10), 
pp. 
1577-1600, 
2010, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2010.508043. 
[22]  J. Allen, “Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 26(11), pp. 832-843, 1983, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/182.358434. 
[23]  B.  FitzGerald, “Science in Geography 1: Developments in 
Geographical Method”. Oxford University Press, 1974. 
[24]  M. Sarkar and M.H. Brown, “Graphical Fisheye Views of 
Graphs,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors 
in 
Computing 
Systems, 
1992, 
pp. 
83-91, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/142750.142763. 
[25]  N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, “Exploratory Analysis of 
Spatial and Temporal Data – A Systematic Approach.” 
Springer, Berlin, Germany, 2006.  
[26]  C. A. Brewer, “Guidelines for Use of the Perceptual 
Dimensions of Color for Mapping and Visualization,” 
International Symposium on Electronic Imaging: Science and 
Technology. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 
1994, pp. 54-63. 
177
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

