193
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Monitoring of Hazardous Scenarios using  
Multi-Sensor Devices and Sensor Data Fusion 
 
Matthias Bartholmai, Enrico Koeppe, and Patrick P. Neumann 
Sensors, Measurement and Testing Methods 
BAM Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing 
Berlin, Germany 
matthias.bartholmai@bam.de 
 
 
Abstract— The combination of different types of sensors to 
multi-sensor devices offers excellent potential for monitoring 
applications. This should be demonstrated by means of four 
different examples of actual developments carried out by 
Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM): 
monitoring and indoor localization of relief forces, a micro-
drone for gas measurement in hazardous scenarios, sensor- 
enabled radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags for 
safeguard of dangerous goods, and a multifunctional sensor for 
spatially resolved under-surface monitoring of gas storage 
areas. Objective of the presented projects is to increase the 
personal and technical safety in hazardous scenarios. These 
examples should point to application specific challenges for the 
applied components and infrastructure, and it should 
emphasize the potential of multi-sensor systems and sensor 
data fusion.  
Keywords- monitoring, multi-sensor, hazardous scenarios, 
data fusion 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
safe 
operation 
in 
hazardous 
scenarios 
(conflagrations, chemical incidents, etc.) and handling of 
dangerous substances (toxic, explosive, harmful for human 
and/or the environment) often requires the usage of sensor 
systems, e.g., to measure the status of a process, to enable 
early warning in case of an accident, or to evaluate the 
situation after an accident happened [1]. In many cases not 
only 
one 
measuring 
variable 
is 
sufficient 
for 
a 
comprehensive evaluation of such scenarios, demanding for 
technical solutions with integration of multiple types of 
sensors. Technical enhancements like miniaturization, data 
processing, and wireless communication are the basis for 
application specific multi-sensor solutions. Data fusion 
offers sophisticated possibilities to analyze and clarify the 
hazard potential of relevant situations – in many cases quasi 
in real-time. 
The following examples present multi-sensor concepts 
applied to different scenarios of condition monitoring and 
safety management. Often similar issues and requirements 
must be taken into account, regardless of whether the 
monitoring object is a firefighter, a cask for radioactive 
material or a subsurface storage area.  
The paper is structured in 6 sections. The Sections II-V 
describe the above mentioned examples on basis of the 
physical principle, functionality and application. Section VI 
gives a short summary and the most relevant conclusions. 
II. 
MONITORING AND INDOOR LOCALIZATION OF RELIEF 
FORCES 
Rescue forces often operate in dangerous scenarios and 
situations, in which their localization can be crucial for safe 
operation and return. Fire, landslip-, or flood scenarios pose 
hazards like suffocation, burn, or undercooling. The 
localization and quick recovery raise the survival chance 
clearly. The use of Global Positioning system (GPS) 
technology allows the exact localization of persons or objects 
everywhere a sufficient satellite reception is possible. 
However, in many hazardous scenarios no or only 
insufficient GPS reception is available. This may be the case 
in underground, indoor, or fire scenarios, making GPS 
localization complicated or impossible. 
A. Concept and Components 
Objectives of the project “Localization and monitoring of 
relief forces in hazardous scenarios” with acronym OMEGa 
are the development and validation of a monitoring system, 
which complements GPS localization with indoor navigation 
[2] and in addition measures the most important vital 
functions. The overall system consists of two units, which 
operate spatially separated and communicate via radio with 
each other. The first unit are portable multi-sensor devices, 
which serve as personal protective equipment (PPE-Device) 
of the rescue force and should be implemented, e.g., by 
integration in the clothes. The second unit consists of the 
components of the control station for data processing and 
display (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Scheme of the OMEGa units. 

194
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 The multi-sensor device (Figure 2) should consist of an 
outdoor localization system (GPS), an inertial navigation 
system (INS) for indoor localization, and sensors for 
monitoring of vital functions like pulse, temperature and 
humidity at the body surface. The communication between 
both units should be implemented through a redundant 
solution of two radio modes, based on mobile phone network 
and ISM band, the latter with multihop routing. Principal 
elements of the control station are analysis tools for 
calculating motion sequences from the sensor data and a 
geographical information system (GIS) to track and monitor 
the equipped persons in map-based software. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Prototype of the OMEGa multi-sensor device. 
Indoor localization on basis of an INS is the most 
sophisticated challenge in the OMEGa project. The INS 
itself is a multi-sensor microelectromechanical systems 
(MEMS) device consisting of 3-axes accelerometers, 
gyroscopes, magnetic field, and barometric pressure sensors, 
partly redundant. The calculation of motion sequences from 
the combined sensor data is performed by data fusion 
algorithms [2][3][4].  
B. Results 
Different motion sequences can be identified by 
analyzing the different sensor signals. In a series of 
experiments, persons were moving on a treadmill with 
different speed. The OMEGa device was placed at their 
central lower back in height of the hip. The type of 
movement (walking or running) and the speed lead to 
varying acceleration signals. Figure 3 displays the data for 
walking at speeds from 2 to 7 km/h and running at speeds 
from 8 to 12 km/h. The walking results show significant 
differences in length and time of single steps between putting 
down and lifting the feet. In contrast to walking, running 
results deliver similar step times, but the acceleration 
impulse differs for different speeds. This example shows 
how movement sequences can be characterized and 
identified by simple means of pattern recognition.  
 
 
Figure 3. INS acceleration signals of different motion sequences. 
The combination of these findings with the measurement 
of vital functions can be used to enable comprehensive 
monitoring of relief forces during operation. Further 
objectives are automated detection of critical situations and 
alarming. 
Another result of the project was the implementation of a 
new calibration method for an INS. This principle is based 
on the free motion at the curved surface area of an ellipsoid, 
which allows free motion calibration of the sensor at any 
place or position [3][4]. In the same way, the algorithm can 
use the movement of the holder as input for a continuous 
recalibration during a normal operation. By moving the 
sensor system in a pseudo static motion, measurement data is 
generated and used to determine the ellipsoid. This 
geometrical figure describes the sensor idle state and 
amplitude at a known measurement value. An optimisation 
function was implemented in the algorithm to gain the 
ellipsoid out of noisy measurements. Furthermore, the 
advantage of this principle is that it is possible to calibrate a 
50
70
90
110
130
150
170
190
210
230
250
0
1000
2000
acceleration (AD-value) 
time (ms) 
running 8 to 12 km/h 
8kmh
9kmh
10kmh
11kmh
12kmh
50
70
90
110
130
150
170
190
210
230
250
0
1000
2000
acceleration (AD-value) 
time (ms) 
walking 2 to 7 km/h 
2kmh
3kmh
4kmh
5kmh
6kmh
7kmh

195
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
free motion of the sensor system at any place or position on a 
person. In other words, the sensor system is calibrated and 
adjusted during normal operation. Hence, there are no more 
movements after the activation of the system or during the 
working process necessary for the calibration [4]. 
III. 
MICRO-DRONE FOR GAS MEASUREMENT IN HAZ-
ARDOUS SCENARIOS 
A research project was carried out at BAM with the 
objective to develop a flying remote-controlled measuring 
system. The system is capable of operating in a variety of 
scenarios of gas emission, e.g., exhaust gas from a chimney, 
flue gas in case of a fire, gas emission in case of an accident 
of chemical or hazardous goods [5]. Another addressed field 
of application is spatially resolved emission control of 
geodynamic active regions, waste disposals, stockpiles, 
landfills, CO2 storage areas (carbon capture and storage, 
CCS), industrial sites and pollution critical areas. Due to its 
mobility the system can measure the gas concentration in the 
immediate vicinity of the object, which causes the emission. 
A further stage of extension is the enhancement of the 
system for identification of gas source locations, plume 
tracking, and gas distribution modeling/mapping (GDM). 
The latter applications are implemented based on the 
combined analysis of position dependent gas concentrations 
and wind vector data. 
 
 
Figure 4. Micro-drone with multi-sensor equippment in flight. 
Gas concentration measurement from an air-borne 
platform (AR 100-B, Airrobot, Germany; see Figure 4) is 
demanding in terms of weight, dimensions, energy 
consumption, influence of the rotors, and speed of the 
sensing device. A gas-sensing payload was developed on 
basis of a commercially available gas detector (X-am 5600, 
Draeger, Germany), which was originally designed as 
personal safety equipment. The device features low weight 
and compact design. The modular concept allows the ad hoc 
exchange of four sensors in the gas detector, which enables 
users to customize it for their specific application. 
Due to the weight restrictions imposed by the platform 
(max. payload 200 g), the micro-drone does not carry any 
wind sensing modalities. Instead, wind measurements are 
estimated by fusing the different on-board sensors of its 
inertial measurement unit to compute the parameters of the 
wind triangle [6]. The wind triangle is commonly used in 
navigation and describes the relationships between the flight 
vector, the ground vector, and the wind vector. The micro-
drone can be operated manually or in GPS mode, e.g., by 
autonomous waypoint following. 
A. Plume Tracking Algorithms 
Both, gas distribution modeling and plume-tracking were 
enabled using data fusion algorithms. For plume tracking 
three promising algorithms were implemented and adapted 
accordingly to meet the system characteristics of the micro-
drone: the surge-cast algorithm (a variant of the silkworm 
moth algorithm), the zigzag/dung beetle algorithm, and a 
newly developed algorithm called “pseudo gradient-based 
algorithm”. First successful tests were performed in real-
world experiments [7][8].  
 
 
Figure 5. Surge-cast algorithm. 
Lochmatter presented in [9] the surge-cast algorithm. It is 
a combination of plume tracking strategies used by the 
silkworm moth and works as follows (Figure 5): The robot 
moves straight upwind until it loses the contact with the 
plume for a certain distance dlost. Then, it tries to reacquire 
the plume by searching crosswind for a deﬁned distance dcast 
on both sides. The chance of reacquiring the plume in the 
ﬁrst crosswind movement is maximized by measuring the 
wind direction to estimate the side, from which the robot has 
left the plume. Every time the robot switches its behavior 
from upwind surge to casting and vice versa, the wind 
direction is re-measured. In comparison to the original 
algorithm, the plume is declared lost in the surge-cast 
algorithm used here, when the micro-drone measures an 
average gas concentration below the threshold after one step. 
To reacquire the plume, casting with increasing step size in 
crosswind direction is performed. These changes were 
necessary to address the constraints of the micro-drone in 
GPS-mode. Furthermore, the wind is re-measured every 
iteration of the algorithm to adapt faster to changing wind 
conditions. If casting fails to reacquire the plume (after a 
deﬁned number of steps) the micro-drone returns to the 
sweeping strategy. 
 
 
Figure 6. Zigzag or dung beetle algorithm. 

196
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The zigzag or dung beetle algorithm was ﬁrst reported by 
Ishida et al. [10]. The basic algorithm works as follows 
(Figure 6): The robot moves upwind with an angle α (e.g., α 
= 
60◦) 
across 
the 
plume 
constantly 
sensing 
gas 
concentrations. If the gas sensor measures a concentration 
below a given threshold, the robot is assumed to have 
reached the edge of the plume. It re-measures the wind 
direction and continues moving upwind with an angle -α 
with respect to the upwind direction. This procedure is 
repeated causing the robot to move in a zigzag fashion within 
the plume. The robot is stopped, when it has reached the 
source. In comparison to the original algorithm, the micro-
drone does only collect gas and wind measurements at the 
waypoints where it stops.  
 
 
Figure 7. Pseudo gradient-based algorithm. 
The idea for the ﬁrst gradient-based algorithms for plume 
tracking goes back to Braitenberg [11]. The chemical 
gradient is measured by a pair of bilateral gas sensors 
mounted on each side of a robot, each directly controlling the 
speed of a wheel. Each sensor is connected to the motor on 
the same side, the motor on the opposite side (cross 
coupling), or both motors. Although it was a purely 
chemotactic approach, a Braitenberg-style robot is able to 
track a plume towards a gas source by following the 
concentration gradient [12]. As the ﬁrst gradient-based 
algorithms do not consider wind information, the robot does 
not know whether it is following a plume towards or away 
from its source. Turning the robot in proportion to the 
concentration gradient in dependence of the upwind direction 
solves this problem [13]. As the rotors of the micro-drone 
introduce 
strong 
disturbances, 
measuring 
a 
local 
concentration gradient with spatially separated sensors is not 
feasible. Instead a new measuring strategy was developed, 
which basically splits up one measuring position into two 
spatially separated ones. In order to respect the minimum 
step size of the micro-drone of 1 m and to progress faster to 
the source, the step size in upwind direction was set to 1.5 × 
step size (Figure 7). 
B. Gas Distribution Modeling/Mapping (GDM) 
Gas distribution mapping can be used in a number of 
relevant application areas where a better understanding of the 
gas dispersion is needed, such as environmental monitoring 
and safety and security related fields. 
To build a predictive gas distribution model, the Kernel 
DM+V/W algorithm introduced by Reggente and Lilienthal 
[14] was used. The input to this algorithm is a set D = 
{(xi,ri,vi)}1≤i≤n of gas sensor measurements ri and wind 
measurements vi collected at locations xi. The output is a grid 
model that computes a confidence estimate, as well as the 
distribution mean and variance for each cell k of the gridmap 
(Figure 8).  
Additional sensors for temperature and humidity are 
integrated into the gas-sensing payload but so far not taken 
into account. It is conceivable to use these data for sensor 
compensation algorithms or to correlate the environmental 
conditions, e.g., in the case of fire. Integration of optical or 
IR data is another viable aspect. 
 
 
Figure 8. GDM Experiment: Predictive mean (top) and variance map 
(middle) of the gas distribution and the corresponding mean airflow map 
(bottom) and the path of the micro-drone created using Kernel DM+V/W. 
The gas source was located approx. at position (2, 6) m and is denoted by 
the cross. The concentration value of CO2 is given in % by volume. 
IV. 
SENSOR-ENABLED RFID TAGS FOR SAFEGUARD OF 
DANGEROUS GOODS 
The project “Sensor-enabled RFID tags for safeguard of 
dangerous goods” with acronym SIGRID investigates and 
assesses possibilities to improve safety and security of 
dangerous goods transports through the use of the latest 
RFID technology [15]. This technology can be used to 

197
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
greatly enhance the transparency of the supply chain and aid 
logistics companies in complying with regulations. In the 
context of SIGRID, custom RFID sensor tags (Figure 9) 
were developed to monitor dangerous goods during transport 
and 
help 
to 
prevent 
hazards 
by 
allowing 
timely 
countermeasures. 
This 
requires 
the 
combination 
of 
communication technology and sensor functionality with low 
power consumption and small design. 
To achieve long battery-life, the use of very energy 
efficient sensors is mandatory. Other desirable properties of 
the sensors include high accuracy, long lifetime, and short 
response time. For gas sensors a high selectivity is also very 
important. Currently, four types of sensors are integrated in 
the RFID tag, which are a combined humidity and 
temperature sensor, gas sensors for carbon monoxide (CO) 
and oxygen (O2), and a tilt sensor. Other interesting sensor 
options that might be tested in future include sensors for 
detecting the filling level and sensors for monitoring the 
operation of equipment that is built into the container like a 
stirring unit. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Prototype of the sensor enabled RFID tag 
The integrated sensors enable the system for recognizing 
and evaluating of different scenarios. Adequate gas sensors 
indicate an emission from the containments via measured 
concentrations. If a possible gas release from the transported 
substance cannot be detected because of lacking the proper 
sensor, the O2-sensor can indicate a leakage through 
decreasing oxygen values. For numerous dangerous goods a 
maximal transport temperature is defined to prevent any 
chemical reaction. Temperatures can be measured and 
compared periodically to substance specific values. If that 
value or a tolerance is exceeded an alarm or countermeasure 
can be activated. The tilt sensor can be triggered on heavy 
vibrations or tilting of the containment. In case of a 
dangerous goods accident the available information about the 
type, amount, and condition of the dangerous goods can be 
used to accurately inform the relief forces. Unavailable or 
inaccurate information represents a significant problem. This 
often leads to a delay of the rescue operation, because relief 
forces must be aware of the involved substances and their 
condition to effectively protect themselves against them. 
 Within the scope of the project, an RFID tag was 
developed, that allows connecting with different types of 
sensors. This RFID tag combines the advantages of semi 
active (only sensors are battery supplied) and active tags 
(sensors and radio communication are battery supplied). On 
one side, this tag is compatible to the ISO 18000, 
respectively EPC-Gen2 standards; on the other side, this tag 
has also the ability to communicate via the widely adopted 
wireless LAN standard Wi-Fi. Because the tag is woken up 
the same way as battery-less passive tags and for that reason 
does not need to power-up a receiver-module, battery-
lifetimes of more than half a year are possible - just as with 
semi active tags. After the tag is woken up, the WLAN 
module is activated and allows very fast data transmission, 
that otherwise would only be achievable with active tags. 
This greater transmission speed makes the tag suitable as 
storage device for much larger amounts of data, than the 
ones that are normally possible with RFID tags. The 
possibility to store great amounts of data in combination with 
a very long battery lifetime makes this tag ideal for use as a 
data logger. Logging intervals can be configured individually 
for every sensor. The tag has also an open interface, which 
allows an easy integration of different kinds of sensors. 
 
 
Figure 10. Interaction between the main system components during 
transport 
Sensor-Tags, data communication, and software are 
combined to an interactive solution, which can tackle 
various scenarios during dangerous goods transports. The 
underlying information is provided by a data base with 
expert knowledge, in this case the BAM dangerous goods 
database "GEFAHRGUT" [16]. Figure 10 displays the 
interaction between the main system components during 
transport. The focal point of the vehicle equipment is the 
onboard unit (OBU), which consists of a ruggedized 
industry PC that is specially designed for use in a truck. The 
main functions of the OBU include acquisition of position 
data via GPS, routing, generation of transport documents, 

198
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
data communication via the mobile phone network, 
monitoring of the load with sensors and surveillance 
cameras as well as WLAN connectivity. It is either possible 
to read the sensors of the semi-active transponders or 
sensors that are permanently installed in the loading area. 
The OBU constantly monitors the measurements to ensure, 
that they are in the allowable range. If that is not the case, an 
alarm is automatically triggered. Current status messages 
are transmitted to the centralized database, that has also the 
cargo manifest stored. In case of need, the OBU should 
supply the relief forces with all required information via 
WLAN. But if the OBU gets destroyed during an accident, 
all information is still available through the centralized 
database. Possible extensions of the system take into 
account vehicle data or GPS information in terms of route 
planning and geo-fencing. 
V. 
MULTIFUNCTIONAL SENSOR FOR SPATIALLY RE-
SOLVED UNDER-SURFACE MONITORING OF GAS STORAGE 
AREAS 
One of the main unsolved issues of under-ground 
storages for, e.g., carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and natural gas 
(primarily methane) is the comprehensive surveillance of 
these areas with reasonable effort and costs. Conventional 
sensors, such as soil air probes or borehole probes, can only 
be used for punctual or locally limited measurements. 
Further they require invasive application, which causes 
structural influences. 
 
  
Figure 11. Membrane based gas sensor. 
A. Sensing principles 
BAM in cooperation with the company MeGaSen UG 
carries out a research project to enhance and validate an 
innovative approach for distributed subsurface monitoring of 
gas storage areas. The concept combines different 
measurement technologies to one multifunctional sensor: 
membrane-based gas measurement technology for in-situ 
monitoring of gases in soil [17] and fiber optical sensing of 
temperature and strain as a measure for structural change 
[18]. 
The gas sensor (Figure 11) is based on the principle of 
selective permeation of gases through a membrane. The 
measuring method combines the gas specific diffusion rates 
through a membrane with Dalton’s law of partial pressures. 
It enables the calculation of gas concentrations with the ideal 
gas law using measurements of pressure, time, and 
temperature. The sensor is implemented in form of a flexible 
tube. The synthetic material allows a variable subsurface 
installation, e.g., in meander or network form (Figure 12). So 
far the gas concentration measurement is implemented for 
carbon dioxide and oxygen, further gases should follow, e.g., 
methane and hydrogen sulfide. 
 
 
Figure 12. Spatially distributed gas monitoring built up of several 
membrane sensors. The brown and yellow areas indicate CO2 hotspots 
underground. The red and grey curves display the averaged measurements 
of the partial CO2 pressure over x and y. 
Glass fiber optical sensors use the effects of stimulated 
Raman scattering (SRS) and stimulated Brillouin scattering 
(SBS) for spatially resolved measuring of temperature and 
strain. Distributed strain measurements can also be 
performed with polymer optical fibers using optical time-
domain reflectometry (OTDR). BAM develops, validates 
and uses such sensor systems in different areas of 
application, such as geotechnics, structural engineering, and 
physical protection. 
Combining these two sensor types (membrane sensor and 
fiber sensor) to a multifunctional sensor offers an innovative 
and promising approach for spatially resolved monitoring of 
large-scale areas [19]. Both technologies offer advantageous 
specifications, 
which 
support 
and 
encourage 
their 
combination: 
• 
Distributed, area-wide applicable measuring system 
with spatially resolution of all variables 
• 
Scalable and adaptable form of application, 
depending on monitoring object and problem 
• 
Non-invasive 
system 
(no 
influence 
on 
the 
monitoring object, due to permanent presence of the 
sensor in the ground) 
• 
No sensitivity against electro-magnetic fields (e.g., 
lightning and high-voltage lines) 
• 
Applicable in explosive surroundings (no electrical 
components at the measuring locations) 
• 
High thermal and chemical robustness 
• 
Comparatively reasonable components 
The structural combination is accomplished by linkage of 
the sensitive elements membrane sensor and optical fiber. 
For this purpose, geogrid materials (Figure 13) act as a 
carrier material. 

199
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Combined data analysis should be investigated and 
further developed to attain synergy effects, increase the 
sensitivity and informational value, and address new fields of 
application. Using sensor data fusion allows in-depth 
analysis of soil processes and early detection of relevant 
changes. For instance, the combined analysis of gas 
concentration, temperature, and strain can enable an 
indication of very small crack formation and gas emission, 
with significant higher reliability compared to sole gas 
measurements. 
 
 
Figure 13. Geogrid with integrated fiber optical sensors. 
Two immediate fields of application are addressed: 
Landfills produce greenhouse gas and warmth. The 
combination of both measurement methods should allow a 
potent landfill monitoring by containment of chemical active 
areas and leakages. 
Underground storage of CO2 as part of CCS as well as 
extraction and production of gases from geological areas can 
lead to mechanical changes of the deck rock (lowering / 
elevation), with which a regional tension field is build up. 
Thus, gas-leading gaps can be induced, which cause local 
ground structure changes. The simultaneous measurement of 
spatially resolved gas concentrations and strain allows the 
development of an efficient early warning system.  
B. Experimental Validation 
The validation, optimization, and practical demonstration 
of the overall system are carried out on the BAM Test Site 
Technical Safety (BAM TTS) [20][21]. For this purpose, a 
test field in application relevant scale of 20 x 20 m² was built 
up (Figure 14). Additionally, a corresponding laboratory 
setup was constructed. Both setups use the same sensors and 
measuring procedures as well as the same soil, which acts as 
ambient medium. The laboratory setup (Figure 15) was 
designed as a cooperative tool to prepare the test site build 
up and operation.  
Comparable investigations can be performed in small-
size and short-term to estimate the efforts and benefits of 
full-size experiments. Gas emission processes can be 
simulated as well as temperature and mechanical impact to 
validate and enhance the proposed multifunctional sensor. 
First, CO2 leakage experiments demonstrate the applicability 
of the technology for rapid leak detection, and thus qualify 
the sensor particularly for safety application in Carbon 
Capture and Storage (CCS) areas [22]. 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Built-up of the test site. Top: level with 4 linear sensors. 
Bottom: level with 40 linear sensors. Each sensor line combines membrane 
gas sensing and fibre optical sensing of temperature and strain. 
 
 
Figure 15. Laboratory setup with corresponding design to the test site and 
size of 2.5 x 1.5 x 0.1 m3. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Safety related monitoring often is necessary in complex 
scenarios. It requires distinct information to evaluate the 
situation and to determine the further operation. The 
combination of several measurands can improve the 
informative value of a monitoring system in terms of 
measuring diversity and accuracy.  
To present the great potential of such systems, four 
examples for monitoring in safety relevant scenarios are 
presented in this paper, which combine multiple application 
specific sensor techniques. An important result considering 
each of the examples and multi-sensor systems in general is 
that data processing and display of the results with focus of 
the relevant information is crucial. The experiences gained 
from these projects show that the focus should lay on the 

200
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
final application and end-users should be involved already in 
the conception of multi-sensor systems. Data fusion offers 
broad possibilities, but conditions and objectives should be 
well defined and expediently applied. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank all participating colleagues from BAM 
and their project partners. The authors also express their 
gratitude to the German Federal Ministry of Economics and 
Technology for funding the research (MNPQ Program; file 
numbers 28/07 and 17/11 and ZIM Program File 
KF2201041SM1). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Bartholmai, E. Koeppe, and P. P. Neumann, “Monitoring 
of Hazardous Scenarios using Multi-Sensor Devices,” 
Proceedings of SENSORDEVICES 2013 - The 4th 
International conference on sensor device technologies and 
applications, pp. 9-13, 2013. 
[2] E. Koeppe, M. Bartholmai, A. Liehrs, and J. H. Schiller, 
“Radio-based multi-sensor system for person tracking and 
indoor positioning,” Proceedings of WPNC 2012 - 9th 
Workshop on positioning, navigation and communication, pp. 
180-186, 2012, doi: 10.1109/WPNC.2012.6268761. 
[3] E. Koeppe, D. Augustin, A. Liehrs, and J. H. Schiller, 
“Automatic 3D Calibration for a Multi-Sensor System,” 
Proceedings of Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation 
(IPIN), pp. 1-6, 2012, doi: 10.1109/IPIN.2012.6418870. 
[4] E. Koeppe, D. Augustin, A. Liehrs, and J. H. Schiller, “Self-
calibration-method for an inertial navigation system with 
three 3D sensors,” Proceedings of Inertial Sensors and 
Systems 
(ISISS), 
pp. 
1-4, 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1109/ISISS.2014.6782522. 
[5] M. Bartholmai and P. P. Neumann, “Adaptive Spatial-
Resolved Gas Concentration Measurement Using a Micro-
Drone,” tm - Technisches Messen, vol. 78, no. 10, pp. 470-
478, 2011, doi: 10.1524/teme.2011.0158. 
[6] P. P. Neumann, S. Asadi, J. H. Schiller, A. J. Lilienthal, and 
M. Bartholmai, “Autonomous Gas-Sensitive Microdrone – 
Wind Vector Estimation and Gas Distribution Mapping,” 
IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 
50-61, 2012, doi: 10.1109/MRA.2012.2184671. 
[7] P. P. Neumann, V. Bennets, and M. Bartholmai, “Adaptive 
Gas Source Localization Strategies and Gas Distribution 
Mapping using a Gas-sensitive Micro-Drone,” Proceedings of 
16. GMA/ITG-Fachtagung Sensoren und Messsysteme 2012, 
pp. 800-809, 2012, doi: 10.5162/sensoren2012/P5.4. 
[8] P. P. Neumann, M. Bartholmai, V. Bennets, and A. Lilienthal, 
“From Insects to Micro Vehicles - A Comparison of Reactive 
Plume Tracking Strategies,” Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Intelligent Autonomous Systems 
(IAS), 2014. 
[9] T. Lochmatter and A. Martinoli, “Tracking Odor Plumes in a 
Laminar 
Wind 
Field 
with Bio-Inspired 
Algorithms,” 
Proccedings 
of 
11th 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Experimental Robotics, vol. 54, pp. 473-482, 2009. 
[10] H. Ishida, K. Suetsugu, T. Nakamoto, and T. Moriizumi, 
“Study of autonomous mobile sensing system for localization 
of odor source using gas sensors and anemometric sensors,” 
Sensors and Actuators A, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 153-157, 1994. 
[11] V. 
Braitenberg, 
“Vehicles: Experiments 
in 
Synthetic 
Psychology,” The MIT Press, February 1986. 
[12] A. Lilienthal and T. Duckett, “Experimental Analysis of Gas-
Sensitive Braitenberg Vehicles,” Advanced Robotics, vol. 18, 
no. 8, pp. 817-834, 2004. 
[13] R. Russell, A. Bab-Hadiashar, R. Shepherd, and G. Wallace, 
“A comparison of reactive chemotaxis algorithms,” Robotics 
and Autonomous Systems, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 83-97, 2003. 
[14] M. Reggente and A. J. Lilienthal, “Using Local Wind 
Information for Gas Distribution Mapping in Outdoor 
Environments with a Mobile Robot,” Proceedings of IEEE 
Sensors 
2009, 
pp. 
1715-1720, 
2009, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICSENS.2009.5398498. 
[15] T. Goedecke, A. Pettelkau, S. Hohendorf, D. Damm, M. 
Bartholmai, and M. Farahbakhsh, “Securing of Dangerous 
Goods Transports by RFID-Tags with Sensor-Functionality 
and integrated 
Database 
“GEFAHRGUT” 
Information 
(SIGRID),” Proceedings of the 17th IAPRI World Conference 
on Packaging 2010, pp. 639-642, 2010. 
[16] BAM Dangerous Goods Database. [online]. Available from: 
http://www.dgg.bam.de 2014.11.24 
[17] D. Lazik, S. Ebert, M. Leuthold, J. Hagenau, and H. 
Geistlinger, “Membrane Based Measurement Technology for 
in situ Monitoring of Gases in Soil,” Sensors, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 
756-767, 2009, doi: 10.3390/s90200756. 
[18] S. Liehr. P. Lenke, M. Wendt, K. Krebber, M. Seeger, E. 
Thiele, H. Metschies, and B. Gebreselassie, “Polymer Optical 
Fiber Sensors for Distributed Strain Measurement and 
Application in Structural Health Monitoring,” IEEE Sensors 
Journal, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1330-1338, 2009, doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2009.201835. 
[19] M. Bartholmai, P. P. Neumann, and D. Lazik, “Multi-
functional Sensor for Monitoring of CO2 Underground 
Storage by Comprehensive and Spatially Resolved Measuring 
of Gas Concentrations, Temperature and Structural Changes,” 
Energy Procedia, vol. 37, pp. 4033-4040, 2013, doi: 
10.1016/j.egypro.2013.06.303.  
[20] BAM Testside for Technical Safety. [online]. Available from: 
http://www.tts.bam.de 2014.11.24 
[21] P. P. Neumann, H. Kohlhoff, K.-D. Werner, J. Erdmann, B. 
Eggeringhaus, M. Kammermeier, M. Schukar, F. Basedau, M. 
Bartholmai, D. Lazik, and S. Ebert, “Setup of a large scale 
soil test field with CO2 injection for testing a novel distributed 
subsurface monitoring system for gas storage areas,” 31th 
Danubia-Adria Symposium, pp. 238-239, 2014. 
[22] M. Bartholmai, P. P. Neumann, K.-D. Werner, S. Ebert, and 
D. Lazik, “Linear Sensor for Areal Subsurface Gas 
Monitoring 
– 
Calibration 
Routine 
and 
Validation 
Experiments,” IEEE Sensors 2014, pp. 942-945, 2014. 
 

