ERP Systems in Public Sector Organization: Critical Success Factors in 
African Developing Countries 
  
 
Marie-Douce Primeau 
Management and Technology Department 
École des Sciences de la Gestion (ESG), UQAM 
Montréal, Canada 
primeau.marie-douce@uqam.ca 
Marie-Pierre Leroux 
Management and Technology Department 
École des Sciences de la Gestion (ESG), UQAM 
Montréal, Canada 
leroux.marie-pierre@uqam.ca
 
 
Abstract— In the wake of budget restriction and increased 
pressure for transparency and accountability, more and more 
public sector organizations have opted to implement enterprise 
resource planning systems. Public sector organizations of 
developing countries have also followed this trend, pressured 
not only by the demands of accountability and efficiency from 
their own citizens but also from the multilateral and bilateral 
development agencies that fund a majority of the development 
projects and programs that they deliver. Enterprise resource 
planning is also seen as a way to foster organizational 
transformation, though best practices adoption and process 
harmonization. Yet, success rate of enterprise resource 
planning systems implementation, adoption, as well as their 
perceived results are less then optimal. This paper aims to 
explore the critical success factors in the implementation of an 
enterprise resource planning system in the context of public 
service organization in African developing countries. The 
results aim to guide practitioners and decision-makers with 
tools to increase the chances of success of these initiatives. 
Keywords- Enterprise Resource Planning – ERP; public 
sector organizations; Critical Success Factors – CSF; developing 
countries. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
An increasing number of public sector organizations 
(PSO) has opted to implement enterprise resource planning 
(ERP) systems [1]. This trend is also followed by developing 
countries, pressured not only by the same demands from 
their own citizens but also from the multinational and 
binational bilateral funding development agencies. 
ERP system implementation is still in its early stages in 
developing countries, with Asia-Pacific and Latin America 
accounting for most of its expansion, and Africa trailing 
behind [2]. Yet, today it is estimated that developing 
countries account for 10% of all ERP sales [3].  
In North America and Europe, the private sector is the 
main client of ERP systems. In developing countries, ERP 
are mainly deployed in large organizations, rather than in 
SMEs. The public sector being the largest employer in 
developing countries [4], the main proportion of ERP 
systems is implemented in PSO. This specificity adds an 
additional level of complexity to an already complex project, 
since funding usually comes in part from external single or 
multiple donors, with their own interests in the project, and 
their own procurement, management and monitoring 
processes. Success rate of ERP systems implementation, 
adoption, as well as their perceived results in PSO in 
developing countries are less then optimal. Yet, little 
research has been undertaken to understand the specific 
Critical Success Factors (CSF) of the implementation 
process of ERP in PSO in developing countries. 
Based on secondary data analysis of CSF collected 
through four professional workshops with key stakeholders, 
this paper aims to explore this gap. The paper is structure as 
followed: Section II presents the main dimensions of an ERP 
systems and draw some insights specific to PSO in African 
context. Section III presents the methodology of this paper, 
while Section IV presents the main results. Section V 
reviews the discussion, before presenting the conclusion in 
Section VI. 
II. 
CONTEXT 
In this section, we will define the main terms used in this 
paper such as ERP, PSO and developing countries; describe 
the reasons why PSO would implement ERP systems; and 
explore main CSF in ERP systems implementation, both in 
general and specific to PSO in developing countries. 
A. What is an ERP?  
An ERP system is an “adaptable and evolutive software 
system that supports real-time and integrated management of 
a majority – if not all – processes of an organization” [5, p. 
70]. ERP systems are an integrated, modular, customizable 
and uniform (database, management and interface) software 
[6][7]. 
ERP systems are highly complex [8]. Marnewick and 
Labuschagne [8] postulate that ERP systems can be 
conceptualize as a combination of four main components: 
Software (Product), Process Flow (Performance), Change 
Management (Process) and Customer Mindset (People; 
Figure 1 below). All four components are implemented 
through a Methodology, which underlines each ERP life- 
cycle phases (pre-implementation, implementation and post- 
implementation phases [9]). 
 
 
279
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure I. Conceptual model for Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), 
Marnewick and Labuschagne [8]. 
 
Conceptual model components: The Software component 
refers to the ERP product itself, such as its main features, 
choice of interface, and other technical aspects, as well as its 
development, testing and troubleshooting. The Process flow 
component refers to the way the different ERP modules flow  
within and between them. This includes both the processes 
themselves and the data they store and process. 
The Customer mindset component refers to the need for 
internal stakeholder management at the user, team and 
organizational levels. Then, the change management 
component covers all factors pertaining to the planning, 
managing and controlling of changes. Change management 
is divided in four subcomponents, namely: user attitudes 
changes, project changes, business process changes, and 
system changes. Lastly, Methodology refers to the 
“systematic approach to implement an ERP system” [8, 
p.153]. All together, these components help better approach 
ERP system’s complexity. 
B. Why would PSO want to implement an ERP system? 
PSO consists of “governments and all publicly controlled 
or publicly funded agencies, enterprises, and other entities 
that deliver public programs, goods, or services”, and exists 
at any level – international, national/federal, regional or 
local) [4]. 
Public and private sectors have “different goals and 
motives and are governed by somewhat different principles, 
with unique groups overseeing their actions and procedures” 
[10]. Organizations in the private sector have “more freedom 
to operate, while public organizations are governed by laws, 
rules, traditions, and structural bureaucratic checks and 
balances” [10]. 
Although very different, benefits sought during ERP 
system implementation seem consistent among public- and 
private-sector organizations [11]. These benefits include 
improvements in: 
• 
Financial 
performance: 
improves 
financial 
management, creates value, maximizes investments, 
and reduces costs;  
• 
Functional performance: increases productivity, 
quality of services, and functional efficiency, 
improves 
management 
of 
resources, 
enables 
automation of operational procedures, eliminates 
redundant data and operations, and reduces cycle 
times; 
• 
Organizational 
performance: 
increases 
organizational 
performance, 
enables 
the 
centralization and delocalization of maintenance 
services, 
increases 
adaptability, 
facilitates 
harmonization around best practices, enhances 
support to organizational activities, and changes 
nature of work in various units and departments; 
• 
Communication management: centralizes and 
harmonizes information, improves management and 
organization of internal and external information 
flux, and improves security and information access 
management; 
• 
Internal audit, monitoring and control: improves 
controls and institutional accountability, enhances 
organizations 
regulatory 
compliance, 
achieves 
accuracy in management information system, 
enables real-time access to performance information, 
which in turn fosters better strategic analysis and 
decision [6] [12] [13]. 
Furthermore, a study on the impact of ERP systems in 
small and midsized PSO suggests that implementing an ERP 
system helped PSO improve services to customers and 
suppliers while enhancing knowledge of primary users and 
increasing shareholders confidence in organization [13]. 
With all those potential benefits, we have to ask: why are not 
more PSO implementing ERP systems? 
C. Is ERP implementation in PSO sucessful? 
As discussed above, ERP system implementation can 
enhance benefits for PSO. Nevertheless, ERP system 
implementation can be cost and time consuming [14]. As 
example, the cost of ERP implementation in the United 
Nations (UN) organizations is estimated at 712 million 
United States Dollar (USD). This does not include 
recurring maintenance costs (at least 66 million USD per 
year), nor the off-budget associated costs (between 86 and 
110 million USD per year). 
Furthermore, failure rate, both in private and public 
organization, is high. The 2016 ERP Report [15] states that 
less that 10% of all ERP projects sampled in 2015 were 
implemented on time, within budget and in respect to the 
planned scope. More than a third (35%) was stopped or 
(indefinitely) differed. The remaining 55% were completed 
with an average of 178% cost and 230% schedule overruns. 
In fact, ERP implementation projects lasted 1 to 3 years, 
with an average of 21 months, while most projects had 
been planned around an 8-14 months’ timetable. 
Although data on the subject is scarce, ERP systems 
implementation failure rate in PSO in developing countries 
is believed to be even higher. In his study of ERP 
implementation in Egyptian organizations, Abdelghaffar 
[16] argued that 75% of ERP implementation attempts can 
be classified as failures. Another study found schedule 
overruns in 67% and cost overruns in 33% of all ERP 
implementation projects in United Nations organizations 
280
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[12]. Reasons frequently mentioned to explain these 
schedule overruns were: changes in project scope; delays in 
personalization of software; users’ resistance to change, 
delays in data conversion, changes in initial project 
strategy, and redefinition of operating procedures. As for 
cost overruns, they were attributable mainly to unplanned 
personalization costs; inadequate definition of functional 
needs; unforeseen delays in the implementation process, 
and unrealistic cost estimation planning. No data was found 
on ERP implementation success in African developing 
countries, even if failure rates are thought to be higher than 
in developed countries [6].  
D. Are all PSO the same? or How do PSO from developing 
countries differ from PSO from African developed 
countries? 
United Nations divides countries into two categories: 
developed and developing countries. This classification is 
mainly based on economic indicators and indices such as 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Gross National Product 
(GNP), 
per 
capita 
income, 
unemployment 
rates, 
industrialization and standard of living [17]. The developing 
countries categories include both developing and least 
developed countries, most of which are in Africa. 
Contrary to developed countries, most PSO in African 
developing countries are funded (partly of entirely) by 
external 
funding. 
Funds 
come 
mainly 
from 
multi 
donors/multilateral aid agencies in the context of national 
strategy to capacity building. In exchange for grants or 
concessional loans, beneficiary countries are expected to 
report their results, and be accountable. In this respect, all 
funded initiatives, whether in the form of technical assistance 
or capacity building projects, in all sectors, including 
governance, are required to be designed, executed and 
evaluated under a results-based management approach. It is 
indeed under the auspices of these major capacity building 
programs for public administrations that ERP projects have 
often been imposed as a way to increase transparency and 
guarantee accountability [6]. In this vein, local participation 
in the project has been a key message to increase ownership 
of public bodies in developing countries. For years, the 
participation of beneficiaries in the process and the 
management of the funds allocated to them has been part of 
participatory approaches, which stipulates that local 
participation in donor-funded initiatives becomes an essential 
ingredient in ownership.  
However, considering the important costs – both 
financial, social and political – associated to ERP 
implementation failures in PSO in African developing 
countries, it is important to understand the CSF that could 
hinder or facilitate this process.   
E. What are the CSF in ERP systems implementation in 
PSO in African developing countries? 
In order to support organizations in their implementation 
efforts, practitioners and researchers have come up with 
CSF that facilitate or hinder implementation. CSF are 
defined as "factors needed to ensure a successful ERP 
project" [18]. This includes both factors that facilitate and 
hinder the implementation of an ERP system. These factors 
vary according to the nature and environment of the 
organization [19]. Yet most research on ERP success factors 
have been done in developing countries, in the context of 
private-sector organizations. 
Through their literature review of CSF in ten different 
countries/regions, Ngai, Law and Wat [19] identified 
eighteen CSF, with more than 80 subfactors for the 
successful implementation of an ERP. The CSF are: 
appropriate business and IT legacy system; business 
plan/vision/goals/justification; 
business 
process 
reengineering; change management, communication; data 
accuracy; ERP strategy and implementation; ERP project 
team; ERP vendor; monitoring and evaluation performance; 
organizational characteristics; project champion; project 
management; 
software 
development, 
testing, 
and 
troubleshooting; top management support; fit between ERP 
and business/process; national culture; and country-related 
functional requirements [19]. This typology has been used 
by other scholars to guide their analysis of the influence of 
CSF in phases of an ERP implementation process [20] [21].  
In the last years, few studies have tried to identify CSF 
specific to ERP implementation in PSO of developing 
countries. 
In its assessment of ERP implementation projects in its 
organizations, the United Nations identified eleven CSF, 
namely: project planning and software selection; governance 
of the project, risk management, change management, 
project team, end users training and assistance; ERP system 
hosting and infrastructure; data conversion and systems 
integration, ERP upgrade, and project audit [12]. 
Another study from the World Bank identified eight CSF 
from its experience implementing ERP systems, namely: 
capacity building and training, close supervision and 
control from the donor agency, favorable political context 
and leadership; pre-existing favorable environment (IT, 
HR, 
Accounting); 
adequate 
preparation 
and 
clear 
conception; good project management and coordination, 
and external environment factors [22]. It also identified 
main 
failure 
factors, 
which 
were: 
inappropriate 
training/education 
of 
project 
teams; 
institutional/organizational resistance; inadequate project 
preparation and planning; complex conception/high number 
of procurements; organizational structure adapted to 
integration efforts; inadequate IT infrastructure; absence of 
leadership/engagement 
and 
ambiguous 
attitude 
of 
authorities regarding  implementation; inappropriate 
technology; inadequate project coordination; and external 
factors (political troubles, natural disasters). These failure 
factors are consistent with other studies on ERP implement 
issues in developing countries [14] [23] [24]. 
These studies offer some insight on perceived CSF in 
ERP implementation from the point of view of donor 
agencies. Yet, these highlight the need to further explore the 
Critical Success Factors (CSF) in the implementation of an 
ERP system in PSO in African developing countries, in hope 
to give practitioners and decision-makers tools to increase 
281
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the chances of success of these initiatives. This paper will try 
to address this gap.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This work uses secondary data collected through 
professional workshops with key stakeholders that have 
direct experience either in the planning, managing or 
implementing of an ERP in PSO in developing countries. A 
description of the initial data collection process and methods, 
as well as an overview of the data analysis techniques and 
conceptual model used for secondary data analysis follows.  
A. Data collection – primary data   
Primary data was collected through four 1 ½- 2 hours 
professional workshops on successful ERP implementation. 
In total, 140 participants took part in the workshops. The 
workshops took place in Abidjan (Ivory Coast), Rabat 
(Morocco) and Marrakech (Morocco). Participants from 
workshops 1 and 3 were all locals, while participants from 
workshop 2 were mostly locals, and all participants except 
two from workshop 4 were from outside of the country, 
namely from other West African countries. In total, 104 
participants gave out their information contacts to organizers, 
for a 74% answer rate. Out of these, 62.5% of participants 
came from Ivory Coast, 20.5% from Morocco, 4% from 
Guinea, 3% from Burkina Faso, 3% from Benin, 2% from 
Mauritania, 2% from Senegal and 1% from Mali.  
The following subsection offers an overview of the 
composition of each of the workshop groups. 
• 
Workshop no. 1: 15 participants from a multilateral 
development bank institution working as Task team 
Leaders, 
Procurement 
and 
Monitoring 
and 
Evaluation. Specialists, and Managers. Languages: 
English and French. 
• 
Workshop no. 2: 85 participants from public and 
parapublic organizations. Participants worked as 
directors, project or program managers, procurement 
or monitoring and evaluation sectors on bilateral or 
multilateral 
initiatives. Two 
came 
from 
the 
academia. Language: French. 
• 
Workshop no. 3: 26 participants from public 
organization sector or project and programs funded 
through bilateral or multilateral development aid. 
Languages: French and Arabic. 
• 
Workshop no. 4: 14 participants from West Africa 
working as either project or program managers or 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists on bilateral 
donors or multilateral projects or programs. 
Language: French. 
The diversity within the different groups was one of the 
main difficulty / challenges encountered by the workshop 
facilitators (English/French/Arabic languages, professional 
status, type of organizations, and number of participants per 
session). To increase participation, reduce cultural barriers, 
provide a safe climate to exchange and create cohesion 
between participants of the workshops, facilitators used 
World Café as a data collection method. 
World café is a collaborative approach that aims “to 
engage [participants] in constructive dialogue around critical 
questions, to build personal relationships, and to foster 
collaborative learning [25, p.28]”, and helping creative new 
ways to address problems emerge from the initiative. Simple 
and flexible, the approach can be used both in small and 
large heterogeneous groups to foster open dialogue and 
collaboration [26]. 
World café follows seven integrated design principles, 
namely: 
□ Set the context; 
□ Create a hospitable space; 
□ Explore questions that matter; 
□ Encourage everyone’s contribution; 
□ Connect diverse perspectives; 
□ Listen together for patterns and insights; 
□ Share collective discoveries [22]. 
At the end of each of the workshops, participants drafted 
a list of factors that facilitated and hindered the 
implementation of an ERP. All entries of the four lists were 
then combined by the facilitators. This final compilation 
was sent to participants in the conference proceedings by the 
workshops organizers. These conference proceedings are the 
basis of our analysis.  
B. Data analysis 
All entries of the conference proceedings were analyzed 
and combined through thematic analysis [27]. To facilitate 
understanding, subthemes were then organized using a 
modified version of Marnewick and Labuschagne [8]’s ERP 
Conceptual Model. This modified version includes all four 
main components (Software, Process Flow, Change 
Management, Costumer Mindset), Methodology, and adds a 
last component - external environment. This component was 
added to consider the influence of national culture [19] and 
other 
macroeconomic 
factors 
pertaining 
to 
the 
implementation of ERP systems in African developing 
countries. The ERP project financing also falls under this 
category, as it has a major impact on ERP implementation in 
developing countries [12]. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The following section presents our results, namely the 
CSF identified and categorized, using the adapted 
conceptual model. To facilitate understanding, results are 
presented per components, namely: Software, Process flow, 
Customer mindset, Change management, Methodology, 
and External environment. In total, forty-one CSF were 
identified through this process (see Table I in the 
appendix). 
 
A. Software 
In total, five CSF were identified by participants for the 
Software component, namely: participatory software 
development, testing and troubleshooting; fair and balanced 
ERP 
vendors/suppliers’ 
relationships; country-related 
functional requirements; adequate ERP infrastructure and 
hosting; and sufficient IP maturity of organizations. 
282
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Participatory software development, testing and 
troubleshooting: participants underlined the importance of 
the choices made through theses phases, and the need for 
user participation in the process to facilitate adoption. They 
highlighted the difficulties associated with the fact that 
these steps are often outsourced, without real inputs from 
directly implicated PSO stakeholders (e.g., users, M&E 
specialists, etc.). Furthermore, the lack knowledge transfer 
to local IT teams throughout the development, testing, and 
troubleshooting phases complicate not only maintenance, 
but hinders the adaptation of the software to PSOs needs.  
Fair 
and 
balanced 
ERP 
vendors/suppliers’ 
relationships: Participants highlighted that the absence of 
local vendors gives disproportionate power to international 
vendors, thus hindering optimal selection of ERP systems 
by PSO. Furthermore, vendors seemed reluctant to adapt 
their products to PSOs particular needs, knowing that they 
will have to buy their products anyway.  
Country-related functional requirements: Participants 
also discussed the fact that ERP often did not meet their 
specific PSO requirements, e.g., integration of performance 
indicators at the result level, reporting formats that do not 
fit the donor requirements, etc. In many cases, PSO needed 
to combine the ERP with other monitoring tools (e.g., 
Excel sheets and MS Project) to fulfill their monitoring 
requirements.  
Adequate ERP infrastructure and hosting: More and 
more ERP systems are cloud-based. Because of the lack of 
access to basic amenities in many parts of African 
countries, many ERP options are not feasible. ERP hosting 
is also a problem, not only because of security issues but 
also because of limited access to electricity. 
Sufficient IT maturity of organizations: Participants also 
underlined the low IT maturity in most African PSO, which 
hinders their ability to facilitate ERP implementation, and 
to maintain the system adequately. This situation furthers 
their dependence on ERP vendors, and limits appropriation 
of the system by local IT teams.   
B. 
Process flow 
The 
Process 
flow 
component 
includes 
two 
subcategories: Process and Data. In total, seven CSF were 
identified by participants for the Process flow component. 
a. Process 
In total, three CSF were identified by participants for 
the Process subcomponent, namely: fit between ERP and 
an organization’s procedures; harmonized practices, 
procedures and processes; and good communication 
management processes. 
Fit between ERP and an organization’s procedures: 
PSO in developing countries, because of their funding and 
organizational structure, have specific procedures (e.g., 
burdensome administrative and procurement procedures, 
strict monitoring and evaluation requirements, etc.). ERP 
systems are created around private-sector (occidental) best 
practices. Therefore, the product offered is often than not 
difficult to adapt to African PSO’s needs. 
Harmonized processes and procedures: ERP systems 
aim to limit the possibility of errors by limiting the number 
of times a same information has to be entered in the system. 
Yet, because of the lack of harmonized procedures, users 
still have the obligation to enter information on multiple 
software. 
Good 
communication 
management 
processes: 
participants highlighted the need for clear and effective 
communication and information management processes, for 
example in sharing management’s plan, in order to 
maximize the probability of successful implementation. 
b. Data 
In total, four CSF were identified by participants for the 
Data subcomponent, namely: efficient data quality control, 
good data collection and methods, solid data management 
practices, and clear data conversion plan and management. 
Good data collection processes and methods: to 
populate an ERP, you need data. Participants discussed the 
need for an effective monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system that promotes good data collection processes and 
methods. On the other hand, unrealistic frequency of 
collection or level of detail of data requested was believed to 
hinder the support for the ERP implementation project.  
Efficient data quality control: once you have data to 
populate your ERP, you have to trust it. Participants 
highlighted the need to have in place efficient quality control 
processes, to ensure data reliability. Ultimately, data of 
questionable quality was perceived to be associated with a 
reluctance from users and other stakeholders to adhere to the 
ERP implementation project.  
Solid 
data 
management: 
good 
and 
solid 
data 
management was considered at the core of ERP 
implementation process. This included not only processes to 
insure data management as a hole, but also addresses the 
topics of data security, access, and traceability. 
Data conversion plan and management: data conversion, 
meaning planning, managing and controlling of prior data 
integration in the ERP, was seen as a core component of an 
ERP implementation project by participants. Yet, many 
highlighted the lack of actual planning around this activity. 
Participants suggested the need for standardized guidelines 
and processes around data conversion that would cover: 
which data to conserve and, which to drop; how far back 
should PSOs go in converting data; what format to choose; 
who is responsible to integrate this data, etc. 
C. 
Change management 
The Change management component can be divided into 
four subcomponents, namely: user attitude, project change 
management, business process change management, and 
system change management. In total, nine CSF were 
identified by participants in the Change management 
component. 
a. 
User attitude  
Participants identified three CSF pertaining to user 
attitude management, namely: Need for communication, 
Need for training and education, and User active 
participation in ERP implementation. 
Effective communication of the change to users: 
283
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Information and effective communication with users are 
crucial tools to manage expectations, facilitate appropriation 
and ease tensions with users. This process should start at 
conception, and continue throughout the project, and be 
planned carefully and strategically. 
Adequate training of users: Often, training is seen as 
the last milestone before transfer to operations. Yet, 
participants highlighted the need for training to start earlier 
in the process, since it often uncovers problems or 
incongruities with the ERP system and its application to 
their everyday work. When done to late in the process, 
project often do not have the resources (and time) to redo 
the work, therefore delivering a product that does not fit 
users’ needs. 
Active participation of users: Users needs differ from 
other stakeholders, and can be misunderstood. As for 
communication, users’ participation is essential in an ERP’s 
appropriation and future use, and should be planned 
throughout the implementation project’s life-cycle. 
b. Project change management 
Participants identified one CSF pertaining to Project 
change management, namely: effective change control 
management processes and procedures. 
Effective change control management processes and 
procedures: Changes are inevitable in projects. Yet, the 
absence of a formalized and effective change control 
management, and clear procedures to support it, made it 
difficult for ERP implementation projects to stay on track. 
At opposite, effective change control management seems to 
have helped project managers to limit unnecessary changes 
to the project scope, by giving them the tools to answer to 
stakeholders’ pressures and change demands that might fall 
outside the intent of the project.  
c. 
Business processes change management 
Participants identified two CSF pertaining to Business 
process change management, namely: harmonization of 
practices and processes, and assessment of best practices. 
Harmonization of practices and processes: The 
importance of understanding all business systems, policies 
and institutional procedures to ensure better alignment with 
ERP 
system 
functions. 
For 
example, 
procurement 
requirements and local vs. international accounting 
standards are not compatible with the system's data 
collection procedures. 
Assessment of best practices: Participants expressed the 
need to know more about best practices before making any 
changes. They say they want to be informed of best 
practices in the African context in order to continue efforts 
towards continuous improvement and institutional capacity 
building. 
d. System change management 
Participants identified three CSF pertaining to System 
change management, namely: management of interests; 
communicate change throughout the organization; and plan 
and manage corporate culture change. 
Management of interests: participants highlighted the 
importance of targeting the expectations of different users 
and other stakeholders, not all of whom have converging 
interests. 
Communicate change throughout the organization: All 
required changes should be communicated in advance. The 
need to put in place communication procedures to promote 
acceptance and ownership of changes throughout the 
implementation of the system. 
Plan 
and 
manage 
corporate 
culture 
change:  
Participants also mentioned the importance of matching the 
organizational culture with the desired properties and 
functions of the ERP system.  For example, a shared values 
charter at the beginning of the project was mentioned as an 
element in an organizational change management plan that 
accompanies process re-engineering. 
D. Customer mindset 
The Customer mindset component includes three 
subcategories, namely: User mindset, Team mindset, and 
Organizational mindset. In total, fourteen CSF were 
identified by participants for the Customer mindset 
component. 
a. 
User mindset 
In total, three CSF were identified for the User mindset 
subcomponent, namely: users’ attitudes/openness to change, 
adequate technical level of competencies and knowledge of 
users, and access to training. 
User attitude/ openness to change: Openness or, on the 
contrary, 
resistance 
to 
change 
was 
systematically 
highlighted as a major factor influencing success of ERP 
implementation.  
Adequate technical level of competencies and knowledge 
of users: users need to have sufficient knowledge of 
computers systems and IT competencies to be able to not 
only feed data but also use efficiently the ERP system. 
Access to training: ERP systems modifications and 
upgrades are inevitable; so are new hires or transfers in 
teams using ERP systems modules. Therefore, users need 
access not only to initial but also to continuous training to be 
able to stay current with the latest development of the ERP 
system. 
b. Team mindset 
In total, five CSF were identified for the Team mindset 
subcomponent, namely:  adequate team competencies, team 
composition, stability of teams / low attrition rate, good 
collaboration, and leadership. 
Adequate team competencies: Participants highlighted 
the need for a multidisciplinary and diversified team that 
addresses both the IT component, but also the organization 
change management facets of an ERP implementation 
project. 
Team composition: participants also discussed the 
influence 
of 
differences 
of 
status/treatment 
and 
employment on the team mindset.  
Stability of teams/Low attrition rate: In some African 
countries, PSO’s employment conditions (such as salary, 
insurance, etc.) makes private employment more attractive 
in sectors such as IT. 
Good collaboration: collaborative relationships between 
team members are essential to navigate the complexity and 
problem diversity of ERP implementation. This includes: 
284
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

good team work, respect between co-workers, and 
collaboration. 
Leadership: ERP projects being complex, participants 
also highlighted the need for leadership inside the team, for 
example to avoid being lost in multiple stakeholders 
demands. Strong management skills from team leaders was 
also put forward as a CSF in ERP implementation. 
c. 
Organization mindset 
In total, seven CSF were identified for the Organization 
mindset subcomponent, namely: prior experience in 
ERP/major IT project implementation, change management 
competency, organizational support/commitment, presence 
of a champion, shared vision, mission and organizational 
goals, stakeholders’ ownership of the project; and need for 
real-time information. 
Prior experience in ERP or major IT project 
implementation: participants highlighted PSO experience in 
implementing similar projects (in form or complexity) as a 
CSF of ERP implementation success. 
Change 
management 
competency: 
Participants 
systematically identified PSOs’ change management 
abilities or competencies as CSF for ERP implementation 
success.  
Organizational 
commitment: 
ERP 
systems 
implementation include not only a prior preparatory phase, 
the project phase itself, but also maintenance and upgrades. 
Furthermore, with a 5-8 year product life-cycle, ERP 
implementation can be seen as a long term commitment for 
PSOs, that will require both funding, adequate staffing and 
logistics.  
Presence of a champion: participants highlighted the 
importance of having a champion. This person needs to be 
part or linked to high management of PSO, and have 
sufficient power within the organization.   
Shared Vision, mission and organizational goals: ERP 
are useful tools to operationalize an organization’s strategy. 
Yet, to be able to perform, participants highlighted the need 
for shared vision, mission and organizational goals. This 
include: mission and vision definition, communication and 
appropriation by stakeholders. 
Stakeholders’ ownership of project: all stakeholders need 
to feel implicated in the project, and have a sense of 
responsibility 
toward 
the 
success 
of 
the 
ERP 
implementation project – and its utilization. 
Need-driven endeavor: To be successful, participants 
highlight that the ERP must be understood as a mean to an 
end, such as the need for real-time information.  
E. 
Methodology 
In total, two CSF were identified by participants for the 
Methodology 
component, 
namely: 
good 
project 
management, and clear ERP implementation strategy. 
Good project management: Participants stressed the 
importance of good project management in ERP 
implementation, namely the need for clear planning, project 
division in multiple steps; realistic performance demands 
and deadlines, collecting of lessons learned; planning of 
implementation costs and maintenance. 
Clear 
ERP 
implementation 
strategy, 
and 
its 
communication to stakeholders, were also seen prerequisite 
for ERP implementation success. 
 
F. 
External environment 
In total, three CSF were identified by participants in the 
External environment component, namely: fit with national 
culture and values; balanced donor-recipient relations; and 
adequate local infrastructure. 
Fit with national culture and values: the participants 
mentioned the lack of coherence between some habits and 
customs and the purposes of a well-established ERP. ERPs 
aim to foster transparency and accountability in public 
projects, therefore supporting the fight against corruption in 
PSO.  
Balanced donor-recipient relations: More often than 
not, donors were not only (openly or not) the instigators of 
the ERP implementation project, but also guided the choice 
of vendors/suppliers.  “Give and take” in the needs of both 
donors and recipients was seen as a CSF of ERP 
implementation success.  
Adequate local infrastructure: Access to electricity, 
telecommunications and Internet remains problematic in 
many African countries, especially when outside urban 
agglomerations [28], though significant improvements have 
been made in recent years. This has a major impact not 
only on ERP implementation but adoption by users. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
As mentioned, ERP systems implementation projects 
aims to the achievement of organizational benefits [9], 
regardless of the nature of organizational, private or public 
activities. Yet, our results suggest that the benefits sought 
in terms of financial, organizational, communication and 
evaluative performance in African PSOs are limited by 
various barriers identified in this study. Furthermore, our 
results highlight the specific nature of ERP systems 
implementation in PSO in African countries, and the need 
to better understand how these specific CSF influence ERP 
implementation success in these context. 
Software dimension: Yet, of the five CSFs in the 
Software 
dimension, 
three 
(participatory 
software 
development/testing/troubleshooting, fair and balanced 
ERP vendors/suppliers’ relationships, and country-related 
functional requirements) seem to be specific to PSOs in 
African developing countries.   
Participation stands out as the first CSF in the software 
dimension. Participatory approach remains one of the 
methodologies advocated as a key success factor in 
international development projects. This is also what was 
identified in Poonam and Agarwal's ERP study [29]. Yet 
this participatory approach seems difficult to achieve 
considering 
the 
unequal 
power 
balance 
between 
stakeholders in international development. 
The power balance between the vendors and African 
PSOs is an unequal relationship, where PSOs do not have 
285
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

all the knowledge to make informed choices, nor the power 
to influence the outcome of the decision process [30] [31]. 
This limits the ability of PSOs to introduce country-specific 
requirements in the contract negotiations. 
Furthermore, the funding agency have been known to 
have direct interest with vendors and ERP service 
providers, biasing the selection processes. Even when this 
is not the case, the choices must meet the requirements set 
out in the loan agreement, which limits the options to use 
local suppliers. This situation complicates the relationship 
between the vendors or the supplier, and the customer, in 
this case the PSO, since the contractual basis, or tacit 
contract, includes three parties. Suppliers are often selected 
for their track record in large Western organizations [31], 
which do not have the same organizational maturity as 
understood by Western standards [32]. New African-based 
competitors – although their products are far from optimal 
at this moment – hopefully will change this dynamic, and 
might foster a more balanced relationship between vendors 
and PSOs. Surprisingly, these two CSFs were not identified 
in the study conducted by the World Bank Group [22]. 
Process dimension – Data sub-dimension Data quality 
and reliability is essential to any ERP implementation 
project. Yet, what makes this CSF specific to African 
developing PSOs is the scale of the M&E necessary to 
populate the ERP. It is important to keep in mind that in 
African developing context, one of the main drivers of ERP 
implementation project is to support PSOs in their efforts to 
provide proof of results in light of funding received. This is 
achieved through the implementation of a results-based 
management system that encompasses the monitoring of 
outcomes and results indicators [33]. These indicators are 
collected either through project and program-funded data 
collection, or through national statistical data collection 
agencies – both of variable and questionable quality in 
developing countries [34]. This highly contrasts the context 
of private organization, where most data integrated into the 
ERP is internally collected, and quality can be more easily 
controlled.  
In these contexts, ERP implementation and deployment 
initiatives are often accompanied by a myriad of 
institutional capacity building measures, such as donors 
finance reform initiatives [29]. In exchange for support in 
public financial management, donors will often include 
conditionalities such as demands for improvements in 
technological infrastructure in their funding agreement. 
These will in turn influence the ERP implementation 
project, therefore adding a level of complexity for African 
PSOs that other organizations do not have. 
Furthermore, although several CSFs had been identified 
in previous studies [10] [17] [18], a closer reading of the 
results provides some nuances. For instance, «Team 
composition», 
«collaboration», 
«leadership» 
and 
«competencies» were found to be CSF in all studies [10] 
[17] [18]. However, the way they materialize differs. To 
illustrate this, let us take the CSF «Team composition» as 
an example.  
All studies agree on the importance of building teams 
that are diversified in terms of skills, experience and 
abilities, with good intra and inter collaborative skills [10] 
[17] [18]. The importance of collaboration is not specific to 
the ERP implementation project. A recent study identified 
this factor as central to the equation leading to capacity 
building in so-called developing countries [35]. However, 
our results attempt to demonstrate that the retention of 
employees assigned to ERP implementation projects is 
problematic. Several factors explain this situation, 
including the high rate of absenteeism and the lack of 
incentives for public servants [36]. The stability of teams is 
often compromised, and consultants, who are highly 
solicited in these types of complex projects, accentuate the 
motivational problems of government employees. In most 
cases, consultants assigned to ERP implementation 
projects, often referred to as "technical assistants", receive 
much higher compensation than civil servants [37]. This 
gap is even more acute when the technical assistant comes 
from an OECD member country, for example. This 
situation, perceived as unfair by local team, has negative 
effects on the dynamics of project teams and their 
performance. ERP project teams in developing countries 
are a combination of consultants, who are often lent by the 
PSO themselves (not always for their competencies), and 
that are paid in a day what the rest of the teammates will 
sometimes do in a month. The apparent unfairness in the 
treatment of team members, although important, may be 
accompanied by other elements that should be addressed.   
Another 
example 
of 
CSF's 
specificity 
is 
the 
«Organizational 
commitment». 
In 
all 
studies, 
organizational commitment, such as support from top 
management, is seen as a major CSF for ERP 
implementation. The World Bank Group's study [22] also 
linked this CSF to the CSF labeled «suitable political 
environment». While the majority of the studies cited this 
variable as one of the most commonly identified CSFs, the 
underlying explanation differs from other contexts. Yet, in 
African PSOs, top management is often the one who 
benefits from the lack of transparency and accountability 
[38], and therefore are the main opponents of these type of 
initiatives [39]. 
 Change management dimension Our results also found 
that CSFs relating to Change management dimension 
encompasses all organizational levels. However, as noted 
above, if the initiative comes from an external source, the 
different dimensions of change (user attitude, business 
process change and system changes) may suffer from 
internal support, thus limiting internal initiatives for 
preparing and adapting to change. Of the 9 CSFs listed 
under this dimension, the "assessment of best practices" 
and "management of interests" seem to be only found in 
this context. On the one hand, best practices are taken from 
Western organizations, which do not seem to be adapted to 
the contexts of African PSOs. This universalist approach 
shows some limitations, as previously highlighted by 
Hasheela-Mufeti [40]. On the other hand, «management of 
interest» is one of the CSFs that complicates the 
286
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

management of ERP implementation projects, since many 
external stakeholders are involved in these initiatives. 
 
External environment dimension Lastly, External 
environment dimension appears to be highly relevant in 
African PSO context. Our results reflect the many CSF that 
need to be considered in order to increase the chances of 
success of ERP implementation projects. The most salient 
refers to the level of development of public infrastructure, 
such as electricity and technology. Again, although the 
study focuses on PSOs in so-called developing African 
countries, levels of "development" vary between countries. 
Following the example of the Gapminder Institute's work 
[42], a large proportion of African countries are at level 2 
(out of 4), which results in inadequate public services in 
several respects. This situation is reflected in frequent 
power cuts, a faulty or even non-existent Internet network 
in many cases.  The reliability of these two types of 
infrastructure, in terms of access and availability, remains a 
major challenge [43]. The CSFs identified in this 
dimension are the first factors that all organizations 
working in international development must evaluate before 
even starting any ERP implementation project, regardless 
of its size. 
VI. CONCLUSION  
ERP implementation projects are often wrongly 
considered IT projects, when in fact they are major 
organizational transformation initiatives [22] that will 
significantly change the processes, structure, even the culture 
of an organization [10]. In line with current research [12], the 
need for training and education (both for users and project 
team members), top management support and multilevel 
change management were most cited CSFs by participants.  
Team members’ mindset also seems to have a major 
influence on ERP implementation success – and on its 
failure. Yet, current research has done little to study the 
issues specific to the dynamics of the teams in charge of 
implementing ERP implementation projects in the context of 
African countries receiving international aid, with all 
financial and legal complexities that it implies.  
Ultimately, our results highlight that CSF’ influence 
vary depending of many factors, such as organizational and 
national culture, type of implementation process chosen 
(one time or gradual implementation), etc. This converge 
with Zouagui and Laghouag’s findings [44]. Yet, these 
specificities are rarely taken into account in ERP 
implementation in PSO in African developing countries 
projects. While this study highlights factors that seem 
specific to ERP implementation in West African countries 
(e.g., fit with values, etc.), other could be generalize to all 
countries that rely on international development (e.g., fair 
and balanced ERP vendor/buyer relationships, balanced 
donor-recipient relations, etc.). Still, further research is 
needed to better understand and conceptualize the CSF in 
ERP implementation in PSO in the African developing 
countries. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M.-D. 
Primeau, 
“Critical 
Success 
Factors 
in 
the 
Implementation of ERP Systems in Public Sector 
Organizations in African Developing Countries”, the Ninth 
International Conference on Business Intelligence and 
Technology (BUSTECH 2019) IARIA, May 2019, pp. 21-
26, ISSN: 2308-4391, ISBN: 978-1-61208-710-8. 
[2] Grand View Research - GVR, ERP Software Market 
Analysis By Deployment (On-premise, Cloud), By 
Functions (Finance, Human Resource (HR), Supply Chain), 
By Verticals (Manufacturing & Services, BFSI, Health 
Care, Retail, Government Utilities, Aerospace & Defense, 
Telecom), by End-User (Large Enterprises, Medium 
Enterprises, Small Enterprises) And Segment Forecasts To 
2022, May 2016. ID: 978-1-68038-669-1. 
[3] A. Hawari and R. Heeks, “Explaining ERP Failure in A 
Developing Country: A Jordanian Case Study”, Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, vol.23, pp. 135-160, 
February 2010, doi: 10.1108/17410391011019741. 
[4] S. Dube and D. Damescu, “Supplemental Guidance: Public 
Sector Definition”, The Institute of Internal Auditors, 
December 
2011, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://na.theiia.org/standards- 
guidance/Public%20Documents/Public%20Sector%20Definiti 
on.pdf. [retrieved: April 12th, 2019]. 
[5] S. Uwizeyemungu, “Evaluation of integrated software on 
organizational 
performance: 
process 
methodology 
development / L'évaluation de la contribution des progiciels 
de gestion intégrés à la performance organisationnelle: 
Développement 
d'une 
méthodologie 
processuelle”. 
Doctorate 
dissertation 
(Doctorate 
in 
Business 
Administration) presented to the Université du Québec à 
Trois-Rivières, 353 p., 2008. 
[6] P. M. Kengue, “ERP and integrated information system 
contribution 
in 
ONU 
driven 
development 
projects/ 
Contribution des ERP et des systems d’information intégrés 
dans les projets de développement pilotés par l’ONU: 
Analyse empirique de la situation au travers de trois 
missions d’expertise (Brazzaville, New York, Bonn) 
abordées sous l’angle du bricolage ciborrien”, Doctorate 
dissertation (Doctorate in IT Systems Management) 
presented to the Université de Nantes, 297 p., 2015. 
[7] K. Debbabi, “Cognitive and emotional determinants of the 
acceptability of information and communication new 
technologies: the case of ERP / Les déterminants cognitifs 
et affectifs de l’acceptabilité des nouvelles technologies de 
l’information et de la communication : Le cas des Progiciels 
de Gestion Intégrés”, Doctorate dissertation (Doctorate in 
Work Psychology and Ergonomy) presented to the 
Université de Grenoble Alpes, 248 p., 2014. 
[8] C. Marnewick and L. Labuschagne, “Conceptual model for 
enterprise 
resource 
planning 
(ERP)”, 
Information 
Management & Computer Security, vol. 13, pp. 144-155, 
April 2005, doi: 10.1108/09685220510589325. 
[9] S. I. Chang, G. Gable, E. Smythe, and G.Timbrell, “A 
Delphi examination of public sector ERP implementation 
issues”. The 21st International Conference on Information 
Systems (ICIS 2000), December. 2000, pp.494-500, 
Available from: http://eprints.qut.edu.au/archive/00004746 
[retrieved: April 10th, 2019]. 
[10] San Francisco University, “5 Key Differences Between 
Organizations from the Public and Private Sectors”, 
[Online] 
Avaliable 
from; 
https://onlinempadegree.usfca.edu/news- resources/news/5-
key-differences-between-organizations-in-the-public-and-
private-sectors/, [retrieved: April 12th, 2019]. 
[11] J. L. Harrison, “Motivations for Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) System Implementation in Public versus 
287
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Private Sector Organization”, 2004, Electronic Theses and 
Dissertations 31, [Online] Available 
from: 
https://stars.library.ucf.edu/etd/31/ [retrieved: April 10th, 
2019]. 
[12] United Nations Group, “Study of management software 
integrated in United Nations organizations”, 2012, [Online] 
Available from http://undocs.org/fr/A/68/344. [retrieved: 
April 12th, 2019]. 
[13] A. R. Singla, “Impact of ERP Systems on Small and Mid-
Sized Public Sector Enterprises”, Journal of Theoretical and 
Applied Information Technology, vol. 4, February. 2008, 
pp. 119-131. 
[14] A.T. Manga, R. A. Etoundi, and J. Zoa, “A Literature 
Review of ERP Implementation in African Countries”, 
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing 
Countries, 
vol.7, 
pp.1-20, 
September 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1002/j.1681-4835.2016.tb00555.x. 
[15] Panorama Consulting Solution Group, “2016 Report on 
ERP 
Systems 
and 
Enterprise 
Software”, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.panorama-
consulting.com/wp- 
content/uploads/2016/07/2016-ERP-
Report-2.pdf [retrieved: April 12th, 2019]. 
[16] H. 
Abdelghaffar, 
“Success 
Factors 
for 
ERP 
Implementation in Large Organizations: The Case of 
Egypt”, The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in 
Developing Countries, vol.52, pp.1-13, December 2012 
doi: 10.1002/j.1681- 4835.2012.tb00369.x 
[17] United Nations Group, “Working Together: integration, 
institutions, and the Sustainable Development Goals: 
World Public Sector Report 2018”, UN Division for Public 
Administration 
and 
Development 
Management, 
Department of Economics and Social Affairs (DPADM), 
New York, April 2018 [Online] Available from: 
http://workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNP
AN 98152.pdf, [retrieved: April 12th, 2019]. 
[18] D. Allen, T. Kern, and M. Havenhand, “ERP Critical 
Success Factors: an Exploration of the Contextual Factors 
in Public Sectors Institutions”, The 35th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-35), 
Jan. 2002, pp.3062 – 3071, ISBN: 0-7695-1435-9, doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2002.993840. 
[19] E. W. T. Ngai, C. C. H.Law, and F. K. T. Wat, “Examining 
the critical success factors in the adoption of enterprise 
resource planning”, Computers in Industry Journal, vol.59, 
pp.548-564, 
August 
2008, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.compind.2007.12.001. 
[20] M.R. Moohebat, A. Asemil, and M.D. Jazi, “2A 
Comparative Study of Critical Success Factors (CSFs) in 
Implementation of ERP in Developed and Developing 
Countries”, International Journal of Advancements in 
Computing Technology, vol. 2, December 2010, doi: 
10.4156/ijact.vol2.issue5.11. 
[21] J. Ram, D. Corkindale, and M.-L. Wu, “Implementation 
critical success factors (CSFs) for ERP: Do they contribute 
to implementation success and post-implementation 
performance?”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Production 
Economics, vol. 144, pp. 157-174, January. 2013, ISSN: 
0925-5273, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.01.032. 
[22] C. Dener, J.A. Watkins, and W.L. Dorotinsky, “Financial 
management information systems : 25 years experience in 
World Bank on what’s working, and what’s not”, 
Washington DC : World Bank, doi: 10.1596/878-0-8213-
8750-4, 2011. 
[23] Z, Huang and P. Palvia, “ERP Implementation Issues in 
Advanced and Developing Countries”, Business Process 
Management Journal, vol. 7(3), pp. 276-284, 2001,doi: 
10.1108/14637150110392773. 
[24] A. Asemi and M. D. Jazi, “A Comparative Study of 
Critical Success Factors (Csfs) in Implementation of ERP 
in Developed and Developing Countries”, International 
Journal of Advancement in Computing Technology, vol. 2, 
pp. 
99-110, 
December 
2010, 
doi: 
10.4156/ijact.vol2.issue5.11. 
[25] C. Fouché and G. Light. “An invitation to Dialogue: ‘The 
World Café’ in Social Research Work”, Qualitative Social 
Work, 
vol. 
10, 
pp. 
28-48, 
March 
2011, 
doi 
10.1177/1473325010376016. 
[26] J. Brown and D. Isaacs, World Café Community, M. J. 
Wheatley and P. Senge, “The World Café Book: Shaping 
our Futures Through Conversations that Matter”, CA: 
Berrett- Koehler Publishers, 2005. 
[27] R. Boyatzis, “Transforming qualitative information: 
Thematic analysis and code development”. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998. 
[28] P. Kraemmerand, C. Moller, and H. Boer, “ERP 
Implementation: an Integrated Process of Radical Change 
and Continuous Learning”, Production Planning and 
Control, vol. 14, pp. 338-348, 2003. 
[29] G. Poonam and D. Agarwal, “Critical success factors for 
ERP implementation in a Fortis hospital: An empirical 
investigation”, 
Journal 
of 
Enterprise 
Information 
Management, 
vol. 
27, 
pp. 
402-423. 
July, 
2014,  https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-06-2012-0027. 
[30] M. Dornan, “How new is the ‘new’ conditionality? 
Recipient perspectives on aid, country ownership and policy 
reform”, Development Policy Review, vol. 35, pp. 46-63. 
July 2017, https://doi.org/10.1111/dpr.12245 
[31] S.E. Fischer and M. Strandberg-Larsen, “Power and 
Agenda-Setting in Tanzanian Health Policy: An Analysis of 
Stakeholder Perspectives”, International journal of health 
policy and management, vol. 5, pp. 355–363. June 2016, 
doi:10.15171/ijhpm.2016.09 
[32] S.O. Babatunde, S. Perera, and L, Zhou, "Methodology for 
developing capability maturity levels for PPP stakeholder 
organizations using critical success factors", Construction 
Innovation, 
vol. 
16, 
pp. 
81-110. 
January 
2016, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/CI-06-2015-0035 
[33] D.W. Brinkerhoff and J.M. Brinkerhoff, “Public Sector 
Management Reform in Developing Countries: Perspectives 
Beyond NPM Orthodoxy", Public Administration and 
Development. vol. 34, pp. 222–237. October 2015, 
doi: 10.1002/pad.1739. 
[34] G. de Vries, M.Timmer, and K. de Vries, “Structural 
Transformation 
in 
Africa: 
Static 
Gains, 
Dynamic 
Losses", The Journal of Development Studies, vol.51, 
pp.674-688. 2015,  doi: 10.1080/00220388.2014.997222 
[35] L.A. Ika and J. Donnelly, “Success conditions for 
international development capacity building projects”, 
International Journal of Project Management”, vol. 35, pp. 
44-63. 
January 
2017, 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2016.10.005 
[36] R. Crook, “Rethinking civil service reform in Africa: 
‘islands 
of 
effectiveness’ 
and 
organizational 
commitment”, Commonwealth & Comparative Politics, vol. 
48, pp. 479-504. 2010, doi: 10.1080/14662043.2010.522037 
[37] F. Abuzeid, “Foreign aid and the ‘big push theory’: lessons 
from sub-Saharan Africa", Stanford Journal of International 
Relations, vol. 10, 2009, pp. 1–9. 
[38] T. 
Hopper, 
"Neopatrimonialism, 
good 
governance, 
corruption and accounting in Africa", Journal of Accounting 
in Emerging Economies, vol. 7, pp. 225-248. May 
2017, https://doi.org/10.1108/JAEE-12-2015-0086 
[39] P. Yanguas and B. Bukenya, "New’ approaches confront 
‘old’ challenges in African public sector reform", Third 
World 
Quarterly, 
vol. 
37, 
pp. 
136-152. 
2016, doi: 10.1080/01436597.2015.1086635 
288
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[40] V. Hasheela-Mufeti, "Current prospects and challenges of 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) adoption in developing 
countries", International Science & Technology Journal of 
Namibia, 
vol. 
9, 
pp. 
94-106. 
2017, 
doi: 
http://hdl.handle.net/11070/2135 
[41] A. 
Eberhard, 
K. 
Gratwick, 
E. Morella, 
and 
P.  Antmann, "Independent power projects in Sub-Saharan 
Africa: Investment trends and policy lessons", Energy 
Policy, 
vol. 
108, 
pp. 
390–424. 
September 
2017, 
doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2017.05.023 
[42] H. Rosling, A.R. Rönnlund, and O. Rosling, Factfulness: 
“Ten reasons we're wrong about the world-and why things 
are better than you think”, New-York: Flatiron Books, 
2018. 
[43] A. 
Eberhard, 
K. 
Gratwick, 
E. Morella, 
and 
P.  Antmann, "Independent power projects in Sub-Saharan 
Africa: Investment trends and policy lessons", Energy 
Policy, vol. 
108, 
pp. 
390–424. 
September 
2017, 
doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2017.05.023 
[44] A. L. Zouaghi, “Aligning Key Success Factors to ERP 
Implementation Strategy: Learning from Case Study”, 
International Journal of Business Information Systems vol. 
22, 
pp. 
100-115. 
January 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1504/IJBIS.2016.0757. 
 
 
289
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Appendix 
 
 
 
 
 
Table I: Aggregated results of CSF of ERP implementation in African PSO 
Dimensions  
Sub-dimension (if 
applicable) 
Critical Success Factor 
A. SOFTWARE 
  
1. 
Participatory software 
development/Testing/Troubleshooting 
 
  
2. 
Fair and balanced ERP vendors/suppliers 
relationships 
 
  
3. 
Country-related functional requirements 
 
  
4. 
Adequate ERP infrastructure/hosting 
  
  
5. 
Sufficient IT organizational maturity 
 
B1 Process 
1. 
Fit between ERP and an organization’s 
procedures 
B. PROCESS FLOW 
  
2. 
Harmonized practices/procedures/processes 
 
  
3. 
Good communication management processes 
 
B2 Data 
4. 
Efficient data quality control 
 
  
5. 
Good data collection processes and methods 
 
  
6. 
Solid data management practices 
 
  
7. 
Clear data conversion plan and management 
C CUSTOMER 
MINDSET  
C1 User influence 
1. 
Users’ attitudes/Openness to change;  
 
  
2. 
Adequate technical competencies and 
knowledge of users 
 
  
3. 
Access to training  
 
C2. Team influence 
4. 
Adequate team member competencies  
5. 
Team composition 
 
  
6. 
Stability of teams/Low attrition rate 
 
  
7. 
Good collaboration 
 
  
8. 
Leadership 
 
C3. Organizational 
influence 
9. 
Prior experience in ERP/major IT project 
implementation 
 
  
10. Change management competency 
 
  
11. Organizational support/commitment 
 
  
12. Presence of a champion 
 
  
13. Shared vision/ mission/ organizational goals 
 
  
14. Stakeholder's ownership of the project 
 
  
15. Need driven endeavor;  
D CHANGE 
MANAGEMENT 
D1. User attitude 
1. 
Effective communication the change to users 
 
 
2. 
Adequate training and education of users 
 
  
3. 
Active participation of users 
 
D2. Project (scope) 
changes 
4. 
Effective change control management processes 
and procedures 
 
D3. Business process 
changes 
5. 
Harmonization of practices and processes 
 
  
6. 
Assessment of best practices 
 
D4. System changes 
7. 
Management of interests 
 
  
8. 
Communicate change throughout the 
organization 
 
  
9. 
Plan and manage corporate culture change 
E EXTERNAL 
ENVIRONMENT 
  
1. 
Fit with national culture and values 
 
  
2. 
 Balanced donor-recipient relations 
  
  
3. 
Adequate local infrastructure 
F METHODOLOGY 
  
1. 
Good project management 
 
  
2. 
Clear implementation strategy 
 
290
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

