203
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Strategic Role of IT as an Antecedent to the  
IT Sophistication and IT Performance of Manufacturing SMEs 
 
              Louis Raymond 
             Anne-Marie Croteau 
                   François Bergeron 
Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières            Concordia University           TELUQ-Université du Québec à Montréal 
           Trois-Rivières, Canada 
                  Montréal, Canada 
                        Québec, Canada 
           louis.raymond@uqtr.ca 
   anne-marie.croteau@concordia.ca           bergeron.francois@teluq.uqam.ca  
 
 
Abstract — The business value of IT (information technology) 
applications for SMEs (small- and medium-sized enterprises) is 
dependent upon how such applications “fit” with the strategic 
orientation of these firms. Based on the strategic alignment of 
IT, this study uses a systemic approach to test the contribution 
of three predictors of IT performance in an organization: the 
strategic role of IT as well as the sophistication of the 
management and the use of IT. A multivariate mediation 
perspective is used to conceptualize alignment. The results of 
an empirical investigation of 44 manufacturing SMEs establish 
an important mediating effect of IT management and IT usage 
sophistication between the strategic role of IT and IT 
performance. 
 
Keywords - IT sophistication; IT performance; SME; strategic 
alignment; strategic role; e-business applications 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The current economic context is marked by a considerable 
expansion of electronic markets. The need for IT 
(information technology) comes with the ever increasing 
demand for information and communication. The impact on 
business is tremendous, especially on SMEs (small- and 
medium-sized enterprises) who need to invest in systems 
with the ability to store, process, and generate data 
stemming from their dealings with various business partners 
[37]. For many small companies, investing in IT has 
become 
necessary 
to 
ensure 
their 
survival 
and 
competitiveness in the face of globalization [27], and 
especially to enable their innovation capabilities [17]. While 
IT-based 
systems 
have 
substantially 
improved 
the 
manufacturing process and productivity of SMEs, they have 
also allowed for more organizational flexibility by removing 
constraints of time and space, and by reinventing the 
internal and external mode of business organization [16].  
With the opening of the global marketplace, SMEs have 
been subject to rapid change and great instability. Now, IT 
can play an important role in a company‘s performance and 
its ability to respond effectively to the changing needs of the 
market, therefore special attention for the small business 
domain has been demanded of researchers [35]. Given the 
inherent fragile nature of the SME, IT plays an increasingly 
strategic role in creating new managerial challenges for 
these firms [11]. New online competitors easily enter 
emerging or existing markets, customers are more informed 
and more demanding because they can compare features and 
prices of products through the Web, and the changing needs 
and wants of the market often render recent IT investments 
obsolete [39]. 
As a result of substantial IT investments by many 
manufacturing SMEs, it has become essential to foresee the 
threats and opportunities that are inherent in these 
technologies, to discover the mechanisms that manage and 
drive IT, and to analyze their impact in terms of cost-
effectiveness and profitability for such enterprises [24]. The 
increased strategic nature of the role of IT in the 
organization may give rise to IT management and IT usage 
problems that may be not only technical but also strategic 
and organizational in nature [6]. It has therefore become 
important for SMEs to understand how their investments in 
IT, coupled with an increased understanding of their IT 
management and usage practices, can provide the most 
value to them [12]. 
This research thus aims to study the impact of the 
strategic role of IT upon the IT management sophistication, 
the IT usage sophistication and the IT performance of 
manufacturing SMEs by answering the following research 
question: To what extent and in what manner do the 
strategic role of IT, the sophistication of IT management, 
and the sophistication of IT usage contribute to the 
realization of business value from IT by manufacturing 
SMEs? We first present the theoretical background of the 
research, followed by the research model, and the method 
by which 44 French manufacturing SMEs were empirically 
studied in order to answer the research question. Next, the 
results are presented and discussed. We further identify the 
study‘s implications and limitations, and conclude with 
future research.  
 
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
The study‘s theoretical background is founded on the 
concept of strategic alignment, which is at the core of the 
strategic paradigm in information systems research. First 
defined in terms of its impact on organizational performance 
rather than on the attainment of business value from IT, this 
concept still constitutes a fundamental basis of our 
understanding of the strategic role of IT and IT performance 
in organizations. According to Henderson and Venkatraman 
[20], strategic alignment is founded on the assumption that 
the firm‘s realization of business value from information 
technologies results from a dynamic coherence among the 
firm‘s business strategy, organizational infrastructure, IT 

204
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
strategy, and IT infrastructure. SMEs should thus ―align‖ 
their IT processes and IT capabilities with their business 
processes and organizational capabilities. As presented in 
Figure 1, Henderson and Venkatraman‘s model is based on 
a systems perspective of alignment, emphasizing the 
importance of aligning both internal and external business 
activities in order to achieve strategic objectives and 
improve organizational performance. 
 
Business Strategy
IT Strategy
Organizational Infrastructure
and Processes
IT Infrastructure
and Processes
Processes
Business
Governance
Business
Scope
Technology
Scope
IT
Governance
Systemic
Competencies
Distinctive
Competencies
Skills
Architectures
Processes
Skills
Administrative
Infrastructure
External
Internal
Business
Information Technology
Strategic Fit
 
Figure 1. Adaptation of Henderson and Venkatraman‘s [20] IT alignment 
framework 
 
As conceptualized above, the strategic alignment of IT 
has studied in various ways over the past two decades, often 
by exploring some of its aspects or dimensions in more 
detail. While it has been demonstrated that coherence 
between business strategy and IT strategy contributes to 
both IT performance and organizational performance [8] 
[13] [25], few studies have taken into account exogenous 
factors such as the organizational context (business strategy, 
organizational 
structure), 
the 
environmental 
context 
(industry, firm size), and the technological context 
(technology solutions, IT management), that is, the ―TOE‖ 
framework emanating from Tornatsky and Fleischer‘s [42] 
work. Despite previous empirical studies that have allowed 
us to better understand the contexts in which strategic 
alignment contributes to the attainment of business value 
from IT and to organizational performance, many aspects 
remain unexplored, including alignment at the technological 
level [2].  
This study proposes a research model for ascertaining in 
what manner IT ―works‖ in SMEs, that is, in terms of the 
strategic role of IT, and the sophistication of IT 
management and IT usage. The attainment of business value 
from IT, namely IT performance, is seen here as a result of 
direct or ―proximal‖ strategic alignment of IT [8], while 
organizational performance would be considered rather as 
an indirect consequence or ―distal‖ of this alignment. 
Returning to Figure 1, the shaded sections of Henderson and 
Venkatraman‘s model are the basis of the research model 
used for the current study.  
 
A. Strategic Role of IT  
According to Powell and Dent-Micallef [34], the firm‘s IT 
capabilities 
and 
organizational 
capabilities 
must 
complement one another in a way that creates intrinsic 
benefits from IT investments and the use of IT. Thus, more 
emphasis is placed upon optimizing the use and 
management of IT based on the internal characteristics of 
the firm as well as its strategic profile, size, in-house IT 
expertise, as well as its managerial, technological, and 
functional capabilities. In this regard, certain researchers 
have explored the idea of an evolution in IT usage within 
the firm, such Ward, Taylor and Bond [46] who observed 
that the strategic role of IT is developed over three major 
periods in order to support the business throughout its 
growth cycle: 1) a period of developing data processing 
standards 
and 
automating 
repetitive 
tasks, 
thereby 
improving operational efficiency, 2) a period of managing 
information systems, designed to improve managerial 
efficiency by producing relevant and timely information that 
will be used to better manage and control the firm, and 3)  a 
period of developing strategic information systems that 
enable the firm to be more competitive in a global economy. 
In the evolutionary model of the role of IT proposed by 
Philip and Booth [33], each organization has specific 
expectations with regard to IT that are dependent upon its 
capacity to align these technologies with its strategic 
objectives. 
According 
to 
this 
model, 
information 
technologies can play five potential roles in the enterprise: 
 
survival - the goal of IT is to achieve greater control 
over 
managerial 
processes 
and 
day-to-day 
administrative and production tasks in order to improve 
operational performance and reduce costs; 
 
resources - IT is used by the firm to procure itself of 
resources such as materials and services from suppliers, 
and to provide and deliver products and services to its 
customers; 
 
competitive advantage - IT is used strategically to fully 
exploit the potential of resources in order to gain a 
competitive 
advantage, 
especially 
by 
enabling 
innovation; 
 
value analysis service - using IT to rethink business 
processes by reengineering them to improve the firm‘s 
competitiveness and flexibility, taking into account the 
rapid changes in the environment; 
 
cyberspace - it is through the Internet and the Web that 
virtual organizations build relationships with suppliers, 
consumers, and other organizations. This type of 
structure is meant to be very flexible, innovative, and to 
provide personalized service.  
 
B. IT Sophistication 
The evolution of the strategic role of IT is closely linked to 
IT sophistication because it reflects the way IT is managed 

205
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and used by the company. Now, IT sophistication can be 
explained by the way IT ―falls into line‖ with the firm‘s 
strategic objectives [36]. The concept of IT sophistication 
and its measurement were first defined and validated by 
Raymond, Paré and Bergeron [38], to be subsequently used 
by other researchers [10] [21] [31] [36]. IT sophistication 
refers to the nature, complexity, and interdependence of the 
management and use of IT within an organization. IT 
management 
sophistication 
includes 
managerial 
and 
functional sophistication on the one hand, while IT usage 
sophistication includes informational and technological 
sophistication on the other hand.  
Managerial sophistication takes into account the 
mechanisms used to plan, monitor, and assess current and 
future applications [37]. Within the context of the SME, this 
is demonstrated by the degree of formalism of the 
company‘s IT processes and the level of alignment with the 
organization‘s goals, including the development of 
applications and the level of user participation in this 
development. This dimension may also contain aspects 
related to the presence of external consultants, the 
development of IT resources and competencies, and the 
level of support for – and appropriation of – IT within the 
firm. Functional sophistication refers to the location and 
functional autonomy of IT within the organization. In the 
SME context, this can refer to the presence of a designated 
manager for IT and by the organizational level at which the 
IT function is positioned [4].  
Informational sophistication refers to the nature, both 
transactional and managerial, and functional coverage 
(accounting, 
finance, 
HRM, 
logistics, 
production, 
distribution, marketing, sales, customer service) of the 
applications portfolio [5]. IT may also include information 
quality and user-system interaction quality. Another aspect 
of informational sophistication is the degree in which 
applications are integrated in the SME; this element can be 
characterized by the implementation of an enterprise system 
software package (ERP). Technological sophistication 
reflects the number or variety of technologies used by the 
SME in several areas such as CAD/CAM, internal 
networking and external networking, including Internet and 
Web technologies. It also refers to the measures put in place 
by the firm for purposes of IT security and confidentiality 
[38].  
 
C. IT Performance  
Assessing the performance of the IT function in an 
organization is not a simple task [28]. In a process 
evaluation of IT costs, Keen [23] proposed taking into 
account various elements such as the technical obsolescence 
of software, the declining cost of work units and operating 
software, development flows, and operating costs. Benefits 
gained from IT remain very complex to identify, 
specifically in relation to organizational performance [43]. 
In addition, quantifying benefits from organizational 
change, improved customer follow-up, or even an 
improvement of internal and external communication, are a 
challenge for a number of enterprises. 
In regard to assessing the business value of IT, DeLone 
and McLean [14] [15] developed and validated a model of 
IT ―success‖ or performance that comprises six dimensions: 
quality of the system, quality of information, usage, user 
satisfaction, individual impact of IT use, and organizational 
impact of IT use. User satisfaction remains however one of 
the most important measures of success and most 
recognized in IT, and it has been demonstrated that the 
quality of the system, the quality of the information output 
and the usefulness of applications point to, in large part, the 
satisfaction of users [40]. 
 
III. RESEARCH MODEL 
As presented in Figure 2, the research model developed 
for this study is based upon a conceptualization of the 
strategic alignment of IT proposed by Henderson and 
Venkatraman [20], more specifically the alignment between 
the IT strategy and the IT infrastructure and processes that is 
deemed to have a positive impact upon the performance of 
IT in manufacturing SMEs. The IT strategy is defined as the 
strategic role attributed to IT by the SME‘s leader, whereas 
the IT infrastructure and processes are as the firm‘s 
sophistication in both managing and using IT. Testing this 
model should help us answer the research question. 
As shown in the research model, the strategic role of IT 
is an independent construct directly related to the dependent 
construct, i.e., IT performance. The impact of the strategic 
role of IT will also be felt by the sophistication of IT 
management and IT usage. This research model aims to 
explain IT performance in a novel way by focusing on the 
strategic role of IT while taking into account the 
sophistication level of IT deployed in manufacturing SMEs. 
It is for this reason that the IT sophistication concept [38] is 
mobilized here, that is, IT management sophistication on 
one hand, and IT usage sophistication on the other hand. 
The first hypothesis is in line with the main proposition 
found in previous conceptualizations of the strategic 
alignment of IT, and is made on the basis of the evolution of 
information technology‘s role in organizations [33] [45]. Its 
distinction and contribution however lie in the choice of IT 
performance 
(business 
value 
of 
IT) 
rather 
than 
organizational performance as the outcome of such 
alignment. 
It had been previously noted that the strategic role played 
by IT in organizations could only be ascertained if one took 
into account their IT management and usage characteristics. 
Now the notion of IT sophistication effectively reflects how 
IT are managed and used within organizations [46]. Hence, 
the second hypothesis assumes the more strategic the role 
played by information technology in the organization, the 
greater the presence of its IT function. Following Henderson 
and Venkatraman [20], it is presumed that in manufacturing 
SMEs, the strategic importance of IT will be reflected in the 
IT resources and capabilities developed by the IT function. 

206
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The third hypothesis reflects the premise that users will be 
more satisfied with the applications implemented and with 
the quality of information output if the SME‘s leadership 
views IT as a strategic necessity or as a source of 
competitive 
advantage. 
Here, 
the 
notion 
of 
―top-
management support‖ as a determinant of IT performance 
would take on added importance in small business [40]. 
IT Usage
Sophistication
IT Management
Sophistication
IT Performance
H5
H4
H6
Strategic Role
of IT
H2
H3
H1
Figure 2.
Research model
 
The fourth hypothesis assumes a certain hierarchy in the 
evolution of IT, as previously indicated, i.e., this technology 
must be effectively managed and deployed in the SME if it 
is to be appropriated and effectively used by employees. 
This is basically in line with DeLone and McLean‘s [15] 
updated IS success model in which system usage and user 
satisfaction are dependent upon the quality of the system, 
the information output, and the ―service‖ provided by the IT 
function [32]. The fifth hypothesis proposes that the 
performance of IT improves when the sophistication of the 
management of IT increases [29]. As noted by Philip and 
Booth [33], ―sustainable advantage depends on the ability to 
manage the IS resources effectively on an ongoing basis‖. 
The last hypothesis similarly proposes that IT performance 
improves with a more sophisticated usage of IT [38], this 
being in line again with DeLone and Mclean‘s [14] [15] IS 
success model.  
In summary, the following hypotheses are tested: 
H1: The more strategic the role played by IT, the higher the 
performance of IT. 
H2: The more strategic the role played by IT, the greater the 
IT management sophistication. 
H3: The more strategic the role played by IT, the greater the 
IT usage sophistication. 
H4: The greater the IT management sophistication, the 
greater the IT usage sophistication. 
H5: The greater the IT management sophistication, the 
higher the performance of IT. 
H6: The greater the IT usage sophistication, the higher the 
performance of IT. 
 
IV. METHOD 
Secondary data was provided by a database created by a 
university research center for benchmarking purposes and 
containing information of 44 French manufacturing SMEs. 
For the study‘s purpose, a SME is defined as having 
between 10 and 299 employees, the median size of the 
sampled firms being 38 employees. The industrial sectors 
represented include metals (27%), food and beverage 
(16%), wood (9%), plastics (9%), textile (7%), minerals 
(5%), electronics (2%), and others (25%). 
 
A. Data Collection 
This database was created in collaboration with business 
owners that belong to chambers of commerce in Midi-
Pyrénées region, by asking the management team and the IT 
manager to answer a questionnaire on the firm‘s strategic 
orientation, practices, and performance with regard to 
information technology and e-business, broken down by the 
main business functions of the SME, namely operations and 
production, sales and marketing, and accounting, finance 
and HRM. In exchange for this information, the firm was 
provided with an overall diagnostic of its situation relative 
to the management and performance of its information 
technology. 
 
B. Measures 
In view of Henderson and Venkatraman‘s [20] 
framework on which this research is based, fit or alignment 
between the strategic role of IT and the sophistication of IT 
management and usage in the firm is ascertained here from 
a ―fit as mediation‖ perspective [44]. First, the extent to 
which IT plays a strategic role in the SME was measured 
through a self-typing approach based on Venkatraman‘s 
[45] and Philip and Booth‘s [33] stage models, by asking 
the chief executive to answer the following question 
(statements were coded from 1 to 4 in order of increasing 
strategic importance):  
Indicate among the following statements the one that best 
defines your understanding of the strategic role that is 
assigned to information technology-based applications 
(ITApps) in your firm (choose one statement)? 
 
1. ITApps should allow us to improve our managerial 
control and our production monitoring. 
 
2. ITApps should insure greater operational flexibility and 
better response to our customers‘ needs. 
 
3. ITApps should facilitate and accelerate the development 
of new products, and allow us to increase our market 
share. 
 
4. ITApps should allow us to integrate our business and 
production processes, and to improve exchanges with 
our business partners. 
 
 
The measures of IT management sophistication, in terms 
of managerial and functional sophistication, and of IT usage 
sophistication, in terms of informational and technological 
sophistication, 
emanate 
from 
constructs 
developed, 
validated, and used in previous research [31] [38]. IT 

207
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
performance is measured by the level of attainment of the 
benefits associated with four types of IT-based applications 
(accounting-finance-HRM, 
logistics-production-
distribution, marketing-sales-customer service, e-business-
Internet-Web), thus following a process-based approach 
wherein the respondents evaluate the business value of IT 
for their firm [41] [43]. A list of expected benefits specific 
to each type of application (e.g. ―increase flexibility‖, 
improve customer service‖, ―facilitate the recruitment of 
personnel‖) is presented to the manager (CEO or CFO, 
operations manager, sales and marketing manager, and IT 
manager) who must indicate on a 5-point scale the extent to 
which the applications implemented contribute to the 
attainment of these benefits.  
 
V. RESULTS 
Descriptive statistics of the research variables are 
presented in Table I.  
 
TABLE I. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS (N = 44) 
 
Variable 
mean 
s.d. 
range 
Org. Size (no. of employees) 
59 
61 
10-301 
Strategic Role of ITa 
2.5 
1.3 
1-4 
Functional Sophistication 
 designated manager for ITb 
 org. level of the IT functionc 
 
.727 
.546 
 
- 
- 
 
0-1 
0-1 
Managerial Sophistication 
 IT development 
 IT evaluation 
 user participation 
 IT resources and competencies 
 IT support and appropriation 
 external consultants 
 
3.0 
2.8 
2.9 
3.4 
3.7 
2.4 
 
0.8 
1.2 
0.9 
0.9 
0.8 
1.8 
 
1.0-5.0 
0.0-5.0 
1.0-5.0 
1.2-5.0 
1.7-5.0 
0.0-5.0 
Technological Sophistication 
 # of uses of IT 
 # of uses of e-bus/Internet/Web 
 quality of IT security 
 
4.8 
6.0 
4.4 
 
1.8 
3.3 
0.9 
 
2-10 
0-15 
2.0-6.0 
Informational Sophistication 
 # of accounting/fin./HRM apps 
 # of logistics/prod./distrib. apps 
 # of mark./sales/cust. serv. 
apps 
 # of ERP system modules 
 information output quality 
 user-system interaction qual. 
 
6.0 
7.0 
3.8 
2.8 
3.6 
3.5 
 
2.8 
3.1 
2.0 
2.5 
0.8 
0.9 
 
0-11 
2-16 
0-7 
0-7 
1.4-4.6 
1.5-5.0 
IT Performance 
 acc./fin./HRM app. benefits 
 log./prod./distrib. app. benefits 
 mark./sales/serv. app. benefits 
 e-bus./Net/Web app. benefits 
 
3.3 
3.3 
3.0 
2.6 
 
1.2 
0.6 
1.1 
0.7 
 
0.0-5.0 
2.0-5.0 
0.0-5.0 
0.0-4.1 
a1: IT for control (n = 14) 
  
 2: IT for flexibility (n = 9)  
  
 3: IT for product and market development (n = 4) 
  
 4: IT for internal and external integration (n = 17) 
b1: yes (n = 32) 
 0: no  (n =12) 
c1: supervised by the chief-executive (n = 24) 
 0: supervised by another manager (n = 20)  
Structural equation modeling was used to validate the 
research model. To this effect, the PLS technique was 
chosen for its robustness, more precisely its capacity to 
handle small samples and formative measurement models in 
comparison to covariance structure analysis techniques such 
as Lisrel, EQS and Amos [19]. 
 
A. Measurement Model 
Given their composite and multidimensional nature, the 
research constructs are modeled as being ―formative‖ rather 
than ―reflective‖ [9]. Such a construct is composed of many 
indicators that each captures a different aspect; hence 
changes in these indicators bring or ―cause‖ change in their 
underlying construct [26]. IT management sophistication is 
thus modeled as a second-order formative construct from 
two sub-constructs, namely managerial sophistication and 
functional sophistication. As presented in Table II, each of 
these sub-constructs is in turn composed of six and two 
formative measures respectively, a functional sophistication 
and managerial sophistication score being obtained from the 
factor scores determined by a principal components 
analysis. Given that this analysis produced two components 
for managerial sophistication, a single score was obtained 
by averaging the two factor scores. 
 
TABLE II. 
PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS ANALYSIS OF IT 
                            MANAGEMENT SOPHISTICATION 
 
factor  
  indicator 
Funct. 
Soph. 
Manag. 
Soph.a 
Manag. 
Soph.b 
Functional Sophistication 
 designated manager for IT 
 org. level of the IT function 
 
.91 
.91 
 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
Managerial Sophistication 
 IT development 
 IT evaluation 
 user participation 
 external consultants  
 IT resources & competencies 
 IT support & appropriation 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
.79 
.68 
.75 
.58 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
.93 
.95 
aIT management practices 
bIT management capabilities 
 
The reliability of a formative construct, as opposed to a 
reflective 
one, 
is 
confirmed 
by 
the 
absence 
of 
multicollinearity between its measures or indicators [30]. 
Formative indicator validity is confirmed by a weight that is 
significant and not less than 0.1 [22], as confirmed in Figure 
3. Discriminant validity of a formative construct is 
confirmed by it sharing less than 50% variance with any 
other construct, whereas nomological validity is confirmed 
when the construct‘s hypothesized links with other 
constructs are significantly greater than zero and in the 
expected direction [1]. 
In similar fashion, IT usage sophistication is modeled 
and 
measured 
from 
two 
sub-constructs, 
namely 

208
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
informational 
sophistication 
and 
technological 
sophistication. As presented in Table III, each sub-construct 
is in turn composed of six and three indicators respectively. 
The reliability and validity of the IT usage sophistication 
construct was similarly confirmed. As to the IT performance 
construct, it is composed of four measures, that is, the 
average benefits obtained from each type of IT-based 
application. One may note again that there is no 
multicollinearity among these last formative measures, the 
highest correlation among them being equal to 0.19 (p > 
0.1), with all four regression weights being greater than 0.1 
(see Figure 3), thus showing adequate reliability and 
validity. 
 
TABLE III. 
PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS ANALYSIS OF IT 
                                         USAGE SOPHISTICATION 
 
factor  
 indicator 
Techn. 
Soph. 
Inform. 
Soph.a 
Inform. 
Soph.b 
Technological Sophistication 
 uses of IT 
 uses of e-bus/Internet/Web 
 quality of IT security 
 
.90 
.81 
.50 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
Informational Sophistication 
 accounting/fin./HRM apps 
 logistics/prod./distrib. apps 
 mark./sales/cust. serv. apps 
 ERP system modules 
 information output quality 
 user-system interaction qual. 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
.78 
.60 
.74 
.69 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
.93 
.95 
aextensiveness of IT usage 
bquality of IT usage 
 
B. Test of the Research Model 
The research hypotheses were tested by evaluation the 
direction, value, and level of significance of the path 
coefficients estimated by PLS, as presented in Figure 3. 
 
Figure  3.
Results of testing the research model
IT Usage
Sophistication
(R2 = 0.27)
IT Management
Sophistication
(R2 = 0.07)
IT
Performance
(R2 = 0.60)
0.04
0,54***
0.65**
Strategic
Role
of IT
0.28*
-0.12
0.32*
managerial
sophistication
functional
sophistication
technological
sophistication
informational
sophistication
.86***
.52**
.83***
.56**
logistics, production
and distribution
application
benefits
marketing, sales
and service
application
benefits
e-business, Internet
and Web
application
benefits
.19
.81***
.29a
Nota. Significance levels were obtained by bootstrapping.      
ap < 0.1     *: p < 0.05      **: p < 0.01      ***: p < 0.001
accounting, finance
and HRM
application
benefits
.27*
 
A positive and significant path coefficient (β1 = 0.32; p < 
0.05) confirms the first research hypothesis, that is, the more 
strategic the role played by IT in the manufacturing SME, 
the greater its IT performance. Moreover, if one removes 
the effect of IT management and IT usage sophistication 
upon IT performance, the strategic role of IT still explains 
25% of the variance in this same performance. The benefits 
obtained from marketing, customer service, and e-business 
applications thus flow directly from a vision of IT as a mean 
for the SME to develop its products and markets, to 
integrate its production processes, and to improve 
exchanges with its business partners. 
A positive and significant path coefficient (β2 = 0.28; p < 
0.05) confirms the second hypothesis, that is, the more 
strategic the role played by IT, the greater the IT 
management sophistication of the SME. When IT 
constitutes a strategic necessity or a competitive weapon, 
when IT is of critical importance for ―core‖ business 
processes of small manufacturers, these organizations act in 
a coherent manner by adopting managerial practices that 
allow them to better manage the development and use of 
these technologies. These are practices such as planning, 
designing and evaluating IT-based applications, sustaining 
and favoring user participation and user appropriation of IT, 
preserving and developing IT resources and competencies, 
and seeking outside consultants to overcome internal lacks 
in this regard. These firms show similar coherence when 
they place the IT function at a high hierarchical level in the 
organization and render IT autonomous (with a designated 
manager), that is, not subordinated to the financial or 
accounting function as is still often the case in small 
business. 
Due to a negative and non significant path coefficient (β3 
= -0.12), the third hypothesis could not be confirmed. It 
stated that the more strategic the role played by IT, the 
greater the IT usage sophistication of the SME. Thus it 
seems that the strategic role of IT would be only indirect 
here, that is, through its effect on IT management 
sophistication. For instance, seeking internal and external 
integration of business processes through IT would lead the 
firm to better plan its use of IT and to dispose of better IT 
resources and competencies; only then could a more 
advanced technological infrastructure and applications such 
as ERP and e-business be implemented.  
The fourth research hypothesis is confirmed by a positive 
and significant path coefficient (γ4 = 0.54; p < 0.001), 
relating the firm‘s IT management sophistication to its IT 
usage sophistication. This result increases the relevance of a 
strategic 
perspective 
based 
on 
IT 
resources 
and 
competencies, namely a resource-based view to explain the 
level of adoption and assimilation of IT in manufacturing 
SMEs [3]. Now, firms that have sufficiently developed their 
IT function and managerial competence and that have 
access to external resources are those that have adopted and 
assimilated the greatest number of advanced manufacturing 
applications, and where system quality and security are best.  

209
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Due to a non significant path coefficient (β5 = 0.04), the 
fifth hypothesis could not be confirmed. It stated that the 
greater the IT management sophistication, the greater the IT 
performance of the SME. In the absence of a direct effect, 
better management of IT has nonetheless an indirect effect 
upon IT performance, that is, through its positive effect on 
the use of TI (which in turn has a direct effect on 
performance, as we shall see). This last result is obtained 
with an estimation of this indirect effect by the product of 
the two path coefficients (β4 * β6 = 0.54 * 0.65 = 0.35; p < 
0.05). 
A strong path coefficient (β6 = 0.65; p < 0.001) confirms 
the sixth research hypothesis, that is, the greater the small 
manufacturer‘s IT usage sophistication, the greater the 
performance of its information technology. Advanced 
applications such as an ERP system, a transactional Web 
site, videoconferencing, and mobile computing, to the extent 
that they are effectively assimilated by SMEs, are those that 
are the most strategic, that is, bring the greatest ―value‖ to 
these firms in the form of increased competitiveness and 
competitive advantage. One may recall moreover that this 
increased assimilation of IT is the result of better 
management of these technologies. In turn, this better 
management is the result of a more strategic vision of the 
role played by IT in the organization. 
In total, these three factors combined explain 60% of the 
variance in the performance of IT. One may note here that 
the applications that are most affected in terms of 
performance are the marketing and sales applications, 
followed by the accounting, finance and HRM applications, 
and the e-business, Internet and Web applications. This last 
result tends to underline the more operational rather than 
strategic nature of the logistics, production, and distribution 
applications as presently implemented in the sampled 
manufacturing SMEs. 
 
VI. DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
The results obtained from 44 SMEs show that IT 
performance is influenced in two ways. First, IT 
performance is directly affected by the strategic role played 
by IT in the firm, and especially in the eyes of its leader. 
Second, IT performance is also influenced indirectly by the 
strategic role of IT through IT management sophistication, 
which in turn influences IT usage sophistication. It is then 
IT usage sophistication that directly contributes and 
contributes most to IT performance.  
This dual contribution of the strategic role of IT to IT 
performance suggests that the functional sophistication of 
IT alone is not sufficient to increase IT performance; it is 
also necessary that IT be adequately used by employees. 
Thus, to ensure that information technology applications 
fully meet their strategic role, their development has to be 
adequately managed. The development and evaluation of 
these applications should take into account the needs of 
users, involving them when conducting business process 
analysis to make the most effective use of resources and 
competencies, this being done within a structured IT 
function which reflects the strategic and operational reality 
of the organization while procuring external resources when 
necessary.  
The strategic role of IT has no direct influence on IT 
usage sophistication; however it does have an indirect effect 
through IT management sophistication. This means that that 
once information technologies are properly deployed, it is 
possible for users to enhance their strategic role. These 
results are in line with Westerman‘s [47] work on the 
evolution of IT, reiterating that IT should adequately 
support business operations, making certain that IT-based 
systems work as and when they are supposed to, that their 
access is secure, that the information output is accurate, 
complete and correct, and that all this is done in time and 
within budget. Users should then be able to learn and 
appropriate 
themselves 
of 
the 
various 
functional 
applications implemented by the firm, and to assess the 
quality of information output by these applications in order 
to make better decisions. 
The descriptive results indicate that for all SMEs, the 
benefits of IT mainly come from accounting/finance/HRM, 
and logistics/production/ distribution applications. Then 
come benefits accruing from marketing/sales/customer 
service applications, and to a lesser extent e-business, 
Internet and Web applications. This descending order of 
benefits is consistent with the increasing complexity of the 
strategic role of IT. Most manufacturing SMEs do not use 
IT for purposes of internal and external integration of 
business processes, which is the most strategic role. The IT 
applications easiest to implement are often the first 
deployed, and therefore are the first to provide benefits. 
In this study, where the benefits are cumulated by the type 
of applications used, firms that have deployed several types 
of applications are the ones showing the highest 
performance from their IT. They are also those who 
envision the most comprehensive strategic role for 
information technologies, the more complex and more 
demanding. In this context, manufacturing SMEs that gain 
more business value from IT are those that devote a more 
strategic role to these technologies, manage them in a more 
sophisticated way, and use them more extensively and 
intensively.  
 
VII. 
LIMITATIONS AND CONCLUSION 
As in any empirical research, this study has some 
limitations that should be mentioned. Given the nature of 
the sample, its representativeness in relation to all SMEs 
limits the scope of the results. As sample firms have chosen 
to undertake an IT benchmarking exercise, they could differ 
from the general population in terms of strategic orientation, 
IT sophistication, and IT performance [6]. The use of 
perceptual measures for assessing the strategic role and 
performance of IT may also have induced some respondent 
cognitive biases, although earlier studies have also resorted 
to such measures [41].  

210
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Notwithstanding its limitations, this study revealed that a 
strategic vision of the role of IT is critical to the managerial 
and technological skills developed by manufacturing SME, 
and to the realization of IT business value from these 
capabilities. Based on a strategic alignment perspective, 
future studies could extend the research model by 
examining whether the role assigned to IT depends on how 
well it ―fits‖ with the SME‘s business strategy, structure, 
and environment. A more complete formative model for 
measuring IT performance, such as that proposed by Gable, 
Sedera and Chan [18], could also be used to include, in 
addition to the organizational impacts, individual impacts, 
quality of IT-based systems, and quality of information 
output by these systems. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Andreev, P., Heatr, T., Maoz, H., and Pliskin, N. (2009), 
Validating formative partial least squares (PLS) models: 
Methodological 
review 
and 
empirical 
illustration, 
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Conference on 
Information Systems, Phoenix, Arizona, pp. 1-17. 
[2] Bergeron, F., Raymond, L., and Rivard, S. (2004), Ideal 
patterns of strategic fit and business performance, Information 
& Management, (41:8), pp. 1003-1020. 
[3] Bharadwaj, A. (2000), A resource-based perspective on the 
information technology capability and firm performance: An 
empirical investigation, MIS Quarterly, (24:1), pp. 169-196. 
[4] Blili, S. and Raymond, L. (1993), Information technology: 
Threats and opportunities for SMEs, International Journal of 
Information Management, (13:6), pp. 439-448. 
[5] Brown, C.V. (1997), Redesigning the emergence of hybrid IS 
governance solutions: Evidence from a single case site, 
Information Systems Research, (8:1), pp. 69-94. 
[6] Caldeira, M.M. and Ward, J.M. (2003), Using resource-based 
theory to interpret the successful adoption and use of 
information systems and technology in manufacturing small 
and 
medium-sized 
enterprises, 
European 
Journal 
of 
Information Systems, (12), pp. 127-141. 
[7] Cassell, C., Nadin, S., and Gray, M.O. (2001), The use and 
effectiveness of benchmarking in SMEs, Benchmarking: An 
International Journal, (8:3), pp. 212-222. 
[8] Chan, Y.E., Huff, S.L., Copeland, D.G., and Barclay, D.W. 
(1997), Business strategic orientation, information systems 
strategic orientation, and strategic alignment, Information 
Systems Research, (8:2), pp. 125-150. 
[9] Chin, W.W. (1998), Issues and opinion on Structural Equation 
Modeling, MIS Quarterly, (22:1), pp. vii-xvi. 
[10] Chwelos, P., Benbasat, I., and Dexter, A.S. (2001), Research 
report: Empirical test of an EDI adoption model, Information 
Systems Research, (12:3), pp. 304-321. 
[11] Cragg, P.B. (2002), Benchmarking information technology 
practices in small firms, European Journal of Information 
Systems, (11:4), pp. 267-282. 
[12] Cragg, P.B., Mills, A., and Suraweera, T. (2010), 
Understanding IT management in SMEs, Electronic Journal 
of Information Systems Evaluation, (13:1), pp. 27-34. 
[13] Croteau, A.-M. and Bergeron, F. (2001), An information 
technology 
trilogy: 
Business 
strategy, 
technological 
deployment and organizational performance, Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, (20:2), pp. 77-99. 
[14] DeLone, W.H. and McLean, E.R. (1992), Information systems 
success: The quest for the dependent variable, Information 
Systems Research, (3), pp. 60-95.  
[15] DeLone, W.H. and McLean, E.R. (2003), The DeLone and 
MacLean model of information systems success: a ten-year 
update, Journal of Management Information Systems, (19:4), 
pp. 9-30.  
[16] Dibrell, C., Davis, P.S., and Craig, J. (2008), Fueling 
innovation through information technology in SMEs, Journal 
of Small Business Management, (46:2), pp. 203-218. 
[17] Dierckx, M.A.F. and Stroeken, J.H.M. (1999), Information 
technology and innovation in small and medium-sized 
enterprises, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 
(60), pp. 149-166. 
[18] Gable, G.G., Sedera, D., and Chan, T. (2008), Re-
conceptualizing information systems success: The IS-impact 
measurement model, Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems, (9:7), pp. 377-408. 
[19] Gefen, D., Straub, D.W., and Boudreau, M.-C. (2000), 
Structural equation modeling and regression: guidelines for 
research practice, Communications of the AIS, (4:7), pp.1-76. 
[20] Henderson, J.C. and Venkatraman, N. (1999), Strategic 
alignment: 
Leveraging 
information 
technology 
for 
transforming organizations, IBM Systems Journal, (38:2&3), 
pp. 472-484. 
[21] Iacovou, C.L., Benbasat, I., and Dexter, A.S. (1995), 
Electronic data interchange and small organizations: Adoption 
and impact of technology, MIS Quarterly, (19:4), pp. 465-
485. 
[22] Jahner, S., Leimeister, J.M., Knebel, U., and Krcmar, H. 
(2008), A cross-cultural comparison of perceived strategic 
importance of RFID for CIOs in Germany and Italy, 
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 
1-10. 
[23] Keen, P.G.W. (1993), Shaping the future, business design 
through information technology, Harvard Business School 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  
[24] Kohli, R. and Grover, V. (2008), Business value of IT: An 
essay on expanding research directions to keep up with the 
times, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 
(9:1), pp. 23-39. 
[25] Kyobe, M. (2008), The influence of strategy-making types on 
IT alignment in SMEs, Journal of Systems and Information 
Technology, (10:1), pp. 28-35. 
[26] MacKenzie, S.B., Podsakoff, P.M., and Jarvis, C.B. (2005), 
The problem of measurement model misspecification in 
behavioral 
and 
organizational 
research 
and 
some 
recommended solutions, Journal of Applied Psychology, 
(90:4), pp. 710-730. 
[27] Marbert, V.A., Soni, A., and Venkataramanan M.A. (2003), 
The impact of size on enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
implementation in the US manufacturing sector, Omega, (31), 
pp. 235-246. 
[28] Myers, B. L., Kappelman, L.A., and Prybutok, V.R. (1998), A 
comprehensive model for assessing the quality and 
productivity of the information systems function: Toward a 
theory for information systems assessment, in Garrity, E.J. 
and Sanders, G.L. (Eds.) Information Systems Success 
Measurement, Idea Group, Hershey, Pennsylvania, pp. 94-
121.  
[29] Paré, G. and Sicotte, C. (2001), Information technology 
sophistication in health care: an instrument validation study 
among Canadian hospitals, International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, (63), pp. 205-223. 

211
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[30] Petter, S., Straub, D., and Rai, A. (2007), Specifying 
formative constructs in information systems research, MIS 
Quarterly, (31:3), pp. 623-656. 
[31] Pflughoest K.A., Ramamurthy, K., Soofi, E.S., Yasai-
Ardekani, 
M., 
and 
Zahedi, 
F. 
(2003), 
Multiple 
conceptualizations of small business Web use and benefit, 
Decision Sciences, (34:3), pp. 467-512. 
[32] Pitt, L.F., Watson, R.T., and Kavan, C.B. (1995), Service 
quality: a measure of information systems effectiveness, MIS 
Quarterly, (19:2), pp. 173–185. 
[33] Philip, G. and Booth M.E. (2001), A new six ‗S‘ framework 
on the relationship between the role of information systems 
(IS) and competencies in ‗IS‘ management, Journal of 
Business Research, (51), pp. 233-247. 
[34] Powell, T.C. and Dent-Micallef, A. (1997), Information 
technology as competitive advantage: The role of human, 
business, and technology resources, Strategic Management 
Journal, (18:5), pp. 375-405. 
[35] Premkumar, G. (2003), A meta-analysis of research on 
information technology implementation in small business, 
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic 
Commerce, (13:2), pp. 91-121. 
[36] Rai, A., Tang, X., Brown, P., and Keil, M. (2006), 
Assimilation patterns in the use of electronic procurement 
innovations: A cluster analysis, Information & Management, 
(43), pp. 336-349. 
[37] Raymond, L., Croteau, A.-M., and Bergeron, F. (2011), The 
strategic role of IT: An empirical study of its impact on IT 
performance 
in 
manufacturing 
SMEs, 
2011 
Sixth 
International Conference on Internet and Web Applications 
and Services (ICIW), St. Maarten, The Netherlands Antilles, 
pp. 89-97. 
[38] Raymond, L., Paré, G., and Bergeron, F. (1995), Matching 
information 
technology 
and 
organizational 
structure: 
Implications 
for 
performance, 
European 
Journal 
of 
Information Systems, (4:1), pp. 3- 6. 
[39] Riemenschneider, C.K. and Mykytyn, P.P. (2000), What small 
business executives have learned about managing information 
technology, Information & Management (37), pp. 257-269. 
[40] Seddon, P.B., Graeser, V., and Willcocks, L.P. (2002), 
Measuring organizational IS effectiveness: An overview and 
update of senior management perspectives, DATA BASE for 
Advances in Information Systems, (33:2), pp. 11-28.   
[41] Tallon, P.P., Kraemer, K.L., and Gurbaxani, V. (2000), 
Executives's perceptions of the business value of information 
technology: A process-oriented approach, Journal of 
Management Information Systems, (16:4), pp. 145-173 
[42] Tornatsky, L.G. and Fleischer, M. (1990), The processes of 
technological 
innovation, 
Lexington, 
Massachusetts: 
Lexington Books. 
[43] Uwizeyemungu, S. and Raymond, L. (2009), Exploring an 
alternative method of evaluating the effects of ERP: A 
multiple case study, Journal of Information Technology, 
(24:3), pp. 251-268. 
[44] Venkatraman, N. (1989), The concept of fit in strategy 
research: Toward verbal and statistical correspondence, 
Academy of Management Review, (14:3), pp. 423-444. 
[45] Venkatraman, N. (1994), IT-enabled business transformation: 
From automation to business scope redefinition, Sloan 
Management Review, (35:2), pp. 73-87.  
[46] Ward, J., Taylor, P., and Bond, P. (1996), Evaluation and 
realisation of IS/IT benefits: An empirical study of current 
practice, European Journal of Information Systems, (4:4), pp. 
214-226. 
[47] Westerman, G. (2009), IT risk as a language for alignment, 
MIS Quarterly Executive, (8:3), pp. 109-121. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

