Practice of Formalised Conceptual Knowledge Complements
Realising Multi-disciplinary Knowledge Resources for
Natural Sciences and Humanities
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU), Germany;
Knowledge in Motion, DIMF, Germany;
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—The results and insights in the practice of multi-
disciplinary knowledge resources presented in this article are
based on the research and developments conducted during the
last years. Many multi-disciplinary and practical geo-spatial data
and application solutions require to employ integrated resources
from disciplines of natural sciences and humanities to exploit
holistically complex knowledge scenarios. In many cases, data and
algorithms as well as workﬂows have to be created and tackled
individually. The goal of this paper is to illustrate examples of
integrated knowledge based on the ongoing research to create
sustainable and innovative resources ans a comprehensive tool
base of conceptual knowledge in geo-spatial application scenarios
and beyond, for arbitrary knowledge context in any media. The
solution should be complementary to the commonly available
geo-spatial features and should fulﬁll a range of further criteria,
especially for a coherent system of knowledge, multi-disciplinary,
and data-centric. The result should allow to create and refer to
facetted knowledge focussed on geo-spatial scenarios. The paper
presents a range of multi-disciplinary knowledge complements in
their formalised common conceptual knowledge and the results
of an implementation based on the fundamental methodology
of superordinate knowledge. The resulting solution is targeting
geo-spatial application scenarios and has been used for many
practical implementations over more than three decades. The
resulting comprehensive subset of conceptual knowledge reference
divisions, which was created from this long-term research, is
available and ﬁrst published with the cited research.
Keywords–Conceptual
Knowledge
Complements;
Multi-
disciplinary
Knowledge
Resources’
Practice;
Superordinate
Knowledge Methodology; UDC; Advanced Data-centric Computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This extended research is based on the practical subset of
conceptual knowledge, which was presented at the GEOPro-
cessing 2019 conference in Athens, Greece [1]. Responding
to the major interests from the public discussion in Athens,
this research goes beyond plain methods and the limited
view of ‘data’ and illustrates the formalisation and conceptual
knowledge complements, the fundaments and organisation of
realising multi-disciplinary knowledge resources, based on the
Principles of Superordinate Knowledge.
The motivation of this research is to show a representative
compilation of components, which are integral components
in complex implementation scenarios and which are under
creation and development for signiﬁcant periods of time.
This paper presents different types of multi-disciplinary
Knowledge Resources from complementary discipline col-
lections and resources in reference with geo-spatial disci-
plines. The paper especially discusses the practice of for-
malised conceptual knowledge complements created with
multi-disciplinary collections, containers, and referenced re-
sources. It is a truth universally acknowledged, that geo-spatial
disciplines are specialised and very much concentrating on
providing solutions and tools for spatial data. When it gets to
more complex situations, then, spatial data based on numerical
coordinate reference systems and domain only approaches may
not be sufﬁcient. This is, for example, the case when describing
the target knowledge with mathematical spacial facets and
dimensions is not sufﬁcient.
Many information and context maybe lost when knowledge
is handled as plain data and mapped to preexisting attributes
and categories. This is the case when a more holistic and
more fundamental approach should be considered. In prac-
tice, associating different objectives and intentions, system-
atic knowledge, and physical features with knowledge, from
methodology to implementation and realisation, can provide
valuable solutions. The principles of superordinate knowledge
provide such fundaments, from methodology to realisation.
The resulting solution is a comprehensive subset of con-
ceptual knowledge, which should be complementary to the
commonly available geo-spatial topologies, taxonomies, and
features and the multi-disciplinary context. In consequence, the
means of describing spatial data, objects, entities, and context
should be substantially extended.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Sections II and
III introduce the state of the art and motivation and discuss pre-
vious work, components, and used resources. Sections IV and
V discuss basic practical examples of conceptual knowledge
formalisation and present representative examples of multi-
disciplinary knowledge complements. Section VI presents the
resulting conceptual knowledge solution. Sections VII and VIII
evaluate the resulting subset, directly related implementations,
research, development, and cases studies and summarise the
lessons learned, conclusions, and future work.
169
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II.
STATE OF THE ART AND MOTIVATION
It is most beneﬁcial to have universal means to describe and
document knowledge over all complements of the Knowledge
Resources and being able to support formalisation. For ad-
vanced applications, it is also beneﬁcial to have means, which
can deal as conceptual knowledge framework.
Formalisation is the process of creating a deﬁned set of
rules, allowing a formal system to infer theorems from axioms.
Formalised conceptual knowledge complements can be created
employing references to consistent conceptual knowledge, here
illustrated by references to UDC and UDC concordances.
Sustainable knowledge and resources management was suc-
cessfully implemented for environmental information and com-
putation [2] along with a basis for environmental management,
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 14000
series containing standard recommendations for assessment,
evaluation, life cycle analysis, communication, and auditing
[3]. Complementary implementations were also successfully
created for advanced mathematical-computational scenarios
[4].
Geo-spatial practice is focussed on providing cartographic
means for certain space and environment. Widely employed
tools are Geoscientiﬁc Information Systems and Geographic
Information Systems. Most of these tools use geo-referenced
data in order to organise and reference information. Available
topologies can also provide for the categorisation of geo-
spatial entities. All together these means are very limited
when seen in a larger context as required for many complex
application scenarios. Regarding that, one of the major deﬁcits
is the lack of a consistent and holistic knowledge concept.
The fundaments of terminology and understanding knowledge
are layed out by Aristotle [5], being an essential part of
‘Ethics’ [6]. Information sciences can very much beneﬁt from
Aristotle’s fundaments and a knowledge-centric approach [7]
but for building holistic and sustainable solutions, supporting
a modern deﬁnition of knowledge [8], they need to go beyond
the available technology-based approaches and hypothesis [9]
as analysed in Platon’s Phaidon.
In sciences, observation is one of the most important fun-
damental tasks [10]. But, as John Burroughs expressed “There
is nothing in which people differ in more than in their powers
of observation. Some are only half alive to what is going
on around them.” [11]. Triggered by the results of a systems
cases study, it is obvious that superordinate systematic prin-
ciples [12] are still widely missing in practice and education.
Making a distinction and creating interfaces between methods
and the implementation applications [13], the results of this
research are illustrated here along with the practical example
of the Knowledge Mapping methodology [14] enabling the
creation of new object and entity context environments, e.g.,
implementing methods for knowledge mining context. This
motivating background allows to build methods for knowledge
mapping on a general methodological fundament.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment (OECD) has published principles and guidelines for
access to research data from public funding [15]. The princi-
ples and guidelines are meant to apply to research data that
are gathered using public funds for the purposes of producing
publicly accessible knowledge. In this context, the OECD espe-
cially addresses knowledge, re-use, and knowledge generated
from re-use. The means to achieve such recommendations even
for complex scenarios is to use the principles of Superordinate
Knowledge, which integrate arbitrary knowledge over theory
and practice. Core assembly elements of Superordinate Knowl-
edge [12] are:
•
Methodology.
•
Implementation.
•
Realisation.
Separation and integration of assemblies have proven beneﬁcial
for building solutions with different disciplines, different levels
of expertise. Comprehensive focussed subsets of conceptual
knowledge can also provide excellent modular and standard-
ised complements for information systems component imple-
mentations, e.g., for environmental information management
and computation [2]. The conceptual knowledge reference
divisions presented here are the result from more than three
decades of scientiﬁc research in information science and multi-
disciplinary knowledge.
III.
COMPONENTS, FORMALISATION, AND DESIGN
There is a number of criteria, which are of major signif-
icance for advanced and complex scenarios, especially, the
conceptual knowledge and the knowledge resources have to
provide. The resulting solution should fulﬁll a range of criteria
in order to provide a most sustainable, ﬂexible fundament, e.g.:
•
Covering a coherent system of knowledge, supporting
universal knowledge.
•
Consistent implementation, quasi-standardised.
•
Providing facetted conceptual knowledge features.
•
Multi-disciplinary knowledge spectrum.
•
Features for multi-lingual implementation.
•
Data-centric implementation / method.
•
Extensible concept.
Therefore, these criteria should allow advanced features, for
example:
•
Documentation of data, objects, scenarios, concepts,
algorithms,
•
universal context of knowledge criteria for all kind of
knowledge in any media,
•
knowledge documentation,
•
knowledge consistent integration of publications and
research data,
•
knowledge mining,
•
wide range of ﬂexible implementation potential,
•
supporting workﬂow features and documentation.
The Knowledge Resources can embrace a wide range of
different types of complements, e.g., collections, containers,
and other referenced resources.
These complements can be organised individually, e.g., due
to the fact that often each collection maybe a long-term or
even open-end matter of development, e.g., for an individual
disciplines’ task, research council or business.
170
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In consequence, the primary design strategies of the core
Knowledge Resources require a focus on data-centricity.
Therefore, a central goal are sustainable, portable structures,
which can be kept vital and knowledge-consistent with future
developments.
The use of multi-disciplinary and consistent conceptual
knowledge frameworks also contributes to the sustainable cre-
ation of sustainable concordances and solutions. For example,
advanced knowledge discovery and computing can be realised
very forward-looking and efﬁcient when based on Knowledge
Resources, concordances, and classiﬁcation [16].
According with these strategies and goals, the selection of
conceptual frameworks and integration is essential in order to
ensure that conceptual references can be seamlessly developed
with the development of growing Knowledge Resources in
ﬂexible and sustainable ways. The components and feature se-
lection for a practical, formalised implementation are described
with the following passages.
For the implementation of case studies, the modules are built
by support of a number of major components and resources,
which can be used for a wide range of applications, e.g.,
creation of resources and extraction of entities. The facility
for consistently describing knowledge is a valuable quality,
especially conceptual knowledge, e.g., using the Universal
Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [17]. The UDC can be used
for consistently formalising universal conceptual knowledge
in multi-disciplinary and multi-lingual context.
The UDC is the world’s foremost document indexing lan-
guage in the form of a multi-lingual classiﬁcation scheme
covering all ﬁelds of knowledge and constitutes a sophisticated
indexing and retrieval tool. The UDC is designed for subject
description and indexing of content of information resources
irrespective of the carrier, form, format, and language. UDC
is an analytico-synthetic and facetted classiﬁcation. It uses a
knowledge presentation based on disciplines, with synthetic
features. UDC schedules are organised as a coherent system
of knowledge with associative relationships and references
between concepts and related ﬁelds. Therefore, the UDC
represents a most ﬂexible facetted classiﬁcation system for all
kinds of knowledge in any media. The UDC provides 70,000
subdivisions, in 50 languages, which provides more than 3
million entries and verbal descriptions. The UDC is up to now
internationally used in 130 countries, for 150,000–200,000
document collections worldwide. The classiﬁcation has shown
up being especially important for complex, facetted, multi-
disciplinary, and long-term classiﬁcation, e.g., with Knowledge
Resources. The UDC is the best publicly available implementa-
tion of conceptual knowledge to illustrate the width and depth
of knowledge dimensions. The UDC allows an efﬁcient and ef-
fective processing of knowledge data and provides facilities to
obtain a universal and systematical view on classiﬁed objects.
Operational areas include author-side content classiﬁcations
and museum collections, e.g., with documentation of resources,
library content, bibliographic purposes on publications and
references, for digital and realia objects. The Knowledge
Resources objects and entities can refer to any conceptual
knowledge, e.g., main UDC-based classes, which for this pub-
lication are taken from the multi-lingual UDC summary [17]
released by the UDC Consortium under a Creative Commons
license [18]. Facets can be created with any auxiliary tables,
e.g., auxiliaries of place and space, time, language, and form
as well as general characteristics, e.g., properties, materials,
relations, processes, and operations, persons and personal
characteristics. Symbolism and meaning have signiﬁcant value
for any application in information science [19]. Object entities
can be associated with symbolism, which can also be referred
to conceptual knowledge [20]. Observation and experience
are essential [21] with the cognition process and the required
referencing.
Multi-disciplinary Knowledge Resources have been de-
signed, created, and developed with various scenarios and real-
isations over the last decades. Figure 1 shows the complements
diagram of core resources and their conceptual organisation
and implementations. The major complements consist of ap-
plication resources and components, knowledge resources, and
originary resources and sources.
The Knowledge Resources are in focus of this research.
They can contain all the relevant conceptual knowledge ref-
erences for the complements. The Knowledge Resources are
ﬂanked by application resources and components, which are
based on module implementations and program components.
Associated implementations imply scripts, bytecode and ex-
ecutables, sources from various high level languages. Imple-
mentations range from individual developments to common
third party components.
The originary resources and sources imply realia and ref-
erence targets, which range from objects in libraries and
museums to in situ objects.
The central Knowledge Resources, which are discussed in
the research, cover the complements of factual, conceptual,
procedural, and metacognitive knowledge. For this research,
we are presenting examples of different content implemen-
tations, especially collections, containers, and referenced re-
sources.
There are no limitations for the conceptual knowledge
referenced in collections, containers, and referenced resources.
However, a standard multi-disciplinary, multi-lingual classiﬁ-
cation is the UDC, which can be consistently used with all
different types of implementations.
The UDC is used for any conceptual description, providing
arbitrary means, e.g., for facetted classiﬁcation, conceptual
inter-references between objects, object association based on
verbal description.
IV.
BASIC PRACTICAL EXAMPLES OF FORMALISATION
A. Required conceptual knowledge features
Data and objects result from public, commonly available,
and specialised Knowledge Resources. The Knowledge Re-
sources are containing factual and conceptual knowledge
as well as documentation and instances of procedural and
metacognitive knowledge. These resources contain multi-
disciplinary and multi-lingual data and context. UDC provides
auxiliary signs [22], which represent kinds of standardised
“operations”. UDC allows the creation of facetted knowledge
using these features. The conceptual knowledge in focus
171
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(c) DIMF, 2019
(c) Rückemann, 2019
Module implementations
Reference Targets
Realia
Program components
UDC, UCC
Factual, Conceptual,
Procedural,
Metacognitive, ...
(Multi−disciplinary)
Collections
Containers
Referenced Resources
Application
Resources
and
Components
Resources
Originary
Resources
and
Sources, ...
Libraries,
Perl, Tcl, C, Fortran, ...
Scripts, ...
Bytecode, ...
Executables, ...
Sources:
Data,
Algorithms,
Documentation,
Categorisation, ...
(Multi−disciplinary)
(Multi−disciplinary)
Objects in Archives,
Museums,
in situ, ...
Data,
Algorithms,
Documentation,
Categorisation, ...
Data,
Algorithms,
Documentation,
Categorisation, ...
Factual, Conceptual,
Factual, Conceptual,
Procedural,
Metacognitive, ...
Procedural,
Metacognitive, ...
UDC, UCC
UDC, UCC
References
References
Knowledge
Figure 1. Multi-disciplinary Knowledge Resources: Complements diagram of core resources and their conceptual organisation and implementations. The three
different types of Knowledge Resources discussed: Collections, containers, and referenced resources. Conceptual knowledge is illustrated via UDC and UCC.
requires to provide references to any universal knowledge
context. References to UDC codes are capable to provide all
the required context. The main tables provide an entry point
to universal knowledge context [23]. For practical use, clas-
siﬁcation references can refer to UDC reference codes based
on science and knowledge organisation [24]. For conceptual
knowledge of place and spatial context the implementation
requires to provide references to classiﬁcation codes. The UDC
provides references based on the common auxiliaries of place
of the UDC [25]. In that context, besides universal knowledge,
additional closely related references are required. UDC can
provide appropriate references, e.g., geodesy, surveying, pho-
togrammetry, remote sensing, cartography (UDC:528) [26] and
geography, exploration, travel (UDC:910) [27], and nonliterary,
nontextual representations of a region (UDC:912) [28].
B. Examples of conceptual knowledge application
Examples of conceptual knowledge reference divisions ac-
cording with UDC (UDC:913, Regional geography, [29];
UDC:94, General history, [30]; UDC:(1/9), Common auxil-
iaries of place, [25]) and UDC conventions are shown in the
following four small sample groups:
UDC:913(3)
⇒ Geography of the ancient world
UDC:913(3/9)
⇒ Geography of the individual regions and
countries of the ancient and modern world
UDC:94(3)
⇒ History of the ancient world
UDC:94(3/9)
⇒ History of individual places of the ancient
and modern world
UDC:94(37)
⇒ History of ancient Rome and Italy
(to 5th century)
UDC:94(38)
⇒ History of ancient Greece
UDC:(37)(24)
⇒ Ancient Rome and Italy, below sea level
UDC:(38)(24)
⇒ Ancient Greece, below sea level
A little more complex facetted example, a single data
object entity of a ship wreck realia as referred in a container
of extended Knowledge Resources, is shown in Figure 2.
1
Lindos [Archaeology, Geophysics, Remote Sensing,
Seafaring]:
2
Greek city, Rhodos Island, Dodekanese, Greece. ...
3
Object: Ship wreck.
4
Object-Type: Realia object.
5
Object-Location: 500\UD{m} SE of Hagios Pavlos Harbor.
6
%%IML: UDC:[902+903+...+904]+629.5+(38)+(4)+(24)...
7
%%IML: cite: YES 19810000 {LXK:Lindos; Rhodes; Ancient
Greece; Archaeology; Artefacts; Ship wreck;} {UDC:...}
{PAGE:--45..--58} LXCITE://Nikolitsis:1981:Rhodos
8
%%IML: ...
9
%%IML: OSMLocation: https://www.openstreetmap.org
/...=36.08...%2C28.08...
10
%%IML: GoogleMapsLocation: http://maps.google.com/maps
...=...,...
Figure 2. Knowledge Resources, conceptual spatial and geo-references:
Lindos object with ship wreck entity, Rhodes, Greece (excerpt).
Passages not relevant for demonstration and not adequate for
privacy and safety reasons were shortened to ellipses. The
object entity contains documentation, object categories and
factual data, conceptual data references, a source reference
[31], and data for geo-references. The conceptual knowledge
comprises details of non geo-spatial domains, e.g., from main
tables UDC:6 and UDC:9, and from geo-spatial context, e.g.,
auxiliary tables for place and space UDC:(24) UDC:(3/9). For
this case, the object entity references can be resolved as:
172
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

UDC:902
⇒ Archaeology
UDC:903
⇒ Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts,
antiquities
UDC:904
⇒ Cultural remains of historical times
UDC:629.5
⇒ Watercraft engineering. Marine engineering.
Boats. Ships. Boatbuilding and shipbuilding
UDC:(38)
⇒ Ancient Greece
UDC:(4)
⇒ Europe
UDC:(24)
⇒ Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
The references can hold further details and sub-contain addi-
tional information, e.g., UDC:903 further refers to artefacts in
more detail. For a wider and deeper view, we have to refer
to a number of successful projects, which were conducted
by the author’s group and various collaborators over the last
decades. All these implementations are signiﬁcantly based on
the solution presented here.
V.
IMPLEMENTATION OF KNOWLEDGE COMPLEMENTS
Example objects from the practical implementations of
formalised conceptual knowledge complements for disciplines
are shown in the following paragraphs. The examples show
the range of contributing disciplines and the signiﬁcance of
features for a consistent conceptual knowledge implementa-
tion. Only excerpts of English language objects are shown
for these examples. Anyhow the complements have to be
available in multi-lingual instances of which the conceptual
reference implementation must be able to handle. With the
shown solution, the conceptual complements support about 50
languages.
A. Complementary environmental information
An example object from the environmental knowledge
resources’ complements is shown in Figure 3.
1
2004/35/EC [Environment, Climate, GIS, ...]:
2
Directive 2004/35/EC, European Community, Environmental
Liability Directive.
3
%%SRC: 20050000 CPR
4
The Environmental Liability Directive [ELD] 2004/35/EC
is one of the most important instruments ...
5
%%IML: UDC:502/504,551.581/551.582,341.1,(4)
6
s. also ELD, EMS
Figure 3. Knowledge Resources, factual and conceptual complements:
Environmental information, directives (excerpt).
The object carries factual knowledge and respective conceptual
knowledge references. The full object refers to environmental
information, climate information, and spatial context.
B. Complementary natural sciences
An example object from the natural sciences knowledge
resources’ complements is shown in Figure 4.
1
diffraction [Physics, Optics]:
2
Deviation of a part of a ray due to the wave character
of radiation.
3
Diffraction occurs if rays hit the edge of an opaque
obstacle.
4
%%SRC: 1994, 2001, 2013 CPR
5
%%IML: UDC-Object:535+535.42+550.3+550.8
6
%%SRC: 2009 CPR
7
%%IML: keyword-Context: KYW :: Physics, Optics, Waves,
Seismics, Geophysics, Resolution, Exploration, Earth
crust, Earth surface, Applied Geosciences, Archaeology,
Scientific Computing, Data Processing, Statistics,
Modelling
8
%%SRC: 2010 CPR
9
%%IML: code: YES 19940401 {LXC:DETAIL----} {UDC:(0.034)
,004.432,004.43.FOR} LXDATASTORAGE:///home/cpr/...
10
%%IML: UDC-Object:(0.034),004.432,004.43.FOR
11
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-name:
diffam}
12
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-language:
Fortran77}
13
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-compilation:
Makefile}
14
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-compiler:
xlf}
15
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-operatingsystem:
AIX}
16
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-compiler:
g77}
17
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-operatingsystem:
Linux}
18
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-compiler:
g77}
19
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-virtualsystem:
VMWARE SuSE Linux}
20
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-routine:
...}
21
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-framework:
...}
22
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-workflow:
...}
23
%%IML: objectcomment: {PROGRAMCODE-usage:
...}
24
%%IML: cite: NO
20130000 {LXK:Diffraction Amplitudes;
Optics; Seismics;} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE:
//Rueckemann:2013:Diffraction
Figure 4. Knowledge Resources, factual and conceptual complements:
Natural sciences, phenomena, formalisation, and methods (excerpt).
The object carries factual knowledge and respective conceptual
knowledge references. The conceptual knowledge refers to
optics, diffraction, geophysics, applied geology, geological
prospecting and exploration, and interpretation of results.
C. Complementary archaeology and mythology
An example object from the object collections for natural
sciences
and
humanities
of
the
knowledge
resources’
complements is shown in Figure 5.
1
Hephaistos [Archaeology, Volcanology]:
2
(greek) God.
3
Greek god, forger for the gods.
4
Later god of fire and the forge.
5
%%SRC: 1990 CPR
6
compare Vulcanus
7
%%IML: UDC:[902+903+904]:[25+930.85]"63"(4)(093)=14
Figure 5. Knowledge Resources, factual and conceptual complements:
Volcanology, archaeology, and mythology (excerpt).
The object carries factual knowledge and respective conceptual
knowledge references. The conceptual knowledge refers to
archaeology, prehistory, prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiqui-
ties, cultural remains of historical times, religions of antiquity,
minor cults and religions, history of civilization, cultural
history, archaeological, prehistoric, protohistoric periods and
ages, auxiliaries of place (Europe) historical sources, Greek
(Hellenic) language.
173
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

An associated example object from the object collections for
natural sciences and humanities of the knowledge resources’
complements is shown in Figure 6.
1
Kukulk´an [Archaeology]:
2
(maya.) God.
3
Feather Snake.
4
Popol Vuh.
5
%%SRC: 1990 CPR
6
%%IML: UDC:[902+903+904]:[25+930.85]"63"(7)(093)=84/=88
7
Syn.: Kukulc´an
8
s. Popol Vuh, Chich´en Itz´a
Figure 6. Knowledge Resources, factual and conceptual complements:
Archaeology, mythology (excerpt).
The object carries factual knowledge and respective conceptual
knowledge references. The conceptual knowledge refers to
comparable context as the previous object but extends the
knowledge matrix by auxiliaries of place (North and Central
America) and Central and South American indigenous lan-
guages.
D. Complementary location
An associated example object from the object collections for
location references of the knowledge resources’ complements
is shown in Figure 7.
1
L’Anse-aux-Meadows [Archaeology]:
2
Viking Settlement, Newfoundland, America.
3
Founded before \isodate{1000}{}{}.
4
%%IML: UDC:[904]:[930.85](23)(4)(7)
5
%%SRC: 1992 CPR
Figure 7. Knowledge Resources, factual and conceptual complements:
Archaeology, physical and geographic locations (excerpt).
The object carries factual knowledge and respective conceptual
knowledge references. The conceptual knowledge refers to
cultural remains of historical times, history of civilization, Cul-
tural history, North and Central America – Europe association,
and above sea level context.
E. Further complementary knowledge gamut
Universal knowledge from any context is further available in
order to support processes and applications besides these small
examples from complementary knowledge resources. The dis-
ciplines themselves are not limited and span all knowledge,
e.g., natural sciences, seismics and seismology, cartography, re-
mote sensing, georeferences, volcanology, mineralogy, physics,
chemistry, geology, mathematics,, archaeology, planetology,
astrophysics, space research, biology, palaeontology, geogra-
phy, religion and mythology, art, linguistics, documentation,
publication.
In the context of application they also have to build facets,
embracing standards and languages as well as referencing
arbitrary factual knowledge, e.g., cities, countries, researchers,
institutions, bibliographies.
Therefore, the comprehensive subset for geo-spatial appli-
cation scenarios, which is the result of this research does have
to handle these references.
F. Creation of objects and conceptual knowledge
In respect of application scenarios, e.g., object processing,
the value of concordances may be reminded. Practical creation
of objects has shown to be most efﬁcient when three different
categories of creation are considered:
•
Manually created objects,
•
Hybrid (semi-automatically) created objects, and
•
Automatically created objects.
In any case creating objects is supported by universal classi-
ﬁcation, e.g., references to UDC. Therefore, that can also be
applied for the creating concordances with objects.
We use a well known object for demonstration, which is
referenced in the same container with all volcano objects.
The listing in Figure 8 shows an instance of a simple
object excerpt from an object collection. The excerpt shows
keywords, content, e.g., including references, documentation,
factual knowledge, and conceptual knowledge.
1
Vesuvius [Volcanology, Geology, Archaeology]:
2
(lat.) Mons Vesuvius.
3
(ital.) Vesuvio.
4
(deutsch.) Vesuv.
5
Volcano, Gulf of Naples, Italy.
6
Complex volcano (compound volcano).
7
Stratovolcano, large cone (Gran Cono).
8
Volcano Type: Somma volcano,
9
VNUM: 0101-02=,
10
Summit Elevation: 1281 m.
11
The volcanic activity in the region is observed by the
12
Oservatorio Vesuviano. The Vesuvius area has been
13
declared a national park on 1995-06-05.
14
The most known antique settlements at the Vesuvius are
15
Pompeji and Herculaneum.
16
Syn.: Vesaevus, Vesevus, Vesbius, Vesvius
17
s. volcano, super volcano, compound volcano
18
s. also Pompeji, Herculaneum, seismology
19
compare La Soufri`ere, Mt. Scenery, Soufriere
20
...
21
UDC:[911.2+55]:[930.85]:[902]"63"(4+37+23+24)=12
22
...
23
UCC:UDC2012:551.21
24
UCC:UDC2012:551
25
UCC:UDC2012:902/908
26
UCC:MSC2010:86,86A17,86A60
27
UCC:LCC:QE521-545
28
UCC:LCC:QE1-996.5
29
UCC:LCC:QC801-809
30
UCC:LCC:CC1-960,CB3-482
31
UCC:PACS2010:91.40.-k
32
UCC:PACS2010:91.65.-n,91.
Figure 8. Processed instance of a simple object (excerpt) from an object
collection.
Both classiﬁcation and concordances, the Universal Classi-
ﬁed Classiﬁcation (UCC), were collected and created semi-
automatically over a period of time. The rest of the object was
created manually.
The listing in Figure 9 shows an instance of a simple con-
tainer entry excerpt from a volcanological features container, in
a representation, which can be input for processing workﬂows.
The excerpt shows a representation of conceptual knowledge
for the container and various factual knowledge. The data
was collected and created semi-automatically over a period
of time.
174
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:UDC2012:551.21
2
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:UDC2012:551
3
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:UDC2012:551
.2,551.23,551.24,551.26
4
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:UDC2012:902/908
5
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:MSC2010:86,86A17,86
A60
6
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:LCC:QE521-545
7
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:LCC:QE1-996.5
8
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:LCC:QC801-809
9
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:LCC:CC1-960,CB3-482
10
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:PACS2010:91.40.-k
11
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:PACS2010:91.65.-n,91.
12
CONTAINER_CONCEPTUAL_KNOWLEDGE: UCC:PACS2010:91.40.Ge
,91.40.St,91.40.Rs,*91.45.C-,*91.45.D-,90
13
...
14
CONTAINER_OBJECT_EN_ITEM: Vesuvius
15
CONTAINER_OBJECT_DE_ITEM: Vesuv
16
CONTAINER_OBJECT_EN_PRINT: Vesuvius
17
CONTAINER_OBJECT_DE_PRINT: Vesuv
18
CONTAINER_OBJECT_EN_COUNTRY: Italy
19
CONTAINER_OBJECT_DE_COUNTRY: Italien
20
CONTAINER_OBJECT_EN_CONTINENT: Europe
21
CONTAINER_OBJECT_DE_CONTINENT: Europa
22
CONTAINER_OBJECT_XX_LATITUDE: 40.821N
23
CONTAINER_OBJECT_XX_LONGITUDE: 14.426E
24
CONTAINER_OBJECT_XX_HEIGHT_M: 1281
25
CONTAINER_OBJECT_EN_TYPE: Complexvolcano
26
CONTAINER_OBJECT_DE_TYPE: Komplex-Vulkan
27
CONTAINER_OBJECT_XX_VNUM: 0101-02=
Figure 9. Processed instance of a simple container entry (excerpt).
The conceptual knowledge of several concordances’ references
is exported into this representation and illustrates how to
integrate conceptual knowledge implementations.
The conceptual knowledge is a matter of more detailed dis-
cussion in the next subsections and sections. The excerpts have
been processed with the appropriate lx_object_volcanology
and lx_container_volcanology interfaces, selecting a number
of items and for the container also items in English and
German including a unique formatting.
The resources’ access and processing can be done in any
programming language, assuming that the interfaces are im-
plemented. For example, combining scripting, ﬁltering, and
parallel programming can provide ﬂexible approaches.
VI.
RESULTING CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE SOLUTION
Table I contains the compilation of a general comprehensive
subset of resulting major conceptual knowledge reference divi-
sions for geo-spatial application scenarios. All the conceptual
knowledge reference divisions presented are referring to UDC
codes, which have been made publicly available. Here, “UDC:”
is the designated notation of references used with Knowledge
Resources and objects in ongoing projects. The UDC illustrates
the width and depth of knowledge dimensions. The full details
of organisation and knowledge are available from the UDC.
As far a possible, the original verbal descriptions (English
for demonstration) were taken, even if the writing of terms
and words may differ from the practice used for the rest
of this paper. The resulting conceptual knowledge solution
comprises a most comprehensive knowledge compendium
of geo-spatially dominated facetted knowledge, which can
be effectively and efﬁciently used in geo-spatial application
scenarios. Besides the level of detail and arbitrary facetted
knowledge, the respective conceptual knowledge reference di-
visions provide a focussed discipline coverage while spanning
a large width and depth of knowledge reference divisions.
For example, let us take an additional view on depth for
UDC:004 (Computer science and technology. Computing. Data
processing), UDC:51 (Mathematics), and UDC:528 (Geodesy.
Surveying. Photogrammetry. Remote sensing. Cartography).
Besides the shown references, UDC:004 also comprises
important subdivision context of data and structure, e.g., data
handling (UDC:004.62), ﬁles (UDC:004.63), databases and
their structures (UDC:004.65), and systems for numeric data
(UDC:004.67). For practical references, UDC:004 can be used
to also hold references to many application scenarios, e.g.,
algorithms for program construction, low level as well as
high level and problem oriented languages, knowledge repre-
sentation, artiﬁcial intelligence application systems, intelligent
knowledge-based systems. For practical references with math-
ematical, geometrical, and topological context, UDC:51 can
be used to also hold references to fundamental and general
considerations of mathematics, number theory, algebra, geom-
etry, topology, analysis, combinatorial analysis, graph theory,
probability, mathematical statistics, computational mathemat-
ics, numerical analysis, mathematical cybernetics, operational
research as well as mathematical theories and methods. For
practical references with geoscience and spatial disciplines,
UDC:528 can be used to also hold references to a much
deeper discipline based knowledge, e.g., fundamentals derived
from potential theory, level surfaces, geoids, geometric/static
methods, use of longitudinal and latitudinal measurements,
gravity measurement, astro-geodetic determination of position,
geographical coordinates, topographic surveying, engineering
surveys, special ﬁelds of surveying, applications of photogram-
metry, fundamental and physical principles, data processing,
and interpretation.
The result of conceptual knowledge reference divisions
based on the methodology of superordinate knowledge is
complementary to geo-spatial topologies and geo-referencing.
It can be used complementary with any geoscientiﬁc and geo-
spatial knowledge in any context.
The result can provide solutions wherever conceptual knowl-
edge references are involved. The methodologies and imple-
mentations make sure that powerful sets of unique attributes
and features are available. The number of possible use cases
is practically unlimited. The case studies showed that a wide
range of application scenarios can beneﬁt from the principles
of superordinate knowledge and considering conceptual knowl-
edge as complementary means for consistently documenting
and handling knowledge. The passages in the following section
refer to discussions and details for an excerpt of successful
implementations.
VII.
EVALUATION FROM IMPLEMENTATION CASES
Many years of research and practical solution developments
contributed to creating a comprehensive subset of conceptual
knowledge, which is the fundament deployed for general
practical solutions, e.g., with geo-spatial applications and with
geo-data knowledge mining and processing.
175
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. COMPREHENSIVE SUBSET OF RESULTING CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE REFERENCE DIVISIONS FOR GEO-SPATIAL APPLICATION SCENARIOS,
PRACTICALLY USED MAIN CLASSIFICATION REFERENCES, UNIVERSAL DECIMAL CLASSIFICATION SAMPLES (UDC, ENGLISH; UDCC [17]; CC [18]).
CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE REFERENCES FOR GEO-SPATIAL SCENARIOS
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
Common Auxiliary Signs
+
Coordination. Addition (plus sign).
[]
Subgrouping (square brackets).
/
Consecutive extension (oblique stroke sign).
∗
Introduces non-UDC notation (asterisk).
:
Simple relation (colon sign).
A/Z
Direct alphabetical speciﬁcation.
::
Order-ﬁxing (double colon sign).
,
[Reference listing, itemisation]
Auxiliary Tables
UDC:=...
Common auxiliaries of language.
UDC:(=...)
Common auxiliaries of human ancestry, ethnic
UDC:(0...)
Common auxiliaries of form.
grouping and nationality.
UDC:(1/9)
Common auxiliaries of place.
UDC:-0...
Common auxiliaries of general characteristics:
UDC:“...”
Common auxiliaries of time.
Properties, Materials, Relations/Processes and Persons.
Place and Space
UDC:(1/9)
Common auxiliaries of place.
UDC:(20)
Ecosphere
UDC:(1)
Place and space in general. Localization. Orientation
UDC:(21)
Surface of the Earth in general.
UDC:(100)
Universal as to place. International. All countries in general
Land areas in particular.
UDC:(1-0/-9)
Special auxiliary subdivision for boundaries and
Natural zones and regions
spatial forms of various kinds
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground
UDC:(1-0)
Zones
generally. Mountains
UDC:(1-1)
Orientation. Points of the compass. Relative position
UDC:(24)
Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
UDC:(1-2)
Lowest administrative units. Localities
UDC:(25)
Natural ﬂat ground (at, above or below sea level). The
UDC:(1-5)
Dependent or semi-dependent territories
ground in its natural condition, cultivated or inhabited
UDC:(1-6)
States or groupings of states from various points of view
UDC:(26)
Oceans, seas and interconnections
UDC:(1-7)
Places and areas according to privacy, publicness and
UDC:(28)
Inland waters
other special features
UDC:(29)
The world according to physiographic features
UDC:(1-8)
Location. Source. Transit. Destination
UDC:(3/9)
Individual places of the ancient and modern world
UDC:(1-9)
Regionalization according to specialized points of view
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(2)
Physiographic designation
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
Main Tables
UDC:0
Science and Knowledge. Organization. Computer Science.
UDC:5
Mathematics. Natural Sciences
Information. Documentation. Librarianship. Institutions. Publications
UDC:6
Applied Sciences. Medicine, Technology
UDC:1
Philosophy. Psychology
UDC:7
The Arts. Entertainment. Sport
UDC:2
Religion. Theology
UDC:8
Linguistics. Literature
UDC:3
Social Sciences
UDC:9
Geography. Biography. History
Science, Knowledge, Organisation
UDC:001
Science and knowledge in general. Organization of intellectual work
UDC:007
Activity and organizing. Communication and control
UDC:002
Documentation. Books. Writings. Authorship
theory generally (cybernetics). ’Human engineering’
UDC:003
Writing systems and scripts
UDC:01
Bibliography and bibliographies. Catalogues
UDC:004
Computer science and technology. Computing. Data processing
UDC:02
Librarianship
UDC:004.4
Software
UDC:030
General reference works (as subject)
UDC:004.6
Computer data
UDC:050
Serial publications, periodicals (as subject)
UDC:004.7
Computer communication. Computer networks
UDC:06
Organizations of a general nature
UDC:004.8
Artiﬁcial intelligence
UDC:061
Organizations and other types of cooperation
UDC:005
Management
UDC:069
Museums. Permanent exhibitions
UDC:005.94
Knowledge management
UDC:070
Newspapers (as subject). The Press. Journalism
UDC:006
Standardization of products, operations, weights, measures and time
UDC:08
Polygraphies. Collective works
UDC:008
Civilization. Culture. Progress
UDC:09
Manuscripts. Rare and remarkable works
Geo-spatial Focus Divisions From Main Tables
UDC:51
Mathematics
UDC:550.3
Geophysics
UDC:528
Geodesy. Surveying. Photogrammetry. Remote sensing. Cartography
UDC:550.7
Geobiology. Geological actions of organisms
UDC:528.2
Figure of the Earth. Earth measurement. Mathematical
UDC:550.8
Applied geology and geophysics. Geological
geodesy. Physical geodesy. Astronomical geodesy
prospecting and exploration. Interpretation of results
UDC:528.3
Geodetic surveying
UDC:551
General geology. Meteorology. Climatology.
UDC:528.4
Field surveying. Land surveying. Cadastral survey.
Historical geology. Stratigraphy. Palaeogeography
Topography. Engineering survey. Special ﬁelds of surveying
UDC:551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC:528.7
Photogrammetry: aerial, terrestrial
UDC:778
Special applications and techniques of photography
UDC:528.8
Remote sensing
UDC:91
Geography. Exploration of the Earth and of
UDC:528.9
Cartography. Mapping (textual documents)
individual countries. Travel. Regional geography
UDC:528.94
Thematic cartography. Topical cartography
(systematic geography). Theoretical geography
UDC:53
Physics
UDC:912
Nonliterary, nontextual representations of a region
UDC:55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC:913
Regional geography
176
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 10. Collage of different implementation cases based on the resulting conceptual knowledge (Table I) from this research: Knowledge mapping,
integration, mining; the samples illustrate context creation and dynamical visualisation. For technical details please see the references for the case studies given
in the text.
The conceptual knowledge framework employed here, es-
pecially UDC, has passed the test of time and is so mature
and used in so many scenarios that the ongoing knowledge
development itself is iterating with its application.
The solution showed to fulﬁll all the major signiﬁcant
criteria, especially:
•
The conceptual knowledge references (e.g., UDC) and
components of the Knowledge Resources fully support
for universal knowledge.
•
These references and components of the Knowledge
Resources fully support multi-disciplinary solutions, in-
tegrating facetted universal knowledge. All the com-
ponents are multi-lingual. The conceptual knowledge
references currently support about ﬁfty languages.
•
All the components, including the conceptual knowledge
references allow sustainable, long-term usable edition
framework, which is a base for consistent, extendable
solutions on all components.
The solution allows all the consequent advanced features,
which are directly linked to knowledge and documentation.
The previously unpublished results of practical conceptual
knowledge are ﬁrst presented with the research cited in this
paper (Table I). The following case studies are based on these
results and present small but illustrative excerpts (Figure 10)
in form of a cross-section of conducted research and de-
velopment, of Knowledge Resources, algorithms, intelligent
workﬂows, and implementations.
Here, for example, a knowledge mining process employing
knowledge objects based on the referred conceptual knowledge
can use all the width and depth of knowledge behind the
comprehensive subset to automatically or semi-automatically
create new context and visualisation for a data set containing
non-georeferenced text entities (afﬁliations in ﬂoating text),
e.g., geographical, political, and climate zone context.
Besides the knowledge fundament and framework being
focus of this research paper, the references in the next pas-
sages contain further details for the practical case studies, the
implemented methods and the technologies, which were used
for the different case studies.
•
Knowledge integration allows to create new views and
insights by computing Spatial Cogwheel modules [32].
•
Knowledge mining: Creating Knowledge Resources and
employing classiﬁcation and concordances can provide
a base for advanced knowledge discovery and compu-
tational solutions [16]. The integration of Knowledge
Resources and advanced association processing can be
beneﬁcial in many disciplines as it provides multi-
disciplinary and multi-lingual support [33].
Methods like the Content Factor can be used for ad-
vanced knowledge processing [34]. The integration of
appropriate methods can be used for further advancing
the Knowledge Resources, as well as the mining pro-
cesses [35].
177
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

•
The methodology of knowledge mapping allows to create
ﬂexible methods in order to handle spatial represen-
tations and knowledge mining by creating a multi-
dimensional context for arbitrary objects and entities
[14].
•
Dynamical visualisation: The methodology can be used
for enabling knowledge based methods for computation
and computational and dynamical visualisation [36].
•
Association and phonetic features: The methodology
supports phonetic association and mining methods [37].
•
Verbal description: The employment of implemented
methods can be supported and make use of multi-
lingual verbal descriptions and concordances [38] as
the conceptual knowledge is consistently available in
50 languages, providing millions of basic conceptual
knowledge references.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
This paper discussed the practice of formalised conceptual
knowledge complements created with multi-disciplinary col-
lections, containers, and referenced resources and presented
different types of multi-disciplinary Knowledge Resources.
This paper presented a complements of formalised con-
ceptual knowledge and a representative compilation of com-
ponents from successful complex implementation scenarios.
All such components are under creation and development
for several decades, which have shown that the creation and
development of multi-disciplinary Knowledge Resources is an
essential long-term value.
With this research, a comprehensive subset of conceptual
knowledge reference divisions was created, further developed,
and ﬁnally compiled from the practical application case stud-
ies, which have been conducted and further developed over the
last decades. This research achieved to create a comprehensive
tool base of conceptual knowledge in geo-spatial application
scenarios for all kinds of multi-disciplinary knowledge context
in any media. The implemented superordinate knowledge
based solution fulﬁlls all the required criteria as was presented
and discussed in this paper.
The result was employed to successfully implement a wide
range of different geo-spatial cases.
Based on the presented research and practiced during exten-
sive creation and development of complementary knowledge
resources, a comprehensive subset of references to conceptual
knowledge, allowing geo-spatially dominated facetted knowl-
edge, was created, further developed, and ﬁnally compiled
from the application case studies, which have been conducted
over the last three decades. Knowledge based fundaments, e.g.,
those built on UDC, showed to have a very high impact on
knowledge creation and mining in theory and practice, not only
for spatial knowledge.
The knowledge approach proved to be a fundamental “en-
abler” and contributed signiﬁcantly to many solutions. Cov-
ering a coherent system of knowledge provides a holistic and
consistent environment for any scenario, which is supported by
excellent features for facetted knowledge. The referenced con-
ceptual knowledge itself is consistent due to its development
and publication via editions. Implementations support fully
multi-disciplinary context and multi-lingual instances for many
languages. Solutions are extensible to integrate and ﬁt special
purposes. The methodology is data-centric and scalable for
width and depth of knowledge as well as for infrastructure re-
quirements. All the cases so far implementing the presented so-
lution provided seamless integration with common geo-spatial
practices and showed excellent sustainability, knowledge cov-
erage, long-term characteristics, and scalability. In review of
these results, all major institutions, e.g., libraries focussing on
information science and research data management, are using
and developing conceptual knowledge with their core tasks,
which opens up a wide range of excellent knowledge sources,
which can be considered high value resources. Moreover,
such Knowledge Resources are complementary, independent
of the fact that they can incorporate different methods and
approaches, e.g., thesauri, semantic frameworks, ontologies,
and phonetic interfaces for the content they handle.
Future research on theory and practice will concentrate on
further developing the spectrum of references and creating
knowledge reference based solutions for scenarios and disci-
plines. In addition, the creation and further development of
knowledge resources is a multi-disciplinary long-term task.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the “Knowledge in Motion” (KiM)
long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for partially funding this re-
search, implementation, case studies, and publication under
grants D2016F5P04648 and D2018F6P04938 and to its senior
scientiﬁc members and members of the permanent commission
of the science council, and the board of trustees, especially to
Dr. Friedrich H¨ulsmann, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek
(GWLB) Hannover, to Dipl.-Biol. Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz,
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, to Dipl.-Ing. Martin Hofmeister,
Hannover, and to Olaf Lau, Hannover, Germany, for collabora-
tion, practical multi-disciplinary case studies, and the analysis
of advanced concepts. We are grateful to Dipl.-Ing. Hans-
G¨unther M¨uller, Cray, Germany, for his excellent contributions
and assistance providing practical private cloud and storage
solutions. We are grateful to all national and international part-
ners in the Geo Exploration and Information cooperations for
their constructive and trans-disciplinary support. We are grate-
ful to the Science and High Performance Supercomputing Cen-
tre (SHPSC) for long-term support. / DIMF-PIID-DF98 007.
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Superordinate Knowledge Based Comprehen-
sive Subset of Conceptual Knowledge for Practical Geo-spatial
Application Scenarios,” in Proceedings of The Eleventh Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems,
Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2019), February 24 –
28, 2019, Athens, Greece.
XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware,
USA, 2019, pp. 52–58, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-61208-687-
3, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
geoprocessing 2019 3 30 30039 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
178
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[2]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Sustainable Knowledge and Resources Management
for Environmental Information and Computation.
Business Expert
Press, Manhattan, New York, USA, Mar. 2018, Chapter 3, pp. 45–
88, in: Huong Ha (ed.), Climate Change Management: Special Topics
in the Context of Asia, ISBN: 978-1-94784-327-1 (paperback), ISBN:
978-1-94784-328-8 (e-book), in: Robert Sroufe (ed.), Business Expert
Press Environmental and Social Sustainability for Business Advantage
Collection, ISSN: 2327-333X (collection, print).
[3]
“ISO 14000 - Environmental management,” 2019, URL: http://www.
iso.org/iso/iso14000 [accessed: 2019-05-02].
[4]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Superordinate Knowledge Based Comprehen-
sive Subset of Conceptual Knowledge for Practical Mathematical-
Computational Scenarios,” in The Ninth Symposium on Advanced
Computation and Information in Natural and Applied Sciences, Pro-
ceedings of The 17th International Conference of Numerical Analysis
and Applied Mathematics (ICNAAM), September 23–28, 2019, Rhodes,
Greece, Proceedings of the American Institute of Physics (AIP), no. 1.
AIP Press, American Institute of Physics, Melville, New York, USA,
Oct. 2020, ISSN: 0094-243X, (to appear).
[5]
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, Volume 1, 2009, Project Gutenberg,
eBook, EBook-No.: 28626, Release Date: April 27, 2009, Digitised
Version of the Original Publication, Produced by Sophia Canoni, Book
provided by Iason Konstantinidis, Translator: Kyriakos Zambas, URL:
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/12699 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[6]
Aristotle, The Ethics of Aristotle, 2005, Project Gutenberg, eBook,
EBook-No.: 8438, Rel. Date: Jul., 2005, Digit. Vers. of the Orig. Publ.,
Produced by Ted Garvin, David Widger, and the DP Team, Edition 10,
URL: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8438 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[7]
L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, Eds., A Taxonomy for Learning,
Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educa-
tional Objectives.
Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA (Pearson Education
Group), USA, 2001, ISBN: 978-0801319037.
[8]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, F. H¨ulsmann, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, P. Skurowski,
and M. Staniszewski, Knowledge and Computing.
Post-Summit
Results, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and Deﬁnitions of Knowl-
edge and Computing, Sept. 23, 2015, The Fifth Symp. on Adv.
Comp. and Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The
13th Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM),
Sept. 23–29, 2015, Rhodes, Greece, 2015, DOI: 10.15488/3409, URL:
https://doi.org/10.15488/3409 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[9]
Plato, Phaedo, 2008, (Written 360 B.C.E.), Translated by Benjamin
Jowett, Provided by The Internet Classics Archive, URL: http://classics.
mit.edu/Plato/phaedo.html [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[10]
T. Gooley, How to Read Nature: Awaken Your Senses to the Outdoors
You’ve Never Noticed.
New York, N.Y.: Experiment, 2017, ISBN:
978-1-61519-429-2.
[11]
J. Burroughs, Leaf and Tendril, 1908, Ch. 1, The Art of Seeing Things.
[12]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Principles of Superordinate Knowledge: Separation
of Methodology, Implementation, and Realisation,” in The Eighth
Symposium on Advanced Computation and Information in Natural and
Applied Sciences, Proceedings of The 16th International Conference of
Numerical Analysis and Applied Mathematics (ICNAAM), September
13–18, 2018, Rhodes, Greece, Proceedings of the American Institute of
Physics (AIP), vol. 2116.
AIP Press, American Institute of Physics,
Melville, New York, USA, 2019, ISSN: 0094-243X, (to appear).
[13]
C.-P. R¨uckemann and F. H¨ulsmann, “Signiﬁcant Differences: Method-
ologies and Applications,” “Signiﬁcant Differences: Methodologies and
Applications”, KiMrise, Knowledge in Motion Meeting, November 27,
2017, Knowledge in Motion, Hannover, Germany, 2017.
[14]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Methodology of Knowledge Mapping for Arbitrary
Objects and Entities: Knowledge Mining and Spatial Representations
– Objects in Multi-dimensional Context,” in Proceedings of The
Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information
Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2018), March
25–29, 2018, Rome, Italy.
XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware,
USA, 2018, pp. 40–45, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-61208-617-
0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
geoprocessing 2018 3 20 30078 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[15]
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
“OECD Principles and Guidelines for Access to Research Data
from Public Funding,” 2007, URL: https://www.oecd.org/sti/sci-tech/
38500813.pdf [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[16]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Advanced Knowledge Discovery and Computing
based on Knowledge Resources, Concordances, and Classiﬁcation,”
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 9, no.
1&2, 2016, pp. 27–40, ISSN: 1942-2679, URL: http://www.thinkmind.
org/index.php?view=article&articleid=intsys v9 n12 2016 3/
[accessed: 2019-07-07].
[17]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[18]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2019-07-07],
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
[19]
F. H¨ulsmann and C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Symbolism and Meaning and Their
Signiﬁcance in Information Science,” KiM Summit, February 20, 2018,
Knowledge in Motion, Hannover, Germany, 2019.
[20]
B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, “Art and Symbolism: The Sistine Chapel,”
KiM On-site Summit, Knowledge in Motion, March 27, 2018, On-
site Summit Meeting, “Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF)”, Rome, Italy, 2018.
[21]
B. Gersbeck-Schierholz and C.-P. R¨uckemann, “To See and Not to
See,” KiM On-site Summit, Knowledge in Motion, July 26, 2018,
On-site Summit Meeting, “Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF)”, Museu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya,
Barcelona, Spain, 2018.
[22]
“UDC, Common Auxiliary Signs,” 2019, Universal Decimal Classiﬁca-
tion (UDC), URL: https://udcdata.info/078885 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[23]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Main Tables,” 2019, Universal Deci-
mal Classiﬁcation (UDC), URL: https://udcdata.info/078887 [accessed:
2019-07-07].
[24]
“UDC 0: Science and knowledge. Organization. Computer science.
Information. Documentation. Librarianship. Institution. Publications,”
2019, Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC), URL: http://udcdata.
info/13358 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[25]
“UDC (1/9): Common auxiliaries of place,” 2019, Universal Deci-
mal Classiﬁcation (UDC), URL: http://udcdata.info/001951 [accessed:
2019-07-07].
[26]
“UDC 528: Geodesy. Surveying. Photogrammetry. Remote sensing.
Cartography,” 2019, Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC), URL:
http://udcdata.info/027504 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[27]
“UDC 910: General questions. Geography as a science. Exploration.
Travel,” 2019, Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC), URL: http://
udcdata.info/068129 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[28]
“UDC 912: Nonliterary, nontextual representations of a region,” 2019,
Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC), URL: http://udcdata.info/
068183 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[29]
“UDC 913: Regional geography,” 2019, Universal Decimal Classiﬁca-
tion (UDC), URL: http://udcdata.info/068186 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[30]
“UDC 94: General history,” 2019, Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation
(UDC), URL: http://udcdata.info/068284 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[31]
N. T. Nikolitsis, “Arch¨aologische Unterwasser-Expedition bei Rhodos,
(English: Archaeological Underwater-Expedition at Rhodes),” Antike
Welt, Zeitschrift f¨ur Arch¨aologie und Kulturgeschichte, (English: Anti-
que World, Magazine for Archaeology and Cultural History), 1981, 12.
Jg., Heft 1, (English: 12th Year, Issue 1), pp. 45–58.
179
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[32]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Creating New Views and Insights by Computing
Spatial Cogwheel Modules for Knowledge Integration,” Int. Journ.
on Adv. in Intell. Syst., vol. 10, no. 3&4, 2017, pp. 314–326,
ISSN: 1942-2679, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=intsys v10 n34 2017 13/ [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[33]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Integration of Knowledge Resources and Advanced
Association Processing for Geosciences and Archaeology,” Int. Jour. on
Adv. in Systems and Measurements, vol. 9, no. 3&4, 2016, pp. 485–495,
ISSN: 1942-261x, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=sysmea v9 n34 2016 22/ [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[34]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Knowledge Processing and Advanced Application
Scenarios With the Content Factor Method,” International Journal on
Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 9, no. 3&4, 2016, pp. 485–495,
ISSN: 1942-2679, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=intsys v9 n34 2016 22/ [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[35]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Progressive Advancement of Knowledge Resources
and Mining: Integrating Content Factor and Comparative Analysis
Methods for Dynamical Classiﬁcation and Concordances,” Int. Journal
on Adv. in Systems and Measurements, vol. 11, no. 1&2, 2018,
ISSN: 1942-261x, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=sysmea v11 n12 2018 5/ [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[36]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Creating Knowledge-based Dynamical Visualisation
and Computation,” in Proc. of The Seventh International Conference on
Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
(GEOProcessing 2015), February 22–27, 2015, Lisbon, Portugal.
XPS
Press, 2015, pp. 56–62, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-61208-383-
4, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
geoprocessing 2015 3 40 30063 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[37]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Archaeological and Geoscientiﬁc Objects used with
Integrated Systems and Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources,” Int. Jour.
on Adv. in Systems and Measurements, vol. 6, no. 1&2, 2013, pp. 200–
213, ISSN: 1942-261x, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?
articleid=sysmea v6 n12 2013 15 [accessed: 2019-07-07].
[38]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Methodology Enabling Knowledge Mining Com-
putation Based on Conceptual Knowledge and Verbal Description,” in
The Seventh Symposium on Advanced Computation and Information
in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), Proc. of The 15th Int.
Conf. of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 25–30,
2017, Thessaloniki, Greece, AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 1728,
no. 1.
AIP Press, Melville, New York, USA, Jul. 2018, ISBN: 978-0-
7354-1690-1 (Book), ISSN: 0094-243X, DOI: 10.1063/1.5043723.
180
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

