Development of MOX Sensors for Low VOCs Concentrations Detection: Responses 
Comparison for WO3, SnO2, and ZnO Sensitive Layers with Interfering Gases as 
CO and CO2 
Short Paper 
Frank James, Tomas Fiorido, Marc Bendahan, Khalifa Aguir 
Aix Marseille Univ, Univ Toulon CNRS, IM2NP, Marseille, France  
e-mail: khalifa.aguir@im2np.fr 
 
 
Abstract—N-type Metal Oxide sensors was developed to detect 
Volatile Organic Compounds at low concentration level. 
Sensitive layers like SnO2, ZnO and WO3 were deposited by 
reactive RF sputtering method. The sensors is based on a 
heater and a MOX sensitive layer on a silicon substrate. Gas 
sensing properties have been investigated toward isobutylene, 
as a typical VOC and benzene. The optimum working 
temperature was experimentally determined at 285°C for this 
study. This work highlights the detection of VOCs with 
interfering gases by MOX sensor at low level. Gas like CO and 
CO2 can be interfering gas for VOCs detection. This study was 
focused on the detection of isobutylene and benzene from 50 
ppb to 500 ppb. The low selectivity is in fact a well-known 
problem of these sensors but we made a comparison between 
these MOX sensors at the same temperature in order to have a 
simple sensor array on the same chip in the future. This system 
will be used for a real time indoor air monitoring. 
Keywords- gas sensor; MOX sensor; isobutylene; benzene 
carbon dioxyde; carbone monoxyde. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the last decades, an increasing demand for the 
monitoring of several parameters allowing to guarantee the 
safety and quality products and environment represents a 
wide market for chemical sensors. Responses comparison 
between sensors allows to choose specific systems for a 
target gas [1]. In different fields, like environmental 
monitoring, home security, and safety, the detection and 
evaluation of gaseous emissions is strongly required 
[2].Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are emitted to the 
atmosphere from various industrial and natural sources. The 
concentration of VOCs is much higher in indoors compared 
to outdoors, which not only pollutes the environment but 
also affects human health through breathing and skin 
contamination. VOCs are present in several household 
products such as paints, disinfectants, wood preservatives 
and automotive products. All these products contribute to 
indoor air pollution. There is a need to develop fast, 
sensitive, and cost-effective gas sensors for the detection of 
VOCs. 
Gas sensing applications require continuous and direct 
exposition of gas sensors to environment to be analyzed with 
interferers. The most common gas sensing technology for 
sensing applications is metal oxide (MOX) gas sensors. The 
development of transducers for metal –oxide gas sensors has 
been reported lately [3].  
MOX sensors in particular is still the most promising 
class of sensing materials, thanks to easy fabrication methods 
and chemical stability. In our case, MOX sensors are 
investigated in order to detect VOCs thanks to their 
miniaturization and real-time monitoring capabilities. These 
sensors need to be heated to elevated temperature to make 
them gas sensitive and to allow them to respond rapidly to 
the momentary gas concentration levels in the ambient air. 
The sensitive layers have been obtained by Radio 
Frequency Magnetron Sputtering. Great attention was 
dedicated to the control of the film thickness. An appropriate 
choice of the materials for a particular gas is very important, 
and some materials are suitable for each type of gas 
detection. Considering that metal oxides are very good 
sensitive layer candidates, the analysis of various parameters 
including 
electro-physical 
properties 
and 
structural 
properties is important for the choice of an effective sensor. 
It is also necessary to pay attention to the performances 
towards interfering gases. An interesting approach to obtain 
enhanced selectivity consists in operating the sensors with 
variable temperature profiles or light modulation [4] [5]. 
Many different shapes and periods of the sensor temperature 
profiles have been proposed in the literature depending also 
on the particular structure of the sensors used [6]. 
Nevertheless, if different materials are on the same chip, the 
right choice have to be made in order to select the more 
sensitive layer for the gas at a working temperature. 
Isobutylene, which is a typical VOC is one of our target 
gas because it is easy to detect. It is also easy to realize a 
concentration calibration with a photoionization detector for 
example. We will start with this gas then we will try to detect 
benzene which is more dangerous for human health. Benzene 
exposure can cause leukemia and permissible exposure limits 
have been set up. This two VOCs will help us to estimate 
how selective can be a system with our different sensors. 
In this work, we have chosen three main n-type metal 
oxides used in this field: SnO2 [7], WO3 [8] [9], and ZnO 
[10]. The aim of the comparison between the performances 
of these sensitive materials is to find the best sensitive layer 
for our low VOCs concentrations sensors and to evaluate the 
effect of interfering gases like CO and CO2. These 
interferences can be a problem when the detection system is 
too sensitive towards these gases. 
158
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II. 
SENSITIVE LAYER 
A. Deposition Method 
The three sensitive thin layers (~50nm) under study were 
deposited by reactive magnetron RF sputtering. So, the metal 
oxide films were grown by reactive R.F. magnetron 
sputtering of pure metal by means of a plasma of argon as 
carrier gas and oxygen as reactive gas. The experimental set-
up was a conventional capacitive coupled R.F. magnetron 
sputtering chamber with a water-cooled cathode target. The 
deposition chamber was first pumped down to high vacuum 
conditions (10-7 mbar). Under a dynamic strangling pumping 
through a valve, pure oxygen was then introduced into the 
chamber and the partial pressure of oxygen was adjusted to 
the desired value (10-3 mbar) by means of a mass flow 
controller. Pure argon was afterwards introduced bringing 
the total working dynamic pressure up to 20 x 10-3 mbar. The 
R.F. forward input power was maintained at 100 W with a 
reflected power rendered minimum (almost zero) by means 
of an impedance matching. The corresponding self-bias 
voltage was around -100 V. These conditions were kept 
constant during the whole films depositions process. Only 
several parameters as the oxygen pressure and the deposition 
time were changed and studied to obtain the right oxide. 
Magnetron Sputtering is a low cost and easy control method 
for layer growth. Finally, the materials were annealed at 
450°C during 1h30 to improve their nano-crystallization and 
the stability of the sensors response.  
B. Structural charatherizations 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were made using 
a Philips X’Pert MPD. The angular range was between 20° 
and 60° for 2θ. Data were collected with an angular step of 
0.02°, 3 s per step. The Cu X-ray source was operated with a 
high intensity ceramic sealed tube (3 kW).  
Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the three thin film. All 
the diffraction peaks show tetragonal rutile structure for 
SnO2, monoclinic structure for WO3 and hexagonal structure 
for ZnO (JCPDS cards No 72-1147, 41-1445, 36-1451 
respectively). The grains size of these materials was around 
20 nm for each one high porosity (Fig. 2).  
Under isobutylene, the reducing molecules will react 
with the adsorbed oxygen ions and release the trapped 
electrons back to the metal oxide conduction band. This 
reaction leads to the decrease of electron depletion barrier 
and to increase the electrical conduction of the metal oxide. 
The same reaction happened under benzene.  
The sensitive layer is the main part of the gas sensor. The 
right choice have to be made about this material in order to 
obtain the best response possible. All these materials have to 
be studied for each VOCs. 
The material characterization was also carried out by 
using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A SEM image 
of one the SnO2 film is shown in Fig. 2 to appreciate the 
morphology. All these materials shown the same surface 
properties that have helped us to compare them. 
 
Figure 1.  XRD patterns of a) SnO2, b)WO3 and c) ZnO made by reactive 
RF sputtering 
The material characterization was also carried out by 
using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A SEM image 
of one the SnO2 film is shown in Fig. 2 to appreciate the 
morphology. All these materials shown the same surface 
properties that have helped us to compare them. The grain 
size was around 20 nm, with homogeneous shapes.  
These layers are the main part of the detection system 
and their structural characterization was decisive to identify 
them and understand their behavior under gases. We looked 
for a simple deposit method and characterization methods to 
demonstrate the feasibility of the process on an industrial 
scale. 
 
159
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2.  SEM of a SnO2, layer 
C. Chip gas sensor 
The gas sensors fabricated with SnO2, WO3 and ZnO 
layers as sensitive material is presented in Fig. 3. It was 
made of Si/SiO2 substrate with Ti/Pt interdigitated 
electrodes. The sensitive layer was deposited on and 
between the electrodes by reactive magnetron RF sputtering. 
These materials were the sensitive layers which will interact 
with isobutylene in this case. This chip was on a hotplate 
that allowed us to reach temperature of 285°C. The 
temperature was monitoring thanks to a K type 
thermocouple.  
 
 
Figure 3.  MOX Sensor with Si/SiO2 substrate  
So, three sensors with the different layers were made to 
obtain the same thickness and the same grain size. These 
sensors were made with the same conditions in order to 
elaborate them on the same chip in the future, for a sensors 
array. This is the first version of the chip. The final device 
could have the three materials on the same chip at the same 
temperature. Particular attention should be given on the test 
conditions to realize the comparison between the sensors. 
 
III. 
METHODS 
A. Gas test bench 
This device has been tested with an automated gas bench 
(Fig. 4) with isobutylene, benzene, carbon monoxide and 
dioxide. We used a power supply to control the operating 
temperature and a source meter for the data acquisition. This 
target gas was injected into a dilution system with or without 
interfering compounds. The outline was connected to a 
thermo-regulated test chamber. For each concentration, the 
sensor was exposed to gas for 1 min then to dry air during 10 
min. The sensors were maintained at the nominal heating 
voltage in dry air until the baseline was obtained to reach the 
response [11] under a flow rate of 500 sccm. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Gas measurement experiment set-up 
The device electrical resistance was recorded by forcing 
0.1 V as the polarisation using a Keithley system. We had 
measured the current I to obtain the polarization resistance. 
The data acquisition is controlled by a PC via a Labview 
program and stored for futher analysis. 
The target gas includes two VOCs including isobutylene 
and benzene, and two interfering gases as carbon monoxyde 
and dioxyde. All of them are reducing gases diluted in 
synthetic air at different concentrations with a constant total 
flow of 500 sccm. These devices have been tested at room 
temperature. 
B. Tested vapours 
Isobutylene is a typical VOCs, currently used for 
concentration 
calibration. 
We 
also 
used 
calibrated 
concentrations of benzene by using a permeation tube. All 
the concentration were checked with a photoionization 
detector. The outline was heated to prevent a gas 
condensation and it was connected to a thermo-regulated test 
chamber. The test were realized without humidity in order to 
characterize the influence of the interfering gases alone at 
stationarity temperature regime. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Response to isobutylene 
Many authors have characterized oxygen adsorption 
state on metal oxide and discovered four species: O2, O2-, O- 
and O2. 
160
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The oxidation of isobutylene on the oxide surface can lead 
to a change of the resistance material. When this reducing 
gas is oxidized by the oxygen ions on the metal oxide 
surface, an electron is given back to the oxide. Then the 
resistance of the gas sensor decreases. 
Fig 5 shows a typical responses with a wide range of 
detection from 50 ppb to 500 ppb of isobutylene at 285°C. 
WO3 and ZnO sensors seem to be the best devices for 
isobutylene. We have reached the highest responses from the 
three sensitive layers with low concentrations. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Sensors response for isobutylène concentrations, from 50 ppb to 
500 ppb. 
These results show fast response to isobutylene at 285°C. 
We reached a response of 1.6 with WO3 although we reached 
1.15 with SnO2. These two results will allow us to have a 
specific response for isobutylene from our system. 
B. Response to benzene 
The oxidation of benzene on oxide surface can also lead 
to the generation of electrons .Fig. 6 shows lower responses 
for benzene than isobutylene with the range of detection 
from 50 ppb to 500 ppb of isobutylene. The working 
temperature was the same as the previous test. 
ZnO and SnO2 sensors are the best devices for benzene. 
We can noticed that the WO3 sensor has the worst response 
for this gas. So, we will be able to compare the responses 
for each VOCs and improve the selectivity of our future 
system with three sensors. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Sensors response for benzene concentrations, from 50 ppb to 
500 ppb. 
C. Influence of interfering gases 
We have chosen 10 ppm of CO and 1% CO2 as 
interfering gases concentrations. These are the type of 
concentration we can meet in ambient air. The Fig. 7 shows 
the comparison of the responses of the three materials and 
for the two gases.  
Sensors were exposed to this interfering concentration 
with the same conditions as isobutylene i.e., 1 min 
exposition time then 10 min of dry air at 500 sccm. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Sensor response under isobutylene and interferring gases 
WO3 and SnO2 show low responses towards CO and CO2 
despite the better response for the target gases. With tests 
under the same experimental conditions (Fig. 7) we can 
classify the right metal oxide for a target gas like isobutylene 
in presence of interfering gases. 
A system based on metal oxide gas sensor array [12] [13] 
and 
pattern 
recognition 
algorithms 
could 
give 
an 
identification for each gas according to the sensors response. 
The temperature modulation could also help to obtain better 
selectivity. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
A set of sensors of single metal oxide has been selected 
to detect isobutylene and benzene. An array of sensors was 
then obtained at the same temperature. In the background of 
realistic concentrations of CO and CO2 showed high 
selectivity to VOCs. 
According to these results, the gas measurement showed 
fast response / recovery times towards isobutylene and 
benzene. The best sensitive layers are WO3 and ZnO for 
isobutylene because we have the highest responses for this 
gas and the weakest influence towards gases like CO and 
CO2. The best sensors for benzene are ZnO and SnO2 for the 
same reasons. This is the first step for air gas monitoring. We 
want to improve the selectivity towards others VOCs. On the 
other hand, and after identifying the appropriate sensitive 
materials, we plan to study the improvement of the 
selectivity of these sensors. This array could be being used 
with test procedure applied to an isotherm mode. Also, this 
study can be the beginning of a study of detection of VOCs 
with three sensitive materials on the same chip. 
161
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Antoine Dumas from 
EcologicSense Rousset – France, a company specialized in 
Diagnostics & Monitoring environments, SATT Sud Est a 
technology transfer accelerator company and Mr. A. Combes 
for his technical support in this work. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. James, T. Fiorido, M. Bendahan, K. Aguir, “Comparison 
between MOX sensors for low VOCs concentration with 
interfering 
gases”, 
Allsensors 
2017 
: 
The 
Second 
Internaltional Conference on Advances in Sensors, Actuators, 
Metering end Sensing, IARIA, Mar 2017, pp. 39-40, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-543-2. 
[2] B. Firtat, C. Moldovan, C. Brasoveaunu, G. Muscalu, M. 
Gartner, “Miniaturised MOX bases sensors for polluant and 
explosive gases detection”, Sens. Actuators B 249, pp. 647-
655, 2017. 
[3] E. Comini, C. Baratto, I. Concina, G. Faglia, M. Falasconi, 
“Metal oxide nanoscience and nanotechnology for chemical 
sensors”, Sens. Actuators B 179, pp. 3-20, 2013. 
[4] K. A. Ngo, P. Lauque, K. Aguir, “High performance of a gas 
identification system using sensor array and temperature 
modulation”, Sens. Actuators B 124, pp. 209-216, 2007. 
[5] Q. Deng, S. Gao, T. Lei, Y. Ling, S. Zhang, “Temperature & 
light modulation to enhance the selectivity of Pt modified zinc 
oxide gas sensor”, Sens. Actuators B 247, pp. 903-915, 2017. 
[6] Z. Tang, G. Jiang, P. C. H. Chan, J. K. O. Sin, S. S. Lau, 
“Theory and experiments on r.f. sputtered tin oxide thin-films 
for gas sensing applications”, Sens. Actuators B 43, pp.161-
164, 1997. 
[7] M. Schweizer-Berberich, M. Zdralek, U. Weimar, W. Gopel, 
T. Vidal, D. Martinez, A. Peyre-Lavigne, “Pulsed mode of 
operation and artificial neural networks evaluation for 
improving the CO selectivity of SnO2 gas sensors”, Sens. 
Actuators B 65, pp. 91–93, 2000. 
[8] M. 
Bendahan, 
R. 
Boulmani, 
J.L. 
Seguin, 
K.Aguir, 
“Characterization of ozone sensors based on WO3 reactively 
sputtered films: influence of O2 concentration in the 
sputtering gas and working temperature”, Sens. Actuators B 
100, pp. 320-324, 2004. 
[9] K. Aguir, C. Lemire, D. Lollman, “Electrical properties of 
reactively sputtered WO3 thin films as ozone gas sensor”, 
Sens. Actuators B 84, pp. 1–5, 2002. 
[10] V. Senay, S. Pat, S. Korkmaz. T. Aydoğmuş, S. Elmas, S. 
Özen, N. Ekem, M. Z. B Balbağ, “ZnO thin film synthesis by 
reactive radio frequency magnetron sputtering”, Applied 
Surface Science vol. 318, pp. 2-5, 2014. 
[11] C. Wang, L. Yin, L. Zang, D. Xiang, R. Gao, “Metal oxide 
gas sensors: Sensitivity and influencing factors”, Sensors, vol. 
10, pp. 2088-2106, 2010. 
[12] D.S. Lee, Y.T. Kim, J.S. Huh, D.D. Lee, “Fabrication and 
characteristics of SnO2 gas sensor array for volatile organic 
compounds recognition”, Thin Solid Films 416, pp. 271–278, 
2002. 
[13] D.S. Lee, J.K. Jung, J.W. Lim, J.S. Huh, D.D. Lee, 
“Recognition of volatile organic compounds using SnO2 
sensor array and pattern recognition analysis”, Sens. 
Actuators B 77, pp. 228–236, 2001. 
 
 
162
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

