Magnitude of eHealth Technology Risks Largely Unknown  
An Exploratory Study into the Risks of Information and Communication Technologies in Healthcare 
 
H.C. Ossebaard1, 2, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen2, A.C.P. de Bruijn1 and R.E. Geertsma1 
hans.ossebaard@rivm.nl , j.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl , adrie.bruijn@rivm.nl , robert.geertsma@rivm.nl 
1 RIVM - National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands  
2 University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract – Many believe that eHealth technologies will 
contribute to the solution of global health issues and to the 
necessary innovation of healthcare systems. While this may be 
true, it is important for public administrations, care 
professionals, researchers, and the general public to be aware 
that new technologies are likely to present new or uncertain 
risks along with their great new opportunities. The present 
paper aims to assess the risks of eHealth technologies for both 
patient safety and quality of care. A quick-scan of scientific 
literature was performed as well as an analysis of web-based 
sources and databases. Outcomes were validated in a focus 
group setting against expert views of stakeholders from health 
care, patients’ organizations, industry, academic research, and 
government. Risks at human, technological or organizational 
levels appear to be no subject of systematic research. However, 
they come into view as ‘secondary’ findings in the margin of 
these studies. Extensive anecdotal evidence of risks is reported 
at all three levels in web-based sources as well. Recent 
authoritative reports substantiate these outcomes. Members of 
the focus group generally recognized the findings and provided 
valuable, additional information. A realistic approach to the 
implementation of eHealth interventions is recommended, 
taking into account potential benefits as well as risks, and 
using existing risk management tools throughout the life cycle 
of the intervention.  
Keywords - risks; eHealth; health technology; patient safety; 
quality of care 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Trust in technology is of growing importance in view of 
the challenges for global healthcare [1]. Most countries face 
a serious increase in 
healthcare expenditures that 
corresponds to ageing, a growth in multi-morbid chronic 
illnesses, the enduring menace of infectious diseases, 
consumerism 
and 
other 
dynamics 
[2, 
3]. 
eHealth 
technologies have frequently been hailed as a panacea for 
these challenges. We view eHealth as the use of information 
and communication technologies (ICTs) to support or 
improve health and healthcare. These technologies have 
proven their potential to contribute to the increase of (cost-) 
effectiveness and efficiency of care, the improvement of the 
quality of care, the empowerment of consumers, system 
transparency, and eventually to the reduction of health care 
costs [4-7]. However, expectations have recently been 
mitigated due to the publication of studies that emphasize 
the complex nature of innovation in healthcare and the lack 
of rigid, systematic evidence for the impact of eHealth 
technologies on healthcare outcomes so far [8, 9]. 
Moreover, the application of eHealth technologies in 
healthcare may introduce risks for patient safety and quality 
of care [10-12]. Nonetheless, trust in information and 
communication technologies seems to remain unaffected by 
these moderating results. This is remarkable against a 
backdrop of widespread declining trust in the legal system, 
in politics, finance, science and other public domains [13, 
14]. Public administrations, care professionals, researchers 
and the general public are generally trustful and overly 
optimistic about the ‘a-political’ power of digital technology 
in virtually all public and personal domains [15, 16]. 
Common principles of evidence based medicine are 
apparently ignored regularly in this field, leading to fast 
introduction of promising eHealth interventions without 
carefully evaluating benefits versus risks. 
 
Recently, we have reported on some drawbacks of 
eHealth technologies at another level and from a different 
perspective [17]. This study was based on a comprehensive 
analysis of eventually sixteen frameworks regarding the 
development and implementation of eHealth interventions 
over 
the 
last 
decade 
(2000-2010). 
The 
reported 
shortcomings are closely related to risks. Eventually, they 
imply equivalent and immediate hazards for the patient’s 
safety or the quality of care. Therefore, we think it relevant 
for the present study to provide a short summary of these 
findings. Table I shows a summary of these risks phrased in 
conceptual terms. 
 
57
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Conceptual risk 
Description 
eHealth technology 
development as an 
expert-driven process  
If project management fails to arrange 
stakeholder participation in the full 
development process risks for rejection by 
(end-)users increase. 
eHealth technology 
development ignores 
evaluation 
If the development is viewed as a linear, 
fixed and static process instead of a 
iterative, longitudinal research activity 
risks of suboptimal outcomes increase.  
Implementation of 
eHealth technology as 
a post-design activity 
If conditions for implementation are not 
properly accounted for  right from the start in 
all subsequent stages stakeholders may drop 
out. 
eHt development does 
not affect organization 
of healthcare 
If it is ignored that eHealth technologies 
intervene with traditional care characteristics 
and infrastructure unexpected effects cause 
stakeholders to abandon.  
eH technologies as 
instrumental, 
determinist applications 
If eH interventions ignore users’ needs for 
affective, persuasive communication and 
information technologies for motivation, self- 
management and support, they drop-out.. 
eH research fails to 
integrate mixed-
methods and data 
triangulation 
If conventional research methods keep falling 
short of assessing the added value for 
healthcare in terms of process (usage, 
adherence) and outcome variables 
(behavioral, clinical outcomes; costs) societal 
and scientific refutation follows. 
* Van Gemert-Pijnen et al., 2011 [22] 
 
TABLE I. RISKS DERIVED FROM PREVIOUS RESEARCH* 
Precisely the opposites of factors that improve the uptake 
and impact of eHealth technologies constitute risk for both 
patient safety and quality of care; they increase the 
probability of occurrence of harm and/or the severity of that 
harm. These are exactly the two components used in the 
internationally accepted definition for risk that we are 
applying in our investigation, i.e., “risk is a combination of 
the probability of occurrence of harm and the severity of that 
harm” [18]. This definition is also used in the international 
standard for risk management of medical devices [19], which 
is the regulatory sector in which part of the eHealth 
technologies can be classified, as well as in other standards 
more specifically relevant to ICT applications in health care.  
 
In the present study, we investigate the nature and 
occurrence of any risk to patients´ safety and quality of care 
that may be associated with eHealth applications. These 
interventions include web-based and mobile applications for 
caregivers, patients and their relatives within a treatment 
relationship as well as technology regarding quality in 
healthcare. In view of the diversity and dynamics of the 
field, we have chosen to use multiple approaches to gather 
our data and to verify our findings. As a first approach, we 
searched for risks as established in randomized controlled 
trials and reported in scientific literature (see Section II). 
This provides an inventory of documented risks that impact 
on quality of care and the patients’ well-being. Additionally 
we have searched a selection of web-based sources related 
to (inter)national health organizations/government agencies, 
incident databases, expert centers, and opinion papers in the 
medical field (Section III). While we were analyzing our 
search results, three authoritative reports with scopes closely 
related to our own were published, and we decided to 
compare their findings with our own as a method of 
independent control. The outcomes were eventually 
validated in a focus group setting against expert views of 
stakeholders from health care, patients’ organizations, 
industry, academic research and government (Section IV). 
In Section V we present the outcomes of these approaches, 
to draw conclusions in the next section and discuss the in 
the last. 
II. 
LITERATURE SCAN 
The literature scan was designed to exploratory assess 
only those risks that are reliably documented in systematic 
studies, i.e., randomized controlled trials (RCTs). The scan 
was restricted to scientific publications regarding risks that 
affect the quality of healthcare and patient safety while 
public health was excluded. Issues concerning security of 
data-transmission, storage, encryption, standardization, 
data-management and privacy were excluded as well to 
avoid overlap and redundancy in view of other studies [20]. 
The search was limited to RCTs. This type of studies 
represents the highest power of evidence in the absence of 
meta-analyses or systematic reviews and allows for 
comparisons with alternative approaches.  
 
The bibliographic database SciVerse Scopus was 
searched because of its broad content coverage including all 
Medline titles and over 16.000 peer-reviewed academic 
journals. The used search query combined the topic 
‘eHealth’ with search terms regarding risk, healthcare-
setting, and study design. The complete query can be found 
in Appendix I. One author reviewed the titles and abstracts 
of the identified publications to decide whether they should 
be examined in full detail. An overview of the inclusion 
criteria is presented in Table II. The study selection process 
is included in Appendix II. 
TABLE  II. INCLUSION CRITERIA FOR THE STUDY SELECTION PROCESS 
     Inclusion criteria  
1. eHealth application 
2a. in Title: outcome-measure and/or evaluation and/or risk  
2b. in Abstract: risk and/or limitation found  
3. Quality of care and/or patients´ safety/well being 
4. Design: Randomized controlled trial 
5. Publication year: between 2000 – 2011 
6. Language: German or English  
 
 
58
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Identified risks were structured according to a multi-level 
approach covering risks dealing with either human factors, 
technological factors or organizational factors, referring to 
the framework for health information systems evaluation as 
proposed by Yusof et al. [21].   
III. 
WEB-BASED SOURCES 
To broaden our view we have included ‘grey literature’. 
The ‘Prague Definition’1 of grey literature states that "Grey 
literature stands for manifold document types produced on 
all levels of government, academics, business, and industry 
in print and electronic formats that are protected by 
intellectual property rights, of sufficient quality to be 
collected and preserved by library holdings or institutional 
repositories, but not controlled by commercial publishers, 
i.e., where publishing is not the primary activity of the 
producing body." This material cannot be found and 
disclosed easily through the usual channels. It may include 
government research and non-profit reports, dissertations 
and expert assessments, conference proceedings and 
technical reports, institutional repositories, investigations, 
and other primary resource materials such as records, 
archives, observations, data, filed notes and ‘new’ sources 
such as pre-prints, web logs, online preliminary research 
results, open data, unpublished theses, project web sites, 
standards and specifications collections, online data archives 
or other types of documentation.  
 
Given the plethora of different types of organizations 
publishing information on eHealth, we decided to start with 
explorative searches in sources of different status without 
using a systematic selection procedure. Firstly, we have 
visited a series of websites of international and national 
health organizations/government agencies to see if they 
mention risks associated with eHealth technology in any 
way. Secondly, we have searched databases, respectively of 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the ECRI 
Institute. Thirdly, we have accessed websites of three expert 
centers on medical technology: the ECRI Institute, Prismant 
(Dutch) and ZonMw (id.). Finally, a major Dutch 
professional journal on health care matters was queried on 
risk factors concerning eHealth and telemedicine (see 
Appendix V).  On each website we searched for information 
on the risks involved with eHealth and telemedicine. The 
search terms used were ehealth, telemedicine and tele*. 
Results involving the monitoring, programming or diagnosis 
of pacemakers and other implantable cardiologic devices 
were excluded because they are considered to represent 
ancillary functions to those devices, rather than eHealth 
applications in their own respect. 
                                                           
1  12th International Conference on Grey Literature (Prague, Dec. 2010); 
http://www.opengrey.eu/item/display/10068/700015  
[accessed Jan 15, 2013] 
IV. 
FOCUS GROUP 
To test the findings from literature against the opinions 
of stakeholders we organized an `invited expert meeting’. 
We selected experts from industry, health care, government, 
patient organizations, insurers and universities from our 
networks and requested them to participate. In advance, they 
received a working draft version of the research report. A 
focus group (n=38) could be composed representing the 
respective stakeholders. Its main goal was to identify 
important sources of data that were not yet included at that 
time, and to further discuss and develop the preliminary 
conclusions and recommendations from the literature scan. 
 
A professional talk-host led the meeting that opened 
with an introduction and a summary of the study outcomes 
by the authors. This was followed by a one-hour 
‘knowledge café’ method, an informal but systematic way to 
exchange and map opinions and ideas of participants. After 
a break and a philosophical reflection on technologies and 
risk, a discussion panel took place wherein representatives 
of stakeholders actively participated. Outcomes were noted 
down, analyzed and summarized. 
V. 
OUTCOMES 
A. Literature scan 
The search was performed in SciVerse Scopus in July 
2011 
delivering 
initially 
340 
potentially 
relevant 
publications. Of these, 17 were eventually included after the 
selection procedure described sub II.    
Human, technological or organizational risks appear to be 
no primary subject of the randomized clinical trials 
identified in the search. However, they are reported as 
secondary effects or unintended outcomes of eHealth 
technology effectiveness studies. In most cases, the 
observed risks are related to a lack of effectiveness in all or 
part of the target groups due to either the design of the 
intervention, 
implementation 
factors 
or 
intrinsic 
characteristics of the target groups. Other types of 
unintended adverse effects leading to harm for patients, 
users or third persons were rarely mentioned. 
 
Identified risks have been structured with regard to their 
primary occurrence at a human level, a technological level 
and an organizational level (Table III). Appendix III contains 
a detailed overview of risks, the level where they occur, their 
classification and their source in eHealth literature. 
 
1) Risks concerning Human factors 
Masa et al. [22] compared conventional spirometry to 
online spirometry with regard to outcome measures like 
forced vital capacity, quality criteria (acceptability, 
repeatability) and the number of maneuvers and time spent 
on both of the two procedures. They found that the number 
of spirometric maneuvers needed to meet quality criteria 
was somewhat higher in the online mode as compared to 
59
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

conventional spirometry. Online spirometry also took more 
time for patients (mean differences of 0.5 additional 
maneuvers 
and 
0.7 
minutes 
more). 
Higher 
time-
consumption may also negatively affect the remote 
technician instructing the patient while the latter uses the 
spirometer. The spirometric values achieved online were 
very similar to the values achieved by conventional 
spirometry.  
 
Some eHealth applications appear to be more beneficial 
for specific patient groups. Bujnowska-Fedak et al. [23] 
tested a tele-homecare application for monitoring diabetes. 
Older and higher educated patients, spending a lot of the 
time at home and having acquired diabetes recently, 
benefited most from the application. A positive association 
was found between educational level and ability to use the 
tele-monitoring system without assistance. Spijkerman et al. 
[24] evaluated a web-based alcohol-intervention without 
(group 1) and with (group 2) feedback compared to a 
control group in order to reduce drinking behavior in 15-20 
years old Dutch binge-drinkers. They found that the 
intervention may be effective in reducing weekly alcohol 
use and may also encourage moderate drinking behavior in 
male participants over a period of 1-3 months. The 
intervention seemed mainly effective in males while for 
females a small adverse effect was found. Women following 
intervention group 1 were less likely to engage in moderate 
drinking and had increased weekly drinking a little, 
although significantly (p=0.06; 1.6 more drinks/week), at 
one month follow-up. Zimmerman et al. [25] performed a 
secondary analysis on data from an RCT on a symptom-
management intervention for elderly patients during 
recovery after coronary artery bypass surgery. They found 
that the intervention had more impact on women than on 
men for symptoms such as fatigue, depression, sleeping 
problems and pain. Regarding measures of physical 
functioning no gender differences were found. Cruz-
Correira et al. [26] tested adherence to a web-based asthma 
self-management tool in comparison to a paper-based diary. 
The tool was designed to collect and store patient data and 
provide feedback to both patient and doctor about the 
former’s condition in order to support medical decision 
making. Patients’ adherence to the web-based application 
was lower than in the control group. Willems et al. [27] 
tested a home monitor self-management program for 
patients with asthma where data such as spirometry results, 
medication use or symptoms were recorded. They found a 
low compliance of participants with the intervention 
protocol. Participants in the intervention group recorded in 
average less PEF tests (peak expiratory ﬂow; lung function 
data): 1.5 per day versus the required number in the protocol 
of 2 tests per day. Verheijden et al. [28] tested a web-based 
tool for nutrition counseling and social support for patients 
with increased cardiovascular risk in comparison to a 
control group receiving conventional care. The authors 
found that the uptake of the application in the intervention 
group was low (33%) with most participants using the tool 
only once during the 8 months study period. Patients 
properly using the intervention were significantly younger 
than those who did not. Morland et al. [29] compared an 
anger management group therapy for veterans delivered 
face-to-face versus via videoconferencing. Group therapy 
via videoconferencing teleconferencing seemed effective to 
treat anger symptoms in veterans. While no differences 
could be found between the two groups regarding 
attendance or homework completion, the control group 
reported a significant higher overall group therapeutic 
alliance than the intervention group. Postel et al. [30] 
evaluated an eTherapy program for problem drinkers, where 
therapist and patient communicated online to reach a 
reduction of alcohol use, as compared to a control group 
receiving regular information by email. While effective for 
complying participants, they found high drop-out rates in 
the eTherapy group though quitting the program did not 
automatically mean that the participant had also relapsed or 
increased alcohol consumption. Ruffin et al. [31] tested a 
web-based application where participants received tailored 
health messages after giving information about family 
history of six common diseases. In the intervention group 
the authors found modest improvements in self-reported 
physical activity and fruit and vegetable intake. But 
participants also showed a decreased cholesterol-screening 
intention as compared to the control group who received 
standard health messaging.   
 
In summary, higher time consumption, unintended 
adverse effects, and selective benefits differing for sex, 
education, age and other variables are the risks observed on 
the side of the human (end-)user. Frequently adherence (or: 
compliance, drop-out, alliance, up-take) is mentioned and 
associated with a negative impact on the desired effect of an 
intervention. 
 
2) Risks concerning Technology 
Evaluating a tele-homecare application for monitoring 
diabetes Bujnowska-Fedak et al. [23] observe usability 
problems among participants; 41% of them (patients with 
type 2 diabetes) were unable to use the system for glucose-
monitoring needing permanent assistance. Patients who 
could easily use the application derived a greater impact 
from its use. Nguyen et al. [32] evaluated an internet-based 
self-management 
program 
for 
COPD 
patients 
but 
discontinued before the sample target was reached due to 
technical and usability problems with the application. 
Participants stated at the exit interview that decreased 
accessibility, slow loading of the application, and security 
concerns prevented them from using the website more 
frequently. Participants reporting usability problems had to 
complete (too) many actions on a PDA-device before being 
able to submit an exercise or symptom entry. Other 
problems dealt with limited wireless coverage of the PDA. 
The technical problems decreased participants´ engagement 
60
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

with the tools. Decreased engagement was associated with 
the number of web log-ins and the exercise and symptom 
entered via the website and/or the PDA. While evaluating a 
web-based asthma self-management tool Cruz-Correira et 
al. [26] found nine patients reporting problems (19 in total) 
related to the use of a web-based self-management tool. 
Most problems concerned the internet connection and the 
graphical user interface. Two of the patients could not even 
use the application because of technical problems. 
Demaerschalk et al. [33] tested the efficacy of a 
telemedicine application (vs. telephone-only consultation) 
for the quality of decision making regarding acute stroke. 
They found technical issues in 74% of telemedicine 
consultations versus none in telephone consultations. The 
observed 
technical 
problems 
did 
not 
prevent 
the 
determination of treatment decision but some did influence 
the time necessary to treatment decision-making. Jansà et al. 
[34] used a telecare-application for type 1 diabetes patients 
having poor metabolic control to send glycaemia values to 
the diabetes team. They found that 30% of team-patient 
appointments were longer than expected (1h vs. 0.5h) due to 
technical problems with the application. Technical problems 
concerned the inability to send results of counseling caused 
by problems with the application itself, the server or 
internet-access. Using a telemanagement application for 
diabetes patients Biermann et al. [35] found that 15% of the 
participants had difficulties in handling the application, the 
consequences of which were not elaborated. In a study of an 
asthma 
self-management 
telemonitoring 
program 
by 
Willems et al. [27] 1/3 of participants experienced technical 
problems, mostly with malfunctioning devices. Practitioners 
had to contact patients, e.g., regarding a missed data transfer 
leading to logistical problems. 
 
In summary, a variety of issues has been reported at the 
technology level affecting patient safety or quality of care. 
They range from usability problems and security issues to 
problem with accessing the server or malfunctioning 
devices. 
 
3) Risks concerning Organization  
Copeland et al. [36] tested whether a telemedicine self-
management intervention for congestive heart failure (CHF) 
patients could be effective in terms of improving physical 
and mental health-related quality of life and cost-
effectiveness as compared to a control group receiving usual 
care. They could not find substantial differences between 
groups, but overall costs related to CHF were higher for the 
intervention group. The authors state that this might be 
related to the intervention encouraging medical service 
utilization by facilitating access to care. 
 
One tele-management application for diabetics allows 
patients to measure their blood-glucose values and send it to 
their care provider [35]. Though time-saving for patients, 
use of the application lead to 20% more time investment (50 
vs. 43 min. per month over a 4-month period, and 43 vs. 34 
min. per month over an 8-month period) on the side of the 
care provider compared to conventional care. The higher 
time expenditure did not reflect time necessary to manage 
the application itself: it was due to more access to the 
provider, so that patients tended to call more often. Montori 
et al. [37] also found a comparable risk concerning time-
consumption. They tested a telecare-application for data-
transmission for type 1 diabetes patients. The nurses needed 
more time reviewing glucometer data (76 min. vs. 12 min.) 
and giving the patient feedback (68 minutes vs. 18 minutes) 
in the telecare condition as compared to the control group. 
The authors found more nurse feedback time to be 
significantly associated with more changes in insulin doses; 
more changes of doses thus appeared in the telecare group.  
Strayer et al. [38] tested a personal digital assistant 
(PDA) as a tool for improving Smoking Cessation 
Counseling (SCC) against a paper-based reminder tool. In 
semi-structured interviews, medical students providing SCC 
reported that they felt barriers for using the PDA in practice 
such as a lack of time or a lack of training. In addition, they 
felt uncomfortable to use the PDA in the presence of 
patients. The PDA tool did not increase key SCC behaviors 
of the participants of the intervention group as compared 
with the paper-based reminder. 
 
In summary, increased time consumption, barriers for 
proper use and financial issues are the risks observed at the 
organizational level.  
TABLE III. OBSERVED RISKS 
Risk level 
Description  
Human level 
Adherence (or compliance, drop-out, 
alliance, up-take) 
 
Unintended adverse effects  
 
Selective patient benefits (sex, 
education, age and other variables)  
Technology level 
Usability problems 
 
Access 
 
Security issues 
 
Malfunctioning devices 
Organizational level 
Higher time consumption 
 
Barriers for proper use 
 
Higher costs 
 
In Table III, the identified risks have been summarized with 
regard to the various levels of their occurrence.  
B. Web-based sources 
From the mixed web-based sources it appears that the 
information on eHealth and telemedicine is overly positive. 
The risks, downsides or failures that are inevitably part of 
any project, are rarely mentioned - neither prominently nor 
implicitly. Nevertheless, a number of sources mention the 
imperative provisions that should be made to ensure that 
eHealth or telemedicine projects will be successful. It could 
be assumed that these are indicative of the risks they are 
often related to. These are grouped into three categories: the 
61
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

human factor, technology and organization, summarized in 
Table IV. 
 
TABLE IV. SUMMARY OF OBSERVED RISKS IN WEB-BASED SOURCES 
 
 
 
1) The human factor 
eHealth and telemedicine are not intended to substitute 
patient-physician contact. Use of technology may reduce the 
number of contacts, thus increasing the efficiency of health 
care. For patients it may be beneficial that the number of 
visits to the physician can be reduced, thus saving time and 
expenses. Nevertheless, periodic direct in-person contact 
should not be completely replaced. Any project should 
primarily be driven by needs and not by technology. Before 
a project starts, a needs-analysis should be performed and 
the added value should be proven. Scientific evidence of 
effectiveness in a large scale settings seems to be missing in 
many cases. Safe application of eHealth and telemedicine 
requires that patients are capable of self-management and 
are physically and mentally able to handle the technology 
and the tasks that come with an intervention. The patient 
should be motivated to use the technology correctly, follow 
instructions and procedures, be well-trained and function 
without cognitive or communication difficulties. The patient 
should be confident to use the technology, but at the same 
time not completely rely on it. 
 
2) Technology 
   The early initiatives of eHealth and telemedicine suffered 
from technological shortcomings such as the limited 
resolution or the narrow band width for transmitting data. 
These limitations are largely overcome, but others appear. 
With more and more wireless applications that transmit 
digital signals, problems arise like interference and 
frequency overlap. Where eHealth or telemedicine depend 
on a continuous online connection, the risk of a failing 
connections should be taken into account. Equipment should 
be designed to match the skills of the user, ergo shall be 
self-explanatory, as simple as possible to operate and be 
‘layman proof’. The databases from the FDA and ECRI 
clearly show that medical technology is known to fail and 
may subsequently cause harm to the patient. Where there is 
a physical distance between the patient and the care provider 
it may occur that a device is not working properly, while 
this is not noticed by the patient or the care provider. 
Mechanisms should be implemented to detect and identify 
errors in transmission, equipment failure and software bugs. 
An emergency plan for alternative treatment or monitoring 
should be in place. Where medical devices and equipment 
from different manufacturers are used together or are 
connected to generate, store or process data, these shall be 
interoperable. The same applies for electronic patient 
records and health files, and where possible internationally. 
 
3) Organization (incl. legal and financial issues) 
All stakeholders should be identified and there shall be a 
common understanding of tasks and responsibilities of the 
stakeholders. Training of the users of the technology should 
be well organized and should include actions that need to be 
taken in case of emergencies, e.g., patient distress, or failing 
equipment. If the technology sends messages to the health 
care provider these should be followed up without delay. 
The health care organization should consider hiring 
dedicated personnel to handle the technical side of eHealth 
or telemedicine services, so that the physicians can focus on 
the medical aspects. Depending on the type of eHealth 
service or telemedicine it may be necessary to have a 24/7 
care response service available. The staff that provides the 
response service should be adequately trained. The supply 
and management of equipment, including maintenance, 
response to malfunction and training of the patient shall be 
organized. To sum up, the management of the technology 
must be well embedded in the organization of the health 
care provider and not be an isolated entity. Legal issues 
include licenses and credentials (especially when patient and 
physician do not reside in the same country), liability, data 
confidentiality, data storage and patient privacy. eHealth 
and telemedicine projects may benefit from local electronic 
patient files and a national (or even international) health file. 
The tasks and responsibilities of all the parties involved in 
the implementation and use of the technology must be 
documented. Financial issues appear to be an important 
‘show stopper’. eHealth and telemedicine need to mature 
into accepted forms of health care that can operate without 
special funding. To convince policy makers and financers, 
every eHealth or telemedicine project needs to be evaluated 
to demonstrate the added value and that the project goals are 
met. 
C. Authoritative reports published during data analysis 
Near the end of our data analysis process, three reports 
were published that we considered particularly relevant to 
our own study. The first is the report ‘National 
RISK LEVEL 
DESCRIPTION 
Human level 
Lack of physical, mental, social, 
cognitive skills (eHealth literacy) 
Substitution human contact, doctor-
patient relationship 
Technology 
level 
Problems with resolution, 
interference, bandwidth, 
connections 
Incompatibility, sub optimal 
interoperability 
User-unfriendly technology 
Insufficient error handling, no 
emergency plans 
Organizational 
level 
Money, lack of training/instruction, 
data-management, hardware 
Home (unclear liability, 
accountability, insurance issues) 
Uncertain response speed of care 
organizations 24/7 
62
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Implementation Agenda eHealth’ [39], a joint policy paper 
(Dec. 2011) of the Royal Dutch Medical Association 
(KNMG), the Dutch Federation of Patients and Consumer 
Organizations (NPCF) and the Dutch Health Care Insurers 
Association (Zorgverzekeraars Nederland). The second is 
the report ‘Health IT and Patient Safety: Building Safer 
Systems for Better Care’ (Nov. 2011)  published by the U.S. 
Institute of Medicine [40]. The third is ‘State of Health Care 
2011. In health care, patient information exchange 
challenges is not resolved with ICT without the 
standardization of processes’ (Oct. 2011) a report by the 
Dutch Healthcare Inspectorate [41]. These authoritative 
reports exemplify that eHealth technology will substantially 
change the health care system in the coming decade. They 
confirm that inconclusive evidence exists when it comes to 
risks for patient safety and quality of care. If risks are to be 
contained at an acceptable level, some serious hurdles have 
to be taken. 
 
The policy paper of three main stakeholders in Dutch 
health care, which was also sent to the Parliament by the 
Ministry of Health, demonstrates the present political 
dynamics necessary to bring about such a change. However, 
the scientific back-up for their claims is not as strong as 
their political determination. For instance the statement that 
eHealth “contributes to affordable, accessible, high-quality 
health care and more direction for patients” is not supported 
by 
prevailing 
evidence 
as 
of 
yet. 
The 
National 
Implementation Agenda also neglects the considerable risks 
as outlined by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) and the 
Dutch Healthcare Inspectorate (IGZ). At the same time, it is 
true that reports are available of successful practices and 
promising outcomes in the whole range of health care 
services. These developments render a certain urgency to 
the issue of risk control and prevention, which until recently 
did not receive much attention.  
 
IOM advances safety as an essential value in health care 
and favors an holistic approach to improve overall safety of 
the health care system. Transparency, education and 
collaboration of all stakeholders are the main components of 
the approach. IGZ emphasizes the importance of safe and 
secure information exchange as a vital to risk reduction. 
Both organizations provide a series of recommendations to 
improve patient safety. 
 
D. Focus group 
The preliminary conclusions of the draft report were 
generally accepted and supported by the experts. From their 
respective angles they advanced valuable additional subjects 
related to the present paper. We inferred the following 
cross-cutting themes from the discussion, that are vital for 
risk control in eHealth: 
- 
Patient-centeredness; 
- 
Interoperability and standardization; 
- 
Risk management tools and regulations; 
- 
Integrative approach of risk-management in 
eHealth; 
- 
eHealth affects organization of care; 
- 
Transparency in risk documentation; 
- 
Education. 
 
The integration of these themes in the implementation of 
eHealth is expected to considerably reduce the incidence of 
risks in healthcare.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Randomized clinical trials and studies of the immediate 
risk of eHealth technology for patients’ safety or quality of 
care have not been found. In the margin of studies aiming to 
evaluate the effectiveness of eHealth interventions risks are 
reported as unintended, secondary outcomes. The selected 
studies suggest evidence for risks at all three levels of the 
multi-level approach applied. Ten studies mention risks 
concerning the patient at the human level, especially where 
adherence issues lead to suboptimal use of an intervention 
and corresponding low effectiveness. But also adverse 
effects were reported, as well as the fact that not all patient 
groups can equally benefit from an eHealth intervention. 
Issues at a technological level were found in seven studies, 
revealing considerable rates of usability problems, limited 
access or other technical problems. Organizational issues 
were found with regard to higher use of resources (time, 
money, staff) affecting quality of care in two studies. Table 
III shows the level and nature of the risks observed in our 
study. In some cases the causes of the risks were qualified as 
study (design) artifacts. In many instances the consequences 
have not been elaborated.  
 
In the web-based sources we studied, a positive attitude 
towards eHealth prevails and risks or failures are rarely 
mentioned. A number of sources mention conditions for 
eHealth projects to succeed (Table IV). These may be used 
as input in risk analysis and should be reinforced through 
risk management and continuous surveillance. 
The focus group outcomes demonstrate the significance of 
stakeholder involvement at all levels. Our findings from 
literature and web-based resources are reflected in the 
resulting themes. We conclude that while not much is 
known about the magnitude of risks associated with 
eHealth, a lot of non-systematic, anecdotal material 
indicates that risks happen at the level of human 
functioning, technology and organization. 
 
We intend to further contribute to risk awareness in eHealth 
and conduct follow-up research in this field. 
VII. 
DISCUSSION 
Increasing use of eHealth technology is one of the major 
developments in today’s healthcare [42]. The opportunities 
of web-based and mobile eHealth technologies should 
63
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

therefore remain central to the global health discourse. At the 
same time, however, it is required to explore the risk 
potential of these technological advancements. 
Risk is a complicated issue that refers to a lack of 
knowledge along subjective and objective dimensions. The 
observed lack of academic interest for risk assessment in 
eHealth technology should be a matter of concern. Patient 
safety and quality of care deserve a higher level of risk 
awareness when it comes to new technologies. At present 
risks emerge in the margin of trials and interventions in 
eHealth. 
They 
are 
conceived 
as 
problems, 
issues, 
disadvantages, costs or other designations that one way or 
another affect human, technological or organizational 
functioning in a detrimental manner.  
 
Though both quantity and quality of the reported issues 
do not seem to be disturbing at first glance, a wider search 
would almost certainly deliver a disquieting range and 
diversity of risks. Given the outcome of our study that none 
of the systematic studies were designed to study risks, we 
must conclude that they do in fact not represent the studies 
with the highest evidence level related to our research 
question. Therefore, a follow-up search, including review 
articles, controlled clinical trials, and perhaps observational 
studies should be performed.  
Furthermore, 
in 
databases 
such 
as 
MAUDE 
(Manufacturer and User Facility Device) of the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration, in grey literature, articles in 
professional magazines and other (online) sources of 
different organizational, consumer and academic nature a 
variety of incidents involving risks have been recorded. 
These are often viewed as avoidable or improvable 
intervention flaws, or explained as study (design) artifacts, 
but they should not be played down. Their presumed 
occurrence give rise to careful reconsideration when it comes 
to exploring the opportunities of web-based and mobile 
eHealth technologies for global healthcare innovation. 
eHealth is not an exotic domain in health care and should be 
treated as a such. The indications for risks found in the 
present study should play a role in keeping the health care 
community alert with regard to risk management. The 
participants of the focus group would certainly acknowledge 
this. 
This implies the need for extensive research that 
explicitly focuses on establishing the volume and nature of 
such risks in order to prevent or minimize them. It also 
implies an improved way of monitoring to advance 
transparency in the reporting of risk occurrence and safety 
incidents. Finally, it implies a higher level of health care risk 
management, continuity of care and understanding of how 
risks affect patients through risk identification, operating 
ways to avoid or moderate risks and developing contingency 
plans when risks cannot be prevented or avoided.  Available 
tools and standards should preferably be used to achieve this. 
 
The results of the present scan are in accordance with 
outcomes from the ceHRes study that covers over a decade 
of 
eHealth 
technological 
development 
[17]. 
The 
‘conceptual’ risks (Table I) represent the same categories of 
risks that result from the literature scan. For instance expert-
driven eHealth interventions that neglect the essential role 
of patients may lead to adherence issues as mentioned sub 
V-A.1). Or disregarding conditions for implementation may 
imply the underestimation of issues such as high time-
consumption, mentioned sub V-A.3). To minimize and 
avoid such risks a ‘Roadmap’ has been developed to design, 
develop, implement and evaluate eHealth interventions (see 
Appendix IV). It applies concepts and techniques from 
business modeling and human centered design [43]. The 
roadmap serves as a guideline to collaboratively improve 
the impact and uptake of eHealth technologies. For this 
purpose 
it 
has 
been 
published 
as 
a 
wiki 
(ehealthresearchcenter.org/wiki/ ). 
 
For now the ubiquitous trust in technology seems to be 
unjustified and it needs to be put in perspective. We have the 
instruments, in particular risk management approaches, and 
the knowledge to reconsider the implementation of eHealth 
to achieve this, so eHealth can become part of evidence 
based medicine.  
VIII. 
LIMITATIONS 
The inclusion criteria of the study, such as the 
requirement for RCTs in the review of scientific literature, 
were found to be limiting, since we are looking to novel 
technologies in tele-/eHealth. Moreover, RCTs in eHealth 
environments tend to mitigate the impact and uptake of 
interventions because of costs, timelines and limitations.  
 
We have probably missed a number of British 
publications and websites because of the choice of the term 
‘eHealth’, which appears to be not widely used in the United 
Kingdom, and generally is assumed to refer to electronic 
patient records and transmission of acute health information 
electronically. Furthermore, we may have missed important 
websites 
such 
as 
NHS 
networks 
(see: 
http://www.networks.nhs.uk/ because of the federal nature 
of the NHS as well as more regional online outlets.  
Exploring the full spectrum of ‘grey literature’ would have 
delivered much more indications on the occurrence of risks 
though we expect it would not have helped in quantifying 
their magnitude. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The Dutch Health Care Inspectorate commissioned the 
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment 
(RIVM) to conduct this study of which we here present the 
outcomes. It was carried out in collaboration between the 
Centre for Health Protection and the Health portal 
kiesBeter.nl (RIVM), and the Center for eHealth Research 
64
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and Disease management (IGS - Institute for Governance 
and Innovation Studies, University of Twente).  
 
The full report is disseminated by RIVM [44]. We thank ms. 
Fabiola Mueller for her work in data collection. We also 
thank the participants of the expert meeting d.d. 25th of 
November 2011, Utrecht, Netherlands. 
 
We are indebted to the members of the Special Interest 
Group Telemedicine of the EC New and Emerging 
Technologies Working Group for their useful comments to 
the draft version of the report on which the present paper is 
based. 
 
Parts of this paper have been presented as an original 
research paper at eTELEMED, the 4th International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine and Social Medicine 
[1].  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H.C. Ossebaard, R.E. Geertsma and J.E.W.C. van Gemert-
Pijnen, “Health Technology Trust: Undeserved or Justified?,” 
in: Proceedings 4th International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine eTELEMED 2012, Jan 
30-February 4, 2012, Valencia, Spain, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-
Pijnen,  H.C. Ossebaard, A. Smedberg, S. Wynchank and P. 
Giacomelli, Eds. Red Hook: Curran Associates Inc., 2012, pp 
134-142.    
[2] WHO, “The World Health Report 2003 – Shaping the future,” 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2003. 
[3] WHO, “Global Status Report on Noncommunicable Diseases 
2010,” Geneva: World Health Organization, 2010. 
[4] S.M. Kelders, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, A. Werkman, N. 
Nijland, and E.R. Seydel. “Effectiveness of a Web-based 
intervention aimed at healthy dietary and physical activity 
behavior: a randomized controlled trial about users and 
usage,” J Med Internet Res. 2011 Apr 14;13(2):e32. 
[5] F. Verhoeven, K. Tanja-Dijkstra, N. Nijland, G. Eysenbach, 
and J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, “Asynchronous and 
Synchronous 
Teleconsultation 
for 
Diabetes 
Care: 
A 
Systematic Literature Review,” J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2010 
May; 4(3): pp. 666–684. 
[6] Resolution WHA58-28, “eHealth,” in: “Fifty-eighth World 
Health Assembly, Geneva, 16-25 May 2005. Resolutions and 
decisions,” Geneva: World Health Organization, 2005. 
http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA58/WHA58_28-
en.pdf [accessed 9 May 2011]. 
[7] R.R. Glasgow, “eHealth Evaluation and Dissemination,” 
Research American Journal of Preventive Medicine 32(5), 
2007, pp. 119-126. 
[8] A.D. Black, J. Car, C. Pagliari, C. Anandan, K. Cresswell, T. 
Bokun, B. McKinstry, R. Procter, A. Majeed and A. Sheikh, 
“The impact of eHealth on the quality and safety of health 
care: a systematic overview,” PLoS Med (8) 2011, e1000387- 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387   
[9] A.A. Atienza, B.W. Hesse, T.B. Baker, D.B. Abrams, B.K. 
Rimer and R.T. Croyle, “Critical issues in eHealth research,” 
Am J Prev Med 2007, 32(5), S71-S74.   
[10] R.E. Geertsma, A.C.P. de Bruijn,  E.S.M. Hilbers, M.L. 
Hollestelle, G. Bakker and B. Roszek. “New and Emerging 
Medical Technologies - A horizon scan of opportunities and 
risks,” RIVM report 360020002, 2007. Bilthoven: RIVM. 
[11] IGZ (Dutch Healthcare Inspectorate),”State of Health Care. 
2008 Medical technological risks underestimated” [Staat van 
de gezondheidszorg 2008. Risico’s van medische technologie 
onderschat]. The Hague: IGZ, 2008. 
[12] National Academy of Sciences, “Health IT and Patient Safety: 
Building Safer Systems for Better Care,” Washington: 
Institute of Medicine, 2011. 
[13] D. Barben, “Analyzing acceptance politics: Towards an 
epistemological shift in the public understanding of science 
and technology,”  Public Understanding of Science 19 (3) 
May 2010, pp. 274-292. 
[14] M. Dierkes and C. von Grote (Eds.), “Between understanding 
and trust: the public, science and technology,” Harwood 
Academic, 2000. 
[15] WRR - Dutch Scientific Council for Government Policy, ” 
iGovernment“ 
[iOverheid]. 
Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam 
University Press, 2011. 
[16] M. Beeuwkes Buntin, M.F. Burke, M.C. Hoaglin and D. 
Blumenthal, 
“The 
Benefits 
of 
Health 
Information 
Technology,” Health Affairs (30)3, 2011, pp.  464-471. 
[17] J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, H.C. Ossebaard, 
A.H.M van Limburg, S.M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach and E.R. 
Seydel, “A holistic framework to improve the uptake and 
impact of eHealth technologies,” J Med Internet Research 
13(4), 2011, e111 doi:10.2196/jmir.1672. 
[18] ISO/IEC, “Guide 51:1999. Safety aspects - Guidelines for the 
inclusion in standards.” Geneva: ISO, 1999. 
[19] EN ISO 14971:2009, “Medical devices - Application of risk 
management to medical devices (ISO 14971:2007, Corrected 
version 2007-10-01).” Brussels: CEN/CENELEC, 2009. 
[20] IGZ (Dutch Healthcare Inspectorate), “State of Health Care. 
2011. In health care, patient information exchange challenges 
not resolved with ICT without standardization of processes” 
[Staat van de gezondheidszorg 2011. Informatie-uitwisseling 
in de zorg: ICT lost knelpunten zonder standaardisatie van de 
informatie-uitwisseling niet op]. Utrecht: IGZ, 2011 
[21] M.M. Yusof, J. Kuljis, A. Papazafeiropoulou and L.K. 
Stergioulas, “An evaluation framework for health information 
systems: human, organization and technology-fit factors 
(HOT-fit),” Int. J. Med. Inform. 77(6), 2008, pp. 386-398. 
PMID:17964851 
[22] J. F. Masa, M. T. González, R. Pereira, M. Mota, J.A. Riesco, 
J. Corral and R. Farré, “Validity of spirometry performed 
online,” European Respiratory Journal, 37(4), 2011, pp. 911-
918. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00011510 
[23] M. M. Bujnowska-Fedak, E. Puchała  and A. Steciwko, “The 
impact of telehome care on health status and quality of life 
among patients with diabetes in a primary care setting in 
Poland,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 17(3), 2011, pp. 153-
163. doi: 10.1089/tmj.2010.0113 
65
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[24] R. Spijkerman, M. A. E. Roek, A. Vermulst, L. Lemmers, A. 
Huiberts and R. C. M. E. Engels, “Effectiveness of a Web-
based brief alcohol intervention and added value of normative 
feedback in reducing underage drinking: A randomized 
controlled trial, “ Journal of Medical Internet Research, 12(5), 
2010, e65p.61-e65p.14. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1465 
[25] L. Zimmerman, S. Barnason, M. Hertzog, L. Young, J.  
Nieveen, P. Schulz and C. Tu, “Gender differences in 
recovery outcomes after an early recovery symptom 
management intervention,” Heart and Lung: Journal of Acute 
and 
Critical 
Care,” 
40(5), 
2011, 
pp. 
429-39. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.hrtlng.2010.07.018. 
[26] R. Cruz-Correia, J. Fonseca, L. Lima, L.  Araújo, L.  Delgado, 
M.G. Castel-Branco and A. Costa-Pereira, “Web-based or 
paper-based self-management tools for asthma--patients' 
opinions and quality of data in a randomized crossover 
study,” Studies in health technology and informatics, 127, 
2007, pp. 178-189.  
[27] D.C.M. Willems, M.A. Joore, J.J.E. Hendriks, R.A.H. van 
Duurling, E.F.M. Wouters and J. L. Severens, “Process 
evaluation of a nurse-led telemonitoring programme for 
patients with asthma,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 
13(6), 2007, pp. 310-317, doi: 10.1258/135763307781644898 
[28] M. Verheijden, J.C. Bakx, R.  Akkermans, H. van den 
Hoogen, N.M. Godwin, W. Rosser, W. van Staveren and C. 
van Weel, “Web-Based Targeted Nutrition Counselling and 
Social Support for Patients at Increased Cardiovascular Risk 
in 
General 
Practice: 
Randomized 
Controlled 
Trial’”  
J Med Internet Res 6(4), 2004, e446(4).  
[29] L. A. Morland, C.J. Greene, C.S. Rosen, D. Foy, P. Reilly, J. 
Shore and B.C. Frueh, “Telemedicine for anger management 
therapy in a rural population of combat veterans with 
posttraumatic stress disorder: A randomized noninferiority 
trial,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71(7), 2010, pp. 855-
863. doi: 10.4088/JCP.09m05604blu. 
[30] M. G. Postel, H. A. de Haan, E.D. ter Huurne, E.S. Becker, E. 
S. and C. A. J. de Jong, “Effectiveness of a web-based 
intervention for problem drinkers and reasons for dropout: 
Randomized controlled trial,”Journal of Medical Internet 
Research,” 
12(4), 
2010 
e68p.61-e68p.12. 
doi: 
10.2196/jmir.1642 
[31] M.T. Ruffin, D.E. Nease, A. Sen, W.D. Pace, C. Wang, L.S. 
Acheson and R. Gramling,”Effect of preventive messages 
tailored to family history on health behaviors: The family 
healthware impact trial,” Annals of Family Medicine, 9(1), 
2011, pp. 3-11. doi: 10.1370/afm.1197. 
[32] H.Q. Nguyen, D. Donesky-Cuenco,S.  Wolpin,L.F.  Reinke, 
J.O. 
Benditt, 
S.M. 
Paul 
and 
V. 
Carrieri-
Kohlman,”Randomized controlled trial of an internet-based 
versus face-to-face dyspnea self-management program for 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Pilot 
study,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, 10(2), 2008, 
doi: 10.2196/jmir.990 
[33] B. M. Demaerschalk, B.J. Bobrow, R. Raman, T.E.J. Kiernan, 
M.I. Aguilar, T.J. Ingall  and B.C. Meyer, “Stroke team 
remote evaluation using a digital observation camera in 
arizona: The initial mayo clinic experience trial, “ Stroke, 
41(6), 
2010, 
pp. 
1251-1258. 
doi: 
10.1161/strokeaha.109.574509 
[34] M. Jansà,  M. Vidal, J. Viaplana, I. Levy, I. Conget, R. Gomis 
and E. Esmatjes, “Telecare in a structured therapeutic 
education programme addressed to patients with type 1 
diabetes and poor metabolic control,” Diabetes Research and 
Clinical 
Practice, 
74(1), 
2006, 
pp. 
26-32. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.diabres.2006.03.005 
[35] E. Biermann, W. Dietrich, J. Rihl and E. Standl, “Are there 
time and cost savings by using telemanagement for patients 
on intensified insulin therapy?: A randomised, controlled 
trial,” Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 
69(2), 
2002, 
pp. 
137-146. 
doi: 
10.1016/s0169-
2607(02)00037-8 
[36] L. A. Copeland, G. D. Berg, D. M. Johnson and R.L. Bauer, “ 
An intervention for VA patients with congestive heart failure” 
American Journal of Managed Care, 16(3), 2010, pp. 158-
165.  
[37] V. M. Montori, P. K. Helgemoe, G. H. Guyatt, D. S. Dean, T. 
W. Leung, S. A. Smith and Y.C. Kudva, ”Telecare for 
Patients with Type 1 Diabetes and Inadequate Glycemic 
Control: A randomized controlled trial and meta-analysis. 
Diabetes 
Care,” 
27(5), 
2004, 
pp. 
1088-1094. 
doi: 
10.2337/diacare.27.5.1088 
[38] S. M. Strayer, S.L. Pelletier, J.R. Martindale, S. Rais, J. 
Powell and J.B. Schorling, “A PDA-based counseling tool for 
improving medical student smoking cessation counseling. 
Family Medicine,” 42(5), 2010, pp. 350-357.  
[39] National Implementation Agenda eHealth, “A joint policy 
paper of the Royal Dutch Medical Association (KNMG), the 
Federation of Patients and Consumer Organisations (NPCF) 
and the Health care insurers Association (Zorgverzekeraars 
Nederland),” 
December 
2011 
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten-en-
publicaties/rapporten/2012/06/07/nationale-
implementatieagenda-e-health-nia.html    
[accessed Oct. 12, 2012]. 
[40] National Academy of Sciences, “ Health IT and Patient 
Safety: Building Safer Systems for Better Care,” Washington: 
Institute of Medicine, 2011. 
[41] IGZ (Dutch Healthcare Inspectorate), “State of Health Care 
2011. In health care, patient information exchange challenges 
not resolved with ICT without standardization of processes,” 
Utrecht: IGZ, 2011. 
[42] D.C. Duchatteau and M.D.H. Vink, “Medical-technological 
developments 
care. 
Background 
study“ 
[Medisch 
technologische 
ontwikkelingen 
zorg 
20/20. 
Achtergrondstudie],  The Hague: Council for Public Health 
and Health Care [Raad voor de Volksgezondheid en Zorg], 
2011.  
[43] A.H.M. van Limburg, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. 
Nijland, H.C. Ossebaard, R.M.G. Hendrix and E.R. Seydel, “ 
Why business modelling is crucial in the development of 
eHealth technologies,” J Med Internet Res 13(4) 201, e124  
doi:10.2196/jmir.1674 
[44] H.C. Ossebaard, A.C.P. de Bruijn, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-
Pijnen, R.E. Geertsma, “Risks related to the use of eHealth 
technologies - an exploratory study,  RIVM Report 
360127001,” 
Bilthoven: 
RIVM, 
2013. 
See:  
http://www.rivm.nl/bibliotheek/rapporten/360127001.pdf 
 
66
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
Appendix I 
Search query used in SciVerse Scopus 
 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY(ehealth OR e-health OR "e health" 
OR etherapy OR e-therapy OR "e therapy" OR emental 
OR e-mental OR "e mental" OR telemedicine OR telecare 
OR teleconsult OR telemonitoring OR telehealth OR 
teleconference OR "health information technology" OR 
"web based") OR TITLE-ABS-KEY("internet based" OR 
"web application" OR domotica OR “personal digital 
assistant” OR “pda”) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY(risk OR 
risks OR danger* OR threat OR threats OR limitation* 
OR barrier* OR problem* OR concern* OR challenge 
OR challenges OR “adverse effect*” OR quality OR 
drawback OR drawbacks) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY(health 
OR care OR “healthcare” OR healthcare) AND TITLE-
ABS-KEY("randomized clinical trial*" OR "randomised 
clinical trial*" OR "randomized controlled trial*" OR 
"randomised controlled trial*" OR rct OR "RCTs" OR 
experimental)) AND PUBYEAR AFT 1999 AND 
PUBYEAR BEF 2012 AND (LIMIT-TO(LANGUAGE, 
"English") OR LIMIT-TO(LANGUAGE, "German")) 
67
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Appendix II 
Study selection process 
 
 
 
68
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

  
Appendix III 
Classification of identified risks 
 
Level  
Risk 
eHealth application 
Source 
 
 
 
 
Human 
(patient) 
Time-consumption 
Telecare 
Masa et al. (2011) 
 
Selective benefit 
Telecare 
Bujnowska-Fedak et al. (2011) 
 
Selective benefits / 
negative effect 
Web-based counseling 
Spijkerman et al. (2010) 
 
Selective benefits 
Telecare 
Zimmerman et al. (2011) 
 
Low adherence 
Web-based self-management  
Cruz-Correia et al. (2007) 
 
Low adherence 
Telecare 
Willems et al. (2007) 
 
Low adherence / 
selective benefits 
Web-based counseling 
Verheijden et al. (2004) 
 
Low adherence/alliance 
eTherapy 
Morland et al. (2010) 
 
Drop-out 
eTherapy 
Postel et al. (2010) 
 
Pos. for 2 endpoints / 
Neg. for other 
Tailored web-based counseling 
Ruffin et al. (2011) 
 
 
 
 
Technology 
Usability 
Telecare 
Bujnowska-Fedak et al.(2011) 
 
 
Self-management via PDA 
Nguyen et al. (2008) 
 
Technical problems 
Self-management via PDA 
Nguyen et al. (2008) 
 
 
Web-based self-management  
Cruz-Correia et al. (2007) 
 
 
Telecare 
Demaerschalk et al. (2010) 
 
Also time consumption 
as risk in this study 
Telecare 
Jansá et al. (2006)  
 
 
Telecare 
Biermann et al. (2002) 
 
Technical / Logistical 
problems 
Telecare 
Willems et al. (2007) 
 
 
 
 
Organization Costs 
Telecare 
Copeland et al. (2010) 
 
 
Time-consumption 
 
Telecare 
Telecare 
Biermann et al. (2002) 
Montori et al. (2006) 
 
Barriers using the 
application 
PDA-based counseling tool 
Strayer et al. (2010) 
 
69
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Appendix IV 
ceHRes Roadmap to improve the impact of eHealth interventions 
 
 
 
 
70
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Appendix V 
Web-based sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sources 
urls 
 
International 
and national 
health 
organizations 
/government 
agencies 
 
World Health Organization (WHO http://www.who.int/goe/en/);  
 
European Commission (EC http://ec.europa.eu/health/medical-
devices/index_en.htm); 
 
UK Department of Health (http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/index.htm); 
 
MHRA (http://www.mhra.gov.uk/);  
 
Scottish Government (http://www.knowledge.scot.nhs.uk/telehealthcare.aspx);  
 
Irish Medicine Board (http://www.imb.ie/);  
 
Bfarm (http://www.bfarm.de/DE/Home/home_node.html); 
 
Australian Department of Health and Ageing 
(http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/eHealth); 
 
Swedish Medical Products Agency 
(http://www.lakemedelsverket.se/english/product/Medical-devices/) 
 
 
Databases 
 
MAUDE (Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience) database (U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration) 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfMAUDE/search.CFM 
 
 ECRI Health Devices Alerts (HAD) database   
https://members2.ecri.org/Components/Alerts/Pages/CPIssues/Issue.aspx?CH=1&ChNam
e=Medical%20Devices&rid=0 
 
 
ECRI Medical Device Safety Reports (MDSR) database 
http://www.mdsr.ecri.org/?pnk=healthdevices 
 
Expert 
centers  
Medical 
technology 
 ECRI Institute; 
https://www.ecri.org/Pages/default.aspx 
 
 
Prismant; 
www.kiwaprismant.nl/ 
 
 ZonMw; 
www.zonmw.nl/ 
Dutch 
professional 
journal on 
health care  
 Medisch Contact 
http://medischcontact.artsennet.nl/home.htm 
 
 
 
71
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

