166
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Advances in the Development of Combat Helmet Systems 
Constructional Contributions for Lightweight Ballistic Composites 
Short Paper 
 
Henrik Seeber, Arash Ramezani, Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
Helmut Schmidt University - University of the Federal Armed Forces 
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: henrik.seeber@hsu-hh.de, ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
Abstract—In the military and police sector, the endangerment 
for the forces has risen over the last decades. Especially police 
forces are facing new threats due to increased terrorist activity 
in western European cities and a rising propensity to violence. 
This development makes it necessary to provide state of the art 
protection for patrol officers. This includes helmets made of 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) to lower 
the overall weight of equipment and increase the combat value 
of the forces by providing more comfort and possibilities for 
attachments. At the moment, these types of helmets are not 
ready to fulfill the required level of protection against 
projectiles. The intention of this paper is to give background 
information about these new threats and to mention first ideas 
how to tackle the emerging problems of current UHMWPE 
combat helmets. In addition, early results regarding the 
process of UHMWPE will be presented. 
Keywords - applied research; fiber-reinforced plastics; 
optimization; armor systems; ballistic trials; material processing; 
post-processing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Combat helmets are a key factor in personal protection for 
military and police forces. Rapidly changed threats on 
missions, especially for police patrol officers and soldiers in 
stabilization missions, prove that protection needs a new 
ability profile [1]. This work provides background 
information to specify the problems and first ideas how to 
solve these. Later on, findings and required settings for pre- 
and post-processing UHMWPE will be shown. The overall 
aim is to create a ballistic combat helmet that meets VPAM 
3 regulations (the third level of ballistic protection of the 
European "union of test centers for armored materials and 
constructions") and the technical directive “System Ballistic 
Helmet” 5/2010 [2].  
II. 
STRUCTURE OF THE PAPER 
Section III gives a brief information about the history of 
combat helmets and their materials through time. In Section 
IV, threats for ballistic protection are mentioned. Section V 
is about the disadvantages of current UHMWPE combat 
helmets and Section V deals with the advantages of lighter 
polymer combat helmets. In Section VII, the aim is 
concretized and explained. In the final section, Section VIII, 
the steps in the development process of a combat helmet are 
described. In addition, findings in the processing and post-
processing of UHMWPE are pointed out. 
III. 
HISTORY 
Combat helmets have a long tradition. Before the invention 
of gunpowder, they were used as a protection against blunt 
trauma and cuts. They were designed to deflect, e.g., a 
sword, so there was less residual energy on the head. Later 
on, helmets were mainly worn for pageantry and unit 
recognition until the First World War began.  
A. Combat Helmets in the 20th Century  
Due to the massive use and increased lethality of artillery, 
the German forces introduced the “Steel Helmet Modell 
1916” in 1915. All nations introduced nearly the same 
helmet models in at this time, which were made of basic 
steel. These helmets were only able to stop the primary 
threat of that time: fragmenting projectiles of artillery 
bombs. They were not able to stop bullets because of the 
available materials. During the Second World War, the U.S. 
Military introduced the M1 in 1943, which was made out of 
“Hadfield steel” (see Figure1). This helmet was used by the 
German armed forces until the 1990s. On the one hand, 
problems with this type of steel helmet occurred because the 
helmets were too heavy and reduced the view, hearing and 
mobility of the solider. On the other hand, the helmet 
provided reliable protection against light and medium 
fragments. The M1 was followed by a very new generation 
of combat helmets, which was made of aramid. Aramid was 
the first synthetic bulletproof material and was invented in 
the 1960s by DuPont [3].  
B. Combat Helmets in the 21st Century  
As a replacement of the M1, the US-Military introduced the 
“Personnel Armor System for Ground Troops” (PASGT), 
was made of aramid. In addition, they used the new 
retention system “NOSHA”, which provided a better shock 
absorption and air circulation. The German armed forces 
introduced this type of helmet system as well, called 
“Combat Helmet, Ground Forces”. This helmet system is 
barely able to stop fragments and 9mm bullets, but the 
residual energy is still too high and as such, the helmet 
cannot provide reliable protection against aforementioned 
threats. The “Advanced Combat Helmet” (ACH) primary 

167
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
has a new suspension system to improve protection against 
blunt impacts. Additionally, the design changed to allow the 
usage of new equipment, such as ear protection and radio 
systems. The next stage of development was – again – a 
totally new material: the ultra-high molecular weight 
polyethylene fibers (UHMWPE). This material combines 
low weight (areal density: ~86.18 N/m2) with high strength 
(tenacity: ~34g/d) [4]. With hybridization techniques, the 
U.S. Military developed a new generation of combat 
helmets in 2010, the so-called “Future Assault Shell 
Technology” (FAST). The German armed forces also use 
FAST with the name “Combat Helmet Special Forces”. 
Also, FAST helmets were added to the concept “Infantry of 
the Future” (see Figure 2) [5]. FAST helmets have been 
designed and developed with special forces and air borne 
units in mind. The helmet system only provides protection 
against light fragments and blunt impacts. The retention 
system has been upgraded to a multi-pad four-point 
retention system. This leads to reduced weight and higher 
comfort for the soldier. In 2012 the “Enhanced Combat 
Helmet” (ECH) was developed. Due to the hybridization of 
fiber composites, the helmet is able to withstand ballistic 
threats. However, the residual energy of a projectile is still 
too high, which leads to back-face deformation and life-
threatening 
injuries. 
The 
Heads-Up 
helmet 
system 
introduced in 2013 aims to protect the entire head and paves 
the way for a new trend. The current generation of helmets 
mainly protects the wearer against fragmentation. Combat 
helmets are developed in order to increase combat 
effectiveness of the individual soldier. In the future, this 
should extend to protection from blast and ballistic threats 
while having fully integrated attachments such as 
communication systems, ear protection or a head-up display 
[3]. 
Figure 1. Evolution of modern combat helmets 
 
 

168
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 2. FAST helmet with the concept “Infantry of the Future” [5]. 
IV. 
NEW THREATS 
A. Changed Threats for Police Forces  
Threats for police forces and military troops have changed a 
lot over the last decades. Police forces face international 
terrorism, especially in western European cities. More and 
more, terrorists are professionally trained and equipped with 
military weapons and gear. Time is the most crucial point in 
hazardous situations, so patrol officers have to engage first 
[5]. Only a combination of ballistic vests and ballistic 
helmets provides the necessary level of protection in such 
situations. Especially patrol officers are facing unpredictable 
threats on duty, so their helmets have to provide protection 
against multiple threats. Apart from this, hits with blunt and 
sharp weapons, fire and chemicals are common risks for 
them. The willingness of patrol officers in Baden 
Wurttemberg to wear their helmets also in common 
situations like brawls and skirmishes makes it necessary to 
provide good shock absorbing attributes against blunt 
trauma [1][6].  
B. New Threats for Military Forces 
Military forces are facing changed threats. Statistics of the 
American operations in Afghanistan and Iraq show that 
head and neck wounds are increasing. The distribution 
shows that 30% of all wounds are in the head and neck area 
(based on injuries/treatments from hospitalization, including 
persons who died of wounds) [3]. The main threats at patrol 
missions are improvised explosive devices (IED) and 
ambushes with assault rifles. Due to the increased use of 
IEDs, blast associated head injuries, e.g., fragments have 
increased compared to gunshot wounds. Furthermore, the 
characteristics of the fragments have changed compared to 
mortar and artillery shells. This can lead to a different 
impact behavior. In addition, blunt traumatic injuries have 
increased because they are linked to blast events. 
Nevertheless, blunt trauma is also associated with non-
combat situations like vehicle crashes, parachute drop 
accidents or falls. Common blunt trauma threats have an 
impact velocity of 6.1 m/s, which is equal to a drop of 1.9 m 
[3]. The primary ballistic threat is caused by assault rifles of 
type AK-47 (7.62x39-mm) and owing to the increased close 
combat situation pistols emerging as threats, for example, 
Makarov (9x18-mm) or Tokarev (7.62x25-mm). Altogether, 
the America Department of Defense locates the main threat 
of infantry weapons at 5.56-mm and 7.62-mm rounds and 
muzzle velocity from 735 m/s to more than 800 m/s. This 
matches approximately VPAM 6 to VPAM 7 [1][3].  
V. 
DISADVANTAGES OF ACTUAL UHMWPE COMBAT 
HELMETS 
A. Back-face Deformation 
Back-face deformation is one of the main problems of the 
actual UHMWPE combat helmets. On the one hand, the 
material has very good attributes against bullet penetration. 
On the other hand, the energy of the bullet is not well 
dispersed. In order to understand the back-face deformation, 
it is vital to understand the behavior of the fiber after an 
impact. Two waves occur: a transversal and a longitudinal 
wave (see Figure 3). The longitudinal wave moves along the 
fiber. During this movement, the fiber is stretched and 
constricted. The transversal wave moves in the direction of 
the projectile path. Due to the stretched fiber and the 
transversal wave the material suffers a deformation in the 
direction of the projectile. This leads to the so-called back-
face deformation, the material indent and the residual 
energy appeals on the head [4]. For German police helmets, 
the residual energy has a maximum tolerance limit of 25 
Joule [6]. The residual energy could lead to possible head 
injuries like long linear skull fractures or closed head brain 
trauma. At the moment, it is unclear whether the injuries 
occur from the deforming of the helmet onto the head or 
from acceleration loads transmitted through the helmet 
padding to the head.  
 
Figure 3. Energy distribution in a fiber impacted by a projectile [4]. 

169
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In addition, the test methodology with clay to display back-
face deformation is not totally linked to head injuries. The 
human skull behavior in such situations is inadequately 
represented in the actual test methodology with clay. 
Especially in the area of back-face deformation there is a lot 
of potential for necessary improvements [1].  
B.   Blunt impacts 
Moreover, the current generation of UHMWPE combat 
helmets have deficits with blunt impacts. The current 
combat helmets can only absorb impacts with a velocity of 3 
m/s or 45 J drop energy [3]. As mentioned earlier, common 
blunt traumas occur with a velocity of 6.1 m/s. In fact, blunt 
traumas occur especially in non-combat and training 
situations. Therefore, there needs to be an improvement, 
because most of the time the wearer of the helmet is in such 
a situation [1]. 
VI. 
 COMBAT HELMET AS MODULAR HEADGEAR SYSTEM 
Combat helmets will evolve from a device only used for 
protection to a multi useable platform to increase the 
survivability and efficiency of the wearer. This includes 
basic attachments like active ear protection, flashlights or 
counter weights to provide a stable weight balance. 
Moreover, the helmet platform can be used to increase the 
leading ability of the group by adding integrated voice 
radio, a head up displays with important mission 
information or health sensors to monitor the group vital 
functions. This would increase the situational awareness of 
the group leader and would lead to an overall increase of 
safety during missions. Furthermore, the combat value of 
every solider or policeman can be increased by adding 
feeder plates for night vision, the ability to wear protective 
masks against warfare agent or attaching standardized rails 
like MIL-STD 1913. Of course, the possibilities are limited 
due to the weight the wearer can handle over the duration of 
the mission. So, if the combat helmet itself weight as little 
as possible, there are more possibilities for attachments and 
this leads to earlier mentioned advantages [1].  
VII. AIM OF THE PROJECT 
First of all, the aim is to create a UHMWPE combat helmet, 
which meets the regulations of the police institute of the 
German police academy in Muenster, this regulation is 
based on the technical directive “System Ballistic Helmet” 
(Technische 
Richtlinie 
“Gesamtsystem 
Ballistischer 
Schutzhelm”) from May 2010 [2]. The use test standards are 
the VPAM “APR 2006” (Allgemeine Prüfrichtlinie 2006; 
Engl.: general test guideline 2006) and VPAM “HVN 2009” 
(Durchschusshemmender 
Helm 
mit 
Visier 
und 
Nackenschutz 2009; Engl.: bullet-resistant helmet with visor 
and neck protection 2009). 
A. Threats 
The main focus of the research is on the ballistic attributes 
of the helmet. Therefore, the helmet has to provide 
protection against soft-core projectiles 9mmx19 fired by 
small arms and machine pistols. This is comparable to 
VPAM 3. Furthermore, the aim is to meet the regulations of 
VPAM 4 to compete with the current generation of titanium 
helmets and provide a state-of-the-art alternative [5]. The 
mentioned titan helmet, which is actually used by the state 
of Baden Wuerttemberg, is the “Hoplit” model by Ulbrichts 
Witwe GmbH (see Figure 4). As mentioned, earlier 
protection against blunt trauma is also a challenge for 
combat helmets. The residual energy has to be lower than 25 
Joule [1].  
B. Constructional Problems  
At the moment, the material has a reliable protection against 
projectile penetration. Additionally, a possible helmet shape 
provides a reliable protection. It has to be verified in which 
areas the protection is effective. Especially near the edges of 
the calotte, it is possible that the protection efficiency is 
much lower compared to the central areas. The actual 
titanium helmets have an efficiency distance of 10 mm to 
the edges. All in all, these helmets provide an effective 
protection area of 90% [6]. As with aramid helmets, which 
have a much lower protective area, the fiber structure of the 
UHMWPE could also be a crucial point to provide a 
protection area as big as titanium helmets [5]. Moreover, it 
is important to determine the optimal shape and 
configuration in which the UHMWPE tape is used. The goal 
is to use fibers, which are as long as possible in order to 
retain the good physical properties. This is difficult to 
achieve with a spherical object and rectangular tapes. 
C. Possible Solutions 
The main problem is back-face deformation. The residual 
energy dispensation of the material is too low in the current 
configuration. Now three possibilities to increase the 
dispensation have to be tested. Varying the direction of the 
material layers may mitigate the deformation. This has to be 
balanced between penetration and deformation of the 
material. The best penetration protection is provided when 
the layers are rotated by 90 degrees. Another idea is to use 
energy-absorbing materials under the calotte and as helm 
pads to reduce the residual energy. So, this means to 
integrate strictly the inlay into the helmet. 
 
Figure 4. “Hoplit F” by Ulbrichts Witwe GmbH [6] 

170
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Another possibility is to use two calottes, the first one as a 
ballistic shell and the second one as a shell to disperse the 
residual energy and to add absorbing material between the 
shells. The next step would be to precise the ideas and test 
their efficiency. After this, a combination of ideas could 
reduce the residual energy to a value lower than 25 Joule. 
Finally, the aim is to meet the regulations of VPAM 3 [1]. 
VIII. COMBAT HELMT DEVELOPMENT 
Before the development started, a progress plan was created. 
The plan is structured as follows: The first step is a detailed 
research concerning the material involved. This includes a 
literature research about failure behavior and material 
properties (a detailed report about this topic is readable [8]) 
and studies about material behavior during the processing, 
which is mentioned in this article. The next step will be the 
production of a prototype, made with different construction 
methods to find an optimal configuration. Also, the optimal 
hardening process parameters need to be found. Finally, 
these prototypes have to be tested on the basis of the VPAM 
HVN 2009 standards.  
A. Used Material 
The UHMWPE, which is used for this research is 
Dyneema® HB26. It is shipped in tape shape and as such, 
the matrix and fiber have already been combined to a fiber 
composite material. This material is ideal for body armor 
due to its low weight (density: 15.9 g/cm3) and high tenacity 
of 37 g/d [7]. The tape has a bidirectional fiber structure 
with four layers of fibers (see Figure 5). This means that the 
tape has two layers in horizontal and two layers in vertical 
direction. That is an important fact, because the physical 
properties depend on the supported fiber length in the 
significant direction and has to be considered during the 
construction. Another crucial point is low temperature 
stability. The operating temperature range must be lower 
than 80°C, otherwise the material behavior might change 
[7]. 
 
 
Figure 5. Damaged Dyneema® HB26 tape. Layer-, matrix- and 
bidirectional fiber structure is visible. 
B. Pre-processing 
The tape has to be cut into the needed pieces for the 
construction. Because of the fiber structure of the material, a 
contactless cutting method is advantageous. Therefore, a 
laser cutter is used. It uses a CO2 laser due to the inorganic 
material, which is processed. Due to the limited working 
surface of the laser cutter, the tape has to be cut into semi-
finished material, which fits into the laser cutter. Therefore, 
a special fiber scissor is used for a preferably tear free 
cutting. The laser cutter has three main parameters 
influencing the cutting result: power, velocity and 
frequency. Following recommendations of the manufacturer 
of the laser cutter the settings are chosen as follows: the 
power is set to 120 W, the frequency is set to 1000 Hz and a 
1.5’’ lens is used. Now, only the velocity needs to be 
determined. The cutting results are evaluated in several 
experiments. Bulging caused by the lead in heat, an optic 
evaluation of the cut and visible damages are compared at 
various velocities. Bulging turned out to be an important 
figure. That is because in lower velocities, the heat input 
leads to a bead nearly twice as thick as the thickness of the 
Dyneema® HB26 (original thickness 0.35 mm) (see Table 
I). The same applies to high velocities. High beads are an 
indication that the edges have been melted away and causes 
problems with geometrical accuracy. A velocity of 0.036 
m/s seems to be optimal cutting setting to cut one layer of 
Dyneema® HB26 (see Table II). With this velocity, 0.5 mm 
of material from edge is melted away. This has to be 
regarded during the construction of the component. In order 
to increase productivity, experiments were made with five 
layers of material taped together being cut at once (see 
Figure 6). The velocity and focus point of the laser were 
changed throughout the experiment (see Table III). The best 
result is achieved with a velocity of 0.011 m/s and a focus 
point on the first layer leads to an acceptable cut.  
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF THE CUT EVALUATION 
Velocity 
[m/s] 
Number 
Bulging 
[mm] 
Optic 
Evaluation 
Damage 
0.027 
1 
0.65 
Bead 
Fiber 
tearing 
2 
0.68 
Bead 
No 
0.032 
1 
0.58 
Bead 
No 
2 
0.59 
Bead 
No 
0.036 
1 
0.48 
Even Edge 
No 
2 
0.48 
Even Edge 
No 
0.044 
1 
0.52 
Even Edge 
No 
2 
0.51 
Even Edge 
No 
0.053 
1 
0.53 
Even Edge 
No 
2 
0.56 
Fringed Edge 
No 
0.062 
1 
0.59 
Fringed Edge 
No 
2 
0.60 
Bead 
No 
0.071 
1 
0.68 
Bead 
No 
2 
0.63 
Bead 
No 
 

171
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  
OPTIMAL CUTTING PARAMETER OF DYNEEMA® HB26 
Parameter 
Value 
Material 
Dyneema® HB26 
Power 
120 W 
Frequency 
1000 Hz 
Velocity 
0.036 m/s 
 
 
Figure 6. Left: Dyneema HB26 cluster with parameter labeling. Right: 
Reverse side of the cluster. 
TABLE III.  
EVALUATION OF CUTTING PARAMETERS OF DYNEEMA® 
HB26 FIVE LAYER CLUSTER 
Focus Point 
Velocity [m/s] 
Successful Cut 
Upper Layer 
0.011 
Yes 
Bottom Layer 
0.018 
No 
Bottom Layer 
0.036 
No 
Upper Layer 
0.018 
No 
Upper Layer 
0.036 
No 
C. Post-processing 
After the hardening-process, the edges of the plates are 
often irregular. It is advantageous to achieve a clear edge to 
prevent fiber tearing and damages. The test plates have a 
thickness of twenty layers and are hardened. In the 
evaluation, the velocity, frequency, focus point, lens and 
repetitions are variable. However, multiple settings are 
tested and evaluated to the following criteria: geometrical 
accuracy, damages, bead and cleanliness of the cut. Finally, 
the settings displayed in Table IV produce an optimal 
cutting result (see Figure 7). 
TABLE IV.  
OPTIMAL CUTTING PARAMETER OF HARDENED 20 LAYER 
DYNEEMA® HB26 
Parameter 
Value 
Velocity 
0.011 m/s 
Frequency 
1000 Hz 
Focus Point 
Upper Layer 
Lens 
1.5’’ 
Repetitions 
5 
 
Figure 7. Hardened 20 layers Dyneema® HB26 plate after post-processing. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
There are three main risks for ground forces: the main blast, 
blunt trauma and ballistic threats. Especially ballistic threats 
are challenging the UHMWPE helmets because of a high 
amount of residual energy. This leads to back-face 
deformation, which can result in live risking head injuries. 
In addition, this characteristic of injuries appears with blunt 
traumas. Some of the mentioned ideas could also lower the 
risk of blunt traumas even if the main challenge is to reduce 
back-face deformation. Another advantage of lighter 
helmets is, in addition to more comfort, the ability as a multi 
role carrier for attachments and a higher acceptance on the 
part of wearer. This ability could improve the survivability 
and efficiency of the wearer. Nevertheless, the focus is to 
reduce back-face deformation to meet the regulations of 
VPAM 3. Possible ideas are to verify the direction of the 
layers, using energy-absorbing materials for the helmet 
inlay or using two decoupled shells with energy absorbing 
materials in between. Therefore, a combination or balance 
between the mentioned ideas is necessary. Now, basic 
information about the material used exists and can be used 
to develop and build a prototype helmet. The next step is to 
evaluate how the prototype helmet can be constructed with 
possible solutions integrated as mentioned in Section VII/C. 
After that, ballistic tests are necessary to get an overview of 
the efficiency and how practical the solutions are. Especially 
the findings relating to the test methodology of the Review 
of Department of Defense Test Protocols for Combat 
Helmets [3] could be implemented into the test cycle. 
Findings mentioned in Section VIII are also usable for every 
future project with Dyneema® and represent an important 
first step. However, this should encourage further research 
of the hardening process to achieve better results in the 
future. To conclude, back-face deformation is current the 
main problem of UHMWPE helmets due to the residual 
energy transmitted through the inlay. As mentioned in 
Section V, also, the test methodology, to investigate the 
relation between back-face deformation and head injuries, 
has to be beheld and then maybe adjusted. 
 
 
 

172
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES  
 
[1] H. Seeber, A. Ramezani, and H. Rothe, “Future Tasks of 
Lightweight-Polymer 
Combat 
Helmets”, 
The 
Ninth 
International Conference on Advances in System Simulation 
(SIMUL2017) IARIA, Oct. 2017. 
[2] Police Institute of the German Police Academy in Muenster, 
Technical Directive “System Ballistic Helmet” (Technische 
Richtlinie 
“Gesamtsystem 
Ballistischer 
Schutzhelm”). 
Muenster, pp. 10-16, 5/2010. 
[3] Committee on Review of Test Protocols Used by the DOD to 
Test Combat Helmets, “Review of Department of Defense 
Test Protocols for Combat Helmets”, Washington: The 
National Academies Press, pp. 8–24, 2014. 
[4] I. G. Crouch, L. Arnold, A. Pierlot, and H. Billion, “Fibres, 
textiles and protective apparel” in “The Science of Armour 
Materials”. Amsterdam: Elsevier, p. 271, 2017. 
[5] J. Weisswange, Protection for the “Main”-Weapon, Modern 
Combat Helmets (Schutz für die “Haupt”-Waffe, Moderne 
Gefechtshelme). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.esut.de/fileadmin/user_upload/EST916 
Schutz_fuer_die_Hauptwaffe_Moderne_Gefechtshelme.pdf 
[08.01.2017]. 
[6] Polizei Praxis. Ballistic Helmets for Patrol Officers 
(Ballistischer Schutzhelm für Streifenpolizisten). [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.polizeipraxis.de/themen/arbeitsschutz-in-der-
polizei/detailansicht-arbeitsschutz-in-der-
polizei/artikel/ballistischer-schutzhelm-fuer-
streifenpolizisten.html [08.01.2017]. 
[7] T.Tam and A.Bhatnagar, “High-performance ballistic fibers 
and tapes” in “Lightweight Ballistic Composites: Military and 
Law-Enforcement 
Applications”, 
Second 
Edition. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1-30 and 210-214, 2016. 
[8] H. Seeber, “Contributions to the development of combat 
helmets made of fiber composite materials for the 
improvement of ballistic attributes”, in: Bachelor degree 
thesis at Helmut Schmidt University- University of the 
Federal Armed Forces  Hamburg, Dec. 2017. 

