High-Speed Video Analysis of Ballistic Trials to Investigate Solver Technologies for 
the Simulation of Brittle Materials 
Using the Example of Bullet-Proof Glass 
 
Arash Ramezani and Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
University of the Federal Armed Forces  
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract—Since computers and software have spread into all 
fields of industry, extensive efforts are currently made in order 
to improve the safety by applying certain numerical solutions. 
For many engineering problems involving shock and impact, 
there is no single ideal numerical method that can reproduce 
the various regimes of a problem. An approach wherein 
different techniques may be applied within a single numerical 
analysis can provide the “best” solution in terms of accuracy 
and efficiency. This paper presents a set of numerical 
simulations of ballistic tests, which analyze the effects of soda 
lime glass laminates, familiarly known as transparent armor. 
Transparent armor is one of the most critical components in 
the protection of light armored vehicles. The goal is to find an 
appropriate solver technique for simulating brittle materials 
and thereby improve bullet-proof glass to meet current 
challenges. To have the correct material model available is not 
enough. In this work, the main solver technologies are 
compared to create a perfect simulation model for soda lime 
glass laminates. The calculation should match ballistic trials 
and be used as the basis for further studies. In view of the 
complexity of penetration processes, it is not surprising that 
the bulk of work in this area is experimental in nature. 
Terminal ballistic test techniques, aside from routine proof 
tests, vary mainly in the degree of instrumentation provided 
and hence the amount of data retrieved. Here, the ballistic 
trials and the methods of analysis are discussed in detail. The 
numerical simulations are performed with the nonlinear 
dynamic analysis computer code ANSYS AUTODYN. 
Keywords-solver technologies; simulation models; brittle 
materials; high-performance computing; armor systems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
In the security sector, the partly insufficient safety of 
people and equipment due to failure of industrial 
components are ongoing problems that cause great concern. 
Since computers and software have spread into all fields of 
industry, extensive efforts are currently made in order to 
improve the safety by applying certain computer-based 
solutions. To deal with problems involving the release of a 
large amount of energy over a very short period of time, e.g., 
explosions and impacts, there are three approaches, which 
are discussed in detail in [1]. 
As the problems are highly non-linear and require 
information regarding material behavior at ultra-high loading 
rates, which is generally not available, most of the work is 
experimental 
and 
may 
cause 
tremendous 
expenses. 
Analytical approaches are possible if the geometries 
involved are relatively simple and if the loading can be 
described through boundary conditions, initial conditions, or 
a combination of the two. Numerical solutions are far more 
general in scope and remove any difficulties associated with 
geometry [2].  
For structures under shock and impact loading, numerical 
simulations have proven to be extremely useful. They 
provide a rapid and less expensive way to evaluate new 
design ideas. Numerical simulations can supply quantitative 
and accurate details of stress, strain, and deformation fields 
that would be very costly or difficult to reproduce 
experimentally. In these numerical simulations, the partial 
differential equations governing the basic physics principles 
of conservation of mass, momentum, and energy are 
employed. The equations to be solved are time-dependent 
and nonlinear in nature. These equations, together with 
constitutive models describing material behavior and a set of 
initial and boundary conditions, define the complete system 
for shock and impact simulations. 
The governing partial differential equations need to be 
solved in both time and space domains (see Fig. 1). The 
solution over the time domain can be achieved by an explicit 
method. In the explicit method, the solution at a given point 
in time is expressed as a function of the system variables and 
parameters, with no requirements for stiffness and mass 
matrices. Thus, the computing time at each time step is low 
but may require numerous time steps for a complete solution.  
 
Figure 1.  Discretization of time and space is required. 
59
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The solution for the space domain can be obtained 
utilizing different spatial discretizations, such as Lagrange 
[3], Euler [4], Arbitrary Lagrange Euler (ALE) [5], or mesh 
free methods [6]. Each of these techniques has its unique 
capabilities, but also limitations. Usually, there is not a single 
technique that can cope with all the regimes of a problem [7]. 
This work will focus on brittle materials and transparent 
armor (consisting of several layers of soda lime float glass 
bonded to a layer of polycarbonate to produce a glass 
laminate). Using a computer-aided design (CAD) neutral 
environment 
that 
supports 
direct, 
bidirectional 
and 
associative interfaces with CAD systems, the geometry can 
be optimized successively. Native CAD geometry can be 
used directly, without translation to IGES or other 
intermediate geometry formats [8]. An example is given in 
Fig. 2.  
The work will also provide a brief overview of ballistic 
tests to offer some basic knowledge of the subject, serving as 
a basis for the comparison and verification of the simulation 
results. Details of ballistic trials on transparent armor 
systems are presented. Here, even the crack formation must 
precisely match later simulations. It was possible to observe 
crack motion and to accurately measure crack velocities in 
glass laminates. The measured crack velocity is a 
complicated function of stress and of water vapor 
concentration in the environment [9]. 
The objective of this work is to compare current solver 
technologies to find the most suitable simulation model for 
brittle materials. Lagrange, Euler, ALE, and “mesh free” 
methods, as well as coupled combinations of these methods, 
are described and applied to a bullet-proof glass laminate 
structure impacted by a projectile. It aims to clarify the 
following issue: What is the most suitable simulation model 
for brittle materials? 
The results shall be used to improve the safety of ballistic 
glasses. Instead of running expensive trials, numerical 
simulations should be applied to identify vulnerabilities of 
structures. Contrary to the experimental results, numerical 
methods allow easy and comprehensive studying of all 
mechanical parameters.  
 
Figure 2.  Native CAD geometry (.44 Remington Magnum). 
Modeling will also help to understand how the 
transparent armor schemes behave during impact and how 
the failure processes can be controlled to our advantage. By 
progressively changing the composition of several layers and 
the material thickness, the transparent armor will be 
optimized.  
After a brief introduction and description of the different 
methods of space discretization, there is a short section on 
ballistic trials, where the experimental set-up is depicted. The 
last section describes the numerical simulations. These 
paragraphs of analysis are followed by a conclusion.  
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART 
First approaches for optimization were already developed 
in 1999. Mike Richards, Richard Clegg, and Sarah Howlett 
investigated the behavior of glass laminates in various 
configurations at a constant total thickness [10]. Resulting 
from the experimental studies, numerical simulations were 
created and adjusted to the experimental results using 2D-
Lagrange elements only.  
Pyttel, Liebertz, and Cai explored the behavior of glass 
upon impact with three-dimensional Lagrange elements [11]. 
A failure criterion was presented and implemented in an 
explicit finite element solver. The main idea of this criterion 
is that a critical energy threshold must be reached over a 
finite region before failure can occur. Afterwards, crack 
initiation and growth is based on a local Rankine (maximum 
stress) criterion. Different strategies for modeling laminated 
glass were also discussed. To calibrate the criterion and 
evaluate its accuracy, a wide range of experiments with plane 
and curved specimens of laminated glass were done. For all 
experiments finite element simulations were performed. In 
2011, these studies were used to analyze crash behavior. 
In the same year, Zang and Wang dealt with the impact 
behavior on glass panels in the automotive sector [12]. In 
doing so, self-developed methods of numerical simulation 
were supposed to be compared with commercial codes. The 
impact process of a single glass plane and a laminated glass 
plane were calculated in the elastic range by the code. 
Furthermore, the impact fracture process of a single glass 
plane and a laminated glass plane were simulated 
respectively. The entire failure processes in detail were 
presented. For the first time, mesh-free methods were 
applied, although these were not coupled with other solver 
technologies. 
In this study, different methods for the simulation of 
safety glass will be introduced. In so doing, the possibility of 
coupling various solver technologies will be discussed and 
illustrated by means of an example. For the first time, glass 
laminates will be modeled using coupled methods. 
Techniques 
previously 
applied, 
show 
considerable 
shortcomings in portraying the crack and error propagation 
in the glass. Mesh-free approaches, in turn, do not correctly 
present the behavior of synthetic materials. To overcome the 
shortcomings of these single-method approaches, this paper 
will present an optimal solution to the problem by combining 
two methods.  
60
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III. 
METHODS OF SPACE DISCRETIZATION 
The spatial discretization is performed by representing 
the fields and structures of the problem using computational 
points in space, usually connected with each other through 
computational grids. Generally, the following applies: the 
finer the grid, the more accurate the solution. For problems 
of dynamic fluid-structure interaction and impact, there 
typically is no single best numerical method which is 
applicable to all parts of a problem. Techniques to couple 
types of numerical solvers in a single simulation can allow 
the use of the most appropriate solver for each domain of the 
problem [13].  
The most commonly used spatial discretization methods 
are Lagrange, Euler, ALE (a mixture of Lagrange and Euler), 
and mesh-free methods, such as Smooth Particles 
Hydrodynamics (SPH) [14].  
A. Lagrange 
The Lagrange method of space discretization uses a mesh 
that moves and distorts with the material it models as a result 
of forces from neighboring elements (meshes are imbedded 
in material). There is no grid required for the external space, 
as the conservation of mass is automatically satisfied and 
material boundaries are clearly defined. This is the most 
efficient solution methodology with an accurate pressure 
history definition.  
The 
Lagrange 
method 
is 
most 
appropriate 
for 
representing solids, such as structures and projectiles. If 
however, there is too much deformation of any element, it 
results in a very slowly advancing solution and is usually 
terminated because the smallest dimension of an element 
results in a time step that is below the threshold level.  
B. Euler 
The Euler (multi-material) solver utilizes a fixed mesh, 
allowing materials to flow (advect) from one element to the 
next (meshes are fixed in space). Therefore, an external 
space needs to be modeled. Due to the fixed grid, the Euler 
method avoids problems of mesh distortion and tangling that 
are prevalent in Lagrange simulations with large flows. The 
Euler solver is very well-suited for problems involving 
extreme material movement, such as fluids and gases. To 
describe solid behavior, additional calculations are required 
to transport the solid stress tensor and the history of the 
material through the grid. Euler is generally more 
computationally intensive than Lagrange and requires a 
higher resolution (smaller elements) to accurately capture 
sharp pressure peaks that often occur with shock waves.  
C. ALE  
The ALE method of space discretization is a hybrid of 
the Lagrange and Euler methods. It allows redefining the 
grid continuously in arbitrary and predefined ways as the 
calculation 
proceeds, 
which 
effectively 
provides 
a 
continuous rezoning facility. Various predefined grid 
motions can be specified, such as free (Lagrange), fixed 
(Euler), equipotential, equal spacing, and others. The ALE 
method can model solids as well as liquids. The advantage of 
ALE is the ability to reduce and sometimes eliminate 
difficulties caused by severe mesh distortions encountered by 
the Lagrange method, thus allowing a calculation to continue 
efficiently. However, compared to Lagrange, an additional 
computational step of rezoning is employed to move the grid 
and remap the solution onto a new grid [7].  
D. SPH 
The mesh-free Lagrangian method of space discretization 
(or SPH method) is a particle-based solver and was initially 
used in astrophysics. The particles are imbedded in material 
and they are not only interacting mass points but also 
interpolation points used to calculate the value of physical 
variables based on the data from neighboring SPH particles, 
scaled by a weighting function. Because there is no grid 
defined, distortion and tangling problems are avoided as 
well. Compared to the Euler method, material boundaries 
and interfaces in the SPH are rather well defined and 
material separation is naturally handled. Therefore, the SPH 
solver is ideally suited for certain types of problems with 
extensive material damage and separation, such as cracking. 
This type of response often occurs with brittle materials and 
hypervelocity impacts. However, mesh-free methods, such as 
Smooth Particles Hydrodynamics, can be less efficient than 
mesh-based 
Lagrangian 
methods 
with 
comparable 
resolution. 
Fig. 3 gives a short overview of the solver technologies 
mentioned above. The crucial factor is the grid that causes 
different outcomes.  
The behavior (deflection) of the simple elements is well-
known and may be calculated and analyzed using simple 
equations called shape functions. By applying coupling 
conditions between the elements at their nodes, the overall 
stiffness of the structure may be built up and the 
deflection/distortion of any node – and subsequently of the 
whole structure – can be calculated approximately [16].  
Due to the fact that all engineering simulations are based 
on geometry to represent the design, the target and all its 
components are simulated as CAD models [17]. Therefore, 
several runs are necessary: from modeling to calculation to 
the evaluation and subsequent improvement of the model 
(see Fig. 4).  
 
Figure 3.  Examples of Lagrange, Euler, ALE, and SPH simulations on an 
impact problem [15]. 
61
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 4.  Iterative procedure of a typical FE analysis [16]. 
The most important steps during an FE analysis are the 
evaluation and interpretation of the outcomes followed by 
suitable modifications of the model. For that reason, ballistic 
trials are necessary to validate the simulation results. They 
can be used as the basis of an iterative optimization process.  
IV. 
BALLISTIC TRIALS 
Ballistics is an essential component for the evaluation of 
our results. Here, terminal ballistics is the most important 
sub-field. It describes the interaction of a projectile with its 
target. Terminal ballistics is relevant for both small and large 
caliber projectiles. The task is to analyze and evaluate the 
impact and its various modes of action. This will provide 
information on the effect of the projectile and the extinction 
risk.  
Given that a projectile strikes a target, compressive 
waves propagate into both the projectile and the target. 
Relief waves propagate inward from the lateral free surfaces 
of the penetrator, cross at the centerline, and generate a high 
tensile stress. If the impact were normal, we would have a 
two-dimensional stress state. If the impact were oblique, 
bending stresses will be generated in the penetrator. When 
the compressive wave reached the free surface of the target, 
it would rebound as a tensile wave. The target may fracture 
at this point. The projectile may change direction if it 
perforates (usually towards the normal of the target surface). 
A typical impact response is illustrated in Fig. 5.  
 
Figure 5.  Wave propagation after impact. 
 
Figure 6.  Ballistic tests and the analysis of fragments. 
Because of the differences in target behavior based on the 
proximity of the distal surface, we must categorize targets 
into four broad groups. A semi-infinite target is one where 
there is no influence of distal boundary on penetration. A 
thick target is one in which the boundary influences 
penetration after the projectile is some distance into the 
target. An intermediate thickness target is a target where the 
boundaries exert influence throughout the impact. Finally, a 
thin target is one in which stress or deformation gradients are 
negligible throughout the thickness. 
There are several methods by which a target will fail 
when subjected to an impact. The major variables are the 
target and penetrator material properties, the impact velocity, 
the projectile shape (especially the ogive), the geometry of 
the target supporting structure, and the dimensions of the 
projectile and target. 
In order to develop a numerical model, a ballistic test 
program is necessary. The ballistic trials are thoroughly 
documented and analyzed – even fragments must be 
collected. They provide information about the used armor 
and the projectile behavior after fire, which must be 
consistent with the simulation results (see Fig. 6). 
In order to create a data set for the numerical simulations, 
several experiments have to be performed. Ballistic tests are 
recorded with high-speed videos and analyzed afterwards. 
The experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 7. Testing was 
undertaken at an indoor ballistic testing facility (see Fig. 8). 
The target stand provides support behind the target on all 
four sides. Every ballistic test program includes several trials 
with different glass laminates. The set-up has to remain 
unchanged.  
62
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 7.  Experimental set-up. 
The camera system is a pco.dimax that enables fast image 
rates of 1279 frames per second (fps) at full resolution of 
2016 x 2016 pixels. The use of a polarizer and a neutral 
density filter is advisable, so that waves of some 
polarizations can be blocked while the light of a specific 
polarization can be passed. 
Several targets of different laminate configurations were 
tested to assess the ballistic limit and the crack propagation 
for each design. The ballistic limit is considered the velocity 
required for a particular projectile to reliably (at least 50% of 
the time) penetrate a particular piece of material [18]. After 
the impact, the projectile is examined regarding any kind of 
change it might have undergone. 
Fig. 9 shows a 23 mm soda lime glass target after testing. 
The penetrator used in this test was a .44 Remington 
Magnum, a large-bore cartridge with a lead base and copper 
jacket. The glass layers showed heavy cracking as a result of 
the impact. 
Close to the impact point is the region of comminution. 
The comminuted glass is even ejected during the impact. 
Radial cracks have propagated away from the impact point. 
The polycarbonate backing layer is deformed up to the 
maximum bulge height when the velocity of the projectile is 
close to the ballistic limit. A large amount of the 
comminuted glass is ejected during the impact. Several 
targets of different laminate configurations were tested to 
assess the ballistic limit and the crack propagation for each 
design.  
 
Figure 8.  Indoor ballistic testing facility. 
 
Figure 9.  Trial observation with a 23mm glass laminate. 
The crack propagation is analyzed using the software 
called COMEF [19], image processing software for highly 
accurate measuring functions. The measurement takes place 
via setting measuring points manually on the monitor. Area 
measurement is made by the free choice of grey tones 
(0…255). Optionally the object with the largest surface area 
can be recognized automatically as object.  Smaller particles 
within the same grey tone range as the sample under test are 
automatically ignored by this filter.   
Fig. 10 shows an example of measuring and analyzing 
cracks and Fig. 11 illustrates the propagation process in a 
path-time-diagram. However, caution must be taken when 
interpreting measurements of wave velocity from such 
sequences. Here, a distinction should be made between radial 
(red) and circular (yellow) propagation. 
 
Figure 10.  Analyzing crack propagation using COMEF. 
63
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 11.  Analyzing the crack propagation over time. 
Cracks propagate with a velocity up to 2500 m/s, which 
is similar to the values in the literature. The damage of a 
single glass layer starts with the impact of the projectile 
corresponding to the depth of the penetration. The 
polycarbonate layers interrupt the crack propagation and 
avoid piercing and spalling. The different types of impact are 
summarized in Fig. 12. 
Spalling is very common and is the result of wave 
reflection from the rear face of the plate. It is common for 
materials that are stronger in compression than in tension. 
Scabbing 
is 
similar 
to 
spalling, 
but 
the 
fracture 
predominantly results from large plate deformation, which 
begins with a crack at a local inhomogeneity. Brittle fracture 
usually occurs in weak and lower density targets. Radial 
cracking is common in ceramic types of materials where the 
tensile strength is lower than the compressive strength, but it 
does occur in some steel armor. Plugging occurs in materials 
that are fairly ductile, usually when the projectile’s impact 
velocity is very close to the ballistic limit. Petaling occurs 
when the radial and circumferential stresses are high and the 
projectile impact velocity is close to the ballistic limit [18]. 
The task is to analyze and evaluate the impact and its various 
modes of action. This will provide information on the effect 
of the projectile and the extinction risk. 
 
Figure 12.  Target failure modes [18]. 
The first impact of a .44 Remington Magnum cartridge 
does not cause a total failure of our 23 mm soda lime glass 
target. Fragments of the projectile can be found in the impact 
hole. The last polycarbonate layer remains significantly 
deformed. 
The results of the ballistic tests were provided prior to the 
simulation work to aid calibration. In this paper, a single trial 
will illustrate the general approach of the numerical 
simulations.  
V. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
The ballistic tests are followed by computational 
modeling of the experimental set-up. Then, the experiment is 
reproduced using numerical simulations. Fig. 13 shows a 
cross-section of the ballistic glass and the projectile in a 
CAD model. The geometry and observed response of the 
laminate to ballistic impact is approximately symmetric to 
the axis through the bullet impact point. Therefore, a 2D 
axisymmetric approach was chosen. 
Numerical simulation of transparent armor requires the 
selection of appropriate material models for the constituent 
materials and the derivation of suitable material model input  
data. The laminate systems studied here consist of soda lime 
float glass, polyurethane interlayer, polyvinyl butyral, and 
polycarbonate. Lead and copper models are also required for 
the .44 Remington Magnum cartridge.  
The projectile was divided into two parts - the jacket and 
the base - which have different properties and even different 
meshes. These elements have quadratic shape functions and 
nodes between the element edges. In this way, the 
computational accuracy as well as the quality of curved 
model shapes increases. Using the same mesh density, the 
application of parabolic elements leads to a higher accuracy 
compared to linear elements (1st order elements). 
Different solver technologies have been applied to the 
soda lime glass laminate. The comparison is presented in the 
following section.   
 
Figure 13.  CAD model. 
64
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 14.  Lagrange method. 
A. Solver Evaluation 
Before the evaluation starts, it has to be noticed that the 
Euler method is not suitable for numerical simulations 
dealing with brittle materials. A major problem of Euler 
codes is determining the material transport. Since material 
flows through a fixed grid, some procedure must be 
incorporated in the code to move material to neighboring 
cells in all the coordinate dimensions. It is also necessary to 
identify the materials so that pressures can be calculated in 
cells carrying more than a single material. 
Because the initial codes were designed to solve 
problems involving hypervelocity impact, where pressures 
generated on impact were orders of magnitude larger than 
material strength, the material was thought of as a fluid. 
Hence Euler codes are ideal for large deformation problems 
but contact is very difficult to determine without adding 
Lagrangian features.  
Nowadays, it is generally used for representing fluids and 
gases, for example, the gas product of high explosives after 
detonation. 
To 
describe 
solid 
behavior, 
additional 
calculations are required. Cracking cannot be simulated 
adequately and the computation time is relatively high. For 
this reason, the Euler (and as a result the ALE) method will 
not be taken into consideration. 
1) Lagrange method: Fig. 14 shows the simulation with 
a single Lagrange solver in the first iteration procedure. This 
method, as mentioned before, is well-suited for representing 
solids like structures and projectiles. The advantages are 
computational efficiency and ease of incorporating complex 
material models. The polyurethane interlayer, polyvinyl 
butyral and polycarbonate are simulated adequatly. While 
the soda lime glass also deforms well, the crack propagation 
cannot be displayed suitably with this solver.  
2) Mesh free Lagrangian method (SPH): The mesh free 
Lagrangian method is not appropiate for simulating bullet-
proof glass. The crack propagation and failure mode of the 
soda lime glass are very precise. The problem here however 
is the simulation of the layers. The particles do not provide 
the necessary cohesion (see Fig. 15). They break easily and 
then lose their function.  
 
Figure 15.  Mesh free Lagrangian method (SPH). 
However, the SPH method requires some of the particles 
to locate current neighboring particles, which makes the 
computational time per cycle more expensive than mesh 
based Lagrangian techniques. For every increment in time, 
each particle must compare its position to all other particles 
in the computation and must build a neighbor list before the 
state variables can be updated. This can be a time-consuming 
process. Furthermore, the mesh free method is less efficient 
than mesh based Lagrangian methods with comparable 
resolution. 
3) Coupled multi-solver approach (Lagrange and SPH): 
The coupled multi-solver approach uses SPH for the soda 
lime glass and Langrange for the polyurethane interlayer, 
polyvinyl butyral and polycarbonate. The grid consists of 
both SPH and Lagrange regions and transfers information 
from one to the other via boundary conditions. The crack 
propagation can be simulated precisely. The deformation of 
the last layer is accurately displayed and the failure mode 
matches the ballistic trial. Fig. 16 illustrates the simulation 
result for this case. This type of approach, where one body 
is much stiffer than the other requires a more elaborate time-
step control than has a simple explicit scheme.  
 
Figure 16.  Coupled multi-solver approach (Lagrange and SPH). 
65
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 17.  Crack propagation in a coupled multi-solver simulation model. 
B. Simulation Results 
With the coupled multi-solver and optimized material 
parameters, the simulation results adequately mirror the 
observations 
made 
in 
the 
ballistic 
experiments. 
Fragmentation and crack propagation are almost equal to the 
ballistic test shown in Fig. 9.  
Fig. 17 illustrates the development of fracture after 10, 
20, 50, and 70 μs due to shear induced micro-cracking 
(damage) in the glass during the penetration process. Note 
that the failure of the glass in the second and third layers 
spreads from the glass / polyurethane interlayers back 
towards the oncoming projectile. This rapid material failure 
is owed to a reduction in material strength as rarefaction 
waves from the interface reduce the confining pressure [18].  
Small fragments are automatically deleted from the 
program to reduce computing time. Regarding the protection 
level of our structures, these fragments are hardly important. 
The projectile is subject to a significant deformation. It 
gets stuck in the target and loses kinetic energy. Fig. 18 
compares the numerical simulation of a .44 Remington 
impact with the experimental result. 
A clear hole, 45-50 mm in diameter, is generated in the 
glass / polyurethane layers of the laminate. A comminuted 
region of glass, shows highly cracked and completely 
crushed material, of around 20 mm in diameter in the first 
layer which extends to around 120 mm in diameter in the last 
layer. Hence, the simulated diameter of comminution is 
almost identical to that observed experimentally.  
Even the delamination of the layers can be reproduced in 
the simulation. The predicted height of the bulge from the 
flat region of the polycarbonate is 28 mm compared to 
approximately 8 mm observed in the ballistic trials. In the 
simulation, comminuted glass is caught between the bullet 
and the polycarbonate layer. This leads to a larger 
deformation. In reality, comminuted glass is ejected during 
the impact. The polycarbonate dishes from the edge of the 
support clamp to form a prominent bulge in the central 
region. Therefore, reducing the instantaneous geometric 
erosion strain of the soda lime glass will significantly 
improve results. Owed to the adopted calibration process, 
these simulation results correlate well with the experimental 
observations. 
VI. 
HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTING 
The objective is to develop and improve the modern 
armor used in the security sector. To develop better, smarter 
constructions requires analyzing a wider range of parameters. 
However, there is a simple rule of thumb: the more design 
iterations that can be simulated, the more optimized is the 
final product. As a result, a high-performance computing 
(HPC) solution has to dramatically reduce overall 
engineering simulation time. HPC adds tremendous value to 
engineering simulation by enabling the creation of large, 
high-fidelity models that yield accurate and detailed insight 
into the performance of a proposed design. HPC also adds 
value by enabling greater simulation throughput. Using HPC 
resources, many design variations can be analyzed. 
Beyond the use of HPC, the software is a key strategic 
enabler of large-scale simulations. The workload for the 
above mentioned simulations is specified in Fig. 19. The 
equation solver dominates the CPU time and consumes the 
most system resources (memory and I/O).  
 
 
Figure 18.  Comparison between simulation results and ballistic trial. 
 
66
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 19.  Comparison between simulation results and ballistic trial. 
This research will evaluate the performance of the 
following server generations: HP ProLiant SL390s G7, HP 
ProLiant DL580 G7 and HP ProLiant DL380p G8. 
To take into account the influence of the software, 
different versions of ANSYS will be applied here. Regarding 
the Lagrange solver and optimized material parameters in a 
simplified 2D simulation model (for the purpose of 
comparison), the following benchmark is obtained for the 
different simulations (see Table I).  
The results indicate the importance of high-performance 
computing in combination with competitive simulation 
software to solve current problems of the computer-aided 
engineering sector.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
This work demonstrated how a small number of well-
defined experiments can be used to develop, calibrate, and 
validate solver technologies used for simulating the impact 
of projectiles on complex armor systems and brittle 
materials.  
Existing material models were optimized to reproduce 
ballistic tests. High-speed videos were used to analyze the 
characteristics of the projectile – before and after the impact. 
The simulation results demonstrate the successful use of the 
coupled multi-solver approach. The high level of correlation 
between the numerical results and the available experimental 
or observed data demonstrates that the coupled multi-solver 
approach is an accurate and effective analysis technique.  
New concepts and models can be developed and easily 
tested with the help of modern hydrocodes. The initial design 
approach of the units and systems has to be as safe and 
optimal as possible. Therefore, most design concepts are 
analyzed on the computer. 
TABLE I.  
BENCHMARK TO ILLUSTRATE THE INFLUENCE OF 
DIFFERENT SERVER AND SOFTWARE GENERATIONS 
  
ANSYS 14.5 ANSYS 15.0 
SL390s G7 
35m02s 
18m59s 
DL580 G7 
27m08s 
16m19s 
DL380p G8 
21m47s 
12m55s 
 
FEM-based simulations are well-suited for this purpose. 
Here, a numerical model has been developed, which is 
capable of predicting the ballistic performance of soda lime 
glass / polycarbonate transparent armor systems. Thus, 
estimates based on experience are being more and more 
replaced by software.  
The gained experience is of prime importance for the 
development of modern armor. By applying the numerical 
model a large number of potential armor schemes can be 
evaluated and the understanding of the interaction between 
laminate components under ballistic impact can be 
improved. 
The most important steps during an FE analysis are the 
evaluation and interpretation of the outcomes followed by 
suitable modifications of the model. For that reason, ballistic 
trials are necessary to validate the simulation results. They 
are designed to obtain information about 
 
the velocity and trajectory of the projectile prior 
to impact, 
 
changes in configuration of projectile and target 
due to impact, 
 
masses, velocities, and trajectories of fragments 
generated by the impact process. 
Ballistic trials can be used as the basis of an iterative 
optimization process. Numerical simulations are a valuable 
adjunct to the study of the behavior of metals subjected to 
high-velocity impact or intense impulsive loading. The 
combined use of computations, experiments and high-strain-
rate 
material 
characterization 
has, 
in 
many 
cases, 
supplemented the data achievable by experiments alone at 
considerable savings in both cost and engineering man-
hours.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “Investigation of Solver 
Technologies for the Simulation of Brittle Materials,” The 
Sixth International Conference on Advances in System 
Simulation (SIMUL 2014) IARIA, Oct. 2014, pp. 236-242, 
ISBN 978-61208-371-1 
[2] J. Zukas, “Introduction to Hydrocodes,” Elsevier Science, 
February 2004. 
[3] A. M. S. Hamouda and M. S. J. Hashmi, “Modelling the 
impact and penetration events of modern engineering 
materials: Characteristics of computer codes and material 
models,” Journal of Materials Processing Technology, vol. 
56, pp. 847–862, Jan. 1996. 
[4] D. J. Benson, “Computational methods in Lagrangian and 
Eulerian hydrocodes,” Computer Methods in Applied 
Mechanics and Engineering, vol. 99, pp. 235–394, Sep. 1992, 
doi:  10.1016/0045-7825(92)90042-I. 
[5] M. Oevermann, S. Gerber, and F. Behrendt, “Euler-
Lagrange/DEM simulation of wood gasification in a bubbling 
fluidized bed reactor,” Particuology, vol. 7, pp. 307-316, Aug. 
2009, doi:  
10.1016/j.partic.2009.04.004. 
[6] D. L. Hicks and L. M. Liebrock, “SPH hydrocodes can be 
stabilized with shape-shifting,” Computers & Mathematics 
with Applications, vol. 38, pp. 1-16, Sep. 1999, doi: 
10.1016/S0898-1221(99)00210-2. 
[7] X. Quan, N. K. Birnbaum, M. S. Cowler, and B. I. Gerber, 
“Numerical Simulations of Structural Deformation under 
67
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Shock and Impact Loads using a Coupled Multi-Solver 
Approach,” 5th Asia-Pacific Conference on Shock and Impact 
Loads on Structures, Hunan, China, Nov. 2003, pp. 152-161. 
[8] N. V. Bermeo, M. G. Mendoza, and A. G. Castro, “Semantic 
Representation of CAD Models Based on the IGES 
Standard,” Computer Science, vol. 8265, pp. 157-168, Dec. 
2001, doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-642-45114-0_13. 
[9] S. M. Wiederhorn, “Influence of Water Vapor on Crack 
Propagation in Soda-Lime Glass,” Journal of the American 
Ceramic Society, vol. 50, pp. 407-414, Aug. 1967, doi: 
10.1111/j.1151-2916.1967.tb15145.x. 
[10] M. Richards, R. Clegg, and S. Howlett, “Ballistic 
Performance Assessment of Glass Laminates Through 
Experimental 
and 
Numerical 
Investigation,” 
18th 
International Symposium and Exhibition on Ballistics, San 
Antonio, Texas, Nov. 1999, pp. 1123-1131. 
[11] T. Pyttel, H. Liebertz, and J. Cai, “Failure criterion for 
laminated glass under impact loading and its application in 
finite element simulation,” International Journal of Impact 
Engineering, vol. 38, pp. 252-263, April 2011, doi: 
10.1007/s00466-007-0170-1. 
[12] M. Y. Zang, Z. Lei, and S. F. Wang, “Investigation of impact 
fracture behavior of automobile laminated glass by 3D 
discrete element method,” Computational Mechanics, vol. 41, 
pp. 78-83, Dec. 2007, doi: 10.1007/s00466-007-0170-1. 
[13] G. S. Collins, “An Introduction to Hydrocode Modeling,” 
Applied Modelling and Computation Group, Imperial College 
London, August 2002, unpublished. 
[14] R. F. Stellingwerf and C. A. Wingate, “Impact Modeling with 
Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics,” International Journal of 
Impact Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 707–718, Sep. 1993. 
[15] ANSYS Inc. Available Solution Methods. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.ansys.com/Products/Simulation+Technology/Stru
ctural+Analysis/Explicit+Dynamics/Features/Available+Solut
ion+Methods [retrieved: April, 2014] 
[16] P. Fröhlich, “FEM Application Basics,” Vieweg Verlag, 
September 2005. 
[17] H. B. Woyand, “FEM with CATIA V5,” J. Schlembach 
Fachverlag,  April 2007. 
[18] D. E. Carlucci and S. S. Jacobson, “Ballistics: Theory and 
Design of guns and ammunition,” CRC Press, Dec. 2008.  
[19] OEG Gesellschaft für Optik, Elektronik & Gerätetechnik 
mbH. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.oeg-
messtechnik.de/?p=5&l=1 [retrieved: March, 2015] 
68
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

