185
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Energy Capture Methods by Piezoelectric Sensors and Applications
Irinela Chilibon
National Institute of Optoelectronics, INOE 2000
Bucharest-Magurele, Romania
e-mail: qilib@yahoo.com
Abstract—This
paper
presents
different
energy
capture
methods with application to the piezoelectric sensors, such as
in small power electrical sources in applications. Piezoelectric
material elements of sensors convert mechanical energy into
electrical charges, due to the direct piezoelectric effect.
Collecting energy from the environment is a major area of
interest to the development of unconventional renewable
energy sources and creates electrical energy, comparatively
with the classic one. Potential energies sources from the
environment could be successfully used. The photostrictive
devices incorporate intelligent materials, illumination sensing
and self-production of drive or control voltage.
Keywords-piezoelectric sensor; supercapacitors; renewable
energy; low-power, Perovskite Lead Lanthanum Zirconate
Titanate, (PLZT).
I.
INTRODUCTION
Capturing energy from the environment has shown
considerable
interest
in
recent
research
[1][2][3][4].
Piezoelectric
material
elements
are
able
to
convert
mechanical energy into electrical charges, due to the direct
piezoelectric effect. These electric charges could be used in
low-power electronic circuitry that use electrically charged
high-capacity capacitors. The mechanical sources could be
vibrations, pulses and shocks. Piezoelectric sensors are
suitable to convert the lower mechanical deformations
directly into electricity, which can be used in small power
electrical sources in applications as: supercapacitors, battery
packs, interferometric lasers, etc.
Collecting energy from the environment is a major area
of interest with extensive applications in the development of
unconventional renewable energy sources. This study may
clarify mechanisms for converting mechanical energy into
electricity with a high efficiency of conversion. The
mechanical energy could come from environmental sources
such as: wind, vibrations, shocks, rotary movements, wheel
rotations, car engines, human breathing, blood flow, body
movements, free or lost mechanical energy or acoustic and
ultrasonic vibrations.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
the piezoelectric materials and structures used. Section III
discusses an overview of Energy Capture Methods in low-
power electronics. Section IV presents a summary of low-
power electronics.
The conclusions, future work and acknowledgement
close the article.
II.
PIEZOELECTRIC MATERIALS AND STRUCTURES
Piezoelectric materials, usually crystals or ceramics,
have the capability to generate a small amount of current,
when they are subjected to mechanical pressure, such as
pushing, bending, twisting, and turning. Multiple such
materials, placed near each other could increase the
electrical energy.
The process of energy conversion in a piezoelectric
material is based on the principle of the piezoelectric effect.
The piezoelectric element stores the energy in two forms, as
an
electric
field
(electrical
energy)
and
as
a
strain
(mechanical energy). The piezoelectric effect exists in two
domains, the first is the direct piezoelectric effect that
describes the material’s ability to transform mechanical
strain into electrical charge, the second form is the converse
effect, which is the ability to convert an applied electrical
potential into mechanical strain energy, as shown in Figure
1. When a piezoelectric element is mechanically stressed, it
generates a charge.
Figure 1. Electromechanical conversion via piezoelectricity
phenomenon
The most common type of piezoelectric used in power
harvesting
applications
is
lead
zirconate
titanate,
a
piezoelectric ceramic, or piezoceramic, known as PZT.
Although PZT is widely used as a power harvesting
material, the piezoceramic’s extremely brittle nature causes
limitations in the strain that it can safely absorb without
being damaged. Lee et al. [1] note that piezoceramics are
susceptible to fatigue crack growth when subjected to high
frequency
cyclic
loading.
In
order
to
eliminate
the
disadvantages of piezoceramic materials and improve upon
their efficiency, researchers have developed and tested
other, more flexible, piezoelectric materials that can be used
in energy harvesting applications.

186
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Another
common
piezoelectric
material
is
poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF). PVDF is a piezoelectric
polymer
that
exhibits
considerable
flexibility
when
compared to PZT.
Mohammadi
et
al.
[2]
developed
a
fiber-based
piezoelectric (piezofiber) material consisting of PZT fibers
of various diameters (15, 45, 120, and 250 μm) that were
aligned, laminated, and molded in an epoxy [3]. Piezofiber
power harvesting materials have also been investigated by
Churchill et al. [4], who tested a composite consisting of
unidirectionally aligned PZT fibers of 250 μm diameter
embedded in a resin matrix. It was found that when a 0.38
mm thick sample of 130 mm length and 13 mm width was
subjected to a 180 Hz vibration that caused a strain of 300
με in the sample, the composite was able to harvest about
7.5 mW of power.
The last years have seen the birth of many new types of
piezoelectric materials or transducers (PZT- lead zirconate
titanate, PT-lead titanate, PVDF- polyvinylidene fluoride-
trifluoroethylene, piezoceramic/polymer composites, Macro
Fiber Composite - MFC, etc.). The schematic of the cross
section of an Active Fiber Composite (AFC) actuator [5] is
presented in Figure 2. If optimized geometrically, a
piezoelectric
generator
associated
with
a
well
suited
electronic is likely able to produce the 3 Watts standard
required for the lighting system, with all the benefits that it
provides.
Figure 2. Schematic of the cross section of an Active Fiber Composite
(AFC) actuator [5].
Piezoelectric materials exhibit the property that if they
are mechanically strained, they generate an electric field
proportional to the strain [6]. Conversely, when an electric
field is applied, the material undergoes strain. These
anisotropic relationships are described by the piezoelectric
strain constant, d, which gives the relationship between
applied stresses while the electro-mechanical coupling
coefficient, k, describes the efficiency with which energy is
converted between mechanical and electrical forms. This
latter coefficient is important in determining the efficiency
of a resonant generator since the overall efficiency of a
piezo element clamped to
a substrate and cyclically
compressed at its resonant frequency is (1):





2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
k
k
Q
k
k



 


where Q is the quality factor of the resonator. As Q
becomes larger, the efficiency tends towards unity but, for
typically achievable Q factors, the efficiency increases
significantly for higher values of k.
Lee et al. [1][7] developed a PVDF film that was coated
with
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene)/poly(4-
styrenesulfonate) [PEDOT/PSS] electrodes. They compared
the PEDOT/PSS coated films to films coated with the
inorganic electrode materials, indium tin oxide (ITO) and
platinum (Pt). When subjected to vibrations of the same
magnitude over varying frequencies, it was found that the
films with Pt electrodes began to show fatigue crack damage
of the electrode surface at a frequency of 33 kHz. The ITO
electrodes became damaged when operating at a frequency
of 213 Hz. The PEDOT/PSS film, however, ran for 10 h at 1
MHz without electrode damage. One can conclude that, by
utilizing a more durable electrode layer, a piezoelectric
device can operate under more strenuous conditions. This
may give the device the ability to harvest more power
throughout its lifespan; however, the exact effect of a
stronger electrode layer may vary depending on the specific
application.
III.
OVERVIEW OF ENERGY CAPTURE METHODS IN LOW-
POWER ELECTRONICS
Piezoelectric generators are appropriate to convert the
smallest mechanical deformations directly into electrical
energy. This solid-state effect is free of degradation in a
wide operation range. Therefore, a very high lifetime and
availability can be guaranteed.
Piezoelectric materials and transducers are available
commercially. Thus, the new piezoelectric generators could
be produced cost-efficiently in large quantities and easy
exploitation.
Nowadays,
it
is
possible
of
generating
renewable electricity using piezoelectric materials and
transducers
placed
in
special
structures
that
allow
amplification
of
the
direct
piezoelectric
effect.
The
generation of electric charges is produced by mechanical
motion action.
Several techniques have been proposed and developed to
extract energy from the environment. The most common
available sources of energy are: wind, solar, temperature
and stress (pressure). In general, vibration energy could be
converted
into
electrical
energy
using
one
of
three
techniques:
electrostatic
charge,
magnetic
fields,
and
piezoelectric materials.
A number of sources of harvestable ambient energy
exist, including
waste
heat, vibration, electromagnetic
waves, wind, flowing water, and solar energy. While each of
these sources of energy can be effectively used to power
remote sensors, the structural and biological communities

187
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
have placed an emphasis on scavenging vibrational energy
with piezoelectric materials [8]. A piezoelectric material
transforms electrical energy into mechanical strain energy,
and likewise to transform mechanical strain energy into
electrical charge [9].
As piezo energy harvesting has been investigated only
since the late ‘90s, it remains an emerging technology. With
the recent surge of microscale devices, piezoelectric power
generation
can
provide
a
convenient
alternative
to
traditional power sources used to operate certain types of
sensors/actuators, telemetry, and Microelectromechanical
systems MEMS devices. Scavenging energy from ambient
vibrations, wind, heat or light could enable smart sensors to
be functional indefinitely.
It is now necessary to develop the structures of materials
with high piezoelectric coefficients, an optimal architecture
to increase the electrical efficiency of specialized devices
for alternative energy production, and cheap to replace
traditional energy sources part.
Now it is necessary to develop the structures of materials
with high piezoelectric coefficients, an optimal architecture
for increasing the electrical efficiency of specialized devices
for the production of cheap alternative energy to replace the
part of traditional energy sources.
Advances in low-power electronics and in energy
harvesting technologies have enabled the conception of truly
self-powered
devices
[10].
Cantilevered
piezoelectric
energy harvesters have been investigated in the literature of
energy harvesting [6][16].
The concept of "harvesting" is recent and involves
capturing the energy normally lost around a system and
converting it into electricity that can be used to extend the
life of the system or to provide an endless source of energy
to a system [11].
IV.
OVERVIEW OF LOW-POWER ELECTRONICS
The methods of accumulating and storing the energy
generated, until sufficient power has been captured, is the
key
to
develop
completely
self-powered
systems.
Piezoelectric transduction has received great attention for
vibration-to-electric energy conversion over the last five
years [12]. Future applications may include high power
output devices (or arrays of such devices) deployed at
remote locations to serve as reliable power stations for large
systems, wearable electronics.
Among those challenges is the electronic circuitry
needed to capture, accumulate and store energy from energy
harvesting energy sources. The circuitry must then switch
the power from an energy storage device and then supply it
to the application.
In general, electricity can be stored in
various
electronic
components,
such
as:
capacitors,
supercapacitors or batteries. Piezoelectric generators are
appropriate to convert the smallest mechanical deformations
directly into electrical energy. Among alternative energy
sources remember: water energy, solar, wind, heat, etc. It
needs to find other methods and possible ways of using
energy sources such as mechanical energy converted into
electrical energy.
Many
conventional
systems
consist
of
a
single
piezoceramic in bending mode (unimorph) or two bonded
piezoelectric in bending mode (bimorph), but upon the
experimental validating model had 4.61 % maximum error
[9]. Some structures can be tuned to have two natural
frequencies relatively close to each other, resulting in the
possibility of a broader band energy harvesting system [12]
[13]. The energy produced by these materials is in many
cases far too small to directly power an electrical device
[11][14]. Recent studies present the ability to take the
energy generated through the vibration of a piezoelectric
material
was
shown
to
be
capable
of
recharging
a
discharged battery [9].
Bimorph actuators consist of two independent flat
piezoelectric elements, stacked on top of the other. By
driving one element to expand while contracting the other
one, the actuator is forced to bend, creating an out-of plane
motion and vibrations [15]. Cantilevered piezoelectric
energy harvesters have been investigated in the literature for
energy harvesting [12]. A more attractive configuration is to
form the piezoceramic into a cantilever arrangement, as
shown in Figure 3 where layers of piezoceramics are bonded
to a substrate, typically made from a suitable metal. This
structure allows a lower resonant frequency to be achieved
while producing large strains in the piezoceramic. Where
two layers of piezo material are used, the structure is
referred to as a bimorph. In this case, the piezo layers may
either be connected in series or parallel. If only a single
piezo layer is used, the structure is referred to as a unimorph
[6].
A.
Piezoelectric devices
Figure 3. Piezoceramic cantilever resonator [6].
Figure 4 presents a power generator array prototype,
realized by small cantilevers of different lengths, in order to
obtain a larger broadband [16].

188
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. Picture of power generator array prototype [16].
The
main
steps
of
fabrication
process
of
micro
piezoelectric power generator is presented in the Figure 5,
namely: (1) Functional films preparation: SiO2/Ti/Pt/PZT
/Ti/Pt, (2) functional films pattern, (3) silicon slot etching
by RIE, (4) back silicon deep etching by KOH solution, (5)
cantilever release by RIE, and (6) metal mass micro
fabrication and assemblage [17], as shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Fabrication process of micro piezoelectric power generator [17].
Figure 6. Types of PZT energy harvesters in pavement [18].
Studies about the piezoelectric effects for energy
harvesting pavement were made by [18], using different
structures of Piezoelectric Sensors, like: PZT cymbal, PZT
pile, PZT stack and PZT cantilever, as shown in Figure 6.
B. Energy harvesting piezoelectric circuitry
Piezoelectric generators are appropriate to convert the
smallest mechanical deformations directly into electrical
energy. This solid-state effect is free of degradation in a wide
operation range. A vibrating piezoelectric device differs from
a typical electrical power source in that it has capacitive
rather than inductive source impedance, and may be driven
by mechanical vibrations of varying amplitude, as shown in
Figure 7. A PZT disc for example, compressed between two
metal surfaces will never be able to expand in the radial
direction as readily as would a long, thin cylinder, which is
only constrained at its ends and assumes a barrel shape on
radial expansion. So, the way in which the material is
mounted will directly affect the energy conversion per unit
volume. The general rule therefore is to allow the PZT body
some freedom to expand radially since charge generation is
directly coupled to deformation.
Figure 7. PZT element generator with 2 diodes as DC converter and a
parallel capacitor C.
Figure 8. Electronic circuit with PZT disc strained by F force, and one
diode DC converter.
The principle of charge generation by a PZT disc to an
electronic circuit performance are the shape of the PZT
transducer, the manner in which the transducer is mounted
and, of course, the nature of the electrical load, as shown in
Figure 8.
Typical energy harvesting circuitry consists of voltage
rectifier, converter and storage, as shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Typical energy harvesting circuitry
Energy harvesting sources that generate power from
ambient sources present problems in generating a predictable
flow of electricity for the operation of electronic circuits. At
times these sources generate zero power. At other times they
generate trace amounts of power that are unusable. Then
there are times when the power generated is so great that a
charge from an energy harvesting source could burn out the
circuitry. Therefore, it should be used electronics with
energy harvesting intelligent piezoelectric transducer. In
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), one of major hurdles is
the limited battery power that is unable to meet long-term
energy
requirement.
Energy
harvesting,
conversion
of

189
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ambient energy into electrical energy, has emerged as an
effective alternative to powering WSNs [19].
Figure 10. A generic sensor network node with energy harvesting device [6].
The
idea
of
harvesting
ambient
energy
from
the
immediate surroundings of the deployed sensors is to
recharge the batteries and to directly power the sensor nodes.
The power consumed by a network node can be split
between the various functions it has to perform, as shown in
Figure 10.
A low power piezoelectric generator, having a PZT
element was realized in order to supply small electronic
elements, such as optoelectronic small devices, LEDs,
electronic watches, small sensors, interferometry with lasers
or Micro-electro-mechanical System (MEMS) array with
multi-cantilevers [20]. A Set-up for the experimental work
was realized [20], Figure 11.
Figure 11. Set-up for the experimental work [20].
A PZT element hit by mechanical shocks can generate
high voltage electrical sparks that processed by electronic
circuits is stored in special batteries.
Energy harvesting technologies have been explored by
researchers for more than two decades as an alternative to
conventional power sources (e.g. batteries) for small-sized
and low-power electronic devices [21].
The
vibrations
energy
harvesting
principle
using
piezoelectric materials is illustrated in Figure 12. The
conversion chain starts with a mechanical energy source,
like vibrations which are converted into electricity via
piezoelectric element. The electricity produced is thereafter
formatted by a static converter before supplying a storage
system or the load (electrical device).
Figure 12. General diagram of a generator, based vibrations energy
harvesting using piezoelectric material
Advances in low-power electronics and in energy
harvesting technologies have enabled the conception of truly
self-powered devices [10].
Band gap and Young’s modulus of elasticity of one-
dimensional nanostructures for ZnO were studied. Also,
how these properties make it a superior material for
piezoelectric energy harvesting [22].
Also, the principle that this material is superior to other
piezoelectric energy harvesting has been established. Other
materials have been explored as being good for building
such energy harvesters. A single nanowire can function as a
nano-transducer
and
generate
piezoelectricity,
and
integrating multiple of these nanowires into arrays on a
single substrate could improve the output power. The use of
polymers and ceramics has been studied for the same energy
harvester. A nutshell, for piezoelectric energy harvesting
and nanostructures could be manufactured and assembled to
work as a self-powered nano / micro-structured device [23].
Piezoelectric
materials
are
capable
of
converting
irregular and low-frequency mechanical vibration into
electricity and useful for nanogenerators. Energy harvesting
devices can convert energy in other forms into the electricity
but have limited energy storage capabilities.
Polarized Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) films were
successful used in supercapacitors manufacture. A piezo-
supercapacitor was made from a sandwich of a PVDF layer
enclosed between two functionalized carbon cloths (FCC)
electrodes. As result, a voltage potential was generated
across the piezoelectric PVDF under external mechanical
vibration [24].
C. The photostriction phenomenon
In certain ferroelectrics, a constant electromotive force is
generated with exposure to light, and a photostrictive strain
results from the coupling of this bulk photovoltaic effect to
converse piezoelectricity. A photostrictive actuator is a fine
example
of
an
intelligent
material,
incorporating
illumination sensing and self-production of drive/control
voltage together with final actuation [25]. When a violet
light is irradiated to one side of the Perovskite Lead
Lanthanum Zirconate Titanate (PLZT) bimorph, enormous
photovoltage of 1 kV mm−1 is generated, causing a bending
motion. The displacement of the tip of a bimorph device

190
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
having a length of 20 mm, and a thickness of 0.4 mm was
150 μm, within a response time of 1 s.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Collecting energy from the environment is a major area
of interest with extensive applications in the development of
unconventional
renewable
energy
sources.
This
study
clarifies mechanisms for converting mechanical energy into
electricity at high efficiency conversion.
Energy harvesting is an attractive concept because so
many energy sources such as light, heat, and mechanical
vibration that exist in our ambient living could be converted
into usable electricity. The technical progress in the field of
extremely low energy electronics opens up the chance to use
harvested energy from the environment. Most piezoelectric
electricity sources produce power on the order of milliwatts,
too small for system application, but enough for hand-held
devices such as some commercially available self-winding
wristwatches. The methods of accumulating and storing the
energy generated, until sufficient power has been captured,
is the key to develop completely self-powered systems.
WSNs
are
crucial
in
supporting
continuous
environmental monitoring, where sensor nodes are deployed
and must remain operational to collect and transfer data from
the environment to a base-station. Further development of
such energy circuitry and piezoelectric materials with
various structures will facilitate the progression of power
harvesting methods from a research topic to a useable
technology in practical devices.
The
photostriction
phenomenon
appears
in
certain
ferroelectrics,
when
a
constant
electromotive
force
is
generated with exposure to light, and a photostrictive strain
results from the coupling of this bulk photovoltaic effect to
converse piezoelectricity.
The
PVDF
material
has
good
properties
of
piezoelectricity and mechanical flexibility, and demonstrated
as a wearable and flexible energy generator. Polarized PVDF
films were successful used in supercapacitors manufacture.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was financed by the Romanian Ministry of
Research and Innovation (MCI), 2019 Core Program,
Contract nr. PN19-18.01.02/2019, Stage I, Stage II, and the
19 PFE-PDI/2018 Project, Stage II/2019.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. S. Lee, J. Joo, S. Han, J. H. Lee, and S. K. Koh,
“Poly(vinylidenefluoride) transducers with highly conducting
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) electrodes,” Proc. Int. Conf.
on Science and Technology of Synthetic Metals, vol. 152, pp.
49–52, 2005.
[2]
F. Mohammadi, A. Khan, and R. B. Cass, “Power generation
from piezoelectric lead zirconate titanate fiber composites,”
Proc. Materials Research Symp., pp. 736, 2003.
[3]
A. A. Bent, N. W. Hagood and J. P. Rodgers, “Anisotropic
actuation with piezoelectric fiber composites,” J. Intell. Mater.
Syst. Struct., vol. 6, pp. 338–349, 1995.
[4]
D. L. Churchill, M. J. Hamel, C. P. Townsend, and S. W. Arms,
Strain energy harvesting for wireless sensor networks,” Proc.
Smart Struct. and Mater. Conf., Proc. SPIE 5055, pp. 319, 2003.
[5]
W. K. Wilkie et al., “Low-cost piezocomposite actuator for
structural control applications,” Proc.7th Int. Symp., 2000.
[6]
J. M. Gilbert and F. Balouchi, “Comparison of Energy
Harvesting
Systems
for
Wireless
Sensor
Networks,”
International Journal of Automation and Computing, vol. 05(4),
pp. 334-347, Oct. 2008.
[7]
C. S. Lee, J. Joo, S. Han, and S. K. Koh, “Multifunctional
transducer using poly(vinylidene fluoride) active layer and
highly conducting poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) electrode:
actuator and generator,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol 85, pp. 1841–3,
2004.
[8]
S. R. Anton and H. A. Sodano, “A review of power harvesting
using piezoelectric
materials
(2003–2006)”,
Smart Mater.
Struct.,
vol.
16,
pp.
R1–R21,
2007,
doi:10.1088/0964-
1726/16/3/R01.
[9]
H. A. Sodano, D. J. Inman, and G. Park, “A Review of Power
Harvesting from Vibration using Piezoelectric Materials,” The
Shock and Vibration Digest, pp. 197-205, May 2004.
[10] M. Lallart, S. Priya, S. Bressers, and D. J. Inman, “Small-scale
piezoelectric energy harvesting devices using low-energy-
density sources,” Journal of the Korean Physical Society, vol.
57(41), pp. 947-951, Oct 15 2010.
[11] H. Sodano and D. Inman, “Generation and Storage of Electricity
from Power Harvesting Devices,” Journal of Intelligent Material
Systems and Structures, vol. 16(1), pp. 67-75, Jan. 2005, doi:
10.1177/1045389X05047210.
[12] A. Erturk and D. J. Inman, “An experimentally validated
bimorph cantilever model for piezoelectric energy harvesting
from base excitations,” Smart Mater. Struct., vol. 18, pp.
025009 (18pp), 2009, doi:10.1088/0964-1726/18/2/025009.
[13] A.
Erturk
and
D.
J.
Inman,
“A
Distributed
Parameter
Electromechanical Model for Cantilevered Piezoelectric Energy
Harvesters”, J. Vib. Acoust, vol. 130(4), pp. 041002 (15 pages),
June 2008, doi:10.1115/1.2890402.
[14] N. M. White, P. Glynne-Jones, and S. P. Beeby, “A novel thick-
film
piezoelectric
micro-generator,”
Smart
Materials
&
Structures, 10(4), pp. 850-852, 2001.
[15] I. Chilibon, C. Dias, P. Inacio, and J. Marat-Mendes, “PZT and
PVDF bimorph actuators,” Journal of Optoelectronics and
Advanced Materials, vol. 9, Issue 6, pp. 1939-1943, Jun 2007,
ISSN: 1454-4164.
[16] J-Q. Liu et al., “A MEMS-based piezoelectric power generator
array
for
vibration
energy
harvesting,”
Microelectronics
Journal, vol. 39, pp. 802–806, 2008.
[17] H-B Fang et al., “Fabrication and performance of MEMS-based
piezoelectric power generator for vibration energy harvesting,”
Microelectronics Journal, vol. 37, pp. 1280–1284, 2006.
[18] L.
Guo
and
Q.
Lu,
“Potentials
of
piezoelectric
and
thermoelectric
technologies
for
harvesting
energy
from
pavements,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol.
72, pp. 761-773, May 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.01.090.
[19] K. Singh and S. Moh, “Comparative Survey of Energy
Harvesting
Techniques
for
Wireless
Sensor
Networks,”
Advanced Science and Technology Letters, vol.142, pp. 28-33,
GDC 2016, http://dx.doi.org/10.14257/astl.2016.142.05.
[20] I. Chilibon, Piezoelectric devices for generating low power,
Proc. SPIE
10010, Advanced Topics in Optoelectronics,
Microelectronics, and Nanotechnologies VIII, Vol. SPIE 10010,
Article Number: UNSP 100101H, (Dec. 14, 2016), doi:
10.1117/12.2248729
[21] M. Safaei, H. A. Sodano and S. R. Anton, “A review of energy
harvesting
using piezoelectric
materials:
state-of-the-art
a
decade later (2008–2018)”, Smart Materials and Structures,

191
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Smart
Mater.
Struct.,
vol.
28,
113001,
(62
pp),
2019,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-665X/ab36e4
[22] R. Agrawal, B. Peng, E. E. Gdoutos, and H. D. Espinosa
“Elasticity size effects in ZnO nanowires – a combined
experimental-computational approach,” Nano Lett. 8(11): 3668–
3674, 2008.
[23] I. Dakua, and N. Afzulpurkar, “Piezoelectric Energy Generation
and Harvesting at the Nano-Scale: Materials and Devices,
Review Article,” Nanomater. Nanotechnol., vol. 3, Art. 21:20,
August 2013.
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.5772/56941
[24] R. Song, et al., “A Rectification-Free Piezo-Supercapacitor with
a Polyvinylidene Fluoride Separator and Functionalized Carbon
Cloth Electrodes,” J. Mater. Chem. A, July 2015, doi:
10.1039/C5TA03349G
[25] K. Uchino, “Focus Issue Review: Glory of piezoelectric
perovskites,” Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 16 046001 (16 pages) ,
2015, doi:10.1088/1468-6996/16/4/046001

