103
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Towards a Component Reference Implementations Frame for Achieving
Multi-disciplinary Coherent Conceptual and Chorological Contextualisation in
Prehistory and Prehistoric Archaeology
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU), Germany;
Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany;
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents contributions towards a new
component reference implementations frame, which can be
used with conceptual knowledge models. The extended research
allows a general chorological and coherent conceptual knowledge
contextualisation across disciplines. The frame will enable to
coherently address multi-disciplinary knowledge by employing
conceptual knowledge frameworks and component reference
implementations. The presented achievements and scenarios
concentrate on new information science approaches for multi-
disciplinary contexts in prehistory and archaeology, targeting the
use of inherent aspects and creation of new insight, strategies,
and perspectives. The new advanced approach can be applied
to any type of knowledge, e.g., factual, conceptual, procedural,
metacognitive, and structural. The integration of chorological
knowledge
includes
integration
of
spatial
and
geospatial
knowledge and features. Goal of this research is a new component
reference implementations frame for multi-disciplinary coherent
conceptual and chorological contextualisation. For the case
scenarios, we are focussing on coherent knowledge in contexts
with prehistory and archaeology disciplines, natural sciences,
and advanced geoscientiﬁc information systems. The solution
also integrates knowledge from satellite data and soil diversity
and respective properties. The knowledge approach allows a
multi-directional utilisation of coherent conceptual knowledge.
Future research concentrates on further continued development
of components, analysis, and application in multi-disciplinary
scenarios of prehistory and archaeology.
Keywords–Reference
Component
Implementations
Frame;
Prehistory;
Natural
Sciences;
Chorology;
Contextualisation;
Coherent Conceptual Knowledge.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper presents the new component reference imple-
mentations frame, which can be used with conceptual knowl-
edge reference implementations. The extended research allows
a general chorological and coherent conceptual knowledge
contextualisation across disciplines. The frame enables to
coherently address multi-disciplinary knowledge by employing
conceptual knowledge frameworks and component reference
implementations. This paper is an extended and updated
presentation of the research based on the publication and
presentation at the GEOProcessing 2021 conference in Nice,
France [1].
These days, mostly all Geographic Information Systems
and even more advanced and more complex Geoscientiﬁc
Information Systems (GIS) are –by themselves– not yet taking
multi-disciplinary coherent knowledge and contexts into con-
sideration. From scientiﬁc point of view, it is a questionable
approach to think of and practice a distinct discipline while
considering any other required scientiﬁc discipline being aux-
iliary, which, for further simpliﬁcation, may even be reduced
to ‘data delivery’, ‘technical’, and ‘procedural’ contributions.
Many measurements and and contexts in prehistorical ar-
chaeology and natural sciences cannot be ‘sensed’ directly
and require further endeavours. Multi-disciplinary scenarios
often require to consider a wide range of contexts with
disciplines put to their level. It is the coherent knowledge
of contexts, which is most relevant for new insight. There-
fore, contextualisation should not be done without considering
multi-disciplinary coherency and expert views from different
disciplines put on a par with respective further scientiﬁc
collaboration and support.
Goal of this research is a new component reference imple-
mentations frame for multi-disciplinary coherent conceptual
and chorological contextualisation, based For the case scenar-
ios, we are focussing on coherent knowledge in contexts with
prehistory and archaeology disciplines, natural sciences, and
advanced geoscientiﬁc information systems.
The new advanced approach enables a systematical, co-
herent contextualisation and can be applied with knowledge
complements, e.g., factual, conceptual, procedural, metacog-
nitive, and structural. The approach is knowledge-centric, in
a way “knowledge-driven” but explicitly not “development-
procedure-driven” or “software-driven”.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II
presents the method of component integration. Section III
illustrates the implementation and realisation scenario for
prehistory’s and archaeology’s conceptual and chorological
knowledge reference implementation contexts. Section IV dis-
cusses the coherent conceptual knowledge integration scenario
case study. Section V delivers the new component reference
implementation frame with major building blocks. Sections VI
and VII discuss the state of the achieved results and summarise
lessons learned, conclusions, and future work.
II.
COMPONENT INTEGRATION AND METHOD
From knowledge complements’ point of view, chorology
is for place what chronology is for time. The integration of
chorological knowledge includes integration of spatial and
geospatial knowledge and features. Here, we are focussing
on scenarios of coherent multi-disciplinary knowledge in con-
text with prehistory and archaeology, natural sciences, and
advanced geoscientiﬁc information system components. The
solution also integrates knowledge from satellite data and soil
diversity with respective properties.
Contexts in prehistory are peculiar in a way that there
are no direct historical sources and respectively no literary
reference and documentation. Contextualisation is therefore a
main intrinsic task in prehistory and protohistory.

104
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An approach has to conform with information science
fundaments and universal knowledge and has to enable an
integration of the required components from methodologies
to realisations for knowledge representations of realia and
abstract contexts [2] while many facets of knowledge, in-
cluding prehistory, need to be continuously acquired and
reviewed [3]. There is no published approach known, which
can be reasonably compared with the implemented and pre-
sented method. Therefore, there was a strong need for an
advanced methodology to contextualise knowledge, e.g., from
practically available knowledge resources. This paper presents
the methodological fundaments for a chorological and coherent
multi-disciplinary contextualisation. The potential for ﬁnding
and integrating multi-disciplinary inherent aspects and creation
of new insight, strategies, and perspectives by development
of components employing coherent conceptual knowledge has
been a major motivation.
Commonly used tools are not aware of features for con-
textualisation from multi-disciplinary components. Therefore,
advanced individual workﬂows need proper preparation of
components and workﬂow procedures. Preparation requires
methods for deployment of respective knowledge character-
istics and properties. Further, any workﬂow should be created
being aware of the individuality of these characteristics.
Many aspects of knowledge, including meaning, can be
described using knowledge complements supporting a modern
deﬁnition of knowledge and subsequent component instru-
mentation [4] [5], e.g., considering factual, conceptual, pro-
cedural, metacognitive, and structural knowledge. Especially,
conceptual knowledge can relate to any of factual, conceptual,
procedural, and structural knowledge. To a comparable extent,
metacognitive knowledge can relate to any of factual, concep-
tual, procedural, and structural knowledge.
Knowledge complements are a means of understanding and
targeting new insight, e.g., enabling advanced contextualisa-
tion, integration, analysis, synthesis, innovation, prospection,
and documentation. The approach can be summarised based
on the methodological fundaments.
•
Selection
and
development
of
a
coherent,
multi-
disciplinary reference implementation. Knowledge com-
plements are addressing reference implementations.
•
Multi-disciplinary knowledge resources and integrated
components are realised with knowledge-centric focus.
•
Contextualisation employing knowledge complements.
•
Analysis, synthesis, documentation can employ refer-
ence implementations for new insight and development.
An approach to the multi-disciplinary nature of this research
requires signiﬁcant developments of coherently integration-
able, fundamental context components especially
•
multi-disciplinary contexts of prehistory and archaeol-
ogy and respective resources,
•
chorological contexts, e.g.,
•
homogeneously consistent high resolution Digital Eleva-
tion Model (DEM) for land and sea bottom, and
•
natural sciences Knowledge Resources (KR), e.g., soil
classiﬁcation resources, standardised soil reference sys-
tems, and parameters.
A more detailed, comprehensive discussion and examples
regarding the fundaments are available with the research on
methodology, contextualisation, and conceptual knowledge.
Relevant pre-existing and ongoing component developments
addressing knowledge with multi-disciplinary KR have been
summarised [6] and discussed.
Further, major practical groups of component implementa-
tions and developments required and addressed for integration
with this research are:
1)
Conceptual knowledge frameworks.
2)
Conceptual knowledge base.
3)
Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks.
4)
Formalisation.
5)
Methodologies and workﬂows integration.
6)
Prehistory Knowledge Resources.
7)
Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources.
8)
Inherent representation groups.
9)
Scientiﬁc context parametrisation.
10)
Structures and symbolic representation.
The following sections will present the implementation and
realisation and integration scenarios and the new resulting
component reference implementation frame.
The implementation and realisation scenario is based on
the coherent conceptual knowledge reference implementations.
The integration scenario employs these reference implementa-
tions and delivers the realisation of integration and symbolic
representation and facilities for further analysis. General choro-
logical and coherent conceptual aspects are in focus of re-
alisations. The resulting component reference implementation
frame delivers the practical integration frame of components
for implementation and realisation and consistently includes
available coherent conceptual knowledge reference implemen-
tations for this and future multi-disciplinary scenarios.
III.
IMPLEMENTATION AND REALISATION SCENARIO
A means of choice in order to achieve overall efﬁcient
realisations even for complex scenarios, integrating arbitrary
knowledge, is to use the principles of Superordinate Knowl-
edge. The core assembly elements of Superordinate Knowl-
edge are methodology, implementation, and realisation [7].
In the following example solutions, scenario targets are
contexts of prehistoric cemeteries and burials at the North
Sea coast, in North-Rhine Westphalia, Lower Saxony, and
The Netherlands. Integration targets are natural sciences and
speleological contexts, caves and cave systems in North-
Rhine Westphalia, Lower Saxony, and The Netherlands, soil
diversity, and overall integration with chorological, symbolical,
spatial context representations, e.g., place, spatial planning,
auxiliary subdivisions for boundaries and spatial forms and
administrative units.
A. Coherent conceptual knowledge reference implementation
We can select relevant references from the implemented
prehistory-protohistory and archaeology Conceptual Knowl-
edge Reference Implementation (CKRI) [8] (E.0.4.4). The
methodology allows to address any other references on a co-
herent information science knowledge base, e.g., geoscientiﬁc
knowledge from natural sciences KR components. Further, the
reference implementation enables to address chorology on the
coherent knowledge base. Universally consistent conceptual
knowledge is based on UDC references for demonstration,
spanning the main tables [9] shown in Table I.

105
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. COHERENT CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE DEPLOYED FOR
CONTEXTUALISATION, SELECTED UDC CODE REFERENCES (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:0
Science and Knowledge. Organization. Computer Science.
Information. Documentation. Librarianship. Institutions.
Publications
UDC:004
Computer science and technology. Computing.
UDC:1
Philosophy. Psychology
UDC:2
Religion. Theology
UDC:3
Social Sciences
UDC:5
Mathematics. Natural Sciences
UDC:52
Astronomy. Astrophysics. Space research. Geodesy
UDC:53
Physics
UDC:539
Physical nature of matter
UDC:54
Chemistry. Crystallography. Mineralogy
UDC:55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC:550.3
Geophysics
UDC:551
General geology. Meteorology. Climatology.
Historical geology. Stratigraphy. Palaeogeography
UDC:551.44
Speleology. Caves. Fissures. Underground waters
UDC:551.46
Physical oceanography. Submarine topography. Ocean ﬂoor
UDC:551.7
Historical geology. Stratigraphy
UDC:551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC:56
Palaeontology
UDC:6
Applied Sciences. Medicine, Technology
UDC:63
Agriculture and related sciences and techniques. Forestry.
Farming. Wildlife exploitation
UDC:631.4
Soil science. Pedology. Soil research
UDC:7
The Arts. Entertainment. Sport
UDC:8
Linguistics. Literature
UDC:9
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:902
Archaeology
UDC:903
Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
UDC:904
Cultural remains of historical times
UDC (1/9)
Common auxiliaries of place
UDC:(1)
Place and space in general. Localization. Orientation
UDC:(2)
Physiographic designation
UDC:(20)
Ecosphere
UDC:(21)
Surface of the Earth in general. Land areas in particular.
Natural zones and regions
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally.
Mountains
UDC:(24)
Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
UDC:(25)
Natural ﬂat ground (at, above or below sea level).
The ground in its natural condition, cultivated or inhabited
UDC:(26)
Oceans, seas and interconnections
UDC:(28)
Inland waters
UDC:(3/9)
Individual places of the ancient and modern world
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
UDC:(4)
Europe
UDC:“...”
Common auxiliaries of time.
UDC:“6”
Geological, archaeological and cultural time divisions
UDC:“62”
Cenozoic (Cainozoic). Neozoic (70 MYBP - present)
For this research, major references from both main and
auxiliary tables are highlighted in italics with bluish colour.
B. Multi-disciplinary views: Prehistory and archaeology
Table II shows an excerpt of UDC:903.. . .:2 ritual/burial ob-
ject and subgroup examples, and conceptual view groups [10]
(PAKA, [11] [12]), referenced according the prehistory-
protohistory and archaeology CKRI (E.0.4.4).
TABLE II. CKRI: PREHISTORY AND PROTOHISTORY RITUAL/BURIAL
OBJECT AND SUBGROUP EXAMPLES, AND VIEW GROUPS [10] (EXCERPT).
Major Object Group
Selected Objects
Conceptual View Group
Ritual places, burials
yes
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cemetery
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Barrow
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
round
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
long
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cist
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Dolmen
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Tomb
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
chamber
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
court
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
portal
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
rock cut
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
wedge
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Pithos burial
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cave
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Body ﬁnding
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Urn
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
. . .
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Regarding the conceptual properties, these example objects
and objects groups represent knowledge facets rather than
simple hierarchical references. Contextualisation based on con-
ceptual knowledge can this way be employed in combinatory
fashion and can address peculiarities by ﬂexible means, e.g.,
by knowledge complements, symbolic representation, and con-
ceptual knowledge views of chorology and chronology.
For this illustrative object scenario, the excerpt does not
show individual micro-groups and individual differences. Be-
sides different distributions and different origins, object context
can be referred, e.g., artiﬁcial origin and natural origins as well
as relevant object properties, materials, and soil contexts can
be considered and systematically contextualised.
C. Multi-disciplinary views: Soil diversity
A soil diversity CKRI development edition (E.0.6.2) was
created based on WRB standard soil type reference groups and
soil type speciﬁcations [13], [14], and a suitable UDC:631.4. . .
base soil reference system for prehistory and archaeology,
which has been compiled along with this research. The results
are available in Table III.
For this research, the reference system is based on standard
soil references and UDC, both enabling a systematic and
coherent approach. Soil diversity groups are relevant for pre-
historical and archaeological objects and contexts. Contextu-
alised soil diversity groups are referenced in a consistent, stan-
dardised way. From this base compilation, a properties based
reference system can be created for further contextualisation,
parametrisation, and processing with the ongoing research
on soil diversity for prehistory and archaeology. Associated
information, e.g., on soil
•
drainage,
•
wetness,
•
pH status,
•
base saturation,
•
chloride,
•
subsoil organic material, and
•
stiffness
can be found as reference in the World Reference Base (WRB)
for soil resources [13], [14] from the Food and Agriculture
Organisation (FAO), United Nations.

106
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III. CKRI: SOIL DIVERSITY, BASED ON WRB STANDARD AND
CONCEPTUAL REFERENCE SYSTEM (UDC:631.4. . .), (E.0.6.2).
Soil Type
Soil Type Speciﬁcation
Reference Group
Name in WRB 2006 / WRB 1998
Acrisol
Haplic / Ferric, Gleyic, Haplic, Humic, Plinthic
Alisol
Plinthic
Albeluvisol
Haplic / Endoeutric, Gleyic, Haplic, Histic, Stagnic,
Umbric
Andosol
Aluandic / Dystric, Humic, Umbric, Mollic, Vitric
Anthrosol
Anthrosol, Plaggic
Arenosol
Albic, Haplic, Protic
Calcisol
Aridic
Chernozem
Calcic, Haplic, Gleyic, Haplic, Luvic
Cambisol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Chromic, Haplic / Dystric,
Haplic / Eutric, Gleyic, Haplic, Mollic, Vertic
Fluvisol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric,
Gleyic, Haplic, Histic, Mollic, Salic, Thionic
Gleysol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric,
Haplic / Haplic, Histic, Humic, Mollic, Thionic
Gypsisol
Haplic / Aridic
Histosol
Histosol, Hemic / Dystric, Hemic / Eutric, – / Fibric,
– / Gelic, – / Sapric
Kastanozem
Calcic, Haplic, Luvic
Leptosol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric,
Haplic / Haplic, Haplic / Humic, Rendzic, Lithic
Luvisol
Albic, Haplic / Arenic, Calcic, Haplic / Chromic,
Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Ferric, Gleyic, Haplic, Vertic
Phaeozem
– / Albic, Haplic / Calcaric, Gleyic, Haplic, Luvic,
Haplic / Sodic
Planosol
Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Haplic
Podzol
Haplic / Carbic, Haplic / Entic, Gleyic, Haplic, Leptic,
Placic, Haplic / Rustic, Umbric
Regosol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Haplic
Solonchak
Gleyic, Haplic, Haplic / Takyric, Mollic
Solonetz
Gleyic, Haplic, Mollic
Umbrisol
Arenic, Gleyic
Vertisol
Haplic / Chromic, Haplic, Haplic / Pellic
In this context, the conceptual references are referring to the
respective categories, e.g., UDC:631.4. . .:903+“4. . .”.
D. Multi-disciplinary integration facets
Table IV shows the reference facets of a respective multi-
disciplinary target contextualisation.
TABLE IV. REFERENCE FACETS OF A MULTI-DISCIPLINARY TARGET
CONTEXTUALISATION, BASED ON CKRI (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref.
Verbal Description (EN)
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:903.. . .
Prehistory, prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
. . .:2
referring to religion and rituals
. . .,“62. . .”
from Holocene
. . .,(4. . .DENW) . . . in North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany
. . .,(4. . .DENI)
. . . in Lower Saxony, Germany
. . .,(4. . .NL)
. . . in The Netherlands
Earth sciences, geological sciences
UDC:551.44
Speleology, caves, ﬁssures, underground waters
Applied sciences, agriculture in general
UDC:631.4
Soil research data
Geodesy. Photogrammetry
UDC:52. . .,(23)
Remote sensing data, above sea level
UDC:52. . .,(24)
Remote sensing data, below sea level
Contextualisation Place
UDC:(4)
Europe
Reference facets of a multi-disciplinary target contextual-
isation are based on CKRI, implemented and realised using
UDC code references. The contextualisation uses coherent
conceptual knowledge and refers to the chorological references
for consequent knowledge integration and symbolic represen-
tation.
IV.
COHERENT KNOWLEDGE INTEGRATION SCENARIO
Figure 1 shows a generated, resulting coherent conceptual
knowledge integration sketch for the realisation based on the
KR. The sketch considers the major conceptual references
for illustration. Detailed research can further detail on prehis-
toric object groups, characteristics, and properties, topographic
properties, soil properties, and many more. Therefore, the
conceptual sketch view can result in levels of arbitrary num-
bers of different integrations of complements and associated
properties as resulting from the KR, which are discussed in the
following. The result integrates required KR components based
on coherent conceptual knowledge and systematical chorolog-
ical knowledge for multi-disciplinary contexts, e.g., arbitrary
group representations, classiﬁcation based representations, and
geospatial representations.
Knowledge objects and contexts are provided by The Prehis-
tory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) [11] [12].
The multi-disciplinary coherent contextualisation employs the
base of a new soil system reference development with soil
types (UDC:631.4. . .) of WRB standard, reference contexts,
especially for UDC:903.. . .:2,551.7+“628”.. . ., prehistorical,
protohistorical time spans and artefacts related to religion and
rituals, geology, especially stratigraphy and paleogeography,
quaternary, especially late glacial and Holocene.
The integrated natural sciences KR further provide infor-
mation on caves in the respective region. Contextualisation is
enabled by the Conceptual Knowledge Reference Implemen-
tation (CKRI), including multi-disciplinary contexts of natural
sciences and humanities [8]. The conceptual knowledge base
is The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [10].
In this illustration plain Digital Chart of the World
(DCW) data are used [15]. The coastline database is the
Global Self-consistent Hierarchical High-resolution Geography
(GSHHG) [16], [17], which was mainly compiled from the
World Vector Shorelines (WVS) [18], the CIA World Data
Bank II (WDBII) [19], and the Atlas of the Cryosphere (AC).
An equal area projection (Eckert IV) is advised due to the
type of discipline knowledge representation. The compilation
uses the World Geodetic System (WGS). The symbolic repre-
sentation of the contextualisation is done via LX Professional
Scientiﬁc Content-Context-Suite (LX PSCC Suite) deploying
the Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) [20] for visualisation.
Concrete details of knowledge complements and compo-
nents have been provided [6]. All basic technical aspects can
be created on that base for individual application scenarios. As
illustrated, the solution is explicitly not a database concept and
the goal is explicitly not just to link different multi-disciplinary
concepts. The solution allows to create individual conceptual
knowledge based algorithms and to integrate with new and
available spatial and temporal processing algorithms. Basic
components and functions are given in the references.
The presented integration approach for chorological and
coherent contextualisation provides a solid base for multi-
disciplinary contexts in prehistory and archaeology. The imple-
mented system of components, continuously in development,

107
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. Resulting coherent conceptual knowledge integration sketch diagram showing knowledge resources for a prehistoric, natural sciences, and spatial
contextualisation for excerpts of prehistoric cemeteries’ and caves’ distributions, remote sensing data, and soil properties with respective knowledge references.
integrates relevant and beneﬁcial methodologies and proper-
ties, especially
•
coherent conceptual knowledge views,
•
multi-disciplinary contextualisation,
•
application approaches for multi-disciplinary contexts in
prehistory and archaeology,
•
allows systematical chorological consideration of knowl-
edge, e.g., arbitrary group representations, classiﬁcation
based representations, geospatial representations,
•
further development and valorisation of resources,
•
integration of multi-disciplinary resources,
•
choice for homogeneity of components,
•
deployment of systematical procedures,
•
effective and efﬁcient integration and analysis,
•
automation of workﬂows and procedures, and
•
provides multi-lingual conceptual knowledge support.
The methodological approach also allows the multi-directional
utilisation: Conceptual knowledge and resulting integration,
e.g., symbolic representation, on the one hand and integra-
tion results delivering references to conceptual knowledge
and new integrated knowledge contexts on the other hand.
As demonstrated with the integration for this research, be-
sides coherency, general ﬂexibility, robustness, and scalability,
criteria for components employed with implementation and
realisation should be evaluated carefully for being able to
consider solid information science fundaments and knowledge
centricity, beyond plain technical and proprietary features.
Resulting from the methodology, the realisation integrates a
wide range of relevant selection criteria, e.g., in this scenario:
•
Conceptual selection (esp. prehistory, cemetery; natural
sciences, caves).
•
Spatial, mathematical selection.
•
Regional spatial selection.
•
Topographic selection (esp. above sea level).
•
Contextualised selection (esp. with availability of sufﬁ-
cient natural sciences, soil, and other context data).
Many solutions resulting from the above scenario were
implemented and realised on the fundament framework of ﬂex-
ibly coupled components. The following sections deliver the
component reference implementations frame created resulting
from the long-term research, achieving the framework for the
required implementations and realisations and for the multi-
disciplinary coherent knowledge integration. The component
reference implementations frame provides a systematical ap-
proach for a large variety of coherent conceptual, consistent
approaches for multi-disciplinary contextualisation for many
scenarios beyond the examples for prehistory and prehistorical
archaeology, natural sciences, and humanities.

108
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V.
COMPONENT REFERENCE IMPLEMENTATIONS FRAME
The next sections give a compact overview of a major Com-
ponent Reference Implementations (CRI) development stage
edition (E.0.3.5) integrated with this research on knowledge
complements and frameworks for coherent knowledge inte-
gration in prehistory, natural sciences, and humanities. A more
detailed, comprehensive discussion and examples regarding the
fundaments are available with the research on methodology,
contextualisation, and conceptual knowledge. Relevant pre-
existing and ongoing component developments addressing
knowledge with multi-disciplinary Knowledge Resources (KR)
have been summarised [6].
The following component reference implementations pro-
vide a resulting, comprehensive set of complements and com-
ponents required for an advanced practical long-term case
scenario, integrating knowledge on prehistory and prehistorical
archaeology, natural sciences, remote sensing, and soil science.
A. CRI: Conceptual knowledge frameworks
Conceptual knowledge frameworks were created as refer-
ence implementations and are further continuously in devel-
opment and used in practice with ongoing long-term research
and applied for KR [6], e.g.:
•
Prehistory-protohistory and archaeology Conceptual
Knowledge Reference Implementation (CKRI), includ-
ing multi-disciplinary contexts of natural sciences and
humanities and any facets (E.0.4.4) [8] [21].
•
Mathematical and computational conceptual knowledge
framework [22].
•
Environmental information systems conceptual knowl-
edge framework [23].
Additional CKRI can be created by and for disciplines and
scenarios and coherently integrated with CKRI already in use.
B. CRI: Conceptual knowledge base
Conceptual knowledge base is The Universal Decimal Clas-
siﬁcation (UDC) [10], a general plan for knowledge clas-
siﬁcation, providing an analytico-synthetic and faceted clas-
siﬁcation, designed for subject description and indexing of
content of information resources irrespective of the carrier,
form, format, and language. UDC is the world’s foremost
document indexing language in the form of a multi-lingual
classiﬁcation scheme covering all ﬁelds of knowledge and
constitutes a sophisticated indexing and retrieval tool. UDC-
based references for demonstration are taken from the multi-
lingual UDC summary [10] released by the UDC Consortium,
Creative Commons license [24].
C. CRI: Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks
Relevant scientiﬁc practices, frameworks, and standards
from disciplines and contexts. Natural sciences, geosciences,
and soil science are continuously delivering updated state
of the art research and insight, including geodiversity and
standardisation [25] [26]. Associated information, e.g., on soil
drainage, wetness, pH status, base saturation, chloride, subsoil
organic material, and stiffness can be found as reference in the
World Reference Base (WRB) for soil resources [13], [14] from
the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), United Nations.
D. CRI: Formalisation
All integration components, for all disciplines, require an
explicit and continuous formalisation [27] process in order to
conform with the information science principles according to
the practices in the disciplines [28]. This includes knowledge
objects and entities as well as procedural components (e.g.,
C [29], Fortran [30], Perl [31], Shell wrapper, Julia [32],
[33], [34]), computation model support, e.g., parallelisation
standards, OpenMP [35], [36], Reg Exp patterns, e.g., Perl
Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE) [37], further standard
tools, e.g., Structured Query Language (SQL), Tool Command
Language (TCL) [38], Extract Transform Load (ETL), Extract
Load Transform (ELT), and hybrid solutions. Addressing as-
pects of discipline related parole [39].
E. CRI: Methodologies and workﬂows integration
Methodologies for creating and utilising methods include
model processing, remote sensing, spatial mapping, high in-
formation densities, and visualisation. Respective contextual-
isation of (prehistoric) scenarios should each be done under
speciﬁc (prehistoric) conditions, especially supported by state-
of-the-art methods, especially, consistent sources of standard
algorithms [40], multi-dimensional criteria, spatial operations,
interpolation geodesic computation [41], triangulation [42],
gradient computation [43], and projection [44]. Workﬂow
integration includes the overall spectrum of problem solving,
e.g., mathematical algorithms, mathematical processes, ﬁlter
processes, phonetic and linguistic context support [45]. Visu-
alisation, Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) [20].
F. CRI: Prehistory Knowledge Resources
Common sources of information in many disciplines are
often not yet aware of universal knowledge concepts and multi-
lingual approaches. Common sources mostly lack sufﬁcient
coherency, consistency, and structure and more often they show
to be fragmented and heterogeneous. In order to overcome ba-
sic shortcomings of public ‘data collections’ the objects, enti-
ties, and respective conceptual knowledge references’ excerpts
and examples are taken from The Prehistory and Archaeology
Knowledge Archive (PAKA), in continuous development for
more than three decades [11] and is released by DIMF [12].
G. CRI: Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources
Several coherent systems of major natural sciences’ context
object groups from KR realisations have been implemented
[6], [10], [46].
H. CRI: Inherent representation groups
The methodology can consider a wide range of repre-
sentation groups for major disciplines and context object
groups regarding their inherent representation and common
utilisation, e.g., points, polygons, lines, Digital Elevation
Model (DEM), Digital Terrain Model (DTM), and Digital
Surface Model (DSM) representations sources, e.g., from
satellites, drones (raster data, RAdio Detection And Ranging
(RADAR), Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), Light Detection
And Ranging (LiDAR), etc.), positioning/navigation (common
satellite systems / satellite navigation systems, e.g., Galileo,
Europe; Global Positioning System (GPS), USA; GLObalnaja

109
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
NAwigazionnaja Sputnikowaja Sistema (GLONASS), Russia;
Quasi-Zenith Satellite System (QZSS), Japan; Indian Regional
Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS) / Navigation Indian Con-
stellation (NAVIC), India), z-value representations, distance
representations, area representations, raster, vector, binary,
and non-binary data. Essential base context sources should
provide worldwide homogeneous and consistent data [26]
allowing extrapolation and interpolation in various dimen-
sions, e.g., from the School of Ocean and Earth Science and
Technology (SOEST), National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration (NASA), Goddard National Space Science Data
Center (NSSDC), National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
resources, European Community (EC) resources, and national
and federal organisations and initiatives for further integration
and future solutions.
I.
CRI: Scientiﬁc context parametrisation
Scientiﬁc context parametrisation of prehistoric targets can
use the overall insights, e.g., from geoscientiﬁc disciplines [47]
[48]. A relevant example is contextualisation with palaeoland-
scapes [49]. In case of prehistory, parametrisation depends on
the prehistorical context, e.g., the geoscientiﬁc parametrisation
and geoscientiﬁc contextualisation depend of the respective
selected prehistorical object groups and associated properties.
The highly inter-dependent complexity can make the scientiﬁc
parametrisation an extremely advanced long-term challenge.
J. CRI: Structures and symbolic representation
The deployment of long-term universal structure and data
standards is essential. Relevant examples of sustainable im-
plementations are NetCDF [50] based standards, including
advanced features, hybrid structure integration, and parallel
computing support (PnetCDF) and generic multi-dimensional
table data, standard xyz ﬁles, universal source and text based
structure and code representations, e.g., American Standard
Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) and LATEX [51].
Structure is an organisation of interrelated entities in a
material or non-material object or system [46]. Structure is
essential in logic as it carries unique information. Structure
means features and facilities. There are merely higher and
lower facility levels of how structures can be addressed,
which result from structure levels. Structure can, for example,
be addressed by logic, names, references, address labels,
pointers, fuzzy methods, phonetic methods. ‘Non-structures’
can, for example, be addressed by locality, source, context,
logic, attributes, size, quantity. Structure is and especially
reﬂects knowledge (especially factual, conceptual, procedural,
metacognitive, and structural complements), context, experi-
ence, persistence, reusability, sustainability, value, and formal-
isation, including abstraction and reduction. Structure system-
atics, meaning, levels of structures, and means of addressing
were discussed in detail [46]. We should be aware that lower
structure levels can only be addressed on higher formalisation
levels, independent of the fact that structure may either be not
available or not recognised. Substantial deﬁcits of lower level
structured knowledge representations cannot be compensated
by (procedural) tools. Therefore, addressing structures on cog-
nostic levels is preferable to isolated procedural means and can
be utilised for symbolic representations. Symbolic representa-
tions of prehistoric context information include graphs, e.g.,
diagrams using visualisation techniques, for logical, quantita-
tive, schematic, and semi-schematic characteristics. Concrete
examples are relationships of entity representations, variables,
topological and spatial properties, and combined representa-
tions of abstract and realia properties. Structures and standards,
in integration with formalisation processes, knowledge system,
and components should foster seamless long-term development
and sustainable realisation. Nevertheless, the complements,
which enable ﬂexible automation capabilites are up to vast
parts depending on the context of how realia are viewed and in
consequence how they should be described and managed, e.g.,
by formalisation, standards, consistency, systematics, method-
ological procedures, structure, and object groups.
VI.
DISCUSSION
The presented practical component reference frame imple-
mentations are based on a number of component groups, which
are in continuous long-term development. The methodology,
methods, case scenarios and the fundaments of the com-
ponent reference implementations and conceptual knowledge
frameworks were lately publicly presented and discussed at
the Informational Modeling - Theory and Practice - Inter-
national Conference, Soﬁa, Bulgaria [8], at the International
Conference on Mathematics of Informational Modeling, Varna,
Bulgaria [52], both Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, at the
Delegates’ Summit, Symposium on Advanced Computation
and Information in Natural and Applied Sciences, Rhodes,
Greece [53], and at the Machine Learning for Industry Forum
hosted by the High-Performance Computing Innovation Center
and Data Science Institute at the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, USA [54]. Practical applications and concrete
developments of conceptual knowledge reference implementa-
tions and a component reference implementations frame were
discussed regarding ongoing and future research initiatives in
prehistory and prehistorical archaeology, natural sciences, and
integrative industry applications. Conceptual knowledge solu-
tions are recognised a fundament of future industrial learning,
collaborative, and multi-disciplinary information science. The
component reference implementations frame resulting from
this research has shown to provide a ﬂexible framework for the
required implementations and realisations including the multi-
disciplinary coherent knowledge integration. Especially, the
respective conceptual knowledge reference edition implemen-
tation stages [55] (E.0.4.4 and future) to integrate seamlessly
with the coupled components.
VII.
CONCLUSION
The new component reference implementations frame en-
ables efﬁcient implementations and realisations of multi-
disciplinary coherent conceptual and chorological context in-
tegration and contextualisation in prehistory and prehistorical
archaeology. The frame allows coherent contextualisation in
prehistorical archaeology and natural sciences even where
contexts cannot be ‘sensed’ directly. The components allow
a seamless integration of Conceptual Knowledge Reference
Implementations (CKRI) for coherent conceptual and choro-
logical context integration and contextualisation in prehistory
and prehistorical archaeology.
The practical solution for implementation and realisation
of the new knowledge-based methodology showed to enable

110
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
coherent conceptual knowledge for contextualisation in prehis-
tory, archaeology, and natural sciences. The more, the approach
enables to integrate multi-disciplinary contexts by a consis-
tent system (editions) and supports multi-lingualism. Multi-
disciplinary scenarios can be considered in multi-fold ways,
e.g., knowledge can be documented, analysed, integrated, and
selected deploying conceptual knowledge. The methodological
approach also allows a multi-directional utilisation. Any KR
result can be considered starting point, intermediate result, and
ﬁnal result, depending on a deﬁned task and workﬂow.
The general methodology provides ﬂexibility for solid in-
formation science based methods and enables a wide range
of beneﬁts for scenarios and implementations, e.g., coherent
multi-disciplinary and multi-lingual documentation and sys-
tematical knowledge based geo-spatial processing, aware of
inherent knowledge spanning arbitrary disciplines. With that,
geospatial scenarios are special cases of chorological contextu-
alisation. Further recommendations from practical experiences
with knowledge complements and component integration are:
•
Create (specialised) coherent CKRI.
•
Add consistent and coherent conceptual knowledge to
objects and entities of your resources and make work-
ﬂows deploy conceptual knowledge.
•
Choose multi-disciplinary resources with homogeneous
properties, e.g., resolution and coverage.
•
Use long-term standards.
•
Practice scientiﬁc state-of-the-art parametrisation of re-
spective knowledge, data, and algorithms.
•
Create context dependent, suitable symbolic representa-
tions and individual methods.
•
Proceed the knowledge-centric integration reasoned and
levelheaded.
Future research concentrates on continued development of
components and reference implementations for creation of
models for analysis and development of multi-disciplinary
knowledge and context, taking new ﬁndings and context inte-
gration of application scenarios in prehistory and archaeology
into account and further considering chorological and coherent
conceptual knowledge contextualisation, especially regarding
dedicated prehistory and prehistorical archaeology research
cases.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This ongoing research is supported by scientiﬁc organisa-
tions and individuals. We are grateful to the “Knowledge in
Motion” (KiM) long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches
Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for par-
tially funding this research, implementation, case studies, and
publication under grants D2018F1P04962, D2018F3P04932,
D2018F6P04938, D2019F1P04998, and D2020F1P05228 and
to its senior scientiﬁc members and members of the permanent
commission of the science council, especially to Dr. Friedrich
H¨ulsmann, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB)
Hannover, to Dipl.-Biol. Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz
Universit¨at Hannover, to Dipl.-Ing. Martin Hofmeister, Han-
nover, and to Olaf Lau, Hannover, Germany, for fruitful discus-
sion, inspiration, and practical multi-disciplinary case studies.
We are grateful to Dipl.-Geogr. Burkhard Hentzschel and
Dipl.-Ing. Eckhard Dunkhorst, Minden, Germany, for proliﬁc
discussion and exchange of practical spatial and drone case
scenarios. We are grateful to Dipl.-Ing. Hans-G¨unther M¨uller,
G¨ottingen, Germany, for providing specialised, manufactured
high end computation and storage solutions. We are grateful
to The Science and High Performance Supercomputing Cen-
tre (SHPSC) for long-term support. / DIMF-PIID-DF98 007;
URL: https://scienceparagon.de/cpr .
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Methodology of Chorological and Coherent Concep-
tual Knowledge Contextualisation: Approaches for Multi-disciplinary
Contexts in Prehistory and Archaeology,” in Proceedings of The
Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Infor-
mation Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2021),
July
18
–
22,
2021,
Nice,
France.
XPS
Press,
Wilming-
ton, Delaware, USA, 2021, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-
61208-871-6, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
geoprocessing 2021 1 60 30045 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[2]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “From Knowledge and Meaning Towards Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching: Processing and Developing Knowledge Objects
Targeting Geoscientiﬁc Context and Georeferencing,” in Proc. of The
Twelfth Internat. Conf. on Advanced Geographic Information Systems,
Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2020), November 21–25,
2020, Valencia, Spain. XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2020,
pp. 36–41, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-762-7.
[3]
R. Gleser, Zu den erkenntnistheoretischen Grundlagen der Pr¨ahis-
torischen Arch¨aologie.
Leiden, 2021, 2021, (title in English: On
the Epistemological Fundaments of Prehistorical Archaeology), in: M.
Renger, S.-M. Rothermund, S. Schreiber, and A. Veling (Eds.), Theorie,
Arch¨aologie, Reﬂexion. Kontroversen und Ans¨atze im deutschsprachi-
gen Diskurs, (in print).
[4]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, F. H¨ulsmann, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, P. Skurowski,
and M. Staniszewski, Knowledge and Computing.
Post-Summit Re-
sults, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and Deﬁnitions of Knowledge
and Computing, Sept. 23, 2015, The Fifth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and
Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 13th Int. Conf.
of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–29, 2015,
Rhodes, Greece, 2015, pp. 1–7, DOI: 10.15488/3409.
[5]
L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, Eds., A Taxonomy for Learning,
Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educa-
tional Objectives.
Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA (Pearson Education
Group), USA, 2001, ISBN: 978-0801319037.
[6]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Prehistory’s
and
Natural
Sciences’
Multi-
disciplinary Contexts: Contextualisation and Context Integration Based
on Universal Conceptual Knowledge,” in Proceedings of The Eleventh
International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computa-
tion (INFOCOMP 2020), May 30 – June 3, 2021, Valencia, Spain. XPS
Press, Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2021, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN:
978-1-61208-865-5.
[7]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Principles of Superordinate Knowledge: Separation
of Methodology, Implementation, and Realisation,” in The Eighth
Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences
(SACINAS), Proceedings of The 16th Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and
Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 13–18, 2018, Rhodes, Greece, AIP CP,
Vol. 2116.
AIP Press, American Institute of Physics, Melville, New
York, USA, 2019, ISBN: 978-0-7354-1854-7, DOI: 10.1063/1.5114033.
[8]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Information Science Paragon: Allow Knowl-
edge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches to Universality,
Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” The International Journal
“Information Models and Analyses” (IJ IMA), vol. 9, no. 3, 2020,
pp. 203–226, Markov, K. (ed.), ISSN: 1314-6416 (print), Submitted
accepted article: November 18, 2020, Publication date: August 17, 2021,
URL: http://www.foibg.com/ijima/vol09/ijima09-03-p01.pdf [accessed:
2021-11-28].
[9]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Main Tables,” 2020, Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: https://udcdata.info/
078887 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[10]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2021-11-28].

111
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[11]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Information Science and Inter-disciplinary Long-
term Strategies – Key to Insight, Consistency, and Sustainabil-
ity: Conceptual Knowledge Reference Methodology Spanning Pre-
history, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Humanities,” Interna-
tional Tutorial, DataSys Congress 2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020,
Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2020/
ProgramINFOCOMP20.html [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[12]
“The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) license,”
2021, (release 2021), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): All rights reserved. Rights retain to
the contributing creators.
[13]
“World reference base for soil resources,” 1998, World Soil Resources
Report No. 84, ISSS-ISRIC-FAO, Rome.
[14]
“World reference base for soil resources,” 2006, World Soil Resources
Report No. 103, ISSS-ISRIC-FAO, Rome.
[15]
P. Wessel, “The Digital Chart of the World for GMT 5 or later,” 2018,
URL: ftp://ftp.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2021-11-28], URL: http:
//www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/dcw/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[16]
P. Wessel, “Global Self-consistent Hierarchical High-resolution Geogra-
phy,” 2016, URL: ftp://ftp.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2021-11-28],
URL: http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/gshhg/ [accessed: 2021-11-
28].
[17]
P. Wessel and W. H. F. Smith, “A global, self-consistent, hierarchical,
high-resolution shoreline database,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 101, no. B4,
1996, pp. 8741–8743.
[18]
E. A. Soluri and V. A. Woodson, “World Vector Shoreline,” Int.
Hydrograph. Rev., vol. LXVII, no. 1, 1990, pp. 27–35.
[19]
A. J. Gorny, “World Data Bank II General User Guide,” 1977.
[20]
P. Wessel, W. H. F. Smith, R. Scharroo, J. Luis, and F. Wobbe,
“The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT),” 2020, URL: http://www.
generic-mapping-tools.org/ [accessed: 2021-11-28], URL: http://gmt.
soest.hawaii.edu/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[21]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Keynote Lecture: The Information Science Paragon:
Allow Knowledge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches
to Universality, Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” Informa-
tional Modeling – Theory and Practice, International Conference We-
binar, Institute of Mathematics and Informatics, Bulgarian Academy
of Sciences, October 20–21, 2020, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, [Lecture], URL:
http://math.bas.bg, 2020.
[22]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Superordinate Knowledge Based Comprehen-
sive Subset of Conceptual Knowledge for Practical Mathematical-
Computational Scenarios,” in The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf.
in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), Proceedings of The 17th
Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28,
2019, Rhodes, Greece, AIP CP, Volume 2293 A.
AIP Press, American
Institute of Physics, Melville, New York, USA, Nov. 2020, pp. 040 002–
1 – 040 002–4, ISBN-13: 978-0-7354-4025-8, DOI: 10.1063/5.0026478.
[23]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Sustainable Knowledge and Resources Management
for Environmental Information and Computation.
Business Expert
Press, Manhattan, New York, USA, Mar. 2018, Ch. 3, pp. 45–88, in:
Huong Ha (ed.), Climate Change Management: Special Topics in the
Context of Asia, ISBN: 978-1-94784-327-1, in: Robert Sroufe (ed.),
Business Expert Press Environmental and Social Sustainability for
Business Advantage Collection, ISSN: 2327-333X (collection, print).
[24]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2021-11-28],
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
[25]
B. M. Das, Advanced Soil Mechanics; Fifth Edition, 5th ed.
CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, London, New York, 2019,
ISBN: 978-0-8153-7913-3.
[26]
“Land Processed Distributed Active Archive Center,” 2021, LP DAAC,
URL: https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[27]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, A. Tsitsipas,
L. Schubert, F. H¨ulsmann, O. Lau, and M. Hofmeister, Best Practice
and Deﬁnitions of Formalisation and Formalism. Post-Summit Results,
Delegates’ Summit: The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in
Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 17th Int. Conf. of Num.
Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28, 2019, Rhodes,
Greece, 2019, DOI: 10.15488/5241.
[28]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Keynote Lecture: Information Science and Struc-
ture: Beware - Ex Falso Quod Libet,” The Tenth Symposium on
Advanced Computation and Information in Natural and Applied
Sciences (SACINAS), The 18th International Conference of Nu-
merical Analysis and Applied Mathematics (ICNAAM), Septem-
ber
17–23,
2020,
Rhodes,
Greece,
September
17,
2020,
[Lec-
ture],
URL:
http://icnaam.org/sites/default/ﬁles/ICNAAM%202020%
20Preliminary%20Program%20Virtual%20ver15.pdf [accessed: 2021-
11-28], 2020.
[29]
“GCC, the GNU Compiler Collection,” 2021, URL: http://gcc.gnu.org/
[accessed: 2021-11-28].
[30]
“GNU Fortran,” 2021, URL: https://gcc.gnu.org/fortran/ [accessed:
2021-11-28].
[31]
“The Perl Programming Language,” 2021, URL: https://www.perl.org/
[accessed: 2021-11-28].
[32]
I. Balbaert, Julia 1.0 Programming: Dynamic and high-performance
programming to build fast scientiﬁc applications, 2nd ed.
Packt
Publishing, 2018, ISBN: 978-1-78899-909-0.
[33]
M. Sherrington, Mastering Julia - Tackle the Contemporary Challenges
of Programming and Data Science with Julia.
Packt Publishing, 2015,
ISBN: 978-1-78355-331-0.
[34]
A. Joshi, Julia for Data Science.
Packt Publishing, 2016, ISBN: 978-
1-78528-969-9.
[35]
L. Dagum and R. Menon, “OpenMP: an industry standard API for
shared-memory programming,” Computational Science & Engineering,
(IEEE), vol. 5, no. 1, 1998, pp. 46–55.
[36]
OpenMP Architecture Review Board, “OpenMP API 5.1 Speciﬁca-
tion,” Nov. 2020, URL: https://www.openmp.org/wp-content/uploads/
OpenMP-API-Speciﬁcation-5-1.pdf [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[37]
“Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE),” 2021, URL: https://
www.pcre.org/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[38]
“Tcl Developer Xchange,” 2021, URL: https://www.tcl.tk/ [accessed:
2021-11-28].
[39]
F. de Saussure, Cours de linguistique g´en´erale, 1916, (title in English:
Course in General Linguistics), C. Bally and A. Sechehaye (eds.).
[40]
W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Nu-
merical Recipes in Fortran 90, The Art of Parallel Scientiﬁc Computing.
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[41]
T. Vincenty, “Direct and inverse solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid
with application of nested equations,” Surv. Rev., vol. XXII, no. 176,
1975, pp. 88–93.
[42]
R. J. Renka, “Algorithm 772: STRIPACK: Delaunay Triangulation and
Voronoi Diagram on the Surface of a Sphere,” AMC Trans. Math.
Software, vol. 23, no. 3, 1997, pp. 416–434.
[43]
B. K. P. Horn, “Hill-Shading and the Reﬂectance Map,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 69, no. 1, 1981, pp. 14–47.
[44]
A. J. Kent and P. Vujakovic, Eds., The Routledge Handbook of Mapping
and Cartography.
Taylor & Francis Group, London and New York,
2018, ISBN: 978-1-138-83102-5.
[45]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Archaeological and Geoscientiﬁc Objects used with
Integrated Systems and Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources,” Int. Jour.
on Adv. in Systems and Measurements, vol. 6, no. 1&2, 2013, pp. 200–
213, ISSN: 1942-261x, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?
articleid=sysmea v6 n12 2013 15 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[46]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Impact of Information Science Accompanied
Structural Information on Computation of Knowledge Pattern Matching
and Processing: A Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and
Humanities Conceptual Integration Perspective,” in Proc. of The Tenth
Int, Conf. on Adv. Comm. and Comp. (INFOCOMP 2020), Sept.
27 – Oct. 1, 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN:
978-1-61208-807-5, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=infocomp 2020 1 10 60015 [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[47]
R. Brinkmann, Abriß der Geologie, Bd. 2, Historische Geologie, neube-
arbeitet von Karl Kr¨ommelbein, 12th/13th ed.
Ferdinand Enke Verlag,

112
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Stuttgart, 1986, ISBN: 3-432-80603-5, (title in English: Epitome of
Geology, Vol. 2, Historical Geology).
[48]
P. Woldstedt and K. Duphorn, Norddeutschland und angrenzende Ge-
biete im Eiszeitalter, 3rd ed., 1974, (title in English: Northern Germany
and Adjacent Regions in the Ice Age).
[49]
G. N. Bailey, J. Harff, and D. Sakellariou, Eds., Under the Sea:
Archaeology and Palaeolandscapes of the Continental Shelf, ser. Coastal
Research Library.
Springer International Publishing AG 2017,
2017, vol. 20, ISSN: 2211-0577, ISBN: 978-3-319-53158-8, DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-53160-1.
[50]
“Network
Common
Data
Form
(NetCDF),”
2021,
DOI:
10.5065/D6H70CW6,
URL:
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/
netcdf/ [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[51]
“Comprehensive TeX Archive Network (CTAN),” 2021, (TEX/LATEX),
URL: http://www.ctan.org [accessed: 2021-11-28].
[52]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Keynote Lecture: The Multi-disciplinary Case of
Prehistorical Insight: Information Science at the Edge of Structured Data
Comprehension,” The XI-th International Conference - Mathematics
of Informational Modeling, Institute of Mathematics and Informatics,
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, July 1–2, 2021, Varna, Bulgaria, URL:
http://math.bas.bg [accessed: 2021-11-28], 2021.
[53]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, Z. Kovacheva, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz,
F. H¨ulsmann, and I. Naydenova, Best Practice and Deﬁnitions –
Concepts of Cognostic Addressing Structured and Non-structured
Data.
Post-Summit Results, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and
Deﬁnitions – Concepts of Cognostic Addressing Structured and
Non-structured Data, September 20, 2021, The Eleventh Symposium
on Advanced Computation and Information in Natural and Applied
Sciences (SACINAS), The 19th International Conference of Numerical
Analysis and Applied Mathematics (ICNAAM), September 20–26,
2021, Rhodes, Greece, 2021, delegates and other contributors: Claus-
Peter R¨uckemann, Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU),
Germany / Knowledge in Motion, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur
Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany / Leibniz Universit¨at
Hannover, Germany; Raffaella Pavani, Department of Mathematics,
Politecnico
di
Milano,
Italy;
Zlatinka
Kovacheva,
Institute
of
Mathematics and Informatics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences /
University of Mining and Geology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; Birgit Gersbeck-
Schierholz, Knowledge in Motion, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur
Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany; Friedrich H¨ulsmann,
Knowledge in Motion, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany; Ina Naydenova, Institute
of Mathematics and Informatics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria; URL: http://www.scienceparagon.de/cpr/x/publ/2021/
delegatessummit2021/rueckemann icnaam2021 summit summary.pdf,
(to appear).
[54]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Coherent Knowledge Solutions From Prehistory to
Future – Towards Coherent Multi-disciplinary Knowledge Reference
Implementation Blueprints for Industrial Learning: Insight from Consis-
tent Coherent Conceptual Integration of Prehistory, Archaeology, Natu-
ral Sciences, and Humanities,” ML4I – Machine Learning for Industry
Forum 2021; hosted by the High-Performance Computing Innovation
Center (HPCIC) and Data Science Institute (DSI), at the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), August 10–12, 2021, Liver-
more, California, U.S.A., (Invited Speech), URL: http://www.llnl.gov
[accessed: 2021-11-28], 2021.
[55]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Towards Conceptual Knowledge Reference Imple-
mentations for Context Integration and Contextualisation of Prehistory’s
and Natural Sciences’ Multi-disciplinary Contexts,” International Jour-
nal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 14, no. 1&2, 2021,
(to be published).

