Electro-Magnetic Modeling and Design of Through Silicon Vias Based Passive 
Interposers for High Performance Applications up to the V-Band 
 
Olivier Tesson1,2 
Magali Duplessis 
Stéphane Charlot 
1NXP Semiconductors, 
PCC RF Small Signal ICRF 
Campus Effiscience, Colombelles 
14906 Caen Cedex 09, France 
2LAMIPS, 
Laboratoire commun NXP-CRISMAT 
UMR 6508 CNRS ENSICAEN UCBN 
Olivier.tesson@nxp.com 
NXP Semiconductors, TCE-Caen 
Campus Effiscience, Colombelles 
14906 Caen Cedex 09, France 
Magali.duplessis@nxp.com 
FIME Ouest 
8 av. Commodore J.H. Hallet 
14000 Caen, France 
Stephane.charlot@fime.com 
 
 
Abstract— The present paper reports the design and Electro-
Magnetic (EM) modeling of Through Silicon Via (TSV) based 
band-pass filters embedded in passive interposers for C and V-
band applications. For each filter, EM simulations have been 
performed with the help of a FEM (Finite Element Method) 3D 
EM solver. Prior to filter implementation, a comparison 
between simulated and measured data is proposed on 
dedicated structures (3D solenoids, and transmission lines) to 
calibrate 
the 
simulator 
and 
validate 
the 
simulation 
methodology. The obtained simulation results are successfully 
correlated to measurement data up to 110 GHz.  In addition, 
an original package characterization up to 30 GHz is also 
proposed to support filter design and implementation. The 
proposed filter architectures permit a clear reduction of the 
filter footprint (up to 90 % vs. conventional implementation on 
ceramic 
substrate) 
with 
good 
electrical 
performances. 
Depending on the application IL of 2,6 and 2,0 dB have been 
simulated respectively at 4 and 42 GHz. Discussion on 
advantages of using either high/low aspect ratio TSV together 
with different Back-End Of Line (BEOL) option is proposed 
based on these two typical examples. Perspectives are then 
given in terms of 3D-IC integration. 
Keywords - Finite Element Method; Through Silicon Via; 
Filtering; EM simulations; passive interposer; Millimeter-wave 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The concept of 3D Silicon integration using TSV 
stacking is one of the most promising technologies. It can 
extend Moore’s law by stacking and shortening the 
connection path between memory and logic [2]. Due to the 
increase in functional integration requirements, more and 
more assembly house and wafer foundries are looking into 
3D TSV technology, which allows stacking of Large Scale 
Circuits (LSI’s) thereby enabling products to be made 
smaller with more functionality. 3D technology realizes 
miniaturization up to 300-400% compared to 
the 
conventional packaging [3]. Furthermore TSV are also 
relevant to develop “more than Moore” applications [4], 
where passive functions originally lying on the PCB 
(Printed Circuit Board) can be designed with the help of 
TSV up to the C-band using original component 
architectures such as embedded solenoids (see Figure 1). In 
that sense, distributed L, C filters based on TSV can be 
optimized and implemented within interconnect dies. 
On the other hand, solenoids have limited performances 
at higher frequencies (in the millimeter-Wave domain). 
Indeed these solenoids made with low aspect ratio vias 
(300/75) exhibit non negligible parasitic capacitance with 
substrate that degrades their Self-Resonant Frequency (SRF) 
and thus their efficiency at higher frequencies [1]. 
Furthermore, passive interposer die with high aspect ratio 
vias cannot allow designing such solenoid but worth being 
considered to make filtering at higher frequencies (Ka and V 
bands) using a different architecture. Indeed, both Ka and 
V-bands – currently reserved for professional applications 
(aerospace, defense, satellite communications) - appear 
promising for developing applications such as automotive 
car-radar and wireless infrastructures [5][6] in order to face 
societal challenges: Energy harvesting, health, mobility and 
safety, security).  
The paper will be organized as follow: a perceived state 
of art regarding passive component implementation is 
proposed in the following section of this document. Then, 
integrated solenoid as well as MOM capacitance will be 
introduced in the second section; their performances will be 
presented from an electrical point of view together with 
their relative precision taking into account the process 
spread. Solenoid performances obtained from wide-band 
frequency 2-ports S-parameter measurements will be 
presented. EM modeling done with the help of a 3D Finite 
Element Method (FEM) solver will be also described and 
compared to measurements. As the effect of packaging 
plays a significant role on the device performances, the third 
section of this study will be devoted to the characterization 
of a conventional QFN package using a very single test-
case. Measurement data will be then used to calibrate the 
EM simulator. In the fourth section of this paper, we report 
the design methodology and the simulation results for a 4 
GHz band-pass Chebyshev filter done using TSV. In the 
55
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

fifth section, we will introduce the micro-strip TSV based 
band-pass filter for Ka/V band applications. Its architecture 
will be presented together with characterization results 
obtained on transmission lines. These measured data will be 
used to calibrate the FEM solver and then propose an EM 
model of the proposed filters. The interest of using both 
high aspect and low aspect ratio of TSV in view of targeted 
applications is also documented in the paper. Simulation 
results based on different scenarios for BEOL and substrate 
options will be presented at the end of the document as well. 
 
II. 
PERCEIVED STATE OF ART 
Many efforts have been done to develop high 
performances active and passive devices especially in 
BiCMOS process [7][8][9] to support high performance 
applications. However, this is not enough; these high 
frequency applications will also require elite passive 
devices. Modification of BEOL and/or substrate properties 
(going to HRS for example) is already a good alternative but 
requires process update that is sometimes very expensive 
and can impact front-end components. In addition, the 
emergence of 3D interconnects such as TSV allows 
designing passive interposers to support these high 
performance applications. They render possible for example 
integrating passive filters necessary in every module. 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 1.  SEM picturesTop view (a) and bottom view (b) of the 3D 
solenoids within GSG (Ground Signal Ground) pads – source IPDiA 
Filters are either integrated on chip (using planar coils 
and Metal-Oxide-Metal (MOM) capacitors) or integrated in a 
hybrid application such as MCM (Multi-Chip Module) lying 
on a ceramic or organic substrate using a micro-strip 
architecture. Some well known structures have been already 
successfully 
implemented 
and 
extensively 
reported 
[10][11][12][13][14]. For the former ones, they can suffer 
from their low quality factors (mainly due to the resistive 
losses within the planar coils) while the latter ones exhibit 
high performances but can deviate a lot from nominal 
behavior compared to silicon because of  process spread. 
Another alternative also consists in implementing the 
filters on top of the carrier substrate (Printed Circuit Board 
for example) with the help of Surface Mounted Devices 
(SMD). The main advantage of such approach is the high 
quality factor value that can be reached. But generally they 
have limited performances at higher frequencies, the total 
footprint is bigger and the lack of accurate and scalable 
electrical 
models 
limits 
their 
applications 
and 
implementations in view of a high selectivity of the signals. 
In case of fully integrated filters within silicon IC processes, 
some passive integration dedicated processes have been 
already developed to tackle the low quality factor of the unit 
components. Devices are generally deposited on HRS (High 
Resistive Substrate) that clearly limits the effects of eddy 
currents [4] [15]. Thick top metals are also implemented and 
copper is often used to reduce the resistive losses. Thickness 
up to 8 µm can be considered in certain cases. Recent 
achievements have highlighted really good performances for 
band-pass filter for TV on Mobile applications [16]. For this 
application, coils exhibit regular planar shape, which 
provides a good compromise for designers between ease of 
layout, manufacturing and electrical performances. Besides 
that, Ka-band filters with really good performances have 
been also recently achieved using micro machined process 
either within silicon or glass substrate [17]. These 
technologies are really good candidates to develop 
applications 
in 
the 
millimeter-Wave 
domain. 
Notwithstanding, they require at least a substrate transfer 
technology (case of glass) that is not often compliant with 
classic wafers handler for which foundry need to adapt 
deeply their production environment [18]. On the other side, 
together with the emergence of new type of interconnects 
such as TSV, embedded solenoid implementation within 
silicon or glass substrate [19] is now considered to easily 
build a coil-type of structure. Several proposals have been 
done in that sense leading to very promising results [20][21]. 
In fact, integrated solenoids can be used to produce larger 
quality factor than in RF BiCMOS/CMOS planar 
technologies within a given footprint [22]. This increase in 
quality factor can be attributed to both metal thickness and 
the specific solenoid property of storing energy according to: 
 
average power dissipated
energy stored
Q
  
 
(1) 
 
Where  designates the pulsation (i.e.,2..freq) 
Thus, the following part of this document will describe 
the solenoid architecture that we have adopted and 
summarize the main electrical performances measured on-
wafer on this kind of devices. 
 
S
G
G
S
G
G
56
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III. 
3D INTEGRATED SOLENOIDS 
In this part, 3D integrated solenoid will be described in 
terms of geometry. Then, high frequency measurements will 
put in obviousness the real interest of such a device in the 
C-band. 
A. Solenoid geometry description 
We have already reported the fact that 3D TSV based 
solenoid can be implemented within a silicon die [22]. This 
process has been developed by IPDiA (formally NXP 
semiconductors). Contrary to the approach proposed in [23] 
where solenoid lies on top of the substrate, our 3D solenoid 
uses the thickness of the silicon as the third dimension. 
Indeed each turn of our solenoid is fabricated with the TSV 
as the vertical sides. A front side and back side metallization 
of the bulk wafer lead to connect the top and the bottom 
tracks, thanks to the TSV, allowing creating loops 
embedded within the silicon. Thereby we obtain a square 
section 3D solenoid architecture. On the top side of the 
silicon, a second level of metal is also used to realize MOM 
capacitors with a density of 100  pF/mm2. 
Copper is deposited onto front and back sides of a 300 
μm depth high resistivity silicon substrate (HRS) according 
to a pattern defined in Figure 2. The vias are partially filled 
with the same metal on the external sides as highlighted by 
the SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy) picture in Figure 
1(b). Consequently N-turns 3D solenoids consist of N 
elementary spirals placed side by side and connected in the 
direction of the pitch between two consecutive vias (see 
Figure 2). Due to the TSV technology process, parameters 
such as via diameter and via height are fixed and so cannot 
be 
modified. 
In 
our 
case, 
the 
aspect 
ratio 
AR 
(height/diameter) is equal to 4. To avoid mechanical stress, 
the pitch between two consecutive vias is set to a minimum 
value equal to 125 μm. Nonetheless, the dimension of the 
metal tracks in front and back sides can be modified in order 
to improve the intrinsic component electrical characteristics 
as suggested by [24]. Hence the solenoid is defined 
according to its number of turns N, its width Dy and the 
metal track width W (that can be different between top and 
bottom traces). A change in the metal tracks width will also 
impact the spacing SP between two consecutive metal 
tracks. 
B. Solenoid measurements 
To support our theoretical investigations, solenoids with 
1 to 6 turns were designed and grown on silicon. Then the 
designed test-case inductors have been placed within 
conventional GSG pads (Figures 3 and 4) and measured 
using a network analyzer PNA8364B from Agilent 
Technologies, with high frequency micro-probes. Full two 
ports S-parameter were performed for each device up to 20 
GHz.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Synoptic representation of a 5 turns 3D solenoid within its RF 
test structure (bulk silicon is not represented on the picture) 
 
 
Figure 3.  X-ray diffraction picture of the solenoid dedicated module 
(source IPDiA) – The bottom white face of the picture is the top side of the 
wafer 
During the RF characterization, the wafer was stacked to 
a grounded chuck to ensure a global reference ground to the 
wafer, the network analyzer and the micro-probes. If no 
precautions are taken, a short circuit appears between the 
grounded chuck and the bottom metal tracks of the wafer. As 
a consequence, a sheet of glass fiber (~100 μm thick, r =4.5) 
has been placed between them. The complete set of 
solenoids is shown on the previous X-ray diffraction picture. 
TSV can clearly be identified as a small vertical dark bar. 
For each measured device, self-inductance value and quality 
factor have been extracted on five crystals. In [22], we have 
already shown that the self-inductance variation versus the 
number of turns N was really close to a linear law, 
suggesting a very low inductive coupling between the loops. 
This is due to the minimum pitch defined by the process that 
is relatively large (= 125 μm). As a consequence, the 
capacitive coupling is also reduced, which allows using the 
inductors at several GHz. Furthermore, due to the typical 
57
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

geometry of the solenoid, the quality factor is improved up to 
several GHz compared to classical planar IC coils either in 
CMOS or BiCMOS processes. A physical lumped elements 
electrical model was proposed also to simulate the device 
behavior versus frequency (see Section C.1). This model is 
indeed really helpful to generate contour plots in order to 
pick-up the right solenoid parameters (N, W, Dy, SP) and 
thus decrease the design iterations. Nonetheless, as any other 
compact model, it is not correlated to the global environment 
of the device (parasitic coupling, ground rails …). So in view 
of designing passive filters, we have also developed an EM 
(Electro-Magnetic) based model. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Illustration of the measurement test-bench used to guarantee a 
good ground reference together with an isolation between bottom metal 
traces and chuck (case of a 2-turns solenoid) 
C. 3D solenoid modeling 
Solenoid modeling is addressed first with a classical 
approach (i.e., compact modeling) and then with a 3D EM 
solver to provide modeling within a real environment. 
 
1) Physical compact modeling 
A first compact and physical model of the TSV based 
solenoid has been already issued. The schematic circuit of 
the model is presented in figure 5. This model has been built 
in order to figure-out the solenoid behavior within its RF 
test structure. Traditional model [25] –also called the “9 
elements model” used for planar coils cannot be used in that 
case due to the 3D specificity of this kind of device with the 
parasitic 3D effects introduced by the vias. Our choice has 
been to follow the physical configuration of a 1-turn 
solenoid to deduce an RLC equivalent circuit model in the 
frequency range 100 MHz-10 GHz. 
Knowing that each of both vias is modeled by two 
equivalent half-vias, the self-inductances of the top and 
bottom metal tracks as well as the vias are characterized 
respectively by Lbot, Ltop and Lvia. The metal tracks and the 
vias are sensitive to the skin effect. The skin depth in the 
copper, with a conductivity of 5.8 107 S/m, at 100 MHz and 
1 GHz equals 6 μm and 2 μm respectively. Hence an RL 
ladder scheme [26] has been used to predict the increasing 
resistance against frequency for each of the metal tracks 
(Rtop and Rbot) and the vias (Rvia). 
 
Figure 5.  Schematic view of the equivalent circuit consider to derive the 
compact electrical model of 3D TSV based solenoid 
Regarding the coupling between two adjacent vias, we 
can distinguish several contributions. The first one is the 
capacitance Cox_via introduced by the oxide barrier (to avoid 
copper diffusion within the substrate) between the via and 
the substrate. The second one corresponds to the capacitance 
Csub and the resistance Rsub of the substrate. As mentioned in 
the measurement results section, the backside of the wafer 
has been protected from the grounded chuck with a sheet of 
glass fiber. Notwithstanding, a capacitance Cmasse exists 
between them and needs to be evaluated. The capacitance 
between the two consecutive top metal tracks (i.e. function 
of the spacing SP) is characterized by Cc. In the case of 1-
turn 3D solenoid, Clines is very weak due to the small area of 
the top metal tracks facing each other. 
In order to address multi-turns solenoid modeling, each 
of the previously defined section is added for each loop of 
the solenoid. Coupling capacitances as well as coupling 
inductances are also implemented. Based on available test-
structures, a good correlation has been obtained between 
both simulated and measured data [27]. 
The primary mean of this compact model is to correctly 
predict the main electrical characteristics of the device such 
as: 
- 
its self-inductance value  
- 
its quality factor (in link with resistive and substrate 
losses) 
- 
its Self-Resonant Frequency (SRF) 
 
Typically, designing an inductor can be very time 
consuming and needs most of time a real experience with 
this kind of device. In fact, the trade-off between series 
resistance and substrate losses represents a conventional 
scenario that RF designers need to address in an efficient and 
quick way when using on-chip inductors in their circuits. So, 
a design tool capable of optimizing the inductor layout by 
considering all these constraints (input parameters and 
overall performance) can significantly accelerate the design 
flow and have an impact on the time to market. Thus, a 
compact model that can predict the performances of a coil 
based on the parameters listed above – related to the input 
geometrical parameters (W, N, Dy), is really helpful and can 
be used to generate contour-plots in order to pick-up the right 
geometry and decrease the implementation time. The 
GSG
GSG
Grounded 
chuck
Glass 
fiber
GSG
GSG
Grounded 
chuck
Glass 
fiber
58
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

following figures, propose some typical contour plots that 
can be generated with the proposed compact model: 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 6.  Simulated variations of (a) the self-inductance value and (b) 
quality factor vs. frequency for 1-turn solenoid (Dy was set to a fixed value 
during the simulations). These plots have been deduced from 2-ports S-
parameter anlysis with a classical CAD simulator (i.e., SPICE). Compact 
model described in the previous paragraph has been used to extract the 
devices performances 
Thanks to these plots, designers are able to find the 
compliant coil layout for achieving a specific inductance 
with the highest Q possible for a given technology of interest 
(only process parameters are required in the equations of the 
model). For example, considering a 700 pH inductor at 1 
GHz, one can decide to have copper tracks that are 70 µm 
width with a 1-turn configuration. In that case, the expected 
quality-factor  is equal to 22. 
Nevertheless, this approach could not anticipate on the 
device behavior when placed in its environment. In micro 
wave a special care needs to be taken during the layout 
topology translation to tackle the unwanted current loops and 
identify both parasitic magnetic and electric couplings. 
Parasitic 
extractor 
provided 
by 
Electronic 
Design 
Automation (EDA) vendors are of particular relevance 
(when coupled with full-wave analysis) in that case 
especially for planar applications [28]. Unfortunately, they 
are not optimized to solve 3D problems like the one 
occurring in bulk silicon substrate. 
 
2) Electro-Magnetic (EM) modeling 
Dedicated test-cases presented in the previous paragraph 
have been simulated using the 3D FEM solver EMPro from 
Agilent. First, TSV have been defined within the substrate 
stack taking into account the partial fill of the vias with 
copper, the barrier between the copper and the silicon bulk 
(to avoid copper diffusion in the silicon). Geometry of the 
vias is also simplified: the circular shape of the TSV is 
converted to an octagonal one, in order to speed-up the 
mesh and thus the simulation time without losing any 
accuracy on the results. Bulk silicon has been described 
with the help of its relative dielectric permittivity (r=11.9) 
and its resistivity - equal to 1000 Ω.cm. First a comparison 
between simulated and measured S-parameter has been 
performed (see Figure 7). Then, both self-inductance value 
and quality factor against frequency have been computed for 
comparison purpose (Figure 8). Self-inductance and quality 
factor values have been extracted according to the following 
relations: 
 
freq
Y
imag
L









2
1
11
 
(2) 




11
11
real Y
imag Y
Q
 
 
(3) 
 
where freq is the working frequency and Y11 is the input 
admittance. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7.  Comparison between Measured and simulated data on both (a) 
Reflection and (b) transmission S-parameter (1-turn solenoid) 
59
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

From the available test-cases, a pretty good agreement is 
found for the self-inductance as well as the quality factor 
variations versus frequency.  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 8.  Comparison between measured and simulated data for 1-turn 
solenoid (a): self inductance value (b) quality factor and 2-turns solenoid 
(c): self-inductance value (d) quality factor 
The SRF (Self-Resonant-Frequency) is also well 
predicted suggesting that the parallel capacitances are also 
well evaluated with the proposed approach. Typically, a 
difference of 3 % is observed on the self-inductance value 
and 10 % on the overall variations of the quality factor. This 
validates our approach that will be used to design a 3D 
solenoid 
based 
passive 
filter. 
Nonetheless, 
these 
measurements and simulations have been performed on-
wafer without any coating on top of the substrate. In the 
following part of this paper, we propose to study a single 
test-case combining a chip, a package and a line on a board 
to validate our EM tool for packaging applications as well. 
IV. 
PACKAGE MEASUREMENT AND MODELING 
The following section will describe an original approach 
that 
has 
been 
considered 
to 
perform 
S-parameter 
measurements on a commercial package (QFN type).  
A. Test-case description and measurement 
Indeed, 
the 
emerging 
applications 
of 
wireless 
communications require effective low-cost approaches to 
microwave and RF packaging in order to meet the demand of 
the commercial marketplace. In that sense, surface 
mountable packages and especially plastic packages are a 
cost effective solution for low-cost assembly and packaging. 
However, plastic packages, whatever their types (standard 
QFN or flip chip based solutions such as BGA) contain 
unavoidable 
parasitic 
elements. 
As 
a 
consequence, 
development of characterization techniques for surface 
mounted packages is motivated by the need to predict the 
parasitic behavior of packages at microwave frequencies. In 
fact, the capability of accurately and easily characterizing 
packages provides a means to study and correctly model 
their high frequency behavior. Work in the literature relies 
mainly on EM simulations [29] [30]. In this paper, we will 
present an “on wafer” method of measuring the microwave 
performances of a chain containing a chip, a package and a 
50Ω line on Rogers substrate. Final goal of this part is to 
calibrate the EM simulator (in our case EMPro from Agilent) 
based on this single test-case. 
B. Package modeling 
One of the main problems of package characterization is 
that the terminals of the lead-frame are not accessible 
without significant modification to the investigated 
structure. To overcome the need for this modification, we 
have divided the test-case into three main parts. A 
photograph of the test case is provided on Figure 9. 
So the first part of the test-case is a BiCMOS (NXP in house 
process) silicon die containing a coplanar line. The line is 
designed in such a way that it allows GSG probing with 
conventional micro-probes from Cascade Micro-Tech. This 
line is then connected with the help of 4 bond wires (2 for 
the signal and 2 for each ground path) to the pins of the 
package. Classical 20 μm diameter gold bond-wires have 
been considered for this study. Then, to be able to measure 
the electrical characteristics of the package, it is mounted 
onto a RO4003C substrate from Rogers Corporation 
(thickness = 406 μm, r = 3.38, tan() = 2.7e-3). A specific 
coplanar access is also designed on the substrate allowing 
also GSG probing (bottom side of the photograph in Figure 
9). 
In order to perform 2-ports S-parameter measurements, 
the package is then opened to access the GSG pads on the 
chip. Prior to measurements, a Short-Open-Load-Thru 
(SOLT) calibration is performed. Four test-cases have been 
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
0.1
1
10
100
freq (GHz)
L (nH)
die1
die2
die3
die4
die5
Simu
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.1
1
10
100
freq (GHz)
abs(Q)
die1
die2
die3
die4
die5
Simu
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0
freq (GHz)
L (nH)
die1
die2
die3
die4
die5
Simu
0
5
10
15
20
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0
freq (GHz)
abs(Q)
die1
die2
die3
die4
die5
Simu
60
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

measured up to 50 GHz to ensure a good reproducibility of 
the measurements. Results are presented in Figure 10. 
The first results clearly show a good reproducibility 
between the measurements. Insertion and Return loss of the 
total chain are respectively equal to -1.3 and -10 dB at 4 
GHz, which makes such a package suitable for multi-GHz 
applications. Of course, many improvements can be 
considered 
to enhance 
these performances (ground 
connection, wire loop profile, down bonds implementation). 
But, these techniques will not be addressed in this paper. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Photograph of the designed test-case suitable for microwave 
package characterization and modeling. Configuration allows 2 ports 
micro-probing: one on the inner die and the second one on the Rogers top 
metal (bottom of the picture) 
Aim of this section is to calibrate the 3D FEM solver 
EMPro from Agilent to correctly handle the S-parameter 
variations of the previously measured test-case. The 3D EM 
model should estimate the electrical performances of the 
package as accurately as possible, but on the other hand, 
should not be too complex for the EM simulations of more 
complex blocks. The following methodology has been 
applied: 
 
Bond wires cross-section have been first described 
with a square shape. Generally speaking, all round 
shapes should be avoided as much as possible as 
they are really time consuming for the simulations 
and the 3D mesh generation. 
 
Bond wire profiles were estimated based on a circle 
shape assumption as proposed by Alimenti et al. 
[31]. 
 
Package terminals are defined into two equal steps 
(each is 100 μm thick) to have accurate modeling of 
the thick metal. One should try also to approximate 
their geometries with few corner points as possible 
but the modifications should not affect the electrical 
response of the simulator. 
 
Coplanar ports have been used on both the chip and 
substrate lines. 
 
All dielectrics are defined with finite bricks taking 
into account their relative permittivity and the loss 
tangent or the conductivity. Plastic brick is open 
with an “Air” brick in order to stick as much as 
possible to the measurement configuration. 
 
The common ground reference was set to the bottom 
metal of the Rogers substrate. 
 
Both reflection and transmission S-parameter obtained 
from EM simulations are plotted in Figure 10 together with 
measured data. The simulated results corroborate the 
measured data with a good accuracy up to several tenths of 
gigahertz. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 10.  Comparison between measurements and simulated data vs. 
frequency on the package test-case – (a) transmission parameter, (b) 
reflection parameter 
To conclude this part, the EM simulation tool enables 
relatively accurate and complex package analysis. So based 
on these two previously studied test-cases (solenoid and 
package) the FEM solver is calibrated and ready for 
embedded filter design with solenoid based TSV. 
V. 
4 GHZ BAND-PASS FILTER MODELING AND DESIGN 
Based on the previous building blocks that have been 
studied in previous sections (i.e., package and solenoid 
measurements together with EM modeling), this part will 
focus on the design feasibility of a 4 GHz band-pass filter. 
plastic
die
G
G
S
Rogers 
substrate
G
G
S
Bond wires
Rogers
top metal
plastic
opening
plastic
die
G
G
S
Rogers 
substrate
G
G
S
Bond wires
Rogers
top metal
plastic
die
G
G
S
Rogers 
substrate
G
G
S
Bond wires
Rogers
top metal
plastic
opening
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
1.E+09
1.E+10
1.E+11
Frequency (Hz)
S21 (dB)
Simulation
sample1
sample2
sample3
sample4
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.E+09
1.E+10
1.E+11
Frequency (Hz)
S11 (dB)
Simulation
sample1
sample2
sample3
sample4
61
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The objective is to design a band pass filter with a maximum 
of 4dB insertion loss. 
A. Schematic design 
First, a third order Chebyshev architecture has been 
considered to design a filter prototype. Nonetheless, taking 
into account coefficient in [32] and applying the well known 
transform from low-pass to band-pass filter, lead to an 
inductor value in the serial electrical path that is equal to 
9.13 nH. Such an inductor will have a high serial electrical 
resistance that will seriously affect the insertion loss of the 
overall filter and will also have a Self-Resonant Frequency 
too close to operating frequency clearly limiting its usage. 
So, a choice has been made to split the filter into two 
different parts as shown on Figure 11 and already proposed 
in [16]. The first part is a 5th order low-pass filter while the 
second one is a 3rd order band-stop filter. Both are 
Chebyshev filters. By doing this, only MOM capacitors and 
small inductances values (i.e., 451 pH for L6 and L10) will 
be present in the serial path of the filters. This approach 
allows reaching the specified level of insertion loss. 
All inductors will be designed using TSV with the same 
architecture as the ones presented in the first part of this 
document. The quality factors of inductors L6/L10 have been 
simulated prior to implementation and are equal to 10, which 
is sufficient for the targeted application. For inductors placed 
on the parallel paths (i.e., L1, L3, L5 and L9) their impact is 
really low regarding the insertion loss. 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Schematic view of the 4 GHz band-pass filter considered for 
this study 
For the capacitors, a choice has been made to use the 
“free” MOM capacitor offered by the process. In fact two 
metallization are present and can be patterned as well on the 
top-side of the wafer. They are separated by a classical 
oxide with a density of 0.1 nF/mm2. A very low serial 
resistance value induced by the capacitor is expected to 
result from the use of two thick copper layers as device 
electrodes. Furthermore, very precise values of capacitance 
can be obtained since its relative precision is driven by the 
oxide thickness, which is really low (+/- 5%). 
All these components will of course interact one with 
another leading to a change in the frequency response of the 
filter. That’s why, a top level EM simulation is required to 
adjust and optimize the topology of the overall filter taking 
into account the interconnections as well as the ground return 
path. 
B. Layout Implementation 
Special care has been taken to optimize the electrical 
resistance on the serial path. Wherever possible, the RF path 
was designed by stacking both levels of metallization 
connected together using vias. Orientation and aspect ratio 
of capacitors have been chosen in such a way to minimize 
the resistive losses. A view of the simulated filter is shown 
on Figure 12. 
First order dimensions of the solenoids (Dy, N) have 
been deduced from the analytical model provided in [22]. 
The value of the ground path inductance (metal tracks + 
bumps) is then taken into account as they participate to the 
self-inductance value from the RF path to the ground 
(inductors L1, L3, L5 and L9). The metal track inductances 
have been calculated in reference to partial inductance 
concept proposed by Ruehli and Zhong [33][34]. Electrical 
parameters of the bumps have been evaluated by calculation 
and single EM simulations as proposed in [35]. 
LC tanks (L6, C7 and L10, C11) in the stop-band filter 
have been realized with one-turn solenoids. Then prior to 
top simulations, each solenoid of the filter is placed with 
care in order to avoid as much as possible coupling between 
them. Typically the maximum space is considered, and an 
orientation of 90° between each inductor is applied to 
minimize magnetic coupling. Dimensions of the whole filter 
are 3.6x2.4 mm2 and clearly outperform conventional 
microwave structures such as hairpin filter for similar 
application [30]. The full structure is then simulated within 
the package with the bump connection to the Rogers 
substrate. Results are presented on Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Top view of the simulated 4 GHz band-pass filter. Plastic of the 
package is not represented on the picture for clarity reason. 
From the available results, the filter exhibits insertion 
and return loss of 2.6 and 16 dB respectively. Insertion 
losses are clearly within the specifications even if they are 
higher than classical micro-strip filters. The main 
contributors to the insertion losses are both inductors L6 and 
RO4033C
Silicon die
Bumps
Rogers
top metal
L1
L5
L6
L10
L9
L3
C2 C4
C8
C11
C7
RFin
RFout
GND
GND
3.6 mm
2.4 mm
RO4033C
Silicon die
Bumps
Rogers
top metal
L1
L5
L6
L10
L9
L3
C2 C4
C8
C11
C7
RFin
RFout
GND
GND
3.6 mm
2.4 mm
62
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

L10 for whom electrical resistance increases very fast with 
the frequency. 
C. Discussion 
The approach described here gives indeed good results 
in case of moderate, loaded quality-factors (i.e., few units). 
Furthermore, it corroborates with the performances level 
already simulated by Georgia Tech on High Resistive 
Silicon (HRS) substrate [19]. On the other hand, it seems 
that this solenoid architecture is not appropriate in case of 
narrow fractional bandwidth where higher loaded quality 
factors  are required. 
 
Figure 13.  Simulation results of the proposed filter. Dark blue line 
corresponds to loss-less schematic filter simulated with ADS® schematic. 
 
For these very specific applications, classical micro-strip 
filters deposited on low-loss substrates such as ceramic 
should be considered. TSV based solenoids can be used to 
build compact filtering applications up to several GHz. In 
fact, as shown by the solenoid characteristics on Figure 8(b) 
and Figure 8(d), the solenoid suffers from resistive losses at 
high frequencies on one side and from moderate SRF on the 
other side. The former effect is impacted by the classical 
phenomenon occurring at high frequencies within metallic 
conductors - the skin effect - while the latter one is due to the 
coupling capacitance between via metallization and the 
silicon substrate. One way to reduce it consists in using very 
high aspect-ratio TSV in combination with thinner silicon 
substrate. In the following part of this contribution, we 
propose to design a 42 GHz band-pass filter based on high 
aspect-ratio vias (50/7). In that case, solenoid type of 
component should be avoided and different filter architecture 
must be proposed. 
VI. 
V-BAND BAND-PASS FILTER MODELING AND DESIGN 
TSV building brick has been identified as a key enabler 
in view of promoting either C2C (chip to chip), C2W (chip 
to wafer), W2W (wafer to wafer) 3D IC integration in order 
to support high performances chips [37]. In a recent work 
[1], and in the previous study depicted in this document, we 
have shown some results obtained on 3D based solenoids 
band-pass filter at 4 GHz. Idea was to use low aspect ratio 
TSV to make embedded solenoids. Q-factor of the obtained 
devices was really promising (vs. planar solutions) 
especially below 5 GHz [22]. However, the devices suffer 
from the low self-resonant frequency due to the parasitic 
capacitance between the metal from the via and the silicon 
substrate, clearly limiting the range of applications of this 
kind of devices to the L and S bands. In fact, the capacitance 
between the via and the substrate is given by the following 
relation: 
 
ܥ௩௔௟ ൌ 2ߨ.ߝ௢ߝ௥݄
݈݊ ቀܴଶ
ܴଵቁ
 
 
(4) 
In this relation, R1 is the inner radius of the via while R2 
is the outer one. R2-R1 is no more than the thickness of the 
diffusion barrier between metal and the substrate. Typically, 
for low aspect ratio via considered in this study, this 
capacitance is in the order of 11 pF; so its impact is not 
negligible on the solenoid SRF.  
So, one can clearly see the interest of using high aspect ratio 
vias with reduced substrate thickness down to 50 um. 
Furthermore, this will have an impact on solenoid density. 
So, for the filter proposed in the following part of this 
document, the architecture will be updated to avoid using 
solenoid that are clearly not suitable for high frequency 
operations (V-band targeted here). The second interest of 
TSV at high frequencies is the availability of such 
interconnect to make a clean and short connection to the 
ground reference (bipolar emitter, …). Indeed, this is a 
crucial point for millimeter-Wave applications and TSV will 
certainly help improving it like it is done in most of AsGa 
based processes [38][39]. In the following section of this 
paper, we propose to use intrinsic properties of TSV to 
make a short inductance value together combined with a 
clean ground connection in order to make a 3rd order 42 
GHz band-pass filter. First, details about the filter 
architecture are given. Then another paragraph is devoted to 
the practical layout implementation of each of the sub-
blocks of the filter. Prior to filter simulation, EM simulation 
results of the transmission lines used in the filters are given 
and compared to measurement data. Finally an analysis 
related to different process options is given at the end.  
A. 42 GHz filter architecture 
Our first idea was to reproduce a classical 3rd order 
Chebyshev filter. Applying the well-known transform from 
low-pass to band-pass filter and using the ad-hoc coefficient 
found in [32], it comes out that a 0.76 nH inductor appears 
to take place in the serial path of the filter (i.e., the serial LC 
resonator). In addition, the self-inductance values of the 
parallel resonator are in the order of 50 pH, which is weak 
and can be achieved with the help of one TSV. A 0.76 nH 
solenoid is easily achievable but will not support 40 GHz 
applications. The self-resonant frequency (SRF) is by far 
below this value. That’s why, it has been decided  to remove 
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
1.E+09 2.E+09 3.E+09 4.E+09 5.E+09 6.E+09 7.E+09
freq (Hz)
S-pars (dB)
Loss less
EMPro – S21
EMPro – S11
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
1.E+09 2.E+09 3.E+09 4.E+09 5.E+09 6.E+09 7.E+09
freq (Hz)
S-pars (dB)
Loss less
EMPro – S21
EMPro – S11
63
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the serial LC resonator and replace it by one parallel 
resonator placed between two /4 micro-strip lines. Doing 
that way, only 50 pH to 65 pH inductors are necessary to 
design the filter. Such inductance will be then TSV based. 
So the filter will use the well-known property of the quarter-
wave lines to invert impedances. The schematic of the filter 
is provided on the figure below: 
 
 
 
Figure 14.  Schematic view of the 3rd order 42 GHz band-pass filter 
considered 
So, basically, the filter will require the implementation 
of transmission lines, metal-oxide-metal (MOM) capacitors 
and short connections. The following part of this document 
will focus on the implementation of each of these sub-
blocks. 
B. Physical layout implementation 
All devices that are used in this study are compliant with 
classical IC design rules (for this example, we have applied 
rules from NXP in house BiCMOS process).  
1) Transmission Lines EM modeling 
A synoptic representation of a transmission line pattern 
is proposed on the following figure: 
 
 
 
Figure 15.  Layout pattern of the considered transmission lines used to 
calibrate the 3D EM simulator 
Transmission lines considered here are mandatory to 
calibrate the 3D EM solver (i.e., EMPRo) and are based on 
the slow-wave concept and uses the latest metal level of the 
BEOL (Back-End Of Line) to propagate the signal. 
Typically, in this study, it is a 3 µm thick copper layer. All 
of them have been measured up to 110 GHz with a network 
analyzer from Agilent Technologies. Prior to parameter 
extraction, de-embedding was performed using a classical 
two-steps Open-Short method. A typical view of a 
transmission line between GSG pads is proposed on Figure 
16. The bottom metal layer of the process is used for two 
main purposes: 
 
To shield the line and thus reduce and prevent the 
losses within the substrate. In fact, the metal shield is 
implemented in order to block the electric field 
penetration inside the lossy substrate. On the other 
side, a patterned design is adopted to be compliant 
with design rules and also to break current loops in 
it. In fact, these loops can have a significant impact 
on line attenuation. 
 
To connect the bottom face of the chip using TSV. 
TSV are used to connect the ground plane for the 
micro-strip line to the back side of the chip, which is 
indeed the real ground reference. 
 
 
Figure 16.  Photograph of a transmission line within GSG pads for two-
ports S-parameter measurements, used to calibrate the 3D EM simulator 
 
 
 
Figure 17.  Comparison between simulated (EM) and measured S-
parameter obtained on a transmission line (length = 2000 µm, width = 15 
µm , spacing  = 8.3 µm ) 
64
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 18.  Comparison between measured and simulated data vs. 
frequency for transmission line characteristic impedance Zc, attenuation 
alpha and quality factor Q (length  = 2000 µm, width = 15 µm, spacing = 
8.3 µm) 
 
Figure 19.  Comparison between measured and simulated data vs. 
frequency for transmission line characteristic impedance Zc, attenuation 
alpha and quality factor Q (length = 2000 µm, width = 15 µm, spacing = 
8.3 µm, 4 bends) 
A physical wide-band electrical modeling has been 
already proposed to deal with the electric behavior of such 
devices [44]. The accuracy is really excellent but like for 
solenoid this model can of course not take into account the 
global environment of the line. That’s why, again an EM 
model is mandatory to correctly simulate the filter response. 
EM 
simulator 
has 
been 
calibrated 
based 
on 
measurements performed up to 110 GHz on various 
geometric variants of the previously described transmission 
lines. Calibration has been performed based on S-parameter 
variations and extracted parameters. These electrical 
parameters are: 
- 
The characteristic impedance Zc (ohms) 
- 
The attenuation  (dB/mm) 
- 
The quality factor Q 
Based on the available data and results, the correlation 
between measurements and EM simulations is really 
satisfying up to 110 GHz. From a performance point of view, 
the attenuation constant is equal to 0.66 dB/mm, which is in 
good agreement with results already published in the 
literature [40]. The patterned shield plays a significant role in 
reducing the attenuation of the lines (i.e., in the order of 1.3 
dB/mm without shield [41]). This is the last building brick 
necessary to achieve the design of the 42 GHz band-pass 
filter. 
 
2) Filter implementation 
The proposed transmission lines have a width of 15 µm 
and the ratio width/height (W/H) is equal to 1.75 to ensure a 
50 ohms configuration. The simulated attenuation is equal to 
0.53 dB/mm and the total length of each line is equal to 
1.134 mm leading to an overall attenuation of  the lines equal 
to 1.21 dB. Based on simulations, characteristic impedance 
of the transmission lines, Zc, has been found equal to 50.5 
ohms at 42 GHz. Taking into account this value, the new 
parallel inductance and capacitance values (see Figure 14) 
are calculated using the initial values deduced from the ad-
hoc coefficients of the Chebyshev filter synthesis: 
 
ܥ௡௘௪ ൌ ܻ௖
ଶ
ܥ߱଴
ଶ 
(5) 
ܮ௡௘௪ ൌ ܼ௖
ଶ
ܮ߱଴
ଶ 
(6) 
 
where Zc is the characteristic impedance of the line (i.e., 50.5 
ohms), Yc=1/Zc and 0=2f0 (f0=42 GHz). 
 
MOM (Metal Oxide Metal) capacitors are designed 
using two levels of metallization. Bottom level uses the 
lowest level offered by the process (same as the ground 
plane for transmission line) while top metal is used for the 
top electrode. Doing like that, an average density of 4.5 
pF/mm2 is achieved allowing designing capacitors with 
values up to 0.5 pF. Like for transmission lines, the lowest 
metal is connected to the ground reference with the help of 
TSV. It should be noted here that high aspect ratio vias 
allow decreasing the ground short inductance, which is 
mandatory at very high frequencies. 
A special care has been taken during the implementation 
of the capacitor in order to reduce as much as possible the 
parasitic inductance value. In that sense, the form factor of 
the device must be chosen accordingly with a high ratio 
width/length. 
Regarding 
the 
parallel 
inductances 
and 
short 
connections, the basic idea here consists in using the TSV to 
make the parallel inductance in the LC resonator and thus 
the connection to the ground reference. The self-inductance 
of a single via can, of course, not be changed and exhibits a 
fixed value of 22 pH (deduced from EM simulations). In 
order to adjust the parallel self-inductance value, the 
length/width of the metal track that connects the /4 lines to 
65
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the vias can vary. At the same time, as explained in the 
previous part of this paper, each TSV will also present a 
parasitic capacitance to the substrate due to the presence of 
the diffusion barrier. In our case, this capacitance is equal to 
12.8 fF/via. It is then necessary to adjust the final value of 
the MOM capacitances taking into account the capacitance 
inherited from the TSV. 
Finally, the layout topology of the filter is proposed in 
Figure 20. 
C. Simulation results 
EM simulations have been performed up to 80 GHz on 
the previous structure taking into account nominal process 
parameters. Prior to simulations, the bottom metal patterned 
shield has been simplified to decrease the mesh complexity 
as well as the simulation time. On the other side, these 
simplifications must lead to the same level of accuracy. So, 
the patterned metal shield is made of metal fingers of 5 µm 
width and 1 µm spacing. The filter has been simulated in its 
global environment including the bumps to connect it to the 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 20.  Top view (a) and 3D view – the gray bottom plate is the ground 
reference of the device (b) of the simulated band-pass filter 
active die, and with and underfill material between the 
stacked dies (not represented on the figures above). 
Simulation results are proposed in the figure below: 
 
 
Figure 21.  Simulated variations of transmission and reflection S-parameter 
of the proposed filter (nominal process parameters with copper back-end) 
IL (Insertion Loss) and RL (Return Loss) are found to be 
equal to -2.0 dB and -18.5 dB respectively at 42 GHz. It 
appears that the losses are mainly dominated by the 
transmission lines losses. One way to reduce these losses 
consists in using thicker metal but requires process updates 
that are not always compliant with cost efficiency. The 
bandwidth of the filter at -3 dB is equal to 12.3 GHz, which 
was predicted by the theory. The filter exhibits a reduced 
footprint of about 2 mm2 compared to classical interposer 
done with LTCC substrate [42] [43]. A summary of 
simulated filters intrinsic properties is proposed in the table 
below: 
 
TABLE I. 
OVERVIEW OF FILTERS CHARACTERISTICS 
 
C-band filter 
V-band filter
Low-density TSV 
High density TSV
f0
4 GHz 
42 GHz
ILa at f0
-2,6 dB 
-2,0 dB
RLb at f0
-16,0 dB 
-18,5 dB
Frac. Bandwidthc
16 % 
29 %
footprint
8,6 mm2 
2 mm2
a. 
Insertion loss 
b. 
Return loss 
c. 
Bandwidth is calculated at -3dB 
 
However, the level of performance might be improved by 
looking into the best process options. Simulations have been 
performed in that sense and are presented in the last part of 
this work. 
D. Process options 
Several process options have been considered for 
investigation purpose: 
 
Thick copper: 8 µm instead of 3 µm 
 
Substrate resistivity: 20 ohms.cm instead of 200 
ohms.cm 
 
BEOL: Al back-end instead of Cu back-end 
 
Simulation results are on the following graph: 
 
66
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 22.  Variations of the Insertion Loss vs. frequency for different 
process options 
Based on available results, one can clearly see that if a 
shield metal is used to block the penetration of electrical 
filed, the silicon conductivity has a minor impact on the 
insertion loss of the filter (provided that the substrate 
resistivity is between 10 and 1000 ohms.cm). Indeed, as 
already mentioned earlier, the losses are dominated by 
resistive losses within the transmission lines. 
On the other side, one can remark that moving from Cu 
BEOL to Al BEOL only degrades the IL by 0.3 dB. Then 
this is a trade-off between process cost – compatibility 
between Al metal and Cu vias – process reliability.  In the 
same way increasing the Cu thickness from 3 to 8 µm, only 
improves the IL by 0.2 dB.   This point can be clearly 
understood if we take into account the skin depth of these 
materials at 42 GHz (i.e., 0.3 µm for Cu and 0.43 µm for Al). 
In fact it is relatively small compared to metal thickness. 
Conclusions would have been of course completely different 
for applications at lower frequencies (<5 GHz). But in that 
case such as design with /4 on silicon lines does not make 
sense. 
 
Changing the substrate resistivity also have a minor 
impact on the results for two reasons essentially: the 
presence of a bottom metal shield is the key point to 
reduce the transmission line losses within the 
substrate as suggested by [44] 
 
The use of high aspect-ratio within a “thin” substrate 
reduces drastically the losses induced by the TSV 
together with parasitic capacitive coupling with the 
substrate. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
In this paper, two band pass filters for 3D-IC integration 
are proposed. The former one centered at 4 GHz is based on 
low aspect-ratio TSV and uses 3D integrated solenoid to 
design inductive elements. The latter is made of high aspect-
ratio TSV combined with thin substrate. It uses /4 
transmission lines to make impedance inverters and thus 
inductive elements are designed using single vias. Capacitive 
elements are classically made with MOM devices for both 
types of filter. The electrical characteristics of each single 
element on silicon (transmission lines, integrated solenoid, 
single via) have been measured up to 110 GHz and results 
have been cross-checked with 3D FEM data in order to make 
the 3D EM solver calibration. Modeling of the passive 
interposer’s environment (i.e., the package and the under fill 
material) is also proposed and correlated to EM simulations. 
An original package characterization technique is also 
reported. It allows package modeling up to 50 GHz with high 
accuracy together with conventional measurements setup. 
For both filters, good performances have been achieved. 
A bandwidth of 16% and 29% are reached with insertion loss 
of -2.6 dB and -2.0 dB combined with return loss of -16 dB 
and -18.5 dB respectively at the center frequencies for the S-
band and V-band filters. It appears from these results that 
TSV based filtering applications are suitable for moderate 
loaded quality factor devices – typically few units. Classical 
micro-strip filters on LTCC should be preferred for very high 
loaded quality factors [45][46]. Investigation based on 
different process options is also proposed on the V-band 
filter. From available results on filter performances, they 
clearly highlight the interest of an efficient shielding 
technique rather than process updates. The presented 
technologies here show significant potential for millimeter-
wave applications and are expected to allow 3D IC 
integration of high performances circuits. In fact, in order to 
reduce the footprint and enhance the performances of the 
products, a displacement from wire-bonding technology to 
flip-chip technology with TSV based passive interposers will 
take place. This new approach will help reducing the 
products size, weight and cost. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has been realized with the support of the 
French Ministry of Industry and Finance through the 
European joint project Catrene 3DIM3. Author would like to 
thank Jean-René Tenailleau from IPDiA for providing us 
with the samples of 3D integrated solenoids. We also thank 
Fabrice Goulet from NXP for his implication in the RF 
characterization of the devices and the package. The authors 
also wish to acknowledge Philippe Torregrossa and Vincent 
Poisson from Agilent for fruitful discussions and valuable 
support on EM simulations.  We further wish to thank Dr. 
Ing. Sidina Wane from NXP for his valuable assistance in 
reviewing the paper and providing us with relevant 
suggestions.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] O. Tesson, S. Charlot, and M. Duplessis, “Step-by-step design 
and EM modeling of a 3D solenoid-based 4 GHz band-pass 
filter (BPF) using through silicon vias, Proc. of 4th 
International Conference on Advances in Circuits, Electronics 
and Micro-Electronics 2011 (CENICS 11), pp. 23-28. 
[2] P. Benkart, “ 3D chip stack technology using through-chip 
interconnects ”, IEEE J. Design and Test of Computers, vol. 
22, n°6, Dec. 2005, pp. 512-518. 
[3] S.W. Yoon, D.W. Yang, J.H. Koo, M. Padmanathan, and F. 
Carson, “3D TSV processes and its assembly/packaging”, 
67
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Proc. of IEEE International Conf. on 3D System Integration 
2009, 3DIC 09, pp. 1-5. 
[4] F. Murray, F. Le Cornec, S. Bardy, C. Bunel, Jan F.C. 
Verhoeven, F.C.M. van der Heuvel, J.H. Klootwijk, and F. 
Roozeboom, “Silicon based SiP: a new technology patform 
supported by very high quality passives and system level 
design tools, Proc. of 7th Silicon Monolithic Integrated 
Circuits in RF 2007 (SiRF 07), pp. 149-153. 
[5] Floyd, B. Pfeiffer, U. Reynolds, S. Valdes-Garcia, A. 
Haymes, C. Katayama, Y. Nakano, D. Beukema, T. Gaudier, 
and M. Soyuer, “Silicon millimeter-wave radio circuits at 60-
100GHz”, Proc. of 7th Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits 
in RF 2007 (SiRF 07), pp. 213-218. 
[6] K.C. Eun, D.Y. Jung, J.J. Lee, S.J. Cho, H.Y. Kim, I.S. Song, 
Y.C. Lee, W.I. Chang, I.Y. Oh, J.H. Bang, C.S. Park, “LTCC 
SoP integration of 60 GHz transmitter and receiver radios, in 
Proc. of  Asia-Pacific Microwave Conference 2008 (APMC 
08), pp. 1-4. 
[7] S.P. Voinigescu, T. Chalvatzis, K.H.K. Yau, A. Hazneci, A. 
Garg, S. Shahramian, T. Yao, M. Gordon, T.O. Dickson, E. 
Laskin, S.T. Nicolson, A.C. Carusone, L. Tchoketch-Kebir, 0. 
Yuryevich, G. Ng, B. Lai, and P. Liu “SiGe BiCMOS for 
analog, high-speed digital and millimetre-wave applications 
beyond 50 GHz”, in Proc. of BiCMOS Circuits and 
Technology Meeting 2006 (BCTM 06), pp. 1-8. 
[8] G. Avenier, M. Diop, P. Chevalier, G. Troillard, N. Loubet, J. 
Bouvier, L. Depoyan, N. Derrier, M. Buczko, C. Leyris, S. 
Boret, S. Montusclat, A. Margain, S. Pruvost, S.T. Nicolson, 
K.H.K. Yau, N. Revil, D. Gloria, D.  Dutartre, S.P. 
Voinigescu, and A. Chantre, “0.13 µm SiGe BiCMOS 
technology fully dedicated to mm-wave applications”, IEEE 
J. of Solid-State Circuits, vol 44, n°9, 2009, pp. 2312-2321. 
[9] W.D. Van Noort, A. Rodriguez, Hong Jiang Sun, F. Zaato,  N. 
Zhang, T. Nesheiwat, F. Neuilly, J. Melai, and E. Hijzen,  
“BiCMOS 
technology 
improvements 
for 
microwave 
application”,  in Proc. of BiCMOS Circuits and Technology 
Meeting 2008 (BCTM 08), pp. 93-96. 
[10] Thomas H. Lee, “Planar Microwave engineering”, Cambridge 
University Press, ISBN 0-521-83526-7, 2004. 
[11] Zequan Guo, Jiamming Zhou, Ming Wei, and Boyu Li, “Ku-
band 
filters 
using 
open-loop 
and 
quarter-wavelength 
resonators based on LTCC technology”, in Proc. of 2nd 
International 
Conference 
on 
consumer 
electronics, 
Communications and Networks 2012 (CECNet 12), pp. 1104-
1107. 
[12] Yuta Takagi, Kei Satoh, and Shoichi Narahashi, “New 
Approach for Configuring a parallel-planar dual-band 
bandpass 
filter 
by 
employing 
multilayered 
LTCC 
technologies”, in Proc. of IEEE Radio and Wireless 
Symposium 2012 (RWS 12), pp. 147-150. 
[13] T.Y. Huang, T.M. Shen, and R.B. Wu, “LTCC embedded 
laminated waveguide filters and couplers for microwave SiP 
applications”, in Proc. of IEEE Electrical Design of Advanced 
Packaging and Systems Symposium 2011 (EDAPS 11), pp. 1-
4. 
[14] S.M. Wu, M.H. Huang, C.H. Li, C.T. Kuo, and P. H. Yu, “A 
novel miniaturized coupled bandpass filter realized in 
laminate substrate”, in Proc. of the Asia-Pacific Microwave 
Conference 2011 (APMC 11), pp. 1929-1932. 
[15] F. Murray, “Silicon based system-in-package : a passive 
integration technology combined with advanced packaging 
and system based design tools to allow a breakthrough in 
miniaturization”, in Proc. of BiCMOS Circuits and 
Technology Meeting 2005 (BCTM 05), pp. 169-173. 
[16] C. Boucey, “Design and realisations of integrated filters on 
silicon for TV on mobile”, in Proc. of National Micro-Wave 
Days 2007 (JNM 07), pp. 1-4. 
[17] L. Martoglio, E.  Richalot, G. Lissorgues-Bazin, and O. 
Picon, “Low-cost inverted line in silicon/glass technology for 
filter in the Ka-band”, IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory. 
and Techniques., vol. 54, n°7, 2006, pp. 3084-3089. 
[18] R. Dekker, P.G.M. Baltus and H.G.R. Maas, “Substrate 
transfer for RF technologies”, IEEE Trans. on Electron 
Devices, vol. 50, n°3, March 2003, pp. 747-757. 
[19] V. Sridharan, “Design and fabrication of bandpass filters in 
glass interposer with through-package-vias (TPV)”, in Proc. 
of IEEE Electronic Components and Technology Conference 
2010  (ECTC 10), pp. 530-535. 
[20] Z. El Abidine and M. Okoniewski, “High-quality factor 
micromachined toroid and solenoid inductors”, in Proc. of 
European Microwave Integrated Circuit Conference 2007 
(EuMIC 07), pp. 354 357. 
[21] F. Hettstedt, H. Greve, U. Schurmann, A. Gerber, V. 
Zaporojtchenko, R. Knockel, F. Paupel, and E. Quandt, 
“Toroid microinductors with magnetic nano composite 
cores”, in Proc. of European Microwave Conference 2007 
(EMC 07), pp. 270-273. 
[22] M. Duplessis, O. Tesson, J.R. Tenailleau, F. Neuilly, and P. 
Descamps,  “Physical implementation of 3D integrated 
solenoids within silicon substrate for hybrid IC applications” , 
in Proc. of European Microwave Conference 2009 (EMC 09), 
pp. 1006-1009. 
[23] J.B. Yoon, B.K. Kim, C.H. Han, E. Yoon, and C.K. Kim, 
“Surface micromachined solenoid on-Si and on-glass 
inductors for RF applications”, IEEE Electron Device Letter, 
vol. 20, n°9, September 1999, pp. 487-489. 
[24] O. Tesson, “High density inductor, having high quality 
factor”, Patent WO 2009/128047, 2009. 
[25] S.S. Mohan, M. del Mar Hershenson, S.P. Boyd, and T.H.   
Lee, “Simple accurate expressions for planar spiral 
inductances”, IEEE J. of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 34, n°10, 
1999, pp. 1419-1424. 
[26] S. Kim and D.P. Neikirk, “Compact equivalent circuit model 
for the skin effect”, in Proc. of IEEE International Microwave 
Symposium 1996 (MTT-S 96), vol. 3, pp. 1815-1818. 
[27] M. Duplessis, “Contribution to RF characterization and 
modeling of 3D interconnection – through silicon vias – 
dedicated to a system in package”, PhD Thesis, University of 
Caen Basse-Normandie France, November 2010. 
[28] Cadence Design Systems, “Cadence QRC Extraction 
Datasheet”, 
http://www.cadence.com/products/rf/qrc 
extraction/pages/default.aspx, 2011. 
[29] I. Kelander, A.N. Arslan, L. Hyvonen, and S. Kangasmaa, 
“Modeling of 3D packages using EM simulators”, in Proc. of 
8th IEEE Workshop on Signal Propagation on Interconnects 
2004, (SPI 04), pp. 186-189. 
[30] R. Jackson, “A circuit topology for microwave modeling of 
plastic surface mount packages”, IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, vol 44, n°7, July 1996, pp. 1140-
1146. 
[31] F. Alimenti, P. Mezzanotte, L. Roselli, and R. Sorrentino, 
“ Modeling and characterization of the bonding-wire 
interconnection ”, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, vol 49, n°1, January 2001, pp. 142-150. 
[32] A.I. Zverev, “Handbook of filter synthesis”, ISBN 10: 
0471986801, Wiley Inter-Science, 1967. 
[33] A.E. Ruehli, “Inductance calculations in a complex Integrated 
circuit environment”, IBM J. Res. Develop., September 1972, 
pp 470-481. 
[34] G. Zhong and C. Koh-Koh, “Exact closed form formula for 
partial mutual inductances for on-chip interconnects”, in Proc. 
of IEEE International Conference on Computer Design 2002 
(ICCD 02), pp. 1349-1353. 
68
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[35] O. Tesson, S. Jacqueline, M. Duplessis, and P. Collander, 
“Hybrid integration of a decoupling system up to 6 GHz – 3D 
silicon based IPD combined with local interconnect 
modeling”, in Proc. of International Microelectronics and 
Packaging Society 2009 (IMAPS Nordic 09), pp. 45-50. 
[36] D. Brady, “The design, fabrication and measurement of 
microstrip filter and coupler circuits”, High Frequency 
Electronics, pp. 22-30, July 2002. 
[37] J.H. Lau, “ Evolution, challenge, and outlook of TSV, 3D IC 
integration and 3D silicon integration”,  in Proc. of 
International Symposium on  Advanced Packaging Materials 
2011, (APM 11), pp. 462-488. 
[38] J.S. Kofol, B.J.F. Lin, M. Mierzwinski, A. Kim, A. 
Armstrong, and R. Van Tuyl, “A backside via process for 
thermal resistance improvement demonstrated using GaAs 
HBTs”, in Proc. of 14th Annual IEEE Gallium Arsenide 
Integrated Circuit Symposium (GaAs IC 92), 1992, pp. 267-
270. 
[39] R.J. Shul, M.L. Lovejoy, J.C. Word, A.J. Howard, D. Rieger, 
and S.H. Kravitz, “High rate reactive ion etch and electron 
cyclotron resonance etching of GaAs via holes using thick 
polyimide and photoresist masks”, Journal of Vacuum 
Science & Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer 
Structures, vol 15, n°3, 1997, pp. 657-664. 
[40] T. Quémerais, L. Moquillon, J.M. Fournier, and P. Benech, 
“65-, 45-, and 32-nm aluminium and copper transmission-line 
model at millimeter-wave frequencies”, IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 58, n°9, 2010, pp. 
2426-2433.  
[41] O. Tesson, “Electrical characterisation of on-silicon CPW 
lines for mm wave applications”, Internal NXP report, June 
2008, unpublished. 
[42] Y. Yuanwei, Z. Yong, and Z. Jian, “Monolithic silicon 
micromachined Ka-band filters”,   International conference on 
Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technology 2008 (ICMMT 
08), vol 3, pp. 1397-1400. 
[43] Y.H. Cho, D.Y. Jung, Y.C. Lee, J.W. Lee, M.S. Song, E.S. 
Nam, S. Kang, and C.S. Park, “A fully embedded LTCC 
multilayer BPF for 3-D integration of 40-GHz radio”, IEEE 
Transactions on Advanced Packaging, vol. 30, n°3, 2007, pp. 
521-525. 
[44] L.F. Tiemeijer, R.M.T. Pijper, R.J. Havens, and O. Hubert, 
“Low-loss patterned ground shield interconnect transmission 
lines in advanced IC processes”, IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 55, n°9, 2010, pp. 
561-570.  
[45] K. Nishikawa, S. Tomohiro, T. Ichihiko, and K. Shuji, 
“Compact 60-GHz LTCC stripline parallel-coupled bandpass 
filter with parasitic elements for millimeter-wave system-on-
package”, in IEEE MTT-S Int. Dig., June 2007, pp. 1649-
1652. 
[46] J.-H. Lee, S. Pinel, J. Laskar, and M. M. Tentzeris, “Design 
and development of advanced cavity-based dual-mode filters 
using low-temperature co-fired ceramic technology for V-
band gigabit wireless systems”, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory 
Tech., vol. 55, n°9, Sept. 2009, pp. 1869-1879. 
 
 
 
69
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

