329
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Design of Rich Environment for Teaching Meaningful Mathematics to Low-
Achieving Students: Research Implications 
 
Orit Broza 
Faculty of Education 
Levinsky College  
Tel-Aviv, Israel  
Email: Oritbroza1@gmail.com 
 
Yifat Ben-David Kolikant  
School of Education 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem  
Jerusalem, Israel  
Email: Yifat.kolikant@mail.huji.ac.il
 
Abstract—The paper describes implications from a design-
based research in which a rich collaborative, computer-
supported learning environment was designed to promote 
meaningful mathematics among low-achieving students. Fifth-
grade students interchangeably solved decimal subtraction 
tasks with peers in the context of a computer game and 
simulations, and in discussion sessions led by their teachers, in 
foursomes. We describe the results of the first round of our 
design-based research, where we traced three such groups, 
using observations and interviews. We found that the 
computer context was both constructive and destructive, in 
terms of students’ learning. The group discussions did not 
yield the rich discussions we had hoped for. Yet, overall, the 
environment 
was 
successful 
because 
students 
gained 
meaningful mathematical knowledge and practiced active, 
thoughtful, and collaborative socio-mathematical behavior, 
which is dramatically different from what they were used to.  
Keywords: low-achieving students; support-rich environment; 
computer games; scaffolding; computer-supported collaborative 
learning.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The question of how students’ construction of 
meaningful knowledge can be supported represents an 
important challenge to both researchers and teachers. 
Teaching the complex topic of mathematics to low-achieving 
students (LAS) poses a special challenge, owing to LAS’s 
unique cognitive and behavioral characteristics [1]. The 
teaching and learning processes of LAS have been studied by 
examining different teaching methods, strategies, and tactics 
(e.g., [2][3]). However, we found sparse work on the 
effectiveness of rich environments, let alone environments 
involving 
computer-supported 
collaborative-learning 
(CSCL), on the learning processes and outcomes of LAS. 
In fact, LAS characteristics, which we describe next, 
might make one doubt the feasibility of teaching LAS basic 
mathematics, 
let 
alone 
in 
(Computer 
Supported) 
Collaborative Learning (CS)CL settings. Nonetheless, we 
hypothesized that a rich CSCL environment, involving a 
computer game, real context mathematics, peer discussions, 
and teacher mediation may be the key for addressing LAS’s 
unique and diversified needs.  Here, we describe the results 
of the first round of a design-based research we conducted to 
examine 
these 
hypotheses. 
First, 
we 
describe 
the 
characteristics of LAS. Then we review the literature and 
how it influenced our hypotheses and design. Next, we 
describe a study, the first round of a design-based research in 
which we examined our hypotheses. We traced the 
participation of 3 groups of four students each, in the 
activities we had designed, using various data sources, such 
as videotapes and audiotapes of the classes, as well as 
interviews and ad-hoc conversations with students and 
teachers, along with observations. We will discuss our 
findings and their practical implications on our design 
framework and the broader scientific community. Our main 
conclusion is that CSCL, when carefully designed, can 
promote LAS learning of meaningful mathematics as well as 
the development of sociomathematical norms.   
In Section II we review the literature on LAS as well as 
on successful interventions in terms of achieving meaningful 
learning. Then, we describe our pedagogical design, and the 
literature that inspired us, such as the decision to involve a 
computer-game session in which students work in pairs, and 
small-group discussions led by the teacher (Sections III and 
IV). We then describe the study (Section V). Next, we 
examined how a rich environment either hinders or supports 
students’ construction of mathematical meaning. We focused 
on the mutual interplay between the two contexts in which 
students worked (on the computer and in group discussions). 
We present the findings (Section VI) and discuss them 
(Section VII). 
II. 
LAS AND MEANINGFUL MATHEMATICS   
There is no single, definitive profile for LAS [4][5]. In 
fact, most studies have not  focused on the methodological 
criteria used to identify those students with learning 
disabilities [5]. LAS are commonly identified based on two 
factors: teachers’ reports and LAS performance on 
standardized or informal tests (students’ score below the 50th 
percentile on standardized tests; however, they are not 
diagnosed as having learning disabilities) [2]. In attempting 
to explain LAS’s poor performance, the literature focuses on 
cognitive deficiencies and on behavioral manifestations of 
their failures. LAS find it difficult to retrieve basic 
mathematics knowledge from their memory [6]. Craik [7] 
terms this difficulty as ‘fragile memory’, a product of 
superficial data processing. They also lack meta-cognitive 
skills [8], and are sensitive to the learning contexts. Thus, 
they find it much harder than others to solve simple and 
complex 
addition 
and 
subtraction 
problems. 
These 

330
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
difficulties may lead them to use less sophisticated strategies 
and to make more errors.  
Recently, Karagiannakis et al. [9] developed a model that 
can be used to sketch students' mathematical profiles for four 
domains (numbers, memory, number line, and reasoning); 
they empirically examined it to determine whether and how 
it can differentiate between students with and without 
difficulties in learning mathematics. According to their 
analysis, students, both the normal/high achievers and the 
underachievers, do not all share the same strong or weak 
mathematical skills. In addition, under achievement in 
mathematics is not related to weaknesses in a single domain 
(e.g., numbers, memory, number line, and reasoning). They 
also suggest that for LAS, just like for other students, 
cognitive strengths or weaknesses may rely on any of the 
four domains (mentioned above) of their model. Their 
findings empirically strengthen the heterogeneity of this 
population group.  
Experiencing repeated failures and difficulties in keeping 
up with the class might, in turn, decrease LAS’s motivation 
and their sense of internal responsibility and make them 
more passive learners. It might also lead them to act 
impulsively, rely on the judgment and feedback of an 
external authority [3], and avoid collaborative work with 
peers [10]. Their schooling-purposed interaction in class is 
largely with the teacher.  
These characteristics probably underlie many teachers’ 
beliefs that LAS are unable to deal with tasks involving high-
order thinking skills and that the most effective way of 
promoting mathematical performance in LAS is to ‘drill and 
kill’, that is, to focus more on the mathematical algorithms 
than on the mathematical meaning [11].  
However, despite their difficulties, there is empirical 
evidence that in certain environments LAS are capable of 
enhancing their mathematical understanding. There is 
empirical evidence that LAS can exhibit mathematical 
reasoning orally when placed in intimate and supportive 
learning environments, such as in small groups where they 
are tutored [12][11]. Peltenburg et al. [13] show that, in a 
familiar context with the help of technological tools, LAS 
can succeed in solving subtraction problems by using an 
indirect addition strategy spontaneously, rather than the 
conventional direct subtraction strategy. Karagiannakis and 
Cooreman [14] suggest that these interventions should be 
designed for repeated success by building on a student’s 
strengths, while avoiding use of repetitive tasks that cause 
repetitive failure experiences, thereby maximizing the 
learning opportunities of all students.  
Synthesizing these empirical evidence with the reports on 
the literature on the diversity among LAS, we assumed that a 
rich environment that includes technological tools, small 
groups, and teacher's support building on LAS’s strengths 
might be the key to their success.  
III. 
THE LITERATURE THAT INSPIRED THE DESIGN AND 
HYPOTHESES  
Our design was inspired by the socio-cultural theoretical 
perspective on learning, especially the notion of distributed 
scaffolding. Scaffolding is “titrated support that helps 
learners learn through activity. It helps learners perform 
tasks that are outside their independent reach and 
consequently develop the skills necessary for completing 
such tasks independently” [24, p.306] . Because LAS vary in 
their behavior, in our design we sought to design distributed 
scaffoldings [15], i.e., to integrate and sequence multiple 
forms of support via various means. Different scaffolds 
interact with each other; sometimes they produce a robust 
form of support, a synergy [16], and other times, they might 
sabotage the learning processes and the outcome.  
We were also inspired by the Learning in Context 
approach, namely, the idea of presenting mathematical 
concepts and procedures in a context relevant to the child’s 
day-to-day life [17], and in particular, the Realistic 
Mathematics 
Education 
(RME) theoretical 
framework. 
According to the RME framework, students should advance 
from contextual problems using significant models that are 
situation related, to mathematical activity at a higher level 
(e.g., engaging in more formal mathematical reasoning). As 
students 
progress 
from 
informal 
to 
more 
formal 
mathematics, their "model of" the situation is transformed 
into a "model for" reasoning.  We hypothesized that RME 
could be the key to promote meaningful learning for LAS, 
because the subtraction tasks, the mathematics to be 
mastered, will be associated with real-life experiences, which 
might mitigate their fragile memory and tendency for 
superficial processing of new knowledge.  
We aimed at transforming students’ social and socio-
mathematical norms, from passive to active, from isolated to 
social collaboration, and from impulsive to thoughtful. We 
were motivated by the premise that digital games, by the 
nature of their design, have the potential to motivate students 
to become active rather than passive, by enabling 
experimentation and exploration without fear of failing in 
front of the entire class [18][19]. The use of games for 
teaching may be particularly beneficial for LAS because of 
their tendency to remain passive and to comply with 
authoritative voices.  
We were aware of the possibility that a hands-on, minds-
off strategy might emerge, especially because of the 
tendency of LAS for impulsivity. This is one of the reasons 
students were asked to work with peers in front of the 
computer. We assumed that collaborative settings would 
trigger twofold interactions: with the system and with the co-
learner. Peers would explain their calculations to each other, 
and question other actions, which would bring about 
reflection and thoughtfulness [20].  
Additionally, every session was designed to include 
interchangeable students’ work in front of the computer with 
their peers, along with group discussions, led by the teacher. 
Teachers’ interactions with students can create zones of 
opportunities that can be directed to scaffold students’ social 
and emotional development [21].  The teacher can mediate 
the use of tools (e.g., computer games, online units), 
orchestrate the students' activities, and reframe them 
conceptually [22].  
Hence, 
the 
students 
experienced 
two 
different 
collaborative settings. When they worked (in pairs) in front 
of the computer (computer games or online units), the 

331
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
teachers were asked to observe them and to offer help when 
necessary (for instance, if students maintain trial and error 
strategies or are stuck in their calculation process). In the 
group discussions, the teachers were asked to focus their 
discussions on various strategies that can be used to solve 
subtraction tasks, to encourage students to verbalize their 
thoughts, and encourage them to rely on each other’s past 
experience, thereby facilitating students in learning the 
meaning of how to participate in the community, i.e., support 
the transformation of their sociomathematical norms [23]. In 
these discussions, the teachers also introduced students to 
new tasks and encouraged them to employ the strategies they 
previously used in a supposedly new context. As we will 
explain in the next section, in our design we presented tasks 
sometimes as stories and sometimes as formal subtraction 
exercises, and gradually increased the difficulty of 
calculating the numbers whose decimals are half, to numbers 
whose decimals include individual units. We assumed that 
students’ sense of security when expressing themselves 
publicly would increase, since they are in a group of equals, 
and will experience active (and successful) work with their 
peers in front of the computer. 
IV. 
THE INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN  
We developed an extracurricular program for fifth grade 
LAS. It consisted of ten weekly sessions that focus on 
subtraction with decimal numbers, a topic that students had 
not yet learned in their regular classes. Students were 
categorized into groups of four, according to their regular 
class, and each group worked with a teacher trained by the 
second author.  
We utilized a real-life context simulated by an ice cream 
shop computer game. Specifically, during the sessions, 
students played a computer game in which they received 
orders from random customers, prepared the orders, 
calculated the price to be paid, and gave change as needed 
(Fig. 1). Because of the heterogeneity of LAS and their 
individual needs, we sought to provide a variety of support 
types. Therefore, students also worked on supplementary 
online study units concerned with the transition between 
money and formal representations, as well as change 
calculations. Students also enacted game-like situations with 
play money using Israeli bills and coins: New Israeli Shekels 
(NIS) and agorot (1NIS = 100 agorot; the smallest coin is 10 
agorot). In order to support the transition from the concrete 
to the abstract, real worksheets were designed, which 
included exercises in concrete, graphic, and abstract forms. 
In order to facilitate the delicate transition from the 
realistic 
environment 
(shop 
simulation) 
to 
formal 
mathematics, subtraction was first presented through 
monetary simulations and calculations only, and formal 
representations were interwoven at a later stage. The 
program progresses in a spiral-like manner. With the help of 
the teacher, students are expected to progress from one level 
to the next. The tasks at each level maintain an overall 
forward trend of increasing complexity, and students are able 
to revisit earlier levels and solve simpler exercises on the 
computer on their own. The teachers had the flexibility to 
fine-tune the program, in response to students’ emerging 
needs.  
 
 
Fig.  1 
 A screenshot of an online learning unit, where the task at hand 
is 50-38.6.  
 
In each session, students spent almost half of their time in 
front of the computer, working in pairs. They were first 
introduced through online activity to two avatars, a girl, and 
a boy, each of whom described a strategy he or she uses for 
calculating the required change. Then they played or worked 
in pairs on the computer. The other half of the session time 
was devoted to class discussions, as described above. 
Specifically, in order to address LAS’s tendency to passively 
rely on external authority and to encourage them to take 
personal responsibility, the teachers were not supposed to 
correct students’ strategies directly, but rather, to ask 
questions to encourage them to talk aloud about their 
thinking processes, thus, making the diagnosis easier and 
potentially leading them to correct their own mistakes, re-
voicing when needed, and referring them to suitable tools in 
the environment when necessary. The teachers generally 
followed these instructions closely. 
V. 
THE STUDY  
Our goal was to examine our design’s hypotheses, i.e., to 
examine the students’ learning processes, focusing on how 
the rich environment either hinders or supports students’ 
construction of mathematical meaning, especially the 
mutual interplay between the two contexts in which students 
worked (on the computer and in group discussions).  
A. Participants  
We traced 12 LAS (4 male, 8 female) from 3 fifth grade 
classes in suburban schools within the same city, and who 
participated in the program. They learned in 3 groups of 4 
students, with 3 different teachers (one of them was the first 
author). All participants were chosen based on the 
recommendation of their mathematics teachers. They all 
performed under the 50th percentile on standardized tests, 
yet were not diagnosed as having learning disabilities.  
B. Data Sources  
In two groups all sessions were videotaped. In one group 
they were audiotaped. We observed students in their regular 
mathematics class two times before they began participating 
in our CSCL activity. We also observed all the sessions, 

332
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
focusing on the sequence of activities—of both the teacher 
(e.g., presenting tasks, intervening during the computer 
sessions, suggesting a tool, getting students’ attention, and 
answering questions) and the students (e.g., how they 
interact with the computer, with each other, with the 
teacher, and so forth). We conducted interviews with the 
CSCL teachers, after the activity as well as ad hoc 
conversations after every session. We also talked with their 
previous mathematics teachers and with each student after 
the CSCL activity.    
C. Methods of Analysis   
Our report mainly draws on the analysis of the 
videotapes. A preliminary analysis of the data was presented 
elsewhere [1]. That analysis was useful to identify patterns of 
students’ interaction with the environment. Here we present 
in detail the results of a fine-tuned analysis. Specifically, we 
were inspired by the analysis model of Powell et al. [24] for 
developing mathematical ideas and reasoning. We fully 
transcribed one group through videotapes. The transcripts 
were coded twice by two researchers. We segmented the text 
into episodes, each beginning with the presentation of a new 
task and ending with its being accomplished (or the work on 
it was terminated). For each episode we examined: (1) who 
participated in it; (2) the knowledge pieces that emerged; (3) 
the difficulties that arose, including whether they were 
resolved, and if so, how and by whom, especially (d) the 
support provided by the teacher; and (5) whether the task 
was successfully accomplished independently or with help 
from others. We also coded affective utterances, both 
positive and negative. We compared the results with the 
video, audio, and notes taken during the observations in the 
other groups. Interviews were analyzed thematically. We 
chronologically traced changes in each student’s thinking 
and behavior, thereby creating data stories. One such data 
story is presented next.  
VI. 
FINDINGS  
A. Students’ Interaction with the Rich Environment 
1) The computer setting: As we hypothesized, the 
computerized environment, especially the computer game, 
encouraged the students to be active as well as engaged in 
their task. For the most part, they were observed to be very 
focused on the current task. In fact, in 5 sessions, students 
continued working (or playing) after the class had ended. 
The students reported in the interviews and ad hoc 
conversations that they had enjoyed the activity. The 
following quotes are but two examples of typical phrases 
heard throughout the entire program: “it was fun…not a 
regular class”, “playing with the computer gives a sense of 
fun, [vs.] a blackboard, where you just sit and solve 
exercises”.  
On the computer the students (who sat in pairs) usually 
decided to work in turns. In each turn the one on the 
keyboard gave ice cream, calculated the price, the change, 
and returned change. For a few couples, we noticed a 
different division of labor: the one on the keyboard 
interacted with the avatar clients and in the meantime, the 
other did the calculations. In a few cases when one student 
took over the keyboard the teacher interfered.  
During the play, each student solved many subtraction 
exercises, manifested by the need to give change to 
customers in the shop.  
They did not solve all the exercises successfully right 
away. However, for the most part failures in this context did 
not discourage or frustrated them. On the contrary, this is 
when we observed collaboration, mathematical discussions 
with their peers and with the teacher. Usually, when they 
received a response from a “customer” indicating that the 
change they gave was incorrect, they were observed pausing 
to think and sometimes they turned to their peers and 
verbalized 
their 
“solution 
process”. 
Sometimes 
this 
verbalization was performed after their peers asked them 
how they had worked. Often the discussion helped them to 
correct themselves. This behavior was dramatically different 
from the observed passivity (or impulsivity) in the regular 
mathematics classes. Moreover, in this context, the students 
generally 
welcomed 
the 
teachers’ 
intervention 
and 
cooperated with them. Hence, the computer and their peers 
often generated a synergetic effect on the students. 
However, we also observed an appreciable number of 
situations in which students merely employed trial and error, 
using the immediate feedback of the computer (“too much” 
and “too little”) to guess the correct answer. Usually the 
partner became silent in these situations. From the 
conversations in these situations, we learned that the 
pressure of time and the wish to gain as many points as 
possible in the game in a designated time frame encouraged 
this behavior. In one extreme example, one student (Betty) 
stopped working because the clients became angry (Fig.2 
and Fig. 3), because it took her time to calculate. This 
episode as well as other important episodes and aspects of 
Betty’s learning process within the environment are 
presented in Section VI.B. 
 
Fig.  2     Speech bubbles turn red as a sign for impatient clients. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  3 
 An angry face of an impatient client. 
 

333
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 We also noticed that in the initial lessons the teacher had 
to compete with students’ attention to their computer in these 
situations. We observed the teacher, in such situations, 
touching the students’ hand or shoulder to get their attention.  
The next episode demonstrates the teacher’s struggle for 
Etty’s attention. Etty stared at the computer screen when the 
teacher approached her: 
 
Ok, how do you calculate the change?  
Teacher: 
282. 
Eh, Eh, Eh…[ looking at the screen, 
trying to concentrate in the game] 
Etty: 
283. 
Etty, please explain.  
Teacher: 
284. 
I am not sure…[keeps playing] 
Etty: 
285. 
Remember how we did it before? 
Teacher: 
286. 
Aha… [Her full body is turned to the 
computer]. 
Etty: 
287. 
And we saw many ways, the way Dor 
[avatar] calculated? 
Teacher: 
288. 
Aha…[she keeps concentrating on the 
computer] 
Etty 
289. 
 
Obviously, Etty preferred to focus on the computer 
session. She concentrated on the task, mumbling "Eh…or 
Aha…" answers to the teachers’ requests as if it was difficult 
for her to split her attention (lines 283, 287).  
2) Group discussions: Group discussions revolved 
around calculations and strategies. Figure 4 illustrates a 
typical discussion routine.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  4 
 Group discussion after game play. 
 
The teacher initiated each episode by presenting a 
subtraction task. After the students solved the task, she then 
asked them to explain their strategies. We observed many 
expressions of frustration among the students. The teacher 
noticed that students tended to take turns when they worked 
at the computer. She borrowed the idea and asked them to 
also solve exercises in turns in the group discussions. 
However, in this setting this idea turned out to be less 
productive. Generally, the interaction took the form of one 
student explaining his or her solution process, followed by 
the teacher’s verbalization. Moreover, the teacher sometimes 
silenced the peers who tried to participate in conversations. 
In her interview she explained that students’ poor discursive 
habits made her prioritize the individual’s learning over 
building a community and discursive habits. We thus 
observed almost no rich peer discussions about strategies. 
We expected that during the participation the students’ 
ability and wiliness to provide explanations would increase. 
During the discussion with the teacher (with or without a 
computer) the students were constantly asked to describe and 
explain their strategies. The alienation of this request was 
prominent in their responses. They became silent, gave 
vague or non-informative answers (e.g., “I just did so”), and 
sometimes even said, “I don’t remember”. The following 
excerpt from lesson 3 illustrates this kind of discourse while 
a student was struggling in calculating the exercise 10 - 4.1 =  
 
How would you like to solve this 
problem? 
Teacher: 
324. 
I don't know which one is more 
comfortable to me. 
Noya: 
325. 
You don't know which one is more 
comfortable to you. [pause].  
Teacher: 
326. 
Ah! Maybe someone wants to help her 
explain how should she solve it? 
Teacher: 
327. 
Addition. 
Neomi: 
328. 
Addition. What do you mean? Explain 
to her. 
Teacher: 
329. 
To add 10 Agorot until we have 10, 
which means that it is 9 times ten 
Agorot. 
Neomi: 
330. 
Until we get to 1 Shekel, right? Until we 
get to a Shekel. 
Teacher: 
331. 
And then we take 5 [Shekels] and 9 like 
these [10 Agorot coins]. 
Neomi: 
332. 
Aha… 
Noya 
333. 
 
The preference question (line 324) confused Noya. 
Probably, she was not used to these kinds of questions in her 
regular math class. When she noticed that Noya became 
silent, the teacher turned to recruit the group (line 328) and 
emphasized the meaning of adding on strategy (line 331). 
The above excerpt also demonstrates that in some of the 
students' explanations (e.g., for Neomi) there was evidence 
of a positive change in their discursive manners. In these 
cases we often found that students relied on the money 
model (especially the fact that 1 nis = 100 agorot) to explain 
their subtraction strategies even when the subtraction task 
Teacher poses a change in  
the computation scenario. 
Students enthusiastically 
raise their hands to answer.  
Teacher asks for an explanation: 
"How did you calculate?" 
 
Students  
use the money 
model terms in 
their explanations. 
Students  
use avatars 
for 
strategies.  
   
The teacher  
verbalizes students' 
strategy naming its  
type and attribution 
(e.g., addition / 
Bars' strategy). 
 
The teacher asks 
 
to think aloud, or 
mentions strategies that 
were explicitly studied, 
or uses peers for 
recruitment (i.e., "does 
someone want to 
help?").
 
 
Students 
become 
 silent.

334
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
was phrased abstractly and not in money terms. Real context 
mathematics, hence, supported students’ leaning.   
 We expected that the students would develop many 
strategies for subtraction. Indeed, the teacher posed questions 
like “in what way would you like to solve this problem?” at 
least three times in each of the first three sessions. However, 
we did not observe the emergence of a new strategy. One 
possible explanation is rooted in our sequencing of students’ 
activities. In the initial lessons, students were introduced by 
an online unit to two strategies, presented to them by two 
avatars who dealt with the task of calculating change. 
Possibly this early exposure, together with students’ 
tendencies to rely on external authoritative voices, brought 
about a fixation in their thoughts. Moreover, sometimes we 
were not sure that students understood the meaning 
underlying these strategies.   
Nonetheless, in conversations with the teachers in the 
regular classes after the program ended, the teachers reported 
that the behavior of most of the participants in their class 
improved; specifically, that despite their difficulties they 
were more motivated and less passive. 
B. Betty’s data story   
Betty was diagnosed by her teacher as a low achieving 
student due to her low academic achievements compared 
with other students in her class, her impulsivity, and her 
"short memory", as Betty testified. The teacher reported that 
once a week Betty used to leave her regular math class to 
learn in a small group in order to help her keep up with the 
class.  
Table I describes Betty’s performance in the subtraction 
tasks during the activity. The table includes details about 
each task (whether it was presented in a story form or as a 
formal exercise), its context (a group discussion led by the 
teacher, an individual worksheet, or peer interactions while 
students worked on the computer), whether it was performed 
orally or in writing, and finally, whether Betty succeeded in 
solving it, and whether the success was assisted or not. Betty 
solved more tasks within the computer context, but since we 
did not record the screen in the first iteration, we have only 
the tasks in which the teacher was directly involved. 
Nonetheless, we took notes on her performance within this 
context as well.  
As shown in Table I, Betty’s performance was 
inconsistent. Betty successfully solved oral subtraction tasks 
within the context of group discussion (tasks A, C). She also 
experienced some success in written calculation tasks (tasks 
G, H, J, K) independently. Her failure occurred partly in the 
computerized context (tasks D, F), probably due to her 
impulsivity.  
1) Starting point: Observations in the regular math class 
preceding the CSCL activity indicated that Betty was 
passive, unmotivated, and unengaged, and that she laid her 
head on the table for most of the lesson as if she was bored. 
However, her behavior changed dramatically right after the 
first lesson when we came up with the computer game. 
Suddenly, she was dominant, controlling the computer, 
helping her peer. She even took over her peer's role of play 
(Fig. 5). We could see that Betty was totally engaged.  
TABLE I. 
BETTY'S TASK PERFORMANCE 
 
 
Although her body language expressed her full 
engagement in the game, we noticed some of Betty's math 
difficulties. For example, she used her fingers for counting. 
She also used the game feedback to calculate basic facts 
(addition and subtraction of whole numbers up to 20) that 
she did not master. She also used trial and error impulsively. 
Research reports also strengthen those impressions: 
"Betty and Neomi cooperate by consulting each 
other [e.g., ‘it said we gave too much; give a bit 
less’], clicking their answers on the computer, 
trying to get to the exact answer. When they get 
positive feedback from the computer, they laugh 
about their own errors… [Taken from the second 
observation]." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  5     Betty controlling the computer. 
 
In group discussions the teacher tried to confront Betty's 
impulsivity by encouraging her to think aloud. Sometimes 
Context 
Performance 
Of The Task 
Task 
Lesson 
No. 
Task 
No. 
Group 
discussion  
Oral 
Story 
(50-41.50) 
2 
 
A 
Group 
discussion  
Oral 
Exercise 
(10-7.20) 
3 
B 
Group 
discussion  
Oral 
Story 
(
20-15
.60) 
4 
C 
Peers 
(with 
computer) 
Oral 
Story 
(15-13.20) 
4 
D 
Group 
discussion 
Oral +Written 
Exercise 
(50-14.80) 
5 
E 
Peers 
(with 
computer) 
Oral 
Exercise 
(15-13.20) 
6 
F 
Group 
discussion 
Written 
Exercise 
(15-13.20) 
6 
G 
Group 
discussion 
Written 
Exercise 
(20-16.80) 
6 
H 
Individual 
worksheet 
Written 
Story 
 (50-42.60) 
7 
I 
Individual 
worksheet 
Written  
Story 
(
100-38.50
) 
8 
J 
Individual 
worksheet 
Written 
Story 
(100-57.30) 
8 
K 
 
Failure 
 
Assisted success 
 
Independent success 
 

335
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the teachers even used hand touching in order to prevent her 
from quickly checking on the computer. A representative 
example is presented in the next episode taken from lesson 3. 
Betty had to calculate the change from 10 NIS for ice cream, 
which cost 7.20 NIS (Table I, task B). Betty hesitantly typed 
a wrong answer and got negative feedback:  
 
[hushing the rest of the group] Girls, 
please let her concentrate. 
Teacher: 
356. 
I thought it was right. 
Betty: 
357. 
Why? 
Teacher: 
358. 
I don't know [she types the same 
answer. Gets negative feedback] 
Betty: 
359. 
Betty, how did you try to solve the 
problem? 
Teacher: 
360. 
[disturbed by her peer] Stop it Eve! 
Betty: 
361. 
Betty, look at the amount to pay. 
Teacher: 
362. 
Ehm..7.20. 
Betty: 
363. 
Seven NIS and twenty Agorot. And 
what is the amount that was paid? 
Teacher: 
364. 
10 NIS. 
Betty: 
365. 
Ten NIS. According to which strategy is 
it easier for you to calculate? Ah? [Betty 
is clicking on the coins on the computer, 
thereby 
returning 
change. 
Getting 
negative feedback] 
Teacher: 
366. 
Wait, wait it is too much…[reading the 
negative feedback] 
Betty: 
367. 
If you give three NIS [change], and he 
has to pay seven NIS, what number you 
get?  
Teacher: 
368. 
[facing the computer screen] Come 
on…. but here he [avatar] said that it is 
too much, so maybe I will add here one 
[adding one ten Agorot coin and waiting 
for the computer’s feedback. She gets 
negative feedback]. 
Betty: 
369. 
No Betty! It is impossible! I want you to 
think for a minute. [Betty counts quietly 
using 
her 
fingers] 
Betty, 
answer 
me…We have Neomi’s strategy ...It 
helped Noya before, did you listen? Did 
you understand what she said?  
Teacher: 
370. 
 
The above excerpt demonstrates the leading questions 
(lines 358, 362, 364, and 366) that the teacher offered in 
order to help Betty to concentrate on the calculation instead 
of the trial and error strategy that Betty had used. Betty 
ignored her and kept the trial and error method, increasing or 
decreasing the number of coins in order to reach the correct 
answer (lines 359, 367).  
Betty was emotionally involved in the game. Her stress 
resulting from the response of the avatars is demonstrated in 
the following episode, taken from lesson 4. Betty and Neomi 
played the computer game. The teacher noticed that Betty 
was stuck so she approached them: 
[to the client avatar] Stop it!!!! [to 
Neomi] Your turn…[give up and pass 
the computer mouse to Neomi]  
Betty: 
279. 
No, No, No, No, No!!!! 
Teacher: 
280. 
I can't, they [client avatars] get angry at 
me!!!I am scared… 
Betty: 
281. 
Don't look. 
Teacher: 
282. 
At the end they will get out of the game 
and come to beat me. 
Betty:  
283. 
What is the bill to be paid? Say it loud, 
what is the bill?  
Teacher: 
284. 
[silent] 
Betty: 
285. 
Thirteen 
Teacher: 
286. 
[Mumbling…thinking…] 
Sh….wait, 
wait, wait [using her fingers, turning to 
the computer, tapping an answer and 
getting positive feedback] I am a 
genius!!! This is what I did before…. 
Betty: 
287. 
 
Although Betty was nervous, the teacher did not give up 
and in a definite statement of “no” (line 280) she decisively 
did not accept this behavior. Instead, she supported Betty by 
breaking down the problem into its smaller components 
(line 284). The use of fingers (line 287) is additional 
evidence that this time Betty calculated and did not guess, 
probably the reason for her success. During the lessons, 
even in the face of the angry avatars, Betty constantly 
displayed highly enthusiastic behavior while next to the 
computer. This behavior contrasted with her attitude 
towards the initial group discussions or the teacher’s 
requests to work on sheets (from lesson 3 onwards) 
frustrated her. She was observed as impatient, did not take 
responsibility for her own work, and often relied on the 
teacher's support. The teacher focused her support on Betty's 
needs.  
2) Turning point:  A great change occurred in lesson 5 
during a discussion about different ways to solve 50-14.80= 
(Table I, task E).  Betty initiated her participation by asking 
the teacher to show her own strategy to calculate by writing 
it on the board: 
 
So, I do 50 minus 10 and I do not 
calculate it now because I do not have 
the strength. [Writes: 50-10=____ ] it 
equals something... 
Betty: 
52. 
Don't you know how much is it? 
Eve: 
53. 
It’s…ah… 
Betty: 
54. 
Sh…….[teacher silence Eve] 
Teacher: 
55. 
Thank you, just a moment. [Writes 40 as 
an 
answer]. 
Now 
40 
minus 
4 
equals…[writes 40-4=___ ] 
Betty: 
56. 
Waits… 
Betty: 
57. 
And then I do… 
Betty: 
58. 
How much do you get here [points at 40-
4=___ ]? How much does it equal? 
Teacher: 
59. 
40 minus 4…emmmm….how you call it 
Betty: 
60. 

336
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[writes 36] 
Great! 
Teacher: 
61. 
And 
then 
36 
minus…wait 
not 
minus…no… 
Betty: 
62. 
Yes, yes! You are in the correct 
direction! What is left? 
Teacher: 
63. 
Minus 0.8 equals something [writes 36-
0.8=__ and turns to the group] 
Betty: 
64. 
[Puts her hand on Betty's shoulder, 
turning her back to the board] 
And how do you solve this? 
Teacher: 
65. 
I take from a Shekel… 
Betty: 
66. 
From a Shekel, great! 
Teacher: 
67. 
[Draws circles to represent coins] one, 
two. I have no power for that…to draw.  
Betty: 
68. 
OK 
Teacher: 
69. 
From a Shekel 8 like this. 
Betty: 
70. 
Eighty Agorot. 
Teacher: 
71. 
So, it comes out 35 plus something 
[writes 35] 
Betty: 
72. 
And what is that something? You took a 
Shekel… 
Teacher: 
73. 
[Answers immediately] plus twenty! 
Betty: 
74. 
Very good, very good!  35 and 20 Agorot 
because in a Shekel we have 100 Agorot. 
Teacher: 
75. 
I am a genius! 
Betty: 
76. 
Excellent, well done!  
Teacher: 
77. 
 
Betty’s difficulties are manifested by her avoidance of 
calculating basic facts. Writing on the board helped her to 
think about intermediate calculations (lines 52, 56, 64, 72). 
She preferred to focus on the procedure of the strategy using 
"___" as a place for the calculated result and the teacher 
accepted that, helping her in critical moments such as 
encouraging her by saying she is on the correct track (line 
63), to focus her attention and avoid distractions (line 55, 
65), or giving her hints by using the money terms in critical 
moments (lines 71, 73). 
Most of lessons 6-7 were devoted to practicing next to 
the computer and solving worksheet tasks. Betty asked to 
play alone and the teacher let her. Lesson 8 was devoted to 
the final assessment where Betty succeeded (Table I, tasks J, 
K).  
Overall, Betty's learning process illustrates the fragility 
of her knowledge, the inconsistency of her performance, her 
impulsivity in the computerized context, the clear 
delegitimization of this behavior by the teacher, combined 
with her support, which led to moments of success by using 
writing as a tool for self-direction.  
VII. DISCUSSION  
Here we discuss the hypotheses and factors that 
influenced 
the 
students’ 
learning 
within 
the 
rich 
environment.  
A. The Computerized Context as a Double-edged Sword 
The computer-peer setting was found to be both 
supportive and destructive in terms of students’ learning. The 
computer played a major role in making students active and 
engaged in mathematical discussions about the current 
subtraction task with their peers and the teacher, despite the 
students’ fragile knowledge. We saw moments of synergy 
[16] when the presence of peers induced a reflection about a 
wrong calculation, and a discussion about the strategy 
applied. Teachers’ interventions in this context were 
welcomed and fruitful. However, as Betty's case study 
illustrates, there were also situations in which the computer 
game encouraged trial and error because of the time factor 
and the competitive nature of games. The teacher, in her 
attempt to disrupt the trial-and-error discourse, often had to 
compete with students as exemplified above.   
B. Group Discusions: Participation Alongside Silence 
We expected that the group discussions would encourage 
students to talk about mathematics and therefore, foster their 
ability and wiliness to provide explanations. The findings 
indicate that the teachers' requests for explanations, 
especially the question about which strategy they chose to 
apply for solving the tasks, were alien. This is probably 
because in regular math classrooms LAS are rarely asked to 
explain their answers. Therefore, the group discussions did 
not yield the rich discussions we had hoped for. Nonetheless, 
we observed that the ability of most students to provide 
explanations had developed during their participation. 
However, these students did not develop new strategies, but 
rather, used the strategies they had been introduced to at the 
beginning. This behavior aligns with the LAS’s tendency to 
focus on a given algorithm, given by an external authority. In 
addition, in this context, as demonstrated in the discussion 
routine (Fig. 4), students’ discursive acts were mostly in 
response to the teacher and merely addressed her.  
C. Movement within the Rich Environment: Evidence of 
Diffusion 
In our design we had expected a metaphorical diffusion 
between the two contexts in which students performed and 
collaborated—that students’ activeness, ability, and wiliness 
to discuss with their peers when failing to solve a task on the 
computer would diffuse to the group discussion and that the 
teacher-led discussions would enrich the mathematical 
discursive practices, which would then diffuse to the 
computer context. Apparently, this diffusion is not 
straightforward and a fine-tuned design is required to support 
its occurrence.  
D. RME: A Valuable Factor  
In line with other empirical studies [17], RME was found 
to be a valuable factor in facilitating LAS meaningful 
learning. Students adapted the real-life money model to 
resolve the subtraction tasks, even when given in an abstract 
form. This was evident in their formulation of their solution 
process in monetary terms as well as in the conceptual 
scaffold “1 NIS equals 100 agorot”, which they often used 
when they had to reason how they subtracted the decimal.  

337
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Implications for the second round 
As we had hypothesized, we found that distributed 
scaffoldings were beneficial to LAS [15]. The premise was 
that such a heterogenic population, from the cognitive and 
behavioral aspects, needs a variety of tools. Indeed, the 
environment simulated a rich “playground” where students 
experience diverse tools in order to build and develop new 
knowledge.  
Obviously, more work was required to fine tune the 
design, in order to better support students’ learning. Utilizing 
the insights gained from our analysis, in the next round we 
re-designed the group discussions in consultation with the 
literature on Accountable Talk [25], aiming at better 
facilitation of establishing the norms of mathematical peer 
discussions. We minimized the time spent in front of the 
computer game and instead, added time to the online unit, in 
which students still simulated the ice cream shop, but 
without the pressure of time  and gaining points. Finally, we 
aimed at setting the students’ mindset right from the 
beginning by explaining to them that this class is about their 
strategies. We omitted the introduction to the two strategies, 
and instead, simulated in class an affair where students 
brought personal items and had to give money and get 
change and then conducted a discussion on their calculation 
strategies. 
 
B. The next round in a nutshell 
Analyzing the rich data of 11 students in the second 
round, we found vivid mathematical discussions. Discussants 
were accountable to the group (i.e., engage in talk that builds 
on the ideas of others), according to the accepted norms of 
reasoning (i.e., talk that emphasizes logical connections and 
the drawing of reasonable conclusions using mostly the 
money model for justifications), and to knowledge (i.e., talk 
that is based explicitly on facts). While in the first round the 
teachers' requests for explanations were alien and sometime 
led to silence among students, in the second round the use of 
AT practices [25] allow the teacher to explicitly set clear 
expectations for reasoning and then to proactively support, 
diagnose, and analyze the development of students' 
mathematical reasoning. 
Consequently, nine of the 11 participating LAS showed 
evidence of positive change in their mathematical thinking 
and behavior as a result of their participation in the 
environment. Students constructed at least one meaningful 
subtraction strategy using it at a high success rate once it was 
constructed.  
Although the majority of LAS exhibited evidence of 
meaningful learning of mathematics in constructing and 
using their own computation strategies, it highlighted the 
challenges their learning difficulties pose. Their learning 
processes were inconsistent characterized by progressions 
and regressions and therefore were difficult to predict by the 
teacher [26]. In rare cases when the teacher-students 
discourse reached impasse, the setting of peer work next to 
the computer on online units was found promoted due to its 
safe and constructive space for building new knowledge.  
Future work is still required. A larger sample of 
participants is necessary in order to generalize and further 
explore LAS learning processes and outcomes in this 
environment and to gain insights as to how to support their 
learning. Indeed, as shown above, the encounter of LAS with 
a rich environment might introduce complexity and pose 
challenges to teachers, who already have to deal with many 
factors (such as the fragility of students’ knowledge, the 
inconsistency of students’ performance, the impulsivity 
within the computerized context and the silent situations in 
group discussions). Nonetheless, this study shows that 
overall, the rich CSCL environment was successful. Not only 
had students gained meaningful mathematical knowledge, 
such as strategies to solve subtraction tasks—they also 
practiced socio-mathematical behavior that differed from 
what they were used to: they moved from passive reliance on 
authority, as well as impulsive and individualistic 
interactions in class, towards active, thoughtful collaboration 
about mathematical meaning. According to the regular class 
teachers, to some extent, this behavior has diffused to their 
regular classes. Thus, we can conclude that meaningful 
learning of LAS is feasible and furthermore, that LAS can 
benefit from CSCL settings, which stands in contrast to their 
characteristics in the literature as passive or even detached 
individualists [2].  
We believe that a rich CSCL environment, involving a 
computer game, real context mathematics, peer discussions, 
and teacher mediation may be the key for promoting LAS’s 
learning. In this respect, our work makes a modest step 
towards achieving equity in mathematics education by 
extending the teaching of mathematical meaning to 
academically diverse students.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Ben-David Kolikant and O. Broza, "The potential of 
support-rich 
environment 
for 
teaching 
meaningful 
mathematics 
to 
low-achieving 
students," 
The 
Tenth 
International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line 
Learning eLmL, 2018.  
[2] S. Baker, R. Gersten, and D. S. Lee, “A synthesis of empirical 
research on teaching Mathematics to Low Achieving 
Students,” The Elementary School Journal, vol. 103, 2002, 
pp. 51–73. 
[3] D. Haylock, “Teaching mathematics to low attainers,” SAGE, 
1991, pp. 8-12. 
[4] D. C. Geary, “Mathematics and learning disabilities,”  Journal 
of Learning Disabilities, 37(1), 2004, pp. 4-15. 
[5] K. E. Lewis and M. B. Fisher, “Taking stock of 40 years of 
research on mathematical learning disability: Methodological 
issues and future directions,” Journal for Research in 
Mathematics Education, 47(4), 2016, pp. 338-371. 
[6] E. Gray, D. Pitta, D. and D. Tall, “Objects, actions, and 
images: A perspective on early number development,” The 
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 18(4), 2000, pp. 401-413. 
[7] F.I.M Craik, “Memory: Levels of processing. International 
encyclopedia of the social & behavioral sciences,” University 
of Toronto, Canada, 2002.  

338
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[8] S. R. Goldman. “Strategy instruction in mathematics,” 
Learning Disabilities Quarterly, 12, 1989, pp. 43-55. 
[9] G. N. Karagiannakis, A. E. Baccaglini-Frank, and P. Roussos, 
“Detecting strengths and weaknesses in learning mathematics 
through a model classifying mathematical skills,” Australian 
Journal of Learning Difficulties, 2017, pp. 1-27. 
[10] R. Alexander, “Culture, dialogue and learning: Notes on an 
emerging pedagogy,” In N. Mercer and S. Hodgkinson (Eds.), 
Exploring talk in school, London: SAGE,  2008, pp.91-114. 
[11] R. Karsenty, A. Arcavi, and N. Hadas, “Exploring informal 
mathematical products of low achievers at the secondary 
school level,” The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 26(2), 
2007, 156-177. 
[12] D. Chazan, “Beyond formulas in mathematics and teaching: 
Dynamics of the high school algebra classroom,” New York: 
Teachers College Press, 2000. 
[13] M. Peltenburg, M. van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, and A. 
Robitzsch, “Special education students’ use of indirect 
addition in solving subtraction problems up to 100—A proof 
of the didactical potential of an ignored procedure,” 
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 79(3), 2012, pp. 351-
369. 
[14] G. N. Karagiannakis and A. Cooreman, “Focused MLD 
intervention based on the classification of MLD subtypes,” 
The Routledge international handbook of dyscalculia and 
mathematical learning difficulties, 2014, pp. 265-275. 
[15] S. Puntambekar and J. L. Kolodner, "Toward implementing 
distributed scaffolding: Helping students learn science from 
design," Journal of research in science teaching, 42(2), 2005, 
pp. 185-217. 
[16] I. Tabak, “Synergy: A complement to emerging patterns of 
distributed scaffolding,” The Journal of the Learning 
Sciences, 13(3), 2004, pp. 305-335. 
[17] K. Gravemeijer, “Local instruction theories as means of 
support for teachers in reform mathematics education,“ 
Mathematical thinking and learning, 6(2), 2004, pp. 105-128. 
[18] J. P. Gee, “What video games have to teach us about learning 
and literacy,” New York: Palgrave Macmillian Publishing, 
2014. 
[19] K. Squire, “Video game-based learning: An emerging 
paradigm 
for 
instruction,” 
Performance 
Improvement 
Quarterly, 21, 2008, pp. 7-36. 
[20] P. Dillenbourg and F. Fischer, “Computer-supported 
collaborative learning: The basics,” Zeitschrift für Berufs-und 
Wirtschaftspädagogik, 21, 2007, pp. 111-130. 
[21] V. Morcom, “Scaffolding social and emotional learning in an 
elementary 
classroom 
community: 
A 
sociocultural 
perspective,” 
 International 
Journal 
of 
Educational 
Research, 67, 2014, pp. 18-29. 
[22] M. A. Mariotti, “Artifacts and signs after a Vygotskian 
perspective: the role of the teacher,” ZDM —The 
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 41(4), 2009, 
pp. 427-440. 
[23] P. Cobb, "Supporting the improvement of learning and 
teaching in social and institutional context," Cognition and 
instruction:Twenty-five years of progress, 78, 2001, pp 19-37. 
[24] A. B. Powell, J. M. Francisco, and C. A. Maher, “An 
analytical model for studying the development of learners’ 
mathematical ideas and reasoning using videotape data,”  The 
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 22(4), 2003, pp. 405-435. 
[25] S. Michaels, C. O’Connor, and L. B. Resnick, “Deliberative 
discourse idealized and realized: Accountable talk in the 
classroom and in civic life,” Studies in Philosophy and 
Education, 27(4), 2007, pp. 283-297. 
[26] O. Broza and Y. Ben-David Kolikant, "Contingent teaching to 
low-achieving students in mathematics: challenges and 
potential for scaffolding meaningful learning," ZDM, 47(7), 
2015, pp. 1093-1105. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

