Pesticides Free Spectrophotometric Filters Creation For Pesticides Quantification in 
Various Vegetables 
 
Umberto Cerasani 
CERAGOS Electronics and Nature 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
Email: umbertocera@gmail.com 
 
 
Ennio Cerasani 
CERAGOS Electronics and Nature 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
Email: cerasani@ceragos.org 
 
 
 
Safa Boudrai 
CERAGOS Electronics and Nature 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
Email: safa.boudrai@gmail.com 
 
 
Oumy Diop 
Antibes, France, 
Email : diop.oumydiop@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— A method for estimation of food contaminants, 
including pesticides, is further described in this document. First, 
Visible Near InfraRed spectrometric measures were performed on 
various food samples with different levels of pollution, including 
pesticides free foods. Methodology and data extraction were 
meticulously addressed. Based on pesticides free food spectral data, 
pesticides free filters were created. These filters permitted 
pesticides isolation without the need of complex chemical 
procedures from foods natural occurring compounds. The removal 
of the natural occurring compounds in foods from their artificial 
counterparts was the initial step, before applying precise pesticides 
estimation procedures to the remaining spectral data. To accurately 
quantify foods pesticides contamination, two methods were 
developed: (1) standard Beer-lambert’s concentration law and (2) 
linear regression. The pesticides contamination evidenced by these 
two methods were very closed, with less than 3µg/mL of difference. 
Finally, implementation of these quantification methods in an 
embedded device, communicating with smartphone application is 
discussed allowing users to monitor food contaminants. 
Keywords—pesticides; Vis NIR spectroscopy; Beer-Lambert’s 
law; Linear Regression Analysis; Microspectrometer 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Pesticides are widely used in agriculture to protect crops and 
seeds and may have contributed to improvement in society 
health and economy [1]. At the same time, widespread use of 
pesticides has led to serious harm on the environment and 
human health [2] [3] [4]. With the increasing demand for a high 
quality agricultural products, new quality and safety control 
devices are being investigated. Because pesticides damaging 
effects are invisible and cannot be directly warned by visible 
observation or simple testing, pesticides estimation in soil or in 
foods prior to their consumption, requires complex techniques 
and remains very challenging [5-7]. 
A 
number 
of 
analytical 
methods, 
including 
mass 
spectroscopy 
gas 
and 
liquid 
chromatography 
gas 
chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC-MS), have been 
reported to detect various pesticides contamination in foods and 
these methods are very sensitive and reliable [5]. However, these 
classical analytical approaches are usually confined to a 
laboratory environment and require costly, long sample 
preparation time, solvent wasting, and hazardous samples 
contact [5, 8, 9]. Additional disadvantages of these methods 
include the restricted database mapping of pesticides analysis 
and the possibility of false negatives in the results [10]. 
Biosensors provides a promising alternative for the detection 
of pesticides [11-15]. Biosensors convert the signal produced by 
the immobilized biological element that detect the analyte into 
an electrically detectable signal and can be classified from their 
signal transduction techniques into electrochemical, optical, 
piezoelectric and mechanical biosensors [16]. Many biosensors 
designed for pesticides detection are based on the inhibition 
reaction or catalytic activity of several enzymes after pesticides 
contact [17]. Electrochemical transducers are usually simple to 
design, small and affordable making them candidate of choices 
for portable pesticides detection [16]. For instance, Enzyme-
Linked ImmunoSorbent Assays (ELISA) have grown rapidly as 
tools for pesticide measurement, although still challenged [17]. 
Since a number of pesticides have a similar mode of action 
affecting the activity of the same enzyme, most of ELISA based 
biosensors suffer poor individual pesticide specificity although 
improper to detect total pesticide content. On the other hand, 
immunosensors are biosensors that senses specific pesticides 
using antibodies (Ab) or antigens (Ag) taking advantage of the 
newest development of Ab technologies, targeted against 
pesticide molecules. Immunosensors are therefore able to 
provide concentration-dependent results in a certain range [17, 
18]. For instance in [19], Triazines were assayed using 
124
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

florescent antibodies (conjugated with with fluoresceine 
isothiocyanate binding to the fibre surface). After contact with 
the pesticide Triazines the fluorescence signal decreased since 
less antibodies were binding to the fibre. The detection limit 
using this immunosensor was very satisfying (around 0.1 ng/ml) 
[19]. However, there is a time gap between current status in the 
field and the most recent created immunosensors [17]. In 
addition, immunosensors usually requires specific testing 
procedures and have low reusability capacity without loss of 
sensitivity for most of them [20-22].  
Due to the great amount of pesticides currently being used, 
there is an augmented concern in the investigation and creation 
of rapid and non-destructive methods for pesticides detection 
[23]. In the last few years, advanced in optical instruments 
allowed the residuals of insecticides detection from agricultural 
samples [10]. Detection of hydrophobic organic pollutants via 
UV, Raman, and IR spectroscopic methods directly at solid 
sorbent phases are usually reported to be less sensitive than 
conventional chromatographic analysis, but permit on-site 
pollution measurements [9]. 
Near Infrared spectroscopy (NIR) is a well described method 
to assess the composition and quality of products in the food 
industry [24-28], since it has the capability to analyze organic 
substances rapidly and cost‐effectively, although suffering of 
low spectral resolution for samples in aqueous solutions due to 
strong water infrared absorption. As an example, a model for the 
quality control of herbicide Diuron in intact olives with 85.9% 
of accuracy using reflectance NIR spectroscopy is presented in 
[29]. Peppers are a frequent object of food safety alerts in 
various member states of the European Union since they 
frequently contain unauthorised pesticide residues. Near Infrared 
Reflectance Spectroscopy (NIRS) for the measurement of 
pesticide residues in peppers using commercially available 
spectrophotometers and demonstrating satisfying results is 
proposed in [30]. Spectral information in the ranges 1644–1772 
and 2014–2607 nm without baseline correction and Partial Least 
Squares (PLS) model interpretation were used to detect 
Buprofezin, Diuron and Daminozide without any sample pre-
treatment and sample destruction in [31]. 
Diuron determination in pesticide formulations was also 
analyzed after its extraction with acetonitrile and subsequent 
transmittance NIR measurements (2021 and 2047 nm). Diuron 
limit of detection reached 0.013 mg.g−1 with this methodology 
which was 10 times higher than that the results obtained by 
Liquid Chromatography (LC), making NIR vibrational method 
appropriate for the quality control of pesticide commercial 
formulations [32]. Fourier transform near infrared (FT-NIR) 
spectroscopy is also of value for the determination of pesticides 
in agrochemicals. Following previous extraction of the active 
principles and transmission measurements were performed on 
Chlorsulfuron, Metamitron, Iprodione, Pirimicarb, Procymidone 
and Tricyclazole, leading to detection values limits ranging from 
0.004 to 0.17 mg.g−1 , 10 times faster than chromatography 
analysis [33]. Chlopyrifos residue detection in white radish, 
based on NIR spectroscopy and PLS regression is proposed in 
[34]. PLS was mainly permitted the determination of the 
optimum wave number range.  
Field portable NIR spectrometer (from 360 to 1690 nm) was 
able to determine nutrient composition of beef feedlot manure in 
[35]. On the basis of analysis of dried mannure samples, the 
field‐portable NIR spectrometer allowed fast determination of 
Carbon, Nitrates, and several other parameters [35]. Field 
portable pesticides detectors, based on NIR spectrometry could 
be therefore considered for pesticides detection using a similar 
procedure. 
Infrared (IR) spectroscopy provides a rapid, low cost and 
highly reproducible diagnostic screening tool. IR spectroscopy is 
currently employed for soil surveillance systems, crops health 
and water quality assessment [36]. For instance, soil absorption 
over the Visible/Near-InfraRed (Vis/NIR) wavelength regions 
(350–2500 nm) is mostly associated with (1) the vibrational 
energy transitions of the dominant molecular bonds of Fe-oxides 
(which have absorptions over the visible (350–780 nm) and 
short-wave NIR (780–1100 nm) spectral regions), (2) clay 
minerals (which have absorption over the long-wave NIR 
(1100–2500 nm) regions), (3) water (which has strong 
absorption features over Vis/NIR regions, most visibly near 
1400 and 1900 nm), and (4) organic matter (which has distinct 
absorption features over the Vis/NIR, due to the various 
complex chemical bonds) [37]. Under certain conditions, such as 
very high concentration in soil, some transition elements 
(including Ni, Cu, Co) may also exhibit absorption features in 
the Vis/NIR spectral regions [37], permitting direct soil 
characterization and estimation of pesticides utilization in fields. 
A Vis/NIR mobile soil sensor was developed in [38] composed 
by optical unit to detect soil extractable phosphorous  (305 and 
1711 nm in reflectance mode). 
Vis/NIR spectroscopy also permits pesticides and other food 
contaminants detection [37, 39]. It may be particularly suited for 
free space measurement and field studies [40]. Internal and 
external pesticides damage detection of various fruits in Korea 
and Japan were detected using non damaging methods, such as 
Vis/NIR Spectroscopy [41]. 
Many aromatic pesticides are either naturally fluorescent or 
photodegrade into fluorescent byproducts and are hence suited 
for fluorescent spectroscopy detection [42]. For example, 
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs), pesticides are 
naturally fluorescent in aqueous solutions and allows for trace 
elements detection without previous pesticides concentration 
procedures [42]. Portable fluorometers are now available on 
market in a single portative device and with fiber-optic probes 
that permit remote observations [42].  
125
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Progress in Raman spectroscopes and in embedded 
computation equipment have enabled Raman spectroscopy to be 
used as an analytical tool for both solid samples and aqueous 
solutions, offering information permitting to determine the 
internal content in samples [5]. Because Raman spectrum of 
compound can furnish narrow and highly resolved bands it 
contains more complete vibrational information than IR 
spectrum. It may not require stabilizing materials and needs no 
chemical or mechanical pretreatment and allows nondestructive 
extraction of physical information [5, 10].  
Raman spectroscopic techniques mostly gathers dispersive 
Raman spectroscopy, Fourier transform Raman spectroscopy 
and Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) [5]. 
Because conventional Raman spectroscopy is limited to a small 
scattering cross section and requires large amount of specimen 
and strong incident light, the employment of SERS greatly 
enhances the sensitivity of the conventional Raman spectroscopy 
and offers more elevated measurement speed and sensitivity 
[10]. 
In food industry, spectroscopy has been satisfactorily used to 
monitor food quality and safety. For instance Raman 
spectroscopy was applied to discriminate between transgenic 
and normal crops in various breeding such as tobacco. Different 
Raman spectrum were obtained between the transgenic tobacco 
and the wild type, since for transgenic tobacco, the expression of 
cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase was greatly depleted after 
cinnamaldehyde lignin incorporation [5]. In addition, Raman 
spectroscopy was successfully used to distinguish the Brassica 
napus ‘Drakkar’ from the new genetically modified line [5]. 
Furthermore, the use of Raman spectroscopy permitted 
carotenoids content quantification in fruits and vegetables [5]. 
Other antioxidant quantification such as lycopene could be 
obtained by NIR-FT-Raman spectroscopy method [5]. FT-
Raman spectroscopy method in conjunction with Hierarchical 
Cluster Analysis (HCA) may accurately assess the energetic 
value and total carbohydrates, protein, and fat of powdered milk 
infant formulas [5]. 
Raman spectroscopic techniques are not only applied in 
quality control but also in safety control of various beverages, 
most specifically for microorganisms contamination and 
adulterants adjunction [43-48]. The identification of oil 
adulteration is of great importance from both market and health 
perspectives in the olive oil industry [49-55]. Unsaturation of oil 
Free Fatty Acids (FFA) and total degree of unsaturation could be 
estimated using spectroscopy measures [5]. Since Raman 
spectroscopy has been successfully applied to organic 
compounds detection in food and beverage, its employment for 
pesticides detection is particularly adequate. Most particularly 
identification and detection of large family of sulfur-containing 
pesticide residues at various fruit peels was performed utilizing 
the shell thickness-dependent Raman enhancement of silver-
coated gold nanoparticles [56]. 
Transmittance spectroscopy is particularly suited for free 
space measurements without sample preparation and can be 
applied to pesticides detection. For example, using a 
transmittance spectroscopy (in the 550 and 980 nm region), 
insect infested cherries within a tart cherry fruit were detected 
with accuracy varying from 82% to 87% [57]. 
Data clustering analysis following spectroscopy data is often 
required to distinguish food contaminants. Spectroscopy such as 
SERS coupled with clustering analysis has been shown to enable 
the trace-level detection of various pesticides [58]. For instance, 
cluster analysis, following Wavelength Dispersive X Rays 
Fluorescence Spectroscopy may permit classification of black 
tea and green tea from tea mineral elements [59]. Clustering 
algorithms often requires variable fitting or selection methods. 
Most commonly employed methods are: Stepwise Regression 
Analysis, Uninformative Variable Elimination, Interval Partial 
Least Squares (IPLS) regression, Clonal Selection Feature 
Selection algorithm [23]. As an example improving PLS 
regression models, used in spectrum data post-processing, may 
hence result in more specific database inquiries and sample 
chemical identification. 
In this paper, we quantified food pesticides contamination 
using Vis-NIR reflectance spectroscopy. Since there are several 
thousand of different active pesticide molecules reported [60, 
61], current pesticides detection is limited to few types of 
pesticides chemical and does not ascertain pesticides free 
products. We worked from another perspective by comparing 
the spectral information obtained from pesticides free and 
pesticides contaminated foods, irrespective of the pesticide 
types. We searched for particular traces in the spectroscopy 
spectrum 
that 
could 
be 
characteristic 
of 
pesticides 
contamination. Mostly two cases could be found: (1) the spectra 
of foods grown with pesticides contains additional traces which 
could be related with pesticides own spectral characteristics or 
modified endogenous food proteins [62-64], (2) oppositely the 
absence of spectral components in particular wavelength in 
pesticides contaminated foods compared to organic or totally 
natural foods (grown without pesticides addition) may also be 
used as a spectral indicator of food purity since certain food 
proteins may not be expressed when pesticides are utilized [65-
68]. 
The measured pesticides free foods spectral data were used 
as filters to isolate the additional non-natural constituents of 
foods. Pesticides contamination quantification was hence 
performed on these additional non-natural food components 
spectral data, avoiding the need of pesticide chemical isolation 
from the food natural components to increase measures 
reliability. Transmission spectroscopy was performed for 3 
pesticides commonly employed in agriculture: (1) Dicofol, (2) 
126
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Thiamethoxam and (3) Malathion and their respective 
absorption spectral data were computed. Since the concentration 
of the tested pesticides was known, peaks in absorption spectral 
data permitted to calculate the Dicofol, Thiamethoxam and 
Malathion absorption coefficients at 791 nm, 774 nm and 475 
nm respectively. Pesticides estimation was realized for different 
foods category from different suppliers, including a market 
gardener claiming to produce pesticides free foods, an organic 
food producer and two supermarkets. Pesticides contamination 
for each food was computed using: (1) the standard 
concentration law applied at pesticides characteristic wavelength 
and (2) linear regression model solved with Non Negative 
Classical Least Squares. Very closed pesticides levels were 
obtained by both methods, although there were applied to foods 
of different category and different suppliers. 
Finally, algorithm implementation inside a portative device 
with an embedded spectrometer, as depicted in Figure 1, allows 
pesticide estimation for non-specialized users. For easier user 
data reading, a wireless communication device (Bluetooth 
module) is integrated in the embedded system for user’s 
smartphone communication. A specific smartphone application 
was created for embedded spectrometer results monitoring. To 
diminish the costs of the overall device, sunlight is used as 
spectroscopic light source, limiting device utilization in bright 
areas.  
Our document will be organized into 3 main sections: first, 
the methodology of our experiment will be introduced with the 
devices used, then, the Vis-NIR spectroscopy results are 
reported and analyzed, finally a conclusion is drawn with 
possible future work direction propositions. 
 
 
Figure 1. User centric based device for food pesticides monitoring 
 
II. METHODS 
Measurements detailed information and equipment used are 
presented in this Section. 
A. Food samples variety 
We tested 3 different food categories: tomatoes, zucchini and 
potatoes. The precise variety of vegetable tested is reported in 
Table I. Food were bought directly from (1) a market gardener 
that did not used any pesticides or chemical contaminant, (2) an 
organic store and from 2 famous French supermarket brands, 
where we assumed that plants were grown using pesticides ((3) 
and (4)). Although several pesticides are contained in the 
vegetable peel, we decided to perform the measure on the 
decorticated vegetable to avoid peel color bias. Each vegetable 
was tested in 3 different areas. 
 
TABLE I. VEGETABLE TYPES AND VARIETIES USED FOR THE 
EXERIMENT 
Food 
Variety 
(botanical 
name) 
Food suppliers 
Market 
gardener 
(pesticides 
free) 
Organic 
shop 
Superma
rket 1 
Supermark
et 2 
Tomatoes 
Lycopersic
on 
escubentum 
Lycopers
icon 
escubent
um, 
Solanum 
lycopersi
cum 
Lycopersi
con 
escubent
um 
Lycopersi
con 
esculentu
m 
Lycopersico
n 
escubentum 
Lycopersico
n 
esculentum 
Zucchini 
Cucurbita 
moschata, 
Cucurbita 
pepo ’De 
Nice à fruit 
ronds´ 
Cucurbit
a pepo 
´Verte 
non 
coureuse
´ 
Cucurbit
a pepo 
´Verte 
non 
coureuse´ 
Cucurbita 
pepo ´Verte 
non 
coureuse´ 
Poataoes 
Solanum 
tuberosum 
´Charlotte´ 
(yellow),  
Solanum 
tuberosum 
´Desiree´ 
(red), 
Solanum 
tuberosu
m 
´Charlot
te´ 
(yellow) 
‘Cherie’ 
‘Cherie’ 
 
B. Test system description: 
Reflectance spectroscopy measures were performed using the 
test bench described in Figure 2. We used the Ocean Optics kit 
including the ECOVIS Krypton Lightsource, the USB-650 Red 
Tide Spectrometer (preconfigured in the 350-1000 nm 
wavelength range), a 200 µm Bifurcated Fiber (Vis-NIR) and the 
OceanView software. The results were then extracted and 
manipulated with Matlab software. The distance between the 
bifurcated fiber and the sample to measure was fixed to 5mm, 
and the reflectance robe was positioned at an angle of 90° to the 
flat surface of the sample to analyze. 
 
127
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2. Test bench diagram used for Vis-NIR spectroscopy measurements 
in various vegetables 
 
C. Absorption spectrum determination 
 
Fresnel’s 
equations 
are 
valid 
in 
non-near 
field 
spectrophotometric analysis and describe the light behavior 
when moving between media of differing refractive indices. We 
use reflective Vis-NIR spectroscopy to analyze opaque solutions 
(foods), which did not necessitate particular sample preparation. 
On the other hand, transmission spectroscopy was selected to 
study 
transparent 
media 
of 
the 
pesticides 
Dicofol, 
Thiamethoxam and Malathion. The three pesticides studied, 
which are described in Table II, were added to a cuvette of 1 
square centimeter area, specifically designed for transmission 
spectroscopy.  
 
TABLE II. ANALYZED PESTICIDES PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
Pesticides 
Concentration 
(Mole/L) 
Density 
(g/mL) 
Molar mass 
(g/Mole) 
Dicofol 
0.75e-3 
1.23 
370 
Thiamethoxam 
0.36e-3 
0.998 
291 
Malathion 
1.9e-3 
1.27 
330 
 
From the food reflection spectra, the corresponding 
absorption spectra were immediately determined by noticing that 
the transmission light was inexistent since the foods were 
opaque at the considered Vis-NIR wavelengths range (400nm – 
850nm).  
Secondly the absorption spectra of the pesticides were 
directly deduced from the pesticides transmission spectra since 
there was no reflected light (light source was perpendicular to 
the cuvette containing the analyzed solutions).  
To establish the foods absorption spectra and the pesticides 
absorption spectra, we used the ECOVIS Krypton Light source 
as the incident reference light and we further removed the light 
background and electronic device noises. Finally, the absorption 
spectra were shifted to avoid negative absorption values.  
 
D. Beer Lambert’s concentration law 
 
Beer lambert’s law (reported in eq. (1)) correlates the 
solution absorbance to the concentration of the solution and to 
the thickness of the material sample [69, 70]: 
-log10(Itransmitted/Iincident) = ε*c*l            (1) 
where Itransmitted is the transmitted light source spectrum, Iincident is 
the incident light source spectrum, c the solution concentration, 
ε is the absorption coefficient and l is the length of the cuvette. 
Therefore, the concentration of a solution is directly proportional 
to 
the 
absorbance 
measurements 
obtained 
using 
a 
spectrophotometer [71]. Traditional solution concentration 
determination using Beer Lambert’s law is restricted to a single 
wavelength, corresponding to the absorption spectrum peak. In 
fact the absorption coefficient (ε) is related to the complex index 
of refraction (n’’) and to the “peak” wavelength (λ), as described 
in eq. (2) (rewritten from [72]): 
ε = 4n’’/λ                                            (2) 
Absorption spectra are additive meaning that absorption spectra 
of a mixture is the sum of absorption spectra of each mixture 
components, measured separately.  
In many cases absorption calibration curve deviates from this 
ideal straight behavior. Deviations from linearity are divided 
into three categories: (1) fundamental which gather the 
deviations in absorptivity coefficients at high concentrations 
(>0.01 Moles) due to electrostatic interactions between 
molecules in close proximity and the changes in refractive index 
at high analyte concentration, (2) chemical, mainly due to shifts 
in chemical equilibria as a function of concentration, and (3) 
instrumental which originate from non-monochromatic radiation 
and light scattering [70, 73]. In consequence, spectrophotometric 
study of pesticides concentration using the linear Beer-lambert’s 
law is restricted to a given concentration interval, above the 
minimum pesticides concentration detection limit. 
 
E. Multiwavelength spectrophotometric analysis 
 
The spectroscopic analysis of mixtures, when the spectra of 
the components overlap considerably, can be performed using 
multiple linear regression analysis, which can be solved by Least 
Squares methods [74]. First, measurement of absorption spectra 
of each mixture component at a particular concentration permit 
to determine the absorption coefficient sensitivity (φ) for all the 
considered Vis-NIR wavelengths interval. 
128
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Given the variable of interest c (scalar vector corresponding 
to the concentration of each component in the mixture), linear 
regression methods aim to model and estimate the relationship 
between a scalar dependent variable c and a vector of 
explanatory variable A (representing the absorption spectrum at 
the considered wavelength) through the linear relation described 
in eq. (3): 
Aλ = φn,λ. cn                                             (3) 
where n represent the number of different components in the 
mixture and λ the wavelength (also referred as regressors in 
linear regression models). The classical linear regression model 
with “standard assumptions”, can be solved using the Least 
Squares principle, which minimizes the sum-squared error in the 
reproduction of the values of A, using only the concentration 
vector c, over all j wavelengths, as expressed in eq. (4): 
∑j (Error)2 = ∑j (Aj - ∑i φij * ci)2                     (4) 
In the special case of error functions, equating the first order 
derivative of the squared sum of errors to 0 with respect to the 
concentrations ci, results in determination of the concentrations 
ci which minimize the differences between the measured 
absorption 
spectrum 
and 
the 
reconstituted 
spectrum. 
Alternatively, the equations can be converted into matrix 
expressions, permitting to determine the concentrations ci of 
each individual components of the mixture, as described in eq. 
(5) [74-76]: 
cn  = (φn,λT * φn,λ)-1 * φn,λT * Aλ                       (5) 
For multiple component analysis, we preferred the use of non 
negative Least Squares, resulting in non negative concentrations 
ci estimation of the components forming the analyzed mixture.  
The use of multicomponent analysis was however restricted 
to experimentation purposes and not directly implemented in the 
created embedded spectrophotometer. 
 
F. Algorithms implementation 
 
For embedded device pesticides detection, the choice of the 
algorithm for pesticides detection was limited by several 
elements, mainly: (1) spectrophotometer accuracy, (2) the 
computational resources, (3) simplicity of implementation 
allowing machine portability, (4) real time computation 
requirements. 
Given these strong restrictions, we decided to select 
monowavelength Beer-Lambert’s concentration determination, 
with predetermined absorption coefficients, for samples 
contamination quantification.  
Figure 3 depicts the measurement procedure we followed to 
extract the absorption coefficient associated with each pesticide, 
from the measured transmission spectrum. The procedure for 
pesticides quantification in foods is indicated in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Pesticide absorption coefficient determination procedure 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Food analysis procedure using the Vis-NIR reflected spectrum and 
the Beer-Lambert’s concentration law 
 
III. RESULTS 
A. Additional spectral traces comparison 
 
Tomatoes spectroscopic measures from different supplier’s 
origin are presented in Figure 5, after division by their respective 
Area Under Curve, to remove the light intensity drift differences 
between 
samples. 
Each 
line 
represents 
the 
spectral 
measurements realized on tomatoes from a market gardener that 
did not used any pesticides or chemical contaminant (blue line), 
an organic store (green line) and from 2 famous French 
supermarket brands, where we assumed that plants were grown 
using pesticides (red and pink lines respectively). For each 
different tomatoes supplier, measures were performed on several 
vegetable samples to decrease the samples intervariability bias 
and the mean value was computed and reported on the figures. 
As an example, the green line in Figure 5 outlines the mean 
129
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

relative light intensity of organic tomatoes sample and the 
magenta lines in the same figure outlines the mean relative light 
intensity of the Supermarket 2 tomatoes sample. 
 
 
Figure 5. Tomatoes spectral analysis comparison (mean samples values). 
 
 
Figure 6. Zucchini spectral data comparison (mean samples values). 
 
 
Figure 7. Potatoes spectral data comparison (mean samples values). 
 
Figure 6 and Figure 7 depict the spectral measures associated 
with zucchini and potatoes from different food supplier’s origin 
respectively. For easier data interpretation, light intensity drift 
was removed. The mean relative light intensity values of the 
pesticides free zucchini and potatoes are both reported in blue 
thick lines in each figure. Similarly, to the previous figure 
results, each different color line describes the spectral 
measurements associated with the 4 different origins of the food 
under study (pesticide free market gardener, organic store, 
supermarket 1 and supermarket 2).  
 
B. Spectral filters creation 
Chemical manipulations mostly precede spectrophotometric 
pesticides analysis to isolate the pesticide from its containing 
solution. Such manipulations often demand material and 
expertise. The spectrum of pesticides free foods was extracted 
for different food category. This spectrum when subtracted to 
the spectrum of foods grown with pesticides, split each pesticide 
grown food spectrum into (1) the natural components composing 
the food spectrum from (2) the extra artificial components of 
foods spectra (mostly non-naturals adulterants). Supplementary 
components of foods include airborne pollutants, pesticides, 
dust, etc. It was assumed that the main supplementary 
components, following foods mechanical cleansing are mainly 
the pesticides and conservatives. 
Analyzing pesticides content on the spectrum additional non-
natural constituents, remove the need of pesticides chemical 
extraction. The creation of pesticides free Vis-NIR filters is 
hence of capital importance in food pesticides estimation, 
provided that the filters created corresponds to the same food 
category and variety that the food under study. 
Reflective spectroscopy spectral data from organic shop 
(green line), supermarket 1 (red line) and supermarket 2 (pink 
line) were subtracted to reflective spectral data of pesticides free 
food of similar variety to obtain the additional non natural 
components 
contained 
in 
the 
foods 
studied. 
These 
supplementary artificial compounds for tomatoes, zucchini and 
potatoes are respectively presented in Figure 8, Figure 9 and in 
Figure 10. 
Figure 8 shows that spectral relative intensity in the 350 nm 
– 400 nm region is particularly characteristic of the tomatoes 
added chemicals. Other spectral rays (435 nm, 587 nm, 672 nm, 
781nm, 791 nm, etc.) deserve extended analysis and database 
characterization. 
Although characterization of food additives or pesticides 
contaminants for zucchini seems straightforward with two large 
peaks at 374 nm and 570 nm compared to pesticides free 
zucchini (Figure 9), the analysis may be more complex. In fact, 
130
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

as presented in Table I, the zucchini variety of the organic shop, 
supermarket 1 and supermarket 2 (Cucurbita pepo ‘Verte non 
coureuse’) is not exactly the same as the one proposed by the 
pesticide free market gardener (Cucurbita moschata and 
Cucurbita pepo ‘De Nice à fruit ronds’). Modification in 
chromophore molecules between these two varieties of zucchini 
may explain the large results variation. For more conclusive 
analysis, data obtained from organic zucchini should be used for 
spectral filter construction, although we further noted that in 
these wavelength areas, data obtained from organic stores also 
differ from the ones associated from the two supermarkets. Of 
particular interest seems to be the spectral rays of 715 nm, 774 
nm, 450 - 456 nm area and need deeper investigation. 
 
 
Figure 8. Additional relative light intensity compared to pesticides free 
tomatoes spectral data 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Additional relative light intensity compared to pesticides free 
zucchini spectral data 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Additional relative light intensity compared to pesticides free 
potatoes spectral data 
 
Filtration of spectral data from organic shop (green line), 
supermarket 1 (red line) and supermarket 2 (pink line) with 
spectral data of potatoes pesticides free mean value is described 
in Figure 10. Except in the 350 nm - 450 nm and the 600 – 750 
nm regions, spectral data obtained from the two supermarkets 
(red and pink curves) seems to be closer to the pesticide free 
spectrum. Several explanations may exist. Like for zucchini, not 
the same potato varieties were compared, explaining the 
discrepancies between results. A second explanation is the 
presence of specific food additional substances, possibly 
pollutants, in organic food compared to supermarket ones 
(organic foods are not entirely devoid of pesticides, since 
pesticides from natural sources are allowed in organic gardening 
[77]). 
 
C. Dicofol, Thiamothexame and Malathion pesticides 
spectrophotometric characterization 
 
The three pesticides Dicofol, Thiamethoxam and Malathion 
were studied and since they were almost transparent, 
transmission measured were performed to determine their 
corresponding absorption spectrum, reported in  
Figure 11.  
In [78], a spectrophotometric method for the determination 
of Malathion is proposed, involving the decomposition of 
Malathion in the presence of alcoholic KOH, further reacting 
with Ammonium meta vanadate in Nitric acid to form a blue 
color. The absorbance maximum of the Malathion solution was 
observed at 760 nm and it was shown that the Beer-Lambert’s 
law was obeyed in the 0.5-11 μg/mL interval [78]. Another 
selective spectrophotometric method developed in [79] for the 
determination of Malathion required Gention Violet addition. 
First alkaline hydrolysis of Malathion in presence of sodium 
ethoxide formed sodium dimethyl dithiophosphate (Na-
DMDTP), then the obtained solution was complexed with the 
131
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

cationic dye Gention Violet, before chloroform extraction. The 
color of the organic layer was measured at 587 nm and the 
concentration law was respected in the 0.1-10 µg/mL interval. 
Other 
authors 
proposed 
a 
cost-effective 
method 
for 
determination of Malathion using spectrophotometric measures 
with absorbance peak around 520 nm (Amaranth dye titration) 
[80]. Spectrophotometric organophosphates detection methods 
require mainly three steps: (1) the reaction  of  Malathion  with 
an  excess  of  oxidant  in  acid  medium to specifically select 
Malathion component from the containing solution, followed by 
(2) the addition of a reacting dye and finally (3) the 
spectrophotometric measure of the reactive dye variation when 
added to Malathion, since the reacting dye has notable 
absorption peaks well characterized [80]. 
Similar 
procedures 
permitted 
the 
extraction 
of 
concentration’s law for Dicofol, with an absorption peak in the 
UV range (232 nm) [81]. A spectrophotometric method for the 
determination of Dicofol is described in [82] and based on the 
Fujiwara reaction (Alkaline hydrolysis of Dicofol,  reaction with 
pyridine to produce red color, addition of glacial acetic acid and 
final reaction with 4-aminoacetanilide to give an orange-red dye, 
further extracted in 3-methyl-1-butanol). The extracted dye 
shows absorption maximum at 525 nm. Beer's law was obeyed 
in the range of 0.025–0.25 μg mL−1 using this method as 
discussed in [82]. 
Statistical analysis using UV spectroscopy showed that there 
was a significant linear relationship between the concentration of 
Thiamethoxam in tea and the absorbance at 250 nm in the UV 
spectra of the mixture [83]. 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Vis NIR absorption spectra of the Dicofol (concentration: 0.75e-3 
Mole/L), Thiamethoxam (concentration: 0.36e-3 Mole/L) and Malathion 
(concentration: 1.9e-3 Mole/L). 
 
Without the use of the coloring dye and based only on the 
Vis-NIR absorption spectra measured (reported in  
Figure 11), each pesticide we studied most probably has 
absorption peaks in the UV and IR regions. We retained the 475 
nm (Blue region), 774 nm (NIR region) and 791nm (NIR region) 
as Malathion, Thiamethoxam and Dicofol respective absorption 
peaks, further used to determine absorption coefficients for 
pesticides concentration estimation. Because the absorption 
peaks were possibly non optimal absorption peaks, the 
concentration range for pesticide detection was reduced 
compared to other literature studies [70]. Avoiding using the 
wavelengths associated with the colors green (approximatively 
550 nm), and red (approximatively 650 nm) but contrarily using 
wavelengths in the Blue or NIR area permit to avoid any 
influence of the food maturation or common food color change 
due to various natural processes. These wavelengths were used 
to extract the absorption coefficients according to Beer 
Lambert’s concentration law, since the concentration of the 
tested pesticides was known. 
 
TABLE III. DICOFOL, THIAMETHOXAM AND MALATHION PESTICIDES 
CONCENTRATION IN DIFFERENT FOODS CATEGORY OBTAINED FROM 
DIFFERENT SUPPLIERS 
 
Dicofol 
(mg/mL) 
Thiamethoxam 
(mg/mL) 
Malathion 
(mg/mL) 
Peak wavelengths (nm) 
791 
774 
475 
Absorption Coefficient 
(Mole/L) 
9.8e5 
3.3e6 
3.8e6 
PESTICIDES CONCENTRATION (MG/ML) 
Organic tomatoes 
0,014 
0,005 
0,003 
Supermarket1 
tomatoes 
0,082 
0,017 
0,002 
Supermarket 2 
tomatoes 
0,057 
0,013 
0,008 
Organic zucchini 
0,167 
0,038 
0,029 
Supermarket 1 
zucchini 
0,113 
0,026 
0,019 
Supermarket 2 
zucchini 
0,119 
0,026 
0,017 
Organic potatoes 
0,016 
0,005 
0,003 
Supermarket 1 
potatoes 
0,0099 
0,005 
0,004 
Supermarket 2 
potatoes 
0,0089 
0,002 
0,004 
 
To directly estimate the foods pesticide contamination 
without previous chemical manipulation and dye addition, the 
main problem to address was to isolate the pesticide contribution 
from other factors at the selected pesticide wavelength. 
Although not perfectly accurate the filtering of the food 
reflection spectra with the corresponding food spectrum 
132
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

obtained from the pesticide free market gardener, permitted to 
isolate the non-natural added substances. This method is hence 
an alternative solution to avoid food sample chemical 
adulteration and dye addition, before spectrophotometric 
analysis. To further increase the accuracy of the measures, 
multiple wavelengths can be considered when computing the 
Beer 
Lambert’s 
concentration 
relation 
and 
the 
mean 
concentration among these multiple wavelengths can be selected 
instead, for each pesticide. The concentrations of the studied 
pesticides among each food category studied after pesticides free 
market gardener food spectra removal is reported in Table III. 
 
Dicofol, 
Thiamethoxam 
and 
Malathion 
pesticides 
contamination is markedly lower in tomatoes obtained from 
organic farming than in tomatoes from supermarkets. Very 
surprisingly, higher Dicofol, Thiamethoxam and Malathion 
pesticides traces were found in organic farming zucchini. 
Difference in variety between market gardener pesticides free 
zucchini and organic farming zucchini may partially explain 
their higher absorption coefficients. Another possible hypothesis 
to interpret these unpredicted results is that the pesticides studied 
are not the commonly used in foods farming but are rather more 
adapted for flowers farming and could easily be transported by 
wind. 
Besides, since the foods were bought in a single organic 
store and in 2 different supermarkets, they are not representative 
of respectively organic agriculture or conventional agriculture.  
 
D. Non Negative Classical Least Squares analysis 
 
Vis-NIR spectrum of a solution composed of multiple 
components, knowing the spectrum of each component can be 
approximated using multiple linear regression models. Multiple 
linear regression equations can be solved using Least Squares 
developments. The main idea with multiple linear regression 
models is to express a function in a different base: from the 
wavelength base (old base or regressor basis) to a new base 
(base of concentration). This can be simply performed by 
multiplying the analyzed function with the inverse transfer 
matrix. Transfer matrix is used to transform the old base 
(wavelength or regressor base) into the new base (concentration 
base). Least Squares is the mathematical method selected to 
accomplish this operation, permitting to reduce the squared error 
between the analyzed function expressed in the old base 
compared to the analyzed function expressed in new base. 
Because the dimensions in the old base (number of wavelength) 
is usually much larger than the dimensions in the new base 
(number of different concentrations of the pesticides studied), 
direct transfer matrix inversion is most of the time not permitted. 
It finally results that the foods studied are described with the 
relative concentrations of the pesticides studied. 
Similarly, to the pesticide concentration determination in 
foods using the previously described method, it is necessary to 
isolate the pesticide spectrum from the entire foods spectra. 
Consequently, pesticides free filters determined for each food 
category were applied before any pesticides concentration 
estimation, highlighting the importance of the created filters. 
 
The reconstruction of the additional non natural components 
foods absorption spectra using the Non Negative Least Squares 
analysis are reported in Figure 12 for organic tomatoes, Figure 
13 for organic zucchini and Figure 14 for organic potatoes. 
These spectra reconstruction was based on the product of (1) the 
concentration coefficients obtained by the Non Negative Least 
Squares analysis, (2) by their corresponding pesticides 
absorption spectra. It should be noted that Non Negative Least 
Squares 
algorithm, 
mainly 
permitted 
to 
obtain 
the 
Thiamethoxam pesticides concentration in foods, since only 
positive concentration coefficients determination were allowed. 
 
In the reconstructed spectrum using the Non Negative Least 
Squares algorithm for organic tomatoes (Figure 12), only the 
470 – 530 nm and the 730 – 800 nm wavelengths regions were 
correctly modeled. Wavelength regions correctly modeled from 
the reconstructed spectrum using the Non Negative Least 
Squares algorithm were further reduced for organic zucchini 
(Figure 13), with mostly the 520 – 530 nm and the 740 – 800 nm 
wavelengths regions precisely reproduced. The reproduction of 
the organic potatoes additional non natural components 
spectrum from analyzed pesticides spectra using the same 
algorithm (Figure 14) was very restricted with only few 
wavelengths correctly replicated (490 – 500 nm and 730 – 740 
nm). Obviously the additional non natural components spectra of 
the various foods did not only contain the three studied 
pesticides but many other constituents, explaining the 
reconstruction divergences. Besides the three pesticides studied 
absorption spectra have a very similar mathematical description 
(Gaussian distribution with peaks at close wavelengths), 
impeding correct reconstruction in other wavelengths area. In a 
general way, stronger are the similarities between the 
reconstruction from pesticides spectra and the foods spectra, 
stronger is the validity of the concentration coefficient obtained 
by the Non Negative Least Squares algorithm. 
The algorithm implemented increased the proximities of the 
solutions at the regressors (wavelengths) maximum and 
minimum values, corresponding to the wavelength regions of the 
pesticides spectral apex. However, these wavelength regions are 
the most corrupted by measurement noise. It is also interesting 
to mention that to avoid strong boundary noises the Least 
Squares method can be weighted by the reflectance spectra of 
the pesticides, leading to better foods spectra reconstruction 
[74]. 
 
133
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 12. Organic tomatoes additional artificial components spectrum 
reconstructed from Non Negative Classical Least Squares analysis using the 
pesticides Dicofol, Thiamethoxam and Malathion spectra. 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Organic zucchini additional artificial components spectrum 
reconstructed with Non Negative Classical Least Squares analysis using the 
pesticides Dicofol, Thiamethoxam and Malathion spectra.  
 
 
Figure 14. Organic potatoes additional artificial components spectrum 
reconstructed with Non Negative Classical Least Squares analysis using the 
pesticides Dicofol, Thiamethoxam and Malathion spectra.  
 
 
Table IV depicts the comparison between the Thiamethoxam 
pesticides concentration in various foods categories obtained 
with the Beer-Lambert procedure or with the Non Negative 
Least Squares procedure. Both methods permit to obtain very 
close concentration values with less than 3µg/mL maximum 
errors.  
 
TABLE IV. THIAMETHOXAM PESTICIDE CONCENTRATION 
COMPARAISON BETWEEN SINGLE WAVELENGTH CONCENTRATION 
LAW AND USING NON NEGATIVE LEAST SQUARES ANALYSIS 
 
Beer-Lambert’s 
concentration 
law 
Non Negative 
Least Squares 
THIAMETHOXAM  PESTICIDE CONCENTRATION (MG/ML) 
Organic tomatoes 
0.005 
0.005 
Supermarket1 tomatoes 
0.017 
0.014 
Supermarket 2 
tomatoes 
0.013 
0.016 
Organic zucchini 
0.038 
0.040 
Supermarket 1 zucchini 
0.026 
0.028 
Supermarket 2 zucchini 
0.026 
0.026 
Organic potatoes 
0.005 
0.007 
Supermarket 1 potatoes 
0.005 
0.006 
Supermarket 2 potatoes 
0.002 
0.005 
 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Due to their wide use and toxicity, pesticides quantification 
in foods are measured by several methods including Liquid 
Chromatography with Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS), Gas 
Chromatography 
(GC), 
High 
Performance 
Liquid 
Chromatography (HPLC), Voltammetry, Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometry (AAS) and  spectrophotometry [80]. 
Spectrophotometry analysis of pesticides often requires 
chemical manipulations such as pesticides extraction with 
solvents and dye addition before dye quantification by 
spectrophotometric measures. Such manipulations are difficult 
to reproduce in outside measures and often requires specific 
material and expertise. In order to directly estimate the 
pesticides concentration in foods extract using the Beer-
Lambert’s concentration law, pesticides extraction from foods 
should be realized first. Avoiding using chemicals for pesticides 
extraction is therefore a very challenging part, that we partially 
solved in this document. By performing spectrophotometric 
measures on food devoid of pesticides contamination and 
repeating the measures to different foods variety and category, 
the spectra of pesticides free foods were extracted. These 
pesticides free foods spectra were used to extract the foods 
134
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

genuine spectra from the added constituents such as pesticides 
and conservatives. Therefore, we propose an innovative method 
based on Vis-NIR spectroscopy for detecting food contaminants 
using spectral filters constructed from pesticides free food 
samples data.  
Our methodology choices were mainly dictated by the 
currently restricted number of contaminants analyzed using 
spectrophotometric 
measures, 
since 
pesticides 
extraction 
experimental procedures are limited and complex. In contrast, 
we used the Vis-NIR spectral trace of additional atypical 
constituents in foods, obtained after application of adequate 
pesticides free foods filters. The creation of these filters required 
first the laborious finding of a certified market gardener 
pesticides free food supplier. Then pesticides free foods spectral 
data were measured using reflective spectroscopy and used as 
pesticides free filters. Vis-NIR spectral data of three categories 
of foods from different food suppliers were compared to the 
corresponding pesticides free foods spectral data and Vis-NIR 
spectral traces of contaminants were extracted. We further 
discussed the most likely wavelengths in the Vis-NIR spectral 
range associated with pesticides chemicals.  
For more rigorous pesticides contamination quantification, 
we compared two different methods of spectrophotometric 
pesticides detection: one based on the standard Beer-Lambert’s 
concentration law and the second based on Non Negative Least 
Squares algorithm. The pesticides of interest were Dicofol, 
Thiamethoxam and Malathion and their respective absorption 
spectra were measured. We further extracted the absorption 
coefficients of these pesticides at appropriate wavelengths. 
Measurement of the additional components of the various 
foods categories in the Vis-NIR spectral trace permitted: (1) the 
estimation 
of 
the 
pesticides 
contamination 
at 
precise 
wavelengths (791 nm for Dicofol, 774 nm for Thiamethoxam 
and 475 nm for Malathion) using the standard Beer-Lambert’s 
law and (2) the estimation of Thiamethoxam food contamination 
principally, using all the wavelengths (Non Negative Least 
Squares algorithm). The pesticides concentration results were 
very similar among the two methods for each category of food 
with less than 3µg/mL of difference between the two methods. 
Globally and from early conclusion, our method is 
promising, easy to implement and directly permits to interpret 
pesticides food pollution. Confrontation of the obtained 
pesticides concentration with another recognized pesticide 
concentration 
estimation 
method 
such 
as 
Liquid 
Chromatography with Mass Spectrometry is the next step to 
validate these encouraging results. The use of pesticides free 
spectral filters and the quantification of pesticides using linear 
regression models are particularly innovative and should 
facilitate non-invasive pesticides testing procedures.  
The main constraint in the developed method is that 
meticulous data should be obtained first for numerous pesticide 
free food variety and category studied, possibly stored in a 
database. 
 Astonishingly, when applying the method we developed to 
foods from different suppliers, it resulted that foods from 
organic farming were not always the less contaminated with 
pesticides. 
Finally, the implementation of such algorithm in an 
embedded platform with a microspectrometer module may allow 
convenient 
device 
user 
estimation 
of 
foods 
chemical 
contaminants. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
O. Diop and U. Cerasani, "Light Reflection Spectrum 
Comparison of Pesticides Free Foods, Organic Foods and 
Conventional Farming Foods for VIS NIR Filter Creation," in 
The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-
oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and 
Services (CENTRIC 2016), Rome, 2016. 
[2] 
D. Pimentel, "Environmental and economic costs of the 
application of pesticides primarily in the United States," 
Environment, development and sustainability, vol. 7, pp. 229-
252, 2005. 
[3] 
N. J. Osborne, R. Cairns, A. H. Dawson, K. M. Chitty, and N. 
A. Buckley, "Epidemiology of coronial deaths from pesticide 
ingestion in Australia," International journal of hygiene and 
environmental health, vol. 220, pp. 478-484, 2017. 
[4] 
M. Sarwar, "The dangers of pesticides associated with public 
health and preventing of the risks," International Journal of 
Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering, vol. 1, pp. 130-
136, 2015. 
[5] 
D. Yang and Y. Ying, "Applications of Raman spectroscopy 
in agricultural products and food analysis: A review," Applied 
Spectroscopy Reviews, vol. 46, pp. 539-560, 2011. 
[6] 
B. B. Dzantiev, N. A. Byzova, A. E. Urusov, and A. V. 
Zherdev, 
"Immunochromatographic 
methods 
in 
food 
analysis," TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 55, pp. 
81-93, 2014. 
[7] 
G. Marrazza, "Piezoelectric biosensors for organophosphate 
and carbamate pesticides: a review," Biosensors, vol. 4, pp. 
301-317, 2014. 
[8] 
D. Lee, S. Lee, G. H. Seong, J. Choo, E. K. Lee, D.-G. 
Gweon, et al., "Quantitative analysis of methyl parathion 
pesticides in a polydimethylsiloxane microfluidic channel 
using confocal surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy," 
Applied spectroscopy, vol. 60, pp. 373-377, 2006. 
[9] 
M. Karlowatz, M. Kraft, and B. Mizaikoff, "Simultaneous 
quantitative determination of benzene, toluene, and xylenes in 
water using mid-infrared evanescent field spectroscopy," 
Analytical chemistry, vol. 76, pp. 2643-2648, 2004. 
[10] 
K. Wong-Ek, M. Horprathum, P. Eiamchai, P. Limnonthakul, 
V. Patthanasettakul, P. Chindaudom, et al., "Portable surface-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy for insecticide detection using 
silver nanorod film fabricated by magnetron sputtering," in 
SPIE BiOS, 2011, pp. 791108-791108-11. 
135
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[11] 
W. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, D. Liu, D. Du, and Y. Lin, 
"Nanomaterial-based biosensors for environmental and 
biological monitoring of organophosphorus pesticides and 
nerve agents," TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 54, 
pp. 1-10, 2014. 
[12] 
S. Hassani, S. Momtaz, F. Vakhshiteh, A. S. Maghsoudi, M. 
R. Ganjali, P. Norouzi, et al., "Biosensors and their 
applications in detection of organophosphorus pesticides in 
the environment," Archives of toxicology, pp. 1-22, 2017. 
[13] 
M. Stoytcheva, V. Gochev, and Z. Velkova, "Electrochemical 
biosensors for direct determination of organophosphorus 
pesticides: a review," Current Analytical Chemistry, vol. 12, 
pp. 37-42, 2016. 
[14] 
L. M. Nollet and H. S. Rathore, Handbook of pesticides: 
methods of pesticide residues analysis: CRC press, 2016. 
[15] 
M. Mutlu, Biosensors in food processing, safety, and quality 
control: CRC Press, 2016. 
[16] 
A. Sassolas, B. Prieto-Simón, and J.-L. Marty, "Biosensors 
for Pesticide Detection: New Trends," American Journal of 
Analytical Chemistry, pp. 210-232, 2012. 
[17] 
X. Jiang, D. Li, X. Xu, Y. Ying, Y. Li, Z. Ye, et al., 
"Immunosensors for detection of pesticide residues," 
Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 23, pp. 1577-1587, 2008. 
[18] 
C. R. Suri, M. Raje, and G. C. Varshney, "Immunosensors for 
pesticide 
analysis: 
antibody 
production 
and 
sensor 
development," Critical reviews in biotechnology, vol. 22, pp. 
15-32, 2002. 
[19] 
F. Bier, W. Stöcklein, M. Böcher, U. Bilitewski, and R. 
Schmid, "Use of a fibre optic immunosensor for the detection 
of pesticides," Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 7, pp. 
509-512, 1992. 
[20] 
M.-I. Baraton, Sensors for Environment, Health and Security: 
Advanced Materials and Technologies: Springer Science & 
Business Media, 2008. 
[21] 
M. Ferrari, M. Ozkan, and M. Heller, BioMEMS and 
Biomedical 
Nanotechnology: 
Volume 
II: 
Micro/Nano 
Technologies for Genomics and Proteomics vol. 2: Springer 
Science & Business Media, 2007. 
[22] 
O. Tigli, Novel SAW devices in CMOS for biosensor 
applications: 
design, 
modeling, 
fabrication 
and 
characterization: ProQuest, 2007. 
[23] 
L. Xue, J. Cai, J. Li, and M. Liu, "Application of particle 
swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm to determine dichlorvos 
residue on the surface of navel orange with Vis-NIR 
spectroscopy," Procedia Engineering, vol. 29, pp. 4124-4128, 
2012. 
[24] 
J. T. Alander, V. Bochko, B. Martinkauppi, S. Saranwong, 
and T. Mantere, "A review of optical nondestructive visual 
and near-infrared methods for food quality and safety," 
International Journal of Spectroscopy, vol. 2013, 2013. 
[25] 
Y.-Z. Feng, G. ElMasry, D.-W. Sun, A. G. Scannell, D. 
Walsh, and N. Morcy, "Near-infrared hyperspectral imaging 
and partial least squares regression for rapid and reagentless 
determination of Enterobacteriaceae on chicken fillets," Food 
Chemistry, vol. 138, pp. 1829-1836, 2013. 
[26] 
E. J. N. Marques, S. T. de Freitas, M. F. Pimentel, and C. 
Pasquini, "Rapid and non-destructive determination of quality 
parameters in the ‘Tommy Atkins’ mango using a novel 
handheld near infrared spectrometer," Food chemistry, vol. 
197, pp. 1207-1214, 2016. 
[27] 
M. Manley, "Near-infrared spectroscopy and hyperspectral 
imaging: non-destructive analysis of biological materials," 
Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 43, pp. 8200-8214, 2014. 
[28] 
H. Huang, L. Liu, and M. O. Ngadi, "Recent developments in 
hyperspectral imaging for assessment of food quality and 
safety," Sensors, vol. 14, pp. 7248-7276, 2014. 
[29] 
L. Salguero-Chaparro, A. J. Gaitán-Jurado, V. Ortiz-
Somovilla, and F. Peña-Rodríguez, "Feasibility of using NIR 
spectroscopy to detect herbicide residues in intact olives," 
Food control, vol. 30, pp. 504-509, 2013. 
[30] 
M. T. Sánchez, K. Flores‐Rojas, J. E. Guerrero, A. 
Garrido‐Varo, and D. Pérez‐Marín, "Measurement of 
pesticide residues in peppers by near‐infrared reflectance 
spectroscopy," Pest management science, vol. 66, pp. 580-
586, 2010. 
[31] 
S. Armenta, S. Garrigues, and M. de la Guardia, "Partial least 
squares-near 
infrared 
determination 
of 
pesticides 
in 
commercial formulations," Vibrational Spectroscopy, vol. 44, 
pp. 273-278, 2007. 
[32] 
J. Moros, S. Armenta, S. Garrigues, and M. de la Guardia, 
"Near infrared determination of Diuron in pesticide 
formulations," Analytica chimica acta, vol. 543, pp. 124-129, 
2005. 
[33] 
J. Moros, S. Armenta, S. Garrigues, and M. de la Guardia, 
"Univariate near infrared methods for determination of 
pesticides in agrochemicals," Analytica chimica acta, vol. 
579, pp. 17-24, 2006. 
[34] 
Y. Zhou, B. Xiang, Z. Wang, and C. Chen, "Determination of 
chlorpyrifos residue by near-infrared spectroscopy in white 
radish based on interval partial least square (iPLS) model," 
Analytical Letters, vol. 42, pp. 1518-1526, 2009. 
[35] 
D. Malley, C. McClure, P. Martin, K. Buckley, and W. 
McCaughey, "Compositional analysis of cattle manure during 
composting 
using 
a 
field‐portable 
near‐infrared 
spectrometer," Communications in Soil Science and Plant 
Analysis, vol. 36, pp. 455-475, 2005. 
[36] 
K. D. Shepherd and M. G. Walsh, "Infrared spectroscopy—
enabling an evidence-based diagnostic surveillance approach 
to agricultural and environmental management in developing 
countries," Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy, vol. 15, 
pp. 1-19, 2007. 
[37] 
T. Shi, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, and G. Wu, "Visible and near-
infrared 
reflectance 
spectroscopy—An 
alternative 
for 
monitoring soil contamination by heavy metals," Journal of 
hazardous materials, vol. 265, pp. 166-176, 2014. 
[38] 
M. Maleki, A. Mouazen, H. Ramon, and J. De Baerdemaeker, 
"Optimisation of soil VIS–NIR sensor-based variable rate 
application system of soil phosphorus," Soil and Tillage 
Research, vol. 94, pp. 239-250, 2007. 
[39] 
M. Kamruzzaman, Y. Makino, and S. Oshita, "Non-invasive 
analytical technology for the detection of contamination, 
adulteration, and authenticity of meat, poultry, and fish: a 
review," Analytica chimica acta, vol. 853, pp. 19-29, 2015. 
[40] 
G. Rateni, P. Dario, and F. Cavallo, "Smartphone-Based Food 
Diagnostic Technologies: A Review," Sensors, vol. 17, p. 
1453, 2017. 
136
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[41] 
S.-H. Noh and K.-H. Choi, "Nondestructive quality 
evaluation technology for fruits and vegetables," in 
International Seminar on Enhancing Export Competitiveness 
of Asian Fruits, Bangkok, Thailand, 2006. 
[42] 
R. D. JiJi, G. A. Cooper, and K. S. Booksh, "Excitation-
emission matrix fluorescence based determination of 
carbamate pesticides and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons," 
Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 397, pp. 61-72, 1999. 
[43] 
A. Kwiatkowski, M. Czerwicka, J. Smulko, and P. 
Stepnowski, "Detection of denatonium benzoate (Bitrex) 
remnants in noncommercial alcoholic beverages by raman 
spectroscopy," Journal of forensic sciences, vol. 59, pp. 1358-
1363, 2014. 
[44] 
E. Ali and H. G. Edwards, "The detection of flunitrazepam in 
beverages using portable Raman spectroscopy," Drug testing 
and analysis, vol. 9, pp. 256-259, 2017. 
[45] 
K. Ilaslan, I. H. Boyaci, and A. Topcu, "Rapid analysis of 
glucose, fructose and sucrose contents of commercial soft 
drinks using Raman spectroscopy," Food Control, vol. 48, pp. 
56-61, 2015. 
[46] 
G. G. Buyukgoz, A. G. Bozkurt, N. B. Akgul, U. Tamer, and 
I. H. Boyaci, "Spectroscopic detection of aspartame in soft 
drinks by surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy," European 
Food Research and Technology, vol. 240, pp. 567-575, 2015. 
[47] 
C. A. F. Penido, M. T. T. Pacheco, I. K. Lednev, and L. 
Silveira, 
"Raman 
spectroscopy 
in 
forensic 
analysis: 
identification of cocaine and other illegal drugs of abuse," 
Journal of Raman Spectroscopy, vol. 47, pp. 28-38, 2016. 
[48] 
C. Martin, J.-L. Bruneel, F. Guyon, B. Médina, M. Jourdes, 
P.-L. Teissedre, et al., "Raman spectroscopy of white wines," 
Food chemistry, vol. 181, pp. 235-240, 2015. 
[49] 
T. O. Mendes, R. A. da Rocha, B. L. Porto, M. A. de Oliveira, 
V. d. C. dos Anjos, and M. J. Bell, "Quantification of extra-
virgin olive oil adulteration with soybean oil: a comparative 
study of NIR, MIR, and Raman spectroscopy associated with 
chemometric approaches," Food analytical methods, vol. 8, 
pp. 2339-2346, 2015. 
[50] 
V. O. Clavero, A. Weber, W. Schröder, D. Curticapean, N. 
Javahiraly, and P. Meyrueis, "Monitoring of the molecular 
structure of lubricant oil using a FT-Raman spectrometer 
prototype," in Optical Sensing and Detection III, 2014, p. 
91411W. 
[51] 
K. Czamara, K. Majzner, M. Z. Pacia, K. Kochan, A. Kaczor, 
and M. Baranska, "Raman spectroscopy of lipids: a review," 
Journal of Raman Spectroscopy, vol. 46, pp. 4-20, 2015. 
[52] 
P. Vandenabeele, H. Edwards, and J. Jehlička, "The role of 
mobile instrumentation in novel applications of Raman 
spectroscopy: archaeometry, geosciences, and forensics," 
Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 43, pp. 2628-2649, 2014. 
[53] 
S. Feng, F. Gao, Z. Chen, E. Grant, D. D. Kitts, S. Wang, et 
al., "Determination of α-Tocopherol in vegetable oils using a 
molecularly imprinted polymers–surface-enhanced raman 
spectroscopic biosensor," Journal of agricultural and food 
chemistry, vol. 61, pp. 10467-10475, 2013. 
[54] 
R. S. Uysal, I. H. Boyaci, H. E. Genis, and U. Tamer, 
"Determination of butter adulteration with margarine using 
Raman spectroscopy," Food chemistry, vol. 141, pp. 4397-
4403, 2013. 
[55] 
C. A. Nunes, "Vibrational spectroscopy and chemometrics to 
assess 
authenticity, 
adulteration 
and 
intrinsic 
quality 
parameters of edible oils and fats," Food Research 
International, vol. 60, pp. 255-261, 2014. 
[56] 
B. Liu, G. Han, Z. Zhang, R. Liu, C. Jiang, S. Wang, et al., 
"Shell thickness-dependent Raman enhancement for rapid 
identification and detection of pesticide residues at fruit 
peels," Analytical chemistry, vol. 84, pp. 255-261, 2011. 
[57] 
J. Xing and D. Guyer, "Detecting internal insect infestation in 
tart cherry using transmittance spectroscopy," Postharvest 
biology and technology, vol. 49, pp. 411-416, 2008. 
[58] 
B. Saute, R. Premasiri, L. Ziegler, and R. Narayanan, "Gold 
nanorods as surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy substrates 
for sensitive and selective detection of ultra-low levels of 
dithiocarbamate pesticides," Analyst, vol. 137, pp. 5082-5087, 
2012. 
[59] 
G. Chunhui, Z. Guoqiang, G. Liangquan, L. Jun, and W. 
Ziqiang, "Determination of trace elements in tea by 
wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy," 
Nuclear Techniques, vol. 36, 2013. 
[60] 
L. R. Goldman, "Managing pesticide chronic health risks: US 
policies," Journal of agromedicine, vol. 12, pp. 67-75, 2007. 
[61] 
Centers, for, Disease, Control, and, and Prevention. (2013). 
CDC - Pesticide Illness & Injury Surveillance - NIOSH 
Workplace 
Safety 
and 
Health 
Topic. 
Available: 
http://www.cdc.gov/ 
[62] 
S. Parvez and S. Raisuddin, "Protein carbonyls: novel 
biomarkers of exposure to oxidative stress-inducing pesticides 
in freshwater fish Channa punctata (Bloch)," Environmental 
Toxicology and Pharmacology, vol. 20, pp. 112-117, 2005. 
[63] 
J. Dorts, F. Silvestre, H. T. Tu, A.-E. Tyberghein, N. T. 
Phuong, and P. Kestemont, "Oxidative stress, protein 
carbonylation and heat shock proteins in the black tiger 
shrimp, Penaeus monodon, following exposure to endosulfan 
and 
deltamethrin," 
Environmental 
toxicology 
and 
pharmacology, vol. 28, pp. 302-310, 2009. 
[64] 
J. J. Fortunato, G. Feier, A. M. Vitali, F. C. Petronilho, F. 
Dal-Pizzol, and J. Quevedo, "Malathion-induced oxidative 
stress in rat brain regions," Neurochemical research, vol. 31, 
pp. 671-678, 2006. 
[65] 
S. B. Ceyhun, M. Şentürk, D. Ekinci, O. Erdoğan, A. Çiltaş, 
and E. M. Kocaman, "Deltamethrin attenuates antioxidant 
defense system and induces the expression of heat shock 
protein 70 in rainbow trout," Comparative Biochemistry and 
Physiology Part C: Toxicology & Pharmacology, vol. 152, 
pp. 215-223, 2010. 
[66] 
R. M. Johnson, J. D. Evans, G. E. Robinson, and M. R. 
Berenbaum, "Changes in transcript abundance relating to 
colony collapse disorder in honey bees (Apis mellifera)," 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 106, 
pp. 14790-14795, 2009. 
[67] 
H. T. Hogberg, A. Kinsner-Ovaskainen, T. Hartung, S. 
Coecke, and A. K. Bal-Price, "Gene expression as a sensitive 
endpoint to evaluate cell differentiation and maturation of the 
developing central nervous system in primary cultures of rat 
cerebellar granule cells (CGCs) exposed to pesticides," 
Toxicology and applied pharmacology, vol. 235, pp. 268-286, 
2009. 
137
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[68] 
M. Collotta, P. Bertazzi, and V. Bollati, "Epigenetics and 
pesticides," Toxicology, vol. 307, pp. 35-41, 2013. 
[69] 
J. D. Ingle Jr and S. R. Crouch, "Spectrochemical analysis," 
1988. 
[70] 
J. Clack and G. Gunawardena. (Updated in  February 2017). 
The 
Beer-Lambert 
Law 
(Chemistry 
LibreTexts 
ed.). 
Available: 
https://chem.libretexts.org/Core/Physical_and_Theoretical_C
hemistry/Spectroscopy/Electronic_Spectroscopy/Electronic_S
pectroscopy_Basics/The_Beer-Lambert_Law 
[71] 
University of California, Los Angeles. (Accesses February 
2017). 
Colorimetric 
Analysis 
(Beer's 
law 
or 
Spectrophotometric 
Analysis). 
Available: 
http://www.chem.ucla.edu/~gchemlab/colorimetric_web.htm 
[72] 
Andor, Oxford, Instruments, and Company. (Accessed in 
February 2017). Absorption, Transmission and Reflection 
Spectroscopy 
Available: 
http://www.andor.com/learning-
academy/ 
[73] 
B. M. Tissue. (Accessed in February 2017). Beer-Lambert 
Law. Available: http://www.tissuegroup.chem.vt.edu 
[74] 
T. C. O'Haver. (Accessed in February 2017). Curve fitting B: 
Multicomponent 
Spectroscopy. 
Available: 
https://terpconnect.umd.edu/~toh/spectrum/CurveFittingB.ht
ml 
[75] 
C.-M. Kuan, "Classical Least Squares Theory," in National 
Taiwan University, Department of Finance & CRETA, 2010. 
[76] 
H. Mark and J. Workman, "Classical Least Squares, Part I: 
Mathematical Theory," 2010. 
[77] 
B. P. Baker, C. M. Benbrook, E. G. III, and K. L. Benbrook, 
"Pesticide 
residues 
in 
conventional, 
integrated 
pest 
management (IPM)-grown and organic foods: insights from 
three US data sets," Food Additives & Contaminants, vol. 19, 
pp. 427-446, 2002. 
[78] 
N. Venugopal and B. Sumalatha, "Spectrophotometric 
determination of malathion in environmental samples," 
Journal of Chemistry, vol. 9, pp. 857-862, 2012. 
[79] 
K. Reddy, K. Suvardhan, K. S. Kumar, D. Rekha, and P. 
Chiranjeevi, "Extractive spectrophotometric determination of 
malathion in environmental samples using Gention violet," 
Journal of Chemistry, vol. 2, pp. 187-192, 2005. 
[80] 
A. A. Gouda, A. S. Amin, R. El-Sheikh, and M. A. Akl, 
"Sensitive spectrophotometric methods for determination of 
some organophosphorus pesticides in vegetable samples," 
Chemical Industry and Chemical Engineering Quarterly, vol. 
16, pp. 11-18, 2010. 
[81] 
A. Bouhaouss, A. Bensaoud, M. El Azzouzi, C. Perrin-
Ganier, and M. Schiavon, "Etude par spectroscopie ultraviolet 
et infrarouge de l'adsorption des pesticides par les apatites," 
Phys. Chem. News, vol. 1, pp. 115-118, 2001. 
[82] 
G. P. Pandey, A. K. Singh, L. Deshmukh, and A. Asthana, 
"Determination of dicofol in various environmental samples 
by spectrophotometric method using chromogenic reagent," 
Synthesis and Reactivity in Inorganic, Metal-Organic, and 
Nano-Metal Chemistry, vol. 45, pp. 1199-1205, 2015. 
[83] 
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, L. Wang, X. Zhu, L. Shen, and Y. Yu, 
"Two-Dimensional UV Absorption Correlation Spectroscopy 
as a Method for the Detection of Thiamethoxam Residue in 
Tea," Journal of Applied Spectroscopy, vol. 82, pp. 311-315, 
2015. 
 
138
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

