Introducing Load Management Analysis and Measures in Manufacturing 
Companies 
 
Steffen Nienke, Jan Hicking, Günther Schuh 
Institute for Industrial Management  
at RWTH Aachen University (FIR) 
Aachen, Germany 
E-mail: {Steffen.Nienke, Jan.Hicking, Guenther.Schuh@fir.rwth-aachen.de} 
 
Abstract—In order to introduce load management in the 
manufacturing industry, some obstacles need to be pointed out. 
This paper presents a feasible approach on how to implement 
load management measures in companies. To this end, load 
management and energy management are explained and 
distinguished in a first step. Subsequently, the implementation 
method is introduced. Therefore, by means of this paper, 
companies will be enabled to use load management measures 
and significantly reduce their energy costs. In the second part of 
the paper, the introduced approach will be applied. Hence, a use 
case of a manufacturing company is described. Alongside 
energy analyses with consumption data, specific measures are 
presented.  
Keywords - Load management; Energy management; Energy 
Monitoring; Manufacturing industry; Renewable energies. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper ist an extended version of [1]. For the majority 
of companies in a continuously changing production 
environment, the ability to stay competitive depends on the 
production price of a product [2–4]. The ability to produce a 
product at lower costs can lead to a significant market 
advantage. Therefore, the ideal adjustments of essential 
target values like occupancy, timelines, or process costs are 
crucial for a company’s success [3]. However, the costs for 
resource, energy and production utility have been raised 
dramatically in the last decades [5].  
In particular, the price for electrical energy in Germany has 
risen severely over recent years. This development is 
connected to the increasing expansion of renewable energy 
[2]. Due to the implementation of the priority access of 
renewable energy, the prices for electrical energy rose [6]. 
This development refers to the fact, that the EEG-allocation 
(EEG: German Renewable Energy Sources Act, legislation to 
foster the use and invest in renewable energies) increases in 
the amount of expanding renewable energies in Germany [7]. 
As a result of the expansion of renewable energy generation 
capacities, the grid stability is endangered [8]. The priority 
access of volatile renewable energy leads to a decrease in 
energy supply reliability, which is one of the most important 
location factors for the German manufacturing industry [9].  
Rising energy prices, as shown for Germany in Figure 1, 
promote a significant competitive disadvantage for the 
manufacturing industry [6]. Moreover, a growing scarcity of 
resources pushes energy prices [2]. Especially the scarcity of 
resources has increased environmental awareness in society 
and industry in the past [3, 10]. 
 
Figure 1. Development of energy prices [11] 
In order to guarantee the grid security and create a greater 
environmental compatibility, Germany set a target to develop 
the most energy efficient and environmentally friendly 
economy in the world [12]. The focus of this program is the 
expansion of renewable energy. To compensate the incoming 
side effects like increasing energy prices, flexibility 
mechanisms are even more relevant. To stabilize the 
electrical grid, load management can be realized by using 
flexibility potentials in manufacturing industry. The 
identification of those potentials is very important. Hence, the 
survey of process-specific energy data in the manufacturing 
industry is necessary to point out any potential [13–15]. In 
this context, the gathering of information can be done by 
continuous energy monitoring of manufacturing companies 
[3]. Many companies are struggling to identify information 
relevant for load management as well as possible collection 
strategies. Apparently, a structured approach on how to create 
the information base to achive energy transparency as a first 
step to load management is missing. The presented approach 
focusses on the manufacturing industry, as literature research 
confirms that this area has the greatest potential for load 
management. However, the concept can easily be adopted to 
other application areas (e.g., office buildings). 
In Section II, this paper describes fundamentals of load 
management concepts. In Section III it then focusses on the 
implemention of load management in the manufacturing 
industry. Considering, among other things, organisational 
requirements as well as the necessary transparency of the 
energy system, this paper develops a general approach to 
245
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

introduce load management in manufacturing companies. 
Finally, in the last section, the approach is applied to a 
specific use case that evaluates the described method.  
 
II. 
DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS 
Describing basic concepts and distinguishing several 
terms within the field of energy management, load 
management, and energy efficiency is essential in order to 
understand work at hand. In contrast to conventional base 
load power plants like lignite-fired power plants or nuclear 
power plants, the sustainable generation in renewable energy 
plants usually cannot be controlled. These circumstances lead 
to a discrepancy between feed-in time and amount of fed-in 
power of renewable energy technologies like wind and solar 
systems [8, 16, 17]. To gain a more profound understanding 
of this, Figure 2 visualizes a comparison of installed and 
generated power of renewable energy technologies. The 
Figure displays the discrepancy of installed and generated 
power of renewable energy technologies in January, May and 
June. Biomass and hydropower are not volatile. Therefore, 
the loads are nearly constant or were reduced by demand side 
management. The behaviours of Solar and Wind plants are 
quite different. The strong volatility of solar can be seen in 
the difference between January and May. Wind, on the other 
hand, covers 70% of the installed load in January, but drops 
the production close to zero in June.  
German 
electricity 
transmission 
system 
operators 
compensate the incoming volatility by using control energy. 
Within this concept, controllable power plants like gas 
turbine plants or pumped-storage power plants are usually 
used [18]. The control energy concept leads to dealing with 
peak loads or loss of loads properly [19]. In summary it can 
be said that through expanding renewable energy in the 
electrical grids the supply reliability cannot be guaranteed. So 
secure the network, control energy uses load flexibilities. 
This is necessary to maintain the critical success factor of low 
energy prices for a society with a manufacturing industry as 
leading edge. However, energy prices are rising. Therefore, 
load management is one possible opportunity to compensate 
increasing energy prices. 
 
Figure 2. Renewable energy volatility [20] 
A. Definition of Energy 
Energy is a fundamental factor. Several types of energy 
can be transformed into each other, but neither be created nor 
exterminated [8, 15, 21]. Energy is used to heat buildings or 
to warm up process fluids to a high temperature (space or 
process heat). Apart from that, energy is used to drive engines 
within machines or vehicles. In this context, energy is called 
mechanical energy or electrical energy. 
B. Definition of Energy efficiency 
The term “efficiency” follows its Latin origin “efficientia”, 
which means efficacy [22]. Energy efficiency is the relation 
between benefit and initial energy input [23]. Energy 
efficiency also describes an intelligent usage of the initial 
input aiming to use the available energy as efficient as 
possible [14]. Following this definition, energy efficiency is 
increased 
by 
reducing 
energy 
consumption 
while 
(simultaneously) keeping the energy benefit constant [24]. 
C. Definition of energy management 
The introduction of energy management in the 
manufacturing industry will have an impact on increasing 
sustainability and lowering energy costs [10, 25–27]. Energy 
management is defined as an instrument of coordination 
aiming at an ecological and economical satisfaction of energy 
requirements in companies. This goal is realized by a 
predictive, organized and systematic approach of energy 
production, procurement, storage, distribution and usage [28, 
29]. 
Energy management can be considered from two 
perspectives. There is a technical perspective dealing with 
energy monitoring, analysing the energy data and deriving 
plans of action to achieve defined goals. Furthermore, there 
is an organisational perspective, which follows a holistic 
view of energy consumption and usage in processes, 
proceedings and procedures in the manufacturing industry 
[10]. To achieve goals, such as raising energy efficiency or 
reducing energy costs, energy management uses approaches 
like investing in new technologies, changing behaviours and 
identifying energy saving opportunities [30]. Referring to the 
identified approaches and goals of energy management, load 
management describes one aspect of energy management. 
D. Definition of load management 
First, load management must be distinguished from 
demand side management (DSM), since both terms are easily 
mixed up. Demand Side Management is a generic term for 
different approaches of systematically switching loads. It 
contains load management, energy saving approaches, fuel 
substitution 
and 
load 
optimisation 
[31–33]. 
Load 
management, however, describes the way to achieve the goal 
of changing the point of time and amount of load that is 
required [32]. Hence, load management describes the 
temporal relocation of energy consumption [13]. In addition 
to that definition load management is defined as switching 
loads on and off [14]. Therefore, load management focuses 
on internal processes, to reduce load peaks and thus reduce 
energy costs [34]. Examples of load management are 
described in the following section.  
 
Generated Power January
Installed Power
Generated Power May
Generated Power June
246
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

E. Measures of load management 
 
 
Figure 3. Load management measures 
To avoid energy costs due to load peaks, load management 
focuses four different types of measures as shown in Figure 
3 [31–33, 35]. In the following, the different types are 
explained. “Peak Clipping” describes the immediate handling 
of peak loads. Thereby peak loads are reduced by a specific 
amount, which reduces the energy costs significantly [31–
33]. It is achieved by ejecting loads to prevent a significant 
peak load [36, 37]. Using energy storage technologies are 
another opportunity to prevent peak loads by feeding-in 
energy at the point a peak load would occur [38]. 
“Load Shifting” also describes the immediate handling of 
peak loads. However, in this case, technologies are 
introduced to reduce peak loads. Energy storage technologies 
enable companies to temporarily switch production 
processes. The change of organisational or production 
processes can lead to a reduction of peak loads. Although 
energy is not saved, energy costs are significantly reduced. 
The energy consumption of several production procedures is 
not saved but switched to a point in time when there is no risk 
of a peak load [31–33].  
“Valley Filling” describes a load management measure, 
which lifts the base load of a company to cut the average 
electricity price. This measure goes with a change of energy 
contract of the energy supplier. Because the total energy 
consumption is increased, the load profile is polished. Any 
energy supplier prefers a polished load profile and will 
remunerate those profiles. Another use case is a loading of 
electric cars in the night. The raised load in off-peak times 
polishes the whole load profile.  
The last measure of load management is named 
“Insourcing”. It describes the reduction of energy purchase. 
Unlike “peak clipping”, “insourcing” reduces the load profile 
holistically. There is no need for a specific peak load analysis. 
Companies reduce the energy purchase by producing a 
specific energy amount themselves. Achieving this goal, 
companies need new energy production technologies like 
cogeneration units or PV-plants in combination with an 
energy storage.  
In order to summarize and classify these findings, the 
following Figure 4 explains in several layers how terms like 
energy and load management relate.  The top layer represents 
the concept layer. As described earlier, operational energy 
management is the primary term. Energy management 
comprises 
several 
goals 
and 
measures.
 
Figure 4. Content of operational energy management 
Hereafter follows the goal layer. In this layer, all goals of 
energy management are summed up. It starts with lowering 
energy costs, raising energy efficiency, acting resource-
friendly and finishes with reducing energy consumption. 
These goals, which have their origin in the operational energy 
management, can be achieved by various actions. The 
organisational layer describes two typical types of how 
energy management topics can be addressed. On the one 
hand, companies can implement a holistic energy 
management system (EMS) that is standardized by a German, 
European or international institutions. On the other hand, a 
not standardized solution to achieve the formulated goals can 
be realized without using such a system. In this case, the 
organisation of the individual solution falls in the 
responsibility of the company. For the appropriate 
application of an energy management system, the 
information flow must be organized properly. Therefore, an 
energy database for continuous memorizing energy data 
would be crucial. Thus, the measured data is always ready for 
a delivery on demand. For a company, it is important to 
receive data and information to the exact right point of time, 
spot and quality. To achieve this, the introduction of an 
energy information system (EIS) is necessary. The 
combination of an energy management system, energy 
information system and energy database is the best way to 
deliver information and data in the desired quality as 
explained above. The use caser layer describes different 
applications within the energy management context. The 
focus of this paper is on the field of load management, but it 
is worth mentioning, that use cases like predictive 
maintenance, quality management and energy monitoring 
can also achieve energy management goals. All aspects have 
in common that they collect data, which must be memorized 
for later use.  
The last layer is the measure layer. This layer contains all 
load management approaches. In principle, all terms of the 
layer above have their own measures on the layer below.  
Peak Clipping
Valley Filling
Load Shifting
Insourcing
Original load profile
New load profile
Load adjustment
Insourcing
Peak Clipping
Energy and load 
development
Load Shifting
Valley Filling
Predictive 
Maintenance
Energy 
monitoring
Quality 
Management
Load 
Management
…
EMS
without System
Lowering 
energy costs
Acting 
resource-friendly
Raising energy 
efficiency
Reducing energy 
consumption
Operational Energy Management
EIS
Energy data 
flow
Energy 
database
247
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF LOAD MANAGEMENT IN THE 
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY 
The following approach should support companies to 
introduce load management. It should give answers to 
questions such as: how can load management be 
implemented holistically? What are the benefits? 
 
 
Figure 5. Load management introducing approach 
The approach in Figure 5 contains four essential steps. 
First, companies must meet the organisational requirements. 
Second, companies must fulfil the demand of information. 
Third, when the demand of information is accomplished, the 
required energy generation/consumption transparency can be 
achieved. Fourth, once all required foundations are provided, 
load management can be introduced by implementing load 
management measures. 
A. Organisational requirements 
The reduction of energy consumption is a long term 
process. Therefore, it is recommended that the introduction 
of load management must be well organized and controlled. 
The organisational requirements are basically described by 
the DIN EN ISO 50001:2011. But not all requirements to 
introduce load management are addressed in this standard. 
First, it is important that companies create an energy policy. 
A policy in this context must contain energy long-term goals. 
Furthermore, it must contain a motivation that is 
communicated within the company, because the employees 
shall live and realise those policies. The policy must be 
formulated close to reality, comprehensible and goal-
orientated. Moreover, a company must implement a process 
of documentation. Besides that, a company has to develop an 
energy plan to summarize all goals, approaches and review 
processes. Within an energy plan, a company determines, 
which energy data must be collected, how data can be 
collected, how a data working process looks like and how a 
company would work with the flows of information. Those 
steps are important to lay the foundations for the introduction 
of load management.  
B. Demand of information 
Every measure within the context of load management 
works with real time data. Collecting those data is therefore 
a necessary requirement. To acquire the required information 
in a continuously changing environment, data must be 
collected in various dimensions of the company, e.g., 
company’s location, buildings, rooms, production processes 
and energy sources. This kind of consideration is called 
system analysis. The objective is to create a holistic flow 
sheet of all forms of energy and its use locations. Assuming 
an overall system, to achieve a holistic flow sheet, it has to be 
broken down to its source elements. 
 
Figure 6. System analysis [23] 
Figure 6 represents a typical construct of a company in the 
manufacturing industry. Dividing this construct in three types 
of system elements, it is shown that there are different 
degrees of depth. Starting with the overall system, which 
contains all given components, a company has its locations 
(T=0). The location level is the first layer. Diving in the 
subsystem, a location contains at least one building (T=1). 
The building level is the second layer. Each building contains 
at least one unit of its company, for example production, 
supply, quality management or services (T=2). The unit level 
is the third layer. The deepest layer represents the energy 
consumers (T=3). For example, there are machine tools, 
cooling energy generation or printers. The consumer level is 
the last layer. In order to achieve energy transparency in a 
company, a system analysis is fundamental. The concept of 
balancing is close to a system analysis. The goal of both 
concepts is to disperse the areal boundaries of energy 
consumers in a company for transparent visible consumer 
structure.  
Once all energy consumers in a company have been 
identified, the next step would be to determine where they are 
located, what form of energy they are using and when they 
are consuming how much energy. Consequently, an energy 
monitoring system must be implemented to collect the real-
time consumption data. The collected real-time data must be 
memorized in a database. But there are circumstances, for 
example, financial barriers, which inhibit a company to 
implement an energy monitoring system. In this case, there 
are different options to collect data. Literature has shown that 
there are just few energy consumers in the manufacturing 
industry with high impact on peak loads. By comparing the 
main energy consumers and the main energy conservation 
potentials in the manufacturing industry, a measurement 
priority listing can be determined:  
1. 
Compressed air generation 
2. 
Energy generation for cooling purposes 
3. 
Ventilation system 
4. 
Machine tools 
5. 
Electrical system 
Energy transparency
Organisational Requirements 
Demand of information
Manage and document the approach
Formulate energy political goals and motivation
Energy planning
Energy balancing
System analysis
Information sources
Identify peak load influence components
Load Management
1
2
3
4
Energy 
database
Company
Units
Locations
Consumers
Buildings
Overall system
Elements
Subsystem
T=0
T=1
T=2
T=3
248
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

6. 
Pumps 
Influences to peak loads due to illumination or information 
and communication technologies are usually neither 
significant nor manageable. The list above shows which 
consumers in the manufacturing industry must be prioritised 
when collecting real-time data. 
C. Energy transparency 
Collecting real-time data is a fundamental component to 
achieve energy transparency in a company. Real-time data is 
required to implement an autonomous load management in 
the future. The needed data acquisition is a separate 
challenge, which is discussed in other publications. In 
addition, the issue of IT security must be considered. The 
acquired data is now used to identify specific components of 
the maximum load peak of a company’s load profile. Figure 
7 presents an activity diagram, which contains an approach to 
identify specifics peak load components. 
Deriving essential elements of the diagram, it is noted that 
load profiles of energy consumers and the main load profile 
of a company are required. Furthermore, the specific 
consumer load profiles must be inspected for load peaks to 
the point of time when the main peak load occurs. After this 
step, all specific loads are summarized and compared with the 
amount of the main peak load. If there is a difference 
(<<if(n)>>) it must be ensured, that the data set is complete 
as possible. If there is no difference (<<if(y)>>) a 
visualisation of the result should be created. The next 
question to be asked is whether the result is detailed enough 
or not. To answer this question, a company’s layer must be 
determined. As explained before, a company has several 
layers. Load management requires information about the 
peak load components in sufficiently detailed depth. The 
ideal case would be at plant level (T=3). When including 
these last steps, energy transparency is guaranteed. The 
described steps enable companies to get a detailed view over 
their energy consumption and which kind of consumer has 
the highest impact on the total consumption. Another 
advantage of implementing the whole energy monitoring 
process is that the result can be used to identify energy 
wastage. 
This procedure was validated at a company. The energy 
transparency was established and it was shown that the 
energy generation for cooling purposes had a peak load share 
of 20%. This transparency allowed counter-measures to be 
implemented. 
 
Figure 7. Identification of peak load components 
 
IV. 
APPLYING THE APPROACH 
To validate the proposed model, it has been applied within 
use cases in companies. One example is described in the 
following section. First, the setting and circumstances of the 
considered company are described. Subsequently, the 
measurements are visualised and described. Finally, the 
possible measures to implement load management are 
introduced.  
Identify components of peak load
Load profiles
of all consumers
Load profile
data
Check specific consumer
loads at peak load
Memorize
Total
control
Guarantee
data completeness
if(n)
Develop
visualisation
if(y)
Memorize
Determine
layer
if(T<3)
Use
Pareto approach
Sum specific consumer
loads up at peak load
Memorize
Total control
Guarantee
data completeness
if(n)
Develop
visualisation
if(y)
Memorize
Record peak load
components
if(T=3)
Check
detail degree
if(y)
Sum specific consumer
loads up at peak load
Memorize
Total control
Guarantee
data completeness
if(n)
Develop
visualisation
if(y)
Memorize
Don’t use
Pareto approach
if(n)
Record peak load
components
249
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Setting 
The considered measurements could correspond to a 
classic manufacturing company in Germany with more than 
500 employees. Such a company is considered to be a large 
company according to EU definitions and is due to German 
regulations consequently obliged to carry out energy audits 
according to DIN EN 16247-1. The production usually runs 
in two shifts. The two shifts run from 8 am to 10 pm. 
Furthermore, a seven-day workweek is also considered. The 
load curve is characteristic for a company is in the metal 
sector, e.g., a company producing body parts for the 
automotive industry.  
B. Measurements 
This section displays and analyzes the measured data. 
Various statistical and non-statistical methods are used for 
the analysis. Figure 8 shows the overall consumption of the 
company. The resolution of the measured data is 15 minutes 
and thus contains 34050 measurement points. There is an 
increase of the minimum and maximum load during summer 
between the beginning of June and the middle of September. 
During winter and early spring, the loads are at a constant 
level of 2350 kW. The load profile suggests that the increase 
in power consumption in the summer is attributable, for 
example, to cooling. However, this cannot be confirmed by 
only considering the consumption of the whole company. 
The minimum loads are within a range of 1300 to 1700 kW, 
with few exceptions. The peak load was 2930.48 kW and 
occurred on July 2, 2015 at 12 am. 
Figure 9 shows the annual load duration curve of the 
measured values. This shows that the load demand decreases 
rarely below 1300 kW over the entire year. There are a few 
points in time at which the load is less than 1000 kW. As seen 
in the earlier figure, there is a night reduction as well as a 
weekend lowering of the load.  
If the median over 24 hours is considered, it is noticeable 
that between 8 am and 4 pm the load reference is constant. 
Between 4 pm and 10 pm, it decreases. From 0 am to 5 am in 
the morning, the load is almost constant 1500 kW. Thus, 
during 5 hours a day the load has decreased to 1500 kW. As 
a result, a high load reference is recorded for 19 hours over 
365 days a year. The basic load can therefore be seen at 6935 
hours (365 days * 5 hours / day). It has to be noted that the 
basic load is more than 50% of the peak load. 
Figure 8 also shows the weekly load cycle at the time of 
the peak load. It should be noted that the basic load in this 
week is about 100 kW higher than the basic load of the annual 
load duration curve. It should also be noted that the peak load 
500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
3.000
Load in kW
Time
Figure 8. Anual Load Curve of the whole company 
0,00
500,00
1.000,00
1.500,00
2.000,00
2.500,00
3.000,00
3.500,00
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
5500
6000
6500
7000
7500
8000
8500
Load in kW
Hours
Figure 9. Annual load duration curve 
250
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

is not an anomaly, instead the general consumption in this 
week is very high. The weekends and nights have a reduced 
load. With regard to the previous assumption that the peak 
load is due to cooling, it should be noted that July 02, 2015, 
was one of the hottest days of the month. The maximum 
temperature was 35.2 ° C.  
Figure 10 shows the load peak distribution of the company. 
The interval lengths are defined by the observation of the top 
2.5% of all measured values. If the interval > 2756 kW is 
considered, it should be noted that less than 50 load peaks are 
counted in this interval. If the lower bound of the interval is 
reduced by approximately 100 kW, the number of load peaks 
triples. The number of load peaks contained in an interval are 
cumulated in the next interval. Therefore, this visualisation 
can be used to identify the load management potential. 
Hence, potential savings can be expected. 
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Load in kW
Hours
95-%-Boxplot
Maximum
Minimum
Median
1
43
112
234
483
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
>2930
>2756
>2669
>2582
>2495
Amount
Intervals
Figure 12. Overall Box Plot covering the weekdays 
Figure 11. Overall Box-Plot covering the hours of a day 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Mo
Di
Mi
Do
Fr
Sa
So
Load in kW
Weekdays
95-%-Boxplot
Maximum
Minimum
Median
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Figure 10. Load Peak Distribution 
251
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 11 shows the box plot covering the hours of a day. 
It considers all data from the year 2015. Ninety-five percent 
of all data is located between the vertical upper and lower 
black lines. Between the maxima (magenta dot) and the upper 
vertical lines as well as the minima (blue dot) and the lower 
vertical line 2.5% of all data is located. Based on the medians 
and the box plots, the nightly reduction of the energy 
consumption can be identified. The peak load occurs mainly 
between 8 am and 5 pm. 
Figure 12 shows the box plot covering the weekdays. It is 
noticeable that the median is 200 kW lower on Saturdays and 
Sundays. The maximum also drops by more than 300 kW. It 
should be noted that 97.5% of all load points lie between 
Monday and Friday at a maximum of 2500 kW. An objective 
of the load management could therefore be to not exceed the 
threshold of 2500 kW. 
The analysis of the measurement presents a strong 
assumption that the used cooling system is responsible for the 
measured peak loads. Therefore, the next step would be to 
break the overall consumtion down to each individual 
consumer. Since, in reality, it is unlikely to monitor each used 
consumer, it is usually sufficient to monitor the large 
consumers and cluster the remaining consumption under 
“others”. In the presented example, the cooling machines can 
be measured and the share of the overall consumption can be 
calculated. Figure 13 shows the box plot of the measured 
cooling machines covering the month. It is noticeable that the 
median of 1680 kW is almost identical between January and 
May, and between September and December. During June to 
August, the median rises to 1900 kW. Peak loads above 2500 
kW occur more often during May to August. During summer, 
the base load and the peak load increases. This proves the 
thesis that the cooling machines have a mayor impact on the 
load. After identifying the machine with the largest 
consumption, load measurements can be implemented.  
C. Possible ways to implementation for load management  
The following section presents different ways to 
implement load management based on the measurements 
done in the previous section. Due to the analysis of 
measurements, there are several opportunities to reduce the 
peak load in the considered company. As analyzed, the peak 
load evolves due to cooling machines, which runs with 
increased power usage when the external temperatures are 
high.  
1) Insourcing: Combined power and heat station 
Reducing the consumed energy by producing energy on 
company’s own, this measure is called “Insourcing”. Within 
this measure the usage of a combined heat and power station 
is recommended. This technology leads to a massive 
reduction of the required energy from an energy supplier.  
In order to use this technology, several parameters have to 
be considered. In this context, a combined heat and power 
unit (CHP) was implemented with these parameters: 
 
PPower = 365 kW 
 
Q̇ Fuel, HCP = 955 kW 
 
Q̇ Heat, CHP  = 478 kW 
 
HCP = 0,88 
 
Power, HCP = 0,38 
 
Heat, HCP = 0,5 
 
v, HCP = adjustable 
The mode of operation of this CHP unit has been designed 
to be heat-guided. Due to the high demand for heating 
available all year round, the CHP is operating at full load all 
year round. It follows that the heat produced can be reduced 
at any time. Furthermore, the CHP is designed to be used for 
the utilization of the energy reduction. The type of design is 
made by entering the electrical power PPower = 365 kW into a 
year duration line. Following this method the result contains 
6620 operating hours of the CHP. It is recommended that the 
CHP should not run in the partial load effiency as often as in 
the overall load effiency. A service contract was obtained that 
effectuates that the CHP is only in maintenance when the 
energy consumption is relatively low, for example, in the 
morning or at weekend. In the calculated example, the result 
of the examiniation of a combined heat and power station 
with 365 kW electrical power was an annual saving of about 
55,000 €. The net present value analyzed over 10 years of the 
investment in the CHP is ca. 2,600,000 €.  
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Januar
Februar
März
April
Mai
Juni
Juli
August
September
Oktober
November
Dezember
Load in kW
Month
95-%-Boxplot
Maximum
Minimum
Median
Jan
Feb
March
April
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dez
Figure 13. Cooling Machines Box Plot covering the month 
252
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2) Insourcing: Emergency power supply  
Alternatively, an emergency power supply can used like a 
CHP. Emergency power supplies are assumed to have a total 
amount auf 3.5 MW electrical power. In that case, various 
emergency power supply stations cannot be used parallel 
since the emergency power supply has to be guaranteed.  
In the example calculation, the total annual savings would 
be more than ca. 60,000 €. 
3) Load Shifting: Ice storage 
Regarding the definition of load shifting, load intensive 
processes are identified, which can be shifted in times of 
lower energy consumption. This approach leads to reduced 
energy costs. There are two types of cool energy storage 
technologies: ice storage or cold water storage without icing. 
Cold water storage technologies have one disadvantage with 
respect to ice storage technologies. Due to the missing icing 
process the cold water storage needs much more space to save 
the same amount of energy. Due to this disadvantage, the ice 
storage technologie is examined. The relevant parameters of 
the ice storage are the following: 
 
QStorage = 500 kWh 
 
PPeak, Storage = 150 kW 
 
nSP = 5  
In order to reduce the peak load by 150 kW, an energy 
storage amount of QTotal, Storage = 2427,84 kWh is required.  
Figure 14 shows how the usage of the ice storage that 
reduces the peak load by150 kW. This measure needs five 
storages to guarantee the load reduction. The calculated 
potential annual saving in the used example is approximately 
15,000 €. Regarding the high cost for investment the net 
present value is less the net present value of the CHP. In this 
particular case the net present value of the ice storage would 
be around 20,000 €.  
 
 
Figure 14. Usage of ice storage 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
Load management leads to lower energy costs in 
companies working in the manufacturing industry. This paper 
described the requirements that need to be fulfilled to 
implement load management. With the presented approach, 
companies are enabled to collect these data and information 
in a well-structured development. Starting with fundamentals 
like formulating a company’s energy strategy and an energy 
plan. Furthermore, the company is advised to motivate their 
employees and to document the whole introduction process. 
Besides that, a company must start with a system analysis 
in order to create a transparent list of all energy consumers. 
Also, a company must start with measurements in an early 
stage, to collect necessary data. Energy monitoring systems 
assist companies in collecting important data and information 
regarding the energy consumption of machines, etc. Possible 
circumstances can force companies to reject energy 
monitoring systems. In this case, the measurement of the 
energy 
consumption 
of 
prioritized 
consumers 
is 
recommended. This paper presented relevant consumers, 
which have a high impact on the main peak load in the 
manufacturing industry. Using these fundamentals and the 
memorized data and information, energy transparency can be 
achieved by analyzing collected and memorized data. 
Therefore, load profiles on all layers, such as buildings, units 
or consumers must be analyzed following the presented 
approach.  
The application of the approach showed that load measures 
can lead to lower energy costs. Therefore, the load profiles 
were analyzed precisely. Due to this analysis, load peaks 
were 
identified. 
Using 
these 
results, 
several 
load 
management measures were derived. With a focus on two 
main measures “insourcing” and “load shifting”, two 
different technologies were introduced to address the 
measures. On the one hand a combined power and heat 
station can be used, and on the other hand an ice storage 
technologies. In the used example calulations, both 
technologies leads to a annual amount of at least 15,000 €.  
Summarizing, load management can be used to reduce 
energy costs in a company. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This article arose during the work of the authors, within the 
context of the research project FlAixEnergy (project number: 
0325819A) funded by the Federal Ministry for Economic 
Affairs and Energy in Germany. The authors want to thank all 
donors, supporter and critics. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Hicking, S. Nienke and G. Schuh, “Implementing Load 
Management in Manufacturing Companies. A Feasible 
Approach”, Seventh International Conference on Smart Grids, 
Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies. 
IARIA, Barcelona 21.-25.05.2017, pp. 1–6.  
[2] M. 
Schenk 
and 
M. 
Schumann, 
“Einleitung 
- 
Herausforderungen für die Produktion mit Zukunft,” in 
Produktion und Logistik mit Zukunft: Digital engineering and 
operation, M. Schenk, Ed., Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2015, pp. 
1–48. 
[3] G. Schuh, Produktionsmanagement: Handbuch Produktion und 
Management 5, 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2014. 
[4] G. Schuh and V. Stich, Eds., Grundlagen der PPS, 4th ed. 
Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2012. 
[5] T. Bauernhansl, Energieeffizienz in Deutschland - eine 
Metastudie: Analyse und Empfehlungen, 2014th ed. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014. 
8
Thermal performance in kW
Ice Storage
Cooling Demand
CS1+2
253
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[6] J. Gochermann, Expedition Energiewende, 1st ed. Wiesbaden: 
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2016. 
[7] S. Döring, Energieerzeugung nach Novellierung des EEG: 
Konsequenzen für regenerative und nicht regenerative 
Energieerzeugungsanlagen. Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2015. 
[8] H. Niederhausen and A. Burkert, Elektrischer Strom: 
Gestehung, Übertragung, Verteilung, Speicherung und 
Nutzung elektrischer Energie im Kontext der Energiewende. 
Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg, 2014. 
[9] BMWi - Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie, Ein 
Strommarkt für die Energiewende: Ergebnispapier des 
Bundesministeriums für Wirtschaft und Energie (Weißbuch). 
Berlin: Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie 
(BMWi), 2015. 
[10] M. Geilhausen, J. Bränzel, D. Engelmann, and O. Schulze, 
Energiemanagement: 
Für 
Fachkräfte, 
Beauftragte 
und 
Manager. Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg, 2015. 
[11] BMWi - Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie, 
“Energiedaten: Gesamtausgabe: Stand: Januar 2016,” Jan. 
2016. 
[12] Deutsche 
Bundesregierung, 
“Energiekonzept 
für 
eine 
umweltschonende, 
zuverlässige 
und 
bezahlbare 
Energieversorung,” Berlin, Sep. 2010. 
[13] M. Roscher, C. Maasem, and R. Martynski, “Intelligentes 
Energiemanagement 
in 
der 
Produktion: 
Effiziente 
Energienutzung in der Fertigung durch Energiemonitoren und 
Lastmanagement,” UdZ - Unternehmen der Zukunft, 2014, pp. 
20–22, 2014. 
[14] H. Seidl, C. Schenuit, and M. Teichmann, “Roadmap Demand 
Side Management. Industrielles Lastmanagement für ein 
zukunftsfähiges Energiesystem: Schlussfolgerung aus dem 
Pilotprojekt DSM Bayern,” Berlin, Jun. 2016. 
[15] F. Wosnitza and H. G. Hilgers, Energieeffizienz und 
Energiemanagement: Ein Überblick heutiger Möglichkeiten 
und Notwendigkeiten. Wiesbaden: Vieweg+Teubner Verlag, 
2012. 
[16] P. Kurzweil and O. K. Dietlmeier, Elektrochemische Speicher: 
Superkondensatoren, 
Batterien, 
Elektrolyse-Wasserstoff, 
Rechtliche Grundlagen, 1st ed. Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg, 
2015. 
[17] C. Köpp, H.-J. von Mettenheim, and M. H. Breitner, 
“Lastmanagement in Stromnetzen,” Wirtschaftsinf, vol. 55, no. 
1, pp. 39–49, 2013. 
[18] S. Lehnhoff, Dezentrales vernetztes Energiemanagement: Ein 
Ansatz auf Basis eines verteilten adaptiven Realzeit-
Multiagentensystems. Wiesbaden: Vieweg+Teubner Verlag / 
GWV Fachverlage GmbH Wiesbaden, 2010. 
[19] H. Voss, Modellierung des regionalen Erzeugungsangebots auf 
dem Elektrizitätsmarkt der Europäischen Union. Berlin: Lit, 
2012. 
[20] Fraunhofer 
ISE, 
Energy 
Charts. 
[Online] 
Available: 
https://www.energy-charts.de/contact_de.htm. Accessed on: 
Jun. 16 2016. 
[21] B. Diekmann and E. Rosenthal, Energie: Physikalische 
Grundlagen ihrer Erzeugung, Umwandlung und Nutzung, 3rd 
ed. Wiesbaden: Springer Spektrum, 2014. 
[22] J. Hesselbach, Energie- und klimaeffiziente Produktion: 
Grundlagen, Leitlinien und Praxisbeispiele, 1st ed. s.l.: 
Vieweg+Teubner (GWV), 2012. 
[23] E. Müller, J. Engelmann, T. Löffler, and J. Strauch, 
Energieeffiziente Fabriken planen und betreiben, 1st ed. 
Berlin: Springer Berlin, 2009. 
[24] W. Irrek and S. Thomas, “Definition Energieeffizienz,” 
Wuppertal, Jul. 2008. 
[25] H. Wannenwetsch, Integrierte Materialwirtschaft, Logistik und 
Beschaffung, 5th ed. Berlin: Springer Vieweg, 2014. 
[26] M. Schenk, S. Wirth, and E. Müller, Fabrikplanung und 
Fabrikbetrieb: Methoden für die wandlungsfähige, vernetzte 
und ressourceneffiziente Fabrik, 2nd ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014. 
[27] S. 
Hirzel, 
“Betriebliches 
Energiemanagement 
in 
der 
industriellen Produktion,” Karlsruhe, Sep. 2011. 
[28] Energiemanagement - Begriffe, 4602-1, 2016. 
[29] J. 
Kals 
and 
K. 
Würtenberger, 
“IT-gestütztes 
Energiemanagement,” HMD, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 73–81, 2012. 
[30] Manufacturing Execution Systems (MES) – Kennzahlen für 
Energiemanagement, 66412-4, 2015. 
[31] CRA, “Primer on Demand-Side Management: With an 
emphasis on price-responsive programs,” Oakland, USA, Feb. 
2005. 
[32] S. C. Bhattacharyya, Energy economics: Concepts, issues, 
markets and governance. London: Springer, 2011. 
[33] Arnusorn 
Saengprajak, 
“Efficiency 
of 
demand 
side 
management measures in small village electrification 
systems,” Dissertation, Universität Kassel, Kassel, 2006. 
[34] M. Kruppa, “Lastmanagement im Unternehmen: Grundlagen,” 
2015. 
[35] Z. Hu, D. Maskovitz, and J. Zhao, “Demand-Side Management 
in China's Restructured Power Industry: How Regulation and 
Policy Can Deliver Demand-Side Management Benefits to a 
Growing Economy and a Changing Power System,” 
Washington, D.C., USA, Dec. 2015. 
[36] Z. Hu, Integrated resource strategic planning and power 
demand-side management. Heidelberg, S.l.: Springer; China 
Electric Power Press, 2013. 
[37] D. Y. Goswami and F. Kreith, Energy efficiency and renewable 
energy handbook. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis 
Group, 2015. 
[38] M. Kleber, “Leitfaden Lastgangmessung: für das Projekt 
Teilenergiekennwerte, gefördert durch das BMWi, erstellt 
durch das Fachgebiet Bauphysik & Technischer Ausbau 
(fbta),” Karlsruhe, 2010.
 
254
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

