 
Safe Transitions Between a Driver and an Automated Driving System 
 
Rolf Johansson 
Zenuity, RISE 
Göteborg, Sweden 
e-mail: rolf.johansson@zenuity.com 
Jonas Nilsson 
Zenuity 
Göteborg, Sweden 
e-mail: jonas.nilsson@zenuity.com 
Annika Larsson 
Autoliv Development 
Vårgårda, Sweden 
e-mail: annika.larsson@autoliv.com
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a methodology for achieving 
functional safety for an automated driving system (SAE Level 
4) with respect to safe transitions between the driver and the 
system. Safety analysis and assessment of an implementation 
example show how to allocate safety requirements on Human-
Machine Interface (HMI) components to handle the risks of 
unfair transition, mode confusion and stuck in transition, 
respectively. The methodology is appropriate for different 
assumptions on driver failures. The paper shows how to identify 
safety requirements on the HMI components, given that there is 
an assumption of a set of single, double or multiple failures by 
the driver. Results from this example show that it is sufficient to 
allocate safety requirements on the sensor and the lock of a 
control to ensure safe transitions. No safety requirements are 
needed on visual feedback to the driver, e.g., displays. 
Keywords-functional safety; automated driving system; HMI; 
safety assessment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Presently, the most critical factor for road vehicle safety 
is the behaviour of the driver. There are different estimates, 
but a common understanding is that driver mistakes in the last 
seconds before a critical situation is a contributing factor of 
more than 90% of serious accidents. However, drivers are 
competent in general to drive safely and handle most risky 
situations well.  
The potential safety benefit of increased vehicle 
automation is undoubtedly large but it is important that the 
extra risks coming from potential failures of automation are 
limited to a minimum. More advanced functionality and 
intelligence implemented in the vehicle means that more of 
the responsibility to drive safely shifts from the driver to 
functionality implemented in the vehicle. In the discipline of 
functional safety, there are methods to assess risks of 
malfunctioning electrical/electronic (E/E) implemented 
functionality, and to reduce these sufficiently. For road 
vehicles, ISO26262 is the functional safety standard.  
This paper is an extension of [1] and focuses on higher 
levels of driving automation in on-road vehicles, where the 
Automated Driving System (ADS) may be given full 
responsibility for a safe behaviour in traffic. According to the 
taxonomy and definitions in J3016 [2], we can say that on 
level 4 (L4) automation, the ADS inside its operating driving 
domain (ODD) takes full responsibility, including fallback, 
for the Dynamic Driving Task (DDT). 
Regarding the responsibility of the driver, the precise L4 
definition says that when in charge, the ADS is responsible 
for the DDT “…without any expectation that a user will 
respond to a request to intervene”.  
The introduction of an ADS with full responsibility for 
the DDT, implies that the problem of traffic safety for an L4-
equipped vehicle can be decomposed into three subproblems: 
1. 
Safe driving when the ADS is in charge 
2. 
Safe driving when the driver is in charge 
3. 
Safe transitions between the driver and the ADS. 
The first point is obvious when stating that the ADS is 
responsible for driving, and may be the major functional 
safety challenge for L4-equipped vehicles. The second point 
includes specific topics coming from the introduction of L4-
equipped vehicles. This is because the introduction of an 
ADS may lead to, e.g., that the driver by mistake relies on an 
inactive ADS. A special case under the second point, is when 
the driver makes a mistake of what vehicle he/she is inside 
now. Such a mistake may hence cause a traditional non-ADS-
equipped vehicle to become unsafe because the driver thinks 
there is an ADS in it. That case is not elaborated in this paper 
having focus on L4-equipped vehicles. The third point is the 
focus of this paper. 
Having functionally safe transitions, implies showing 
absence of malfunctions in the ADS transition functionality 
that may lead to unacceptable risks. This includes risks 
related to the interaction between the driver and the ADS. 
One key question is what are reasonable human mistakes and 
misuse? Consequently, human factors expertise is a vital part 
to achieve functional safety.   
Note that this paper focuses on the functional safety of an 
ADS and as a part of this analysis use human factors 
expertise, not the other way around. The goal of functional 
safety is to show that the remaining risk for the system (e.g., 
the ADS) in its context is reasonable. Human factors (HF) in 
safety, on the other hand, focus on optimizing the safety of 
the driver-vehicle system, but do not have the ambition to 
show that all risks (due to, e.g., system malfunctions) have 
been sufficiently mitigated. 
The contribution of this paper is a method for achieving 
functional safety for an L4-equipped vehicle with respect to 
safe transitions between the driver and the ADS. Note that 
according to the definition of L4, we need to achieve this 
under no assumptions that the driver will take back control 
within a bounded time. 
100
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II refers to 
related work. Section III describes the new hazards related to 
the driving mode transitions introduced by SAE L4. In 
Section IV, we discuss how to define a safe transition and the 
acceptable level of tolerance to driver mistakes. Section V 
elaborates on possible implementations using a system 
example and corresponding functional safety analysis and 
assessment. Finally, Section VI presents concluding remarks. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
As the existing autonomous systems within the 
automotive industry are still in their infant stages and the 
majority of them still are semi-autonomous (i.e., SAE L1-L2) 
at time of writing, these systems are excluded from the state-
of-the-art comparison. The interested reader may study 
results from several research efforts on this topic; PReVENT, 
HAVE IT, ADAPTIVE and INTERACTIVE to mention a 
few.  
A. Related Work in Automotive 
There are two general strategies how to consider the 
interaction between the driver and the ADS. SAE L4, which 
is the focus of this paper, uses by definition the more 
conservative strategy where there are no assumptions that the 
driver can take back control within a bounded time. We can 
call this an autopilot with full responsibility for safety, as it 
does not need to rely on any responsiveness from the manual 
driver to stay safe. 
Automotive research within human factors and transitions 
of control have focused on the less conservative strategy and 
consequently SAE L2 and L3 vehicles. This is a research 
question that is currently very much investigated [3] [4] [5]. 
A rather recent overview of what controllability assumptions 
that are reasonable for different levels of vehicle automation 
is also found in [6]. Research on L3 vehicles has focused on 
how transitions may take shorter or longer time to complete, 
as drivers who are not in control will sometimes prioritize 
other tasks over driving. Results indicate that the time needed 
for a safe and completed transition of control following an 
ADS request for transition, ranges from about 7 seconds to 
over 30 seconds [3] [7]. Thus, it may be difficult to allow 
drivers to be out of the driving loop and still expect them to 
accept and succeed in resuming control within a short time 
period.  
It has also been shown that it may take drivers several 
seconds to control the vehicle manually without reduced 
performance, following a forced resumption of manual 
control [8]. This reduction in controllability are however at a 
very detailed level, and other research has indicated that 
about 7-10 seconds after being forced to resume manual 
control, drivers are able to avoid critical situations as well as 
before activating automation [3].  
Much research effort has also been spent on optimizing 
the design of the HMI to alert drivers to the need to resume 
control from L2 and L3 vehicles. Results have indicated that 
it is preferable to show the driver what the vehicle is “aware” 
of so drivers can handle the situation if needed [9] [10] [11]. 
The known accidents that have been attributed to vehicle 
automation so far, have been caused by automation 
limitations in handling the DDT and the driver feeling so safe 
as to cease monitoring its limitations. 
There are also simulator studies suggesting that human 
drivers may change their driving behaviour when taking back 
control from an autopilot [12].  This is not considered in this 
paper as we focus on functional safety rather than design of 
the HMI or autopilot driving behaviour.  
B. State-of-the-art comparison with other industries 
This section describes technology, systems and concepts 
from other industries where similar problems arise caused by 
mode confusion and unsafe transitions. The focus has been 
on nuclear, avionics and rail since these industries deal with 
complex systems, exist in a regulated environment and all 
demand active users for proper operations. Experiences from 
other industries give valuable insight into how to design 
interfaces and processes that ensure safe transitions in the 
context of autonomous driving. 
The two major players in the civilian avionics industry, 
Boeing and Airbus, apply different philosophies regarding 
automation. Boeing implements a strict assisting role for 
technology and automation, where the pilot always acts as the 
final authority. Airbus rather sees automation as a way of 
enhancing flight performance by assisting the responsible 
pilot. This subtle difference in philosophy causes different 
problems, where the Boeing strategy allows the pilot to 
perform errors that may cause accidents and the Airbus 
strategy may interfere and prevent the pilot from performing 
necessary manoeuvres needed for safety in extreme situations 
[13] [14]. One approach cannot, however, necessarily be said 
to be safer than the other as aviation accidents are very rare.  
In military avionics, there is a system called Auto Ground 
Collision Avoidance System (Auto GCAS) that monitors the 
pilot’s response in certain situations and if the pilot does not 
respond to an alarm, the system takes over and performs the 
necessary manoeuvre. After avoiding the threat, control is 
returned to the pilot. Inagaki describes this as situation-
adaptive autonomy where authority over a system is 
transferred between human and machine agents [15]. A 
similar system in the automotive industry is that of forward 
collision warning with automated emergency braking, where 
the warning comes first, and if the driver does not respond to 
the warning, automated emergency braking intervenes. 
However, the main point of reference within both civilian 
and military avionics is that an educated pilot is always 
responsible for operation of the airplane with the help of 
coordination and information from air traffic control, 
differing from the automotive situation envisioned in SAE 
L4-5. In aviation, there are also several protocols for 
transitioning control, be it between pilot and co-pilot (pilot 
flying and pilot not flying) or between pilot and autopilot. In 
emergencies, civilian pilots generally have several minutes to 
diagnose a problem and try different countermeasures, being 
able to consult each other while doing so.  
Within the nuclear industry there are numerous processes 
for operators to monitor. This is handled with different 
interfaces displaying process information. One main control 
board represents the state of the system and operators are 
101
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
specially trained on how to read it. The main control board is 
assured to high safety integrity and acts as the primary source 
of information should different sources provide inconsistent 
information. Nuclear operators are well educated with the 
processes and the system and are regularly trained in handling 
risky scenarios. They also use binders which contain detailed 
information on what procedure to follow given different error 
messages and states of the main control board. Some tasks 
that could be automated have not been, in order not to make 
the operators passive and complacent to changes in the 
system state [16]. 
In modern nuclear power plants, there are specific 
procedures ensuring correct decisions are made even in 
emergencies regarding the operation of the nuclear plant. 
Regulations state that the plants are to be designed in such a 
way that operators always have a 30-minute window to 
search for, deliberate and perform a procedure. In other 
words, the plant is fully autonomous for 30 minutes at a time 
[16]. There are also mechanisms for actions at high safety 
levels that require several users to acknowledge the actions 
independently in order to perform it. The time allowed for 
deliberation is, thus, much longer than in automotive or any 
other vehicle industry. 
Studies from the rail industry have analysed operator 
workload and the possibilities of it causing human errors. 
Two main ways of managing human performance have been 
formulated, through either technology or human resource 
management. Assessment of individual possibilities to 
manage the required workload has been performed through 
psychometric testing, as well as limiting workdays and 
issuing regular breaks [17].  
When reviewing earlier experiences from the nuclear, 
avionics and rail industries we make three important 
observations. One: In nuclear, rail, avionics and space the 
time available to operators are on the minute scale, 
sometimes tens of minutes. This means incidents in those 
contexts allow for perception, deliberation, and action. 
Automotive often operates in much shorter time scales in the 
realms of seconds and milliseconds, leading to much shorter 
response times mainly allowing for perception and action. 
Two: Within these industries, the technical solutions are 
operated by educated users, certified to use the specific 
equipment, and trained on a regular basis. This is not the case 
in automotive, where most countries only require one driving 
test during the entire lifetime of the driver. Three: These 
industries rely heavily on safety procedures, regulating what 
is to be done and in what order. These procedures are often 
written on paper and can be physically viewed in case of 
emergencies. These industries also often operate in controlled 
environments and operators handle incidents in cooperation 
with colleagues supporting them. 
Translating information displays such as those in the 
nuclear industry into the automotive setting is problematic, as 
most of the information sources’ primary purpose in cars is 
to enhance and ease the experience rather than to provide 
safety-assured information on the system state. Also, the 
displays in nuclear demand training for the operators and are 
not self-explanatory. Adaptive interface features linked to 
specific task requirements with consistency in interface 
design across different modes of system operation is 
recommended for the users to effectively apply mental 
models [18]. As the automotive setting makes it difficult to 
limit usage periods, the technology and interfaces must be 
designed to ensure safe usage under these different 
circumstances.  
 
III   
WHAT CAN CAUSE THE ADS-EQUIPPED ROAD 
VEHICLE TO BECOME UNSAFE 
One interpretation of a hazard analysis & risk assessment 
(HA&RA) today according to ISO26262 is that the vehicle 
itself is considered safe, if it only puts the driver in situations 
that are possible to manage safely. The driver is ultimately 
responsible for safe driving, and the malfunctions of the 
vehicle should be restricted in such a way that the driver can 
keep the vehicle in a safe state. The explicit method for 
determining the requested Automotive Safety Integrity Level 
(ASIL), restricting a certain hypothetical vehicle failure, is to 
measure three factors: exposure (E), severity (S) and 
controllability (C). The two first factors are the traditional 
ones that are part of the definition of risk, i.e., a combination 
of probability and severity. The third factor is the one that 
considers that the driver may sometimes have a possibility to 
keep the vehicle safe, even though the ordinary (safety-
related) functionality is failing.  
When we shift from a situation where a manual driver has 
the ultimate responsibility, to highly automated driving 
where the manual driver and the ADS are alternating, this will 
have an impact on the HA&RA. So, what will become 
different when going to SAE L4? This new challenge has 
partly been addressed in [19]. 
As a starting point, we require the same from an ADS as 
from a driver. This means focusing on a safe style of driving, 
making the driver or ADS capable to handle also unexpected 
events. When programming an ADS, this is what we cover 
on the tactical level [2] [20] [21] [22]. The ADS should 
always choose to perform the manoeuvres in such a way that 
reasonable, but still unexpected, situations could be handled 
safely. For example, the decision whether to initiate an 
overtaking manoeuvre is on the tactical level. An optimistic 
decision to overtake may place the vehicle in a situation 
where avoiding one accident may cause another. The solution 
to this dilemma is of course to initiate an overtaking 
manoeuvre only when the entire operation is foreseen to be 
possible to fulfil in a safe manner.  
Note the contrast to Advanced Driver Assistance Systems 
(ADAS), where the vehicle takes over mainly on the 
operational time scale, maintaining as steady-state as 
possible, and then assumes the manual driver to continue 
according to the (maybe revised) tactical plan. The ADAS 
functionality today does not take the ultimate responsibility 
to drive the vehicle safely. Firstly, it operates on the 
operational time scale, and does not revise tactical plans. 
Secondly, it only assists the driver. In SAE L4 when 
responsibility is transferred from the driver to the ADS, there 
is no longer an assistance relation. The transfer means that 
from then on, the ADS is fully responsible for driving the 
vehicle safely. 
102
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Given that the ADS can drive safely once in command, 
the HA&RA must also cover the transitions between the 
driver and the ADS. In SAE L4, these transitions introduce 
three new types of hazards, namely unfair transition, mode 
confusion and stuck in transition. These are described in 
detail in the following sections.  
A. Unfair transitions 
It may be complicated for the driver to make a proper 
override of what is perceived as a failing or unsafe tactical 
decision of the ADS. This is because drivers may find 
different tactical solutions to a certain driving situation, and 
each of these may be correct. It may be hard for a driver to 
distinguish an unsafe tactical decision from a one that is just 
different from his or her own favourite pattern. Even more, it 
may be hard to continue to fulfil a tactical plan of another 
driver if the responsibility is transferred in the middle of the 
intended sequence. This difficulty is both for a driver to 
continue a plan of the ADS, and for the ADS to continue what 
has been initiated by the manual driver. Problems can arise in 
terms of non-driving task engagement, safe headways, and 
the knowledge of other road vehicles’ positions.  
If the manual driver realizes that the ADS has handed 
over responsibility, without the manual driver agreeing to 
this, this is a new risk to consider when entering SAE L4. We 
can say that the manual driver is put in a situation of unfair 
transition. For a driver with the same understanding of the 
traffic situation and the control of the vehicle, the situation 
may be possible and easy to handle, but an unfair transition 
may put the driver in a situation where continuing to drive 
can be difficult. For example, the driver may be engrossed in 
a non-driving related task and therefore take a long time to 
resume manual control [7]. 
The problem of unfair transitions may appear in both 
directions. It is reasonable to assume that the automated 
driver can drive safely as long as it can choose its own tactics. 
This is a far easier task than being able to understand and 
solve arbitrary situations.  
To summarize, if the responsibility is transferred from 
one driver to the other, this must include a confirmation from 
the receiving driver. Otherwise, the transition may be 
regarded as unfair, and it is a non-negligible risk that the 
second driver is incapable of handling the situation, on both 
operational and tactical time scales.  
B. Mode confusion 
In order to make the entire trip from start to stop safe, it 
is critical that the two drivers always agree which of them 
currently is in charge. If they misunderstand each other, there 
is a risk that either there are two drivers trying to control the 
vehicle, or there is no one taking care of the ride. Both these 
potential mode confusions need to be addressed.  
If we allow both the manual driver and the automated 
driver to override each other, there is an obvious risk that the 
resulting non-harmonized commanding of the vehicle may 
result in dangerous situations. This is especially probable 
because the two drivers most likely make different tactical 
decisions now and then, and as consequence regard the 
operative command of the other as faulty. For safe driving in 
SAE L4, it is important to reduce the risk of this reciprocal 
override. Note that this does not necessarily exclude the 
opportunity to adjust operational tasks such as lane position, 
within bounds that the responsible (driver or ADS) agrees 
with.  
It is perhaps even more obvious that it will become 
dangerous if neither the manual driver nor the automated 
driver regard herself or himself as the ultimately responsible. 
Such reciprocal underride is therefore obviously important to 
reduce properly when performing the risk assessment for 
driving on SAE L4.  
C. Stuck in Transition 
If either the ADS or the driver is unsuccessful in 
executing a transition for some period of time, then this may 
impair the driving skills of the responsible party, thus leading 
to a hazard. Consider the case when the driver tries to 
activate, e.g., by pressing one or multiple buttons, and the 
ADS refuses or fails to activate itself. The driver might react 
to this by repeatedly pressing the buttons to activate the 
system. When doing so, it is a risk that the driver is stuck in 
transition, gets distracted and thus cannot drive safely. 
 
IV. 
METHOD FOR ASSURING SAFE TRANSITIONS 
In the previous section, we listed new categories of 
hazards to handle related to the dual driving modes when 
going up in automation degree to SAE L4. In the following 
sections, we outline a method to handle these. In Section IV-
A we discuss how to define a safe handover functionality and 
in Section IV-B we describe how to do Hazard Analysis and 
Risk Assessment, HA&RA.      
A. Principles for safe handover 
Below we propose a way to define the part of a 
functionality (denoted item in ISO26262 [23] and feature in 
J3016 [2]) which transfers control of the DDT between the 
driver and the ADS. We remark that this section only 
discusses the part of the item definition which is related to 
transitions. A complete item/feature for an ADS will also 
include, e.g., how the ADS drives, i.e., performs the DDT. 
We assume that both the manual driver and the ADS are 
capable of safe driving, as well as judging its own ability to 
drive safely. Being capable of safe driving also includes 
driving safely until a handover is completed.  
The item definition seeks to be “traffic safe by definition” 
assuming that the ADS works as intended. This is to say that 
functional safety of the item/feature implies traffic safety. 
Consequently, only violations of the principles below, i.e., 
malfunctions can lead to hazards. We remark that it is 
possible to make a more explicit definition of the item/feature 
functionality, which would then require that safety of the 
defined functionality must be proved outside the scope of 
functional safety. 
For a safe transition of control between manual driver and 
the ADS, transfer of responsibility for the DDT may only 
occur if the following conditions are fulfilled:  
 
103
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
1. Driver and the ADS both accept transfer, i.e., have 
consensus 
2. The recipient (driver or ADS) is capable to drive 
safely 
 
These two points introduce a fair procedure for handover 
to eliminate unfair transitions. This means that the current 
responsible (driver or ADS) stays responsible until there is an 
agreement for a handover to a capable recipient. This also 
implies that both the driver and the ADS need to explicitly 
confirm that a transition is possible and fair to perform. 
Furthermore, it implies that both the driver and the ADS 
really are aware of what has been agreed. Thus, neither the 
driver nor the ADS are required to take control and thus the 
vehicle will be in a safe state if either of them accept to take 
control of the vehicle.  
Note that these two principles may imply that conditions 
on the surrounding environment are fulfilled. Traffic 
situation will probably need to be “tactically simple” to hand 
over safely from the ADS to the driver. 
The problem of Mode confusion can be solved by 
combining the safe handover procedure described above with 
mechanisms that handle interference from the part which is 
not in charge, i.e., override. To ensure safe driving between 
transitions, the following condition must also be fulfilled: 
 
3. The non-responsible party (driver or ADS) must 
not affect vehicle motion outside the constraints set 
by the responsible party (ADS or driver)  
 
This can be handled either by making the current 
responsible capable of ignoring the other or by avoiding 
interference by the non-responsible party. When the driver is 
responsible, we require the ADS not to interfere in such a way 
that the driver cannot control the motion of the vehicle. This 
is how ADAS are designed today.  
When the ADS is responsible, the driver should then try 
to avoid interfering with the vehicle controls. A potential 
solution is not allowing the driver to have any impact on the 
vehicle, if not first going through a handover procedure. We 
then transfer part of the responsibility to the ADS by putting 
safety requirements on ignoring any try from the driver to 
control the motion of the vehicle. For means of trust and 
comfort, it may be advisable to allow the human operator to 
control, e.g., lane positioning or following distance. The 
range of such adjustment should then be constrained within 
bounds set by the ADS, similar to how adaptive cruise control 
contains merely a few distance settings.  
To manage the stuck-in-transition hazard we formulate 
the following condition:  
 
4. Transition sequence shall not affect the capability of 
the responsible party (driver or ADS) to drive safely 
 
This will put requirements on the handover sequence to 
be easily managed by the driver when activating the ADS. In 
the other direction, the ADS must not let the deactivation 
sequence affect its driving. 
There are many ways to define a detailed handover 
protocol between the driver and ADS which implement the 
safety principles above. For examples, see Section V. 
B. 
 Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment 
A Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment (HA&RA) is 
needed to identify situations and driver behaviours that could 
lead to hazards. The driver behaviours to be analysed must 
also include reasonably foreseeable driver mistakes. Already 
today, we have a substantial amount of serious traffic 
accidents caused by driver lapses. There is no reason why not 
to regard the driver of a highly automated vehicle as prone to 
mistakes in any HMI, including the one for transition of 
responsibility.  
The granularity of this analysis is a design choice. We 
could make a conservative assumption that all driver 
mistakes are common and that they will always lead to severe 
hazards. This makes the HA&RA simple but will most likely 
lead to higher ASIL on some system components compared 
to a more detailed HA&RA. 
All hazardous events are assigned values for exposure, 
severity and controllability C, which together lead to an 
ASIL. As an example, consider the case where the ADS is 
driving at high speed and a malfunction in the ADS combined 
with a relatively frequent driver mistake leads to 
unintentional deactivation of the ADS. The situation is 
common leading to high exposure (E4). Furthermore, we 
assume that the driver cannot control the vehicle at 
unintentional deactivation (C3) and that this would have a 
fatal consequence (S3). Conclusion is that the system must 
not deactivate at high speed due to this specific driver mistake 
with ASIL D. 
A similar analysis can be performed for any hazard and 
situation, e.g., single or multiple and coordinated driver 
mistakes. Less probable driver mistakes will result in a lower 
exposure and thereby lower ASIL.  
A way to argue that a transition is safe with regards to all 
relevant driver mistakes is to check what happens if there is 
either a driver mistake or an E/E failure, or combination of 
these. This must be checked for any state in the transition 
protocol. For any hazardous consequence, it must be shown 
that the corresponding E/E failure is prevented with an 
appropriate safety requirement.  
Note that this method also addresses the nominal function 
of the protocol. If a manual failure may lead to a hazardous 
consequence even in a fault-free case, the protocol 
implementation is obviously not robust enough.  
For the ADS, we assume that safety requirements are 
allocated to all elements critical for achieving a transition in 
such a way that it can be considered as fair and consistently 
understood by both drivers. Of course, redundancy patterns 
may be applied allowing the ASIL D to be decomposed onto 
different elements of the implementation. 
V. 
GENERAL IMPLEMENTATION SUGGESTION 
This section provides some guidance on how to design and 
implement a protocol for safe handovers. To make a 
transition tolerant to any single manual mistake, there are a 
few different general ways to design the protocol. The 
104
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
redundant action from the manual driver can in general be 
either in time or in space, or a combination of these. By time 
redundancy, we mean here to request a sequence of actions 
where the second must follow in a certain time interval after 
the first one. Space redundancy is on the other hand when the 
manual driver is requested to apply several actions 
simultaneously. In both cases, the idea is that it can be argued 
that the set of actions is extremely unlikely to be performed 
by mistake.  
A less conservative assumption is that a protocol should 
be immune against any single manual mistake. A more 
conservative assumption is to increase the number of 
mistakes a driver can perform still being conformant to the 
protocol. A high number of such mistakes may be argued to 
occur if they entire protocol sequence can be seen as an 
automated behaviour, being possible to execute in total by 
mistake. The scope of this paper is not to argue what 
combination of manual mistakes that are likely, but showing 
a general technique and illustrate this with some examples. 
The first examples are designed to be robust to single human 
mistakes, and the last one is implementing a protocol still safe 
in the presence of two human mistakes. 
 
A. Example HMI Protocol and Implementations 
As a first example in this paper, we chose to describe a 
protocol based on manual time redundancy. This means that 
we always require two actions from the driver for any 
transition from the mode when the driver is responsible, here 
denoted MD, to the mode when the ADS is responsible, here 
denoted AD. The same requirement on two actions by the 
manual driver are also valid for the reverse transition from 
the mode AD to the mode MD. Furthermore, we say that the 
second action of the manual driver defines the transition, 
which means that there is no requirement on the manual 
driver to observe the resulting outcome correctly, more than 
knowing what she or he is doing herself or himself. As long 
as the second action is fulfilled, the transition is deemed to 
have occurred.  
In Figure 1, a general protocol is illustrated, where two 
coordinated actions are required from the manual driver. 
When implementing this it is important for the ADS HMI not 
to allow the driver to perform the second action, without 
having acknowledged the first one.  
In this example, we choose the first action to be a press of 
a button and the second to be a change of lever position. This 
lever has exactly two possible positions, equal to the two 
modes: AD and MD. For a certain L4 feature, the journey is 
always to be started in MD, and the driver may change the 
mode after reaching the proper state in the transition protocol. 
We consider the lever to be locked at any other time. 
Furthermore, if the lever is not moved fast enough after 
getting acknowledge by the ADS, it will be locked again 
requiring the protocol to start over again to perform a 
transition. 
This protocol is based on the assumption that it is always 
safe to keep the mode if nothing else is agreed. The current 
responsible (manual driver or ADS) should always be able to 
continue to take care of the vehicle in a safe manner. The 
exception is when the progress of the protocol execution is 
hindered in a way that generates the failure stuck in 
transition. 
Figure 1.  Example of a simple transition protocol. 
 
105
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
We can extend the protocol to cover the cases where the 
ADS can suggest a transition, either by declaring that the 
ADS is ready to take over from the manual driver, or by 
telling the manual driver that the ADS performance is 
limited. Such a protocol is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
To implement this protocol, we show two different 
possible implementations. In the first implementation, we 
chose the following HMI components: 
● 
Tell-tale light showing the ADS view of preferred 
mode 
● 
Push-button to for the manual driver to ask for mode 
change (first action) 
● 
Tell-tale light showing whether the ADS is prepared 
for a change as requested by the manual driver 
● 
Lever for the manual driver to select mode (second 
action) 
 
Any failure mode of these four HMI components then 
needs to be included in the safety analysis, and this in 
combination by any single mistake by the manual driver. 
To summarize, a fault-free uninterrupted transition from 
the MD mode to the AD mode in this example follow the 
steps: 
● 
The manual driver drives the vehicle (MD mode) 
● 
The ADS declares it is ready to take over by changing 
the preference tell-tale to AD mode available 
● 
The manual driver asks to take over by pressing the 
push-button 
● 
The ADS acknowledges that it is prepared by 
indicating the readiness tell-tale and unlocking the 
lever 
● 
The manual driver changes the lever to AD mode 
position 
● 
The ADS locks the lever, and continues to drive in 
AD mode 
 
The transition from AD mode to MD mode is performed 
in a similar way, i.e., the manual driver may either 
independently, or suggested by the ADS, start by asking for 
a mode change. The ADS then acknowledges by indicating 
on the readiness tell-tale and unlocking the lever. Finally, the 
manual driver changes the lever to the MD mode position and 
starts to drive manually. 
B. Safety Analysis 
In the following section, the above protocol and 
implementation is analysed with respect to its sensitivity to 
any human mistake, vehicle component failure, or a 
combination of these. Hence, we walk through the detailed 
state 
diagram 
and 
investigate 
the 
possible 
failure 
consequences at any state. When doing the safety analysis, 
we document the result in Table I. The columns are: 
● 
Protocol state 
● 
HMI failure to investigate 
● 
Possible driver mistake 
● 
Consequence in words 
● 
Consequence in terms of safe/unsafe 
Figure 2.  Example of an elaborated transition protocol. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of a simple transition protocol. 
 
 
106
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Each row in this table marked as unsafe in the last 
column, needs to be protected by a corresponding safety 
requirement allocated to restrict this HMI failure. If all 
occurrences of an unsafe consequence are protected by 
appropriate safety requirements, the protocol implementation 
is deemed safe. For the safety argumentation to be valid, it is 
important that the table is shown to be complete. This 
includes an argumentation that all possible human mistakes 
are considered. 
C. Safety Assessments 
As concluded from the safety analysis in Table I, there are 
four ways for this first example protocol implementation to 
fail in an unsafe way, caused by either of a manual mistake, 
a vehicle component failure, or a combination of these. The 
four failures that we need to avoid maintaining safety are: 
● 
The ADS cannot correctly sense the mode lever 
position, which may cause mode confusion. 
● 
The ADS cannot guarantee lock of the mode lever 
according to the protocol. This in combination with 
the manual driver moving the mode lever to AD 
mode, without noticing it, may cause mode confusion 
(or unfair transition if discovered by the manual 
driver). 
● 
The ADS cannot guarantee locking of the mode lever 
according to the protocol. This in combination with 
the manual driver changing lever position from MD 
to AD, without getting acknowledgment of a 
prepared ADS, may cause unfair transition.  
● 
The ADS cannot guarantee unlocking the mode lever 
according to the protocol. Which may cause stuck in 
transition. 
 
TABLE I. SAFETY ANALYSIS OF TRANSITION PROTOCOL 
Protocol 
state 
HMI failure 
Driver mistake 
Consequence 
Safe/ 
Unsafe 
MD - 
normal 
drive 
Fault in 
lever lock 
No 
MD driver not 
trying to touch 
lever.  
Stay in MD. 
Safe 
MD - 
normal 
drive 
Fault in 
lever lock 
Driver changes 
lever position 
without asking for 
change first. 
Unfair transition. 
Unsafe 
MD - 
normal 
drive 
Fault in 
preference 
tell-tale 
Any mistake or 
correct behaviour 
MD cannot change 
locked lever. Stay in 
MD- normal drive. 
Safe 
MD - 
AD 
available 
Fault in 
lever lock 
No 
MD driver not 
trying to touch 
lever.  
Stay in MD. 
Safe 
MD - 
AD 
available 
Fault in 
lever lock 
Driver changes 
lever position 
without asking for 
change first. 
Unfair transition. 
Unsafe 
MD - 
AD 
available 
Fault in 
preference 
tell-tale 
No 
Stay in MD  
Safe 
MD - 
AD 
available 
Fault 
preference 
tell-tale 
Driver ignores lack 
of availability 
Transition sequence 
fulfilled. Change to 
AD. 
Safe 
MD - 
requested 
AD 
Fault in 
push-button  
Any mistake or 
correct behaviour 
No Acknowledge by 
AD. Lever still 
locked.  
Stay in MD. 
Safe 
MD - 
prepared  
AD 
Fault in 
prepared 
tell-tale 
Driver correct: 
Driver stops 
transition sequence 
Time-out in 
protocol. Stay in 
MD. 
Safe 
MD - 
prepared  
AD 
Fault in 
prepared 
tell-tale 
Driver incorrect: 
Driver ignores lack 
of ack.  
Transition sequence 
fulfilled. Change to 
AD 
Safe 
MD - 
prepared  
AD 
Fault in 
lever lock 
Driver correct: 
Driver tries but 
cannot fulfil 
transition 
sequence. 
Stuck in transition. 
 
Unsafe 
MD - 
prepared  
AD 
Fault in 
lever lock 
Driver incorrect: 
Driver doesn’t 
continue transition 
sequence. 
Time-out in 
protocol. Stay in 
MD. 
 
Safe 
AD – 
taking 
control 
Fault in 
lever sensor 
Any mistake or 
correct behaviour 
Mode confusion 
Unsafe 
AD – 
normal 
drive 
Fault in 
lever lock 
No 
MD driver not 
trying to touch 
lever.  
Stay in MD. 
Safe 
AD – 
normal 
drive 
Fault in 
lever lock 
Driver changes 
lever position to 
MD without asking 
for change first, 
and without 
noticing what is 
happening. 
Mode confusion. 
(Unfair transition, if 
realized later). 
Unsafe 
AD – 
normal 
drive 
Fault in 
preference 
tell-tale 
No 
MD acts as in 
normal AD mode.  
Stay in AD or ask 
for transition. 
Safe 
AD – 
normal 
drive 
Fault in 
preference 
tell-tale 
Driver tries to 
change lever 
position but it is 
locked in AD 
position.  
Stay in AD. 
Safe 
AD – 
asking for 
MD 
Fault in 
lever lock 
No 
MD not touching 
lever without asking 
for change first.  
Stay in AD. 
Safe 
AD – 
asking for 
MD 
Fault in 
lever lock 
Driver changes 
lever position by 
mistake without 
noticing it in the 
first place, and 
without asking for 
change first.  
Mode confusion 
(Unfair transition, if 
realized later). 
Unsafe 
AD – 
asking for 
MD 
Fault in 
preference 
tell-tale 
Any mistake or 
correct behaviour 
MD can request MD 
mode or stay in AD 
mode. 
Safe 
AD – 
requested 
MD 
Fault in 
push-button 
Any mistake or 
correct behaviour 
No Acknowledge by 
AD. Lever still 
locked.  
Stay in AD. 
Safe 
AD – 
prepared 
MD 
Fault in 
prepared 
tell-tale 
No 
Driver stops 
transition sequence. 
Time-out in 
protocol. Stay in 
AD. 
Safe 
AD – 
prepared 
MD 
Fault in 
prepared 
tell-tale 
Driver ignores lack 
of ack. 
Transition sequence 
fulfilled. Change to 
MD 
Safe 
MD – 
taking 
control 
Fault in 
lever lock 
Any mistake or 
correct behaviour 
Driver tries but 
cannot fulfil 
transition sequence. 
Stuck in transition 
Unsafe 
MD – 
taking 
control 
Fault in 
lever sensor 
Any mistake or 
correct behaviour 
Mode confusion 
Unsafe 
 
107
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
As we assume that the manual driver may make any 
single failure at any time, the way to argue for avoiding the 
above failures is to put the entire responsibility on the ADS. 
This implies that we put three safety requirements on the 
HMI of the ADS: 
● 
ASIL D on restricting faulty lever sensor, i.e., the 
lever sensor needs to be always correct. 
● 
ASIL D on restricting lever lock faulty unlocked. 
● 
ASIL D on restricting lever lock faulty locked. 
 
If we can guarantee that the ADS HMI is implemented 
according to these three safety requirements, we can claim 
that we make a safe transition even in the presence of an 
arbitrary single manual mistake. This takes care of all three 
aspects (mode confusion, unfair transition and stuck in 
transition) of a safe transition. 
If ASIL D sensors and/or ASIL D locks are considered 
either unavailable or very expensive, we may consider 
redundancy implementation techniques. Instead of one 
sensor always telling the correct lever position with ASIL D 
attribute, we may consider three (sic!) sensors each with 
ASIL B. If at least two of the three are correct, we can stay 
safe. This means that we need to restrict that two of the three 
are failing. This shall be guaranteed with a total ASIL D, 
which we distribute as ASIL B on each sensor. Similarly, 
using ASIL A sensors would require seven times redundancy. 
If four out of seven are working we consider it as safe. This 
means that we need to restrict that four of the sensors are 
failing. This shall be guaranteed with a total ASIL D, which 
we distribute as ASIL A on each sensor. 
As a second example in this paper, we use the same 
protocol, but chose other means of HMI components. Instead 
of pushing a button to initiate the AD->MD transition, the 
driver keeps his eyes focused on the traffic on the road for 
some seconds. Instead of a tell-tale on the instrument cluster 
to indicate to the driver that a mode change is prepared, we 
use a heads-up display (HUD) icon. Finally, instead of a lever 
for the driver to indicate the mode change, we choose a flip 
of some lateral steering wheel segments. These means can be 
argued as in-line with the idea of not distracting the driver, 
but making sure that while performing the transition 
sequence, the driver keeps attention to the driving task as 
well.  
When we perform a similar analysis of this protocol 
implementation as we did for the first example in Table I, we 
will get exactly the same results. This means that in presence 
of fault-free HMI components, the implemented protocol is 
robust to any single driver mistakes. Furthermore, to 
guarantee safety in the presence of HMI component failures 
and any single manual mistake, we need to put safety 
requirements restricting failures on the steering wheel flip 
indicator, and on the locking mechanism of the steering 
wheel flipping mechanism. 
Both the above examples can be argued as idiotic 
implementations. The idea here is not to show what is the best 
implementation of a protocol, but rather to illustrate the 
technique to investigate the failure modes of the HMI 
components together with the possible manual mistakes 
according to a certain protocol.  
In the last example, we go one step further and construct 
a protocol tolerant to any double human mistakes. This 
implies that any handover sequence involves three 
coordinated actions by the driver (two actions could be a 
double failure).  
The example protocol can be found by just expanding the 
previous one with one action from each part, as shown in 
Figure 3. 
 
The chosen HMI components for the sake of the argument 
are the following:  
 
● 
A tell-tale + sound indicating to driver that the 
ADS prefers to leave control to the Driver. 
● 
A button for the Driver to push when initiating a 
mode change from AD to MD. 
● 
A HUD icon asking the driver to show readiness 
to take over control. 
● 
An eye tracker checking that the Driver keeps 
the eyes on essential parts of the road and traffic 
environment. 
● 
A HUD icon telling the Driver that it is OK to 
take over control. 
● 
A steering wheel with flippable lateral segments 
for the driver to indicate mode of driving (when 
compressed in AD mode; when expanded in MD 
mode). 
● 
A locking mechanism, making sure the steering 
wheel segments only are flipped at valid 
moments according to the protocol. 
● 
A HUD icon telling Driver when mode change 
from MD to AD is available. 
● 
A button for the driver to press when initiating a 
MD to AD hand over. 
● 
A HUD icon asking for confirmation from 
Driver that mode change to AD is intended. 
 
 
We can now again walk through the protocol and 
investigate the failure modes in similar was as was done in 
Table I. This leads to similar result following the general 
pattern: 
 
Every ADS HMI component being responsible for either 
of 
• 
not allowing the driver to (by mistake) perform 
such a forward transition in the protocol that 
makes any of the user actions unneeded to 
complete the transition 
• 
not misinterpret the driver actions such that a 
forward transition in the protocol that makes 
any of the user actions unneeded to complete the 
transition 
• 
not hindering the driver to perform the last 
action in the transition protocol, when the user 
should expect it to be aloud  
will get an ASIL requirement. And only those. 
 
 
108
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
The first two conditions above are to guarantee absence 
of mode confusion and of unfair transitions, and the third one 
is for avoiding stuck in transition. Note that what is listed 
above are just the safety requirements on the HMI 
components. The internal logic executing the protocol is still 
subject to safety requirements for any failing transition.  
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
When introducing an automated driving system (ADS) 
according to SAE Level 4, which takes full responsibility to 
drive the vehicle once activated, it becomes crucial to ensure 
safe transitions between the manual driver and the ADS. The 
existence of dual driving modes brings three new sources of 
risk, namely unfair transition, mode confusion and stuck in 
transition. 
We propose to define a safe transition as a transition 
where neither a (complex) manual mistake nor an E/E failure, 
nor combination of these, leads to an unfair transition, mode 
confusion or stuck in transition.  
We do not prescribe what manual failures to consider, but 
rather showing a methodology how to perform safety analysis 
of implementations of transfer protocols. Given that we agree 
on what set of single, double or multiple failures by the driver 
to assume, we show how to argue that an appropriate set of 
safety requirements on the HMI components would be 
sufficient to deem the HMI of the ADS functionally safe. 
Furthermore, we demonstrate on some system examples 
how to allocate safety requirements on HMI elements to 
ensure safe transitions, and we show how the same protocol 
can be implemented by different HMI components. We also 
show an example of a protocol and implementation designed 
to be robust to dual driver mistakes. 
Results from this example show that it is sufficient to 
allocate safety requirements on the sensor of the driver action 
and of the lock of the mode control, to ensure a safe transition. 
No safety requirements are needed on visual feedback to the 
driver, e.g., displays. We remark that the example 
implementations by no means are unique or optimal solutions 
to the safe transitions problem, but intended to illustrate a 
methodology. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by the Swedish 
government agency for innovation systems (VINNOVA) in 
the ESPLANADE project (ref 2016-04268).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.    Example of an elaborated 3-action protocol, robust against two manual failures. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Example of a simple transition protocol. 
 
 
109
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Johansson, J. Bergenhem, and M. Kaalhus, “Safe transitions of 
Responsibility in Highly Automated Driving,” DEPEND 2016: The 
Ninth International Conference on Dependability, July 2016. 
[2] SAE, “Surface Vehicle Recommended Practice – J3016 – Taxonomy 
and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation systems for 
On-Road Motor Vehicles”, September 2016. 
[3] C. Gold, D. Damböck, K. Bengler, and L. Lorenz, “Partially 
Automated Driving as a Fallback Level of High Automation,” 6. 
Tagung Fahrerassistenzsysteme. Der Wig zum Autom. Fahren., 2013. 
[4] National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, “Human Factors 
Evaluation of Level 2 And Level 3 Automated Driving Concepts Past 
Research, State of Automation Technology, and Emerging System 
Concepts,” 
http://www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NVS/Crash%20Avoidance/Tech
nical%20Publications/2014/812043_HF-
EvaluationLevel2andLevel3AutomatedDrivingConceptsV2.pdf,  
retrieved: June 2016. 
[5] M. H. Martens and A. P. Van Den Beukel, “The road to automated 
driving: Dual mode and human factors considerations,” IEEE Conf. 
Intell. Transp. Syst. Proceedings (ITSC) , 2013, pp. 2262–2267. 
[6] F. Naujoks, C. Mai, and A. Neukum, “The effect of urgency of take-
over requests during highly automated driving under distraction 
conditions,” Adv. Hum. Asp. Transp. Part I, vol. 7, July 2014, p. 431. 
[7] M. Blanco, J. Atwood, H. M. Vasquez, T.E. Trimble, V.L. Fitchett, J. 
Radlbeck, and J. F. Morgan, “Human factors evaluation of level 2 and 
level 3 automated driving concepts,” Report No. DOT HS 812 182, 
Washington, DC, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
2015. 
[8] N. Merat, A.H. Jamson, F. F. C. H. Lai, M. Daly, and O. M. Carsten, 
“Transition to manual: Driver behaviour when resuming control from 
a highly automated vehicle,” Transportation Research Part F: Traffic 
Psychology and Behaviour, 26, 1–9, 2014. 
[9] T. Helldin, G, Falkman, M. Riveiro, and S. Davidsson, “Presenting 
system uncertainty in automotive UIs for supporting trust calibration 
in autonomous driving,” In Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular 
Applications - AutomotiveUI ’13 (pp. 210–217). New York, New 
York, USA: ACM Press, 2013.  
[10] J. Beller, M. Heesen, and M. Vollrath, “Improving the Driver-
Automation 
Interaction: 
An 
Approach 
Using 
Automation 
Uncertainty,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society, 55(6), 1130–1141, 2013.   
[11] B. Seppelt, and J. Lee, ”Making adaptive cruise control (ACC) limits 
visible,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 2007.   
[12] S. Brandenburg and E. Skottke, “Switching from manual to automated 
driving and reverse: Are drivers behaving more risky after highly 
automated driving?,” IEEE 17th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC),  
pp. 2978–2983, 2014. 
[13] A. Marinik, R. Bishop, V. Fitchett, J. F.  Morgan, T. E. Trimble, and 
M. Blanco. “Human factors evaluation of level 2 and level 3 automated 
driving concepts: Concepts of operation,” Report No. DOT HS 812 
044. 
Washington, 
DC: 
National 
Highway 
Traffic 
Safety 
Administration., July 2014. 
[14] H. Orlady, and R. Barnes, “A Methodology for Evaluating the 
Operational Suitability of Air Transport Flight Deck System 
Enhancements,” SAE Technical Paper # 975642, 1997. 
[15] T. Inagaki, “Design of human–machine interactions in light of domain-
dependence of human-centered automation,” Cognition, Technology & 
Work, Volume 8, Issue 3, pp 161-167, 2006 
[16] T. Lackman, ”Utredning och kartläggning av tillfällen då människan 
räddat och förbättrat en situation där automatiken inte räckt till eller 
fungerat fel,” Strålskerhetsmyndigheten 2011:24, ISSN 2000-0456, 
2011. 
[17] J. Cunningham “Break the monotony,” Professional Engineering, 
20(20), 33-33, 2007. 
[18] D.B. Kaber, and L. J. Prinzel, “Adaptive and adaptable automation 
design: A critical review of the literature and recommendations for 
future research,” NASA/TM-2006-214504, September 2006.  
[19] R. Johansson, C. Bergenhem, and H. Sivencrona, “Challenges of 
Functional Safety  in ADAS and Autonomous Functions,” SAE World 
Congress, Detroit, April 2014. 
[20] J. A. Michon, “A Critical view of driver behavior models: What do we 
know, what should we do?,”,in L. Evans & R.C Schwing (eds.) Human 
behavior and traffic safety (pp. 485-520). New York: Plenum Press, 
1985. 
[21] R. Sukthankar, “Situation Awareness for Tactical Driving,” Ph.D. 
thesis, Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA, January 
1997. 
[22] T. X. P. Diem and M. Pasquier, “From Operational to Tactical Driving: 
A Hybrid Learning Approach for Autonomous Vehicles,” 10th Intl. 
Conf. on control, Automation, Robotics and Vision, Hanoi, Vietnam, 
December 2008.   
[23] ISO, "International Standard 26262 Road vehicles -- Functional 
safety", November 2011.
 
110
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

