Spectrum selection Through Resource Management in Cognitive Environment
 
Yenumula B. Reddy 
Grambling State University, Grambling, LA 71245, USA 
ybreddy@gram.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Spectrum is a scarce resource. The cognitive radio 
environments utilize the spectrum efficiently through the 
dynamic spectrum access approach. Game theory, genetic 
algorithms, neural network, marketing, and economic 
models became the catalysts to boost the dynamic spectrum 
access for efficient utilization of the spectrum. Combinations 
of these models may sometimes help better in the allocation 
of unused spectrum (spectrum holes) for cognitive users 
(secondary users). The paper introduced the electronic 
commerce model to identify a quality channel preferred by 
the secondary user. The rating of the spectrum (channel) 
was modeled with a combination of Sporas formula and 
fuzzy reputation model proposed by Carbo, Molina and 
Davila. The proposed model helps to select the quality 
channel to cognitive user. Further, the cooperative game 
theory was introduced to gain the better channel by the 
cognitive user. The channel selection also tested with 
automated collaborative filtering and case-based reason 
applications. 
Keywords-dynamic 
spectrum 
access; 
spectrum 
holes;  
cooperative games, fuzzy rating, cognitive user.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
The existing static allocation of the spectrum is a major 
hurdle for its efficient utilization. Current research 
concentrates on efficient allocation of the allotted 
spectrum without disturbing the licensed users [1-3, 36]. 
For efficient allocation of the unused spectrum, one must 
create algorithms to track the unused spectrum at any 
given time, location, and allocate to the needed users. The 
design requires appropriate detectors at the physical layer 
to sense and access the strategies at the MAC layer. If the 
traffic on the communication space is random, the fixed 
channel allocation method is inefficient. The flexible 
sensing policy helps better in the allocation of the channels 
to the most qualified user (s) while avoiding other 
competing users. 
For efficient use of the spectrum, one must detect the 
spectrum holes. The main function of cognitive user (CU) 
is sense, manage, mobile, and share the spectrum. It is 
difficult to search and detect the unused channels. The CU 
has to use a strategy to sense and manage the unused 
spectrum (channels). Game models help to detect the 
unused spectrum (available channels) and in assigning 
appropriate channel to the cognitive user. 
Detecting spectrum holes (unused spectrum) without 
any errors (false alarms) and then efficiently allocating the 
unused spectrum is a critical issue. Once the unused 
spectrum is detected, the cognitive user (CU) decides to 
transmit on a selected high utility channel based on 
detection analysis (outcome). Trusting the detector, 
minimizing the interferences, and avoid the collisions are 
part of the resource (spectrum) allocation problems. If the 
probability of detection accuracy is extremely high, then 
the channel will be allocated using the channel allocation 
policies. The channel allocation policy must avoid the 
collisions and interferences. 
The secondary users (cognitive users) adopt several 
methodologies to identify spectrum holes, learn from 
current communication environment, and exploit the 
opportunities to grab the spectrum without disturbing the 
primary user. This means that the cognitive users can 
create flexible access to the spectrum. They can partition 
the spectrum into a large number of orthogonal channels 
and complete the transmission simultaneously with a 
flexible set of channels. Such partition can be designed 
using a distributed approach for dynamic spectrum access. 
The approach may use graph models, game theory models, 
or any other Artificial Intelligence related models that 
quickly adapt to the varying traffic demands. These 
models determine the number of channels to use and 
maximize user throughput. These strategies follow the 
local maxima and continue until they achieve global 
maxima. 
To use the spectrum holes efficiently, we must create 
the spectrum sharing scenario where multiple secondary 
users (SUs) coexist in the same area and communicate 
with the same portion of the spectrum. The game models 
were tested in a share market related problems and 
currently introduced in wireless communications [4-8]. 
The spectrum sharing problem can be solved with the 
cooperation of economic models and the selfish 
motivation of game models. In cooperative and selfish 
environments, the CU (SU) must consider the presence of 
other SUs as well as primary users (PUs). In a cooperative 
environment, 
it 
is 
required 
to 
consider 
explicit 
communication between CUs [9] only. In the selfish 
environment, the SUs compete for the resources using 
machine learning models or game models [1, 10, 11, 36]. 
In recent years, the FCC has been promoting the 
technologies for the efficient utilization of the spectrum. 
The FCC‟s interest helped industries to introduce devices 
with various capabilities including frequency agility, 
adaptive modulation, transmit power control, and 
localization. Furthermore, the NeXT generation program 
of the Defense Advanced Research Program Agency 
46
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(DARPA) concentrated on technology based on using 
cognitive radios (CR) for efficient utilization of the 
spectrum. Therefore, dynamic spectrum access (DSA) 
became a promising approach for efficient utilization of 
the spectrum [12]. 
Dynamic spectrum access (DSA) is the sharing of 
existing spectrum by unlicensed users (secondary or 
cognitive users) with licensed users (primary users) 
without interference to the licensed users. Sharing of 
spectrum requires following certain rules and policies. 
Spectrum sharing rules and protocols that allow the 
bandwidth to share are discussed in [14]. The important 
point is the amount of information that the secondary 
systems or cognitive systems need to know to use the 
unused spectrum. The information includes the current 
state of other cognitive users accessing same resource, 
unutilized and underutilized spectrum. 
The key component for DSA is the sharing the 
spectrum with efficient allocation of the unused spectrum 
resources and the scheduling these resources among the 
SUs. Identification of the unused spectrum is the main part 
of the resource allocation. CRs play a major role in sensing 
unused spectrum intelligently making the appropriate 
decisions to gain access to unused spectrum. Game models 
help to select the unused spectrum intelligently and bring 
above the appropriate outcome for efficient allocation of 
resources. Since multiple users are involved in the process, 
security becomes an important factor. Therefore, CRs have 
additional work to deal with selfish and malicious users.  
There are many models developed including efficient 
channel utilization, channel modeling, and allocation of 
resources for underlay techniques [6, 15, 22]. Recently, the 
research is diverted towards the design of efficient models 
for overlay and underlay techniques. The game models are 
the new introduction for spectrum sharing and utilization 
and produces encouraging results [30, 6, 15, 22]. The 
researchers introduced the role of games and game models 
for efficient use of spectrum. Non-cooperative and 
congestion game models are more suitable to the overlay 
and underlay spectrum usage.  
Some of the game models presently trying to apply for 
overlay and underlay spectrum are zero-sum games, non 
zero-sum games, potential games, cooperative games, non-
cooperative games, and congestion games. The behavior 
and stability of game models is measured through Nash 
equilibrium. The fundamental is that the players must 
reach Nash equilibrium to provide stable condition. Some 
of the models are discussed below: 
 The zero-sum game is played between two players. 
The net result of two players that equals zero means 
that the gain of one player equates the loss of another 
player. Zero-sum game is not useful in the current 
problem because we have to utilize available spectrum 
efficiently. There is no loss involved. 
 The non-zero-sum game model can be used in overlay 
spectrum utilization because if one or more of the 
players (cognitive users) cooperate then some or all of 
the players will be benefited. In non-zero-sum game, 
the cooperation of secondary users helps for efficient 
use of spectrum. 
 The potential function in game model is a useful tool 
to analyze equilibrium properties of games. In 
potential game, the incentive of all players is mapped 
into a single function called potential function. In 
finite potential games [12, 13], the change in any 
player‟s utility exactly matches by a change in 
potential which concludes that the Nash equilibrium is 
a local maxima. If we treat the total incentive as 
utilizing unused spectrum, we may use the potential 
games to find the unused spectrum and make it 
available to the cognitive users. 
 In cooperative games, the players stay close together 
for the overall benefit of all players. In non-
cooperative games, each player makes independent 
decisions. Any cooperation in the game is self 
enforcing. The cooperative game may be useful in the 
current problem of efficient utilization of spectrum. 
 Congestion games [15, 16] are a class of non-
cooperative games where players share a common set 
of strategies. The utility of a player in congestion 
games depends on using a resource with the players 
that are using the same resource. That is the resulting 
payoff is a function of the number of active users 
(congestion). The authors used the congestion game 
model for better utilization of the unutilized spectrum 
by cognitive users. 
In this research, marketing models for rating of a 
channel, case-based reasoning and automatic collaborative 
filtering concepts were used to allocate the preferred 
channel to the SU. The concept of the cooperative game 
approach boosts the case-based reasoning and automatic 
filtering models in maximizing channel allocation to a 
prioritized SU. 
The Contribution: 
The contribution includes the design of the problem using 
game models with opportunistic access to the spectrum by 
secondary users at any given time slot. The reward and 
penalty for user action are introduced depending upon the 
channel gain by the SU. The problem solution is dealt with 
game model using the collaborative effort of SUs. The 
channel rating was obtained using a new approach called 
Sporas, Carbo, Molina and Davila (SCMD) method. The 
channel gain by SUs was explained using Algorithm 
SCMD. The algorithm was discussed using simulations 
with random data developed in the MATLAB language. 
The remaining part of the document is organized as 
follows: The related work and recent developments are 
47
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

discussed in Section 2. The channel selection in Fuzzy 
environment was discussed in Section 3. The problem 
formulation for total reward was discussed in Section 4. 
Section 5 introduces the case-based reasoning and 
automatic collaborating filtering. Sections 6 and 7 discuss 
the cooperative game model and preference of a channel 
for secondary users. The algorithm and simulations using 
examples with sample data were discussed in Section 8. 
The Section 9 concludes the results and outlines the future 
research. 
2. RELATED WORK 
The overview of the opportunistic spectrum access and 
taxonomy of dynamic spectrum access was provided by 
Zhao et al. [13]. Zhao et al. explained the confusion of the 
broad term CR as a synonym for dynamic spectrum access 
(DSA) and provides the clear distinction between the 
spectrum property rights, dynamic spectrum allocation, 
ultra wide band (spectrum underlay) and opportunistic 
spectrum access (spectrum overlay). Spectrum overlay 
(opportunistic spectrum access) and spectrum underlay 
techniques are also used for efficient allocation of the 
spectrum [31, 33]. Hidden Markov model to predict the 
primary user and efficient use of unused spectrum was 
discussed in [32]. Le and Hossain developed an algorithm 
for underlay and the quality of service (QoS) in code 
division multiple accesses (CDMA) with minimal 
interference was discussed in [34].  
Efficient allocation of unused spectrum through 
auction, bidding, and rating was discussed in [1, 8, 19, 31, 
32. The research contributions include the economic, game 
theory, stochastic, case based reasoning, Markov, and 
hybrid models for efficient allocation of unused spectrum. 
Auction-based dynamic spectrum allocation and lease the 
spectrum to CUs was discussed in [8]. The congestion 
game model for maximizing the spectrum utilization by 
secondary users with minimal interference to primary 
users was discussed in [31]. The Hidden Markov Models 
using Baum-Welch procedure to predict the future 
sequences infrequency and use them in computing the 
channel availability was discussed in [32]. The spectrum 
bidding behaviors and pricing models that maximize the 
revenue and better utilization of the spectrum was 
discussed in [19]. The market-based overlay model 
discussed in [7] imposes the spectrum mask to generate the 
better spectrum opportunities to secondary users.  
Furthermore, for efficient usage of unused spectrum, the 
primary user uses the economics competition for purchase 
of power allocation on each channel. This economic model 
uses the market equilibrium while controlling the 
interferences. The real-time spectrum auctions discussed 
by Gandhi et al. [19] include spectrum bidding behaviors 
and pricing models. The model discusses the spectrum 
demands and how to maximize the revenue for efficient 
utilization of the spectrum. 
The recent developments for efficient utilization of 
spectrum holes include the role of cognitive radio using 
economic, game, stochastic, and Markov decision process 
models [14-18]. The auction-based dynamic spectrum 
allocation to lease the spectrum by secondary users was 
discussed by Wu [8]. In their paper, they proposed a 
mechanism called “multi-winner spectrum auction with a 
collision resistant pricing strategy” to allocate the 
spectrum optimally. The greedy algorithm proposed by 
Wu helps to reduce the complexity in multi-band auctions. 
The game models for spectrum sharing and controlled 
interference is studied in [9, 20 -22]. Nie et al. [20] 
formulated the channel allocation as a potential game and 
showed the improvement of the overall network 
performance. Ji et al. [21] discussed the dynamic spectrum 
sharing through the game theory approach and discussed 
the analysis of the networks, the user‟s behavior, and the 
optimal analysis of the spectrum unused allocation. 
Halldorsson et al. [22] viewed channel assignment as a 
game and provided the price anarchy depending upon the 
assumptions of the underlying network. Finally, Liu et al. 
[9] used the congestion game model for spectrum sharing 
and base station channel adaptation. 
In the current research, we introduced the opportunistic 
channel access by secondary users represented by a tuple 
consisting of a number of users contesting, the resources 
available, and the strategies used by the users that create 
an objective function (utility function). Whenever a user 
tries to gain an action to a channel, three cases arise. The 
user request is often accepted, denied, and the user has no 
action. The award or penalty depends after acceptance of 
the user request.  
We further introduced the cooperative way of gaining a 
channel using SCMD model. These two models help to 
gain the channel access with the help of user‟s previous 
experience which includes channel weight and channel 
rating. The preference is calculated using nearest neighbor 
algorithm and/or mean square difference formula. These 
two formulas were used with users‟ cooperation activity. 
The cooperative activity includes their channels rating and 
user preferences. Using these concepts, the SU demands 
will be fulfilled. 
3. CHANNEL SELECTION IN FUZZY ENVIRONMENT 
Efficient allocation of the spectrum requires the 
coordination among the cognitive users (CU). The 
cognitive users prefer the high-rated spectrum. The high-
rating depends upon the spectrum in demand. The high 
reputation of the spectrum is the measurement of demand. 
The reputation of the spectrum is the continuous rating by 
users. Sporas formula can be used for updating the 
reputation of the spectrum and CMD (Carbo, Molina and 
Davila) formula for updating fuzzy ratting. The rating of 
the spectrum with loosely connected agents (cognitive 
users) is given in the following formula [3]. 
 
)
)(
(
1
1
1
1
i
i
i
i
i
R
C
R
R
R
  
(1) 
 
48
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

/)
(
1
1
1
1
1
)
(
D
R
i
i
e
R
 
 
(2) 
where: 
 -  effective number of ratings taken into account 
(
1). The change in rating should not be very 
large. 
  -  helps to slow down the incremental change 
i
C  - represents the rating given by the node i  
D -  range or maximum reputation value 
-  the acceleration factor to keep the  above certain 
value (> threshold). 
 
If the rating of the channel falls below the required 
threshold value (
) 0
(
i 1
i
R
C
) then cognitive users 
will not request that channel. That is, the current channel 
cannot provide Quality of Service (QoS). The Sporas 
formula was used to rate the channel and verify the 
current rating. Initially
i 1
i
R
C
was selected as positive 
and made
i
C as random and > 0.9. The Figure 1 show the 
channel rating increases initially and falls down later, 
since the value of 
i 1
i
R
C
becomes negative at later 
time. We assumed the following arbitrary values for 
simulations to calculate the channel ratings. 
=45;    
Ci > 0.9 (taken as random); 
D=0.95;  
=0.3 
Ri 1=0.95 
 
 
Figure 1: Channel Ratings using Sporas formula 
 
Sporas formula calculates the ratings of a channel 
using the previous ratings. We have taken
 value bigger 
to observe the change of ratings of channel slowly.  
The channel ratings are provided by the user. The 
ratings may be vague, uncertain, and incomplete. 
Representing such information in nature is fuzzy. The 
ratings of the channel are continuously changing through 
user supply information. The recent ratings (reputation of 
the channel) are modified (increase or decrease) using the 
user supplied approximate ratings. Therefore, current 
ratings depend upon the previous ratings.  
Let
iR 1
be the rating of the channel at 
th
i
)1
(
instant 
and 
i be the rating currently provided by the user after 
completion of the channel usage at instanti .  The new 
reputation of the channel depends upon these values 
i
and
iR 1
. The previous value will be used depends upon 
the learning factor
. Therefore, the reputation of the 
channel can be computed using the CMD formula [4, 5] 
as below. 
 
2
)
.(2
1.
i
i
i
R
R
 
 
 
(3) 
 
If the learning factor
0 means that the current rate 
is same as previous rate. If the learning rate
1means 
that the channel rate is constant. The learning rate will be 
updated each time by a factor 
using the Sporas 
formula. The update of learning factor is given as: 
 
2
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
The value for 
is provided through Sporas formula 
from equation (1). The channel rate will be increased or 
decreased depending upon the current value
. Figure 2 
shows the comparison of the channel ratings using Sporas 
formula, the fuzzy reputations using CMD formula, and 
CMD formula with learning updates using Sporas 
formula. The use of Sporas formula or CMD formula will 
not provide the stable ratings. Further, if updating the 
learning factor with Sporas formula, the channel rate will 
become stable quickly. The Figure 2 concludes that the 
best channel rate will be obtained with the combination of 
the recommendation process of CMD and learning 
updates with Sporas formula. The Figure 2 concludes that 
the Sporas formula or CMD formula will not provide the 
stable ratings of the channel. The combination of these 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.947
0.948
0.949
0.95
0.951
0.952
0.953
0.954
Number of Iterations (Rated the node)
Current Ratings
49
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

two models (hybrid model) will provide acceptable 
recommendation. The cognitive user will have a better 
choice if the user gets stable rating rather than vague 
ratings. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Comparison of Channel ratings (Sporas, CMD, and 
CMD& Sporas 
 
4. PROBLEM 
Let P denote the primary user (PU) and S denote the 
secondary users (SU). There are N primary users and M 
secondary users. Each primary user 
iP
)
...1
(
N
i
has 
bandwidth 
iB (
N
i
,...,1
) and secondary user
iS
)
...1
(
M
i
 competes along with other secondary users
j j i
S ,
 in the network to gain access to unused spectrum 
by PUs. The SU or cognitive users (CU) compete for the 
spectrum during sleeping time (unused time) of PU. The 
available spectrum slots depend upon the geographical 
locations. Each SU competes for spectrum and sense it at 
the beginning of each time slot. 
The availability of
jth
primary channel
)
...1
(
N
j
 
for 
ith
secondary user
)
...1
(
M
i
depends upon the 
probability 
of 
the 
channel 
availability 
and 
the 
opportunistic access by the 
ith
SU. Suppose, there are 
primary channels available to M secondary users 
competing at any given time slott , then each SU has 
chance to obtain the channel at time slot t is
/ M
. 
Therefore, the opportunity for the 
ith
SU to access the
available primary channels at any time slot t is 
 
K
t
S k
i
/
( )
, for
M
i
 
 
The total opportunities for all secondary users at any time 
slot for 
available primary channels is  
M
i
i
M
i
ik
K t
t
S
1
1
( )
( )
and 
T
t
the time unit. 
 
The opportunistic channel access is represented by the 
tuple
)
,
,
( ,
U
S
, where S is the set of SUs competing 
for resources 
)
( ik
which is a set of channels 
available to SU at any given time slott , and each SU uses 
the strategy
that generates the utility
U
u
. For 
each action of the secondary user
iS , the user senses the 
spectrum with a strategy
i . The sensing action may get 
success/fail with reward 
iR which is 1 or -1. The channel 
access tuple can be represented as a game, where each SU 
in the game uses a strategy to compete for the resource 
called spectrum that costs for gaining the specific utility as 
the object function. During the process the SU may gain or 
lose the opportunity and generate the reward or penalty. 
Therefore, the game model G is represented as  
 
}
,
,
{ ,
U
S
G
  
 
 
 (5) 
 
The total benefits are the sum of all gains minus the 
sum of all penalties. Therefore, the total reward
is given 
by 
 
M
i
T
t
t
iR
1
1
 
 
 
 
(6) 
 
and 
is a constant 
1
0
. 
the resource at time slot t
user i fails to obtain
if
no action
for
user i gains resource with strategy i at time slot t
if
t
iR
1
0
1
 (7) 
 
The sensing policy of the cognitive user decides the 
action to be taken at a given time slot. Once the channel is 
sensed as free then the allocation policy decides which 
secondary user has priority to gain access. The average 
reward per time slot (T ) is calculated as 
/T
and will 
be used for throughput criteria. 
The channel gained by the SU depends upon the 
current state and policy of the assignment that maximizes 
the total reward. Therefore, the channel assignment to the 
SU depends upon probability of availability of a channel 
and the probability of getting a channel. The probability of 
availability of a channel to a SU at any time slot t is 
50
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

/ M
and the probability of assignment of the channel 
will be obtained by using the SCMD [23 - 25]. 
5. CASE-BASED REASONING AND AUTOMATIC 
COLLABORATIVE FILTERING 
In the selection of a product, CBR is used when 
experts find it hard to articulate their thought processes 
because the knowledge acquisition for these cases would 
be extremely difficult to such domains and is likely to 
produce incomplete or inaccurate results. CBR systems 
allow the case-base to establish characterized cases 
incrementally. Therefore, the case of SU is established 
incrementally for priority policy. A widely used formula 
for CBR in identifying and recommending similar 
channels (spectrum) is the nearest neighbor retrieval, 
which is based on weighted Euclidean distance [35]. 
The nearest neighbor algorithm deals with the 
similarity between the priority of stored cases (channels) 
and newly available cases (channel). The outcome depends 
upon the matching of the weighted sum of features. The 
toughest problem is to determine the weights of the 
features of the resource (spectrum). The limitation of this 
approach depends upon the converge to the correct 
solution and retrieval times. A typical algorithm for 
calculating the nearest neighbor (matching) is the one used 
by Cognitive Systems Remind software reported in 
Kolodner [24]. The nearest neighbor algorithm with 
weight of a 
ith
feature (
iw ), similarity functionsim, 
input case of 
ith
feature
if I
 , and retrieval case of 
th
i
feature 
if R
is given by (
 ) [24]: 
 
8)
(
)
,
(
1
1
n
i
i
n
i
R
i
I
i
i
w
f
sim f
w
    
 
Equation (8) calculates the nearest neighbor of the best 
channel from the available channels of SU. If the 
difference between the 
ith
and
jth
feature is negligibly 
smaller than the two features are closely matched. 
Equation (8) calculates the highly rated and close 
matching interests of the 
ith
user channel. The selection 
will be compared with ACF. The final selection will be the 
combined result of ACF and CBR. 
Automated 
collaborated 
filtering 
(ACF) 
is 
a 
recommendation of a product based on word of mouth. In 
ACF, if user A‟s ratings of a channel (or channels) 
matches with another user B‟s ratings then it is possible to 
predict the ratings of a new channel for A, if B‟s rating for 
that channel is available. In other words, let us assume that 
if users X, Y, and Z have common interest in the channels 
C1, C2, and C3, then if X, Y did high rate of channel C4, 
then we can recommend the C4 for Z. That is, we can 
predict that user Z bids high for that channel C4, since C4 
is close interest of Z. The approximate bid of a kth bidder 
can be calculated by storing the bids of current bidders on 
the spectrum. 
The ACF uses the mean squared difference formula 
[27] with two users. Let U and J  be two SUs interested 
in a channel. Let 
U f
and
J f
be the ratings of U and J on 
a feature f of the channel. Let
be the set of features of 
the channel. Both U and J are rated and f
. The 
difference between two persons U and J in terms of their 
interests on a channel is given by [27]: 
 
S
f
f
f
U J
J
U
2
,
)
(
|
|
1
 
 (9) 
 
The ACF recommendations are two types, invasive 
and noninvasive based on the user preferences [1, 28, 29]. 
An invasive approach requires explicit user feedback, 
where the preferences can vary between 0 and 1. In the 
noninvasive approach, the preferences are interactive and 
Boolean values. In the noninvasive rating, zero (0) means 
the user does not rate the item and one (1) means rated. 
Therefore in noninvasive cases, it requires more data for 
any decision. In ACF systems, all user recommendations 
are taken into account, even though they are entered at 
different times. More user recommendations provide good 
strength for the ACF recommendation system and the new 
recommendations solely depends upon the data. 
6. COOPERATIVE GAME MODEL 
The secondary users rate the spectrum after the use. 
The rating will be updated (on a channel or spectrum) 
using SCMD. At a later time, the ratings will help the CUs 
to select appropriate spectrum to match their requirements. 
In the same way, the users rate the spectrum after they use 
in cooperative game model.  
In cooperative games, the competition between 
coalitions of players groups the players and enforces 
cooperative behavior. The players choose the strategies by 
a consensus decision making process. It is assumed that 
each player has more than one choice. The combination of 
choices may win/loose/draw with an assigned payoff. The 
players know the rules and select the higher payoff. The 
payoff will be calculated using equation (7) and the 
channel selection with equations (8) and (9). This 
concludes that the channel selection will be done using the 
CBR and ACF models and cooperative behavior of the 
players. 
The assignment of the channel to SU will depend upon 
the characteristic function 
as defined below: 
Definition 1: The tuple 
(M, )
is a cooperative game 
only if
is monotone. This concludes that the cost 
assignment is positive. That is, 
)
(
)
(
'S
S
for all
M
S
S
'
. 
51
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The 
channel 
preferences 
can 
be 
arranged 
monotonically using the definition 1, equation (4), and 
equation (5). The SU will then choose the best choice from 
the available channels. For example, let us consider the 
similar interest SUs into a sub group 
'
S where
S
S'
. 
The similar interest SUs on a particular available channel 
needs the priority of these users. The best available 
channel that will be calculated using equation (4) and 
equation (5) then provide the difference between two users 
in terms of their interest. Therefore, it is easy to assign the 
closely matching channel to one of the SU. 
In a cooperative game, an allocation is simply a overall 
value created and received by a particular user. For 
example if 
ix for
n
i
...
3,2,1
, a collection of values 
related to a channel, then the allocation is efficient if 
ix is 
in
)
(S . That is 
)
(
1
S
x
n
i
i
.  
 
This shows that each player (SU) must get as much as 
they need without interacting with other users. The 
creation of quantity 
)
(S means the efficiency of its 
created values and gain of access to the appropriate 
channel by a SU. 
Definition 2: The marginal contribution of a player is the 
amount of the overall value created and the value shrinks 
if that player has to leave the game. 
Therefore, 
in 
a 
collaborative 
effort, 
marginal 
contribution members deduce something about the overall 
contribution to a particular game. This is a justification for 
a cooperative game related to users‟ contribution and leads 
towards the justification of channel selection. 
7. PREFERENCE OF THE CHANNEL 
Let us assume that there are four SUs, rated using eight 
channels that were used before. The weights are the user 
ratings and the preferences are the similarity function sim
. The sim is based on availability and retrieval 
(preference). Let the preference selection rate vary as
1
0
sim
. Similarly, the user rating (weight) also 
varies
1
0
iw
. The preference of a channel is 
calculated with randomly selected values as in Table I. 
The Table 1 uses the abbreviations as below: 
 
U#   =   User number 
C#   =   Channel Number 
CR   =   Channel Rating 
CRR   =   Channel Retrieval Rate 
w     =   weight assigned to channel 
sim =   Average weight 
 
TABLE I: SPECTRUM BIDDING WITH N CHANNELS AND K USERS 
U # 
C# 
CR 
CRR 
sim 
w 
1 
1 
0.5 
0.6 
0.55 
0.6 
2 
2 
0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
0.5 
1 
4 
0.6 
0.5 
0.55 
0.5 
4 
3 
0.8 
0.7 
0.75 
0.7 
3 
5 
0.2 
0.3 
0.25 
0.3 
2 
8 
0.5 
0.6 
0.55 
0.6 
1 
7 
0.8 
0.8 
0.8 
0.9 
2 
6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.7 
The 
value in equation (4) is for the nearest 
neighbor.  The calculations are provided in table I and the 
value is given by: 
 
=0.6948 
 
Therefore, the channels closest and greater than the 
value will have a better choice of the selection by the SU. 
In the above table, the channels 3 and 7 have primary 
choice and channels 1, 4, 6, and 8 will get second choice 
for selection. Channel 5 has low priority. 
In the case of ACF, we will consider the interest of two 
users on a particular channel and their ratings. In this case, 
we will look into the quality of service (QoS) and ratings 
on a particular channel by the two users. The interest 
factor will be calculated using the channel features called 
QoS and Ratings as shown in Table II.  
 
TABLE II CHANNEL RATING BY TWO USERS FOR 
PREFERENCE 
User# 
Rating 
QoS 
 
1 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
2 
0.8 
0.75 
0.9 
 
Using the difference formula in equation (5), and the 
data from Table II, the 
value is calculated and is given 
by: 
= 0.0139 
 
In the current case, since the difference between the 
interests of two users is close to 1%, the two users will bid 
for the channel. The highest bidder wins the channel or 
highest preference by the priority allocation will get the 
channel. The preference (priority) may be a hand-shaking 
situation, where a user is moving from one access point to 
another. Therefore, in the current channel allocation the 
cooperative games use the economic model for preference 
52
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and allocation of the channel. The characteristic function is 
based on CBR or ACF model. 
8. SIMULATIONS 
We will discuss the efficient utilization of spectrum by 
secondary users by gaining a preferred. The following 
algorithm 
CBR-ACF 
calculates 
and 
assigns 
the 
appropriate channel using priorities to SUs at any given 
time. 
 
Algorithm CBR-ACF 
a) Find available channels (generate randomly) 
b) Use the nearest neighbor algorithm (CBR) and 
o 
find the channel (s) closest to user1 preference 
o 
find the channel (s) closest to user 2 preference 
c) Using ACF formula find the user preferences for the 
same available channels between two users 
d) Assign the channel using CBR and ACF data 
e) Repeat the steps (a) to (d) for another user 
 
The Algorithm CBR-ACF selects the channel closest 
to the user choice. If more than one user is interested in the 
same channel, then the system must select the preferred 
user.  
The simulations were conducted using random data. 
The program was written in MATLAB. In the current 
case, we assumed 99 channels. The values for CR, CRR, 
and w were assigned using a random function. The sim
values are calculated for each channel. Many simulations 
were conducted and recorded for key explanation of 
algorithm CBR-ACF. 
 
Case 1 
The following data was obtained using the Algorithm 
CBR-ACF and equations (4) and (5). Basing the 
simulations data, we concluded the current available 
channel will be allocated to the preferred user. 
=0.5079 
Free channels: 51     8     6    63    62 
Preferred channel: 51 
Preferred CRR for this channel: 0.5136 
ACF for this channel calculated for 3 user cases: 
User1 ACF = 0.0241 
User2 ACF =0.0378 
User3 ACF =0.0295 
According to this data user 1 will be assigned the channel 
51. 
 
Case 2 
=0.4769 
Free channels: 71  50   47   6    68 
Preferred channel:  6 
Preferred CRR for this channel: 0.4218 
ACF for this channel calculated for 3 user cases: 
User1 ACF = 0.0381 
User2 ACF =0.0298 
User3 ACF =0.0542 
 
According to this data user 2 will be assigned the channel 
6. 
For example, consider the case 2; the CBR assigns the 
available channel to user 1 with its priorities. The priorities 
are calculated using the closest matching of ratings and 
combined decision using CBR and ACF. The decision is 
the collaborative since the outcome was used users‟ 
priorities and recording their suggestions through weights, 
channel ratings, and priorities. We are working on the 
reward and penalty depending upon the assignment. We 
are also working on the bidding policy, when two users are 
closely matches for request. 
9. CONCLUSION 
Recent developments show that the there are different 
approaches for the efficient utilization of the spectrum.  
The approaches include genetic algorithms, neural 
networks, stochastic models, game models, and economic 
models. These models are used display the by dynamic 
spectrum access concept as a catalyst for efficient 
utilization of unutilized and underutilized spectrum. The 
channel-gain in an opportunistic and collaborative way is 
also a part of efficient utilization of the spectrum. In the 
current research, we introduced a new approach using 
case-based reasoning and automatic collaborative filtering 
with the cooperative game approach. The combination 
brings the cooperative game concept in the selection of a 
channel. The research was presented as a basic game 
model and channel gain by the SUs. The channel 
assignment to SUs was done by using the CBR and ACF 
models. These approaches were demonstrated using 
examples through a proposed Algorithm CBR-ACF.  
The future work involves the identification of preferred 
SUs using reward and punishment model. Furthermore, 
automatic collection of spectrum holes and prioritizing the 
SUs using economic and biological models will save time 
in the fast allocation of channels to SUs. Automatic 
prioritizing also saves time and improves the quality of 
channel assignment (to a preferred and needed user). 
 
Acknowledgment 
The research work was supported by Air Force Research 
Laboratory/Clarkson Minority Leaders Program through 
contract No: FA8650-05-D-1912. The author wishes to 
express appreciation to Dr. Connie Walton, Grambling 
State University, for her continuous support. 
 
53
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

References 
[1] 
Reddy, Y. B., “Efficient Spectrum Allocation Using Case-Based 
Reasoning 
and 
Collaborative 
Filtering 
Approaches”, 
SENSORCOMM 2010, July 18-25, 2010, pp. 375-380. 
[2] 
Wang, W.,  and Liu, X., “List-coloring based channel allocation 
for open spectrum wireless networks,” in Proc. of IEEE VTC, 
2005, pp. 690-694. 
[3] 
Sankaranarayanan, S., Papadimitratos, P., Mishra, A., and 
Hershey, S., “A Bandwidth Sharing Approach to Improve 
Licensed Spectrum Utilization,” in Proc. of the first IEEE 
Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access 
Networks, 2005, pp. 279-288. 
[4] 
MacKenzie, A.,  and DaSilva, L., Game Theory for Wireless 
Engineers. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, ISBN: 1-59829-016-9, 
2006. 
[5] 
Blumrosen, L., and Dobzinski,S., “Welfare Maximization in 
Congestion Games”, ACM Conference on Electronics commerce 
(EC „06), Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 2006, pp. 1224-1236. 
[6] 
Milchtaich, I., “Congestion Games with Player-specific Payoff 
Functions”, Games and Electronic Behavior, 13, 1996, pp. 111-
124. 
[7] 
Xie, Y., “Competitive Market Equilibrium for Overlay Cognitive 
Radio”, http://www.stanford.edu/~yaoxie/ee359win09, Stanford 
University, 2009 (last access: May 17, 2011),  
[8] 
Wu, Y., Wang,B., Ray Liu,K.J., and Charles Clancy,T., 
“Collusion-Resistant 
Multi-Winner 
Spectrum 
Auction 
for 
Cognitive Radio Networks” IEEE Proc. of GLOBECOM 2008, pp. 
1-5. 
[9] 
Liu, H., Krishnamachari, B., and Zhao, Q., “Cooperation and 
Learning in Multiuser Opportunistic Spectrum Access”, CogNets 
Workshop, IEEE ICC 2008, Beijing, China, pp. 487-492. 
[10] Reddy, Y. B., “Detecting Primary Signals for Efficient Utilization 
of Spectrum Using Q-Learning”, ITNG 2008, April 7 - 9, 2008, pp. 
360-365. 
[11] Reddy, Y. B., Smith, H., and Terrell, M., “Congestion game 
models for Dynamic Spectrum sharing”, ITNG 2010, April 12 - 
15, 2010, pp. 897-902. 
[12] Akyildiz, I. F., Lee, W., Vuran, M. C., and Mohanty, S., “NeXt 
generation/dynamic spectrum access/cognitive radio wireless 
networks: A survey”, Computer Neworks, Volume 50, September 
2006, pp. 2127-2159. 
[13] Zhao, Q., and Sadler, B., “A Survey of Dynamic Spectrum Access: 
Signal Processing, Networking, and Regulatory Policy”, IEEE 
Signal Processing Magazine, Vol. 24, 79, 2007, pp. 79-89. 
[14] Etkin, R., Parekh, A., and Tse, D., “Spectrum Sharing for 
Unlicensed Bands”,  IEEE Jr. on selected areas in communications, 
vol. 25, no. 3, 2007, pp. 517-528. 
[15] Liu, M., and Wu, Y.,  “Spectrum Sharing as Congestion Games”, 
46th Allerton Conf. Comm. Control and Computing, Monticello, 
IL, Sept. 2008, pp. 1146-1153. 
[16] Reddy, Y. B., “Cross-layer based Approach for Efficient Resource 
Allocation in Wireless Cognitive Networks“, Distributed Sensor 
Networks, DSN 2008, November 16 – 18, 2008, Orlando, Florida, 
USA, pp. 385-390 
[17] Liu, K., Xiao, X., and Zhao, Q., “ Opportunistic Spectrum Access 
in Self Similar Primary Traffic”, EURASIP Journal on Advances 
in Signal Processing: Special Issue on Dynamic Spectrum Access 
for Wireless Networkin, 2009, pp. 1-6. 
[18] Liu, H., and Krishnamachari, B., “Cooperation and Learning in 
Multiuser Opportunistic Spectrum Access”, CogNets Workshop, 
IEEE ICC 2008, Beijing, China, pp. 487 – 492. 
[19] Gandhi, S., Buragohain, C., Cao, L., Zheng, H., and Suri, S., “A 
General Framework for Wireless Spectrum Auctions”, 2nd IEEE 
International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum 
Access Networks, DySPAN 2007, April 2007, pp. 22-33. 
[20] Nie, N.,  and Comaniciu, C., “Adaptive Channel Allocation 
Spectrum Etiquette for Cognitive radio Networks”, Mobile 
Networks and Appls., 11, 2006, pp. 269 - 278. 
[21] Ji, Z., and Liu, K. J. R., “Dynamic Spectrum Sharing: A Game 
Theoretical Overview”, IEEE Comm. Magazine, May 2007, pp. 
88-94. 
[22] Halldorsson, M.M., Halperm, J. Y.,  Li Li, and Mirrokni, V.S., “On 
Spectrum Sharing Games”, Proceedings of the twenty-third annual 
ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing, 2004, 
pp. 107-114. 
[23] Chen, H., Wu, H., Hu, J., and Gao, C., “Agent-based Trust 
Management Model for Wireless Sensor Networks”, International 
Conference on Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering”, 2008, pp. 
150-154. 
[24] Carbo, J., Molina, J.M., and Davila, J., “Trust Management 
through Fuzzy Reputation”, International Journal of Cooperative 
Information Systems”, Vol. 12, Issue 1, 2003, pp. 135-155. 
[25] Carbo, J., Molina, J.M., and Davila, J., “Comparing Predictions of 
Sporas vs. a Fuzzy Reputation System”, 3rd International 
Conference on Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Systems, 200, pp. 147-153.. 
[26] Kolodner, J. L., Case-Based Reasoning, Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. 
[27] Cunningham, 
P., 
“Intelligent 
Support 
for 
E-commerce”, 
Proceedings of First International Symposium on Intelligent 
Systems, 2002, pp. 210-214. 
[28] Hays, C., Cunningham, P., and Smyth, B., “A Case-based 
Reasoning View of Automated Collaborative Filtering”, Case-
Based Reasoning Research and Development, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, 2001, Volume 2080/2001, pp. 234-248 
[29] Sollenborn, M., and Funk, P., “Category-Based Filtering and User 
Stereotype Cases to Reduce the Latency Problem in Recommender 
Systems”, 6th European Conference on Case Based Reasoning, 
Springer Lecture Notes, 2002, Advances in Case-Based Reasoning, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2002, Volume 2416/2002, pp. 
285-290. 
[30] .8.Zhu Ji and K. J. Ray Liu., “Dynamic Spectrum Sharing: A 
Game Theoretical Overview”, IEEE Comm. Magazine, May 2007, 
pp. 88-94. 
[31] Y. B. Reddy and Heather Smith., “Congestion Game Model for 
Efficient Utilization of Spectrum”, SPIE, 2010, 7707 - 9 V. 1 (p.1 
to 12) 
[32] M. Sharma, A. Sahoo, and K. D. Nayak., “Channel Modeling 
Based on Interference Temperature in Underlay Cognitive 
Wireless Networks”, ISWCS, 2008, pp. 224-228. 
[33] V. D. Chakravarthy., “Evaluation of Overlay/Underlay Waveform 
via SD-SMSE Framework for Enhancing Spectrum Efficiency”, 
Ph. D. Thesis, Wright State University, 2008. 
[34] L. B. Le and E. Hossain., “Resource Allocation for Spectrum 
Underlay in Cognitive radio Networks”, IEEE Transaction on 
Wireless Communications, Vol. 7, No. 2, 2008, pp. 5306-5315. 
[35] Wettschereck, D., and Aha, D. W., “Weighting Features”, Proc. Of 
the 1st International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning, 
Springer, New York, USA, 1995, pp. 347-358. 
[36] Zheng, H., and Peng, C., “Collaboration and Fairness in 
Opportunistic Spectrum Access”, in Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Comm. (ICC), 2005, pp. 3132-3136. 
. 
 
54
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

