Statistical Convergence Investigation of Routing
Protocols
Frank Bohdanowicz, Marcel Jakobs, Christoph Steigner
University of Koblenz
Germany
{bohdan,zimon,steigner}@uni-koblenz.de
Abstract—The performance of routing algorithms can only be
compared if they undergo a comprehensive convergence analysis.
In this paper, we present a new approach for convergence
analysis in order to evaluate the beneﬁt of a new distance vector
routing algorithm, which is no longer affected by the well-known
Counting-to-Inﬁnity (CTI) problem which still occurs in topology
loops. The newly developed Routing with Metric-based Topology
Investigation (RMTI) protocol only uses event-triggered updates.
Thus, the convergence time and the update trafﬁc can be reduced.
Convergence properties of RMTI are compared with the Routing
Information Protocol (RIPv2) under the impeded condition of
provoked CTIs. In this way, the performance beneﬁt of RMTI
can be shown in comparison to RIPv2. The major focus of this
paper are the approaches to measure the convergence time of
routing protocols in a newly developed test environment. Special
effort is directed at minimizing measurement perturbations by
the separation of the online data capturing task from the ofﬂine
data evaluation task. The results show that this convergence
measurement method is of universal quality. RMTI is a newly
competitive intra-domain routing protocol which can perform
ﬁltering policies in contrast to other intra-domain routing pro-
tocols.
Keywords- distance vector routing; metric-based topology in-
vestigation; routing loops; counting to inﬁnity problem; routing
evaluation
I. INTRODUCTION
Routing is the exchange of routing information between
routers to provide them with reachability information about
destination nodes in the computer network. Decentrally run-
ning routing protocols can repair interrupted links if the
network topology contains enough loops. In case of a link
failure, loops provide alternative links to the same destination
node in a network.
However, loops in the topology are also the main reason for
the occurrence of routing loops. A routing loop is a circular
trace of a routing update message which returns to the same
router, either directly from the neighbor router or via a loop
topology. It is crucial to detect and to prevent routing loops
since they can consume a large amount of network bandwidth
and impact the end-to-end performance of the network.
All common routing protocols cope more or less efﬁciently
with the routing loop problem as a routing system is a
distributed system. Therefore, new routing protocols should
deal with topology loops as well as routing loops in an efﬁcient
way in order to provide convergence and stability for the
network.
The newly developed Routing with Metric-based Topology
Investigation (RMTI) protocol [2] can detect routing loops
and omit the Counting-to-Inﬁnity (CTI) problem. The well-
known CTI-problem stands for the characteristic routing-loop
situation in RIP-networks. In a CTI situation the routing
metric is constantly increased due to circulating routing update
messages in a routing loop. RMTI accelerates the convergence
time and reduces the update trafﬁc by only using event-
triggered updates together with neighbor-alive-notiﬁcations. In
contrast to this new approach the common RIP protocol is
mainly based on periodic update messages.
To compare the convergence time of routing protocols, a
new test environment has been developed. This test environ-
ment consists of the following components (see Figure 1):
• A computer network based on virtual linux machines
connected by software bridges.
• An online data capturing facility to collect characteristic
data during a test run.
• A script-based event generator capable of triggering fail-
ure events.
• A topology generator able to generate many different but
regularly structured topologies (see Figure 4) and random
topologies with pre-deﬁned constraints.
• An ofﬂine statistical analysis tool to visualize the results
of a test run using plots and graphs.
Network failures which cause CTIs can be triggered, recorded
and evaluated with the test environment. The update trafﬁc
together with a time stamp is recorded during the online data
capturing phase. In the ofﬂine data analysis phase, the events,
starting with the ﬁrst network failure up to the end of the
convergence process, are analyzed.
A major concern of this research is to include and compare
the CTI-problem of common RIP algorithms into the con-
vergence analysis. A convergent state in a distributed routing
system is given when all forwarding tables in the routers
contain the optimal next hop entries for the given network
topology. The convergent state is not given if the forwarding
tables do not offer the optimal next hop entries due to a certain
network failure.
This paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, other
approaches of convergence tests and routing protcols are
137
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

reﬂected. In Section 3, the newly developed test environ-
ment is introduced. In Section 4, the tested routing protocol
is presented. In Section 5, an overview about the routing
algorithms tested so far is shown. In Section 6, the tested
topologies and the convergence measurement technique is
described. Furthermore the results of the convergence analysis
are discussed in this section. The paper ends with an outlook
of further research items.
II. RELATED WORK
Newly developed routing protocols or enhancements to
existing routing protocols are usually tested in simulation
test environments. They only analyze a certain part of the
respective protocol in order to reveal its features. The authors
of [11] and [26] analyze their protocol enhancements by
simulation techniques. The test environment described in this
paper is not based on simulation, but on emulation technique.
It can analyze routing software which is fully implemented
and ready to be used, e.g., in company networks.
The test environment is based on the Virtual Network
User Mode Linux (VNUML) system [20]. A system especially
developed for protocol testing in a virtual machine infrastruc-
ture. Virtual machines are generated with User Mode Linux
(UML)[6][7] and are connected together by software bridges
[25]. In order to generate many different network topologies
and link failure situations, the VNUML system has to be
extended by an automatic script software. This script software
can also collect a great deal of data within log ﬁles.
Currently, there is hardly any research on convergence
analysis in deployed networks. Therefore this newly approach
is presented in the next section. Several enhanced distance
vector protocols have been proposed in order to avoid routing
loops as well as the CTI problem. In contrast to RMTI,
many of these approaches increase the amount of information
exchanged among the nodes of a network.
The Ad hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV) proto-
col [16] by Perkins extends the distance vector information
originally based on subnet N, next hop NH and distance D,
to a 4-tuple (N,NH,D,SEQ), where SEQ denotes the sequence
number. This approach is loop free [15] but it is not compatible
with RIP due to the required protocol changes.
The Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP)
used by Cisco is based on the DUAL algorithm proposed
by Garcia-Luna-Aceves. DUAL provides loop-free paths at
every moment, which was proven in [10]. EIGRP is a Cisco
proprietary routing protocol and not compatible with RIP
because of a completely different protocol design.
A solution called Source Tracing has been introduced by
Cheng et al [5] and Faimann [9]. This approach provides
additional information in updates and routing tables by adding
a ﬁrst-hop indication to the path. In this way loops can be
recognized recursively.
These protocols avoid the CTI problem because they pro-
vide loop freedom. Likewise, they are not compatible with the
RIPv2 standard or are proprietary approaches.
	A
BCDAEFE
	E
BE
	
BE
	E
EAEE
	A	E


EAEEF
	
E
C
A


A


F

A	




*
+
CEF
,EA	
CDB	E
CEE
E
CEE
-	
-.	
EAEE
*
+
	

/
/
F

F	A	E 
EAEE

E
!
E
EAEE	
Fig. 1.
Test Environment
In contrast to these approaches, we aim to provide a solution
that has a complete and sound backward compatibility with
every existing implementation of RIPv2 [12]. The enhanced
knowledge is based on information already provided by the
RIP protocol. Therefore, a new RMTI router can be deployed
at selected nodes in an existing RIPv2-domain.
III. TEST ENVIRONMENT
Various tests with different topologies have been carried out
in order to investigate the convergence properties of different
routing protocols. For an automatic execution of these test
runs a script software was written to perform the following
operations which
• starts many different VNUML network scenarios in suc-
cession
• uses a test script of certain network failure situations (e.g.,
link corruption, router collapse)
• controls each VNUML scenario during runtime
• causes runtime failures in a predicted manner
• collects data needed for the ofﬂine evaluation
• evaluates the captured data during an ofﬂine phase with
respect to convergence time and network trafﬁc.
The measurements are carried out by the analysis of au-
tomatically generated tcpdump ﬁles [21] after the test run.
Speciﬁc network data are logged and analyzed during each
test run. This approach prevents measurement pertubations as
only speciﬁc data are captured during runtime.
The separation of the test script ﬁle and the topology
discription ﬁle (see Figure 1) allows for ﬂexible design of
test runs. The test script ﬁles deﬁne the topologies and the
frequency of test runs. Each test run is divided in an online
and ofﬂine phase (see Figure 1) in order to distort the runs as
less as possible by the data capturing. This test environment
138
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

is needed to provide measurement results that are as close to
reality as possible in order to analyze convergence properties
of routing algorithms.
The tested routing protocol implementations are part of the
widely used Quagga Routing Software Suite [17]. The RMTI
algorithm is implemented as a re-engineered version of the
Quagga RIPv2 router. The test environment can carry out up to
1000 and more test runs where each run can be fully controlled
and analyzed.
During a test run all characteristic actions and changes are
saved with a corresponding timestamp for later synchroniza-
tion. When the online test phase is ﬁnished the captured data
are evaluated by a statistic analysis in the ofﬂine phase.
The test environment is developed for evaluating complex
and comprehensive test runs without any human interaction.
The environment can be conﬁgurated for many different test
runs which cover various network failure situations. Each step
of a test run can be pre-determined precisely by the test script.
Many test cases including random or previously deﬁned link
and router failures can be performed.
To be able to test various failure scenarios that could occur
in networks, the test environment allows for the opportunity
to cause packet losses or transmission delays for single or
multiple devices of one or more routers. In order to expose
the distance vector routing algorithms to Counting-to-Inﬁnity
situations, the test environment can cause these situations by
retaining certain update messages on certain router ports.
The high degree of automation of the test environment
enables to gather a great deal of result data that can be
statistically analyzed. Together with the network environment
for the test cases, very detailed insight into the behavior
of common routing algorithms can be obtained. The results
of the test runs can be summarized and then visualized as
diagrams. With this approach, the relationship of the various
test parameters as well as a performance comparison between
the different routing algorithms can be shown. The evaluation
of these results enables the user to depict these relationships
as mathematical functions. These functions are approximated
using regression analysis. Additionally, the representation of
frequency distributions such as in Figure 13 is supported. The
test environment can average the results before analyzing them
with statistical methods. It can create a network graph of the
network topology even if the topology is randomly generated.
Before the test starts, topology properties of the network
like diameter, articulations, leaves and number of nodes, edges
and circles [8] are analyzed ofﬂine and saved in the topology
description (see Figure 1). During the runtime of the test, all
characteristic events are saved as routing update packets with
a timestamp for the ofﬂine analysis after the run. After the
runtime the convergence properties, such as convergence time
or trafﬁc amount, are calculated with the saved update trafﬁc
and information about the topology tested.
As the test environment is modularly designed it can be used
for the comparison and testing of other intra domain routing
algorithms as well. For this purpose, only the speciﬁcations
for the ofﬂine analysis module have to be modiﬁed. This can
be done by identifying the update packet which leads to the
convergence of the network.
A. Detailed description of test and measurement procedure
To measure the convergence time of a certain network, the
network has to be changed from a convergent state to an in-
convergent state by changing the status of certain links or
routers in order to cause a link or router failure.
In order to calculate convergence properties of the network
after a test run, the protocol analyzer tcpdump [21] is used
to capture the existing network trafﬁc. To get proper results
the routing daemons in the routers have to reach a convergent
state before the status of certain links or routers is changed
to cause a failure. Then the sequence of state changes is
recorded starting with the failure state and ending with the next
convergent state. When the network has reached its convergent
state, the run is automatically stopped and the next run follows.
After the online capturing of the router states is completed,
the ofﬂine evaluation of the states can be executed. To evaluate
the measurement, the captured update trafﬁc has to be treated
in the same way as the routing algorithms do in order to
calculate the forwarding table entries. That means that the
ofﬂine evaluation module repeats the processing steps of the
routing algorithm.
The timestamped update packets of all subnets are sorted
chronologically for evaluation. To identify the starting point
of the convergence time tconv, the ﬁrst packet with the
information about an unreachable subnet is selected and its
timestamp saved for later use (as ﬁrst timestamp tf). As well,
the timestamp of the ﬁrst update packet can be taken as ﬁrst
timestamp to analyze the coldstart1 behaviors of a routing
algorithm.
In order to ﬁnd the timestamp of the update packet leading
to convergence (the last timestamp tl), all update packets are
re-processed from the start.
Whenever a routing table is updated, the timestamp of the
appropriate update packet is saved. As the network must be in
a convergent state when no routing table is updated any more,
the last timestamp tl must belong to the update packet that led
to this state. This timestamp is chosen for convergence time
calculation.
The convergence time tconv is now deﬁned as:
tconv = tl − tf with:
(1)
tconv = convergence time,
tl = last timestamp,
tf = ﬁrst timestamp
Adding up the packet sizes of the whole trafﬁc sent between
the ﬁrst timestamp tf and the last timestamp tl shows the
trafﬁc volume produced by routing updates during the conver-
gence procedure.
1all routers in the considered network were rebooted and start with empty
routing tables
139
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. IP NETWORKS AND ROUTING PROTOCOLS
Within computer networks, routers are special nodes which
provide the whole network with information about the loca-
tion of subnets. The IP protocol uses packet forwarding to
deliver data packets from the source to the destination. Packet
forwarding means that a node only knows the adjacent node,
which is closer to the destination node. Therefore, every router
has to know which adjacent router is closer to the subnet of
the destination node. A router maintains a forwarding table
listing the subnets in connection with the corresponding next
hop router and the metric which represents a distance to the
destination node. Routing is the process of completing and
maintaining an accurate forwarding table. It is a distributed
network-wide process which offers some properties such as
dynamic adaptation to network changes, scalability and system
stability. At any time, a forwarding table of a router must
correctly describe the location of subnets and how to get there
in order to prevent misguided data packets. There is always a
small time gap beginning with a network failure and ending
with the detection of the failure by the routers. Keeping the
network free of invalid routing information during this time is
a challenge every routing protocol has to cope with. It may
occur that routing updates between routers become invalid on
their way through the network and forwarding loops can take
place. In practice, all common routing protocols are affected
by forwarding loops [24]. A forwarding loop corresponds to a
loop in the forwarding process of data packets. Thus, a routing
loop corresponds to a loop in the routing process caused by
circulating routing update packets. A routing loop is in close
connection with a forwarding loop because the routing process
has a direct impact on the forwarding process.
A. Relevant Items of the RIP Protocol
The Routing Information Protocol (RIP) is considered as the
classical representative of the distance vector protocol family.
It employs the hop count as a metric to a destination node in
the network (see Figure 2).
k
i
j
m
A
l
a
B
C
D
E
F
d
b
C
m E
P
i,d
m
i,d
m l,d
h i,j
h j,k
P
j,d
A
j,d
k,d
F
Fig. 2.
Network model, hi,j = hop from router i to router j, Pi,d = path
from router i to subnet d with metric mi,d.
RIP works like this: If a RIP router i receives a routing
update from an adjacent RIP router j to a subnet d with
the metric mj,d via interface A of router i, this indicates
the existence of a corresponding path P j,d from RIP router
j to subnet d. Router i does not know the complete path
P j,d, but knows the number of hops of this path. Then, from
the view of router i, there will be a path P i,d
A
with metric
mi,d
A = mj,d + 1 by appending a hop hi,j from i to j to the
path P j,d. Therefore, router i knows the metric mi,d
A and the
next hop towards subnet d (see Figure 2). If a RIP router has
a valid path to subnet d, it will reject all equivalent or inferior
paths to the same subnet. RIP prevents the proliferation of
routing loops by implementing a limit on the number of hops
allowed in a path from the source to a destination node. The
maximum number of hops allowed is 15. This hop limit also
limits the size of the diameter of a RIP network. A hop count
of 16 is called inﬁnity. It is considered an inﬁnite distance
and used to deprecate inaccessible routes. RIP mainly detects
suddenly inaccessible routes by the expiration of timers due
to missing conﬁrmations. RIP uses three timer intervalls:
• an update timer (default 30 sec) for periodically sending
out routing updates,
• a timeout timer (default 180 sec) to detect invalid entries
in the routing table and
• a garbage collection timer (default 120 sec) to delete
invalid entries from the routing table.
The timeout timer of an entry is re-initialized when the entry is
conﬁrmed by an incoming routing update. Should the timeout
timer of the entry expire, the corresponding route is marked
as unreachable with metric inﬁnity (16), and the garbage
collection timer is started. The garbage collection timer is
stopped when the entry is conﬁrmed by a valid routing update.
If the garbage collection timer expires, the entry will be deleted
from the routing table. RIP periodically sends routing updates
every 30 seconds containing the whole routing table to all
adjacent routers. As it is not useful to claim reachability for
a subnet to the neighbor from which the route was learned,
the split horizon scheme is deﬁned in the RIP speciﬁcation
[12]. Split horizon omits routes learned from one neighbor in
updates sent to that neighbor in order to avoid loops between
two neighbor routers on one link. Another enhancement, Split
horizon with poisoned reverse, includes such routes in updates,
but sets their metrics to inﬁnity. Routing updates are also
sent with every change in the routing table only containing
the affected entries. These event-driven routing updates are
called triggered updates. RIP uses two kinds of message
types, RIP updates and RIP requests which have the same
message structure (see Figure 3) but differ in their processing.
RIP updates are used to announce routing information to the
adjacent routers. RIP requests are used to ask adjacent routers
for routing information. The messages can be recognized by
the value in the command ﬁeld of the message structure.
As RIP only uses one message structure type, it is very
easy to implement and to deploy RIP in contrast to complex
routing protocols like Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)[14].
The simple deployment of RIP is one reason why it is still
widely used.
B. RIP Request Messages
A RIP request is used to ask for a response containing all or
part of a router’s routing table. Requests and their treatments
are part of the standard RIP speciﬁcation [12]. Usually, RIP
requests are sent as multicast messages to neighbors by routers
which have just booted and try to ﬁll in their routing tables.
140
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 3.
The RIP message structure of the update and the request message
as speciﬁed in [12].
Therefore, the most common request messages causes all
neighbor routers to transmit all route entries in their routing
table. Also single entries can be requested. An option which
is mainly used for monitoring, e.g., by network monitoring
tools.
The RIP request message is processed entry by entry (see
Figure 3) and can have 25 entries at its maximum before a
second message is needed. If there are no entries in a RIP
request message, the requested router does not response. If
there is exactly one entry in the request, and it has an address
family identiﬁer of zero and a metric of inﬁnity (IP-Address
0.0.0.0 and metric 16), then this is a request to send the entire
routing table. Except for this special case, the processing of
the RIP request is quite simple. For each entry, the destination
is looked up in the router’s routing database and, if the route
is listed, the route’s metric is put in the metric ﬁeld of the
request message (see Figure 3). If there is no explicit route
to the speciﬁed destination, the inﬁnity value is put in the
metric ﬁeld. Once all the entries are ﬁlled in, the value in the
command ﬁeld is changed from request to response and the
datagram is sent back to the requestor.
V. THE RMTI PROTOCOL
The RMTI router evaluates redundant routing updates from
different directions to the same destination. The RMTI proto-
col is implemented on top of the Routing Information Protocol
(RIP). Thus, our RMTI-protocol is downward-compatible to
RIP. As the RMTI extension does not change the message
structure but only the processing algorithm, the RMTI tech-
nique can also enhance other distance vector routing protocols
as well.
A. RMTI optimizations
In distance vector routing the Counting-to-Inﬁnity problem
(CTI) reﬂects the routing loop problem. A group of RIP-
Routers can get into an unstable state as soon as a CTI
occurs. This problem cannot be solved by the well-known
split-horizon scheme, because this approach can prevent CTIs
in virtual loops but not in real loops. A real loop can be
found in networks where at least three routers are connected
to each other via separate links. Therefore the RIP protocol
is restricted to a small network diameter in order to limit
the impact of the CTI update sequence. This impact has two
aspects:
1. wrong routing updates are proliferated and
2. payload packets are misguided.
The RMTI protocol avoids CTIs as well as routing loops and
forwarding loops. If all routers in a network are RMTI-routers
the inﬁnity metric is no longer necessary. The RMTI protocol
and its enhancements to RIP are described in [2][3][19]. The
RMTI algorithm is an optimization that affects convergence
time and update trafﬁc. The update trafﬁc is reduced by
sending small neighbor-alive-notiﬁcations instead of periodic
routing updates. An incoming neighbor-alive-notiﬁcation con-
ﬁrms all routes received from this neighbor. Changes in the
network will be advertised by event-triggered updates which
are already part of the standard RIPv2 speciﬁcation [12]. The
neighbor-alive-notiﬁcation is small in contrast to the ordinary
periodic routing update whose size depends on the amount of
subnets in the network. Moreover, due to the smaller neighbor-
alive-notiﬁcations either
• the entire routing update trafﬁc can be reduced or
• the sending interval and the convergence time of the
network can be reduced.
There are two options to optimize the RMTI protocol either
to have less update trafﬁc or to reduce the convergence time.
B. RMTI with neighbor-alive-notiﬁcations
The
periodic
routing
updates
are
replaced
by
small
neighbor-alive-notiﬁcations which accelerates the convergence
time and the reliability of RMTI. In order to keep RMTI
downward compatible to RIP, the neighbor-alive-notiﬁcation
is performed by empty RIP Request messages.
In correspondence to the RIP speciﬁcation, a RIP router
does not have to reply to a Request with no entries. An RMTI
router can identify its neighbor as RMTI router, if it receives
empty requests. The neighbor-alive-notiﬁcation is very small
and, is periodically sent via multicast to all neighbor RMTI
routers. There is a time and a trafﬁc optimization of the
RMTI. The time optimized RMTI sends the neighbor-alive-
notiﬁcation every ﬁve seconds in order to detect link failures
immediately. This optimization speeds up the convergence
time. The trafﬁc optimized RMTI’s sending period is larger
than 5 seconds in order to reduce the update trafﬁc between
the routers. Should an RMTI router detect an empty request
from a neighbor router, it accepts this router as an RMTI router
and does the following:
• Firstly, the timeout timers of all route entries in the
routing table from this neighbor are reduced to ,e.g., 10
seconds. So, if the entries are not conﬁrmed within 10
seconds they will be marked as unreachable.
141
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• Secondly, every time a neighbor-alive-notiﬁcation is re-
ceived from the neighbor router, the corresponding route
entries in the routing table will be conﬁrmed at once and
their timeout timer will be re-initialized.
The burden of periodical routing updates which contain the
whole routing table could be omitted. The tedious routing
update which transmits the whole routing table every 30
seconds is replaced by a small neighbor-alive-notiﬁcation sent
every 5 seconds. If a route is not conﬁrmed by a neighbor
in RIP for 180 seconds, it will be marked as unreachable. If
a neighbor is not conﬁrmed in RMTI within 10 seconds, all
route entries from this neighbor will be marked as unreachable.
Individual entry changes in the routing table are transmitted
by the event-driven triggered updates further on.
The neighbor-alive-notiﬁcation allows for speeding up the
convergence time of the network in case of a link failure due
to lower timeout and short-intervalled alive notiﬁcations. Since
the triggered updates become most signiﬁcant for the RMTI
routing process, the sender needs an acknowledgment of the
triggered updates. Our acknowledgment approach is based on
split horizon with poison reverse, which is part of the RIPv2
speciﬁcation [12]. All routes received by a triggered update
are immediately acknowledged with metric inﬁnity.

Fig. 5.
Y-Topology class
VI. CONVERGENCE MEASUREMENT
In this section, the tested topologies, the measurement
methods, and the results of the convergence properties of the
RIP and RMTI algorithms are presented.
A. Tested Topologies
A simple network topology in which the CTI problem
can occur is shown in Figure 5. This topology consists of
a topology loop and a row of routers r1, r2 and r3. Router
r3 is the node connecting the topology loop with the row. The
respective subnets are peripherally located outside the topol-
ogy loop connected to router r1 and r2. Routing information
about these subnets can ﬂow into a CTI sequence within the
topology loop after a link failure between router r2 and r3 .
As depicted in Figure 5, a CTI can occur if the information
of the unreachable subnet will be lost or just simply delayed in
one path of the topology loop. If the link between router r2 and
r3 fails, the subnets located between r2 and r1 are unreachable
for r3. Router r3 does not receive any more updates and the
timeout for these subnets expires. The routes in r3’s forward-
ing table are marked as unreachable with metric inﬁnity. Then,
router r3 sends a triggered update with metric inﬁnity to router
r4 and r5 and advertises this new routing information. Router
r4 forwards the information about the unreachable subnets to
the next router. In Figure 5 router r5 does not receive the
routing information from r3 due to a transmission failure and
the routers behind r5 in the topology loop do not receive
the information about the unreachable subnets. At this point,
the old invalid routing information prevails over the current
routing one. The routers which have lost their route to the
subnets accept the old routing information as new alternative
routes. The well-known split horizon scheme cannot avoid
the CTI situation. Split horizon is an extension to RIP which
prevents a router from advertising routing information back
to the router from which it was received. Router r4 gets the
invalid routing information indirectly from router r5 and sends
the information to r3. Router r3 accepts the invalid routing
information from router r4 as new and valid alternative route
to the subnets via r4. Then the CTI sequence starts. As long
as the CTI occurs, a malicious routing loop is established.
For the test runs, several topologies were used which allow
conclusions about expected correlations of a particular topol-
ogy property and convergence properties. These topologies are
presented in Figure 4. For the evaluation, over 300 topologies
with a total of over 5000 test runs are analyzed. Due to the
high computational complexity, the test topologies have been
limited to a maximum size of 50 routers and 100 subnets.
In order to obtain meaningful results it is important that any
correlations between individual topologies are considered.
The following topologies are used in the test environment
in order to analyse routing protocols (see Figure 4 and 5):
• the y-topology,
• the crown topology,
• the square topology,
• the Arpanet, described in [27], and
• the Internet 2 topology, used in [28].
142
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 4.
The tested topologies: square, crown, arpanet, and internet2
B. General Convergence Properties
In order to compare different routing algorithms, it is crucial
to know how they behave in general. Coldstart tests are
performed to measure convergence time and update trafﬁc
volume from the point in time where all router daemons are
started until the network reaches the convergent state for the
ﬁrst time. For this test case, no CTI is provoked as the CTI
situation is a special case. This test scenario was designed to
test the propagation speed of the routing updates being the
worst case scenario for convergence time and trafﬁc.
These measurements covered over 300 (mostly randomly
generated) topologies showing that the convergence time for
both algorithms mainly depends on the network topologies
diameter d. As shown in Figure 6 the convergence time
increases in this test environment by a factor of 2.5 along with
an increasing diameter d. However, the update trafﬁc volume
of both algorithms increases with polynomial growth with the
number of subnets in the network (see Figure 7).
Test cases show that RMTI and RIP reache their convergent
state at the same time (see Figure 6). If the time-optimized
RMTI (Section V-A) is used, it does not affect the convergence
time because the time beneﬁts correspond to the detection of
a topology change. With trafﬁc improvement the RMTI needs
10 percent less trafﬁc than RIP2 (see Figure 7). The trafﬁc
2To achieve this result, the ﬁrst 60 seconds from coldstart are measured
instead of stopping the measurement at the convergent state.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Convergence time in seconds
Diameter
RMTI
RMTI approximated
RIP
RIP approximated
Fig. 6.
Convergence time for RIP and RMTI at coldstart
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
Update Traffic in KiB
Number of Edges
RMTI
RMTI approximated
RIP
RIP approximated
Fig. 7.
Trafﬁc comparison of optimized RMTI and RIP at coldstart
volume for the time-optimized RMTI is the same as for RIP.
The analysis of the measurements shows that an even better
equation for the approximation of convergence time tapprox is
achievable. Besides the network diameter d, the number of
nodes n in the network topology require to add the product
0.16 · n to the convergence time. The variance is halved from
7.28 to 3.56. Now the approximated convergence time tapprox
from coldstart can be calculated for every network using the
following Equation (2):3
tapprox = 2.5 · d + 0.16 · n − 5 ± 1.89 [seconds] with:
(2)
tapprox = convergence time,
d > 1 = diameter of network topology ,
n = Number of nodes in the network topology
In Figure 8 and 9 the dependencies between the number
of edges (subnets) are shown for the square and the crown
topology.
In Figure 10 and 11 the dependencies between the network
diameter and the convergent time in seconds are shown for
the square and the crown topology.
Fig 12 depicts the amount of trafﬁc as function of the
number of verticies (router nodes) and the number of edges
(subnets) within a topology in relation to the trafﬁc.
3The values may differ a bit depending on the test environment
143
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
Traffic in KiB
Number of Edges
RMTI Crown
RMTI Square
Fig. 8.
Trafﬁc comparison between the topologies square and crown with
RMTI at coldstart.
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
Traffic in KiB
Number of Edges
RIP Crown
RIP Square
Fig. 9.
Trafﬁc comparison between the topologies square and crown with
RIP at coldstart.
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Convergence time in seconds
Diameter
RMTI Crown
RMTI Square
Fig. 10.
Convergence time comparison between the topologies square and
crwon with RMTI at coldstart.
C. Importance of CTI avoidance
Despite the Split Horizon algorithm, CTIs can occur under
certain circumstances when the network contains loops and
links are ﬂapping or routing updates are lost. To show the
importance of CTI avoidance for distance vector algorithms,
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Convergence time in seconds
Diameter
RIP Crown
RIP Square
Fig. 11.
Convergence time comparison between the topologies square and
crwon with RIP at coldstart.
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10  5
 55
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
Traffic
Approximated Function
Interpolated Data
Edges
Vertices
Traffic
Fig. 12.
Trafﬁc comparison in relation to the growing number of edges
(subnets) and verticies (router nodes).
some test runs have been performed that show the CTI
frequency for links with different packet losses.
As CTIs can occur in Y-Topologies (Section 4) they have
been tested with a loop size of 3 where a failure was provoked
on one subnet. If the failure update of this subnet is announced
to either upper router r4 or r5 (Figure 5), a CTI occurs. The
bigger the loop size, the more probable is the occurrence of
a CTI. This test case is a best case scenario because there
are more subnets to pass and more possibilities to lose the
information about the failed subnet in bigger loops.
As the results illustrate in Figure 13, the CTI frequency
FCT I increases with the routing update packet loss Lp (in
percent) in a linear way.
The general rule is:
FCT I = 0.55 · Lp ± 0.62 [% (absolute)] with:
(3)
FCT I = CTI frequency in percent,
Lp = packet loss in percent
With an update packet loss Lp of 0.01%, a CTI is provoked
with a probability of 0.0055% or averaged at every 180st
144
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
CTI frequency in %
Packet loss in %
500 measurements with Y-Topology
approximated function
Fig. 13.
CTI frequency depending on Packet loss
failing subnet.
D. CTI Duration
The impact of CTI situations become apparent by examining
their duration. As long as the CTI situation lasts, all payload
trafﬁc for the corrupted subnet is cycling in the loop. This is
a burden for all routers and subnets located in the loop.
Since RMTI can detect routing loops and avoid CTI occur-
rences it eliminates this burden. To quantify these beneﬁts the
convergence time of RIP and RMTI have been measured in
case of a CTI situation. As CTIs only occur in loops several
Y-Topologies with different loop sizes (Figure 5) have been
tested.
To provoke a CTI router, r2 (Figure 5) is shut down. This
leads to an unreachability of a certain subnet. Router r3 is
forced to propagate the new inﬁnity metric of the unreachable
subnet only to one of its neighbors (r4 or r5) so that this kind
of update transfer must result in a CTI.
For each topology tested the time was measured starting
when a router detected a failing subnet and ending when
the network was convergent again. Hence, these results are
independent of the RMTI optimization (time or trafﬁc - see
Section V-A), because time optimization only speeds up the
topology change detection.
The result graph (Figure 14) shows that the beneﬁt of RMTI
is between 30 and 120 seconds. The average CTI duration
with increasing loop size increases with a factor of 18.6 for
RMTI. That is nearly one fourth of RIP’s growth factor which
is 74. The average CTI duration of all tested topologies with
RMTI only needs 30% of the average RIP CTI duration. The
irregularities (see Figure 14) of the RIP results are generated
when the update timer of one router expires and affects the CTI
in reaching inﬁnity (metric 16). This only happens for certain
loopsizes together with speciﬁc timer settings. For these tests
the standard RIP update timer of 30 seconds was used. With
other timer settings this behavior occurs with other loop sizes.
RMTI can converge so much faster because RMTI stops the
CTI at router r3 (Figure 5).
Starting the measurement with the topology change, RIP
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
CTI duration in seconds
Loopsize
RMTI
RMTI approximated
RIP
RIP approximated
Fig. 14.
CTI duration
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Convergence time in seconds
Diameter
RMTI
RMTI approximated
RIP
RIP approximated
Fig. 15.
Convergence time for random router failures
converges slower because of its long timeout timer of 180
seconds.
E. Common Convergence Behavior
As the most common topology changes do not provoke CTIs
(Figure 13), the convergence properties were also measured
in case a router fails without CTI provocation. Therefore, a
random router has been shut down in each test run. As shown
in Figure 15 the RMTI algorithm with time optimization
(Section V-A) converges 50 seconds faster on average than the
normal RIP from the time point where the topology change
happens. With a trafﬁc optimized RMTI the convergence time
is the same as with RIP, but there is a noticeble update trafﬁc
reduction.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
To demonstrate the advantages of new routing algorithms in
contrast to common intra domain routing algorithms, compre-
hensive tests have to be carried out. In practice, a variety of
network topologies and a succession of critical events have
to be automatically generated by random generators. Test
situations concerning the capability of a routing algorithm to
re-organize itself after a topology change have to be covered.
With the newly developed test environment, one can show
the beneﬁts of the new RMTI algorithm in comparison to
RIP. The ﬂexible design of the test environment allows us
145
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to test RIP, RMTI and other intra domain routing protocols.
The RMTI algorithm shows two important advantages: the
possibility to avoid CTI situations and to converge much faster
than other distance vector algorithms in case of a topology
change. The ability of RMTI to choose whether to optimize
a fast topology change detection or a trafﬁc reduction (or a
mixture of both) makes the test environment adaptable to the
speciﬁc needs of many different networks. With the VNUML
script, it is also possible to run larger networks on computer
clusters which will support the results for those networks. The
high degree of automating the test environment and the ability
to gather large amounts of measurement data is a big advantage
for analyzing all kinds of routing protocols. Another issue that
we will deal with in our future research is the performance
analysis of the RMTI algorithm with payload trafﬁc and the
comparison with other intra domain routing protocols.
We have shown that we can obtain a variety of characteristic
routing parameters and various relationships between them.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Bohdanowicz, M. Jakobs, and Ch. Steigner, Statistical Convergence
Analysis of Routing Protocols, in Proceedings of the Nineth International
Conference on Networking (ICN 2010), Les Menuires, France, 2010.
[2] F. Bohdanowicz, H. Dickel, and Ch. Steigner, Routing with metric-based
Topology Investigation, International Journal on Advances in Internet
Technology, 2009, vol 2 no 1.
[3] F. Bohdanowicz, H. Dickel, and Ch. Steigner, Metric-based Topology
Investigation, in Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Networking (ICN 2009), Cancun, Mexico, 2009.
[4] Ch. Steigner, H. Dickel, and T. Keupen, RIP-MTI: A New Way to
Cope with Routing Loops, in Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Networking (ICN 2008), Cancun, Mexico, 2008.
[5] C. Cheng, R. Riley, S.P.R. Kumar, and J. J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, A loop-
free extended bellman-ford routing protocol without bouncing effect,
ACM Sigc. Symp. Commun. Arch. and Prot., pp. 224-236, 1989.
[6] J. Dike, User Mode Linux, Prentice Hall, 2006.
[7] The
user-mode-linux
project
page,
URL:
http://user-mode-
linux.sourceforge.net, 18.01.2011.
[8] C. Berge, Graphs and Hypergraphs, North-Holland Publishing Com-
pany, 1973.
[9] B. Rajagopalan and M. Faiman, A new responsive distributed shortest-
path routing algorithm, ACM Sigcomm Symposium Commun. Arch.
and Protocols, pp. 237-246, 1989.
[10] J.J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, Loop Free Routing Using Diffusing Computa-
tions, IEEE Transactions on Networking, 1993.
[11] K. Levchenko, G. M. Voelker, R. Paturi, and S. Savage, XL: An Efﬁcient
Network Routing Algorithm, Proc. Sigcomm 2008, August, 2008.
[12] G. Malkin, RIP Version 2, RFC 2453, 1998.
[13] V. Fuller, T. Li, Classless Inter-domain Routing (CIDR): The Internet
Address Assignment and Aggregation Plan, RFC 4632, 2006.
[14] J. Moy, OSPF Version 2, RFC 2328, 1998.
[15] C. E. Perkins, Ad hoc networking, Addison-Wesley, Amsterdam 2001.
[16] C. E. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, S. Das, Ad hoc On-Demand Distance
Vector (AODV) Routing, RFC 3561, 2003.
[17] The quagga project page, URL: http://www.quagga.net, 18.01.2011.
[18] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, S. Hares, A Border Gateway Protocol 4, RFC 4271,
2006.
[19] A. Schmid and Ch. Steigner, Avoiding Counting to Inﬁnity in Distance
Vector Routing, Telecommunication Systems 19 (3-4): 497-514, March
- April, 2002, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
[20] VNUML project home page, URL: http://www.dit.upm.es/vnuml, Tech-
nical University of Madrid (UPM), 18.01.2011.
[21] tcpdump project home page, http://www.tcpdump.org, 18.01.2011.
[22] OpenWRT Project home page, http://www.openwrt.org, 18.01.2011.
[23] Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall PTR,
1996, pp. 358-359
[24] Z. Zhong, R. Keralapura, S. Nelakuditi, Y. Yu, J. Wang, C. Chuah and S.
Lee, Avoiding Transient Loops Through Interface-Speciﬁc Forwarding,
Transactions on Networking, IEEE/ACM, Volume: 15, Issue: 6, Dec.
2007.
[25] F. Galan, D. Fernandez, W. Fuertes, M. Gmez and J. Lpez de Vergara,
Scenario-based Virtual Network Infrastructure Management in Research
and Educational Testbeds with VNUML: Application Cases and Current
Challenges, Annals of Telecommunications, special issue on Virtualiza-
tion: a path for the future Internet, vol. 64(5), pp. 305-323, May 2009.
[26] B. Premore, An Experimental Analysis of BGP Convergence Time, ICNP
’01: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Network
Protocols, IEEE Computer Society, 2001.
[27] Frank, Howard, Robert E. Kahn und Leonard Kleinrock, Computer
communication network design: Experience with theory and practice, in
Proceedings of the spring joint computer conference (AFIPS ’72 Spring),
May 1972.
[28] Gunes, Mehmet H. und Kamil Sarac, Inferring Subnets in Router-level
Topology Collection Studies, in Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM
conference on Internet measurement (IMC ’07), Oktober 2007.
[29] Internet 2 Fact Sheet,
URL: http://www.internet2.edu/resources/AboutInternet2.pdf,18.01.2011.
146
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

